

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
RECORDS
OF
CONVERSATIONS,
NOTES AND PAPERS EXCHANGED BETWEEN
THE ROYAL EGYPTIAN GOVERNMENT
AND
THE UNITED KINGDOM GOVERNMENT
(MARCH 1950—NOVEMBER 1951)
CAIRO—1951




MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
RECORDS
OF
CONVERSATIONS,
NOTES AND PAPERS EXCHANGED BETWEEN
THE ROYAL EGYPTIAN GOVERNMENT
AND
THE UNITED KINGDOM GOVERNMENT
(MARCH 1950 NOVEMBER 1951)
CAIRO-1951




MESSAGE
from H. E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
to H.E. Mr. Bevin
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt presents his best
compliments and good wishes to The Right Honourable Mr. Ernest
Bevin.
2. While appreciating the delicate parliamentary situation
confronting Mr. Bevin, he believes, and hopes that Mr. Bevin shares
his belief, that that situation should not hinder endeavouring a
clarification of the political atmosphere in the Middle East in general
and between Egypt and Great Britain in particular, as current world
events cannot await parliamentary adjustments.
3. The present Egyptian Government have referred to the national
cause in the recent speech from the Throne in the following terms :
“ The nation without exception has proclaimed the necessity of
“ liberating our Valley, both Egypt and The Sudan, of any restriction
“ on its liberty and independence; so that it may regain its past glory
“ and assume a worthy place in the concert of nations.
“ My Government will spare no effort to hasten the evacuation of
“ the two parts of the Valley and to protect their unity under the
“ Egyptian Crown against any encroachment or aggression.
“ My Government is anxious to strengthen its relations of cordiality
“ and good understanding with all countries on a footing of equality
“ within the bounds of mutual interest and respect, and within the
“ framework of the Charter of the United Nations. It will contribute
“ fully towards the maintenance of international Security, the
“ establishment of peace and the protection of the rights of Man. ”
It would be in the interest of both parties that such frank and
explicit terms be taken into consideration in any attempt at facing the
issue.
4. It would also be advisable to take into consideration the state
of Egyptian public opinion and the evolution of national self conscious-
ness. It is noteworthy that Egyptian public opinion is of primary
importance in the Middle East. It has grown to believe, after successive
bitter trials, that it would be futile to proceed with negotiations unless
based on the immediate withdrawal of British Forces and the safe


guarding of the unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown, and that Egypt cannot contribute her full share to world peace
before her national rights have been completely secured.
5. Should the British hasten to agree to the aforesaid basis, the
Egyptian Government would welcome entering into talks with Great
Britain with the object of arriving at an understanding over the
measures to be taken for confronting the dangers that threaten inter-
national security and the independence of nations, and with a view
to reaching a practical settlement which would ensure the complete in-
dependence of Egypt and The Sudan as one integral whole, and would,
at the same time, secure wholehearted collaboration in the combined
efforts for repelling international communist danger.
6. In this connection, the Minister for Foreign Affairs wishes to
remind The Right Honourable Mr. Bevin of his words said at their
meeting on January 28th. last to the effect that it is not important that
there should be a written treaty between us but it is essential that there
should be mutual confidence and trust.
7. The Minister for Foreign Affairs would welcome an early reply
as Egyptian public opinion is in a state of great anxiety over the
national rights and the prospects of peace in the Middle East,
March 1950.


MESSAGE
from H.E. Mr. Bevin
to H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
1. Mr. Bevin wishes that the Minister for Foreign Affairs should
be informed that the problem of Anglo-Egyptian relations has recently
been given the most careful consideration by His Majesty’s Govern-
ment, Mr, Bevin himself has been giving this matter his close personal
attention, but unfortunately his recent absence from the Foreign Office,
necessitated by an operation, has precluded him from making a com-
munication to the Egyptian Government as soon as he would otherwise
have wished,
2. Mr. Bevin fully appreciates the desire of the Egyptian
Government for a clarification of the political atmosphere in the
Middle East in general and between Egypt and the United Kingdom in
particular. He shares the Egyptian Governement's expressed desire to
strengthen its relation of cordiality and good understanding with all
countries on a footing of equality within the bounds of mutual interest
and respect, and within the Charter of the United Nations. He feels
that, with this end in view, it is most desirable that Egypt and the
United Kingdom should reach an understanding based on mutual
confidence and trust. He considers that the most helpful contribution
which His Majesty’s Government could make to the achievement of
this object, at this stage, would be for the Chief of the Imperial General
Staff, Fied-Marshal Sir William Slim, to have a completely frank and
informal discussion with the Egyptian Government of the military
aspects of the problem before us in the Middle East. While His
Majesty’s Government recognise that there are other aspects in this
problem besides the military ones, they nevertheless feel that such a
discussion would serve to clarify the issues and might well indicate the
lines upon which a solution could be reached.
It is expected that the Field-Marshal would be able to spend a
few days in Egypt about the beginning of June, and His Majesty’s
Government very much hope that the Egyptian Government would be
prepared for discussions with him then. It is hoped further that any
such discussions could be held with the minimum of publicity.
3. It is our hope these discussions would pave the way for
further discussions which Sir Ralph Stevenson, who will be proceeding
to his post of His Majesty’s Ambassador in Cairo shortly thereafter,
would be instructed to pursue with the Egyptian Government,
May 17th, 1950.


MESSAGE
from H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
to H.E. Mr. Bevin
1. The Egyptian Government arc pleased to record that the
British Government share their expressed desire to strengthen their
relations of cordiality and good understanding with all countries on a
footing of equality within the bounds of mutual interest and respect
and within the Charter of the United Nations.
2. The Egyptian Government in asking the British Government
to agree to the two principles of the evacuation of the British troops
and the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown as
a basis for negotiations between the two countries, actually act according
to the natural right, to the principles of the United Nations Organisation
and its decisions, and in application of the Charter’s provisions.
3. With a view to having these two principles confirmed and
speedily carried out, the Egyptian Government would welcome to contact
everyone whom the British Government delegate, whether civilian or
military. The Egyptian Government, therefore will welcome with
pleasure Field Marshal Sir William Slim early in June to discuss with
him the military matters, first and foremost the complete and immediate
evacuation of the British troops.
4. The Egyptian Government will also be pleased to contact,
within the framework above, H.E. the new British Ambassador imme-
diately after his arrival to discuss the political matters.
5. The Egyptian Government trust that these discussions would
lead at the earliest time to negotiations between the two Governments
realising their common object of clarifying the political atmosphere in
the Middle East in general and between Egypt and Britain in particular.
May 30 th, 1950.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
on Monday June 5th, 1950, at 10 a.m.
Present :
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey EI.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
H.E. Abdul Rahman Hakki Bey H.E. Mr. Chapman-Andrews
Foreign Minister ;— I welcome H.E. Marshal Slim and would
listen to all what he would like to tell me. I presume that he saw the
communications exchanged between the two Governments, which ended
by the agreement on this visit* They are three communications; one
from me to H.E, Mr. Bevin, and Mr. Bevin’s answer to it; a third,
I sent recently to H.E. Mr. Bevin a few days before your arrival. Any-
way, whether H.E. the Marshal has seen these communications or not
it gives me pleasure to listen to what he says.
We cannot, in my opinion, separate the political and military
aspects.
Marshal Slim : lam grateful for the opportunity to meet Your
Excellency. I have seen the communications and I would like to give
the views of a military man. Concerning the political aspect of
the matter, it is impossible, as Your Excellency said, to separate the
two (the political and the military). But it is necessary first to have
a clear understanding of the military aspect.
As Your Excellency knows, all approaches made by the Western
Powers had no progress. The Soviet object is complete domination of
the world. This is laid down in their teaching and was proved in every
action taken by them.
The Russians follow a doctrine and stick to it as Hitler did. They
expect and look forward to a war between them and the Capitalist
States. In order to meet that, these Powers have to take steps.
The basic fact is that no nation can by itself defeat Russia in war.
If the United States went to war with Russia, it will be a draw and
preparation for another war. If the United States and the United
Kingdom go to war together, they will win.
If there is disunity among these Powers, Russia advance, if they
show unity, Russia will hesitate.


Russia made an effort in Berlin to throw the United States and
United Kingdom out; but we showed them we were united. But
wherever there is no unity, they sweep on. The only hope to check
Russia is for us to unite. We have done that in the West.
I do not say Russia is militarily strong now, but she is getting
stronger every day.
The only way for nations to become solid, militarily and industrially,
is to give up some of their sovereignty and traditions in the past. We
gave up that, and accepted foreign troops in our country.
It is that common notion which is essential.
The United States made great advance in this point. Her isolation
is gone and she came forward in many ways.
No one nation can defend itself, neither Egypt nor Britain. The
danger of war is realised by two ways. In Europe, the Eastern forces
and the Western forces face each other; a clash may happen any time,
and would result in war. On the other hand, the Russians have made
a plan which would lead to war between them and the Capitalist States,
This is by continuing to spread their doctrines and thus wait for a
chance when the Western Powers would seem weak and then drag
them into war.
That danger is a real one. The Russian Army is very large, the
largest, and has about 100 divisions and could be increased to 250 a
large number. They are not modernly equipped, but have a large air
force and submarines which Russia took from Germany. These give
them enough force to attack in Europe and against Britain, and to push
on to South Europe and come down to the Mediterranean.
If war comes, one of the Soviet interests is this Country : Egypt.
Egypt, in the Middle East, is like France and Belgium in Europe; if
there is war in Europe, Belgium and France would be in it. Any*way,
Egypt will be in war right from the beginning.
You may say that by having British troops in Egypt, you attract the
Russians to come and drive them out. What they want is Egypt. You
are the country with wealth and resources. Anybody who wants to
hold the Middle East, must hold Egypt. You have ports and everything,
and will be the centre of target for Russia, Egypt cannot hold that by
being neutral.
Only two countries can remain neutral; either one so great and
powerful, and Egypt is not; or one that is small but possesses something
useful for both sides, like Sweden and Switzerland, and Egypt is not.
You cannot remain neutral. If you want to defend yourself, you
must be ready for defence. The only way is to have an Ally. Obviously,
that Ally is Britain,
War comes suddenly. No good thinking long like the Americans
did in the last war. You have to be ready. War is a colossal organisa-
tion and one must be ready on the spot.
We want to come to some military agreement with you. It will be
entirely defensive, but will safeguard Egypt.


That is the broad position. I am convinced that Russia plans for
war; they want to get into Africa.
One thing I want to say; from the military point of view, the relations
between the British troops and the Egyptian; troops are cordial. We
are supplying them with equipment. The British troops are impressed
with your pilots. Everything is most excellent in this respect.
We want a new approach between the Egyptian troops and the
British; to have them as Allies, working in partnership and not having
the British as teachers; we like to have things on mutual terms like
we do with the Americans and the French.
I have no back history in Egypt; I am not Spinks Pasha, I have
a fresh mind.
Foreign Minister : I would like to hear more details about this new
picture of cooperation and the difference between it and what used to
happen in the past.
Marshal Slim : We have to find a new approach.
Foreign Minister : As the statement which Your Excellency would
like to make is long, and as I presume that you would like to say the
same thing to H.E. the Minister of War, I suggest to call His Excel-
lency to be present at the discussions to save time.
Mr. Chopman-Andrews : This is not a bad idea; but we thought,
when he fixed the appointments, that you prefer to see Sir William
Slim separately.
Foreign Minister; — We thought that Sir William Slim would like
to see us separately because you made separate appointments for him
with each of us. We thought it was all right. But now, I see it
would be practical to cal H.E, Nosrat Bey,
Marshal Slim ; — I did not yet make the acquaintance of Their
Excellencies Nahas Pasha and Nosrat Bey. So, I would like to meet
them first separately to talk to them, and then we all meet together,
Mr. Chapmon-Andrews : The Marshal has met Your Excellency
now. Then he will meet H.E, Nosrat Bey, and then His Excellency
Nahas Pasha, to tell them what he would like to say. Then you all
meet him to answer his statement and ask any questions you like.
Foreign Minister : I agree to this idea.


RECORD
of a conversation between H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha,
President of the Council of Ministers
and H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
on Monday June 5th, 1950, at 11 a.m.
Present :
H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey H.E. Mr. Chapman-Andrews
Nahas Pasha : lam glad to meet Your Exellency here to-day and
to make your acquaintance. I had hoped to meet you on your last visit
to Egypt when I was told that you wanted to see me. At that time I
was in the opposition. But unfortunately this wish was not fulfilled,
as your personal circumstances obliged you to leave the country before
we saw eacjh other. You may imagine how glad I am to meet you
to-day, when I am Prime Minister. I hope this visit will be a good
opening to a new era for the welfare of our two countries.
Marshal Slim : lam honoured to make your acquaintance and I
am sorry that circumstances did not allow me to meet Your Excellency
last time.
I am particularly pleased this time because there is a Government
in Egypt backed by the people, representing the people’s aspirations,
and able to lead the people in the right direction which will result in
good understanding between the two countries.
Nahas Pasha ; lam interested to know the point of view which
the Field Marshal would like to express to achieve this end, hoping that
he will facilitate my task in convincing the people of what we agree on.
I am confident that, by considering the circumstances, and with good
will on both sides, we can reach real understanding and sincere
cooperation.
Mr. Chapman-Andrews : The Field Marshal would like to explain
the military situation in the world at present, as he did with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs.
These discussions are not really negotiations, they are informal
talks.
Marshal Slim : — The situation, as you know, may be summed up
in the fact that we have tried to reach an agreement with Russia, but


all approaches for understanding were rebuffed. The reason is plainly
that Russia has its doctrines. At some time, there must be a clash
between the capitalists and Russia,
Nahas Pasha : These are destructive doctrines. Then he added;
“ In order to reach an agreement. I hope to keep these talks con-
fidential. ”
Marshal Slim :— Russia, with this object in mind, has been
preparing forces, preparing for war large forces, sufficiently large to
attack both Western Europe and the Middle East at once.
The Middle East is one of their main objectives because the loss
of the Middle East will be a great blow not only to the Middle East
but also to all Europe.
Any attack on the Middle East will be directed at Egypt. Egypt is
the key to the Middle East. Who holds Egypt holds the Middle East.
We have drawn up a defence plan in Iran and Turkey, The other
Middle East countries are not strong enough. Turkey alone has some
power.
If war comes, air attacks will be a matter of hours, and Russian
troops can reach Egypt in a few weeks only.
Nahas Pasha : By which route will the Russian troops come?
Marshal Slim : The Russian troops will come by way of Iran or
Turkey, and can reach Egypt in four months. They will use from 10 to
15 divisions. They can be delayed some time if Turkey holds out.
No nation by itself, whether the United States or the United
Kingdom, can defeat Russia. If one of the big countries went to war,
like the United States, the result would be a draw, and preparation for
another war. If the United States and the United Kingdom will go to
war together against Russia, they will win. But it will be a very long
war and the Middle East will be devastated and Britain herself will
suffer. Its target will be the Middle East. But if countries from
Europe and the Middle East join the United States and Great Britain,
the situation will be different and it will be possible to drive away the
danger from the Middle East. This is why we work to consolidate
Western Europe. No one can stand alone and we have to be united
and march together politically, militarily and economically. This is not
easy because we all have to give up some of our cherished rights and
traditions.
Each one of us has to accept the other one's troops and installations
in his own territories, and to put his troops under another command.
We, the British, accepted the presence of the American troops in
England, and American bases in London.
We accepted that our troops in Germany be under French com-
mand.
In the same way, the French, the Dutch and the Belgians accepted
to place their troops under foreign command.
It is a fair arrangement in which each gives some of his rights.


I am speaking for myself. What I would like to see in Egypt, and
this is important, is a system of this kind between Egypt and Great
Britain, so long as they undertake defence together.
I would like to see a complete break with the past.
The position in Egypt differs from many other countries. But as
the military side is our main concern, we can find a way similar to
what goes on in Europe in this respect.
Egypt cannot defend herself. England, too, cannot defend herself.
It is not a disgrace. Egypt can be defended if Egypt and Britain
integrate their defences.
While I realise there is immense difficulty, I believe that this
modern conception could be made acceptable, not only to the Egyptian
Government, but to the Egyptian people.
I would look forward to some arrangement of defence that would
make it clear that the presence of British troops has in no way any
meaning of occupation. Their presence is for defence, to meet the
international situation.
I am sure that the Egyptian Military authorities can produce some
sort of organisation for the mutual interest of our two countries, in
which we are not dominating,
I do not want to go in the details of this set-up. This is a matter
for your officers and mine, but as an example of what I mean, I say that
the air defence of Egypt is something which must be ready at once. If
there is one lesson that we have learnt, it is that air defence must be in
being before war starts, and it must be in position. What I would picture,
is a combined air defence of Egypt. Anti-aircraft regiments would be
exchangeable; Ido not mind under what command though. At present
I do not know of any Egyptian commander. In that air defence, we
must have British air units, and we are the only people that have them
and know how to use them.
As far as the Army is concerned, we should have joint army and
joint training. On all these things, the relations between Egyptian and
British troops are good. If this is accepted it will lead us to good results.
I cannot help feeling that, with the Prime Minister’s immense
position in the Government and with the people, His Excellency can
make it clear to the people that this is a new doctrine and not the old
one, and that it does not mean occupation.
Now, I apologize to the Prime Minister that, unlike a soldier, I
made such a long speech.
Nahas Pasha:— I would like first to thank H.E. the Marshal for
his confidence. But I know quite well as a leader of the people
that they are angry and resentful, and can never depend on new
promises or accept new conceptions, which aim at maintaining foreign
troops in Egypt under any name or in any capacity. I can never be
convinced or convince the people that the maintenance of a foreign
army in peace time means anything else but a sort of occupation and


incomplete sovereignty. We have suffered much from the past
repeated experiences, and I stood beside you and led the people to give
you every help materially and morally in the last war, I did this not
only in compliance with the Treaty, but also because I was confident
of the cause of liberty. The people were behind me, serving you and
putting all their service at your disposal; they were helping you with
their hearts and souls as they did in the first World War. They gave
you their crops and put their railways, means of communications and
other services at your disposal in order to serve the Allied cause,
hoping for the fulfillment of the promises of evacuation and complete
independance. But none was fulfilled,
I cannot agree with what Sir William Slim said about having a
break with the past, because the past is still facing us and cannot be
ignored or forgotten. It is summed up in the long occupation and
unfulfilled promises. How can I have confidence now or accept a new
conception which does not differ in results from the experiences of the
past?
You can say that the people’s confidence in your promises and
conceptions has weakened, also in the Big Powers dominating the
world. Why should we stand on your side, get ourselves killed, des-
troy our lands and lose our resources, if we do not know for sure that
this third time our demands are satisfied? We cannot say to the
people that we shall have a break with the past so long as the present
is a copy of the past, however different the shape or form.
We have to find a new way, a new sort of co-operation, which
realises the evacuation and safeguards our mutual interests, I believe
that we can defend ourselves, and think of a sort of co-operation
between us which would remove the fears and realise immediate and
complete evacuation.
I like you to know that no power on earth can convince the Egytian
people that Egypt will be meant for itself for attacks or aggression.
What will cause this attack is the presence in our land of foreign troops
which will be the target for Russian aggression. The presence of these
troops will be the excuse which the Russians will make to attack Egypt,
It is obvious and necessary to complete our military preparedness
in land, sea and air, and completely to furnish the Egyptian Army with
equipment. You yourselves should furnish the Egyptian Army with
modern armaments of all kinds, and give us in this respect serious
and effective help, not as you do now, promise to send tanks without
carrying it out. If our army completes its military preparedness with
arms and ammunitions, we will stand on your side to repel any aggres-
sion against Egypt, and will wholeheartedly co-operate with you to that
end. This co-operation will be fruitful and sufficient without any
need to maintain foreign troops in Egypt in peace time.
Do not forget the morale of the army; the Egyptian army will have
a high morale when it feels independent. Your evacuation from our
land will enhance this spirit and induce the army to great sacrifices in
serving the common cause of peace.


Why do you keep your troops in the Canal and not in Palestine or
Gaza, although these same troops, both heavy and light, can reach us
in one week, and can be here in time of war?
This is the only way by which I can convince the people.
Marshal Slim : — I agree entirely but it is not a question of
occupation; the presence of troops does not mean occupation. It is a
new conception of allied defence.
Nahas Pasha : The conception is entirely different here. Let
us agree in thoughts, and we shall succeed. As you are the highest
military commander in the British Empire, use your influence with us,
and we shall reach an agreement. Put all the troops you want outside
our frontiers, and I assure you that you will find full and wholehearted
material co-operation when war breaks out.
Marshal Slim : You must have some British Air Forces, because
you have not got enough. I speak as a military man.
Nahas Pasha : What you say as a military man can be solved
nicely politically. As for the Air Forces, we do not object to your giving
us all the planes you want to be ours, and they will be used in your
own interest if war comes; we, inside our country, will make all the
preparedness whid;h the situation requires. As for the other forces,
it is easy to arrange for them to reach Egypt in time of war. This will
be subject to the detailed agreements which will be made in this respect.
Marshal Slim : Defence is not a matter of one service, but of all
services put together. British forces outside Egypt cannot come
suddenly. There must be preparedness,
Nahas Pashas : — The preparedness will be effected with your
agreement and technical supervision, but you will not be vith us;
you will be near us, and as military experts to us,
I want to explain this to you personally, in order to understand my
conception which is to find some sort of productive co-operation,
provided our country is evacuated. This will facilitate everything. I
want to reach an agreement by which I can convince the Government,
the people and the opposition. We cannot deny that the opposition has
its eyes wide open, watching us. But I am doing the right thing.
Marshal Slim :— I do not think that any British Government will
be prepared to say that if the British troops leave the country, they will
be able to return in a few days,
Nahas Pasha : If the British Government does not appreciate the
situation, you must know that the Egyptian Government does not accept
the present conditions.
Marshal Slim : If we can define what military arrangements could
be made to make clear to the masses that we have completely finished
with occupation, and that the new arrangement is only one of joint
defence based on equality, Your Excellency could easily put that to the


people by your influence. Egypt is advenced, like other countries. You
are now in a position to do it. This goes on between the big powers
like America, England and France.
Mr. Chapman-Andrews : You have to choose between safety and
ruin.
Nahas Pasha :— These words were said in the negotiations of the
1936 Treaty and all previous negotiations. Their effect on the Egyptian
people will be exactly the same as in the past. We were in the same
boat: You were saved and we were drowned. I know its effect on
the Egyptian people better. The sort of co-operation which I am after
is the one based on realising the evacuation. You ought to think, as I
am going to think too with my colleagues, about the nature of this
co-operation and its details.
Marshal Slim : We do not want any sort of occupation.
Nahas Pasha : You must know that evacuation is very important
and fundamental. If it is completed, we shall work together hand in
hand and with all our hearts and souls.
Marshal Slim : It will be very difficult to advise my Government
to accept complete evacuation, I do not think you can defend your-
selves. If the British troops withdraw from Egypt, it will have a
disastrous effect on the cold war against Russia. Arab countries,
Turkey, Iran and the Dominions will be horrified. Our Allies in
America will think we have deserted them.
We do not think that British troops in Egypt should remain for
ever. But I do not see how Egypt can be defended vithout some
British troops; and vithout the presence of some British troops, our
Allies will not see how Egypt can be defended.
Nahas Pasha :— You agreed with Sidky Pasha on complete
evacuation by September 1949. How can I say otherwise to the people
now? We were against him for delaying evacuation till that date and
asked for immediate evacuation.
Marshal Slim : We advance in our conceptions of defence. If
war comes and we have an agreement, Egypt will be defended by many
others. If there are no British troops in Egypt, I would be wasting my
time if I went to these people, and told them : ” Send me some troops, ”
if I myself have left the country.
Nahas Pasha ;— We can consider in this case concluding a treaty
with all of you in order to reassure you all.
Marshal Slim : lam stating facts; I have been with all the troops
of the British Empire, New Zealand, Australia, South Africa, etc. It
is no use asking them to send troops to Egypt if there are no British
troops in Egypt.
If we can come to a reasonable agreement, the defence of Egypt is
a practical one. Troops could get there in time.


But I do not consider it beyond the statesmanship of Your
Excellency to convince the people that we have finished with the 1936
Treaty, that the Egyptian troops will be on a footing of equality with
the other troops, and that Egypt has complete sovereignty and
independence. If this is difficult, His Excellency is the man to do
difficult things.
I have an open mind; I am not Spinks Pasha and I do not think in
terms of occupation.
Nahas Pasha : I noticed that myself, so I talked with you frankly
and about everything, and I meant to convince you in the course of the
discussion in order to reach a just solution.
Marshal Slim : I see your political difficulties, and the difference
between you and me is not one of principle but of organisation and
method in Egypt's interest.
Ibrahim Farag Bey : What is the period you —as a military
man consider necessary for this organisation and method which you
talk about?
Marshal Slim : I cannot fix a definite time. The British Army
does not want to stay in Egypt. All their families do not like it. The
army lives in bad conditions, British Forces will be there so long as
the international situation threatens Egypt. Ido not know how long. It
depends on the international situation.
I am confident that if you can keep to this view, there will be no
difference in principle between us, and if the Prime Minister sees
that this is in Egypt's interest, he will not find it difficult to convince
the people to accept and find a way out.
Nahas Pasha : — We have exchanged views. So think, Your
Excellency, of what I told you. I am going to discuss the matter with
my colleagues, and we shall meet again.
Marshal Slim : As long as lam in Egypt, I put myself at your
disposal.


RECORD
of a conversation between H.E. Moustafa el Nahas Pasha,
President of the Council of Ministers
and H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
on Tuesday June 6th, 1950, at 11 a.m.
Present :
H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Mr. Chapman-Andrews
H.E. Moustafa Nosrat Bey
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
Nahas Pasha : — 1. The question is not only to convince the
people, but the Governement should be convinced first; and then they
can convince the people.
2. The Government consider the complete evacuation as a basis
for any understanding between Britain and Egypt for the following
reasons :
a) Egypt’s natural right to have its territory free from any foreign
troops.
b ) Britains's promises to evacuate, which exceeded 60, the last of
which was made by the British Government in the Sidky-Bevin Project,
to evacuate by September 1949. Had this agreement been signed at
the time, there would be no British troops in Egypt today. Britain’s
insistence on keeping her troops now would make the Egyptian people
feel that she was not serious in accepting evacuation. This would
weaken the Egyptian people's confidence in any agreement concluded
now unless based on immediate evacuation. It cannot be claimed that
circumstances have changed since 1946. The international circum-
stances have not changed since the end of the war. The expected
Russian danger has been existing since then.
c) The Charter’s provisions and the resolutions of the United
Nations.
d ) With the advance in military strategy and weapons, the
stationing of this limited number of troops in the Canal Zone has
become futile from the military viewpoint,
e) Egypt can easily put more troops than the number of the
present British troops in this zone; and if Britain's help to strengthen
the Egyptian army is serious, Egypt can fill the gap with her national
forces.


/) The Egyptian people, after all these repeated promises, cannot
possibly have any confidence or trust in anything less than complete
evacuation. This confidence and trust are essential to gain the people’s
support and loyalty in carrying out any obligations undertaken by them
when danger threatens. To gain the support of the Egytian people is
much more useful to Britain in war time than to maintain this limited
number of her troops in the Suez Canal in peace time.
g) The claim that the existence of the threat of war at present
justifies the maintenance of British troops in the Canal means the
occupation will last for ever, because this danger will never disappear
at any time. This danger came in the past from Germany; then from
Germany, Italy and Japan in the last war; now it is said to come from
Russia. In fact, it is a vicious circle. It will be always possible to say
that there exists a danger of war from one of the big powers.
Therefore, Egytians cannot accept the occupation of their country
because of such an argument.
h) The countries surrounding Russia herself, like Turkey and Iran,
and which are threatened with the danger of direct invasion, are not
occupied at present by foreign forces. The invasion will not reach
Egypt except after these and neighbouring countries have been overrun.
Britain has many strategic and air bases in the countries surrounding
Egypt, such as Malta, Cyprus, Cyrenaica, and Transjordan, from which
it would be easy to send troops to Egypt in time of war.
As to the analogy between Egypt and Britain, regarding the presence
of foreign troops in England, the answer may be summed up as
follows:
1) There can be no question that the presence of these forces
does, in no way, prejudice British sovereignty, in view of the fact that
the two States are equal.
2) This siuation in Britain is temporary and occasioned by an
emergency, bu!: in Egypt it is considered a continuation of 60 years of
occupation.
3) Should Britain ask the American forces to leave, they will, no
doubt, leave immediately. This is not the case with regard to the British
forces in Egypt.
4) The difference in the way the British and Egyptians view the
presence of foreign troops in their countries.
Egypt, therefore, does not accept the stationing of foreign troops
on her soil either in time of peace or imminent threat of war or an
apprehended international emergency.
Egypt considers that the question should be dealt with in the
following manner;
o) The immediate evacuation of British troops from Egypt.
6) Since Egypt is anxious to strengthen her army, supply it with
the most modern weapons and equipment, especially in regard to air
defence, and complete all military and civil preparations requisite for


defence, such as; construction of air-fields, armament factories, roads
and other means of communication, etc..., it is necessary that Britain
should hasten to aid Egypt by supplying her with her needs,
c) In the event of a situation threatening Middle East security,
the two Governments will consult together on the situation.
d ) In the event of an armed agression against Egypt, or of Great
Britain being involved in war as a result of an armed aggression against
any of the adjacent countries to Egypt, Egypt will cooperate militarily
within her own boundaries, and within the limit of her capacity,
with Great Britain in defence of Egypt. The details of such cooperation
shall be agreed upon later.
If in such eventuality it were found necessary to send British
troops to Egyptian territory, they would find all necessary facilities to
receive them which can be agreed upon in advance.
It is understood that as soon as military operations are terminated,
British troops should leave Egyptian Territories.
The Egyptian Government are willing to discuss any other proposals
by the British side so long as they are based on the immediate
evacuation of Egypt.
After H.E. Nahas Pasha made this statement, he added:
“ It is true that we shall complete these talks with the politicians.
But this is the basis, I trust you appreciate the efforts made to reach
this end. ”
Marshal Slim ; I listened with great interest to your statement,
but you kept on speaking of the termination of British occupation
when we are speaking of cooperation and not of occupation.
Nahas Pasha ; This is what you say, but the people regard it as
occupation, because of the circumstances which I have explained.
Marshal Slim ; As to the presence of British forces in Egypt, I
cannot help thinking that if we approach the problem from the defence
angle, instead of that of occupation, things would be different.
Nahas Pasha ;— I explained to Your Excellency the way
of defending Egypt without having to keep British forces.
Marshal Slim : Speaking from a military point of view, Ido not
think you can ensure the defence of Egypt without British troops. The
danger against Egypt is twofold : By way of air and by way of land.
It is necessary, for the proper air defence of Egypt, that forces should
be integrated now in peace-time. If they are not made ready
beforehand, the situation will be difficult,
Nahas Pasha : If all preparations will be made here beforehand,
why then should British forces remain?
Marshal Slim : You cannot make preparations beforehand, unless
you have Egyptian and British air squadrons working together. It is


a military fact. You must be trained with us in order that we may have
the necessary coordination. In the case of Radar, for exemple, British
and Egyptians must work together at the same time. It is not enough
to send experts.
Nahas Pasha :— We can find a solution for this problem. We
can, for instance, have them as experts. How many are they anyway?
Marshal Slim . I cannot quite honestly say how many.
Nohas Pasha We will find a solution for this.
Marshal Slim ; There is no solution. We have to be integrated
before the attack starts. The first air attack should be met with
cooperation between us. Egypt cannot do that by herself. She has
neither the men nor the experience. The only way is for our forces to
be integrated. If we suddenly bring British help, it would be too late;
it should be there and ready before the start.
On the first attack, we should be in a position to meet it. Anti-
aircraft should work in cooperation with the fighter planes; otherwise
it can happen that Egyptian anti-aircraft fire at British planes.
This was our experience in the last war, and we benefited by it, I
speak as a military man, for the safety of the people. This is in so far
as air defence is concerned.
I would like to speak now for a moment of land troops. We have
land troops in Western Europe, all under one command, namely French.
There are joint manoeuvres. I asked Heidar Pasha to see them. The
higher command is an integrated staff.
To come back to Egypt, there is another reason why I must insist
on keeping British troops in peace-time. If Egypt is attacked, we hope
to have troops from the Dominions and other countries to reinforce our
troops in Egypt. Australia, New Zealand and South Africa would not
agree to sending troops to Egypt if we are not there,
I assure you of that because I know them. They would not even
consider it. They may be wrong or stupid. You can easily ask the
Australian Minister or the American Ambassador.
Nahas Pasha : — You can influence them as you are trying to
influence us now. As for the command, it would not matter in time of
war, if the command be yours or ours; this is immaterial. But we
cannot accept military forces in peace-time. You must take all circum-
stances into consideration, ours and others. So it is up to you to
convince them as to our circumstances.
Marshal Slim : — It would be easier for you to persuade the
Egyptians in your own way, than for me to convince the Australians,
New Zealanders, South Africans, etc.
Nahas Pasha ;— You can do that if you tell them that Nahas
Pasha himself cannot, despite his personality, convince the people of
allowing one single foreign soldier to remain in Egypt.


Mr. Chctpman-Andrews : Do the people realise the danger
confronting them?
Soloh Eddin Bey : The people regard British occupation as a
standing fact; but the other danger is only a mere threat. They can-
not be convinced that occupation should remain to repel that danger.
Mr. Chopmcm-Andrews r Do they realise that the danger of
Russian occupation is worse that British occupation?
Scdah Eddin Bey : It is very difficult to convince the people of
that.
Nohas Pasha : lam willing to discuss any proposal, provided it
is based on the evacuation of British troops. I would be glad to meet
you another time, when you return, after you have tried to convince
the others.
Soloh Eddin Bey ; We must consider the psychological aspect of
the question. The Russians have gained a lot in Egypt in this connec-
tion on account of the presence of British troops,
Mr. Chapman-Andrews ; The war is closer this time than in 1936.
Salah Eddin Bey : If you evacuate, it means that the divergences
between us have ended, and the result will be excellent. Your
evacuation will give us an excellent argument, as one of their
contentions is that we are not an independent country so long as British
troops remain.
Nohas Pasha : What you say about the others not coming to our
aid when they find that you have evacuated is hypothetical; an idea
which could be true or otherwise. But the case here is a factual one,
and definitely makes it impossible to repel the danger when it comes.
So, why do you not make an attempt to convince the others. And then
come back and let us know? Help me and benefit by this apportunity,
and try to convince the others.
Marshal Slim : It is not hypothetical. You cannot ask troops to
come if we are not in Egypt,
Nohas Pasha : Tell them: Your are helping England by sending
troops and not Egypt. Does not America wish to help you?
Marshal Slim : America is out of this; it has nothing to do with
the Middle East; and I cannot speak for the Dominions,
I heard what you said, and appreciate the psychological effect; but
drop the word “ occupation " please.
The safety of Egypt and England depends on the integration of
defence. I agree that it is difficult in view; of the history of British
occupation. But the present Government can make the people under


stand that we do not mean occupation. I hope that you will consider
this, and I will consider it too.
Our difference is not one of principle but of presentation. I hope
that we can make some progress towards reaching an agreement.
I thank you for listening to me, and I may return about the 12th of
July.
Mr. Chapman-Andrews : I want to say a word. Field Marshal
Sir William Slim did not work in Egypt, and was not a member of the
Occupation Army. His views are objective and his object is the
security of this country. We must try to work out something new.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Sunday July 8th, 1950, at 4.30 p.m.
Present ;
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.£. Ibrahim Farag Bey
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador; — I thank H.E. The Prime Minister for
sending me the record of Field Marshal Sir William Slim’s talks with
Egyptian Ministers. I wanted to see it because I was anxious to know
whether the Egyptian Government has full appreciation on the possi-
bilities of the situation and how potentially dangerous it is. We do not
know if the Soviet Union will try to find a weak point at which to effect
a thrust but it is obvious that they are experimenting. I would also like
in view of the rapid deterioration of the situation to point out that the
world situation has changed for the worse, particularly in recent days,
I would like you to consider whether there is, as I suggested the other
day, room for a bargain between us. Does Egypt intend to use all her
force and take advantage of everything to defend herself? If she does,
then there is room for a business deal. If both sides want the same
thing then there is room a practical solution,
I fully agree that during our relation with Egypt in the past fifty
years things were far from satisfactory. It is possible to make a break
with the past and make a new start. I understand that Egypt says yes
provided that the British go from Egypt. But if you are really seeking
a practical solution you cannot make a clean sweep of all British instal-
lations and troops in Egypt and then try (o bring them back on a new
basis. It would not be practical in present circumstances. It would take
a long time for them to go and it would take a long time for them to
come back, and in the meantime the whole defence position would be
disrupted.
Everybody needs allies. We have called on America to help us and
you can call upon us to help you. Examine the possibilities drawn up by
Field Marshal Slim. In the event of war breaking out, the Middle East
will be one of the main points of attack. The first attack will be by air.
That would be accompanied by submarine attacks in sea communica-
tions followed by land attacks. If you are going to deal with an air


attack there must be in Egypt a complete air defence already establish-
ed: Radar, communication system, observation points, anti-aircraft ar-
tillery, and a whole scheme of defence. At the moment, Egypt is not in a
position to provide that. What we suggest is that we and Egypt should
have a defence system of Egypt, not necessarily as Anglo-Egyptian de-
fence, but as Egyptian defence provided by integration and cooperation
of the two Air Forces. There should be no difficulty about arranging
for naval defense as base facilities in Egyptian ports would only be
needed by the British Navy in war time. As to the land forces, I fully
agree that the position of these forces in Egypt is different. Let us
examine that question. If it is desired to keep an invading army away
from Egypt, our military authorities say that you cannot do it unless
you have combatant land forces in position in Egypt on the outbreak
of war. That is obviously the ideal but it might be possible to hold the
land forces sufficiently near to bring them to Egypt swiftly on the out-
break of war. Whether that is so or not, a military base is in any case
essential; and in order to be kept in a state to be used at short notice,
it must be staffed by technicians and administrative personnel of all
kinds. The greater part of the British in the Canal Zone now are
technicians.
The thought I want to put in your mind is the possibility of dis-
tinguishing between technical personnel and fighting troops, I want you
to consider whether the evacuation of the combatant land forces from
Egypt would be sufficient to prove to the Egyptian people that what
you call " occupation v is finished. A complete break with the past, the
abrogation of the 1936 Treaty and the evacuation of all combatant land
troops from Egypt would be a marked gesture.
Let me recapitulate the questions to which I would like you to reply.
These are :
(a) Is Egypt determined to defend her territory by force if need
be?
(b) Do the Egyptian Government agree that Egypt is not in a
position to do this from her own unaided ressources?
(c) If so, is Egypt prepared to enter into a free and friendly alliance
with Great Britain so that our common aim of ensuring the
security of Egypt and whole Middle Eastern areas is attained?
(d) If so, do the Egyptians agree that the Air Defence of Egypt
should be organised with British assistance until such time as
Egypt can assume this responsibiity unaided?
(e) The Egyptian Government realise that the land defence of
Egypt is impossible unless a military base is kept in working
order on Egyptian soil ready for immediate expansion when
needed; and that such a base demands considerable numbers
of technical and adminitrative personnel whom Egypt can-
not supplv?
(f) If so, would the evacuation of combatant land forces, be re-
garded as putting an end to “ occupation, " it being obvious that
technical and administrative personnel cannot occupy a conn-
trv 7


Foreign Minister : I feel and I hope Sir Ralph shares the feeling
that the international situation required from both sides immediately to
work together for the settlement of questions outstanding between Egypt
and Britain. The nature of the present talks between us may be no more
than an exchange of views, nevertheless I attach great importance to
them and I hope they will help to clariy the atmosphere of Anglo-
Egyptian relations. To achieve this it is important to speak with com-
plete frankness. It is also inevitable to probe a little into the past for
only in the light of that past can we understand Egypt’s real position.
Egyptian public opinion is unanimously agreed on two points:
First, the immediate evacuation of British troops from Egypt and
The Sudan.
Second, the unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown,
British occupation has always been held by Egypt to be prejudicial
to her sovereignty and detrimental to her personality since in its long
history extending over sixty seven years, it proved to be so. The
arguments put forward by Britain for the occupation of Egypt have
changed on various occasions and promises of evacuation have been
lavishly given, but those promises have never up till now been fulfilled.
Britain had always found an excuse for the continuation of occu-
pation.
The latest argument put forward by Britain in recent years is the
inability of Egypt to defend herself independently. This argument had
been put forward in the course of all negociations which took place
between both sides from 1919 up to the conclusion of the 1936 Treaty,
There is an article in this Treaty which explicitly provides that the
presence of British forces in Egypt shall not constitute in any manner
an occupation.
Egyptian public opinion and by that, I do not mean the man-in-
the-street alone but intellectuals, thinkers and leaders as well, they all
feel that if Egypt is not able to-day to defend herself independently,
the greater part, if not the full responsibility for this, must inevitably
fall on Britain, for the British had full control over the affairs of Egypt
over fifty years, a period long enough to prepare Egypt for defending
herself but Britain did not do so.
It was at least possible had Great Britain realised the common
interest, to make good this inability in the period between 1919 and
9139, that is, in the period between the end of World War I and the
outbreak of World War 11, but Britain had instead been anxious for
the occupation to continue and for Egypt to remain weak and unable to
defend herself so that this weakness may serve as an excuse to continue
the occupation.
The argument pu forward by you now for the continuation of
occupation in some shape or another, viz. fear of Russian agression,
has always and will always exist, and should Egypt accept it, it would
mean that she accepts indefinite and permanent occupation. This
argument existed before World War I in the form of a German threat


and before World War II in the form of a threat from the German-Italo-
Japanese Axis and after World War II in the form af a Russian threat.
Should we assume to-day that the Western Bloc completely annihilated
the Russian threat, there would emerge in future the possibility of a
new threat from some country aspiring to achieve world domination.
British Ambassador : British defence forces throughout the world
are extended to their utmost. We find difficulty in continuing to bear
the burden alone. Our aim is to make Egypt strong enough to relieve
us of at any rate part of the burden of maintaining security in the
Middle East, Our intention now is to make Egypt strong enough to
defend herself. We do not want to be here, God forbid!
Foreign Minister : lam very happy to hear this.
British Ambassador : This is one of the ideas that Field Marshal
Sir William Slim tried, on the direct instructions of the British Govern-
ment, to impress on the Egyptian Government,
Foreign Minister ; lam very happy to hear this comment which
is indicative of a new policy indeed, if I may say so, of a new mentality.
I assure you on my part that I heartily welcome {hat Egypt should bear
to-day this important task, I have already pointed out to H.E. Mr,
Bevin in my talks with him last winter when passing through Egypt
that the strengthening of the Egyptian army was the key to the whole
situation.
I would have very much liked this change in British policy to have
taken place since the conclusion of the 1936 Treaty. It is my conviction
that the period which elapsed since then would have been enough,
indeed more than enough, for Egypt to become sufficiently strong to
bear that burden. Three years have elapsed since the conclusion of
the Treaty up to the outbreak of war in the course of which many things
could have been done for the strengthening of the Egyptian army. The
same thing applies to the war period when arms flowed from America
in accordance with the Lend and Lease Act and were given to Russia,
also after the war when there were considerable quantities of arms left
over which could have been made use of by Egypt, but none of these
things had ever been done, lam afraid nothing had been done because
the British side did not countenance in the past the idea of a strong
Egypt, in other words, confidence had been lacking and this lack of
confidence had complicated matters until they reached the present dead-
lock.
It seems to me that this factor of lack of confidence and the desire
that Egypt should not assume her proper place as a nation of many
possibilities and potentialities both from the material and moral stand-
points, had also been the cause of the policy followed by Britain in The
Sudan, for an independent, prosperous and strong Egypt united with
The Sudan, can assume a high place in the Middle East at the head of
a strong bloc of Arab Nations and on good terms with many Moslem
and oriental countries. This, it seems to me, was not countenanced by
British policy. If this change to which you have alluded was made in


connection with the question of defence involving evacuation, I hope
a similar change has also been made in connection with the question
of The Sudan,
In order that I may complete the picture, I would like to refer to a
third question, viz. the establishment of Israel on Egypt’s borders. I
must tell you in all sincerity and frankness that public feeling ascribes
to Britain the establishment of this State on our borders so that it may
be a thorn in our side and a permanent threat to prevent Egypt from
strengthening herself, making full use of her resources and assuming
her proper place among the nations.
British Ambassador : It is distressing to me to see how far the
lack of confidence has gone.
Foreign Minister : I think, whether or not you are able to concur
with me on this point, that you agree in any case that the establishment
of Israel which was the ultimate aim of British policy envisaged by the
Balfour Declaration has become a most complicated problem giving rise
to the gravest concern in Egypt and the Arab States, threatening peace
in the Middle East and leaving behind most distressing consequences
in the form of the problem of Refugees.
These are the most important psychological, logical and political
causes which led to the present deadlok between Egypt and Great
Britain, They may be summed up in lack of confidence and ill-thinking.
No just and equitable man can blame Egypt for this. If you have
sincerely resolved on breaking with the past, this will not produce the
desired effect unless a clean break is effected by complete and imme-
diate evacuation, by supplying Egypt with the requisite equipment to
bring her defence up to standard and by the recognition in practice of
the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan and desisting from any action
intended to prejudice this unity.
Should this materialise, I assure Your Excellency that the atmo-
sphere of Anglo-Egyptian relations will be completely reversed and will
become absolutely clear. Confidence, security and cooperation will
prevail between the two countries.
I woulds also very much like to point out an essential and most
important factor which requires on your part to speed up complete and
immediate evacuation. This factor is that the Egyptian people cannot
really feel that they are defending themselves against foreign invasion
so long as occupation exists in any form whatsoever. In fact they feel
and they have a right to do so that any attack on Egypt is not
intended in itsef but is made on account of the presence of your forces
in Egypt,
And now I give Your Excellency a general answer to the question
put by you.
Yes, Egypt is determined to defend herself and she agrees to the
conclusion of a defensive alliance with Great Britain on two conditions ;
Complete and immediate evacuation and that the Treaty of Alliance be
one between equals on a footing of equality. I refer Your Excellency


to the details expressed by H.E. Nahas Pasha to Field Marshal Slim at
their last meeting. Your Excellency will find full replies to your ques-
tions on other matters.
By way of acquainting myself with your views I should like, in
my turn, to inquire of the number of British Forces now present in
Egypt. How many of them are combatant troops? How many pilots?
How many technicians? How many artisans? How many workers?
Also the number of administrative personnel and what are the special
qualifications required for the work entrusted to them.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. Field Marshal Slim
on Thursday July 13th, 1950, at 10.30 a.m.
Present :
H.E. Mohamcd Salah liddin Hey H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim
H.E, Ibrahim Faray Bey H.Fi. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Moustafa Nosrat Bey
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister : Shall we resume our previous talks?
Marshal Slim : I cannot help thinking that the Korean business
offers an example of a vacuum in time of war. Southern Korea was
taken by surprise. It could not have been done had there been Amer-
ican troops. A point was raised by Ministers in Egypt regarding the
withdrawal of British troops. You see what has happened in Korea,
British Ambassador : In the meantime Korea suffers.
Minister of War : — Had they armed Southern Korea she could
have defended herself.
Marshal Slim : If they had a small American force in the country
they would have not thought of invading Korea.
Minister of War : If the British wish to be near the Canal in
Palestine, there are several places in which they can be stationed.
Marshal Slim: — One of which is Gaza strip?
Minister of War : Possibly,
Foreign Minister ; On the contrary I find that the Korean business
lend support to the Egyptian viewpoint. There is no doubt that the
danger was clear to the U.S.A, nevertheless, she decided to withdraw
her troops occupying Southern Korea and actually gave effect to that
decision. There were of course political and moral considerations as
well as other considerations connected with equity and the United
Nations Charter, etc..., which dictated the withdrawal of American
troops from Korea in spite of the possibility of danger. Then again,
the analogy does not at all hold good since there is a big difference
between the two cases. Southern Korea is adjacent to Northern Korea
which is occupied by the Soviet and which, in its turn, is adjacent to
Communist territory. Egypt is far removed from the first line of attack.


It is understood that it would take four to six months for invading
armies to reach Egypt. This is not the case in connection with Korea.
Marshal Slim : The time factor is of course rather important.
The speed of land attack will depend on the defence system and air
defence. I is not quite right to say it takes four months for invading
armies to reach Egypt. It will depend on the amount of delay imposed
on the invading armies. Although it is true that the Americans withdrew
their troops from Korea I think you will agree with me that had the
Americans stayed in Korea it would not have been attacked.
Foreign Minister : I agree with the Field Marshal that had Amer-
ican troops remained in Korea, Northern Korea would not in all prob-
ability have attacked Southern Korea. But this cannot be offered as
an argument for the continuation of British occupation of Egypt in any
form whatsoever on account of the various reasons given to you by
H.E. Nahas Pasha in previous talks and which I did not omit to explain
to H.E. the British Ambassador in the course of my contacts with him.
The reasons which led to the withdrawal of American troops from
Southern Korea in spite of probable danger are by far much weaker
than the historical, psychological, practical and political reasons on the
grounds of which the Egyptian people can no longer bear to hear any-
thing about the presence of British troops in Egypt. This state of
affairs cannot be changed by merely saying that the presence of these
troops does not constitute an occupation. This was explicitly stated in
the 1936 Treaty. Subsequent evens have shown that there is a big
difference between that which is said or written down and that which
takes place in actual practice.
I would ask H.E. the Field Marshall not to consider the possibilities
of the situation in the light of purely tactical considerations, but also
to consider the psychological element which, in my view, has a great
deal to do with the military factors that a great General like Field
Marshal Slim has to consider, I have no doubt that H.E. agrees with
me that a well-contented Egypt trusting in the good intentions of Great
Britain after evacuation can contribute by far a greater share in defend-
ing herself and serving the common cause of peace than a resentful
Egypt who cannot help feeling that her sovereignty and independence
are being prejudiced by the presence of British troops in her territories.
In fact, I cannot imagine how can any cooperation exist under such
circumstances, H.E. Nahas Pasha has already pointed out to you that
we desire to defend our country and that we are prepared to conclude
an alliance with you provided it is preceded by evacuation. It is pos-
sible so long as good-will prevails and so long as this basis is agreed
upon for Egypt to have all means of defence and preparations pro-
vided on her territory and for Britain to supply her with the necessary
equipment to achieve this end so that if war broke out and British
troops came back in accordance with the alliance it would be possible for
them to cooperate straightaway with the Egyptian forces in defence.
I believe in all sincerity and I hope you agree with me that our
declaration that Egypt intends to defend herself and is prepared to
enter into an alliance with Great Britain should be enough to allay any


fears Britain might have. Accordingly it would be better to start forth-
with to make good any deficiency in the means of defence and in
equipping the Egyptian army without loss of precious time.
If events in Korea have any significance in this connection, its
greatest significance, in my view, is that you have long delayed supply-
ing the Egyptian army with necessary arms and equipment. Had this
been done a long time ago which was quite possible things would
have been different to-day and you would not have found any reason
to offer for the presence of British troops in Egypt.
In point of fact there exists a vicious circle which ought not to
continue. Egypt demands evacuation, you, on yOur side, do not wish
to agree to it and consequently you do not provide the Egyptian army
with necessary arms, the Egyptian army, therefore, remains weak and
your argument for the presence of British troops in Egypt stands. Had
you started at the right starting point dictated by he internal conditions
of Egypt, i.e., resolving on the immediate evacuation of British troops,
it would have been in your interest to speed up the process of equip-
ping the Egyptian army with necessary arms.
Marshal Slim:— It is not only our interest but it is a desire on
our part to make the Egyptian army as strong as possible. There
remains, however, that Egypt cannot defend herself. We have no
ulterior thought about keeping the Egyptian army weak. The stronger
the Egyptian army the better I’ll be pleased. Believe me that we are
working to strengthen the air defence and we will do the same with the
Egyptian army.
We are agreed on two things and it is better for everybody that
we should have them :
1) That the Egyptian forces will be as strong and well-equipped
as possible ;
2) That a definite alliance be concluded for that purpose. Merely
having an alliance between us does not make for security.
The alliance must be based on four things :
1) A Headquarter in existence with communications.
2) A base which will be ready to receive and maintain at once all
reinforcements.
3) Air defence which can go into action at once.
4) Some sort of mobile force to engage the enemy.
If we can find some means by which these things can be provided
and at the same time satisfy the Egyptian people,- everything will be
settled.
Foreign Minister: — lam glad to hear from H.E. the Field Marshal
that you are anxious to supply the Egyptian army with various and


necessary arms. I would like to point out in this connection that I in-
tended to see you alone to-day ; it was not agreed that H.E. The
Minister of War would be present with us but that he would see you
by himself later. But H.E. got in touch with me this morning and asked
that we should see you together. The reasons for this is that none of
the small quantity of arms agreed upon to be given to the Egyptian
army had been delivered since our last meeting, Egypt’s idea of arming
is by no means a small thing. It must necessarily be proportional with
the number of population, Egypt’s area and strategic position as well
as with Egypt’s desire to defend herself and the cause of Democracy
and Universal peace. We cannot help wondering when we see arms
flowing from America to the Atlantic countries and to Turkey, Greece
and Iran while Egypt is treated differently. I would like to add that
we see many alliances concluded here and there which do not provide
for the presence of foreign troops in the countries with whom these
alliances are concluded. There are no foreign forces in Turkey, yet she
is at the danger line, nor in most of the Atlantic Pact countries if not
all. There are to-day no British forces in India or Pakistan. For these
reasons in addition to the special reasons appertaining to Egypt, I would
request Field Marshal Slim to start, as I have already pointed out, at
the right starting point by resolving on the immediate evacuation of
British troops from Egypt. I can assure His Excellency that if he makes
that start, it would be possible to overcome any difficulty and bring
up to standard all defence requirements in Egypt provided they are
Egyptian and are employed in time of war by our ally.
Marshal Slim;— You say we give arms to Turkey. Actually we
don’t. There is a big difference between countries to which we have
certain engagements and countries to which we will come to help in
time of war. If you are going to send reinforcements into a country
you want some preparations to receive them.
Foreign Minister: — I don’t see your point.
Marshal Slim: — The whole orientation of policy is turning now
to joint defence everywhere.
Minister of War; — If the British give the Egyptian army all the
arms required by it, I assure you that Egypt will be in a position to
defend herself.
Marshal Slim : Ido not know whether we have all the equipment;
for instance you asked for Sherman tanks and in practically all the
countries I have visited they asked me for Sherman tanks; Burma, Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, etc... We haven’t got them. If we send you
all the quantity you want we would probably go short ourselves.
Foreign Minister:— It is admitted that Egypt is an important
strategic point and therefore you must give her sufficient arms with
which to equip herself.
Marshal Slim; — We havn’t enough arms to give to all countries.


Foreign Minister:— My point is this, if you have a limited amount
of armaments for defending the Canal zone, this limited amount should
be given to Egypt as having priority over her ally for defending herself.
Marshal Shm:— Tell me what I’ll do with France ?
Foreign Minister: — It is entirely your business.
Marshal Slim:— It would be helpful if you would make some
suggestions for a settlement satisfactory to both sides.
Foreign Minister: — I will discuss this in my next meeting with
H.E. The British Ambassador.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Thursday August 3rd 1950, at 5.30 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador: — I am now in a position to give you the
answer to the questions you put in the last meeting :
Combatant troops consist of field formations with their field adminis-
tration units :
450 Officers
8150 Other ranks
8600 Total
Headquarters and Signals :
450 Officers
2750 Other ranks
3200 Total
Static Base Personnel:
1200 Officers
10800 Other ranks
12000 Total
Static Guard duty mostly Mauritians ;
100 Officers
8400 Other ranks
8500 Total


Air Defence :
70 Officers
1630 Other ranks
1700 Total
Grand Total for the Army;
34000
Egyptians;
Skilled workers (clerical, professional, artisans, drivers, etc-) :
16000
Non-skilled (gaffirs and domestics) :
4500
Daily Labour :
20900
41400 Total
Items of Static Base Personnel;
Royal Army Service Corps (Storage and issue of rations petrol lubric-
ants for Army and R.A.F. Transport for both ; fire brigades
barrack service, etc.) :
3000
Royal Army Ordnance Corps (Storage and care of clothing furniture,
equipment transport, warlike stores and all munitions) :
2800
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Corps (Workshops for
repair and modification of fighting and non-fighting vehicles and
for repair and modification and (to a limited extent) production of
technical equipment of all sorts) :
1500
Royal Army Medical Corps (Storage and issue of medical stores ; Base
Hospitals, laboratories, etc.) :
650
Royal Engineers (Base Survey Office, maintenance and construction of
buildings and camps ; Electric power water; engineer stores :
military post and railway operation ; movement control) ;
2500
Royal Signal Corps (Communications for Base and Air Defence Organi-
sation) :
200
Royal Army Pay Corps (Public and individual accounts ; pay and
allowances ; local purchases) :
600


Provost (Military Police) (Discipline, traffic control: prevention
and detection of crime) :
250
Military Prisons (Detention of soldiers under sentence) :
200
Base Records Office (Record of all personnel; repatriation ; postings) :
300
Pioneers and Labour (Local Civilian labour, Gaffirs and Guards) :
100
Education (School for children, libraries, adult education, etc.) :
150
Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Care of animals used in Base instal-
lations) :
30
Hirings, Disposal and Claims Office (Hiring and release of building
disposal of surplus stores, investigation of claims) :
15
GRAND TOTAL:
11000 to 12000
Royal Air Force;
211 Pilots
93 Officers on technical duties.
3887 Other ranks
274 Officers on administrative duties.
4148 Other ranks
In addition. Headquarters :
58 Officers on technical staff duties.
216 Officers on administrative staff duties.
Total of :
211 Pilots
641 Officers
8035 Men
8887 Total
Civilians :
220 British civilians (civil engineers, architects,
auditors, clerks, etc.).
9000 Egyptian (25% unskilled and 75% skilled).
9220 Total


The nucleus base has to be maintained for the use of the British
army in war time. It holds a considerable amount of equipment to
bring existing units and reinforcements to their war scale. The base
may be represented as a gigantic wholesale-shop. All the stock belongs
to Britain. The proposal of evacuating the base of British personnel is
discarded as impracticable. The minimum personnel which can main- 1
tain it in good working order is the present number.
The idea of an Anglo-Egyptian defensive alliance would be to
keep the war as far as possible from the Canal. In order to do that we
must encourage resistence on the part of North-Eastern countries. If
there is no base in Egypt, the build up will be too slow. The safety of
Egypt herself depends on how quickly the build-up could be made. It
has been suggested that it might be possible to have one of the four
points specified by Marshal Slim, viz. the mobile striking force at Gaza.
This has not as yet been considered. What I can say, from a military
as well as from a political standpoint, this would be impossible unless
there is peace between Israel and Egypt. With a hostile or even neutral
Israel this would be impossible. I must insist that the placing of troops
in Gaza must depend on peace between this country and Israel.
There is another point which I would like to make now. Egypt
finds it difficult to accept the analogy between our troops here and those
in Holland. There is complete analogy between the troops stationed on
the Canal and the United States in Panama. The Panama Canal is
guarded by the United States troops. There is also a naval base in
Cuba and the Cubans welcome it.
Foreign Minister: — Before I make any comment on the many
details which Your Excellency has been so kind to give, I would like
to ask two questions ;
First, did you intend when you agreed to the Sidky-Bevin project
to keep this base in Egypt after the completion of evacuation in Sep-
tember 1949? And if you had intended at the time to give it up, are
we to understand that the defence of the Middle East, which has always
been of great importance to you according to your theories, does not
need this base?
My second question is about joint defence in the Sidky-Bevin pro-
ject. I understand that this joint defence involved no more than the
exchange of views between leading Generals of both sides without need
for any large scale cooperation in all these details given in your state-
ment. I would like to know whether I am right or whether you meant
something else by joint defence ?
British Ambassador: — I am afraid in asking me that you caught
me on the wrong foot partly because I have not my papers to refer to.
I can tell you that it was intended to move the whole of the base, but
at that time the situation was different from now. It was then possible
to move lock, stock and barrel. There was an alternative at the time.
The requirements of a base are communications, certain amount of in-
dustry and man-power.


Foreign Minister t — lam afraid I have to ask a third question about
the place to which you intended to move the base. Your Excellency is
aware of the importance of this in our talks.
British. Ambassador; — 1 fear I cannot answer that question but
1 should have thought it could be deducted from the minutes of the
negotiations.
Foreign Minister'- If we deduce that you intended to move the
base to Palestine which was then under your mandate, is it not possible
now to move it to Transjordan and other parts of Palestine under her
in addition to the Gaza strip ?
British Ambassador: — That could never be a suitable place, there
are no communications, no ports, no man-power.
Foreign Minister: — May 1 ask then of the strategic importance
of territories under Israel and how you regard them in your plan for
Middle East defence and is there any understanding on that point
between you and your American allies ?
British Ambassador:— First of all as to the strategic importance
of the country and territory under Israel, the defence of the Middle East
would be practically impossible without Israel. If you look at the map
you will find how important it is.
The question of arrangement between America and ourselves is a
delicate one. I understand however that in general the Americans are
leaving this part of the world to Britain and her allies. I cannot say
whether there are arrangements for dispatch of troops.
Foreign Minister: — If it is agreed in general to leave the defence
of this part of the world to Britain, have you or the United States con-
sidered the occupation or establishment of bases in Israel for that purpose
having due regard to the enormous strategic importance mentioned by
you ?
British Ambassador:— In so far as Britain is concerned our rela-
tions with Israel are not such as to make it possible for us to consider
such a proposal.
Foreign Minister; — And do you believe that your relations with
Egypt are such as to permit bases to be kept in her territory despite the
detailed facts I have given you about the history of occupation and in
spite of how the Egyptian people in their entirety look upon it ?
British Ambassador: — I could only hope that if it were shown to
the Egyptian people that the relations between our two countries are
now on a different basis, they will accept the idea of giving hospitality
to a military base and headquarters in order to secure our common
defensive aims.
Foreign Minister: — I would like after asking these many ques-
tions to take up again the comment on your statement. 1 will reserve
the detailed comment to some future occasion when I have examined it


in detail. I now content myself with a general comment; the most
important point to which I would like to call attention is whether or
not confidence will be the basis of our alliance. I think you agree with
me that alliance cannot be envisaged except on a basis of confidence
and if so, there can be no importance to the cost of the base kept by you
now in Fayid. And whatever cost you may have incurred, it could be
handed over to your Egyptian allies with one condition : that they are
able to take it over and to maintain it in the same condition for future
use and expansion in time of war when your troops and those of your
allies come to Egypt in accordance with the Treaty of Alliance.
I think this is possible without need for your combatant or non-
combatant forces remaining in Egypt. The statement Your Excellency
has so kindly made supports my view since all those we described at
the beginning of our talks as technicians carry out in fact ordinary
duties which would be very easy for Egyptians to take over with the
exception of the 1500 electrical and mechanical engineers. The services
of some of those cannot be immediately dispensed with but it is not
difficult to have them gradually replaced in a few months by Egyptians.
British Ambassador: — As to the question of confidence, there is
no lack of confidence, but from a technical point of view it would not
be possible for Egypt to keep the base in order without our assistance.
Secondly, it is question of timing. If the British personnel have
to be reintroduced into the base, it would need time and it would not
be possible to secure the defence of Egypt if war were imminent. If
you do not have a base ready in Egypt, then you cannot defend Egypt.
That is the brutal truth.
Foreign Minister: — If we are agreed that the difficulty is not one
of confidence but is one of timing, I am sure we will find the way smooth
and easy before us since there is no doubt it is possible to have the
British in this base replaced in a short time by Egyptians. I will explain
this later to Your Excellency when I discuss your statement in detail.
If three years were considered sufficient in the Sidky-Bevin project to
move the whole of the base to another place, there can be no doubt
that one third of this period or even less would be enough for your
Egyptian allies to work and maintain this base. I hope furthermore that
it would be understood that in our loyalty to the alliance we shall not
content ourselves with taking over the base and efficiently managing it,
but we aim at the strengthening of the Egyptian Army and seriously
raising' its standard at the earliest possible opportunity so that it may
be able to shoulder the responsibility of self-defence and to co-operate
in the defence of the Middle East. This should not be difficult if arms
were to flow into Egypt as they flow into Western Europe considering
that the Middle East is strategically no less important than any other
part of the world.
British Ambassador: — Regarding your comments on the base, I
would like very much to take you to Fayid to see how complicated and
how impossible to expand in short time.


Foreign Minister: — I shall think this over with my Colleagues.
There is one more point on which I would like to comment. You
pointed out to the necessity of concluding peace with Israel if the striking
forces are to be moved to the Gaza strip.
This is the first time the problems of Israel are introduced into talks.
I do not wish now to deal at length with this question but I content
myself for the time being with saying that we have concluded as Your
Excellency is aware a permanent armistice with Israel in accordance
with which no side may attack the other or violate the armistice lines.
I believe that, within the framework of this armistice, we can agree from
the political and legalistic standpoints to move your striking forces to
the Gaza strip without any difficulty and without the need of compli-
cating matters with another question which is very hard for public
opinion to accept or to imagine, viz. concluding peace with Israel.
British Ambassador:— I much regret that this is the way you look
at it. This might indeed lead to a general peace in the Middle East. If
it should transpire eventually that a settlement of our difficulties de-
pended on this point I could only hope that Your Excellency’s Colleagues
in the Cabinet would not share your views.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
H.E. the British Ambassador
On Saturday August 5th 1950, at 5.p.m.
Present :
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
H.E. Abdel-Fattah Amr Pasha
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister: — I have studied the details Your Excellency
has been so kind as to give in the last meeting. The analysis of these
details has fully supported the hurried idea with which I commented
upon them in that meeting. Following this analysis I felt optimistic as
to the possibility of reaching a satisfactory solution of the question of
immediate evacuation. You may notice that this is the first time I use
the word optimistic, but in order that this optimism be materialised, good
will and confidence must prevail. Now I leave it to the language of
figures to support my views.
If the evacuation of combatant troops numbering 8600 is complete
and if the evacuation of guard troops numbering 8500 is also completed
and I do not think that any one can say that we cannot replace them
by Egyptians and if we agree to the evacuation of all those of the
base forces who can be replaced by Egyptians without affecting' the
efficiency of the work, we would find it very easy to dispense with all
those base forces with the exception of a few hundred since the greater
part of them really serve the combatant troops, the guard troops and
themselves. If it is agreed to evacuate the combatant troops and the
guard troops together with all those of the base forces not needed on
technical grounds, there will be no necessity for those who serve them.
This clearly applies to the Royal Army Medical Corps, the Royal Engi-
neers, the Royal Signal Corps, the Royal Army Pay Corps, Provost,
Military Prisons, Base Records Office, Pioneers and Labour, Education,
Royal Army Veterinary Corps and the Hirings, Disposals and Claims
Office.
The same thing applied to the Royal Army Service Corps and the
Royal Army Ordnance Corps since there is no doubt that the greater
part of their men numbering 3000 and 2800 consecutively, only serve
the others. If it is decided upon the evacuation of those others there will
be no need for them to remain with the exception of those in charge of
the technical care of munitions. I should be thankful if Your Excellency


would fix their number since the figure of the Royal Ordnance Corps
was given as a whole and not in detail.
The whole matter would then resolve itself in the Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers Corps which I pointed out in the last meeting.
This alone requires some consideration. Here again I would request
Your Excellency to give me some details of the total figure which you
gave as 1500, as there can be no doubt that the greater part of those
carry out ordinary repaid and maintenance work for which Egyptians
can be easily found.
The net result would be that we are left after the combatant troops,
guard troops and base forces with only a few hundred technical people
to whom we have no objection to remain for a short time until Egypt-
ians, who are going to replace them, are trained in their work.
As to Headquarters and Signals, there will be no need for them to
remain after the evacuation of the aforesaid forces since the greater part
of their duties is the co-ordination and supervision of the affairs of
those forces and since military plans may be drawn up at any nearby
place even on board a ship.
It is of course understood that the place of the Headquarters should
be as near as possible to the combatant forces. I content myself now
with this statement and put off the discussion of the Royal Air Force
and British Air Defence until I hear what Your Excellency has to say
and I hope you will agree with the views I have just expressed.
British Ambassador:— In order that you might be able to appre-
ciate the matter more fully, I can only repeat my invitation to visit Fayid.
But in the meantime I would like to say that while it is not incon-
ceivable to reduce the number of troops in the base, it is most essential
to keep it in efficient working order. The kind of base needed is one
that can be expanded immediately. If you have to build up your base
again it will take months. I tried to make it clear last time that your
suggestion that the base could be built up quickly presents insuperable
difficulty. The movement even of technical troops before the out-break
of war would be regarded as a hostile act. There is no possibility of
putting the base on a care and maintenance basis. It becomes something
else rather than a base. That is not, in modern warfare, a practicable
proposition. The idea that Headquarters and Signals are not necessary
is not quite correct. The Headquarters at present has extremely wide
domain apart from the local forces for Egypt’s defence. The Com-
mander-in-Chief’s Administration extends as far north as Turkey and
Iran, and from Malta in the Mediterranean to the borders of Pakistan
and as far south as Kenya. All that is a world area which we are trying
to consolidate against the Communist menace. So far as Headquarters
are concerned it would be to some extent therefore a matter of hospitality
and courtesy on the part of Egypt. But that is not the case with the
base, which is necessary for the defence of Egypt.
I would fully agree with the logic of your statement if the base
were only an arms depot. It is not that, it is a living organisation which
will have to be widely expanded on the outbreak of war. The number


of personnel can possibly be reduced, but there is a minimum beyond
which this is not possible without turning it into a mere arms depot
which it is not meant to be.
Foreign Minister: — I would like to say that my Colleagues the
Ministers and I are fully prepared to visit the base together with such
technical people as we deem necessary and I hope this visit will confirm
my views. When I gave my analytical statement, I did in fact realise
that you want a base which will be ready for immediate action on the
outbreak of war and I would not say on the imminent menace of war
since our theory about which I am anxious there should be no ambiguity,
is for the British forces to remain outside Egypt not only in peace time
but also in the event of imminent menace of war or apprehended inter-
national emergency. His Excellency Nahas Pasha had clearly and ex-
plicitly explained that to Field Marshal Slim.
As to how it would be possible to conciliate between keeping the
base in good working order and the evacuation of forces, the question
depends on two things : first, keeping all installations, equipment and
stores in a good condition that is, in the same state of preparedness in
which they were left; second, the return to Egypt of all those who are
trained in the management of the base and acquainted with all its
branches immediately on the outbreak of war. This is possible as Your
Excellency is aware in a few hours by air. Once they cameback they
will be able to resume their work in a few days and I would not say in
a few hours. And thus it would be possible to conciliate between the
practical necessities and our national and political necessities which
should always be kept in your view as it is in ours. We do wish in fact
to conciliate between the necessities of defence and the insistence of
the Egyptian people on complete and immediate evacuation. This is
what I could think of to achieve that end I assure Your Excellency 1
cannot find any other means. I think it appropriate and adequate if
good-will and confidence prevail.
British Ambassador:— I am sure that good-will and confidence
prevail, but I do not think that any military man would agree with your
suggestion in regard to how these two matters would be reconciled.
A base needs constant attention. It is not a matter of a key just
being turned in a door and everything being kept tidy and in good
condition. The material that is there rapidly becomes out-of-date and
must continually be turned over and changed. Your suggestion would
render the base an obsolescent arms store which would not serve the
purpose it was meant to serve. lam sure that when you go to Fayid
with your Colleagues you will realise the difference between a base
and an arms depot.
Foreign Minister: — I appreciate your point of view but I would
refer you to my previous statement that the movement of munitions and
the higher technical jobs require a few hundred British technicians until
such a time when Egyptians are sufficiently trained to replace them. In
fact what you want by keeping the base as a live organisation ready to
spring into immediate action at any time could only apply to the move


ment of munitions and supervision for workshops. As to cashiers, guards,
cooks, road workers, lorry drivers, doctors, vets, etc., etc..., those we
cannot at all understand how they could be needed for the efficiency
of the base.
British Ambassador:— You can only get that by seeing the base.
I would like to add one remark. In addition to the function it fulfils now
and will fulfil in war time, the Air Defence of Egypt cannot be carried
out without the services rendered by the base.
Foreign Minister: — I have nothing to add to my previous state-
ment except to remark that you disregard that all these auxiliary and
secondary jobs which do not fall within the scope of higher technical
work may be done straightaway by Egyptians. Should we grant for
the sake of argument your thesis regarding the necessity of keeping all
these jobs within certain limits, why shouldn’t Egyptians do them if
confidence and good-will prevail ?
I would like in this connection to ask Your Excellency to give me
the minimum requirements, in other words, the safety margin by which
the base may in your view be administered in peace time so that it may
be ready for action on the outbreak of war.
British Ambassador:— That is a pertinent question. I talked to
the military authorities about reducing the number, but they maintain
that the present figures represent the minimum. I was not disregarding
your argument about Egyptians replacing British personnel. I am sure
that Egyptians could do a great number of jobs but there must be enough
of our own people on the spot. It must be remembered that they will
be there to receive and maintain British reinforcements.
Foreign Minister: — I would like to ask the military people again
of the minimum requirements or safety margin by which in your view
the base can be administered in time of peace keeping in mind that we
must always take into consideration that military people are apt to exag-
gerate and that it our duty as politicians not to take all they say for
granted and to sift their demands to get the real military necessities out
of them.
British Ambassador: — I agree that we have to relate military ne-
cessity to what is politically possible.
Foreign Minister: — 1 fully agree with you on this.
British Ambassador: — It is fully understood that we are talking
informally without any commitments.
Foreign Minister: — And now I take up the question of Air Force
and Air Defence. What I would like to say in this respect may be
summed up in two things : first, the evacuation of British Air Force
and Air Defence was agreed upon in the Sidky-Bevin project. It must
have been observed in that agreement the possibility of British aircraft
coming back to Egypt in a few hours on the outbreak of war ; second,
this question was the subject of another technical study in the summer


and autumn of 1949 between technicians of both sides. Egyptian repre-
sentatives who took part in the talks assured me that they were able to
convince the British side with the possibility of the evacuation of British
Air Force and Air Defence in peace time. And if so, this matter should
be considered closed and there should be no need for further discussions.
British Ambassador: First of all, although it is quite true that
evacuation of all troops, of everything, was agreed upon, I must repeat
once again that the international situation has changed since 1946. I
am quite certain that whatever may be your airmen’s view on the subjet,
no British Air officer will agree that Egypt can defend herself and have
an Air Defence on her resources. I talked to Air Marshal Sir John
Baker of this and he told me that there is excellent material in the
Egyptian Air Force and that the younger officers are much more
efficient than their seniors. But it will take time until your Air Force
can be fully equipped for the Air Defence of the Country. You really
must build up and reorganise it thoroughly. It is not that lam being
rude about your officers but the younger officers know well that it cannot
be done yet. If we go, Egypt will be laid bare to air attack to which
she is especially vulnerable and you have neither the arms nor the
equipment to meet it.
Foreign Minister: — I think there is no time now for a detailed
reply to your statement, but we should differentiate between the
efficiency and preparedness of the Egyptian Air Force and Air Defence
and between the evacuation of British Air Force and Air Defence. We
do not insist on their evacuation relying on the efficiency of our Air
Force, but on the fact that your aircraft and Air Defence are not needed
in peace time so long as it is possible for them to reach Egypt within
a few hours from Cyprus, Malta, Cyrenaica and Transjordan. I believe
this last point had been the subject of discussions between the two sides
in 1949. As to bringing the Egyptian Air Forces up to standard in
every respect and the joint manoeuvres which might be required of the
allied parties in peace time, these are other questions which could be
discussed and agreed upon.
British Ambassador: — As a preliminary remark, I think recent
experiences have shown that Egypt’s Air Defence will be a very com-
plicated matter and she cannot carry out the Air Defence scheme
herself.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Thursday August 10th 1950, at 5.30 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
H.E. Abdel-Fattah Amr Pasha
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador: — I would like first of all to suggest that we
should recall the military talks that took place last year as a result of
which a scheme for air defence was worked out and elaborated. Ido
not know the details of the scheme but I think we can take it as the basis
for the defence of Egypt. I would like to give you an idea of what
I think should be included in the scheme. I do not know how many
airfields were provided for. I think the new scheme should provide
airfields, communications between them, radar also to have an observers
corps. Also the scheme should provide for anti-aircraft replacements.
It is absolutely necessary to make provisions for civil air defence. For
that the Air Military Authorities should have a great deal to do with
the civil authorities as regards blackouts, fire-fighting, safety of civilians,
etc. Then also it will be necessary to arrange for the defence of air-
fields and installations, headquarters, communications centres, etc.
Speaking as always on a purely personal basis I should like to add that
if it is agreed that the air defence of Egypt should be an integrated
affair between us, I do not see why it should not be possible to make it
clear to the Egyptian people that it is a matter of Egyptian defence
and for the personnel and material to be regarded as a loan, to augment
Egypt’s air resources at any rate at the beginning. Another aspect might
be the arrangement for training Egyptian personnel and as they become
trained they can take over from us and replace our personnel which
will be a great relief to us. Another way of proving that the air defence
is an Egyptian Air Defence would be for aircrafts to have Egyptian
markings, also the transport and anti-aircraft guns; and if the British
personnel wear the same insignia as the Egyptian personnel it would
mean that the air force and air defence are Egyptian. We are helping
you until you can take over yourself and in the mean-time the force
will obviously be an Egyptian Air Defence.
Foreign Minister: — I agree with you on many points of your
statement. If however you added one more point, that is, different


iating between the efficiency of the Egyptian Air Force and Air Defence
and between the presence of British Air Forces or air defence in Egypt
in peace time we would have found ourselves in complete agreement.
We do not claim that our Air Force has fully attained the required
standard of efficiency and let us now drop the question of who is re-
sponsible, but we say, as our experts have pointed out in the talks of
1949, that there is no need for British Air Force to remain in Egypt
in peace time since your airfields are close at hand and surround Egypt
from all sides, from Malta, Cyprus, Cyrenaica, Transjordan and Iraq,
and air reinforcements could come by air in a few hours. It is known
that bombers are much heavier and slower than fighter planes. These
could come first before any air attack launched from Russian bases
which are much further than your bases. Should we add to this that Egypt
is anxious to complete all requirements of air defence including airfields,
communications, radar, observers corps, pilots, technicians, adminis-
trative personnel, etc., you would find on the outbreak of war and on
your return to Egypt to take up her defence along with the Egyptian
Forces that everything is ready. There is no doubt that what you
stated about supplying Egypt with the necessary material on a loan
basis will help very much to achieve this end. We accept this loan
with pleasure in accordance with the procedure followed between West-
ern States. As to the loan of personnel this would inevitably lead to
misinterpretation however hard we try to camouflage the matter by
insignia worn by your personnel to show that they belong to Egypt.
I even fear that these efforts would lead to the very reverse of what
you mean and we would both be accused of deceiving the Egyptian
People. I think you agree with me that it is not to anybody’s interest
that such an idea should spread or that such suspicion should be roused
in the mind of the People.
British Ambassador: — My first comment is that you do not realise
how immobile an air force is. It takes longer to move an air force
than a land force. A squadron of aircrafts is no good without its ground
organisation which is very difficult to move. Therefore, it follows that
we could not in fact come here as soon as war breaks out. The whole
of my exposition just now was based on the idea of integrated air defence
and that it might be acceptable to Egypt. If it is not, then there is
no use of discussing an air defence scheme. If you study the talks of
1949 you would find that Egypt cannot defend herself alone.
I had no intention whatever of trying to deceive the Egyptian
people by suggesting that the British personnel might wear the insignia
worn by Egyptians. It is merely a symbol of integrated and joint
defence of Egypt.
You spoke of the loan of material. Even if we could lend you
a great amount, you would not be able to use it. You have not enough
personnel. A loan of material must be accompanied by its personnel.
Foreign Minister: — I did not at all mean that you wish to deceive
the Egyptian people by your proposal but the question is one of mis-
interpretation and of the people’s psychology in regard to any form
of occupation. No doubt Your Excellency is aware of the influence of


propaganda and that there is an opposition in Egypt whatever that
may be which we should take into consideration in connection with
such a vital and delicate question as this. The Wafd party, when it
was in the opposition rejected the idea of joint defence and Egyptian
public opinion was unanimous in supporting the Wafd's attitude. The
talks ended with the majority of Egyptian delegates rejecting the Sidky-
Bevin project on account of joint defence and despite the fact that
the project provided for complete evacuation by land, sea and air. I
would like to differentiate between joint defence in war time and joint
defence in peace time. Joint defence in war time is an accepted and
foregone conclusion in accordance with the alliance. But joint defence
in peace time was rejected by Egypt and would be difficult for her to
accept in any form whatsoever. As we reject joint land defence, we
equally reject joint air defence in peace time: but this does not mean
that we remain inactive as regards completing air defence requirements
for the Egyptian army. On the contrary we are anxious to do that at
the earliest possible opportunity and in a most adequate manner. There
are now certain facilities of yours in the Canal Zone which we can
maintain in the way I have already detailed in connection with the
base. Meanwhile the Egyptian Government would continue to complete
the defence requirements for her army as well as those of civil air
defence. It would also continue the training of pilots and technicians
by sending missions to Britain and America. If need be, we can
consider the question of retaining a small number of British experts
for a short time to train Egyptian technicians provided that their services
would ultimately be dispensed with and provided that their employment
would not last long as to cause doubt in the minds of the People.
The gist of the matter is ; should we direct our atention to ways
and means by which reinforcements may reach Egypt immediately on
the outbreak of the war, which is the essence of the Egyptian view-
point it would be more profitable to us than trying to set up a basis
which we know beforehand would never be accepted by the Egyptian
People.
British Ambassador: — I fear there is no meeting of our minds on
this matter. All your comments seem to me to ignore the basis on which
I made my personal suggestions. There should be an entirely different
relationship between our two countries which the Egyptian people accept.
Only the Wafd can get that idea across. If the Egyptian Government
were able to convince the Egyptian People of the reality of a new
relationship, the abrogation of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty and the
abandonment of all our rights would be ample proof of our good-will.
Surely it would be easy in such circumstances for the Wafd to convince
the Egyptian People of joint defence. We would be here on your
invitation. You invite our help for the joint defence of Egypt and the
Middle East during the time which will take the Egyptian Air Force
to be able to defend Egypt. It is to our advantage to make this time as
short as possible. As it is, with the best will in the world, you cannot
do it without our help.
I would like to emphasise that the suggestion I brought up is a


fundamental one. It is at the root of any amicable settlement. Whether
the Egyptian Government can convince itself in concert with the
Egyptian people that it is a new basis of relationship we are now
establishing.
Foreign Minister; — I have already expressed my view and that
of the Egyptian Government in regard to the new basis on which it is
desired to establish Anglo-Egyptian relations. I have welcomed your
desire to make a break with the past and I have hastened to express
complete agreement that Egypt should take up her own defence and
should conclude an alliance with you. The most important thing is to
make a clean break with the past so that the desired co-operation may
be truly sincere and spontaneous. lam anxious to reach an agreement
and I know Your Excellency is just as anxious as I am. For this reason
I am anxious to remove all ideas and manifestations which I knew
and I can say that I have a thorough knowledge of the Egyptian People
would lead to poisoning the new atmosphere which we all desire
to pervade our relations. I would like it to be understood that the
Wafd derives its influence over the People from their faith in that it
safeguards the country’s rights as planned in 1919 the first and fore-
most of which being the question of immediate evacuation. I do not
know why you always assume that co-operation is impossible in war
time unelss there is joint defence and other traces of occupation in
peace time. What I hope for and I trust your military People will
collaborate with us in working out, is to draw tip a plan for co-operation
in war time only which would be effective and would secure the desired
results. This is no innovation in relations between countries. It is the
procedure followed in the majority of alliances concluded between inde-
pendent states. Ido not know why a thing should be easy for others
and extremely difficult for us. This alone is enough reason for the
People to doubt our efforts and however great the influence of the Wafd
might be, it could not remove this doubt from the minds of the People
as its causes are obviously clear.
I have no doubt that Your Excellency agrees with me that it would
be folly to offer the People a draft agreement which we know bofere-
hand to be doomed to failure and which would lead moreover to the
loss of the Wafd’s prestige with the Egyptian People.
British Ambassador:— lam afraid, I cannot reply in detail to your
statement now but I would merely like to add that you should remember
what happened in 1940 in the case of small countries like Belgium and
Holland who refused to make military preparations in peace time with
the help of their allies. We have learned the lesson. Now the North
Atlantic countries have a joint defence scheme. Indeed the world’s
trend at the present is towards joint defence.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Monday August 14th 1950, at 5 p.m.
Present:
H.E, Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sid Ralph Stevenson
H.S. Foad Serag Eddin Pasha ■ A - ir Commodore Hayes
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
.H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
Group Captain Ibrahim Gazzarine
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador: — In the statement you made at the last
meeting you questioned the necessity of having foreign troops in Egypt
in peace time while alliances with other countries are concluded without
that requirement.
The main reason is the geographical position of Egypt and her
possession of the Suez Canal which is a vital communications’ link, in
which all maritime nations are interested. That is why the situation
here is different from the situation in the countries of our other allies.
It is impossible for us to risk that link being out. The only analogy
is that of Panama Canal. The United States has a defensive zone and
assumes the defence of the Canal by treaty. In Egypt we do not ask
you to hand over the Canal zone to us, but we ask to share the defence
of the Canal zone with you. There again the most important part of
the defence is air defence. Egypt should agree to have an integrated
air defence since she cannot defend the Canal zone on her resources.
Foreign Minister : The reason you have just given to differentiate
in treatment between Egypt and other independent countries that con-
clude alliances has not been given for the first time to-day. It is an
old reason, an excuse which the British occupation had long made and
which the British side had given in all previous negotiations without
exception. Egypt had its answer to it in all those negotiations and
there is no need for me now to repeat why Egypt finds herself unable
to accept it. I note however that in 1946 you finally accepted complete
evacuation by land, sea and air. The Suez Canal then is the Suez
Canal now. We can reply to your statement very simply : Egypt is
an independent country and is a member State with you in the United
Nations Organisation on a basis of equality in sovereignty. Egypt
rightly considers that the presence of your forces in her territory in
whatever capacity prejudices her sovereignty. She has every right to


resent this violation and to protest against it however great the strategic
importance of the Suez Canal may be to you. The independence of
Egypt is much dearer to her and to the Egyptian People than any
importance you attach to the Suez Canal. Moreover the Suez Canal
has no longer the same military importance it had in the past. This
may be evidenced by the fact that most of the shipping to the Far East
during the last war went via the Cape of Good Hope. Furthermore
we have the possibility of navigation being stopped in the Canal for
a long time if an atom bomb were dropped on it. It could be seen from
the foregoing that Egypt itself is your real object and not the Suez
Canal only. You are not often lacking in candidness for your go as
far as enumerating the advantages acruing to your forces from remain-
ing in Egypt such as communication facilities, ample food supply, man-
power .etc. I like this candidness and I much prefer it to the old tune
to which you revert to-day namely the strategic importance of the Suez
Canal. The analogy of Panama or any other country is unacceptable*
Panama may accept American occupation but Egypt and the Egyptian
people unanimously reject any form or trace of British occupation.
Actually, the theory which you have just expounded is a most
serious one and is conducive to chaos in international relationships
which should be based on the independence of States and equality of
sovereignty not on the domination of some states over others whether
they liked it or not merely because the interest of one country happened
to affect the other. This theory may lead to every big state demanding
defensive bases from smaller states which happen to be on her com-
munication route. However important the Suez Canal may be to you
we can give many similar examples of the strategic importance of certain!
states to others. I presume you appreciate the gravity of the conse-
quences which result from the generalisation of this strange theory
namely the occupation of a small state by a higher state claiming an
interest in her territory without the express consent of that state.
I hope this frankness would not annoy you. My only object is to
explain to you how anxious the Egyptian People are to start a new page
in Anglo-Egyptian relationship, a page based on forgetting the past
which had almost led to Egypt believing that the Suez Canal had brought
disaster on her. Fortunately we have found on your part a similar
desire to ring down the curtain on the past to make a clean break with
it and to start a new page in Anglo-Egyptian relationships. On the basis
of this mutual desire we have both tried to find a way out of all these
difficulties which are a legacy of the past. I personally believe that
in spite of the many difficulties remaining, our view-points have come
so much nearer as to invite optimism. Why then should’nt we keep on
trying to bring our viewpoints nearer and nearer still without having
recourse to these obsolete theories which have outlived their objects both
from the de jure as well as from the de facto standpoints. As to youf
statement about air defence I have to-day with me Group Captain
Ibrahim Gazzarine who was one of our delegates in the 1949 talks
with your military delegates to explain to you the technical viewpoint
on the question. lam glad that on your part, you have with you Air


Commodore G.W. Hayes for the same purpose and I hope their presence
will have some practical use which would help to overcome difficulties
in connection with the air defence of Egypt.
British Ambassador : I assure you that the innocent remark which
provoked your eloquent reply was meant to illustrate that Egypt is in
a different position as compared with other countries. You say Egypt
is an independent country and you reject the theory of joint defence
on the part of Egypt and you call it a strange theory. Ido not think
it is strange in view of the modern trend in the world to joint defence.
It is not a matter of imposing anything on anybody. If it were a
question of imposing I would not be here arguing with you. We want
you to invite our help in consolidating peace in the Middle East, I am
glad you are optimistic and I have always shared your optimism. The
People you represent are at heart sane and sensible People who would
appreciate the facts of the situation.
I am now ready to take up the question of the military talks of
last year.
Foreign Minister:— This is a fine declaration which I welcome
and for which I thank you and in particular your saying that you have
no desire to impose on us anything we do no tlike, but you wish only
to convince us. On our part, we shall do our utmost to convince you
of our viewpoint and we hope that this attempt on both sides lead to
pur points of view meeting and ultimately to agreement. I hope this
declaration will be pushed to its logical conclusion in the event of finding
the desired agreement difficult to achieve since alliances as Your
Excellency is aware must have complete consent for a basis, otherwise
they are no good. The consent of People nowadays and particularly in
the event of war is much more valuable than any strategic position. I
would not speak at length of these details so that we can go back to
our practical talks, but I would like before that to say that we look at the
question of air defence not from the angle of the efficiency of Egyptian
air defence at the present, but from the angle of your air forces not
being needed in peace time so long as we are ready in conformity with
the alliance to have them back on the outbreak of war to co-operate
in the defence of Egypt.
British Ambassador: — I think that it is very easy from a technical
point of view to refute your argument about the necessity of evacuating
air defence in peace time. It has been the bitter experience of many states
in the last ten years that they have suffered bcause they did not have
an air defence in peace time. Nowadays it is no good trying to take
your measures after the war breaks out. Nothing is so immobile as
an air force and if you try to defend a country from outside you make
your task so much more difficult and so much more expensive that no
nation can afford it. The scheme which was laid down by the talks
last year showed what was necessary including fighter squadrons,
ground organisation, radar, etc. From what I know of the scheme it
struck me as being altogether beyond the capacity of the Egyptian air


defence. Perhaps we consider the scheme itself and ask Group captain
Gazzarine to explain this.
Foreign Minister: — I would like before I give the word to Group
Captain Gazzarine to say that with my civil mentality I distinguish
between equipment and personnel. As to equipment we have no
objection at all to the installation of full and complete equipment so
that pilots and technicians may find them in readiness when the time
comes. There is no doubt that we can find Egyptians to maintain them
in peace time. But our objection applies to your personnel remaining
in Egypt in peace time since it is possible for them on the outbreak of
war to reach Egypt in a few hours from your airfields which surround
it on all sides.
British. Ambassador: — I think that you are talking without know-
ing what the air defence of a country would require.
Group Captain Gazzarine: — Nobody can say that Egypt can on
her resources stop the threat of an air bombardment from Russia. Nor
is the present British air force able to stop such a threat. The position
is this : Is it really important to have a foreign air force in peace time
or can your squadrons come to Egypt on the outbreak of war to help
in such a defence ?
The Royal Air Force have bases in Cyprus, Malta and Cyrenaica.
From these places any fighter squadron could come to Egypt in a short
time. The question is what does an air defence need to operate
satisfactorily ? Airfields, workshops, spares, ammunitions, fuel and
radar for warning. We are prepared to put at your disposal our airfields
and workshops. We have our plan for radar and we have signed
contracts with British firms for equipment. If these equipments arrive
in a short time we will be in a position to operate and use them and
when your fighters arrive they can use them. If you have these ready
we can take over from you and operate them in accordance with your
regulations. As for the personnel needed for the operation of your
aircraft I think you will agree they could be transported by air with
your fighter aircrafts. The other question I would like to ask is this.
We all consider that if a major war starts, Egypt may be subjected to
air attacks but when can such attack take place ? Will it start from
D Day or will it start later when Russian land forces approach nearer
Egypt ? Would it not be better for the Russian air force leader to send
his strategic bombers to England and to Europe where such an attack
will be more fruitful ? Wouldn’t there be enough time for your aircraft
and squadrons to arrive to well prepared airfields than have them stay
in here in peace time against the will of the country ?
British Ambassador: — I would like to deal with the last question
Group Captain Gazzarine put. Will there be enough time for our
aircraft and squadrons to come ? Nobody knows that. All I can say
is that an attack can just as well come on D Day. The Russians may
start by cutting communications between us and Australasia or by
bombing Europe. The obvious points are of course the West, the


Middle East and possibly the Far East. Any way unless you have a
properly organised air defence, you have no chance to repulse an air
attack. What we hope to do is to build up the present air defence into
a force which is capable of doing this.
Air Commodore Hayes:— I think there are one or two points :
Bases at Cyprus, Malta and Cyrenaica. The first two are adequate
and suitable. But to develop new bases will certainly take a long time.
It will take a long time to build up a base in Cyrenaica. As Gazzarine
has said neither the Egyptian nor the British at present can repulse a
major atack.
The other point is as His Excellency the Ambassador has said we do
not know when the attack would come. Experience shows that the
attack may come suddenly at any time. As split force, that is removing
our forces to other bases would not do; you must have a centre and that
must be as Gazzarine agrees in Egypt. The time factor is a most
important thing. If we go back to Cyrenaica we are going in the wrong
direction. We have no chance of beating off a heavy attack if we have
hot a joint force available.
One other point which Gazzarine has raised is having everything
prepared : I think he will agree with me that it will be sometime before
everything can be operationally ready. There is quite a lot of training
to be done. I say again that if the forces are split the scheme will fail.
Group Captain Gazzarine:— What is the strength of the fighter
planes in the Suez Canal ?
Air Commodore Hayes:— Five squadrons.
Group Captain Gazzarine:— We can consider the Egyptian Air
Force as the nucleus to build on. Your squadrons at present cannot
repulse a major attack. What is the maximum damage that a bomber
atack on Egypt will do ? Will it flatten Egypt entirely or the Suez
Canal ? Why should the Russians bomb Egypt at the outbreak of war?
There are more important targets in Britain and Europe. Would it
not be rather premature for the Russians to bomb Egypt right on the
outbreak of war ? I spoke of putting your five squadrons in other bases.
You have already a base in Cyrenaica which can be developed. There
is no doubt it can be developed. There is no doubt it can be done. You
said it takes a long time to make a base. I do not think that it would
take more than six to nine months. You said it takes time to train
personnel, but we think it does not take more than nine months.
Air Commodore Hayes;— This is an awkward question to answer.
But in any event I still feel that to meet the attack if it comes we need
the built-up force not divided in other countries.
British Ambassador: — In other word we need on integrated force.
Group Captain Gazzarine: — If you want to defend Egypt, you
do not put all your squadrons in Egypt. You must have another base


and we will see to it that everything will be ready for your forces to
come in on the outbreak of war.
British Ambassador:— However, I still maintain that to meet the
attack the force should not be divided.
Group Captain Gazzarine: — As an airman what effect will Russian
bombing of the Canal have ? It will be possible in less than 48 hours
to clear the Canal of bombs.
British Ambassador: — Unless we are here, it would be difficult.
Group Captain Gazzarine: — What I can add is we have the
nucleus of an air force and it will be a good nucleus to build on. There
will be no value of Russian attack on Egypt. What will the Russians
achieve by bombing Egypt ?
British Ambassador: — The question of the attack is a question
of strategic appreciations. The scheme suggested last year does call for
a great deal more than the present force.
Group Captain Gazzarine:— The scheme was to provide twenty
squadrons on D Day.
British Ambassador: — As Field Marshall Slim suggested in his
four points there must be an integrated air defence on the spot not a
split force. Unless air forces are ready on the spot, it will not be
possible to meet the attack.
Group Captain Gazzarine:— They still can come if they are in
near bases.
Foreign Minister:— This technical discussion has in fact confirm-
ed the ideas I had in mind and emphasised my viewpoint that there is
no need whetever for your pilots or your air defence to remain in
Egypt in peace time. The English saying tells us not to put all our
eggs in one basket. I think this saying fits completely in this case of
ours. It is to the advantage of both of us to divide our defence forces
on the lines actually obtaining now. If you have a ready base in
Malta and similar one in Cyprus and if it is possible to develop the
two bases of Cyrenaica and Transjordan and consolidate your air
defence in Iraq, the defence bases in Egypt would be taken over in
peace time by the Egyptian Air Force provided that we bring the force
up to standard at the earliest possible opportunity, a thing which Egypt
is more anxious to do than you are. I have now understood from Group
Captain Gazzarine that Russian bombers take about twelve hours to
reach Egypt while fighters could come from all these bases surrounding
Egypt in two or three hours. This in fact refutes any argument which
could be offered for British Air Forces remaining in Egypt in peace
time, since radar stations could warn all air bases in the proper time and
fighters will go up to meet these bombers before they reach Egypt. In
any case an adequate number of British fighters could arrive to co-
operate in the defence of Egypt some time before the Russian bomber;.


arrive. As to the various equipment needed including airfilds, work-
shops, depot, spares, etc., I have repeatedly stated that we have no
objection to having them fully installed so that your fighters will find all
necessary facilities on their arrival. If we have any complaint in this
connection, it is in fact the delay in the delivery of these equipments
to us. With goodwill it would be possible to complete them a short
time. For all these reasons I have repeatedly stated that we should
differentiate between two things : Equipment and these we agree to
have installed in full. The other is personnel and we have shown that
there is absolutely no need for their remaining in Egypt in peace time.
There remains one more thing, namely the necessary joint manoeuvres
of the two forces. This I have already stated that we are prepared
to consider.
British Ambassador; — I do not claim to be as much of a radar
expert as Gazzarine Bey. Ido not know what kind of notice you can
get from radar. I also do not know whether it is possible to organise
our defence on a wide perimeter. But even if we could how can the
idea of joint training be carried out ?
Group Captain Gazzarine; — Just exactly as a squadron of the
fleet visits Alexandria for a week or so.
Air Commodore Hayes;— We have all continually worked for
the efficient training of the Egyptian Air Force.
Group Captain Gazzarine;— The presence of your air force does
not train the Egyptian Royal Air Force.
Serag El-Din Pasha: — We should take public opinion into consi-
deration, particularly as you have agreed in 1946 to the evacuation of
these forces.
British Ambassador ; I have not been authorised by His Majesty’s
Government to make any poposals at all but as Field Marshal Slim
pointed out, four things are essential. Integrated air defence with actual
air forces of both parties present in the country and integrated together.
That I understand is unacceptable to Egypt.
We say that integration is necessary not only for the ground
organisation but also for squadrons. That is apparently not acceptable
to Egypt.
The ground organisation takes some time to build up. What you
want is our assistance (equipment, training and advice) in building up
a ground organisation, the number of technicians being left to a joint
committee to decide.
Seraoj Eddin Pasha;— This is a reasonable basis.
British Ambassador; — Ground organisation includes anti-aircraft
defence.
Group Captain Gazzarine: — In the last war the anti-aircraft
defence was given to the Egyptians to operate.


British Ambassador: — How about coastal defence ?
Group Captain Gazzarine:— Committees have agreed that guns
for coastal defence are enough.
British Ambassador: — The nearest the Egyptian Government
can accept is assistance in ground organisation and for limited period.
Group Captain Gazzarine;— Nine months.
Foreign Minister:— A few months only.
Serag Eddin Pasha;— If you keep your air forces in Egypt they
will be looked upon as constituting an occupation. Egyptians doubt
your intentions and something ought to be done to remove this doubt.
You have no armies in Iraq; you only have aircrafts, yet the presence
of these is regarded in both Iraq and Egypt as an occupation.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on August 17th 1950, at 5.30 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
H.E. Abd el-Fattah Amr Pasha
Mtre. Aiy Z. Husny
British Ambassador:— I would like to make some preliminary
remarks before taking up each of the three points.
In fact it is something I mentioned before but I wish to reiterate its
importance. It is the progressive deterioration of the international
situation. We had hope four years ago of finding peaceful modus
vivendi with Soviet Russia but now we are definitely of the opinion
that the Soviet Union is openly hostile. This is supported by recent
events. The results of all this is that diplomats and politicians are in
a much weaker position than before and military People have got the
upper hand, temporarily I hope. The British budget for war purposes
of 780 millions this year has been increased by 45 % over the next
three years. That means that our reconstruction is put off, the standard
of living cannot rise and hardships will be inflicted on the civil popula-
tion. No British Government can contemplate at the same time anything
that weakens our defences in any part of the world. So far as this
country is concerned, the Wafd government is responsible for the
defence of Egypt and the welfare of her People. The question you have
to ask yourself is whether you are able to discharge this responsibility.
You maintain that Egypt can defend herself alone by her own efforts
provided you are given the material. Could the Egyptian budget bear
the burden of a defence policy on a large scale ? The British forces
are between forty and fifty thousands. They are not sufficient even
with the Egyptian army. The defence scheme provided for three times
as much as the present squadrons. In order to put Egypt’s forces on a
defensive basis you probably have to spend another forty or fifty mil-
lions a year ? Could Egypt bear that burden ? You talk about a lend
and lease basis. Unless the receiving country is in a position to put the
material to full use, the lending country is reluctant to provide it.
As to the instruction period, Egyptians are easy to train, but that
cannot be completed in nine months. Starting from a state similar to
that in which Egypt now finds herself we could not do it with our own


people in nine months. I would like to say that after this meeting
I propose to visit the Commanders in-Chief on Sunday 21st and hear
what they have to say about the Egyptian counter proposals and then
we meet here again on Tuesday. After that I will report to London.
I would like to make an appeal to the Government to rouse the
Egyptian People to the dangers of the situation and the weakness of
the Egyptian army. I want you to bring that home to the Egyptian
People. The country is almost defenceless and only joint defence can
meet the situation. Lastly I would like to impress on you the responsi-
bility of Egypt vis-a-vis the Arab States. She must take the lead in
this matter and not insist on trying to stand alone while it is quite
obvious that no country, however strong, con defend herself on her
resources.
Foreign Minister; — You have made a clever move by shifting
the discussion to the ability of Egypt to defend herself alone. I admit
as I have admitted before that this is impossible. We have repeatedly
said on previous occasions that Great Britain herself cannot defend
herself on her resources. We have therefore told you at the very outset
that we are prepared to conclude a defensive alliance with you. But
here is another question namely the question of the presence of your
forces in Egypt which the Egyptian People cannot, for the many reasons
1 have given and which I need not repeat now, accept in any form
whatsoever since there are many other countries similarly exposed to
the dangers of world war and are perhaps more exposed to those
dangers than Egypt who cannot defend themselves on their re-
sources and yet you do not occupy them nor are they occupied by other
big states. You have given an example of Holland but I can give you
many examples to support my view. India, Pakistan, Iran, Turkey and
most West European countries have no foreign forces stationed in
them as it is the case with Egypt. As to your previous reference to
the presence of American forces in Britain itself, I have already stated
that the analogy does not hold good since there are great differences.
America had no past history in occupying Britain so that the British
People may look with resentment and doubt on such an occupation. On
the contrary the British People welcome it. The two countries are on
a footing of equality in power and international position. It cannot
be imagined that one of them would violate the sovereignty of the other.
The presence of American forces in Britain is dependent on your
consent. It you wish to have them evacuated at any time they would
immediately be withdrawn. This is not so with Egypt. The aforesaid
reasons in addition to your repeated promises of evacuation and repeat-
ed non-fulfilment of these promises have created an acute crisis of
confidence which we suffer to-day and which we cannot overcome
except by removing its causes namely by complete and immediate eva-
cuation of British forces. If military people dominate the situation at
present in view of the dangers of war it is their duty not to ignore the
psychological factors of different peoples, factors which may sometimes
be of far more reaching effects and of greater consequence than the
purely military considerations. Military people should understand that
a satisfied, trusting and friendly Egypt, though no single British soldier


remain in it, is far better for Britain and the cause of international
peace than a resentful and unfriendly Egypt as a result of past and
present occupation. Should the military people not appreciate that, it
is the duty of politicians and diplomats to understand it and to convince
them of it. In these long and delicate talks we have been considering
the matter in all its practical aspects including using the base of Fayid
together with the equipment of air defence, replacing of British personnel
by Egyptians, maintaining these installations alive and in good working
order and completing them if need be, provided that all this should be
in the hands of Egyptians with the assistance of a small number of
technicians for a reasonable period which would not rouse the doubts
of Egyptians and bring back to their minds the idea of occupation. In
addition to this you will have the defensive alliance which would allow
you and your allies to come to Egypt on the outbreak of war where you
would find all necessary defence equipment ready for action. This is
the essence of the Egyptian viewpoint by which we try to conciliate
divergent considerations: in other words we do not ignore the military
viewpoint and at the same time give due atention to the political
standpoint which it is not possible for us nor for you to ignore.
There remains the question of cost necessary for defence require-
ments. I do not claim that the Egyptian budget can afford what the
United States budget or your budget can in this respect, but the question
is relative and Egypt is prepared to do her utmost within her financial
resources. Her international co-operation should play its role in the
same way as it did in Atlantic countries Greece, Turkey or Iran and
on the same lines and conditions.
You have said more than once that the Wafd party and the present
government should rouse the Egyptian People to the communist danger
with a view to convincing them of the necessity of British forces re-
maining in Egypt to defend her. I would like here to be extremely
frank and to call your attention to the fact that it is difficult for the
Egyptian people who had in the past felt the effects of British occupation
and still feel that it impairs their sovereignty and independance, to
fully appreciate that probable danger. They make a comparison between
two things : the actual occupation and a probable danger of which it
is desired to convince them and ask for their sovereignty in return for
repelling it. It is obvious that the Wafd however great its influence
might be would only expose itself to lose the confidence of the People
if it atempts anything of this sort.
Finally we should keep in mind that the greatest weapon exploited
by communist propaganda in Egypt and in all countries occupied by
foreign forces is this same occupation and the economic and social
effects resulting from it. This propaganda finds fertile soil in the minds
of nationalists who are anxious for the independence of their country
so much so that it is feared that they might gradually confuse nationalism
with communist propaganda. Experience in Egypt has shown that all
pamphlets of communist propaganda which were seized mostly make
use of this weapon. In fact it almost makes use of it to the exclusion
of other ideological weapons.


British Ambassador : That is a good argument. I would now
like if you agree to take up the three points :
1. The base: Field Marshal Slim suggested that there should
be a base in Egypt to maintain and supply Egyptians and British forces
in the Middle East. The control of the base he suggested should be
under a joint Anglo-Egyptian committee.
2. Headquarter : This was a matter partly of hospitality on the
part of Egypt. He said it would be a joint headquarters. The Canal
zone is the place most suitable for such a headquarters.
3. The mobile striking force : the best place for that would
be on the Canal. It should move forward on the outbreak of war to
stiffen resistence of the Middle East countries. The other advantage
is that it would make the progress of the training of Egyptians much
quicker.
Foreign Minister: — lam sorry that after these long talks with
you, you go back to the statement made by Field Marshal Slim at the
very outset and before we started our political talks. It seems as if we
have gained nothing by them or made a single step forward in the
direction of understanding and agreement. I have done my utmost to
conciliate all different considerations and I have suggested many solu-
tions which I believe to be satisfactory and to fulfil the object of military
people as well as that of politicians.
I have understood from you that you agree to the evacuation of
the combatant forces. This is a good step in the right direction which
we think should be supplemented by the following steps :
1) Evacuation of all guard troops since it is very easy for Egypt-
ians to replace them.
2) Evacuation of all base troops since as I have already pointed
out they serve combatant troops, guard troops and themselves. There
is therefore no need for them to remain with the exception of a few
hundred technicians in munition, engineers and skilled artisans necessary
for workshops and provided that Egyptians replace them on having
their training completed.
3) The evacuation of Headquarters simultaneously with the
evacuation of all these forces. Field Marshal Slim himself says that
the matter is one of hospitality on the part of Egypt in other word it is
not a definite military necessity. In any event it is reasonable that
Headquarters should be as near as possible to the combatant forces.
4) Evacuation of all air forces and air defence with the exception
of the necessary number of technicians required for the maintenance
of equipment for which Egyptians are not available. These technicians
will train Egyptians who are going to replace them. Agreement could
be reached as to the joint manoeuvres between the Egyptian and British
forces.


5) The concluding of a defensive alliance to permit your forces
and those of your allies to come to Egypt in war time to co-operate
in defence. The details of this were given in the last meeting of
H.E. Nahas Pasha with Field Marshal Slim.
British Ambassador : As you know I have no authority to put
forward or to agree to any proposals. We have been trying to find
a basis for possible agreement and you have made certain suggestions.
It is not quite clear to me how you propose to deal with some of the
points. The mobile striking force for instance ?
Foreign Minister:— May I ask what you had in mind when you
referred to the possibility of the evacuation of the combatant forces ?
British Ambassador; — Nahas Pasha suggested in his talks with
Field Marshal Slim that they should be moved to the Gaza strip.
Foreign Minister: — Let it then be Gaza strip.
British Ambassador : If the Egyptian Government suggest to have
those forces stationed in Gaza, do you realise the political implications
of this including the making of peace with Israel ?
Foreign Minister:— We have concluded a permanent armistice
with Israel which does not permit anyone side to attack the other or
to violate the armistice lines.
British Ambassador: — That is not sufficient unless there is a
definite state of peace and an agreement that Israel should give us free
passage through her territory as we could not force our way through
Israel to meet a hostile army.
Foreign Minister:— This a question on which you can agree with
Israel. No doubt the United States of America who is concerned with
the defence of the Middle East can give you effective help in this
respect. I notice that you did not hold peace with Germany or with
Japan. The condition obtaining between Egypt and Israel is not an
innovation in international usage. In any case why do you put the cart
before the horse ? If we can overcome all difficulties in our way and
if you agree to complete and immediate evacuation in the manner I have
shown, it will not then be difficult to find a way out of this difficulty
concerning Israel.
British Ambassador: — One further thing lam not clear about,
that is the base. I pointed out it was not an arms store and as it has to
deal with both Egyptian and British reinforcements, it should be staffed
by both Egyptians and British.
Does Egypt accept the idea of Egyptians and British administer-
ing it ?
Foreign Minister: — I have repeatedly stated that the base should
be administered in peace time by Egyptians, but in war time by Egyptian
and British jointly.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on August 24th 1950, at 5.30 p.m.
Present.
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador: — I propose first of all to give you the military
comments on your ideas on the four points proposed by Field Marshal
Slim :
1) Air Defence : The proposal to move the squadrons. The Air
Officer C-in-C said that the removal of squadrons would weaken
Egypt’s position in the critical moment and would ruin the scheme of
joint training. It could only be considered as and when the Egyptian
squadrons are fully equipped and trained to take over.
As regards anti-aircraft, he said, it would be a great advantage
if Egyptians took that over as soon as possible. I asked him whether
the administrative and technical staff could be reduced, he said only
at the expense of efficiency.
2) The base : As to the minimum figure to which it could be
reduced, the C-in-C said reduction could only be carried out at the
expense of efficiency. It could only be done by splitting the base which
means doubling the expense and doubling the work. I asked him if
he would consider a skeleton base, but he said it would not work.
But nothing is impossible and political decisions may overrule
military considerations.
About the guards, the Egyptian Army could not in present cir-
cumstances guard the base. At the moment the losses come to many
thousands of pounds a month. If the Mauritians are removed he could
not continue to take the responsibility vis-a-vis the British tax-payer.
If the change were made on political grounds the question of responsi-
bility would have to be settled between the two Governments. He
went on to talk about the base itself and said he would try to show
the Egyptian delegation who were-due to arrive next day what an
immense orgainsation it is. It covers the supply, repairs and technical
work for the whole of the Middle East area. .
3) The mobile striking force: He confirmed to me that peace
between Egypt and Israel and Israel’s agreement to forward deploy


ment in time of war were necessary for putting the mobile striking force
in Gaza. There is no port in Gaza and all supplies would have to come
by rail. Accommodation would have to be constructed and would cost
between 8 and 12 million pounds.
The training of both the striking force and the joint training with
the Egyptian Army would have to be done in the desert of Sinai.
4) Headquarters : The C-in-C said that the Military Headquarters
must be near the base and the idea of moving it to Gaza would be
impossible because lack of communications. It would also prevent the
proper coordination of the work and training of the two armies.
I repeat again that these are military comments and it is always
possible for His Majesty's Government to modify them on political
grounds.
I would like once more to beg you, Mr. Minister, to take into
account the gravity of the international situation. A proof of its serious-
ness was witnessed by the Egyptian delegation who saw when they
visited our Base in the Canal Zone how mobilisation stores are already
being assembled. Neither Britain nor Egypt is a free agent. We are
both faced with a prospect of having to fight for our lives. We cannot
hope to survive in isolation and must both subordinate our narrow
national interests. Egypt is now faced with a dilemma, on the one hand
she wants to defend herself and on the other to fulfil her national
aspirations. These two aims cannot be attained at the same moment.
The brutal fact must be accepted by the Egyptian Government that
complete and immediate evacuation is not compatible with the defence
of the country. Some way must be found of reconciling the imperative
needs of defence with Egypt’s national dignity. There is nothing incon-
sistent with national dignity in the free acceptance of help freely given.
I would like to appeal to you to put this question to the Prime
Minister and to your Colleagues :
Can Egypt accept even provisionally and subject to reviews of agreed
intervals the principle of joint military preparation in peace time ? If
not, there is nothing with the best will in the world which His Majesty’s
Government can suggest to solve the problem. But if the principles can
be accepted I am sure that His Majesty’s Government would be ready
to consider any proposal which would make it easier for the Egyptian
Government to convince the people of Egypt of the reality of the new
relationship between our two countries. I am quite certain that the
Wafd can convince the people of the necessity of joint preparations in
peace time if proper use were made of the Press-
Don't forget that in Britain we have decided to reimpose a regime
of austerity on the people. No British Government could accept at
this moment the weakening of our defensive position anywhere.
Foreign Minister:— I assure Your Excellency that lam well aware
of the gravity of the present international situation, but on the other
hand I shoulder the responsibility of defending my country’s rights and
of working for the fulfilment of its aspirations. I know what Egyptians


unanimously accept and what they unanimously reject. There is no
need for me to repeat my previous answers to all these considerations
for the details I have given again and again in our previous meetings and
of which I have given a precise summary in our last meeting. If a new
factor has arisen, it is the visit of the Egyptian Government delegates to
the British base in Fayid. Those delegates have come back and they
report that they made a speedy visit to the base in accordance with a
programme laid down for them. The visit did not go beyond this pro-
gramme even when the delegates found it necessary to visit certain
other places or to ask for information on things not included in the
programme. The delegates have assured me that the places, equipment
and installations seen by them were all normal. The Egyptian Army
has similar ones and none of these equipment and installations would
at all be difficult for Egyptians to take over from your forces. There
may be certain other equipment or installations to which this description
does not apply, but I am giving you now the result of the visit as it
took place and within the limits laid down for it.
This new factor supports and confirms my viewpoint and I hope
Your Excellency will not imagine that it is a personal viewpoint. I am
confident that it is the Prime Minister’s viewpoint as well as that of
my colleagues. Now you have referred the whole questions to the
British Government on the one hand to see whether it would support
the military People or would have a different opinion and to His
Excellency Nahas Pasha on the other hand so that he might know how
far our talks progressed and express an opinion on them. This is quite
natural course, but I would like to call your attention in all sincerity
to the fact that time is pressing and to my fears regarding the conse-
quences of this crisis through which our talks are passing particularly
should it become more acute and culminate in our inability to reach a
suitable basis for negotiations and agreement.
I would like Your Excellency to know that Egyptian public opinion
has been convinced in late years of the futility of negotiations and that
Egypt should definitely abandon negotiations as a means for attaining
her rights and should seek other means by which she can realise her
aspirations. But the Wafd after its victory in the last general elections
was able to confront public opinion with the fact that it will attempt
negotiations once again. Egyptian public opinion reluctantly accepted
that for one reason only namely the conviction of the People in Egypt
and the Sudan that the Wafd in entering negotiations, does so on the
basis of complete fulfilment of national aspirations. If we fail this time
to reach a successful conclusion I am afraid Egyptians, will definitely
lose all hope in the possibility of solving our problems through negotia-
tions and thus will the crisis of confidence become more acute and we
reach an impass from which there would be no way out. Your
Excellency will no doubt appreciate the great harm which would affect
both sides as a result of this and now communist propaganda would
exploit it at home and abroad to our detriment.
And now public opinion is impatiently awaiting, as Your Excellency
is aware, the results of our talks and the Press is asking every day for


information about what is going on. The time will come very soon when
we have to make some statement about the matter. It is probable that
I leave Egypt for Europe early in September to meet His Excellency
Nahas Pasha and then 1 leave for America to attend the meetings of the
General Assembly of the United Nations Organisations. It is expected
that I should be back before the end of October or the begining of
November. Your Excellency is aware that the Egyptian Parliament
will have to meet in the third week of November. The speech from the
Throne will be given in this meeting and it is inevitable to submit to
Parliament and to the People an account of our foreign policy and its
results in the past year. The third week in November is actually the
time-limit when we should know definite results. In fact it is necessary
that we should know them a sufficiently long time before then in order
to be able to prepare what we have to say.
You have appealed to me to convince the People of the dangers
of the situation and of the difficulty of conceding the demand of
immediate and complete evacuation in the present international cir-
cumstances. I appeal to you in my turn to give up the obstinacy and
exaggeration of military People which is in tact a part of the profession
and to deal with the question from both the political and psychological
aspects which are in my opinion more deserving of consideration in the
present circumstances than the purely military viewpoint, particularly
if it exaggerated as I have noticed in the opinions of your military
people.
You are not now engaged in actual war, but you are engaged in
a cold war which might go on for a long time. I assure you that the
continuation of occupation and insistence on absolete imperialist views
are the strongest weapons used against Western countries in this cold
war. If this cold war, God forbid, changes into actual war, military
people should understand that the psychological condition of people,
their conviction of the cause for which the war is fought and their
loyalty based on this conviction, all these are of great advantage than
the purely military considerations which rouse the resentment of the
People. Indeed, these psychological factors may often have decisive
results as to the outcome of war.
I have nothing to add to this except to say in all candidness that
the attitude of your military people to our proposals by which we aimed
at reaching a solution satisfactory to both sides, can only be interpreted
as lack of confidence in the Egyptian Army and the Egyptian people.
The C-in-C himself has frankly said to the Egyptian delegates who
visited Fayid that the question is not a question of efficiency necessary
for the administration of the base, but it is a question of the necessity
of this base remaining in peace and war time under British control.
The spirit is not compatible with the idea of alliance which should be
based on mutual confidence.
British There are several points I would like to
comment upon: - •. ■ •
The Base : You referred to the visit to the base by the Egyptian
delegates as being the only new factor which has arisen. I would like


to remind you that the idea was to show that the base was not an arms
depot but a live organisation supplying the whole Middle East area.
The statement of the C-in-C does not raise the question of confi-
dence but emphasises the necessity of the base being staffed by British
personnel as it has to receive and maintain British or Dominion reinforce-
ments speaking the same language. Field Marshal Slim suggested that
it should be under a joint Anglo-Egyptian Administration.
2) As to time pressing, I quite agree that that is so and we have
to make an effort to reach a friendly agreement as in my view the
satisfactory consolidation of the whole Eastern Mediterranean area
depends on it.
3) As to public opinion awaiting results of our talks we have Come
to a situation in which a decision should be taken. You have to refer
to Nahas Pasha and your colleagues and I have to refer to His Majesty’s
Government. It seems to me that the only thing we could say would be
that informal talks have been proceeding in a cordial atmosphere and
will be resumed on your return to Egypt.
4) As to the charge you made regarding obstinacy and exaggera-
tion of military people, I can assure you that there is neither one nor
the other. I gave you the professional military view. If the general
principle of joint military preparations in peace time is accepted alle-
viations can doubtless be made.
5) As to the psychological side of the question, there is no doubt
that a friendly people are more valuable than military considerations.
It is a precisely for this reason that I am seeking to establish a new basis
of friendly relationship between our two countries.
I do trust you will put the matter strongly to Nahas Pasha and
your Colleagues and urge them to accept the principle of joint military
preparations in peace time even if it is only provisionally and subject
to review at agreed intervals.
Foreign Minister;— If I have referred to the exaggeration of mili-
tary people it is because, beside its being a well-known thing, they went
as far as making it difficult to replace Mauritian guards by Egyptians.
This is quite an evident exaggeration whatever the causes might be.
If on your part you take such precautions as regards Egypt and the
Egyptian army, it is only right that we should be very cautious as
regards expected results if we accept your offer of this tremendous
number of British forces remaining in Egypt on the pretext of joint
administration of the base. We are to be excused if we regard this as
a continuation of occupation and if we refer to past promises to train
the Egyptian army by your military mission with the result that the
Egyptian army remained weak and lacking in equipment and arms. It
is feared that this would happen again if we agree to your theory. You
will always depend only on your forces and the urge to serious assistance
in strengthening the Egyptian army would be lacking. But if complete


and immediate evacuation is agreed to, it would then be to your advant-
age to do all you possibly can for the strengthening and raising the
standard of the Egyptian army.
As to the possibility of considering the situation at agreed intervals,
it would not advance us a single step forward and we cannot rely upon
it. It is not advisable to leave matters in suspense in that way. Your
interests and ours require that we should decide the matter once for all
in a definite manner leaving no room for doubt which we should work
to eliminate and to replace by mutual confidence.
You have referred in your statement to the American base in Britain
and you said that Americans would not have come to your assistance
in time of need had you not offered them that base. I would like to
remind Your Excellency that American troops flowed over Europe in
the last two world wars to liberate it without any prior agreement with
European countries on bases or the like- Indeed there were no treaties
or alliances to bind them together. Your own troops went twice to
France and Western European countries without prior agreement on
building up bases there. All this, due to mutual confidence prevailing
between them and we hope that similar confidence will prevail between
us. However, the base is already there and it is possible for Egyptians
to maintain it in good working order for receiving allied armies in the
event of war. Thus that would be in better position than that of Ame-
rican troops who went to Europe in the two last wars.
British Ambassador: — It is always distressing to me when you
show such suspicion and lack of confidence. 1 would like to say about
the Mauritians in the base that the C-in-C merely said that if the guards
were changed the responsibility for the safeguarding of the stores would
have to be shifted. You cannot consider that military exaggeration.
1 was not here when the British mission came to Egypt, but from
what I heard they did their best. The Egyptian Government, however,
dismissed them.
As to your argument that complete evacuation would encourage us
to raise the Egyptian army to a standard of efficiency, the idea is to
maintain defence while the Egyptian army is being trained and brought
up to standard. We cannot do that if we are not here. Remember that
Britain is no longer as strong as she was and the sooner she is relieved
of part of this burden the better. It is therefore to our advantage to press
on as quickly as we can with the training and equipment of the Egypt-
ian army.
I am fully in agreement that a final decision is better for every one
concerned than a provisional arrangement subject to periodical review.
I only suggested the latter in the hope of making things easier for the
Egyptian Government. As regards the matter of military bases I repeat
that it is all a matter of timing. If you have to build up your base after
war breaks out you lose precious time and inflict untold sufferings on
the country attacked.


RECORD
of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and H.E. the British Ambassador
on August 26th, 1950 at 5.30 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Bey
H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister:— Before we move on to discussing the unity
of Egypt and The Sudan, I would like to say a short word in comment
on a point in your last statement namely that the military mission did
its best to discharge its duty but the Egyptian Government dismissed
it. I do not wish to enter into an argument on this question but suffice
it to say that the Egyptian Government had dispensed with the services
of the Mission because she was convinced by experience that there was
no good coming out of the continuation of the Mission.
British Ambassador: — I was not in Egypt at that time but I under-
stand that the British Military Mission did its best but complained of
lack of cooperation from the Egyptian Authorities.
Foreign Minister: — Now I move on to the other part of Egypt’s
rights namely the unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown. I believe that good-will in this question would lead to an imme-
diate agreement since it has none of these strategic problems and defence
questions which are raised in connection with the evacuation of Egypt.
In other words the question does not involve the international situation
or the expected danger of war which would prevent you from the im-
mediate recognition of the rights of Egypt and The Sudan and handing
them over to their legitimate owners.
In my view, the question is very simple since your presence in The
Sudan resulted from your occupation of Egypt. You admit now that
the time for occupation had passed and therefore the natural result would
be that your presence in The Sudan should also come to an end. I
would like to say in all candidness that the withdrawal of Egypt from
The Sudan, its reconquest by the Anglo-Egyptian forces and concluding
the 1899 Agreement, all these came as a direct result of occupation and
took place under its authority. Yet you never claimed then that you
act for yourselves or that you have obligations vis a-vis the Sudanese.


Indeed you have always declared, as you have done in the Fashoda
incident and as Lord Cromer had repeatedly stated in his reports, that
you act on behalf of Egypt and that you only aim at keeping The Sudan
out of the capitulations regime which Egypt had inherited from Turkey.
This should lead to one result namely that you should now leave Egypt
and The Sudan alone and that you should evacuate The Sudan just as
you evacuate Egypt and that the Condominium should come to an end
and be replaced by a regime agreed upon by Egypt and The Sudan.
British Ambassador:— I would like to make one or two comments:
As to your statement that the time has come to hand over The
Sudan to its legitimate owners, there is no doubt in our minds who the
legitimate owners of The Sudan are. They are the people who live
there. The British Government will hand it over to its owners when
the time comes. Your resume of the past is perfectly correct but the
deductions you drew are not so correct. The fact is that the Sudanese
are demanding independence. The immediate withdrawal of all British
subjects from The Sudan would create chaos. Such a solution would
be outside the practical sphere. I am confident that the British Govern-
ment are prepared to consider any practical solution you may suggest
provided that it is not against the will of the Sudanese or without their
consent.
Foreign Minister: — I am glad you admit the validity of the his-
torical facts pointed out by me, but I disagree with your opinion that
these facts do not lead to the deductions I made. They cannot possibly
lead to anything else whatever you might claim of late about the
changing of circumstances in The Sudan. These historical premises
all prove that The Sudan was, according to your admission, a trust for
Egypt in your hands or in the hands of the Condominium which is in
fact the Government of one side namely the British side. Egypt now
and indeed since it started to demand her rights, ask for this trust to be
restored to her. This is the only thing between us now. In other words
you have no right to speak for the Sudanese since the historical and
legal facts do not give you such a right. And if we grant the validity
of your theory that the Sudanese ask for independence, this is a question
which can be settled between Egyptians and Sudanese and you need
not interfere.
British Ambassador: — I am afraid I cannot agree. As a result of
$0 years’ administration we have a responsibility towards the peoples of
The Sudan and we cannot divest ourselves of it whatever the legal,
historical, or even moral considerations may be. The Sudanese are
7 1/2 millions, 2 1/2 millions are pagans and they do not talk Arabic.
The fact is that the country cannot as yet govern itself. The Egyptian
demand of evacuation just isn’t a practical possibility. Even if it were
possible and we try to do it and replace our people by Egyptians you
could not find a sufficient number to go there. Whatever Egypt might
wish to do, she must produce some practical alternative for the present
regime. Does she want to wash out the Condominium and the adminis-
tration altogether. You speak about an agreement reached by the


Egyptians and the Sudanese, do you mean while the present adminis-
tration is still there or you propose to change the present regime.
Foreign Minister: — Fifty years or even a hundred years of British
administration cannot change the actual legal point or historical facts
particularly as we have always declared that you are acting in the name
of Egypt. This new tune, the tune of the Sudanese asking for inde-
pendence and your obligations vis-a-vis them only came to existence
when Egypt started to demand the restoration of her rights, that is,
when conditions in Egypt were favourable to you and there was no
serious resistance to your authority, you found no need to claim obliga-
tions vis-a-vis the Sudanese. But when you felt that conditions in Egypt
have changed and that she started to demand her rights and to seek
to achieve them, you began this new tune for no other purpose but to
separate The Sudan from Egypt, despite the fact that you had always
regarded it as a trust for Egypt in your hands. lam afraid that this
purpose was planned by you for Egypt and The Sudan from the very
beginning, otherwise fifty years would have been enough, indeed more
than enough, for The Sudan to become independent and for you to be
relieved of your obligations vis-a-vis the Sudanese. Then again you
only aim in fact to the continuation of your administration in The Sudan
under the guise of the Condominium since, as your politicians have
repeatedly declared and as Your Excellency has now declared, you
regard The Sudan far from ripe to govern itself. With regard to the
Southern Sudan : The Sudan Government has endeavoured to keep
Southern Sudan in its primitive conditions so that this will serve as an
argument for delaying The Sudan on its way to self-government or
separating the Southern Sudan from the North just the same as you
endeavour to separate the whole of The Sudan from Egypt. The whole
question is one of considered and premeditated imperialist policy and
not the will of the Sudanese or your obligations towards them. We can
now make an analogy between The Sudan and Libya. We find that
the Sudan is more progressive and more qualified for self-government
than Libya which the United Nations Organisation has decided to give
self-government indeed independence within two years ending in 1952.
This is a recognised international standard giving a very simple solution
namely that there should be a transition period not exceeding two years
during which you evacuate The Sudan, bring the Condominium to an
end after which The Sudan will have its own government in unity with
Egypt represented by the Egyptian Crown, foreign policy, currency,
army and other questions that may be agreed upon between Egyptian
and their compatriots the Sudanese. There is no doubt that the unity of
Egypt and The Sudan would make this solution much more easy than
the solution decided by the United Nations Organisation for Libya.
British Ambassador:— My comments on your statements ;as to
the idea of Sudanese independence and our responsibility being a new
tune, I do not think that is the right way to look at it because until Egypt
started to put forward her claim over The Sudan nobody disputed that
responsibility. Britain has no vital economic or strategical interest in
The Sudan and she does not care either way whether Egypt and The


Sudan be one country or not. Nobody can in fact separate The Sudan
from Egypt for two countries living on the same river cannot be sepa-
rated unless of course the Egyptians themselves do so by antagonising
the Sudanese.
As to the question of how far the Sudanese are capable of self-
government, it is a personal opinion. We do not think the Sudanese are
ripe enough for that now whereas the Libyans are.
Nobody can charge Britain with holding The Sudan by force. We
learned in 1857 in India that you cannot try to hold the people by force.
It can only be done with the acquiescence of the people.
I do not think that two years transition period is enough. You have
to accept the fact that the Sudanese want their own government. The
thing for Egypt and Britain to do is to find a modus vivendi to put the
Sudanese on the path towards self-government. The Sudanese them-
selves do not know what they want in regard to their precise relations
with Egypt. It is extremely difficult to find out.
Foreign Minister; — I fully agree to the points raised by Your
Excellency in connection with the geographical facts which make of
Egypt and The Sudan one integral whole as they both depend on the
same river, the Nile. I welcome your statement that you do not aim at
holding The Sudan by force and I hope to see the result of this shortly
as you have done in India. If, as you have stated, The Sudan is of no
material value to you, I can see there is no problem for us. You simply
have to leave it to Egypt which regards it as an integral part essential
to its life and the life of the Sudan itself. Indeed it is more essential to
Egypt than Alexandria as the late Zaghloul Pasha had stated in his
negotiations '"ith the late Mr. Macdonald in 1924.
Moreover I am confident that this is not the will of Egyptians only
but it is the will of the sweeping majority of their compatriots, the
Sudanese. Proofs of that are not lacking. You may find them in results
of municipal elections results of the election for the graduates Congress
who are the cream of the cultured class in The Sudan, and in the
sympathies of religious bodies. I would like to ask you in this connec-
tion whether you would agree to a plebiscite to be carried out now in
The Sudan provided conditions and guarantees requisite for a free ple-
biscite under neutral supervision are there, foremost among these
conditions is of course the immediate withdrawal of British forces and
British administration in the Sudan. As to the analogy between The
Sudan and Libya and your disagreeing with me, it is a matter of personal
opinion but I would like to give you one standard to support my view-
point very clearly, namely the percentage and standard of the educated
and those capable of working in the administration in the two countries.
This proportion is much higher in The Sudan than in Libya. The tran-
sition period of two years is therefore sufficient for The Sudan to move
on from the present state to the state I have described. In any case I
would like to know in my turn what you think of this period and how
long you think it should be.


British Ambassador: — I must tell you frankly that I did not want
to start this question. The reason is that we also have a sentimental
approach to it. It is one of the peculiar traits of the British character.
It is perfectly correct to say that Britain has no economic or strategic
interests in The Sudan. It is also true that it has no interests whether
The Sudan and Egypt be one.
You spoke of confidence that The Sudan is on your side. lam
sure your reports differ from ours.
As to the plebiscite, I would not discard this proposal at all. I will
ask His Majesty’s Government about that.
I presume that the Egyptian forces would of course be withdrawn
together with the British forces. But I cannot see how you could with-
draw the administration ; it is not practical. There are only 120 political
officers in the administration. They cannot hold down the people or
force them in either direction. As to the standard of education, I do not
know about Libya but I understand that only 3% of the Sudanese are
literate.
As to the transition period, my estimate would be 10 years at the
least. This is an under-estimate rather than an over-estimate. Is it the
view of the Egyptian Government that there should be a transition
period of two years followed by a withdrawal of British troops and
administration ; and secondly a plebiscite immediately after that with-
drawal and the withdrawal of the Egyptian troops. Would the
Egyptian officials be included in the withdrawal too ?
Foreign Minister: — Before I answer your questions, I would like
to refer to one point in your last statement, namely the sentimental con-
sideration which dictated your attitude towards The Sudan. I think
you will agree that there are sentimental considerations between Egypt
and The Sudan and between Egyptians and the Sudanese which out-
weigh by far the British sentimental consideration you refer to. The
unity of Egypt and The Sudan rely on history, geography, nature,
religion, language, Arab origin and similarity of customs and charac-
teristics in addition to the fact that they complete one another and
depend both on one river, the Nile. Mr. Churchill himself described
Egypt and The Sudan as a palm tree having its roots at the sources
of the Nile and its branches in the Delta. And now to answer your
questions. The solution I suggested is in fact confined to a transition
period of two years during which British forces are evacuated and the
Condominium ceases to function and after which the Sudanese will have
their own government under the Egyptian Crown with unity in foreign
policy, army, currency and other questions that may be agreed upon by
Egyptians and Sudanese. It would be understood that I mean this
solution to be final without having recourse to a plebiscite or the like.
As to the plebiscite, 1 only wanted to prove to you how certain we are
of the sentiments of our compatriots the Sudanese and of their real
aspirations. Also to know how far you are ready to abide by the wishes
of the Sudanese and whether you would go to the extent of agreeing to


the evacuation of the British forces and administration in The Sudan.
I still attach a great importance to your answer and in the event it is
in the affirmative, it would be easy to agree to the conditions ensuring
the complete neutrality of the plebiscite on our part and on yours and
to provide at the same time a means for the administration of The Sudan
during the plebiscite.


RESUME
of a conversation between the Secretary of State and the
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs
at the Waldorf-Astoria, New York
on September 28th, 1950
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Mr. Bevin
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny Mr. Barclay
On Thursday, September 28th, 1950, during the General Assembly’s
meeting the British Delegation’s Secretariat informed the Egyptian
Delegation’s Secretariat that His Excellency Mr. Bevin was leaving New
York on Friday morning and would be pleased to see me before his
departure. It was agreed to hold a meeting on Thursday evening at
Mr. Bevin’s Hotel. In this meeting there has been no rapprochement
between our respective viewpoints. Mr. Bevin’s main concern was to
make me understand that Britain cannot take upon herself the respon-
sibility for the defence of Egypt and the Middle East with Egypt insist-
ing on non-participation of British forces in preparing means of defence
in peace time. He intentionally pointed out that many Egyptians keep
on asking them to remain in Egypt and that he believes that the diffi-
culty comes from politicians only. He concluded by saying that he will
submit the matter to the British Cabinet but that he personally cannot
recommend the acceptance of the Egyptian viewpoint. The Cabinet will
have to decide in this case what is to be done to face the situation. Mr.
Bevin said that for six years he kept on trying to reach an agreement
with Egypt and has followed a policy favourable to the Arabs but he
found no response to,his efforts from the Egyptian side.
I replied that Mr. Bevin has been left a legacy of Britain’s mistakes
in Egypt and Palestine and that although we thoroughly appreciate his
friendship we cannot forgo our national rights but we have at the same
time done our utmost for the rapprochement of our respective viewpoints
and have agreed to conclude a treaty and to let British forces come in
war time not only to the Canal Zone but wherever defence measures
may require. I pointed out that in an unrecorded conversation with the
British Ambassador I gave one year as a transition period after which
complete evacuation should be accomplished and means for strengthen-
ing the Egyptian army be completed. In any case it is essential that
there should be a known and agreed time limit for complete evacuation.
The British side, in case of not agreeing to my proposal, should submit


another proposal and not content itself with a negative reply. I dealt
at length with Mr. Bevin’s reference to certain Egyptians asking them
to remain in Egypt and pointed out to him that the viewpoint expressed
in my conversations with the British Ambassador is also the Prime
Minister’s viewpoint as well as that of my colleagues the Ministers, the
Parliament and public opinion. I used his own words that for six years
he “found no response to his efforts,” as an argument to prove that the
Egyptian Government’s attitude is the attitude of all Egypt since the
Wafd Government only came to power a few months ago. In other
words the power of public opinion barred in the past the way to agree-
ment on anything short of fulfilling national aspirations. This power
stands today behind the Government fully supporting its attitude. I
added that when I mentioned to His Excellency Nahas Pasha my pro-
posal of one year transition period after which complete evacuation
should be achieved. His Excellency was not pleased and considered the
period of one year too long. 1 concluded by saying that we have done
all we could for the rapprochement of our respective viewpoints but the
British side did not do so on its part being influenced by the exaggera-
tions of military people although there are many political considerations
which politicians should take into account. I have however seen to it
during our conversation to keep some doors open. I took advantage of
his reference to efforts made to complete the preparedness of Atlantic
countries so that Russians may know what to expect if they dare embark
on war and asked him why have they hitherto refused Turkey admission
to the Atlantic Pact. He resolutely declined to speak of Turkey and said
that Turkey is their ally. I asked him whether they are prepared to
conclude a similar treaty with us as that concluded with the Turks. He
again declined to answer. I also pointed out that the principles on which
the Atlantic Pact is based differ completely from those on which their
policy in Egypt is based and that if it is desired to conclude a similar
pact in the Middle East so that the Russians may feel the power of the
Western bloc complete in all aspects, it would be possible for us to
discuss this matter with them.
There was not enough time for further details nor for discussing
The Sudan question as Mr. Bevin had an appointment with Mr. Acheson,
American Secretary of State, who came on time and waited for a while
until we finished the point then under discussion. The last thing Mr.
Bevin said was that he will communicate his Government’s considered
opinion to us. I presume of course that this opinion will involve all the
questions dealt with in my conversations with the British Ambassador.


RECORD
of a conversation between the Foreign Secretary
and the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs
in the Foreign office
on December 4th, 1950, at 4 p.m.
Present :
H.E. Mr. Bevin H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey
H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson H.E. Abdel Fattah Amr Pasha
H.E. Mr. Bowker Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Mr. Stewart
Mr. Bevin:— After the usual courtesies, said that he had been
studying the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty and thought that it looked as
though Article 8, providing for the presence of British troops in the
Canal Zone, was the source of the difficulty between His Majesty’s
Government and the Egyptian Government. He asked, however, whe-
ther there were any other aspects of the 1936 Treaty which the Egyptian
Foreign Minister would like to discuss.
Salah Eddin Bey:— There is no doubt that Article 8 dealing with
the occupation is the article to which we object more than any other
article. But there are other articles to which we object. Practice has
actually shown that certain articles of the Treaty are no longer suitable
as for example the article dealing with the priority of the British Ambas-
sador. Actual practice has, with the consent of the British Government,
run counter to this article. In fact all articles contrary to the principles
of sovereign equality or giving the impression that they were set under
duress, all such articles need necessarily be reconsidered. I have not
the Treaty before me now but I give as an instance the article providing
for the perpetuation of the Alliance. This does not mean that we dislike
to be always on good and friendly terms with Britain, but the perpe-
tuation of the Alliance gives, as I have already pointed out, an impres-
sion of force. There can be no use of friendship unless it is inspired
by complete willingness at all times and under all conditions.
Mr. Bevin;— Said that a proof of His Majesty’s goodwill was that
whatever was in the Treaty they were ready to discuss it. He would,
however, like to draw the Foreign Minister’s attention to Article 1 of
the Treaty, which specifically terminated the occupation of Egypt. For
the Egyptian Government, therefore, to go on speaking of the occupa


tion of Egypt was somewhat unreal, since this question was settled in
1936. The fact is the question was not one of occupation but one of
joint defence. He would like to know what the Egyptian Government
would wish to see in the place of the two Articles (8 and 16) to which
it appeared they took particular exception.
Salah Eddin Bey:— What Egypt asks for is the actual evacuation
of Egyptian territory by British forces. Words do not count in this
connection. Actual facts are the only things that count and if it is a
question of joint defence as you said, joint defence does not always
require the presence of foreign troops within the boundaries of one of
the contracting parties. The British Government have actually agreed
before to evacuate by land, sea and air within a period not exceeding
September 1949 in spite of the wording of the 1936 Treaty providing
that the presence of the British forces in Egypt does not constitute an
occupation. This I believe was because you realised that Egyptian
public opinion does not only hate occupation in name but it hates it
in actual fact and demands that an end be put to it in practice.
Mr. Bevin : — Said that he did not think it would be useful to go back
to the 1936 talks. He now understood that the Egyptian Government
would not object to the presence of British troops in Egypt in war-time.
The difficulty was how the question of the re-entry of British troops
was to be decided : furthermore, there was the question of keeping the
Egyptian base in such order that it would be possible for Great Britain
to do her duty in war-time. He asked the Foreign Minister whether he
had any suggestions to make on this point.
Salah Eddin Bey : Yes we have agreed to British forces coming
to Egypt in time of war in accordance with the Alliance which we are
prepared to conclude. The criterion is the actual outbreak of war. The
Sidky-Bevin scheme provided certain details in this connection and so
did His Excellency Nahas Pasha in his talks with Field-Marshal Slim,
viz. in the event of aggression against Egypt or in the event of Great
Britain entering a war on account of an aggression against countries
adjacent to Egypt. In any case, the two last World Wars had shown
it is possible to fix the time of the outbreak of war.
As regard the base there are in my talks with H.E. the British
Ambassador some lengthy discussions on the subject.
The Egyptian viewpoint is that it is possible to maintain the base
in good working order, in fact ready to be expanded when required
without the need of any British occupation. This could be done by the
Egyptian Army maintaining the base as your Ally so that you will find
it ready for action on the outbreak of war.
Mr. Bevin-: Said the difficulty was nowadays there was no formal
declaration of war. War was started suddenly and experience had
"shown that it was essential that troops must be on the spot and the base
must be kept in continuous readiness.
Salah Eddin Bey : I know that wars break out without an actual
declaration of war. But as I have already mentioned, the last two


World Wars had shown that the whole world knew when a great war
broke out. In 1914 as soon as the Archduke of Austria had been assas-
sinated or a few hours later, the whole world knew that it was in a
state of war. The same thing applies to the last World War. As soon
as Germany invaded Poland the whole world knew that a second World
War had started. As to maintaining the base in good working order
and in readiness for immediate action, we are prepared to ensure that.
It must be borne in mind that Egypt is not on the first line of possible
fighting and a few months must necessarily elapse before it could be
exposed to a land invasion.
Mr. Bevin: — Pointed out the dangers of an airborne invasion. He
said that it was impossible to ward off an air attack unless the air defence
of the country attacked was up-to-date and in the highest degree efficient.
British bases in adjacent countries such as Cyrenaica, would not neces-
sarily help the defence of Egypt. He suggested, however, that His
Majesty’s Government and the Egyptian Government could record
agreement that in war-time British troops would be able to return to
Egypt. He asked, however, whether the understanding regarding British
troops could be taken to cover United States troops as well, and pointed
out that it was likely that the British and United States Air Forces
would be integrated in time of war.
Salah Eddin Beyt— As regards air attack on Egypt, I have had
another discussion on the subject in my talks with H.E. the British
Ambassador. The Egyptian viewpoint in this connection is that there
is no need for the presence of any British air force in Egypt in peace
time since it is possible for them to come to Egypt immediately from
nearby airfields. Britain has several airfields near at hand surrounding
Egypt on every side. British aircraft can therefore go up to meet attack-
ing enemy aircraft on their way to Egypt. Moreover, British fighter-
planes can come to Egypt from those airfields within a few hours
whereas it takes heavy bombers coming from Russian airfields about
12 hours to reach Egypt. We should not forget also that there is an
Egyptian air force which we can strengthen with your help and bring
up to the standard required to replace the limited number of air force
personnel provided for in the 1936 Treaty.
As to your Allies coming to Egypt in war-time, Egypt may agree
to this in principle. It should not be difficult to take the necessary
constitutional measures in this connection.
Mr. Bevin t — Asked the Foreign Minister whether the latter ever
considered the possibility of an integrated force under a supreme com-
mander for the defence of Egypt. Perhaps the Foreign Minister had
some such idea in mind when he mentioned the possibility of associating
Egypt with the Atlantic Pact when they met in New York.
Salah Eddin Bey t — This reference made in the course of my talks
with Your Excellency in New York was in a general form without any
elaboration or definition. It proves a real desire on our part to overcome
all difficulties and to reach an agreement which can be regarded by


Egypt as fulfilling its objectives and by you as fulfilling your defence
requirements. On my part, I believe that an agreement of this kind
may be acceptable to Egypt if evacuation of foreign troops can thereby
be achieved. It would indeed be more acceptable if such an agreement
is made within the framework of the United Nations’ Charter and the
resolutions of the General Assembly. I think the resolution passed lately
under the heading of "Joint Action for Peace” involves such a question
as this. In any case, the Egyptian Government is fully prepared to con-
sider seriously all proposals you might wish to make in this connection.
There is no doubt that your experience in this respect is greater than
ours which fact leads us to expect that the proposal should come from
your side.
Mr. Bevin:— Said that the solution might lie somewhere between
the United Nations Resolution and a bilateral agreement between Great
Britain and Egypt. Perhaps, though he was not putting forward the
idea of a formal proposal, it might be possible to find a solution on the
basis of an agreement of a restricted group of countries. He though it,
however, necessary to emphasise that a substantial change in the present
basis of the Middle East defence system might be very dangerous. His
Majesty’s Government did not want to see a vacuum. He would, how-
ever, like to ask the Foreign Minister whether, if agreement was reached
regarding the entry of British troops into Egypt in war-time, there would
be no limitation on the area in which these troops could be employed
or move.
Salah Eddin Bey:— As to finding a half-way house solution
between the United Nations’ resolution and the bilateral agreement, we
are prepared to consider any solution of this kind which you might
suggest on one condition, namely that it fulfils the evacuation of Egypt
by foreign troops and that the alliance concluded would be based on
complete sovereign equality.
As to the reference made by Your Excellency to the international
situation, the Egyptian Government is fully aware of the gravity of this
situation. Indeed this very same gravity urges us to reach an agree-
ment as quickly as possible so that we would not be surprised or taken
unawares by events while we are still disagreed. War may or may not
break out and in either case it is advisable for us to solve our problems
and settle outstanding questions.
As to Your Excellency’s question in connection with taking the
necessary measures to meet defence requirements in time of war without
being limited to the Canal Zone, we have explicitly agreed to this in
my talks with H.E. the British Ambassador, this being the normal prac-
tice between allies in time of war.
Mr. Bevin; — Then asked what arrangements could be made for
looking after the workshops and the stores and equipment now in the t
Canal Zone base if British troops were evacuated.
Salah Eddin Bey;— Our viewpoint is that it is possible for the
Egyptian Army to maintain those workshops and should there be some


highly technical jobs which Egyptians cannot do, it is possible to retain
a small number of British technicians for a limited period during which
Egyptian can be trained in these jobs and ultimately take over them-
selves.
Mr. Bevin: — Took note of this, and then, reverting to the larger
question of the defence of the Middle East, said that he felt it would be
too great a responsibility to let the 1936 Treaty go unless something
effective was ready to take its place. He asked the Foreign Minister
informally whether Egypt would consider an Anglo-Egyptian agreement
which might include, however, other Middle East countries, such as
Israel, Iraq.
Salah Eddin Bey:— I agree with Your Excellency that we should
make an effort to reach an agreement satisfactory to both sides and I
believe that such an agreement may easily be expanded in the Middle
East. The Arab States have actually worked out a collective defence
system, but I have explained to H.E. the British Ambassador that no
Arab State can participate with Israel in such a system. Public opinion
in Arab countries is not prepared to enter into any relationship with
Israel. You may agree with Israel on what you deem fit without us
being connected with it in any way. Your agreement with Israel would
thus supplement any deficiency you may find in the possible agreement
between us.
Mr. Bevin:— Said the difficulty was that in fact we were already
in a sense at war. Did the Foreign Minister agree that the present
international situation justified the presence of British troops in the
Canal Zone ?
Salah Eddin Bey:— I believe in all sincerity that the grave inter-
national conditions to which Your Excellency has referred call for im-
mediate action to strengthen Egypt so that it may contribute her share
in the defence scheme since she is anxious to defend herself and since
she is prepared to make an alliance with you. A period of one year is
in my view sufficient in the present circumstances in which the whole
world is arming as fast as it can to bring the Egyptian army up to the
required standard. All what you have to do is to look at Egypt the same
way as you look at all those independent countries such as the Atlantic
countries, Turkey, Iran and Greece which receive considerable quanti-
ties of arms whereas the Egyptian Government finds it extremely diffi-
cult to obtain the necessary arms for her Army. If you change your
look at Egypt and if you treat her the same way as you treat those
other countries, the one year under present conditions would be suffi-
cient to bring the Egyptian Army up to a standard I would not say
equal to fighting Russia but certainly equal to replace the limited number
of your forces permitted to remain in Egypt in peace time by the 1936
T reaty.
As to war-time, your troops as well as those of your Allies may
come to Egypt as I have explained before.


Mr. Bevin; — Pointed out that the Foreign Minister had said that
he wanted to make a new agreement on the basis of mutual confidence,
but would the proposed solution serve as a basis for agreement to face
the present international conditions and could His Majesty’s Govern-
ment be confident that the Egyptian Government might not deny Great
Britain her rights under the agreement at a critical moment.
Salah Gddin Bey:— I view the possible solution as one single
entity. This solution may be summed up in Egypt accepting alliance
with you and a transition period of one year during which British forces
can gradually withdraw and the Egyptian Army brought up to standard
to replace the British forces permitted to remain in Egypt in peace time
by the 1936 Treaty. This solution as a whole is equal to meet any
possibility. If we agree on this today and if war breaks out after a
month, only a small number of your forces would have evacuated during
that month. But if war breaks out after six months for example, the
Egyptian Army would have then become appreciably stronger and you
will still have forces in Egypt. But if war breaks out after a year, the
Egyptian Army would by then be able to stand the first shocks until
your reinforcements and those of your Allies would arrive. We should
always bear in mind that the forces permitted by treaty to remain in
Egypt in peace time are limited in number and it is easy to have them
replaced by the Egyptian Army if you are really serious about helping
us to bring it up to standard. I would like to say in all frankness that
the confidence crisis between us is not the outcome of the present day
so that we can be accused of going back on our obligations in times of
danger and stress. This crisis is the result of decades of British occu-
pation and the deplorable turn which our relations have taken since
that last World War. I do not wish to enter into details as I do not
want to waste your valuable time.
Mr. Bevin:— Asked the Foreign Minister to give him a clue to
what he had in mind.
Salah Eddin Bey;— When we concluded the 1936 Treaty we be-
lieved that the best advantage it offered was that we would be able to
strengthen the Egyptian Army in the shortest possible time so that
evacuation can be effected in the shortest time possible- We regarded
the period of twenty years only as a maximum time limit which does
not prevent evacuation taking place before it falls due. But we did not
find the help we expected to strengthen the Egyptian Army. We met
and still meet with great difficulties which confirmed the idea already
in our minds that Britain does not wish to see a strong Egyptian Army
so as to perpetuate her argument for occupying Egypt. Then again
Egypt expected after the Allied had emerged victorious from the last
war and following the setting up of the United Nations Organisation
that Britain would of her own accord feel that conditions have changed
and that Anglo-Egyptian relations should be set up on a basis compa-
tible with the new conditions. I believe that five years were more than
sufficient to strengthen the Egyptian Army on the one hand and to
establish this new relation on the other.


Mr. Bevin t — Then said that it might be useful to summarise some
of the points of agreement which had emerged between the Foreign
Minister and himself over the last two hours discussion. He thought,
and the Egyptian Foreign Minister concurred, that both Governments
were agreed on the necessity of a new alliance. Both Governments were
also agreed on the necessity for full cooperation during war-time without
restriction as to area. They were also agreed that they should discuss
their difficulties in a friendly spirit. On the last point, however, he wish-
ed to say that he thought that the denunciation of the 1936 Agreement
by the Egyptian Government would have a most unfortunate effect and
he asked for an assurance from the Foreign Minister that the Egyptian
Government did not intend to take any such step. Mr. Bevin then said
that the principal point of disagreement appeared to be the presence of
British troops in the Canal Zone and he asked the Foreign Minister
whether the latter had any suggestions to make, apart from the proposal
that His Majesty’s Government should withdraw their troops from
Egypt within a year, which would get over this difficulty. He added
that he did not expect to have these proposals straightway since doubt-
less the Egyptian Foreign Minister would like to have time to think
the matter over.
Salah Eddin Bey : Your Excellency was good enough to give me
time to think over the suggestion of another solution. I will avail my-
self of this opportunity to review all the other questions you have just
pointed out. I will give you my answer in the next meeting. I would
only like to mention that I am still thoroughly convinced for the reasons
I gave now and have already given in my talks with H.E. the British
Ambassador that the period of one year is sufficient. I would also like
to call Your Excellency’s attention to the fact that our talks today have
been confined to one part of the problem, namely evacuation. There
still remains the other part which is no less important, i.e., the Unity of
Egypt and The Sudan.
Mr. Bevin: — Said that he would be glad to discuss the Sudan at
some other time but at present he could see no prospect of agreement
between His Majesty’s Government and the Egyptian Govrnment except
on the basis of self-determination for the Sudanese.
It was agreed that the talks should be continued later in the week.


RECORD
of a conversation between the Secretary of state and
the Egyptian Minister for Foreign
Affairs in the Foreign Office
on December, 7th, 1950, at 4 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mr. Bevin H.E. Mohammed Salah Eddin Bey
H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
H.S. Mr. Bowker Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Mr. Allen
Mr. Stewart
Salah Eddin Bey;— I have considered very carefully the questions
which Your Excellency has raised at the end of the last meeting but
time did not permit me then commenting on them. They may be summed
up in three points :
1) Your Excellency has asked me to give an assurance that the
Egyptian Government does not intend to take any steps for the denun-
ciation of the 1936 Treaty.
2) Your Excellency has asked me to make suggestions for a solu-
tion apart from the proposal of the withdrawal of British troops within
U transition period of one year.
3) Your Excellency has stated that you could see no prospect of
agreement on the Sudan question except on the basis of giving the
Sudanese the right of self-determination.
As to the first point I have no power to give Your Excellency such
an assurance and I believe the Egyptian Government could not accede
to this. The Egyptian Government has explicitly defined its position
in the Speech From the Throne. Your Excellency is aware of the im-
portance of the Speech from the Throne as a pledge made by the
Government to the representatives of the Nation in Parliament. You are
of course free on your part to accept the Egyptian Government’s view-
point in connection with the 1936 Treaty or to reject it, but the Egyptian
Government has strong reasons for taking this attitude referred to in
the Speech from the Throne. If you dislike this attitude and complain
of it I can, on my part, cite several instances where the British Govern-
ment has taken and still takes attitudes prejudicial to the rights and
interests of Egypt. We have also a right to complain but the exchange


of complaints in this manner does not advance us one step forward. It
would be much better to exert our efforts to smoothe down the difficult
ties in our way so that we may reach an agreement satisfactory to both
sides. Moreover the Speech from the Throne itself has stated that the
Egyptian Government still expects suggestions from you for reconciling
the respective viewpoints in such a manner as to ensure Egypt’s rights
and satisfy the wishes of the people of the Nile Valley. In other words
the two Governments are still in contact with each other in order to
reach a satisfactory agreement. All our efforts should therefore be
exerted to that end.
As to whether I can make any suggestion of a solution apart from
that proposed by the Egyptian Government in its talks with Field-
Marshal Slim and later in its talks with Sir Ralph Stevenson, I would
like to remark that you have not on your part sufficiently explained your
attitude regarding this solution so that we may know whether you com-
pletely reject it or you simply object to certain details and what could
these details be and what are the grounds for your objection, etc. But
if it is intended to propose a solution in which other countries may par-
ticipate with Egypt and Great Britain, I have already pointed out that
I expect the proposal to come from your side since you have greater
experience in this kind of agreements than we have. Should we add to
all this that the Egyptian Government expects a reply from you as pointed
out in the Speech from the Throne, I am inclined in this stage of our
talks to leave it to Your Excellency to make some new proposals or to
express a detailed opinion on ours.
As to The Sudan, I content myself now with making the following
comment: The Egyptian Government on her part is not prepared to
accept any solution which does not recognise the unity of Egypt and
The Sudan in word and in practice. The Egyptian Government is sur-
prised at the attitude of the British Government as summed up by Your
Excellency in the last meeting after the British Government having
explicitly admitted this union under the Egyptian Crown in the Sidky-
Bevin scheme and after having agreed to draw up the details of govern-
ing The Sudan within the framework of this Unity, In other words,
here again, you go back on what you have already agreed to. There
is no doubt that this retracting on your part as regard the question of
evacuation and the unity of Egypt and The Sudan cannat possibly make
agreement any easier or gain the confidence of the Egyptian Govern-
ment and the Egyptian People.
Mr. Bevin: — Said that the Foreign Minister’s statement had at
any rate the advantage of clarity. He did not, however, think that the
proposal that the British troops should be withdrawn within one year
offered a practical solution. Evacuation within this time limit would
mean that Great Britain would be expected to undertake the defence of
the Middle East in war-time without having been able to make adequate
preparations. He cited the technical difficulties, such as the organising
and mounting of radar, as an example, of the difficulty which we would
have in war-time if no preparations had been previously made. His
Majesty’s Government saw no reason to give up the 1936 Treaty if


nothing effective were to take its place. He was quite sure that neither
the Egyptian Army nor the British Army could do their job properly if
the time limit were to be one year.
As regards the Sudan, he had agreed with Sidky Pasha on self-
determination for the Sudanese. They had together estimated that com-
plete Sudanisation would take about twenty years. The Egyptian Gov-
ernment had twice been invited to participate in the political evolution
of the Sudan, but had refused. He was satisfied that he himself had
carried out and was carrying out, even though there was no legal
obligation for him to do so, all he had undertaken at the time of the Sidky
talks. He thought it unfortunate that the Foreign Minister had found it
necessary to say that he, Mr. Bevin, had gone back on his undertakings.
The Sudan had in fact made great administrative, economic and poli-
tical progress within recent years and the standard of living was as high
or higher than in many countries in that part of the world.
Salah Eddin Bey:— Before I give a detailed answer to the state-
ment Your excellency has just made I would like to ask whether it is
the period of one year you object to as insufficient for the Egyptian
Army to be brought up to the standard required to fill the vacuum or
whether you object to the entire solution ?
Mr. Bevin: — Said that his mind was in no way closed but that he
could not commit himself until he saw some evidence that His Majesty’s
Government and the Egyptian Government’s thinking on defence mat-
ters was much closer. The Egyptian slogans of evacuation and the
union of Egypt and The Sudan did not provide a practical working
basis. He thought, however, that if we could find such a basis the ques-
tion of the time limit could be discussed later. He had, himself, no
authority to put forward proposals, but was trying to establish a common
approach.
On the point of the denunciation by Egypt of the 1936 Treaty,
what he wished to imply was that, if both sides were anxious to settle
by negotiation, denunciation would not be in accordance with that spirit.
Salah Eddin Bey:— I should like first of all to assure Your Excel-
lency that I take great pains choosing my words so that they may be
compatible with the regard and esteem I have for you. When I made
a reference to your going back on your agreement as regards the ques-
tions of evacuation and the unity of Egypt and The Sudan, I certainly
did not mean your person. I merely meant to describe the situation
arrived at. I will later explain this when I deal again with the unity of
Egypt and The Sudan. But for a start I would like to give an answer
to the statement you have just made as regards the proposed solution for
the problem of evacuation. My answer is a very simple one namely
that the period in which evacuation is completed is closely connected
with what you have always termed as filling the vacuum. Notwithstand-
ing the fact that public opinion in Egypt does not link these two ques-
tions together and demands complete and immediate evacuation as one
of Egypt s natural rights as an independent and sovereign state and as


a result of her participation in the United Nations Organisation on a
basis of sovereign equality with all member states, notwithstanding this
fact we wanted to reconcile the two respective viewpoints and we have
suggested one year as a transition period after which evacuation should
be completed and the Egyptian Army brought in the same time up to
the standard required for filling the vacuum.
I would like to repeat here that the vacuum to be filled is the limited
number of British troops permitted to remain by the 1936 Treaty in
Egypt and the Canal Zone in peace time. I believe in all sincerity that
this limited number can be replaced bythe Egyptian Army in one year.
I have therefore said and I repeat that the period of one year is closely
connected with the difficulty Your Excellency has raised against eva-
cuation and may be regarded as a sufficient reply to it. It is also for
this reason that I have asked you whether it is the period of one year
you object to and regard as insufficient to serve your purpose ?
Mr. Bevin: — Agreed that the number of combat troops in the
Canal Zone was limited, but apart from these there were the questions
of the base and the Air Force. Without in any way wishing to belittle
the Egyptian Air Force, he thought it would be quite impossible for one
year to suffice for training the latter to take over the work of the R.A.F.
Air development was rapid and highly technical. He said that, whatever
happened, it was necessary that there must be an orderly transfer of
power and cited the example of the British withdrawal from India, where
numerous officers and technicians were left behind to serve in the
Indian Army. He pointed out that the Foreign Minister’s insistence on
evacuation left no possibility of working out a proper transfer of respon-
sibility. The Foreign Minister should remember that the base alone
would have to supply a vast army in war-time. It was obviously impos-
sible for His Majesty’s Government to leave themselves without having
taken every precaution to ensure that it would be ready when it was
required again. He disliked the continual talk of evacuation and would
prefer to see this unfortunate word substituted by something like the
“transfer of authority.” Personally, he had always visualised that sooner
or later His Majesty’s Government would come to an agreement with
Egypt. He had this in mind when the Joint Defence Board was proposed
at the time of the Sidky talks. He wished to get rid of the present
situation where the Egyptians were pressing their demands and the
British were obliged to resist them. Continual talk about evacuation
sounded like an ultimatum and he could assure the Foreign Minister
that Parliament was as a whole behind him in resisting this. He assumed,
however, that the ultimate aim of the Foreign Minister was the same
as his own : friendship between their two countries. Personally and in-
dividually he thought that if it were possible to get the equipment and
training of the Egyptian Army on a proper basis it might be possible to
agree on a transfer of responsibility. He would also like to see the air
experts of Great Britain and Egypt examine the problem of the air de-
fence of Egypt together. These officers would not deal with political
questions, but he suggested there might be some advantage in a separate
approach to each of the three defence problems, i.e., air, land forces


and navy. All this, however, would hardly be possible in a matter of
one or two years. He wished earnestly to suggest to the Foreign Minis-
ter that both sides should try and concentrate less on the political aspects
of the problem and more on the practical. As an example of where
practical cooperation might yield great benefits, he cited the utilisation
of Egypt’s man-power. He would like first to agree with the Foreign
Minister that defence questions should be a matter of practical and
expert examination ; he would also like to have an agreed definition
(recorded perhaps in an exchange of letters) of the circumstances in
which British troops would be entitled to re-enter Egypt. If this were
possible, political trouble would be avoided in future. Finally, he would
like to examine with Egypt the possibility of associating other Arab
countries with the defence arrangements of the Middle East. Mr. Bevin
concluded by saying that he had shown his mind very frankly and hoped
that his confidence would not be abused. He had, however, to emphasise
that what he had said, he had said entirely on his own responsibility,
and that any suggestions he had thrown out would, of course, require
to be endorsed by his Government and by the British Government’s
Service advisers.
Salah Eddin Bey:— I feel duty bound to explain to Your Excel-
lency two things which I believe are very important in order that you
may understand the real position of the Egyptian Government and the
Egyptian People.
You have shown dislike to the word “evacuation” and have stressed
the fact that all members of the House of Commons dislike the word
which has unanimously been agreed upon in Egypt so much so that it
has become a slogan as you have described. But Egyptians do not keep
reiterating this word for no reason or without justification. Britain has
occupied their country for 67 years and they have always protested
against this occupation. British politicians have always assured us that
it was temporary and have repeatedly given promises of evacuation but
none of these promises ever did materialise. Availing herself of the
opportunity of World War I, Great Britain declared Egypt a protec-
torate which measure was resented by the Egyptian People just as much
as occupation was resented by them. As a result the Egyptian National
movement started as soon as war came to an end. The Allied victory
in the war would have permitted Britain to concede Egypt’s demands
but she did not and she tried in all her negotiations with Egypt to pre-
serve occupation and the spirit of the protectorate. It was not until the
1936 Treaty that Egypt got rid of all vestiges of the protectorate but
not of occupation.
The principal reason which urged Egypt to conclude the 1936
Treaty was that we believed that this treaty would give Egypt an oppor-
tunity of strengthening the Egyptian Army and consequently of getting
rid of that occupation which Egyptians kept resisting for over sixty
years. But subsequent events disappointed Egypt. Despite the presence
of the British Military Mission which the Treaty provided for, the
Egyptian Army remained weak and Britain maintained her argument for
British forces remaining in Egypt. It is for this reason that the Egyptian


people stick to the word evacuation. They just like it as much as you
hate it here in Great Britain. The reason, of course, is the history of
occupation, its harmful effect on the Egyptian Army and the non-fulfil-
ment of the many promises made by the British to evacuate. This is
the first thing I am anxious to explain to Your Excellency so that you
may be able to form the right idea about our attitude.
The second thing I would like to point out is the doubt we have
about any arrangement made for strengthening the Egyptian Army and
making evacuation conditional on it. The long time which elapsed since
the occupation of Egypt started would have been sufficient, in fact more
than sufficient, to achieve this end, in other words to fulfil the repeated
promises of evacuation. The time which elapsed since concluding the
1936 Treaty would have alone been sufficient for this purpose yet the
Egyptian Army remained in the same condition and occupation remained
on the grounds of the weakness of this army, that is, we are really facing
a vicious circle which must, from the Egyptian viewpoint, be broken
down. This could only be done by fixing a definite date for the with-
drawal of Britain forces from Egypt without linking this to any arrange-
ment which might be agreed upon for the strengthening of the Egyptian
Army. And this, in my view, is the only way to remove this doubt which
rightly comes to the minds of the people and those responsible in Egypt.
1 would like to comment now on the comparison Your Excellency has
drawn in connection with the evacuation of India. Your Excellency has
stated that you evacuated India on the strength of an old relationship
with the Indian Army which inspired confidence to hand power over
to it. But this relationship, as I have already explained, exists as regards
the Egyptian Army. The Egyptian Army was under the actual command
of the British up to 1936. Then it was handed over to the British
Military Mission so that it can be said that the factor existing as regards
the Indian Army also exists as regards the Egyptian Army. Moreover
the Egyptian and British armies, in fact, have successfully cooperated as
testified by your commanding officers during the last world war and
the Egyptian Army had been entrusted with the important task of anti-
aircraft defence. In any case, I am able to deduce from Your Excel-
lency’s statement that you do not object to the idea that one year may
be sufficient for preparing the Egyptian Army to fill the vacuum conse-
quent up on the evacuation of the limited number of land forces permit-
ted by the 1936 Treaty to remain in Egypt in peace time. But you have
your fears about the base. I have, in my talks with H.E. the British
Ambassador, replied to those fears after a detailed study of the number
of forces stationed in the base and the different jobs performed by them.
I showed that all these jobs could be performed by the Egyptian Army
with the exception of a few highly technical jobs for which we could
retain a small number of British technicians for a limited period during
which they can train Egyptians in these jobs and ultimately hand them
over to them. I believe that the same period of one year is ample for
that training. The result would be that the base will be maintained in
good working order by Egypt so that you may find it ready for imme-
diate action on the outbreak of war when your troops come back in
accordance with the Alliance. I do not find any justification for your


fears over the base except perhaps one thing, namely, lack of confidence
whereas confidence is the very essence of alliance and without it no
alliance can be of any real value.
As to the air force, I may remark that the number of air force men
permitted by the 1936 Treaty to remain in Egypt in peace time is limited
and it would not be difficult to train Egyptian Air Force men to replace
them within a year. In any case and reserving my reply to the concep-
tion outlined by Your Excellency, I would like to express to you my
pleasure at the development of our talks to such an extent as to permit
you to help with your ideas the attempts we are making to reach a satis-
factory solution. This, 1 believe, is the duty of both sides not that of
the Egyptian side only.
There can be no doubt that expressing an opinion on the conception
outlined by Your Excellency depends on further crystallisation of that
conception and on the experts’ opinion regarding questions on which
you wish to consult them. I believe this would not take long since no
doubt those experts have a ready idea as all those questions have cer-
tainly come under examination by them during the previous and the
present talks, that is during the past four years.
Mr, Bevin:— Said that the period of one year, which the Foreign
Minister had mentioned, would in any case be inadequate. It was
necessary to keep the international situation, which was very threatening,
in mind. He now would have to talk over his ideas, which he again
emphasised were purely personal, with his colleagues and the British
military advisers. He would, however, say that, if in the end they pro-
vided a basis for an understanding, he personally would do his best
to ensure that every help was given to the training of the Egyptian
Army. In the meantime he said that he thought it was in the interest
of both countries to do nothing which might create political difficulties.
Salah Eddin Bey: — Time has not permitted the discussion of the
Sudan question to-day. I would request Your Excellency to fix a date
for discussing this question.
It was agreed that the Foreign Secretary and the Egyptian Foreign
Minister should meet at 11 o’clock on 9th December again for a talk
on The Sudan.


RECORD
of a conversation between the Secratary of State and
the Egyptian Minister for Foreign
Affairs in the Foreign Office
on December, 9th, 1950, at 4 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mr. Bevin H.E. Mohammed Salah Eddin Bey
H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
H.S. Mr. Bowker Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Mr. Allen
Mr. Stewart
Salah Eddin Bey:— Made the following statement:
I would like now to explain to Your Excellency the Egyptian view-
point in regard to The Sudan with the same candidness and sincerity I
used in explaining the Egyptian viewpoint in regard to evacuation.
Egypt maintains that together with The Sudan they form one single
country under one single Crown, the Egyptian Crown. This unity is
natural and is supported by history since remote and ancient times. The
Sudan had always formed one single unit with Egypt. It is equally
supported by geography since Egypt and The Sudan are linked together
by the River Nile and are not separated by any physical boundaries.
This is in addition to the ties which bind the people of Egypt with their
compatriots, the Sudanese, including Arab origin, language, religion,
traditions and customs, etc., etc. Britain had nothing to do with The
Sudan before the occupation of Egypt. But she took advantage of this
occupation and forced the Egyptian Government to withdraw from The
Sudan, then she forced her to reconquer it jointly with Britain, and then
she forced her to conclude the 1899 Agreements which provided for a
joint administration of the Sudan. Without British occupation of Egypt,
none of this would have taken place and Britain would not have been
in The Sudan to-day. In other words, she would not have been able
to claim what she claims of late that she has responsibilities vis-a-vis
the Sudanese. I say of late because Britain did not claim after the 1899
Agreements that she was acting for herself or on behalf of the Sudanese.
On the contrary, she plainly admitted that she is acting there in the
name and on behalf of Egypt. She explained her participation in the
administration of The Sudan by one thing, namely, to keep The Sudan
out of the capitulation regime against which Egypt protested and com-
plained. Lord Cromer’s reports and the Fashoda incident bear this out.


All this goes to prove that Egypt does not rely as regards the question
of unity of Egypt and The Sudan on natural right only, but also on the
legal position whereas Britain cannot find any support for claiming res-
ponsibilities towards the Sudanese. The question is not only confined
to the fact that Britain has no right in the Sudan, but it goes further,
Britain has no interests in The Sudan. I have asked H.E. the British
Ambassador whether the British have any intentions of colonising The
Sudan or exploiting it economically, and he answered in the negative.
The strategic factor which you offer as an argument in the question of
evacuation does not exist insofar as the Sudan is concerned. All this
entitles us to ask you to keep hands off The Sudan and to leave it to
the people of Egypt and The Sudan who are one people living in one
country as I have already pointed out.
And since you admit that your occupation of Egypt has come to
an end, you are bound to admit that your relationship with The Sudan
must accordingly come to an end. This relationship was, as I have
already explained, the outcome of occupation and the result of occupa-
tion should cease to exist once occupation has come to an end. More-
over our stand as regards The Sudan question does not depend for sup-
port on the natural and legal rights only, but it depends also on the will
of our Sudanese compatriots, since the sweeping majority of the Sudanese
maintain the same ideal as maintained by Egypt, namely, the unity of
Egypt and The Sudan, and here are the proofs :
1) Election results of the Graduates Congress which includes prac-
tically all the cultured element in The Sudan are every year in
favour of those maintaining the unity of Egypt and The Sudan.
2) Municipal Elections results show a sweeping majority approxi-
mating to unanimity for those who maintain this unity. Need-
less to say that these elections are carried out under the super-
vision of The Sudan Government which cannot be accused with
interference in elections in favour of Egypt’s supporters.
3) Boycotting the General Assembly’s Election since the proportion
of those taking part in the elections for this Assembly did not
exceed 2% of the Sudanese people, and 20% of the electorate, in
spite of the Administration’s attempt to persuade the largest
number of electors to take part in these elections.
4) The most important and numerous religious sects in The Sudan
maintain the unity of Egypt and The Sudan. Those sects cons-
titute in fact the mass of the people of The Sudan.
You have no right therefore to offer the will of the Sudanese as an
argument and to claim that you uphold their interests. The small and
weak minority seeking separation from Egypt cannot help you in this
connection. It is not to be wondered at that such a minority should exist
in The Sudan under bilateral administration in name but British in
practice which had always, and particularly in later years, worked to
antagonise the Sudanese against their Egyptian compatriots.


I would like in all candidness and sincerity to add that this political
acumen which directed your policy in The Sudan to appear as the
champion of the rights of the Sudanese against their Egyptian compa-
triots is of no avail. You keep reiterating the slogan of self-government
and self-determination for the Sudanese, but when we ask you whether
you are prepared to agree that a Sudanese democratic government de-
pending on a truly representative assembly be forthwith established, and
that the present administration hand over power to this government, you
try to find excuses just as H.E. the British Ambassador did by replying
that the Sudanese are not as yet mature enough for self-government.
And if we ask you when in your estimation, they would be mature
enough for this stage you give a period of 10 to 15 years. Again if we
offer as an analogy the case of Libya which the United Nations has
found worthy of independence and self-government within a period of
two years terminating in January 1952, you contend that the Sudanese
have not attained the same degree of progress as the Libyans notwith-
standing the cruel condemnation of your administration over 50 years
in The Sudan, which this contention seems to imply. In fact all this
does not show real anxiety for the welfare of the Sudanese or respecting
their will, but it shows one thing only : that the British Government who
declared at the start that she was acting in The Sudan in the name and
on behalf of Egypt, is now striving hard to separate the Sudan from
Egypt on the plausible pretext of preparing the Sudanese for self-
government and giving them the right of self-determination. Evidence
is not lacking to show the persistence of The Sudan Government in this
harmful policy so much so that the Minister of Education in The Sudan
threatened war against Egypt in a public statement he made lately.
And now I would like to ask why does the British Government try
to separate The Sudan from Egypt, and at the same time put off the
time when the Sudanese may enjoy self-government. I can find one
answer only to this, namely, that Britain acts in The Sudan in her own
interest and not on behalf of Egypt or the Sudanese. There is evidence
of great significance in support of this logical conclusion, namely, the
policy followed by The Sudan Government in the South of The Sudan,
a policy which has for its object keeping this part of The Sudan in a
primitive condition and complete segregation from the North involving
non-admission of people of the North into it. No one can claim that
this policy which may be justly described as ringing down an Iron Cur-
tain on the South of The Sudan, is in the interest of the Sudanese or
the people of the South of The Sudan themselves. We can easily
deduce from this policy that Britain is acting in The Sudan in her own
interest. As to Egypt, I have already pointed out that her policy has for
its object that the Sudanese enjoy self-government in the shortest pos-
sible time. Egyptians and the sweeping majority of the Sudanese are
both agreed on The Sudan having its own government and its own
Parliament in a unity represented by the Crown of Egypt, foreign policy,
army, currency and other matters which Egyptians and their compatriots
the Sudanese may agree upon. It is possible to have all this realised in
two years, which period was deemed sufficient for the independence of
Libya and for her enjoying constitutional government.


I sincerely hope after this comprehensive statement that the British
Government would change her policy in The Sudan and accept this
solution which is in complete accord with the will of the people of Egypt
and The Sudan, and which fulfils the well-being of the Sudanese and
the development of their interests. We witness to-day the tendency of
nations towards consolidation as is now taking place in Europe itself.
"Why then should the British Government strive to put asunder Egypto-
Sudanese unity which had since time immemorial remained intact ?
I have seen personally before coming to this country how the British
delegation to the United Nations exerted every effort for the realisation
of the unity of Eritrea and Ethiopia under the Ethiopian Crown which
has lately been achieved. Can anyone with any sense of justice say
that relations binding those two countries are as strong as the relations
binding Egypt and The Sudan? Why should the British Government
make that flagrant discrimination in treatment ? Strive for the unity of
Eritrea and Ethiopia on the one hand and work for the separation of
The Sudan from Egypt on the other. I say in all candidness that such
a policy is not conducive to the consolidation of Anglo-Egyptian friend-
ship. It is my greatest hope that Mr. Bevin will ask His Majesty’s
Government to change this policy, more especially as the British Gov-
ernment have agreed to the unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the
Egyptian Crown in the Sidky-Bevin scheme. Mr. Bevin had told us
in the last meeting that this was not meant to deprive the Sudanese of
the right of self-determination even if they choose separation from Egypt.
My answer to this is that first, Sidky Pasha himself, who was a party
to the negotiations had another interpretation. Second, in face of this
difference we can only go back to The Sudan protocol in the Sidky-
Bevin scheme. It starts by establishing a fundamental principle that the
policy which the High Contracting Parties undertake to follow in The
Sudan should proceed within the framework of the unity between Egypt
and The Sudan under the common Crown of Egypt. Then it goes on
to outline the essential objectives of this policy which are the well-being
of the Sudanese, the development of their interests and their active pre-
paration for self-government and consequently the exercise of the right
to choose the future status of The Sudan.
There is no doubt that all this should take place within the frame-
work of the unity between Egypt and The Sudan, which is the funda-
mental principle laid down at the very outset by the protocol, and which
defined before everything else the policy of the contracting parties. In
other words, the choice of the future status of The Sudan exercised by
the Sudanese should be made within the framework of the unity between
Egypt and The Sudan under the common Crown of Egypt. Within
that framework they may settle details of this unity. What form would
it take ? What aspects of governmental work would it include ? etc., etc.
This only is what it meant by the words "the future status of The
Sudan.”
I must apologize to Your Excellency for this long statement, but
the matter is of the greatest importance to us. Your Excellency has
pointed out how difficult it is. I felt it therefore my bounden duty to


do all I possibly can to overcome this difficulty by explaining the Egypt-
ian viewpoint together with the arguments in its support.
Mr. Bevin: — Thanked the Foreign Minister for his statement
which he said His Majesty’s Government would naturally be willing to
study. He was bound to point out that there were facts as well as
theories in any political situation. The reference to the Egyptian Crown
in the Sidky Protocol had produced serious reactions in The Sudan. He
had tried very hard to settle the question of The Sudan in 1946, but
Sidky Pasha’s interpretation of the wording of the Agreement went far
beyond the understanding reached in London. He had also to point
out that the Foreign Minister’s statement ignored the attempts His Ma-
jesty’s Government had made since 1948 to associate Egypt with political
development in The Sudan. His Majesty’s Government, however, as
one of the two Powers responsible for The Sudan, could not discharge
its responsibilities without taking steps to help Sudanese political deve-
lopment. He regretted that the Foreign Minister had found it necessary
to link the question of The Sudan with that of defence. They were
essentially two different problems. He thought that if they could be
taken separately progress might be possible. He said that His Majesty’s
Government must stand firm on The Sudan but he personally would
like to see whether it was not possible to settle the problem of defence,
Salah Eddin Bey;— I would like first of all to thank Your Excel-
lency for your patience and for the attention you have paid to my long
statement on The Sudan, also for your promise to refer this statement
to His Majesty’s Government for study. But I hope for more than that.
I hope that you will study it in a spirit calculated to gain Egypt’s confi-
dence and friendship and secure the real interests of the Sudanese which
I believe in all sincerity to be in their unity with Egypt.
I am confident if you consider the matter in this spirit that rappro-
chement between our respective viewpoints would be possible, and it
would be easy to solve The Sudan question at the same time the evacua-
tion question is being solved. I have noted Your Excellency has said
that your instructions are to stand firm on The Sudan question. I very
much regret this, since it is not a question of standing firm or otherwise,
but it is a question of mutual understanding and agreement on the
dictates of right and justice and the real interests of all parties con-
cerned. If you dislike Egypt linking the question of evacuation with that
of The Sudan, Egypt on her part cannot deviate from linking these two
questions together. In fact she has always done so and both questions
were dealt with in all the negotiations which took place between Egypt
and Britain. Indeed, certain negotiations, such as those Zaghloul-Mac-
Donald and Nahas-Henderson, failed on account of The Sudan. In the
negotiations which paved the way for the 1936 Treaty, the two ques-
tions were dealt with together and provisions concerning both were
included in that Treaty. It is no innovation, therefore, that we should
insist to-day on linking together the two questions. I hope Your Excel-
lency will take into consideration that your foreign policy is of such a
wide range that it almost embraces all international problems. But our


foreign policy is a very limited one and can almost be resolved in these
two questions now under discussion, the question of evacuation and that
of the unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown. I
would like to say in all frankness that the second question is no less
important to Egypt than the first. Indeed it is a matter of life and death
to Egypt. Mr. Churchill has himself depicted Egypt and The Sudan as a
palm tree having its roots in The Sudan and its branches in the Delta.
Can you imagine how the branches could survive if the roots were
severed ? This picture alone is sufficient to justify our attitude towards
this question, and our insistence upon linking it with the question of
evacuation. I am anxious to state, now that you have explicitly stated
that your instructions are to stand firm on The Sudan question, that my
instructions too are to stand firm on this question and to insist on linking
it with the question of evacuation.
I do hope that by goodwill and sincere desire on our part and yours
to reach an agreement, we will find the two questions easy to settle. In
fact I believe that The Sudan question is much easier than that of eva-
cuation since the former has nothing to do with the strategic problems or
the international situation on which you rely for justifying your attitude
in the question of evacuation. If you study carefully my statement on
The Sudan giving the historical and legal arguments and upholding the
interests of the Sudanese it will be possible for you to appreciate the
Egyptian viewpoint. Perhaps it is best to repeat here the comparison
I made between your attitude towards the unity of Eritrea and Ethiopia
and your attitude towards the unity of Egypt and The Sudan. Also the
comparison between The Sudan and Libya which I justly consider less
advanced than The Sudan.
I would earnestly request Your Excellency to study the question in
the light of these two comparisons, and you will find it easy to come to
a just and equitable conclusion. In any case, I believe we are agreed
on several points, the most important of which is preparing the Sudanese
for self-government which we should proceed with as quickly and dili-
gently as possible.
If the period of two years is not sufficient for this preparation in
spite of the logical comparison I made with Libya, I would ask Your
Excellency once more how long would it take to achieve this end. It is
equally easy to agree on the fundamental question with which Egypt is
concerned, i.e., the unity of Egypt and The Sudan in the light of your
agreement with Sidky Pasha and the logical interpretation I gave in my
statement. This interpretation is very simple and very clear. If we say
that the policy which the contracting parties undertake in The Sudan,
within the framework of the unity of Egypt and The Sudan aims at such
and such things, it is perfectly clear that those aims should not run
counter to that unity. To say otherwise would only mean that both par-
ties intended their text to be contradictory and that one of them, which
is Egypt, undertakes to act against the principle of unity which she
maintains. Such hypothesis does not, of course, hold water.
Mr. Bevin:— Repeated that he would study the Foreign Minister’s
statement with great care. He must, however, say that he could not


accept the latter’s remarks that His Majesty’s Government were
ing a selfish policy in The Sudan. He himself had been personally
interested in the development of The Sudan and had repeatedly sought,
Egyptian cooperation as the Egyptian Ambassador in London could
testify. He considered, without in any way wishing to make invidious
comparisons, that the standard of administration and the development of
the country compared well with Egypt. He did not ask the Egyptian
Government to drop their claims to The Sudan, but, of the two ques-
tions facing them now, he thought The Sudan was less pressing than the
question of defence, even from the Egyptian Government’s point of
view. He therefore wished to turn to defence again. There were two
points which he wished to put to the Foreign Minister. In the first place
he would like to know, whether, if it were agreed that His Majesty’s
Government and the Egyptian Government should work on a basis of
the transfer of responsibility, the latter would consider the present
arrangements (i.e., those deriving from the 1936 Treaty) in force if war
were suddenly to break out. Secondly, would the Egyptian Government
agree that the base in the Canal Zone would remain British even if the
Egyptian Government assumed responsibility for looking after it ? Mr.
Bevin explained that the security of the base was a matter of great
importance and that he would not like any arrangement made between
the two Governments to be subject to political or financial disputes.
Salah Eddin Bey:— Said that he recognised the importance of Mr.
Bevin s questions and would like time to consider them before giving
an answer.
Mr. Bevin:— Then asked whether the idea of a transition rather
than an evacuation appealed to the Foreign Minister. He wanted to see
a gradual development in Anglo-Egyptian relations, rather than an
abrupt change. Article 8 of the 1936 Treaty implied the possibility of
a revision. He wondered whether, if agreement were reached, it would
be possible to take Article Bas a point of departure. He reminded the
Foreign Minister that this article authorised the stationing of British
troops in the Canal Zone “until such time as the High Contracting Par-
ties agree that the Egyptian Army is in a position to ensure by its own
resources” the defence of the Canal. He thought that it would be in the
Egyptian interest to record agreement that this state of affairs had been
achieved. Mr. Bevin then said that he still was not persuaded that a
year would be enough to allow for the orderly transfer of responsibility.
He had asked the British Government’s advisers to examine the question
of what had to be done and how long it would take, but he hoped that,
if His Majesty’s Government and the Egyptian Government were able
to agree in principle, the time factor would not predominate. Mr. Bevin
then said that he wished to refer to the question of the military techni-
cians who would be necessary for maintaining the base at the proper
level of efficiency. He asked the Foreign Minister whether the Egyptian
Government would object to these technicians, who would, of course, be
service personnel, being in uniform. He explained that it would be diffi-
cult to ensure the necessary degree of efficiency with civilians and


thought that in any case the technicians of the British and Egyptian
armies and air forces might find it easier to agree amongst themselves
than civilians from both countries. Finally, he said that he thought it
would be necessary to have a very clear understanding about the circum-
stances in which the British forces would return to Egypt. His anxiety
in this respect did not imply any lack of confidence in the Egyptian
Government, but the point was clearly one of vital importance and one
on which he felt entitled to ask for fair protection. Mr. Bevin then
explained that, owing to other commitments, it would probably be diffi-
cult for His Majesty’s Government to give the Egyptian Government a
considered opinion on the preliminary ideas which he had given the
Foreign Minister before the middle of January. He suggested, however,
that it would be useful if the Foreign Minister could give him the
Egyptian Government’s first response to these ideas by the time he and
the Foreign Minister met again on 15th December.


RECORD
of a conversation between the Secretary of State
and the Egyptian Minister for Foreign
Affairs on December 15th, 1950, at 4 p.m.
Present;
H.E. Mr. Bevin H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey
H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson H.E. Abdul-Fattah Amr Pasha
H.E. Mr. Bowker Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Mr. Allen
Mr. Edmonds
Mr. Bevin: — Made the following statement:
At our meeting here on 9th December, as Your Excellency will
remember, I undertook to study your statement about Egyptian policy
regarding The Sudan and to refer it to my colleagues in the Government.
I have not yet been able to put it before the Cabinet, who have been
greatly preoccupied with other matters, but Your Excellency may like
to have a short account of my own reactions to your statement now.
In the first place, I have been struck by the gap which separates us,
not so much about policy, but about our interpretation of the facts about
The Sudan. Without going into the remote past, I should like to take
three examples from the more recent history of The Sudan, to which
you referred.
First, I cannot accept the contention that, taking advantage of the
presence of our forces in Egypt, we "compelled” the Egyptian Govern-
ment to withdraw from The Sudan in 1885.
Secondly, there is no evidence, of which I am aware, that it was
under “compulsion” that the Khedive allowed British forces to assist in
the re-conquest of The Sudan.
Finally, if the 1899 Agreement was indeed concluded under duress,
it seems surprising that your present Prime Minister, as recently as 1936,
should have signed a further Treaty, containing an article which speci-
fically provides that the administration of The Sudan should continue
to be that resulting from the 1899 Agreement.
Then there is the question, which we have already discussed at our
previous meeting, of the interpretation of the protocol which the late
Sidky Pasha and I initialled in London four years ago, 1 have nothing
further to say about this, except that I did not agree then and I do


not agree now with the interpretation which Sidky Pasha placed upon
this protocol. Moreover, it is important to remember that we have had
certain actions in The Sudan, which I believe are in the spirit of my
agreement with Sidky Pasha, and that as a result the political develop-
ment of The Sudan in the intervening years has been so rapid, that that
protocol has been overtaken by events.
Your Excellency suggested at one point in your statement that, for
reasons of self-interest, my Government were deliberately encouraging
separatism in The Sudan, in order to split the country from Egypt. I
assure you categorically that the primary interest of my Government in
The Sudan is simply the welfare of the Sudanese people and their prog-
ress towards self-government and self-determination. I have, however,
consistently emphasised the economic facts of the Nile, and that nothing
must be done to jeopardise the security of Egypt’s water supplies and
their development to the maximum extent possible. My Government is
willing to associate themselves with any rational policy designed to
achieve this end. Equally, we expect of Egypt that she, for her part,
will do nothing to prejudice the water interests of The Sudan.
But again it is clear, from the four points which you listed in your
statement, that our two Governments do hold different views on the
facts of the political situation in The Sudan, both past and present. 1
shall take these four points one by one.
The first concerned the Graduates' Congress. I understand that
they have said they are in favour of a union between Egypt and The
Sudan. But the Congress does not even represent the majority of
Sudanese intelligentsia, and it has in recent years come under the domi-
nation of an extremist clique, which represents only a very small pro-
portion of the Sudanese people.
As regards the municipal elections I really do not believe that the
facts support your Excellency’s view that there is something approaching
unanimity in favour of union. In fact the unionists are in a minority in
Khartoum. In Omdurman they have a majority of only one. I give
these as examples.
As regards the percentages of the electors taking part in the Legis-
lative Assembly’s election the facts are that this election was held both
by direct and indirect election. Ten seats were filled by the former
means, and 55 by the latter. In the direct elections it is estimated that
18 per cent of the electorate voted. (Incidentally, I believe that in the
last Egyptian general election, which returned the Government of which
Your Excellency is a member, only some 15 per cent of the Cairo
electorate voted). In the indirect elections in the Sudan no figure at
all can be given, since the primary elections on which they were based
>vere mainly decided by acclamation.
• As regards your fourth point, concerning the views of the religious
sects in The Sudan, I think I should say that, on my information, those
Sudanese who profess to favour union with Egypt are not more than
about one-fifth of the total population of the country.
I now turn to another question raised by Your Excellency which,
although it appears relevant to the future of The Sudan at first sight.


does not in my opinion affect this issue, namely, the decisions recently
taken by the United Nations about the future of Libya and Eritrea.
In the first place I must make it clear that these are decisions taken
by the United Nations with which, as a loyal member of that organisa-
tion, my Government was bound to comply. Neither decision represents
what, in our opinion, would have been the “ideal” solution, and great
care will have to be exercised in their execution.
As regards Libya, we agree to independence within two years, since
the United Nations were in favour of it. Having done so, our first
consideration, as in the case of The Sudan, is that the Libyan people shall
be allowed to determine their own future.
As regards Eritrea, it was our view that that part of the territory
where the overwhelming majority of the inhabitants wished to be re-
united with Ethiopia, should be united with that country. In the event
a different solution federation has been adopted. Here again we
have complied, because in the circumstances there was no alternative.
But circumstances in the Sudan are quite different, and as I said
in the House of Commons, it would be tragic if anything were to disturb
the progress which has been made in the political and material fields.
I should now like to say a few words about what my Government
considers the real core of The Sudan problem, namely, how soon the
country should attain complete self-government and determine its own
future. It is my object to persuade your Government to work with mine,
towards this end. The declared policies of both our Governments in
regard to The Sudan are the same. What we must solve, therefore, is
the practical problem, namely, how to assemble the elements necessary
for a stable Government in The Sudan, and how to guide the Sudanese
people towards self-government. Before I discuss this, however, I should
like to refute one suggestion made in Your Excellency’s statement. I
mean your suggestion that The Sudan Government, with my Govern-
ment’s approval, has deliberately kept the Southern Sudan “in a primitive
condition and complete segregation from the North” and has not allowed
Northern Sudanese to enter the South.
Frankly, if you study the Southern Sudan, you will find that this
is not correct. History has shown over and over again that if primitive,
indigenous cultures are to be preserved from extinction when they first
come into contact with more advanced peoples they must be treated
with the greatest care. This The Sudan Government have successfully
done.
The difference in development between the Northern and Southern
Sudan presents a serious problem. In recent years, however, the South-
ern Sudanese have reached a stage where closer contact has become
possible. To-day their representatives sit in The Sudan Legislative
Assembly, where they debate on equal terms with their fellow-members
from the North; Southern Sudanese civil servants, like Northern
Sudanese, serve in any part of The Sudan : and I would commend to
Your Excellency’s study The Sudan Government’s education plan for the
South, which contains, among other things, provisions for the increased
use of Arabic in all schools in the Southern Sudan, including those


directed by Christian missionaries. If there is one sphere of The Sudan
Government's administration which is beyond reproach, an impartial and
unprejudiced body of observers would undoubtedly agree that it is their
adittinistration of the Southern provinces.
To return to what I described as the "core” of The Sudan problem :
the granting of self-government to the Sudanese is, in my opinion, large-
ly a matter of timing. Both our Governments have a duty to discharge
in this matter. If, setting aside mutual suspicion, we can work together
to solve this problem, we shall have achieved a great work. The
Governor-General’s Executive Council now has a Sudanese majority. As
I have already said, The Sudan Government hope to broaden the elec-
toral basis of the Legislative Assembly before the next elections. These
are two important steps in the right direction.
A further step would be the Unionists’ participation in the next
elections for The Sudan Legislative Assembly. If they do so, The Sudan
People will for the first time be represented by a body not only demo-
cratically elected, but one whose members will be drawn from “all”
classes and creeds. This would be a tremendous step towards a Sudan
settlement.
At the moment, however, I feel bound to point out to Your Excel-
lency that the principal obstacle to the election of a fully representative
Legislative Assembly in The Sudan is the rigid attitude adopted by the
Egyptian Government towards the future of The Sudan. Compromises
may have to be made. The United Kingdom have a long experience of
the successful guidance of other peoples, in Asia, in Africa, and else-
where, towards self-government. So long, however, as the Egyptian
Government refuse to modify their insistence on the unity of Egypt and
The Sudan, their supporters in The Sudan must naturally find it hard to
achieve a compromise with those Sudanese who sincerely believe that
the best interest of their country lies in independence.
Meanwhile, the policy of my Government remains as before that
we shall do everything in our power to ensure that the choice which the
Sudanese People finally make about the way in which their country is
to be governed is a free one.
In conclusion, I should like to say that I believe that our two Gov-
ernments are agreed in principle about the future of The Sudan. I was
glad to see that, at the end of your statement about The Sudan, Your
Excellency made it clear that both our Governments are agreed that our
aim in The Sudan is to give the Sudanese self-government as quickly
as possible.
Unfortunately, we still differ about the means whereby this end
should be achieved. Can we agree to create the conditions necessary
for Sudanese self-government? Can we agree, forgetting mutual suspi-
cion, to shepherd the Sudanese People and to do all in our power to
assist them to achieve this end ? If so, the problem of The Sudan can
be solved.
Salah Eddin Bey:— I should like to thank Your Excellency for the
attention you have given to my statement and for your reply to it. I do
not wish now to comment on this reply as my comment may be long and


it would be advisable to postpone it until I have studied your reply at
leisure. But there is a point to which I must call attention ; We are now
doing our best to discuss outstanding questions between our two Gov-
ernments in order to overcome the difficulties confronting us and to
reach a satisfactory solution to both sides. I believe you will agree With
me that it is advisable to avoid anything that might disturb our discus-
sions.
I say that because I have received a cable from my Government
last Saturday evening concerning a motion submitted to the Legislative
Assembly of The Sudan on self-government. The Governor-General of
The Sudan permitted this motion to be debated in the Assembly. The
Egyptian Government rightly believe that the Governor-General cannot
take action in this matter without the approval of that Government and
it is not enough to have the approval of the British Government assuming
that the matter was referred to it and approved. His Excellency the
Prime Minister of Egypt had to wire to the Governor-General explaining
this and asking him to suspend the debate on the motion. His Excellency
has sent me the text of his wire to the Governor-General and has asked
me to contact Your Excellency in order to explain the situation and
request Your Excellency to send instructions to the Governor-General
not to proceed with this plan which would disturb our friendly discus-
sions.
But I did not wish to disturb Your Excellency on your day off. His
Excellency Amr Pasha contacted the Foreign Office in this connection
and they promised to consider the matter and send a reply to him. I
trust the Foreign Office has taken steps with the Governor-General not
to proceed with the debate on the motion before the Legislative Assembly
and at the same time advise him to avoid anything that might raise diffi-
culties or agitate Egyptian public opinion during this important and
delicate stage of our talks, if the Foreign Office has not done so, it is
my earnest hope that this question should be given immediate attention
since our Ambassador has not so far received any reply.
Mr. Bevin : In reply began by making it clear that the Governor-
General had not consulted His Majesty’s Government about this matter
in advance. His decision to give his consent to the holding of this debate
was, in Mr. Bevin’s opinion, one which he was fully entitled to take on
his own authority as Governor-General. Sir Robert Howe had been
confronted with a difficult problem which only the man on the spot could
assess. Mr. Bevin then informed Salah Eddin Bey of the results of the
debate, of which he himself had only just learned, and read out to him
the text of the Governor-General’s reply to Nahas Pasha’s telegram, to
which Salah Eddin Bey had referred.
Mr. Bevin said that he himself was inclined to think that had the
debate been postponed, it would have given rise to undesirable mis-
understanding in The Sudan and to unjustified suspicion of the conver-
sations then in progress between Salah Eddin Bey and himself. Never-
theless, he personally agreed that the holding of a debate of this nature
at the present juncture was unfortunate. He had accordingly asked the
Governor-General to do all in his power to ensure that no action was
taken in Khartoum which was in any way likely to cause controversy


between the Egyptian Government and His Majesty’s Government, and
he also undertook to do everything possible himself to ensure that
nothing would be done in London, as a result of the motion, which would
disturb the atmosphere of the current discussions. Mr. Bevin then sug-
gested that a personal message from himself, in the sense of his preced-
ing remarks, should be conveyed to the Egyptian Prime Minister.
Salah Eddin Bey:— Now that the debate on this motion had taken
place in the Legislatice Assembly, I am anxious that nothing that would
cause the displeasure of the Egyptian Government or agitate Egyptian
public opinion or disturb our talks should happen again. I am glad Your
Excellency agree with me on this and will take steps to ensure it. I
shall be also glad to convey to His Excellency Nahas Pasha that you
agree with him that the time was not appropriate for the debate of this
motion during our talks. I leave the matter at that trusting that your
instructions will bear fruit and nothing would happen in the future to
evoke any complaint.
Mr. Bevin;— Then turned to the question of defence. He informed
Salah Eddin Bey that the Cabinet had instructed their advisers to under-
take an immediate study of the proposals which he had put forward on
a purely personal basis at his last meeting with the Egyptian Foreign
Minister. This was, however, without commitment. All he could say
now was that he was anxious that a settlement of the defence question
should be secured which, on the one hand, would be negotiated on terms
of mutual respect and equality, and, on the other hand, would contain
provisions guaranteeing the defence of the Middle East. He himself
believed that the approach to the problem which he had put forward on
a personal basis offered the best chance of any so far suggested of
fulfilling both these conditions. The experts’ study would be given a
high priority and he hoped to be able to give the Egyptian Government
His Majesty’s Government’s considered view of this approach by the
middle of January or as soon afterwards as possible.
Salah Eddin Bey;— In view of this there is nothing for me to do
except to wait for the results of your study. I am glad to hear from Your
Excellency that it will be completed as soon as possible and results will
be transmitted to me on the completion of that study.
Mr, Bevin:— Concluded the meeting by expressing his gratitude
to Salah Eddin Bey for making this visit. He himself had always been
anxious to secure an Anglo-Egyptian settlement. He believed that a
chance of doing so now offered itself, given mutual trust and under-
standing. He felt that both sides understood each other better as a
result of the present conversations, which had proved extremely illumi-
nating. While his suggestions were being studied, he would do his best
to ensure that the British press did not pay undue attention to Anglo-
Egyptian relations, and he hoped that in Egypt also everything would
be done to create a favourable atmosphere.
Salah Eddin Bey;— Agreed that this was desirable and, after the
wording of a joint communique on the two Foreign Secretaries’ discus-
sions had been agreed, the meeting came to an end.


Joint Communique
The discussions between the Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Mr. Bevin on the main problems affecting Anglo-Egyptian relations
have been proceeding in a friendly and cooperative spirit and have
resulted in a most useful exchange of ideas.
The Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs will continue to be fully
occupied for the present with his negotiations on sterling balances with
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, but hopes to take advantage of the
British Parliamentary recess to return to Egypt early in the new year
and consult personally with Nahas Pasha before resuming his discus-
sions with Mr. Bevin.


Personal Message from Mr. Morrisson
for Dr. Salah-Eddin Bey
I much regret the present delay in the resumption of discussions.
As the Minister will be aware, I have only recently taken over the con-
duct of foreign affairs in His Majesty’s Government and I feel it essential
in dealing with a question of this importance to familiarise myself with
the details and to consider all the implications of the problem. I think
it would be wrong for me to attempt to hurry my consideration of the
question even though I fully appreciate the difficulties of the Egyptian
Government and the efforts which they have made to prevent premature
discussion in public. At the same time, I hope the Minister will under-
stand that I feel bound, especially in view of the Parliamentary difficul-
ties which were apparent in the debate on the Sterling Balances Agree-
ment, to consult fully with my colleagues. I hope, therefore, that the
Minister will not consider it unreasonable if I am not in a position to
make any communication to the Egyptian Government through His
Majesty’s Ambassador until the first week in April.
24th March, 1951.


BOUSTANE
LONDON
12. Please interview Mr. Herbert Morrison and convey to him the
following message :
“ Personal message from Salah Eddin Bey for the
Right Honourable Mr. Herbert Morrison.
The Egyptian minister of Foreign Affairs is pleased to know that
the Foreign secretary fully appreciates the difficulties of the Egyptian
Government and the efforts they have made to prevent premature
discussion, in public. The minister of Foreign Affairs has no doubt that
the foreign secretary agrees with him that the discussions have lasted
longer than is necessary and that it is inevitable in the interest of
both countries to bring them to a definite conclusion at the earliest
opportunity. The minister of Foreign Affairs understands the Foreign
secretary’s care to familiarise himself with the details and to consult
fully with his colleagues. He even welcomes this care on the part
of the Foreign secretary since it means that he will acquaint himself
with the Egyptian viewpoint which had been fully explained in the
discussions. The minister of Foreign Affairs trusts, however, that the
return of his Majesty’s ambassador will not be delayed beyond the first
week in april and that he will bring back with him all the precise
information expected here. ”
Minister.
Cairo, 27/3/1951.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. Salah Eddin Bey Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on April 11th, 1951, at 11 a.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Abdel-Fattah Amr Pasha H.E, Mr. Chapman-Andrews
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador: — I have been instructed by His Majesty’s
Government to put before you certain proposals for the solution of the
defence problem. It was impressed on me that in doing so I should
make definitely clear the Government’s situation in England and the
reality of the resentment caused in Britain by the continuation of the
restrictions on Oil Tankers passing through the Suez Canal.
(Here H.E. The British Ambassador read out the statement attached
herewith.)
He then added: I would like to tell you that His Majesty’s Gov-
ernment feels that it is making generous concessions to the Egyptian
point of view. His Majesty’s Government hope that their proposals
will receive a very carefully considered reply. His Majesty’s Govern-
ment do not wish these proposals to be regarded in any way as an
ultimatum and would be glad to consider any counter proposals from
the Egyptian Government. I cannot however hold out any hope of
substantial changes in view of His Majesty’s Goverment’s commitments
and of present world conditions.
I am ready to answer any questions you might like to put to me.
Foreign Minister: — The only question I have now is to ask you
whether there is anything about the Sudan.
British Ambassador: — I thought you would ask this.
(Here H.E. the British Ambassador read out the statement attached
herewith.)
Foreign Minister t — I think that will be all for to-day. You want
a considered answer and we will give you a considered answer but I
feel bound to point out for the present that unless many substantial
changes are introduced into these proposals I can see no way to any
agreement.


His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are prepared to
resume negotiations for the revision of the 1936 Treaty of Alliance in
accordance with the provisions of Article 16 of that Treaty.
His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are aware of
the Egyptian Government’s great difficulties in the matter. They cannot
however in view of their commitments to their other allies in the North
Atlantic and in the Middle East, accept the responsibility of making
any arrangements which prejudice their ability to contribute to a success-
ful defence of this region against an aggressor. Such a defence will
only be possible if in the future the Egypt base continues to function in
such a manner as to be immediately available in war and if the air
defence of Egypt is assured.
In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government in the United
Kingdom propose that the 1936 Treaty of Alliance be revised so as to
provide for the following :
(a) The phased withdrawal of British troops from Egypt beginning
within one year of the conclusion of an agreement on Revision of
the Treaty and ending in 1956. (It should be noted that rate
of withdrawal of the combatant troops and of General Head-
quarters depends largely on the rate at which accommodation
can be provided for them elsewhere.)
(b) The progressive civilianisation of the base which it is suggested
should be completed by 1956, essential British civilian personnel
being introduced as military personnel are withdrawn. The base
thereafter to be entrusted to the Egyptian Armed Forces for
security purposes but to be operated in accordance with British
military policy under the overall administrative control of an
Anglo-Egyptian Control Board. (His Majesty’s Government in
the United Kingdom would be prepared to pay rent for base
installations and sites.)
(c) The creation of a long term Anglo-Egyptian co-ordinated air
defence system in which there should be both Egyptian and
British components.
(d) The provision at an early date of arms and equipment on train-
ing scale for the Egyptian forces and thereafter the provision
of whatever further arms and equipment may be necessary in equal
priority with other nations with whom Great Britain has working
defence agreements. (His Majesty’s Government in the United
Kingdom would also be prepared to render any assistance requir-
ed by the Egyptian Government in the training of Egyptian
forces.)
(e) In the event of war, imminent menace of war or apprehended
international emergency, Egypt would agree to the return of
British forces for the period of emergency and would grant to
them and to the forces of Britain’s allies all necessary facilities
and assistance including the use of Egyptian ports, aerodromes
and means of communication.
11th April, 1951.


His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom cannot accept
the validity of the view that the question of the Sudan is inseparable
from that of defence. Nevertheless His Majesty’s Government would
be prepared to discuss the question of the Sudan if the Egyptian Govern-
ment think that this would be useful.
It is the aim of His Majesty’s Government to enable the Sudanese
to atain self-government at the earliest practicable opportunity and it
would be impossible for them to accept any understanding with Egypt
which interferes with this objective.
In any event His Majesty’s Government suggest that discussion of
the defence question should be pursued first and that any discussion of
the Sudan should be deferred until at least a preliminary exchange of
views on defence has been completed.
11th April, 1951.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on April 24th, 1951, at 12 .30 p.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Bey H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister: — You have asked me to give you a considered
answer to the British proposals. lam now in a position to give you
the considered answer of the Egyptian Government.
(Here H.E. The Foreign Minister read out the reply attached
herewith.)
British Ambassador: — I would like to ask for certain clarifications.
The first 1-8 items are your specific objections to the proposals.
(Here H.E. The British Ambassador summarised the objections one
by one.) Then he said:
You do not raise objections to the civilianisation of the base 7
Foreign Minister:— The principle is that the base is to be handed
over to the Egyptian Army within the time agreed upon.
British Ambassador: — And thereafter there should be no British
civilians to operate it 7
Foreign Minister: — No.
British Ambassador: — As the late Mr. Bevin informed you in
December last, one year for completing evacuation is physically im-
possible. As to the question of priority, you will be treated the same
as other nations which have working defence agreements with Britain.
You will get the arms on the same footing as those nations. That
means special priority.
Foreign Minister:— Our point is to make up for lost time and
catch up with the other nations who are now ahead of us in arming.
British Ambassador t — The stipulation for the evacuation of all
British officials from the Sudan in two years is utterly impracticable.
The Sudan cannot get on without the British officials.
Foreign Minister; — I think it can be done.


British Ambassador: — I do not think this is a practical possibility.
Now I come to paragraph 6 of your counter proposals.
“The conclusion of an agreement between the two parties whereby
British Forces may return to places...,” what does that mean ? The
original Egyptian proposal was that in the event of war the same faci-
lities would be given as in the last war.
Foreign Minister; — We mean places in Egypt to which the return
of British Forces is deemed necessary and is agreed upon by the two
Governments.
British Ambassador; — The later part of this paragraph refers to
Arab countries adjacent to Egypt which would only mean Transjordan.
It would not, therefore, apparently include an attack on Turkey or an
attack on the Middle East through Turkey or Iraq.
Foreign Minister: — It would not.
British Ambassador; — There is a veiled threat in the last para-
graph. Our proposals were not an ultimatum, are yours an ultimatum ?
Foreign Minister; — That depends on your answer to our proposals.
British Ambassador; — Whether it is an ultimatum or not depends
on our answer ?
Foreign Minister;— Yes, it depends on your answer.
British Ambassador :* — lam not yet authorised to open discussions
on the Sudan but as soon as I get the authorisation I shall let you know.
Foreign Minister; — lam ready to discuss The Sudan question at
any time.
British Ambassador: — You should not expect a rapid answer to
these proposals. The British Government will have to study them at
length.
Foreign Minister; — We indeed expect a very rapid answer. The
situation is becoming more difficult both in the press and in Parliament.
British Ambassador: — The British Government will not delay but
the whole position is so serious that they will not be able to answer
your proposals hurriedly. It does appear from the terms of the counter
proposals of the Egyptian Government, that there is no advance on our
last summer talks and I cannot conceal from you my opinion that they
do not offer a reasonable basis for agreement. However, do not let us
relax our efforts. No effort is ever wasted.
Foreign Minister;— That is very good philosophy.


The Egyptian Government wishes to express its deep regret and
biter disappointment at the contents of the British Government’s reply
after long discussions lasting over 10 months during which the Egyptian
side has spared no effort to explain and support its rights and to meet
all the considerations with which the British side was concerned in a
manner which would not be inconsistent with Egypt’s rights.
The Egyptian Government has no alternative but categorically to
reject the British proposals in toto and in detail especially as regards
the following points :
1 The date at which evacuation of British troops is to begin and
the time set down for completing that evacuation.
2 The rate of withdrawal of the combatant troops and General
Headquarters being made dependent on the rate at which ac-
comodation can be provided for them elsewhere.
3 The time taken in handing over the base to the Egyptian Armed
Forces and the stipulation that the base be operated in accord-
ance with British military policy under the overall administrative
control of an Anglo-Egyptian Control Board.
4 The creation of a long term Anglo-Egyptian coordinated air
defence system in which there should be both Egyptian and
British components.
5 The exceedingly slow rate suggested for the provision of
necessary arms and equipment for the Egyptian Forces.
6 The return of British Forces to Egypt in the event of imminent
menace of war or apprehended international emergency.
7 Separating the question of evacuation from that of the Unity
of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown.
B■ Offering “the earliest practicable opportunity” as a pretext for
putting off the time at which the Sudanese may enjoy self-
government.
The Egyptian Government desires also to affirm that, so far as
it is concerned, it rejects the British Government’s claim to share in the
defence of the Middle East on the plea of their obligations towards
their other allies in the North Atlantic and the Middle East.
The Egyptian Government puts forward in its turn the following
counter proposals as a basis for resuming negotiations between the two
Governments within view to a settlement of the problems outstanding
between them :
1 The evacuation of British troops from Egypt to begin imme-
diately upon concluding the agreement and the necessity of
completing this evacuation by land, sea and air within a period
not exceeding one year.
2 The base to be handed over to the Egyptian Armed Forces
immediately upon the completion of evacuation in accordance
with the preceding paragraph.
3 Special priority for the provision of necessary arms and equip-
ment to be given to the Egyptian Army at the earliest
opportunity considering that Egypt is situated in a sensitive
strategic area.
4 The unity of Egypt and the Sudan under the Egyptian Crown


and self-government for the Sudanese within two years in the
framework of this unity.
5 British Forces and British officials to be withdrawn from The
Sudan and the present regime in The Sudan to be terminated
immediately upon the expiry of those two years.
6 The conclusion of an agreement between the two parties where-
by British forces may return to those places to which, in the
agreed opinion of the two Governments, it is necessary that
they should return for the purpose of assisting in the defence
of Egypt in the event of an armed aggression upon her or in
in the event of the United Kingdom’s being involved in war
as the result of an armed aggression on the Arab countries
adjacent to Egypt.
7 In the event of their returning to Egypt in accordance with the
preceding paragraph, British troops will begin to withdraw
from Egyptian territory immediately upon the cessation of
hostilities. This withdrawal to be completed by land, sea and
air within a period not exceeding three months.
8 The Treaty of Alliance signed in London on 26th August, 1936,
together with the Agreed Minutes, notes and Convention, also
the two Agreements of 1899 regarding The Sudan to be
abrogated immediately upon the entry into force of the new
agreement.
These are the counter proposals of the Egyptian Government. They
are, as the Egyptian side, in the course of talks with Field Marshal
Slim, The British Ambassador and The Late Mr. Bevin, has fully and
clearly explained, adequate to meet the international situation. Indeed
they are the only means of clarifying the sombre atmosphere pervading
Anglo-Egyptian relations for the common good of the two countries
and in the interest of international peace in the Middle East as a whole.
Should the British Government, therefore, recognise as we hope
in all sincerity they will that British, Egyptian and international
interests all call for a speedy acceptance of these proposals as a basis
for settling outstanding problems between the two countries and that
any delay in dealing with the situation is fraught with grave harm to
future Anglo-Egyptian relations and to the cause of international peace,
then there will be no difficulty in reaching the desired agreement.
But if all efforts after this long time prove abortive, the British
Government are no doubt aware of Egypt’s attiude towads the 1936
Treaty and the 1899 Agreements. This attitude had been frankly and
explicitly stated by the Egyptian Government on many occasions the
latest being the Speech from the Throne addressed to the Egyptian
Parliament in November last.
On Wednesday May 30th, 1951, H.E. The British Ambassador
communicated to me the following verbal message :
“ Following our meeting on Monday, May 28th, 1 have conveyed
to Mr. Morrison Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs your
desire for a speedy reply to the Egyptian Government’s note of April
24th. I have to-day received information from Mr. Morrison that the
matter will be considered to-morrow May 31st by the British Cabinet
and that information will be sent at an early date.”


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on June 8th, 1951, at 12 noon
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
Mtr. Aly Z. Husny H.E. Mr. Chapman-Andrews
British Ambassador;— I have two pieces of paper to give you
to-day. The first is about Defence (Here H.E. The British Ambassador
read out the attached Aide Memoire 1.); The second is about The Sudan
(Here H.E. read out the attached Aide Memoire 2.).
He then said : There are a few remarks I would like to made :
1 No mention is made in the Aide Memoire on The Sudan of
either Egyptian sovereignty or Sudanese independence that the
issue is not prejudged either way.
2 A declaration of Egyptian or any kind of sovereignty over The
Sudan will not be accepted by the majority of the Sudanese.
3 The Egyptian Government have to face certain facts :
a) The fact of Sudanese national consciousness which has
appeared in the past five or six years.
b) The Sudanese must be treated as a national community.
No alteration in their status can take place without having
consultation with them and they must have the right of self-
determination.
Foreign Minister:— I will confer with my colleagues on the con-
tents of your Aide Memoires and then arrange for a meeting with you
but I would like to make a hurried comment on your last remarks. The
question is a question of unity of Egypt with The Sudan not a question
of sovereignty of Egypt over The Sudan. When you have a united
country, the question of self-determination does not al all arise.
British Ambassador:— I think we should say something to the
Press about to-day’s meeting. The Foreign Office in London gave out
that a communication was sent to me yesterday to convey to the Egypt-
ian Government.
Foreign Minister j— I suggest that H.E. Nahas Pasha will inform
the Press on Sunday morning that a communication from the British
Government was handed in by the British Ambassador to the Egyptian
Foreign Minister on Friday afternoon Bth June, 1951.
This was agreed upon.


I. AIDE MEMOIRE
His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are making a
careful study of the proposals contained in the Egyptian Government’s
Aide Memoire of the 24th April in regard to a possible new Anglo-
Egyptian Defence Agreement in the hope that some way may be found
of narrowing the wide divergency of view which evidently exists
between the British and Egyptian proposals or at least that some
common approach to the problem can be worked out. Meanwhile His
Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom note with disappoint-
ment that whereas their own proposals represented a very considerable
modification of the position laid down by the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty
of 1936, the Egyptian proposals do not appear to differ in essence from
the claims put forward by the Egyptian Government as their objectives
when they assumed power some 18 months ago.
BRITISH EMBASSY,
CAIRO.
Bth June, 1951.
II. AIDE MEMOIRE
Despite the fact that no material progress has been made in the
direction of a Defence Agreement, His Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom, while maintaining their view that the question of The
Sudan is entirely separate from that of Defence, are prepared to open
discussions on The Sudan with the Egyptian Government.
His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom hope, as a first
step, to secure the agreement of the Egyptian Government to the prin-
ciples set forth in the annex to this Aide Memoire. These principles
represent an earnest attempt by His Majesty’s Government to formulate
a common statement of objectives in regard to the future of The Sudan.
It will be observed that they recognise the interdependence of Egypt and
The Sudan, they enable the Egyptian Government to play their proper
part in the evolution of The Sudan and at the same time they take into
account His Majesty’s Government’s own commitments to the Sudanese
people.
If the Egyptian Government are willing to subscribe to these
principles it might then be possible to work out jointly a programme
of political and economic development in the Sudan.
These principles have been drafted with the greatest care and
with the object of avoiding affront to both the Egyptian and the
Sudanese people and also of avoiding any misconstruction of their true
meaning of the kind which contributed to the failure of the Anglo-
Egyptian negotiations in 1946.
BRITISH EMBASSY,
CAIRO.
Bth June, 1951.


ANNEX
Statement of Principles
(a) In view of the dependence of both Egypt and The Sudan on the
waters of the Nile and in order to ensure the fullest co-operation
in expanding the supplies available and in sharing them, it is
essential that the friendliest relations should link the two peoples.
(b) It is the common aim of Egypt and Great Britain to enable the
people of The Sudan to attain full self-government as soon as
practicable and thereafter choose freely for themselves their form
of government and the relationship with Egypt that will best
meet their needs as they then exist.
(c) In view of the wide differences of culture, race, religion and
political development existing among the Sudanese, the process
of attaining full self-government requires the co-operation of
Egypt and the United Kingdom with the Sudanese.
(d) The two Governments therefore agree to set up forthwith a
tripartite commission in order to help the Sudanese towards the
goal in (b) and to assist them in formulating their future
Constitution.
Bth June, 1951.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Friday July 6th, 1951, at 10.30 a.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Parag Pasha
Mtr. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister: — I have an Aide-Memoire to hand to you
containing the reply to your last two Aide-Memoires. You will also
gather from this reply the feelings of the Egyptian Government in regard
to the whole situation. (Here the attached Aide-Memoire was read out.)
British Ambassador;— The first two paragraphs deal with defence.
The situation has not improved in any way as regards peace in the
Middle East. It has not been possible to come any nearer to the
Egyptian Government’s claim of complete evacuation. We are consi-
dering a common approach to the problem of defence. When I receive
instructions on the subject I will let you know. I do not despair of
coming to an agreement but the Egyptian Government must first realise
that they are faced with two alternatives (1) to-operate in a valid and
efficient scheme of defence which might prevent Egypt being invaded
at all, (2) having two invasions, one from the North East to occupy
the country and the other from the West by the Western Powers to
expel the aggressor. That is an absolute certainty. By a common
scheme of defence you certainly have a good chance of escaping invasion
just as happened in the two last wars. I am sure it is not impossible
to find some common approach to the question of defence.
As regards the second part of the Aide-Memoire, it seems to me
that it is a statement of the Egyptian Government’s views and their
objectives. It is not based on a thorough knowledge of affairs in The
Sudan. I can only suggest that the Sudanese be consulted and if they
agree to this statement well and good but we are certain they do not.
As to commitments of His Majesty’s Government to the Sudanese,
these derive partly from our long association with The Sudan and partly
from what the Sudanese desire themselves.
The historic and legal thesis of the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan
can doubtless be defended from certain points of view- But in the last


hundred years there has been a great change. As regards the claim
of community of race it cannot be seriously maintained that there is
anything of the kind between the Shilluks and Nuers on the one hand
and the Northern Sudanese on the other.
As for preventing the spread of the Arabic language and the
Moslem religion to the Southern Sudan, The Sudan Administration have
done nothing of the kind. On the contrary they have promoted the
teaching of Arabic and encouraged the spread of the Moslem religion.
In comment on the statement of principles given by the Egyptian
Government in the sth paragraph of your memorandum I note that they
are very different from those in my Aide-Memoire. We do not maintain
that the interdependence of Egypt and The Sudan is limited to the
waters of the Nile and we recognise that Egypt and The Sudan are
contiguous geographically and have common economic interests.
You will appreciate that the British Government cannot agree to
principle (a) stated baldly like that without the consultation and agree-
ment of the Sudanese. It seems to me that principle (a) in the Egyptian
memorandum, the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown, is rather a statement of Egypt’s attitude towards the question.
Can we not find an agreed form of wording to replace all the principles ?
We would not object to any of your principles if the Sudanese are
consulted and agree to them. We cannot accept them however without
consulting the Sudanese. We have no intention or desire to separate
the Sudanese and Egyptians but we insist on freedom of choice in the
matter by the Sudanese.
As to the immediate withdrawal of the British elements in the
present Administration, that again is impossible. To withdraw them
prematurely would mean that the whole system of government in The
Sudan would crumble which would not suit Egypt’s interests in any way.
The only one of our proposals which you apparently accept is the
tripartite commission and even that is made conditional on your prin-
ciples a, b and c being accepted.
I would like to know whether the Egyptian Government are ready
to discuss with me the reformulation of the principles as I am authorised
to discuss this without further reference to London.
Foreign Minister: — Before I reply to your comment I would like
to ask in general whether it is expected that we receive a reply to our
counter-proposals concerning evacuation at an early date ?
British Ambassador:— I do not know. I cannot answer this
question; but I do know that His Majesty’s Government are giving
consideration to the problem and are trying to find some common ap-
proach to it. They are, as you will realise, much preoccupied at present
with other problems.
Foreign Minister: — I am aware that the British Government are
preoccupied to a great extent with the problems confronting them in
Iran but the troubles of the British Government are endless and their
foreign policy is of a considerable wide range and if we delay the


settlement of questions pending between us on account of the troubles
confronting Britain in other parts of the world, we shall never finish.
The Egyptian question is no less important in itself and in so afar as
it is concerned with the cause of universal peace than any other inter-
national problem. Indeed it may be of greater importance than many
of these problems. This, at least, is how we view it and indeed to us
it is a question of life or death. The two months which elapsed since
we handed to you our counter-proposals are sufficient, in fact more
than sufficient to get a reply from you to these counter-proposals what-
ever other preoccupations might be. I would like to assure Your
Excellency that the Egyptian Government - as explained in the Aide-
Memoire I handed to you to-day cannot possibly go on with these
talks for another long period. Indeed the parliamentary conditions
themselves determine the time at which we should know whether or
not there is any hope of reaching a successful conclusion on the basis
of right, justice, sovereign equality and the respect of the independence
of nations and integrity of their territories.
The present parliamentary session in Egypt is about to come to
an end. It will not continue in my estimation more than a few weeks
which may not exceed six. The Government are obliged, before the
present session is prorogued, to make a full statement before Parliament
on the talks as the representatives of the nation have a right to know
before their session is prorogued whether or not these talks have reached
a successful conclusion. The natural result of the failure of the talks
is to break them off and to present all details thereof to Parliament to
which an accurate account should be made of the Government’s action
on the most important questions of foreign policy during the past two
years. I have nothing to add to the foregoing except to remark in
regard to yOur comment on the question of evacuation that it is couched
in the language of war, force and invasion while as Members of the
U.N.O. we should talk the language of peace, security, recognition of
right and justice and respect of the sovereignty of nations and the
integrity of their territories. This is the language which we have
hitherto failed to impress upon you and I believe there can be no way
to any agreement until the two languages become closer.
British Ambassador:— Do I take it that it is the firm intention
of the Egyptian Government to make a statement on these talks before
the close of the present parliamentary session ?
Foreign Minister; — Certainly they have to give a detailed account
of these talks.
British Ambassador; — I do not think you comment on my state-
ment being in the language of war is quite fair. Ido not think Britain
is less faithful to the principles of the U.N.O. than is Egypt. The
Charter itself provides for regional agreements and we are trying to
establish agreements of regional security.
Foreign Minister: — We regard that the policy pursued by Great
Britain in Egypt and The Sudan runs contrary to the U.N. Charter
both in word and in spirit. It is contrary to the principle of sovereign


equality, the principle of independence of Members States and their
sovereignty and to the principle which provides that every State should
refrain from prejudicing the independence of other Members States or
the integrity of their territories. It is also contrary to the U.N. Reso-
lution providing for the necessity of evacuating foreign troops from the
territories of states occupied without their consent etc., etc.
As to concluding regional agreements, I am aware that the Charter
allows it but these agreements must be concluded with the free choice
and consent of the States concerned. Needless to say that Egypt
both people and Government have no desire to conclude any agree-
ment on the basis of occupying her territory and prejudicing her unity
and integrity.
British Ambassadorj— You told me it is the firm intention of the
Egyptian Government to make a full statement on the talks before
Parliament. Is this a definite decision ? In that case His Majesty’s
Government may also have to make a statement and I think this might
have a bad effect because the two sides will make public statements
from which they will find it difficult to retreat or carry on future
negotiations. Therefore, the wording of any such statements will have
to be very carefully considered. We do not want to make negotiations
more difficult.
Foreign Minister:— No doubt His Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom are equally entitled to make a statement before the
British Parliament and no doubt that the relations between the two
countries in the future will be affected to a considerable extent by these
public statements made in both Parliaments. I cannot be very optimistic
in regard to the future of these relations should the talks fail and are
consequently broken off. I believe that this failure would lead to the
Egyptian People losing every confidence in the possibility of coming
to an understanding with you through negotiations. You are aware
that Egyptian public opinion had actually formed such a belief but the
present Government took upon themselves the responsibility of resuming
the talks with you and gave them all the necessary time for if we
consider Field Marshal Slim’s discussions as a starting point, our talks
would have lasted over 15 months- As to the necessity of great care
being taken in the wording of the statement to be made in Parliament
as pointed out by you, I would say that the Egypian Government will
endeavour to present the facts as they are and it will be inevitable in
this case to publish all the records of the talks.
British Ambassador % Will the Egyptian statement merely give
the position of the talks as they are at the time even if we have not
come to a conclusion of the talks within six weeks ?
Foreign Minister? — I have already mentioned that the failure of
the talks will inevitably entail their being broken off and it is presumed
in this case that they will be broken off before explaining the facts to
Parliament and it will be said in Parliament that the talks have failed
and have consequently been broken off.


British Ambassador:— In other words you say that unless a
satisfactory conclusion is reached between us before the close of the
parliamentary session, the Egyptian Government will break off nego-
tiations. If this is a definite decision I must emphasise the very serious
consequences of it and express my regret at the Egyptian Government’s
evident intention to force the issue. I take it that you have been
empowered by the Cabinet to inform me of this decision.
Foreign Minister: — I say this in the name of the Egyptian Gov-
ernment in my capacity as Foreign Minister. And now I come to your
comment on our proposals regarding the Unit of Egypt and The Sudan.
I notice that you always forget the origin of the right. Egypt and
The Sudan have from time immemorial been naturally linked together.
You had nothing whatsoever to do with The Sudan before your occu-
pation of Egypt. The Sudan then formed Egypt’s Southern part and
you took advantage of your occupation of Egypt to set your feet in
The Sudan. Yet you never claimed that you act for yourselves there
or that you have obligations towards the Sudanese but you have always
said that you are acting in the name of Egypt and for Egypt. We do
not, therefore, recognise what you claim now about your obligations
towards the Sudanese. In the absence of these obligations which lack
legal and historical support and as long as the legal, historical and
geographical fact of the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan is established,
you will clearly recognise the invalidity of the principles contained in
your Aide-Memoire and the validity of the principles contained in
our reply.
I am glad to see that in your explanation of the wording of the
British Aide-Memoire you did not limit the interdependence of Egypt and
The Sudan to the waters of the Nile only but you admitted that this
interdependence includes both the geographical and economic aspects
also.
I believe that the interdependence of Egypt and The Sudan from
these aspects which you have admitted is enough in itself to concede
the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan. What if we add the ties which
bind Egyptians and the Sudanese including ties of race, Arabism,
language by which I mean the Arabic language and religion by which
I mean the Moslem religion. I do not think you go as far as denying
the .existence of these ties between Egyptians and four-fifths of the
people of the Sudan.
As to the inhabitants of the South they are linked with the inha-
bitants of Northern Sudan and those of Egypt by the Hamitic origin
and this is what we meant when we said that your remark about the
difference of race between the peoples of The Sudan lack actual scien-
tific support. I do not wish to go into lengthy scientific discussion but
suffice it to say that several anthropologists including a number of
eminent British scientists admit that the Sudanese are all one race and
that the inhabitants of the Southern Sudan are not negroes. Actually
if we gradually go up the Nile from the Delta to Upper-Egypt, to the
Northern Sudan, then to the Southern Sudan we will find that the
gradation of the Hamitic race inhabiting all these lands is the natural


and reasonable gradation and that the difference of colour or dialects
does not mean in this case a difference of race but it is the result of
the difference of climate and environment owing to the remote distances
separating the Mediterranean from the Equator.
The difference of Southern Sudan from the North as regards
language and religion is as we have explained in our Aide-Memoire
one of the results of the policy of isolating the Southern Sudan from
the North. The Sudan Administration should have been duty-bound
since four-fifth of the people of The Sudan are Arabs and Moslems
speaking the Arabic language, to remove all barriers in the way of the
natural spreading of the Arabic language and the Moslem religion
among the primitive people of the South not to do the reverse by the
promulgation of laws and resources preventing the people of the North
from contacting those of the South and at the same time encouraging
Christian Missions to practice their activities there.
Moreover the vast majority of the inhabitants of the South of The
Sudan still lead a primitive life and should, therefore, be attached to
their compatriots in the North so long as The Sudan is one country
and one fatherland for all, a fact which I do not think you can deny.
As to your insistence on the necessity of consulting the Sudanese,
I have already commented thereon in my previous talks with you and
with the Late Mr. Bevin and I have set forth the many arguments
which show that the great majority of the people of The Sudan believe
in the principle of the Unity with Egypt. Then again you have not as
yet given me an answer to my frank and clear question which I put
to you, namely, do you agree to a free plebiscite taking place in The
Sudan keeping in mind that the freedom of the plebiscite cannot be
secured except by the withdrawal from The Sudan of the British Admi-
nistration, troops and officials ?
To sum up, our objections to the principles contained in your Aide-
Memoire are supported by right and the established facts whereas your
objections to the principles contained in our proposals have no basis.
However, 1 would like before going any further with my comment to
ask Your Excellency to study our proposals and to let me know in the
next meeting how the principles can, in your opinion, be reformulated
to our satisfaction and yours since you have stated that you have been
authorised to discuss these with me.
British Ambassador: — It does seem to me, on the basis of what
you have just said, that, for instance, Norwegians and Italians should
be regarded as one people. But whatever the historical and anthropo-
logical rights or wrongs may be, it is necessary to deal with things
as they are to-day. I cannot believe that the Egyptian Government
seriously consider the primitive inhabitants of the Southern Sudan to
be one people with the inhabitants of the Delta.
As to the question of plebiscite, I want to know whether you wish
to add this to your proposals.


Foreign Minister:— This is not what I meant but I believe that
I am entitled to put this question to you so long as you reiterate the
question of consulting the Sudanese when Your Excellency is well aware
that the freedom of their consultation would be lacking in the presence
of the existing regime in The Sudan.
British Ambassador:— I will study the reformulation of the prin-
ciples with a view to some rapprochement. I must be excused for
returning once more to the intention of the Egyptian Government to
break off the negotiations. I would like to know whether this will be
done in the event of our failing to reach a successful solution of all our
problems before the close of the parliamentary session or in the event
of our failing to find a basis for continuing the talks.
Foreign Minister:— The answer lies in between the two. What
I mean is that in this time we should be able to reach satisfactory bases
for negotiations for as Your Excellency is aware we have not
as yet and despite all this long time gone beyond the stage of talks.
Aide - Nemoire
1 The Royal Egyptian Government hope that His Majesty’s
Government in the United Kingdom have completed the study
of the Egyptian counter-proposals concerning evacuation which
were contained in the Aide-Memoire handed by the Egyptian
Foreign Minister to the British Ambassador on 24th April last.
Sufficient time had no doubt elapsed since then to enable His
Majesty’s Government to complete that study and to give an
opinion on the said counter-proposals.
2 The Royal Egyptian Government find themselves obliged to call
His Majesty’s Government’s atention to the impossibility of
going on indefinitely with the talks conducted between the two
Parties since July, 1950. Hitherto these talks have lasted over
a year without a glimpse of hope towards reaching the desired
agreement. Indeed these talks are no more than a further link
in the chain of attempts made in vain by Egypt since the end
of World War II to impress upon Great Britain the necessity
of respecting Egypt’s rights and of putting a stop to the ag-
gression against her sovereignty and the integrity of her
territory. It is obvious that His Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom lose nothing by this procrastination but it has
become extremely difficult for the Royal Egyptian Government
and Egyptian public opinion to contemplate any further pro-
longation of this state of affairs.
The remark made in the British Embassy’s Aide-Memoire
dated Bth June, 1951, that the Egyptian counter-proposals do
not appear to differ in essence from the claims put forward
by the Egyptian Government as their objectives when they
assumed power some 18 months ago is unwarrantable and there


can be no comparison between the positions of the two Govern-
ments in the manner set forth in the said Aide-Memoire for
whereas the Royal Egyptian Government claim inviolable
national rights which cannot be bartered away. His Majesty’s
Government in the United Kingdom pursue exaggerated in-
terests and when right and interest are at variance, right should
be made to prevail.
Nevertheless, the Royal Egyptian Government have done
their uttermost to reconcile the interests claimed by Great
Britain to Egypt's rights. They believe in all sincerity that their
counter-proposals can alone satisfactorily ensure this recon-
ciliation.
3 The Royal Egyptian Government cannot differentiate between
certain national rights and others. They cannot countenance
separating the question of evacuation from that of the Unity
of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown. Indeed
they regard these two questions as one indivisible whole and
it is inevitable that both questions be simultaneously settled and
covered by any agreement to be concluded between th two
Parties.
4 The Royal Egyptian Government are glad to see that His
Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have abandoned
their view of postponing the discussion of the question of The
Sudan. They have no objection to the formulation of a common
statement of objectives in regard to the future of The Sudan,
but they cannot possibly accept the viewpoint contained in the
British Aide-Memoire and its Annex in regard to those objectives
for the following reasons :
First: The British viewpoint omitted to mention the Unity of
Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown. This is
an established fact and no agreement which fails to recognise,
this fact can ever be acceptable to any Egyptian Government.
True, the British Aide-Memoire stated that the principles an-
nexed thereto recognise the interdependence of Egypt and
The Sudan but the Annex limited this interdependence to
the waters of the Nile and drew only one conclusion there-
from : that it is essential that the friendliest relations should
link the two peoples !
In fact the link of the dependence of both Egypt and The
Sudan on the waters of the Nile the importance of which
no one would underestimate is not the only link that binds
together Egypt and The Sudan from time immemorial. There
is the community of race, language, religion, culture, customs
and interests as well as the geographical unity, the economic
unity, etc., etc. In the presence of all these strong and in-
severable ties it is gross injustice for the British Aide-Memoire
and its Annex to speak of two countries and two peoples


instead of speaking of one country and one people indivisible,
inseparable.
Second: The British Aide-Memoire spoke of commitments of
His Majesty’s Government to the Sudanese people. It is not
enough for His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom
to impose upon themselves those so-called obligations deriving
from no right whatever then make use of them to-day for
separating Egyptians and their compatriots the Sudanese.
Indeed the historical and legal position of the Unity of Egypt
and The Sudan leaves no gap for His Majesty’s Government
in the United Kingdom to penetrate through on the pretext
of their obligations towards the Sudanese. The Royal
Egyptian Government have on many occasions made clear
this position and a recapitulation thereof would be super-
fluous here.
Third: The Annex referred to the wide differences of culture,
race, religion and political development existing among
the Sudanese. Some of these differences lack actual scien-
tific support such as the difference of race. The Sudan
Administration is to blame for the rest of those differences
for it has deliberately sought to isolate the South of The
Sudan from the North and to prevent the inhabitants of the
North from getting in touch with those of the South thereby
standing in the way of the natural penetration and spreading
of the Arabic language and the Moslem religion into the
South.
In any case, the Royal Egyptian Government can by no
means accept those differences as an argument to dis-
tinguish between the various parts of The Sudan or to hinder
the Sudanese in their entirety from enjoying self-government.
5 In view of the above, the Royal Egyptian Government propose
that the statement of principles should be made as follows :
(a) The Unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown.
(b) Self-Government for the Sudanese within the framework of
this unity in two years.
(c) British forces and British officials to be withdrawn from
The Sudan and the present regime in The Sudan to be
terminated immediately upon the expiry of those two years.
(d) In the event of the principles outlined in (a), (b) and (c)
being accepted, the Royal Egyptian Government agree to
setting up a tripartite commission in order to help attain
the goal in (b).
July 6th, 1951.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador
on Friday 13th July, 1951, at 10.30 a.m.
Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pacha H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Pasha
Mtr. Aly Z. Husny
British Ambassador:— I have been thinking deeply on the questions
raised in our last meeting and I have come to the conclusion that:
1 Whatever may be the rights and wrongs of the historical argu-
ments, we have to consider the situation as it is to-day.
2 We must proceed on the assumption that both sides have for
their aim to promote the welfare of the Sudanese not to pursue
their own interests. If this is accepted our difference would
only be one of method.
Foreign Minister: — We cannot possibly disregard the historical
facts since they are connected with the existence or non-existence of
the right. It is impossible for Egypt to forego its right and accept the
Fait Accompli which is the handiwork of force alone. As to the welfare
of the Sudanese, this is exactly what Egypt strives to do for the Sudanese
in their' capacity as compatriots in the Egypto-Sudanese Fatherland.
If the welfare of the Sudanese is your only concern, this welfare is
realised in the manner I have just explained.
British Ambassador:— You do accept then that high ideals inspire
both sides. So far as Britain is concerned you can accept my assurance
on that. If you agree, then the difference is one of method.
Foreign Minister:— This means that you are asking us in a tactful
way to concede your claim that you have obligations towards the
Sudanese which we cannot possibly concede for the many reasons I
have given you in our past meetings. In fact we cannot raise any
building unless we first agree to the basis on which to build. The
basis accepted by Egypt is the Unity of Egypt and The Sundan under
the Egyptian Crown since this is Egypt’s established right. If you admit
this fact it will then be possible for us to exchange views on the building
to be raised thereon.


British Ambassador: — You do not dispute the fact that we are
trying to the best of our abilities to promote the welfare of the Sudanese.
Foreign Minister: — Yes I dispute this and I believe that The Sudan
Administration which was supposed to act provisionally in the name
of both the Egyptian and British Governments and in the interest of
the Sudanese and for their progress, acted exclusively for the British
Government and aimed, for imperialistic reasons, at separating The
Sudan from Egypt as well as the Southern Sudan from the North.
However, circumstances have changed, the national consciousness
in both Egypt and The Sudan has awakened and the time has come
for the present regime in The Sudan to be terminated and for conditions
to revert to their normal channels by leaving us and our compatriots the
Sudanese to seek our own common good.
British Ambassador; — In view of what you say it does not seem
that we will make very much progress in that direction. Let me give
you an analysis of the situation as I see it and of Egypt’s attitude. Egypt
maintains the thesis of the Unity under the Egyptian Crown. No
Sudanese will interpret this except as Egyptian control over the Sudan-
ese. Whatever your Ashigga correspondents may tell you Egyptian
control is not acceptable to the vast majority of the Sudanese. The
Ashigga Party is losing its influence and a more important Party in
The Sudan is now the National Front. They do desire some link with
Egypt as a potentially useful neighbour and as a deterrent to the creation
of a new Mahdia. They have taken a considerable part in the recently
established commission for the amendment of the Executive Council and
Assembly Ordinance. This Commission will probably recommend the
immediate establisment of a purely Sudanese Executive Council but they
are paying serious attention to the claims and fears of the South and
the tribal areas of the East and West. In fact the Sudanese seek real
self-government and if Egypt would only show a little flexibility there
is no doubt that geographical and economic considerations in general
and mutual dependence on the Nile Waters in particular will inevitably
draw. Egypt and The Sudani together. But if Egypt insists on imposing
her will I am afraid this policy will seriously prejudice her future relations
with The Sudan and that would be to no one’s advantage. In disregard-
ing national consciousness in The Sudan Egypt is acting against her
own interests.
Foreign Minister: — The details you have just given which are no
doubt derived from The Sudan Administration are in themselves a proof
that this Administration acts exclusively for Britain and supplies her in
these, talks with information to support her point of view. We can
even, say that The Sudan Administration directs affairs in The Sudan
in, such a manner as to lend support to the British Negotiator. What-
ever your view about the Ashigga Party may be, you know that this
Party is not the only party that maintains the unity of Egypt and The,
Sudan but all parties with, the. exception of the Umma Party maintain
that Unify.. The National Front referred to by Your Excellency has
wired the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affatemand Nahas


Pasha demanding the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan. Its Members
have taken part in the Commission for the amendment of the Legislative
Assembly Ordinance only to achieve this end as they frankly stated
when they agreed to take part in that Commission. The parties to
which they belong have, however, taken precautions against their being
considered responsible for any possible deviation by the Commission
from the principle of Unity. To obviate any suspicion that might arise
in this connection, these parties have declared that the Members take
part in the Commission in their personal capacities. There remains the
Umma Party which is the only Party recognised by the Sudan Admini-
stration despite the fact that it demands the independence of The Sudan
which would mean you getting out of it. This in itself is significant
and clearly shows that this Party acts under your influence for the
purposes I have already explained. In any case if we judge the ob-
jectives of this Party by its declared policy, the result would be that
all parties in The Sudan are unanimous on the necessity of your getting
out of it. This is not the case with Egypt which is supported by all
other parties representing as I explained on several occasions the
vast majority of the Sudanese. Egypt does not, therefore impose her
will on the Sudanese but actually she speaks on their behalf and defends
their objectives which are hers at the same time. Nothing could be
more gratifying to Egypt than the present regime in The Sudan being
terminated at the earliest opportunity and that the Administration be
handed over to the Sudanese themselves within the natural Unity which
binds them to Egypt, several factors of which you have yourself
admitted.
British Ambassador: — Well anyway we are agreed that the
Sudanese want self-government. The way it looks from outside is that
Egypt is dictating to the Sudanese the form of self-government whereas
Britain refuses to impose anything on the Sudanese and insists on con-
sulting them. That seems to me a difference of method.
Foreign Minister: — I would like before I reply to this to put this
question :
Do I understand that you look upon self-government and self-de-
termination for The Sudan as one and the same thing ?
British Ambassador: — It is obvious that The Sudan cannot
determine its future until it has self-government. One must precede'
the other.
Foreign Minister: — Why then do you consider when Egypt claims
self-government for The Sudan within the framework of Unity that
she is imposing her will on The Sudan ? In fact the difference between
us is that you want self-government for the Sudanese to be subservient
to the Governor-General of The Sudan and in other words to the
British Government whereas we want this self-government to be free
except in regard to certain natural links necessitated by all factors and
agreed upon between Egyptians and the vast majority of their com-
patriots the Sudanese, namely, the Unity of the Crown, foreign policy,
army and currency. Self-government on these lines is of a wider scope


than any regime hitherto proposed by you or by The Sudan Admini-
stration for the Sudanese. There is another difference between us.
You wish to make use of time to enable the Governor-General and his
Assistants to work under cover of self-government to antagonise the
Sudanese against their Egyptian compatriots and thereby to separate
The Sudan from Egypt in the name of self-government.
And here again I must repeat that I have asked you several times
whether you accept a free plebiscite in The Sudan keeping in mind that
this freedom can only be achieved by the immediate withdrawal of your
Administration, forces and officials.
British Ambassador:— It seems to me that Egypt’s idea of self-
government for The Sudan means Egyptian control of many phases
of Sudanese life whereas Britain’s idea is eventual full self-government
and self-determination.
As to the plebiscite, if it were a definite proposal of the Egyptian
Government His Majesty’s Government would consider it: but I gather
it is not a definite proposal. It is possible to conceive of different kinds
of plebiscite. One would be a plebiscite under neutral supervision.
Another would consist of taking the opinion of the elected representa-
tives of the people. Egypt has not as yet accepted the Legislative
Assembly so she is presumably not ready to accept it as representing
all the views of the Sudanese. If Egypt were to co-operate in ensuring
that the Legislative Assembly is based on wider popular vote, she might
then be ready to accept it as representative of the views of The Sudan.
I would add that the premature withdrawal of British administra-
tive officials and technicians from The Sudan would be fraught with
the gravest consequences for Egypt, not least in the matter of Nile
Waters.
It seems to me that the two standpoints from which we are viewing
the whole problem are so wide apart that we must seek some basic
factors physical or otherwise on which we can agree. We can then
perhaps make some progress.
As to the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian
Crown, this is a political claim in which as I have already said Britain
is not prepared to subscribe. You have raised objections to our state-
ment of principles. Would you agree to the fact that the dependence
of both Egypt and The Sudan on the waters of the Nile makes it
essential that the friendliest relations should link both peoples ? If that
is possible, if we can agree on some such elementary physical facts such
an agreement might be covered by an exchange of notes in which Egypt
will state her principles about Egypt and The Sudan and Britain will do
the same thing each side giving their ideas about the future status of
The Sudan. What is your reaction to the idea of agreeing to such a
common statement of principles, possibly reformulated ? Put our first
principle in other words if you like. It seems to be the highest point of
common agreement.
Foreign Minister; — The question is not one of wording or formu-
lation and it is useless to exchange notes in which each side gives its


viewpoint without both sides first agreeing on the essentials. Such a
procedure cannot be called an agreement. In fact you lose nothing so
long as the present regime in The Sudan stands and this is what you aim
at whereas we consider as I pointed out before that the time has come
in view of the development of national consciousness in both Egypt
and The Sudan for Britain to withdraw completely from The Sudan
and to leave Egyptians and their compatriots the Sudanese to manage
their own affairs in the manner they choose. Actually they are agreed
on self-government for The Sudan within the framework of Unity under
the Egyptian Crown with a common foreign policy, army and currency.
In reiterating this principle I am perturbed at the wide difference be-
tween us after I heard you say to-day that the British Government is
not prepared to subscribe to this principle.
I must tell you in all frankness that agreement in this case will be
impossible and it will naturally be futile to pursue words and formulae.
Then again I ask you why do you not concede this principle which you
have admitted in the Sidky-Bevin negotiations ? The friendship which
we should like to prevail between the Egyptian and British people can-
not survive the denial of the right.
As to your comment on the question of plebiscite, you were per-
fectly right when you said that I did not mean it to be a proposal from
the Egyptian Government since it is impossible for Egypt to propose
a plebiscite in a part of the Fatherland but I only want as I believe
I am entitled to —■ to know how serious you are insisting on the consul-
tation of the Sudanese. Indeed were you really serious in this respect
you would have declared that you are prepared to withdraw from The
Sudan in order that a free plebiscite may be carried out there. But you
aim at one object, namely, the continuation of the present regime in
The Sudan since it is to your advantage and since it would realise your
objects as already pointed out by me.
British Ambassador:— I am afraid you misunderstood me when I
said that Britain is not prepared to subscribe to the principle of Unity
under the Egyptian Crown. We cannot subscribe to any such principle
in advance but we would not reject any solution of the problem which
the Sudanese agree to freely.
Foreign Minister: — Why then do you not leave it to the Sudanese
themselves to express that and the matter between us would then be
limited to the fact that you have gone to The Sudan after your occupa-
tion of Egypt to act for Egypt. Now that you have recognised the
independence of Egypt and the termination of your occupation, you
should abide by the logical conclusion and get out of The Sudan too.
British Ambassador; — I do not think it will serve a good purpose
to go back to the historical facts. I do, however, recommend you to
study the principles and see whether a common denominator could be
found. Can we find some common principle on the basis of which we
can say what the future of The Sudan will be ? May I suggest that we
study that until next week ? It does seem possible to me to find some
principles however elementary they may be.


Foreign Minister: — Before adjourning this meeting I would like to
ask you a question :
We have fixed two years in our principles as a transition period
after which the Sudanese will be given self-government. Have you
anything to say to this ?
British Ambassador: — I do not know what the British Government
think about this but if you like I will get their opinion. I doubt whether
they can be more specific in regard to the period for the establishment
of Sudanese self-government than they have been in the statement of
principles. I would like to point out, however, that if the probable
recommendations of the amending Commission prove acceptable The
Sudan might have a purely Sudanese Executive Council in much less
than two years.


RECORD
of a conversation between
H.E. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. The British Ambassador
on Thursday July 26th, 1951 at 10.30 am.
’Present:
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha HE. Sir Ralph Stevenson
H.E. Ibrahim Farag Pasha H.E. Mr. Oreswell
Mtre. Aly Z. Husny
Foreign Minister: — At the end of the last meeting Your Excel-
lency stated that if the probable recommendations of the Amending
Commission would be acceptable. The Sudan would have a purely
Sudanese Executive Council in much less than two years. Time did not
permit me in that meeting to comment on this statement and I would
like to comment on it now by asking you, so long as you are acquainted
with the results of the Amending Commission’s deliberations, whether
the Executive Council referred to by Your Excellency will be respon-
sible to the Legislative Assembly or will it be responsible to the Governor-
General ? Also will the Legislative Assembly or the body replacing -it
after the approval of the amendment be given full powers or will there
be restrictions on those powers in the form of a veto vested in the
Governor-General ? And what are the questions covered by the veto
if any ? And do you not agree that it is fitting to have such a right
vested in His Majesty The King of Egypt who appoints the Governor-
General rather than in the Governor-General ? I hope you are in a
position to give me an answer to these questions in view of the impor-
tance of those answers in throwing light on the statement made by Your
Excellency.
British Ambassador: — I am very much afraid I cannot give you
a satisfactory answer to your questions as the report of the Amending
Commission has not been completed yet. The Commission has been
considering the constitutional aspect of the Ordinance and is I believe
in need of further legal advice. I have heard that, in consequence, one
or more members of the Commission intend to visit London this summer
for that purpose. All that I know of the deliberations of the Commission
is that it has in mind to suggest that there should be a purely Sudanese
Executive Council. More than that I cannot tell. Until the work is
completed we do not know to whom it will recommend that the Legis


lative Assembly should be responsible, or what restrictions would be
placed on the Executive Council or the Assembly. 1 think it likely that
the rural members of the Commission will insist that some kind of veto
should remain in the hands of the Governor-General in order to protect
their interests. The Governor-General of The Sudan is appointed by
His Majesty The King of Egypt. A veto by the Governor-General is
therefore a veto by delegation of His Majesty.
Foreign Minister t — May I ask you how you got hold of the
details you have mentioned just now ?
British Ambassador;— I was told by The Sudan Agent here. Any-
how H.E. Farag Pasha can find out all about it to-morrow when he sees
the Civil Secretary.
Foreign Minister:— What I wanted to say is that the Sudan Admi-
nistration is anxious to acquaint the British Government and the British
Ambassador in Egypt with the details of these serious happenings in
The Sudan. But the Egyptian Government are percluded as to those
details and the Sudan Administration does not care to acquaint them
with goes on there. This is a very serious matter and it proves
what I have repeatedly stated that the Sudan Administration acts exclu-
sively for the British Government not for both the Egyptian and British
Governments as it is assumed in a dual government and not for the
welfare of the Sudanese. But there is something more serious than that
for I have just heard from you that certain Sudanese Members of the
Amending Commission are visiting London for consultation which
means that the whole thing is a British policy supervised by the British
Government.
The Egyptian Government have already objected to the Governor-
General merely allowing a debate in the Legislative Assembly on a
motion on self-government. In the course of conversations between the
late Mr. Bevin and myself in our meeting of 15th December, 1950, this
objection was discussed and Mr. Bevin promised to do all that is possible
to ensure that nothing will be done in the future which will disturb the
admosphere of the current discussions. You can now see that this pro-
mise was not kept and that the Sudan Administration still goes on with
plans of a much graver nature than those to which we objected and
which you promised not to repeat.
As to the possibility of the Governor-General exercising the right
of veto by delegation of H.M. The King who appointed him, it was
never meaht that the Governor-General could take action of constitu-
tional nature without the prior consent of the Egyptian Government.
British Ambassador:— Your first remark was that the Sudan Admi-
nistration was not anxious to let the Egyptian Government know what
is going in The Sudan in regard to these matters. But I think I am right
in saying that the Egyptian Government refused to accept the constitu-
tion or recognise the Legislative Assembly. Nevertheless had the
Governor-General been asked for information he would certainly have
given you all that you require. The fact that some members of the


Amending Commission are visiting London means nothing at all. There
is surely no objection to their visiting Paris, New York, Cairo or any
other place in search of the desired legal advice. I remember you made
an objection to the motion of self-government being debated by the
Legislative Assembly at one of your meetings with the Late Mr. Bevin
last December.
I know that Mr. Bevin regarded this debate at that particular
moment as inopportune but he made it quite clear that the Governor-
General was in a difficult position and that once a Legislative Assembly
had been created it was scarcely possible to stop the members from
talking. Mr. Bevin was not in a position to give any promise about that.
Foreign Minister; — The objection of the Egyptian Government to
the Constitution of the Legislative Assembly should have stopped its
being established. But the Governor-General went on with its formation
in spite of this objection. The Egyptian Government duly protested
against this action at the time and it was natural for Egypt under the
circumstance not to recognise the Legislative Assembly. Your Excel-
lency is aware that the reason of this attitude was that we did not con-
sider the formation of this Assembly as an action which had for its
object the welfare of the Sudanese or giving them a share of self-govern-
ment but as an action by which it was meant to carry out the plan of
the Sudan Administration aiming at separating The Sudan from Egypt
while the Egyptian Government were anxious that the Sudanese should
enjoy a real share of self-government. The Egyptian Government drew
up a detailed scheme in this connection which was sent to both the
British Government and the Governor-General. In any case the mistake
made by the Governor-General going on with the formation of the Legis-
lative Assembly in spite of the Egyptian Government’s objection does
not justify committing further mistakes and omitting to notify the Egypt-
ian Government of actions taken thereafter in The Sudan on the pretext
that they did not accept the constitution of the Legislative Assembly.
The Governor-General should, in conformity with the normal procedure,
have asked both Governments’ permission in such serious matters. Then
again the Egyptian Government’s objection was made on the grounds
of the trivial and insufficient powers given to the Legislative Assembly.
If the Governor-General has finally come to recognise the soundness of
the Egyptian Government’s objection as evidenced by the fact that he
formed a commission for amending the Legislative Assembly Ordinance
and giving it wider powers, he should have realised that the matter
requires consultation with the Egyptian Government more than with the
British Government since the Egyptian Government was the party who
called attention to the insufficient powers given to the Legislative
Assembly and to the necessity of expanding them. As to the Late Mr.
Bevin’s promise to me, I would read it out to you textually from the
record of the meeting of 15th December, 1950 :
"Nevertheless he personally agreed that the holding of a debate
of this nature at the present juncture was unfortunate. He has
accordingly asked the Governor-General to do all in his power to
ensure that no action was taken in Khartoum which was in any


way likely to raise controversy between the Egyptian and British
Governments. He also undertook to do all that is possible himself
to ensure that nothing will be done in London as a result of the
motion which will disturb the atmosphere of the current discus-
sions.”
This is a definite and straightforward promise to which, I do not
think the Governor-General gave due attention.
British Ambassador: — You first of all say that Egypt does not
recognise the Legislative Assembly then you demand to be consulted
about measures taken in connection therewith. You can hardly call this
logical. However the Legislative Assembly does exist and you appar-
ently do not propose to do away with it. I am sure that the Sudan
Government would be ready to give you any information you require
about it. As regards Mr. Bevin’s statement it was no kind of a promise
to halt the Sudan’s progress towards self-government. He undertook to
make a recommendation to the Governor-General who doubtless carried
it out to the best of his ability.
And now I would like to make a few general remarks about the
last meeting :
The fact that I have not denied in detail all the accusations made
against the British Government should not be taken as proof that I
accept them. As to public opinion in The Sudan I can hardly believe
that you would take the information which reaches you for granted-
You certainly would not hear the same thing from reliable sources or
from people of independent opinion in The Sudan.
There is one of your accusations which I must however formally
.deny. That is your repeated accusation that Great Britain’s sole object
is to separate Egypt from The Sudan. Even if you cannot accept my
assurance on this subject you must obviously see for yourself that if a
burning desire for unity with Egypt exists as you maintain among the
vast majority of the eight million inhabitants of The Sudan it would be
utterly impossible for 150 British political officials and one battalion of
British infantry to stand against it.
I feel also that I must repeat once again that Great Britain rejects
no solution of the problem which may be freely accepted by the Sudanese.
You may regard this as begging the question of how to ascertain the
real wishes of the Sudanese. A plebiscite is clearly ruled out if only
because the Egyptian Government could not contemplate such a proce-
dure. The proposal for a plebiscite has never been rejected by Great
Britain because it has never been seriously put forward by Egypt. I
must admit, however, that I very much doubt the practical feasibility of
arranging a plebiscite. In the circumstances the only alternative seems
to be an expression of the opinion of the freely elected representatives
of the people. If Egypt really wants to find out what the views of the
Sudanese are she will co-operate in ensuring the broadening of the
electoral basis of the Legislative Assembly.
Foreign Minister: — True, the Egyptian Government exclude the
plebiscite for the reasons I gave in the last meeting. I only asked you


whether you accept a free plebiscite in order to ascertain how serious
you were in proposing the consultation of the Sudanese and I made it
clear that this freedom cannot be achieved unless your administration
and forces are withdrawn. Do you accept this condition ?
British Ambassador; — A premature withdrawal would cause a
breakdown of the Sudan Administration.
Foreign Minister; — Then all you aim at is the continuation of the
status quo in The Sudan, in other words the continuation of the British
influence so that your objects will ultimately be realised under cover of
the will of the Sudanese. As to your statement that your troops in The
Sudan do not exceed one battalion and your political officials do not
exceed 150, it can be easily rebutted since they have behind them the
British Fleet, the British Air Force, the British Army and the Base
occupied by you at Fayid to which we strongly object. This Base is in
Egypt and very near The Sudan.
To sum up, I cannot see any hope of a possible agreement since first,
you deny our established right in the Unity of Egypt and The Sudan.
Second ,you claim for yourselves without any right obligations towards
the Sudanese which we cannot possibly recognise. Third, you use these
obligations as a pretext for complicating the situation and continuing the
present regime in The Sudan so that no satisfactory solution would be
possible.
British Ambassador; — I have already denied that we reject unity.
We do not reject anything the Sudanese accept.
Although you seem to be pessimistic as to the possibility of an
agreement, I still maintain that we can agree on a common basis, how
about a reformulation of principles in an exchange of letters ?
Foreign Minister; — I repeat this cannot be done unless we first
agree to the essentials and now do you expect any answer about eva-
cuation ?
British Ambassador;— I can hold out no hope of a speedy reply
from His Majesty’s Government on defence matters for reasons which
I have already explained. In the meantime it seems to me that we have
reached a deadlock and I can only express the hope that you will not
say anything irrevocable in Parliament which will make it difficult to
resume negotiations.
Foreign Minister; — I refer you to my answer in the last meeting.
British Ambassador; — I will not fail to make a full report to His
Majesty’s Government.


STATEMENT IN PARLIAMENT
by H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha
Minister for Foreign Affairs
on Monday 6th August, 1951
At this delicate stage through which Anglo-Egyptian relations are
passing, Mr. Morrison’s statement before the Commons revealed the
wide gap separating the two opposing viewpoints regarding the main
questions outstanding between Egypt and the United Kingdom, namely
evacuation. The Sudan and Palestine. The British Secretary for Foreign
Affairs outlined with no little frankness and detail the policy of his
Government regarding these three questions and his speech was flashed
all over the world. It is therefore, as much your right as it is ours
to outline with the same frankness and detail the policy of the Egyptian
Government regarding these questions.
I. EVACUATION.
Since British occupation was forced upon Egypt on July 11th, 1882,
she kept on demanding evacuation while the British endeavoured to
find various excuses to prolong that occupation. Protection of the
Khedive, protection of foreigners, protection of poorer classes, protection
of minorities and protection of so-called vested interests, all these various
and oftimes contradictory excuses were put up one after the other. On
Egypt’s great awakening and the manifestation of her unanimous will
to regain her rights which put an end to all excuses showing the British
as working for the interests of others, Britain revealed the real cause
for occupation and confronted Egyptian nationalism with the protection
of British communications. When this pretext lost most of its force
through the independence of India and Pakistan, the largest jewel in
the Crown of the Empire, the British were not at a loss to find other
excuses. To-day they offer as an excuse what Mr. Morrison called
“the responsibilities of Great Britain in the Middle East, on behalf of
the rest of the Commonwealth and the Western Allies as a whole.”
Besides these excuses for prolonging their occupation, the British
made a considerable number of promises as a dope to Egyptians. These
promises exceeded 60 in number, the last of which being their promise
in 1946 to have evacuation completed on land, sea and air by the end
of September 1949.
I need not dwell here on the pernicious effects of occupation in
dividing us, retarding our progress and obstructing our development,


but I am bound to make one reference by way of illustration to
the condition of the Egyptian Army after 69 years of occupation and
15 years after the conclusion of the 1936 Treaty wherein the British
undertook to train the Egyptian Army and supply it with arms and
equipment. Had they been sincere in their claim that they had occupied
Egypt for the good of the Egyptians or in the task they undertook to
discharge under the 1936 Treaty, the Egyptian Army would have been
to-day a force to be reckoned with and relied upon in the defence of
Egypt and neighbouring Arab States. It would have been powerful
enough to undertake within the framework of United Nations Charter
an important share of responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
international security in the Middle East.
But how can the British be expected to work for strengthening the
Egyptian Army when by so doing they would forego their pretext for
the occupation of Egypt and their claim of bearing responsibilities for
the Middle East.
It was, therefore, inevitable that the valiant Egyptian Army should
remain without arms and equipment. This the British have always
endeavoured to do but have now redoubled their efforts to accomplish.
Not only have they refused to supply us with arms actually contracted
and mostly paid for, nor even were they content with the outcry raised
time and again in their Parliament to reaffirm their intention to deprive
Egypt of arms, but wherever we turned to get arms we found our way
already blocked by them. And thus they would continue their pretexts
for prolonging occupation.
A vicious circle which cannot be broken if we accept British argu-
ments and disregard the painful facts of the past and confine ourselves,
as they would like us to do, to the facts of the present situation, namely
to the danger of war which according to them is threatening the Middle
East and the whole world.
But was the world ever free from a threat of war ?
Before World War I we were told that this danger came from
Germany and her Allies.
Before World War II we were told it came from the Axis Powers.
And ofter World War II we are told it comes from the Soviet
Union and its Kominform Satellites.
There will always be some international dispute which may be
construed as a threat of war and described as a menace to peace. Is
it fair that we should be asked to tolerate indefinitely an occupation
violating our sovereignty and independence because the world will never
be free of a danger threatening international peace and security ? Cer-
tainly not!
Egypt is unflinchingly determined to refuse any vestige of occupa-
tion whatever might be the danger said to threaten her.
British occupation of Egyptian territory is a standing reality, a stark
violation of our independence, a wound to our national dignity and a
vestige of hateful British imperialism which must be effaced. As to the


threat of war against which we are warned from time to time, it is no
more than a possibility which, pray God, would never materialise. In-
deed it will never materialise if sovereign equality between nations
prevailed and if each Major Power respected the sovereignty and terri-
torial integrity of smaller and weaker nations thus setting a good
example of international conduct regardless of actions taken by others.
In fact the United Nations Charter provides for and stresses the
principle of sovereign equality and forbids every member state to violate
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other states. The United
Nations General Assembly recommended on 14th December, 1946, that
no state should have forces stationed in territories of other independent
states without their free consent. I need not emphasise that Egypt cate-
gorically rejects British forces remaining on her soil.
On the other hand the Charter provides for procedure and measures
to ensure the settlement of disputes between nations and the main-
tenance of international peace and security. To my knowledge these
provisions do not include the occupation of Egyptian territory by Britain
against Egypt’s will.
Though details of these procedures and measures have not as yet
been completed and favourable circumstances for their application have
not as yet been created, the General Assembly in its last session set up
a plan for united action to be taken for the maintenance of peace. The
basis of this action is to depend on national armies for the maintenance
of international security within their territories and in neighbouring areas,
Egypt had from the outset shown full readiness to take part in this great
international duty provided that she and other Middle East States in
sensitive strategic positions be supplied with necessary arms and equip-
ment to enable them to collaborate in the maintenance of international
peace in this area.
I take the opportunity of speaking before the house to declare our
unwavering loyalty to the high principles and objectives of the United
Nations Charter and to the resolutions made by this Organisation in
accordance therewith. To do this in full sincerity, Egypt must oppose
occupation, insist on the evacuation of British troope from her territory
and hasten to refute this latest innovation of British policy, namely the
responsibilities which the British claim they bear in the Middle East on
behalf of the Commonwealth and the Western Allies as a whole. It is
immaterial that the British should claim for themselves in the Middle
East all kinds of responsibilities so long as Middle East countries them-
selves do not recognise those claims.
11. THE SUDAN.
Here again I must go back to the past and in the light of history,
to judge the present correctly and to derive a lesson therefrom for
ourselves and for our compatriots in the South.
When the British' occupied Egypt they had nothing to do with The
Sudan, but they took advantage of their occupation of Egypt and of


their complete domination over her affairs to force the Egyptian Govern-
ment to evacuate The Sudan, then force her to agree to a Joint reconquest
of The Sudan and then again force her to sign the two Agreements of
1899 for the Joint administration of The Sudan. They did not claim
then that The Sudan had a separate status or that they had responsi-
bilities towards the Sudanese. On the contrary, they repeatedly affirmed
that they were acting in The Sudan on behalf and in the interest of
Egypt as illustrated by the Fashoda incident and by many of Lord
Cromer’s reports. Contrary to their declared policy they endeavoured
through the Sudan Administration dual in name but British in fact
to antagonise the Sudanese by various subterfuges and manoeuvres
against their Egyptian compatriots preparatory to separating The Sudan
from Egypt and to isolate the Southern from the Northern areas of The
Sudan as a prelude to separating the South from the North with the
ultimate intention of colonising the whole of The Sudan, South and
North alike. This intention was very clearly shown in 1924 when Britain
took advantage of the assassination of the Sirdar and put Egypt bag
and baggage out of The Sudan and went further with their aggression
as to threaten interference with Egypt’s Nile waters.
Now that national consciousness has awakened in Egypt and The
Sudan, the British adopted new tactics to meet the new circumstances.
They repeatedly declare their concern for the welfare of the Sudanese
and demand that they should be consulted and be given self-government
leading eventually to self-determination.
It can be seen, therefore, that when Egypt in the early days of
occupation could not question their actions, they made use of Egypt’s
name and of acting on her behalf to dominate The Sudan. When we
demanded the independence of Egypt and The Sudan, the pretext of
acting in the name of Egypt became of no use to them. They had to
turn to another pretext which was this time that they speak in the name
of the Sudanese and defend their interests. It is obvious that the two
pretexts are contradictory for indeed there is a great difference between
administering The Sudan in the name of the Egyptians and demanding
from Egyptians in the name of the Sudanese that The Sudan should
ultimately have the right of self-determination.
May we ask who authorised the British to speak in the name of the
Sudanese and who asked them to shoulder the responsibilities they claim
in The Sudan ? What historical, legal or moral right have they to
interfere between Egyptians and their compatriots the Sudanese who
have been united from time immemorial by the Nile, by geographical
and economic unity and by ties of race, language and religion ?
The fact of the matter, is that the British never had Egypt’s interest
at heart when they acknowledged that they administered The Sudan in
Egypt’s name and on her behalf, nor do they have now the interest of
The Sudan at heart when they claim that they are endeavouring to give
it self-government and self-determination. But it is a subterfuge to con-
tinue, their administration of The Sudan for as long, as possible so that
they would have the opportunity of independent action- under cover of
the. will of. the Sudanese,


This is borne out by the fact that their repeated talk of self-govern-
ment has resulted in an effete Legislative Assembly shorn of all authority
whereas Egypt wanted The Sudan to have a truly representative Legis-
lative Assembly endowed with considerable powers.
Now, that the British have been obliged to admit Egypt’s point of
view that the powers of the Legislative Assembly fall short of the repre-
sentative system which the Sudanese deserve, we find them retain for
themselves in the amendment projects various powers in the form of a
right of veto to be vested in the Governor-General, when this right
should belong within limits to be agreed upon to His Majesty the
King of Egypt who appoints the Governor-General.
Furthermore, if we ask the British about the period after which The
Sudan may enjoy real self-government, they estimate it between 15 and
20 years, while Egypt maintains that The Sudan should have self-govern-
ment within two years basing her estimate on the Resolution of the
United Nations General Assembly in regard to Libya, for indeed. The
Sudan is no less deserving of self-government than Libya.
The British pretension as regard to the will of the Sudanese is
obviously false. If they truly respect this will, they would comply with
the unanimous demand of the Sudanese for the termination of the present
regime in The Sudan and the evacuation of British forces therefrom.
As for Egypt, the British themselves do not deny that a great part of
the Sudanese who constitute in fact the overwhelming majority
demand unity with Egypt under the Egyptian Crown. Were it not
for the British and their manoeuvres in The Sudan, the Sudanese would
by now have achieved real self-government within the framework of
this unity interpreted by a common army, currency and foreign policy.
I presume that our compatriots the Sudanese will grasp this as well
as the fact that the pretext made at present by the British to differen-
tiate between Egypt and The Sudan preparatory to separating The
Sudan from Egypt, will if the manoeuvre succeeds be used as a
weapon by the British for separating the South of The Sudan from the
North.
Let our compatriots in the South beware of this double danger, let
them unite to avoid it and let them agree to say to the British get out
and leave us alone with our Egyptian compatriots to arrange our own
house away from the wily designs of the intruder.
These are the points of difference between the Egyptian and British
Governments regarding evacuation and The Sudan. The dispute inevi-
tably involves another dispute as to the 1936 Treaty.
The British maintain the 1936 Treaty and claim that we cannot
unilaterally have it denounced for it enables them to continue their occu-
pation of Egypt and their manoeuvres in The Sudan. As for Egypt, she
will not allow the 1936 Treaty to stand in the way of her sovereignty,
independence and unity with The Sudan.
The British rely for justification of their attitude in regard to this
Treaty on the sanctity of treaties and forget or rather feign to forget
that the Resolution of the Security Council of 14th April, 1946, in con


nection with the Soviet-Iranian dispute is definite in that the presence
of foreign troops on the territory of another state deprives this state
of the freedom of choice in negotiations.
On the other hand the 1936 Treaty violates the sanctity of two
important international treaties more worthy of respect, namely the
agreement of Constantinople concluded on 29th October, 1888, and the
United Nations, Charter of, 26th June 1945. The former precedes while
the latter follows and the 1936 Treaty stands in between as an infidel
between two devout worshippers. It constitutes in toto and in detail a
flagrant violation of the multilateral agreement of Constantinople whose
sole objective and motive had been to establish complete equality be-
tween all signatory countries with the exception of the country concerned
as regards navigation in Suez Canal and measures and arrangements
consequent thereupon. It also constitutes a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter as already explained. What sanctity can, there-
fore, be expected for a treaty concluded under pressure of occupation
and is furthermore a standing violation of the sanctity of other pacts
and treaties ?
The Egyptian Government were within their international right
when they promised the abrogation of the 1936 Treaty in the last
speech from the Throne. They shall God willing fulfil their pro-
mise of abrogating this Treaty before the next speech from the Throne.
3. PALESTINE.
In his statement before the Commons, Mr. Morrison gave special
attention to conditions prevailing in Middle East as a result of the
dispute between the Arabs and Israel since this is closely'connected with
the restrictions imposed by Egypt on navigation in the Suez Canal. I
would like to place on record in this connection that the British Foreign
Secretary has fully admitted the failure of British policy in Palestine but
he attributed that failure to inability to find a settlement acceptable to
both Arabs and Jews. He said both sides were to blame for this. In
fact Mr. Morrison was more severe with the Arabs, his severity amount-
ing to a threat. He blamed the Arabs because they seemed unwilling
or unable to accept the plain fact that Israel has come to stay and
cannot be swept into the Mediterranean. But he forgot one thing in
his unjust blame, that is, the prime author responsible before any one
else, for all the confusion and chaos at present prevailing in the Middle
East. This prime author, the whole world knows is no one else but
Great Britain.
It seems that the British have a dislike to history and prefer to
forget all about it, for their past abounds in ruthlessness and injustice.
But the oppressed, like ourselves, cannot possibly forget or ignore history,
since it establishes the innocence of the lamb accused of aggression by
the wolf.
Let us then go back to the days of the Great War when the leaders
of Arab countries forming part of the Ottoman Empire rebelled against.


it and sought their freedom and independence. Great Britain then
championed the cause of freedom and independence and encouraged the
Arabs to revolt against the Turks. Their emissary. General MacMahon,
promised the late King Hussein independence for all Arab countries
seceding from the Ottoman Empire with a special status for The Leba-
non, that is, Palestine had been among the Arab States which were
promised freedom and independence by the British. When the Great
War ended, the British as usual forgot their avowed promise and the
independence of the Arab States consequently evaporated and was
replaced by two mandates or, in other words, two colonisations, one
British and the other French. Palestine came under British mandate.
Mandate is a synonym to trusteeship. It is the duty of the trustee
to develop the ward’s fortune or at least to preserve it for him so that
it would be handed over to him intact on his reaching majority.
What had the British policy done with that trust in Palestine ?
Before 1917 there was no more than 50,000 Jews, mostly Arabs, in
that purely Arab Country. British justice deemed it fit under the Balfour
Declaration of the 11th November, 1917, to establish a national home
for the Jews in Palestine and graciously to provide that this new home
of the Jews should not prejudice the interests of the original inhabitant’s,
the Arabs.
How can a new national home be established within the very heart
of a country without prejudicing the interests of the original inhabitants
of that country ?!! But British policy can perform such miracles. It was
easy for the British to remember one part of their promise, that of a
national home for the Jews and to forget the other part, namely not to
prejudice the interests of the Arabs and praised be Him who never
forgets !
Thus they proceeded to fulfil their promise to the Jews at the ex-
pense of Arab victims.
They threw the gates wide open for Jewish immigration into Pales-
tine and allowed the Jews by various subterfuges to possess the most
fertile Arab lands and when the Arabs protested against this flagrant
injustice they were put down by force.
The World War II provided a suitable opportunity for the British
to allow the Jews to create a fully trained and equipped army and at
the same time to confiscate arms from the Arabs.
Once this Jewish Army was created and Arab People were dis-
armed, the British felt that their humanitarian mission was accomplished
and on 15th May, 1948, they withdrew from Palestine.
Are we to hold the British to blame if the Jews took advantage of
this opportunity to attack the Arabs, massacre their sons, assault their
women and usurp their property as they did in Deir Yassin ?!
Surely we would be unjust if we were to say so and think evil of
the British who are the loyal friends of the Arabs !
In addition to these material and generous efforts by the British
to grab Palestine from the Arabs and serve it on a silver tray to the


Jews, the British manoeuvres in the United Nations became active and
secured the partition Resolution on 29th November, 1947.
Neighbouring Arab States rallied to the succour of Palestine Arabs
to save all they could of their lives and property, but the Great Powers
banded together against them and Israel was established against the
will of all Arabs, in the most important and extensive part of Palestine.
The creation of Israel had meant the driving of Palestine Arabs
out of their homes. Approximately one million Arabs took refuge in
the few parts which remained of their country and in neighbouring Arab
countries leading a life of misery and privation and only 150,000 Arabs
stayed behind in Israel to live in abject fear and servility.
United Nations conscience was stirred by the outcry raised by the
refugees. The General Assembly decided that they should return to
their homes and that compensation be paid to those unable to return ;
but Israel the “petty child” of the Great Powers, who was never taught
to obey, ignored this Resolution as well as the General Assembly’s Reso-
lution concerning the internationalisation of Jerusalem and indeed the
Partition Resolution itself, the birth Certificate which brought Israel into
existence.
The “Spoilt child” goes on violating the armistice agreements
attacking at Um Rashrash, then at Bir Kattar, then at Houlah and em-
barking on a project for drying up the Jordan and bringing ruination to
Arabs inhabiting its valley a long chain of aggressions which were
placed on record against Israel by the Armistice Commissions.
From time to time the “spoilt child” goes into a hysterical fit. It
shakes its fists in the air bragging and threatening to overrun the Arab
States, from the Euphrates to the Nile !
It would have been immaterial had the “baby” relied on itself for
the realisation of these expansionist ambitions but it is backed by
Jewish funds from all parts of the world, by the intrigues of International
Zionism and by the Great Powers themselves without whose assistance
Israel would never have come into existence.
This ambition for territorial aggrandissement which Jewish politi-
cians do not conceal is accompanied by a continuous large-scale Jewish
immigration into Palestine which has become actually crowded for its
inhabitants. Should this immigration into Israel continue, it would be
inevitable for Israel in the near future to expand at the expense of her
neighbours and thus history will repeat itself and the Arab States will
once more be exposed to Zionist intrigues and international manoeuvres
which accompanied the birth of Israel.
Are we, therefore, to blame if we feel that a serious danger threatens
us on the part of this undesirable neighbour and if we strive hard to
avoid this danger by employing the plain and simple right of legitimate
self-defence more especially as we are still, from the legal viewpoint, in
a state of war with Israel ?
Yet, in face of all this, what have we done ?


We had recourse to the weakest of weapons. We boycotted Israel.
No fair minded person would dare raise his voice to tell the Arabs to
stop this boycott.
Iraq stopped her oil to flow into the Haifa refinery.
Egypt imposed certain restrictions within the narrowest possible
limits on navigation in the Suez Canal to prevent military materials and
oil from reaching Israel. By doing so, Egypt was no aggressor. She
was within her rights under Article 10 of the Agreement of Constanti-
nople. The British themselves had made use of this right in the last two
World Wars as allies of Egypt and it would be absurd to say that Egypt
herself could not exercise the same right. But the British complain of
oil tankers being prevented from carrying oil into Israel across the Suez
Canal on account of the material loss sustained by the British refinery
in Haifa. This explains their unjust attack against us in the British Press
and Parliament and recently before the Security Council.
Merciful Heavens ! All this uproar on account of the Haifa refine-
ries !
What of the loss sustained by us Arabs as a consequence of British
policy in Palestine ?
One million Arab refugees have lost the most cherished possession
in life : Home !
Hundreds of millions of pounds worth of property and land lost by
refugees !
And a rampant danger in Israel threatening every Arab State in the
Middle East.
The attitude of the British over oil tankers is just the same as that
of the wolf telling the lamb downstream that he had disturbed the water
and must therefore be blamed and eaten up.
But that is not all. The British go as far in their ruthlessness as to
remind us that Israel had come to stay and could not be thrown into
the sea.
W r ho had said that we intend .to throw anyone into the sea ?
We have concluded a permanent armistice with Israel and if any-
one had violated this armistice it could not be the Egyptians.
But on the other hand, we know full well that oppression is short-
lived, that Israel was created by oppression unprecedented in history,
that its creation was artificial and that anything artificial is bound to
collapse.
Such is the history of the British with Egypt as regards the ques-
tions of Evacuation, Palestine and The Sudan, and yet Mr. Morrison
affirms that should war break out, the Egyptian people will, as in the
past, join with the British. Dreams and delusions ! We have affirmed
to the British Government in our talks and on the occasion of the invita-
tion to participate in the Nairobi Conference that Egypt will never colla-
borate with them in any military effort so long as they keep on violating
her sacred rights and occupy her territories and so long as they continue
their policy in The Sudan. I am sure that Egypt will not take this stand


alone but this same stand will be taken by all Arab peoples whose inde-
pendence has been violated by the British or who have been so shame-
fully betrayed in Palestine.
And now what is the situation vis-a-vis the British ?
I will give you a short account of this situation. The British Secret-
ary for Foreign Affairs has closed the door on current talks between the
two Governments in his recent statement before the Commons. As to
subsequent steps to be taken, the Ministerial Political Committee presided
over by His Excellency the Prime Minister will decide on these steps
in the next few days. The matter will then be submitted to the Council
of Ministers for final approval. We will then refer to you before the
present parliamentary session is prorogued to acquaint you with the full
facts. We shall then discuss with you what we shall do for the realisation
of the national objectives unanimously agreed upon by the Egyptian and
Sudanese people with a view to redeeming the definite pledge given by
the Government in the last Speech from the Throne.


II parait des conversations qui ont eu lieu entre le Ministre des
Affaires Etrangeres et I’Ambassadeur Britannique que I’attitude du Gou-
vernement peut se resumer comme suit:
Le Gouvernement Egyptien refuse d’attendre plus longtemps le
resultat des etudes entreprises par le Gouvernement Britannique en vue
de trouver une solution du probleme de defense. Le Gouvernement
Egyptien egalement refuse de continuer les efforts d’elaborer avec le
Gouvernement Britannique une solution du probleme du Soudan a moins
que le Gouvernement Britannique accepte d’avance d’imposer aux
Soudanais, sans les consulter, le genre de relations entre I’Egypte et le
Soudan que le Gouvernement Egyptien croit approprie.
L’Ambassadeur Britannique serait reconnaissant a Son Excellence
Nahas Pasha de vouloir bien lui indiquer si ce resume de I’attitude du
Gouvernement Egyptien est exacte.
Le cas echeant I’Ambassadeur Britannique voudrait savoir si c’est
vraiment I’intention du Gouvernement Egyptien d’annoncer au Parle-
ment Egyptien que les conversations entre le Ministre des Affaires
Etrangeres et I’Ambassadeur Britannique ont echoue et qu’il ne servirait
a rien de les continuer, comme a indique Son Excellence Salah El Din
Pacha lors de la derniere conversation qu’il a eue avec I’Ambassadeur
Britannique.
A ce propos I’Ambassadeur Britannique veut attirer I’attention de Son
Excellence Nahas Pacha a I’accusation faite par le Ministre des Affaires
Etrangeres au Parlement Egyptien le 6 aout que le discours de Mr. Mor-
rison a la Chambre des Communes le 30 juillet a ferme toute voie aux
pourparlers entre les deux gouvernements. Ceci est loi d’etre la verite
comme Son Excellence Nahas Pacha peut noter lui-meme en parcourant
le texte du discours de Mr. Morrison. Son Excellence Salah El Din
Pacha parait avoir base sur cette interpretation fausse du discours de
Mr. Morrison des indications que le Gouvernement Egyptien se propose
prochainement de declarer au Parlement les mesures qu’il prendra pour
remplir la promesse de denoncer le traite de 1936.
Le 8 aout 1951.


PERSONNELLE
Monsieur le President du Conseil et Cher Ami,
Je vous envoie, ci-joint, un extrait du discours prononce par Mr.
Morrison a la Chambre des Communes le 30 juillet, concernant les rela-
tions Anglo-Egyptiennes, ainsi qu’une traduction arabe comme je vous
I’avais promis a notre entretien d’hier.
Comme vous le verrez bien, les paroles de Mr. Morrison ne cons-
tituent nullement une “fermeture de la porte” aux pourparlers actuels ;
et je suis sur que le Gouvernement Egyptien, ayant etudie le texte, com-
prendra bien I’esprit dans laquelle Mr. Morrison invite la co-operation
de I’Egypte, en partenaire egale et sur une base nouvelle, dans notre
effort commun pour assurer la paix du monde.
Veuillez agreer, Excellence, I’expression de ma plus haute consi-
deration.
(Sgd. RALPH SKRINE STEVENSON.
Son Excellence
Mustafa El Nahas Pacha,
Alexandrie.


EXCERPT
from Mr. Herbert Morrison’s Statement
in the House of Commons
on July, 30th 1951.
I now turn to the Egyptian question. I should like first to pay
tribute to the work of my predecessor, who laboured unflaggingly to
place Anglo-Egyptian relations on a footing which will both preserve the
best elements in the close relationship which has long linked our two
countries and will, at the same time, take account of the realities of the
dangerous situation in which the civilised world finds itself today.
That work I am anxious to carry on. He believed, and I also believe,
that one of the cornerstones on which stability and security in thfe Middle
East must Test is friendship and co-operation between us and Egypt in
the various fields in which we have common interests. We are well
aware of the difficulties which face the Egyptian Government and we
have tried to approach our common problems with patience and the
understanding of these difficulties. We know that the stand taken by
Egypt has its roots deep in the past, and we have tried to take account
of that fact. Unfortunately, our patience and understanding have not
always been reciprocated, and we are still faced with uncompromising
insistence on demands which bear no relation to present-day realities.
The problem of the presence of British troops in Egypt is not now
a purely Anglo-Egyptian problem. We are a Power bearing responsi-
bilities in the Middle East on behalf of the rest of the Commonwealth
and the Western Allies as a whole. Egypt is in some respects the key
to the Middle East. As history bears out, it is mere delusion to pretend
that Egypt can stand aside in any major conflict. Situated as she is on
the bridge between two continents and upon a vital link in the sea com-
munications between the Eastern and Western hemispheres, she is an
objective of first importance for any aggressive Power in the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Levant.
The destinies and civilisation of our two countries are bound up
together and it is unrealistic for Egypt to pretend that she can avoid
danger by refusing to allow us to share in the defensive organisation of
the area. Moreover, she can no more stand alone in the defence of her
own territory than we can in the defence of our country.
I have confidence that should war be forced upon the free world
the Egyptian people will, as in the past, join with us in resisting the
aggressor, but the vital difference between us and the Egyptian Govern-
ment in disagreement over the measures required to prpare to meet such


an emergency. We know that without extensive preparations in time
of peace our cause would be. lost before the struggle began. Our
task is to persuade the Egyptian Government to face this inescapable
fact and to convince them of the dangers to them and to us all of
neglecting such preparations.
In common with our North Atlantic and Commonwealth Allies, our
own people have assumed a great burden in time of peace in order to
make the world safe for those countries with whom we share a common
heritage and civilisation. We invite Egypt’s partnership as an equal in
this common effort to make the world safe. We want to plan our rela-
tionship on an entirely new basis. If Egypt rejects that invitation, we
cannot allow that to prejudice the fulfilment of our international respon-
sibilities, but we shall not give up hope of persuading her to offer the
spontaneous co-operation which will make our task immeasurably easier.
I now come to the Sudan. We are now discussing with the Egypt-
ian Government the future of The Sudan. Here, again, we are faced with
certain prejudices which prevent the Egyptian Government from
approaching the problem in a realistic frame of mind. The Sudanese
people, though mixed in race and religion, have advanced rapidly in
the political, social and economic spheres to become a well-ordered, self-
reliant community. Their mutual dependence on the waters of the Nile
have linked the destinies of The Sudan inextricably with those of Egypt,
and in due course we hope to see the Sudanese people choose that rela-
tionship with Egypt which best fulfils their needs. It is our aim that they
should be brought as soon as possible to a stage of development in
which they are able to exercise their choice in full freedom and cons-
ciousness of its implications.
We are only too anxious that Egypt should play her full and proper
part with us in guiding the Sudanese along the path of political evolu-
tion. To insist, however, as certain Egyptians do, that there is no
distinction between the Sudanese and Egyptian peoples is simply to
ignore the facts, and such an attitude can only tend to increase the diffi-
culty of obtaining the close and intimate association and understanding
which we should be glad to see develop between them.'
I now come to the Suez Canal. The House will share my regret
that the Egyptian Government have not yet been fit to modify their
attitude over the restrictions which they continue to maintain in defiance
of world opinion on the free passage of shipping in the Suez Canal. In
common with the other great maritime Powers, we have done everything
open to us through diplomatic channels to persuade the Egyptian Gov-
ernment of the injustice and unreasonableness of these restrictions and
to induce them to put an end to them by spontaneous action.
Unfortunately our efforts have borne little fruit and the matter is
now before the Security Council of the United Nations. It may be that
the Security Council will find that, since the permanent armistice regime
has been in uninterrupted operation between Egypt and Israel for well
over two years, there is no reasonable ground for the continued discri-
mination against international shipping in the Canal or for the ban
which prevents oil from the Persian Gulf from reaching the great Haifa


refineries. This irresponsible action on the part of the Egyptian Govern-
ment is causing at least as much damage and distress to innocent third
parties as it is to the intended victims. It is intolerable that the maritime
nations should t>e expected to suffer, apparently, indefinitely from an
abusive practice which has neither practical nor moral justification.
Moreover, whatever the immediate purpose of these restrictions,
their effect is to retard rather than advance the prospects of a peaceful
settlement of differences between the Arab States and Israel, to which
both parties are committed on their own declarations. All maritime
Powers have responsibilities as well as interests, and Egypt especially
so. I think that we have the right to expect that in her unique geograph-
ical position Egypt should set an example of international conduct rather
than abuse this position to flout maritime tradition and international
convention in the way she is doing in the Suez Canal and in the Gulf
of Aqaba.


(10+ 1/115/51 G)
17th August, 1951.
Monsieur le President du Conseil et Cher Ami,
Je suis charge de faire parvenir a Votre Excellence un message
personnel de la part de Monsieur Morrison dont le texte se trouve
ci-inclus.
Je vous exprime mes regrets les plus vifs qu’a cause d’une indispo-
sition legere, je suis empeche de vous faire livrer le message moi-meme.
Je saisis, cependant, cette occasion, Monsieur le President, pour
renouveler a Votre Excellence I’assurance de ma tres haute conside-
ration.
(Signe): Ralph Skrine Stevenson.
Son Excellence
Mustapha El Nahas Pacha,
President du Conseil des Ministres.


As I am leaving this week for a short holiday, I want to take this
opportunity to send Your Excellency this personal message. I am con-
cerned that while I am away, something might be said or done which
might close the door conclusively to further talks between our two Gov-
ernments about defence questions and The Sudan. I have no intention
or have His Majesty’s Government any intention of saying or doing
anything which might make further talks impossible. On the contrary
I am urgently considering a definite new approach to the solution of
the defence question and I intend to give this further thought while I
am away. I feel confident that Your Excellency meanwhile would not
wish that on your side anything should be done at this juncture which
might prejudice the possibility of reaching a settlement satisfactory to
both sides.'
TRADUCTION
Comme j’ai I’intention de partir cette semaine meme en bref conge,
je tiens a saisir cette occasion pour faire parvenir a Votre Excellence ce
message personnel.
Je suis assez trouble en pensant que, pendant mon absence, il pour-
rait survenir une declaration ou une action quelconque, qui egalement
pourrait fermer la porte d’une fagon definitive aux entretiens entre nos
deux Gouvernements sur les questions de la Defense et du Soudan. II
n’y a aucune intention ni de ma part ni de la part du Gouvernement de
Sa Majeste Britannique de faire ou de dire quoi que ce soit qui pourrait
empecher la continuation de ces entretiens. Au contraire, j’examine
d’urgence un nouveau projet definitif pour parvenir a une solution de la
question de la Defense, que j’etudierai plus loin pendant mon absence.
Je suis sur aussi qu’entretemps, Votre Excellence ne voudrait pas que,
du cote egyptien, une action quelconque soit entreprise en ce moment,
qui nuirait a la possibility d’atteindre a un accord qui serait acceptable
pour nos deux Gouvernements.


No. 213
(10+ 1/116/51 G)
17th August, 1951.
Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to inform Your Excellency that I have been
instructed to convey to you the enclosed personal message from Mr.
Morrison.
I very much regret that an indisposition prevents me from deli-
vering this message in person as I would normally have done.
I have the honour to be,
With the highest consideration,
Monsieur le Ministre,
Your Excellency’s most obedient Servant,
(Sgd.) Ralph Skrine Stevenson.
His Excellency
Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha,
Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Alexandria.
PERSONAL MESSAGE FROM MR. MORRISON
I was much concerned to learn from your speech in the Chamber
on August 6th that you had the impression that my statement in the
House of Commons on July 30th closed the door on conversations that
have been proceeding between out two Governments. This was very
far from my intention and by now you will have the full text of what
I said which I think will help you. I wish to assure you that it is still
my most earnest wish to reach a settlement of our common problems
which will meet the essential requirements of both sides. lam leaving
this week for a short holiday, and intend to take advantage of it to
consider further a definite new approach to the solution of the defence
question. Meanwhile I sincerely trust that nothing may be done to
prejudice the possibility of realising the objective which we both have
at heart.


PRESS STATEMENT
A speech made by Mr. Herbert Morrison, the British Foreign
Secretary, in the course of a Debate on the Middle East in the House of
Commons on July 30th, was the subject of considerable comment in the
Egyptian press at the beginning of the month. Egyptian newspapers
have also reported that His Excellency, Dr. Salah Eddine Pasha referred
to Mr. Morrison’s speech in his statement on Anglo-Egyptian relations
in the Senate and Chamber of Deputies on August 6th.
Believing as I do that the majority of the Egyptian people desire, no
less sincerely than the British people do, a fair and friendly settlement
of all the matters under discussion between our two Governments, I
have been sorry to see that many of Egyptian newspapers have placed
a wholly mistaken construction on the speech of the British Foreign
Secretary and that some have gone so far as to inform their readers
that, in consequence of Mr. Morrison’s statement, “the door is closed on
the conversations” between our two Governments.
It is most important, I believe, that where opinions or policies are
based on interpretations of words spoken by a Statesman, the exact
words used should be put before the public so that they may rightly
judge the truth or falsity of the interpretations placed upon them.
What in fact did Mr. Morrison say about Anglo-Egyptian relations
on July 30th ? The full text of his speech and of the remarks of all other
members of the House of Commons who took part in that Debate is now
available for everyone to read in the official Report (Hansard).
Far from declaring, or even implying, that the “door was closed on
negotiations,” Mr. Morrison said :
“I believe that one of the cornestones on which stability and
security in the Middle East must rest is friendship and co-operation
between us and Egypt in the various fields in which we have com-
mon interests. We are well aware of the difficulties which face the
Egyptian Government and we have tried to approach our common
problems with patience and understanding of those difficulties. We
know that the stand taken by Egypt has its roots deep in the past,
and we have tried to take account of that fact.”
No-one who has read Mr. Morrison’s speech can fail to see the
absurdity and illogicality of alleging that it is the British Government
which wants to break off negotiations for an equitable agreement with
Egypt. With the utmost clarity the Foreign Secretary has emphasised
that His Majesty’s Government’s policy is the very contrary of this.
Their policy, he says, is :
“to place Anglo-Egyptian relations on a footing which will both
preserve the best elements in the close relationship which has long


linked our two countries and will, at the same time, take account of
the realities of the dangerous situation in which the civilised world
finds itself today.”
Why does the British Government so earnestly desire to place its
relations with Egypt on such a footing ? The answer is that the British
people are profoundly aware that they have the Egyptian people a
common interest in the defence of peace and the values of the civilised
world. The British people are aware of the danger that threatens the
free world today ; they cannot believe that the Egyptian people are not
equally aware of it since, in Mr. Morrison’s words : “Situated as Egypt
is on the bridge between two continents and upon a vital link in the sea
communications between the Eastern and W’estern hemispheres, she is
an objective of first importance for any aggressive Power in the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Levant.” The British Government have never
refused to take into account Egyptian national sentiments but they urge
Egypt to recognise, as Mr. Morrison says, "that it is unrealistic for her
to pretend that she can avoid danger by refusing to allow us to share
in the defensive organisation of the area. She can no more stand alone
in the defence of her own territory than we can in the defence of our
country.”
There is not the slightest question of denying or infringing on
Egypt’s rights ag a sovereign nation. That is made abundantly clear in
Mr. Morrison’s speech :
“In common with our North Atlantic and Commonwealth
Allies, our own people have assumed a great burden in time of peace
in order to make the world safe for those countries with whom we
share a common heritage and civilisation. We invite Egypt’s
partnership as an equal in this common effort to make the world
safe. We want to place our relationship on an entirely new basis,”
It is hard to see how the British Government’s view of the relations
they desire to have with Egypt could be put in plainer terms and I per-
sonally find it difficult to believe that, if these words of Mr. Morrison’s
had been truly reported in Egypt, the Egyptian people would believe
either that the British Government are seeking to break off negociations
or that in our conversations they have sought anything but the best
means of serving our common interest while respecting Egypt’s rights
as a free and equal member of the community of free nations to which we
belong.
August 17th, 1951.


PRESS STATEMENT
When Mr. Herbert Morrison, British Foreign Secretary, made a
statement in the House of Commons in the course of a Debate on Middle
East on 30th July, 1951, news agencies including Reuters flashed the main
parts of his speech all over the world and Egyptian Press gave special
publicity particularly to those parts of the speech dealing with Egypt.
On the full text of the statement being published by Hansard Reports, it
was ascertained that the parts published by the Egyptian Press of Mr.
Morrison’s statement completely correspond with the text as given by
the Reports. The Egyptian Press comments on Mr. Morrison’s speech as
derived from correspondents and news agencies cannot therefore be re-
garded as hasty or erroneous since these comments had actually been
made on Mr. Morrison’s speech as delivered in the House of Commons.
The Egyptian Press could not, of course, have postponed their comment
on such an important statement until the arrival of the official reports.
The spontaneous effect of the statement on the Egyptian Press and
Egyptian public opinion was extremely bad. Everybody felt that the
statement closed the door on the talks proceeding between the Egyptian
and British Governments. But it seems that British circles could not
understand how Mr. Morrison’s statement could create such an impres-
sion devoid as it was of a concrete reference to closing the door on con-
versations and including passages deemed by those circles as satisfactory
to the Egyptian Government and the Egyptian people.
But irrespective of the effect of these very same passages on Egypt-
ian public opinion, which can only view them in the light of Egypt’s
national rights, it seems that the said circles have forgotten that the
statement included other passages which constitute a definite negation
to those rights and are completely irreconciliable with the Egyptian
viewpoint.
In his statement Mr. Morrison says : “Unfortunately our patience
and understanding have not always been reciprocated, and we are still
faced with uncompromising insistence on demands which bear no relation
to present-day realities.”
He also says : “The problem of the presence of British troops in
Egypt is not now a purely Anglo-Egyptian problem. We are a power
bearing responsibilities in the Middle East on behalf of the rest of the
Commonwealth and the Western Allies as a whole.”
Also : “We want to plan our relationship on an entirely new basis.
If Egypt rejects that invitation, we cannot allow that to prejudice the
fulfilment of our international responsibilities.”
This last passage is obviously not lacking in threat and hints at
having recourses to force if need be.


As regards The Sudan, Mr. Morrison says : “Here, again, we are
faced with certain prejudices which prevent the Egyptian Government
from approaching the problem in a realistic frame of mind.”
He also says : “The Sudanese people, though mixed in race and
religion, have advanced rapidly in the political, social and economic
spheres to become a well-ordered, self-reliant community.”
Also : “To insist, however, as certain Egyptians do, that there is
no distinction between the Sudanese and the Egyptian people is simply
to ignore the facts, and such an attitude can only tend to increase the
difficulty of obtaining the close and intimate association and understand-
ing which we should be glad to see develop between them.”
The style of Mr. Morrison’s statement and the manner in which it
is formulated are not, however, as important as the meaning and objec-
tives of his words. Doubtless, any Egyptian reading the complete text
of Mr. Morrison’s statement would come to one conclusion, i.e., the in-
sistence of the British Government on the following :
1 The continuation of the occupation of Egypt by British forces.
2 Joint defence in peace time.
3 Justification of the above two points by a new British claim,
namely, that Britain bears responsibilities in the Middle East on
behalf of the rest of the Commonwealth and the Western Allies
as a whole.
4 The denial of the unity of Egypt and The Sudan, that natural
and historical unity supported by irrefutable legal arguments,
indeed by past actions of Britain herself as illustrated by the
Fashoda incident.
5 Separating the Egyptians and the Sudanese by various means
and pretexts and using the Sudan Government dual in name
but British in fact to achieve this end.
No one can fail to see the wide gap between the above and Egypt’s
rights, namely, the immediate evacuation by land, sea and air of British
forces from Egypt and The Sudan and the unity of both under the
Egyptian Crown.
If we add to the foregoing that Mr. Morrison’s statement came as
an overt conclusion of the long and arduous discussions between the two
Governments lasting over fifteen months during which the Egyptian
side spared no effort to reconcile Britain’s interests to Egypt’s rights and
to find a practical solution for every difficulty, the absurdity and illogic-
ality of alleging that Mr. Morrison’s statement did not close the door
will be clearly shown.
August 20th, 1951.


PERSONNELLE
Alexandrie, le 26 Aout 1951.
Monsieur I’Ambassadeur et Cher Ami,
Me referant a notre entretien du 8 aout 1951, et en reponse a votre
Note de meme date et a votre lettre personnelle du 9 aout 1951, j’ai
I’honneur d’exposer ce qui suit:
1. Le texte du discours de Monsieur Morrison que vous m’avez
transmis ne differe pas de ce qui a ete public par la presse egyptienne
d’apres Reuter et que nous avions sous les yeux lors de la preparation
du discours prononce par le Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres d’Egypte
devant les deux Chambres du Parlement, Lundi dernier, 6 Aout 1951.
Mais de plus, le texte transmis par Votre Excellence contient des termes
que la presse n’a pas publie et qui sont plus severes envers les droits
nationaux de I’Egypte et sont encore plus loin de les reconnaitre.
2. En fait, I’attitude du Gouvernement Britannique a atteint, du
point de vue pratique, un degre equivalent a la fermeture de la porte aux
pourparlers longtemps avant que le discours de Monsieur Morrison ne
fut prononce. Apres des conversations longues et ardues, qui avaient
dure plus de dix mois et dans lesquelles le cote egyptien avait deploye
tous ses efforts pour concilier les interets Britanniques avec les droits
nationaux de I’Egypte, dont il est impossible de se departir, les proposi-
tions que vous avez remises le 11 Avril 1951 au Ministre des Affaires
Etrangeres d’Egypte furent aussi loin que possible de tenir compte des
droits nationaux de I’Egypte. Nous n’avons jusqu’a present re?u aucune
reponse a la partie de nos contre-propositions relative a I’evacuation, bien
que ces contre-propositions aient ete remises a Votre Excellence le 24
Avril 1951 et que plus de trois mois et demise soient ecoules depuis, et
malgre les nombreux rappels du Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres d'E-
gypte, rappel dont le dernier eut lieu dans I’entrevue du 26 Juillet 1951.
Votre reponse fut alors la suivante :
“I can hold out no hope of a speedy reply from His Majesty’s
Government on defence matters for reasons which I have already
explained. In the meantime it seems to me that we have reached a
deadlock and I can only express the hope that you will not say
anything irrevocable in Parliament which will make it difficult to
resume negotiations.”
Quant a I’unite de I’Egypte et du Soudan, les trois entrevues que
vous avez cues avec le Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres d’Egypte, les
6, 13 et 26 Juillet 1951, ont montre la profondeur de I’abime qui separe
les points de vue des deux Gouvernement a ce sujet, et ce non point
parce que I’Egypte veut que le genre de relations qui lient le Soudan a
1 Egypte soit impose aux Soudanais sans les consulter comme il est men


tionne dans votre Note, mais bien parce que le Gouvernement Britanni-
que refuse obstinement de reconnaitre les droits de I’Egypte et les realties
des faits historiques et geographiques, ainsi que la volonte de la majorite
ecrasante du Peuple Soudanais dont les manifestations sont si nombreu-
ses, comme le Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres d’Egypte l’a demontre a
plusieurs reprises a Votre Excellence et a feu Monsieur Bevin.
3. II est evident qu’il est impossible de poursuivre indefiniment les
pourparlers. Le Gouvernement Egyptien I’avait deja exprime dans son
Aide-Memoire du 6 Juillet 1951, soit depuis plus d’un mois. On y lit
en effet:
"The Royal Egyptian Government find themselves obliged to
call His Majesty’s Government’s attention to the impossibility of
going on indefinitely with the talks conducted between the two
Parties since July 1950. Hitherto these talks have lasted over a year
without a glimpse of hope towards reaching the desired agreement.
Indeed these talks are no more than a. further link in the chain of
attempts made in vain by Egypt since the end of World War 11,
to impress upon Great Britain the necessity of respecting Egypt’s
rights and of putting a stop to the aggression against her sovereign-
ty and the integrity of her territory. It is obvious that His Majesty’s
Government in the United Kingdom lose nothing by this procras-
tination but it have become extremely difficult for the Royal Egypt-
ian Government and Egyptian public opinion to contemplate any
further prolongation of this state of affairs.”
4. De ce qui precede, vous pouvez constater que le Gouverne-
ment Egyptien ne s’est pas eloigne de la verite en considerant que le
dlscours de Monsieur Morrison avait ferme la porte aux pourparlers.
Veuillez agreer, Excellence, les assurances de ma plus haute consi-
deration.
(Signe): Mustafa El Nahas.
Son Excellence
Sir Ralph Skrine Stevenson, G.C.M.G.,
Ambassadeur Extraordinaire et Plenipotentiaire
de Grande-Bretagne.
Alexandrie.


Réponse du Président du Conseil des Ministres
J’ai remis aujourd'hui, 26 Aout 1951, a S.E. I’Ambassadeur de
Grande-Bretagne ma reponse a sa note du 8 Aout et a sa lettre person-
nelle du lendemain.
Dans ma reponse, j’ai expose les raisons pour lesquelles le Gouver-
nement Egyptien a considere que le discours prononce par Votre Excel-
lence le 30 Juillet 1951 a la Chambre des Communes a ferme la porte aux
entretiens en cours entre nos deux Gouvernements. Cependant, le
message personnel de Votre Excellence, remis au Ministere Egyptien
des Affaires Etrangeres le .17 Aout, comportait un element nouveau, a
savoir que vous examiniez d’urgence un nouveau projet definitif pour
parvenir a une solution de la question de la defense.
Vous n’ignorez pas toutefois que I’evacuation des forces Britanni-
ques n’est que la moitie de la cause Egyptienne, que I’unite de I’Egypte et
du Soudan sous la Couronne Egyptienne en est I’autre et que ces deux
parties constituent un tout indivisible. Or les bases sur lesquelles le
discours de Votre Excellence a ete fonde en ce qui concerne le Soudan
sont en elles-memes suffisantes pour fermer la porte aux entretiens. De
ce cote done, la situation n’a change en den apres votre message per-
sonnel, surtout si les propositions promises relativement a I’evacuation
etaient fondes sur les bases et orientations rapportees dans votre discours
a la Chambre des Communes.
Neanmoins, rien n'equivaudrait a mon contentement si vos susdites
propositions me parvenaient en temps opportun et si le Gouvernement
Egyptien y trouvait les indices pratiques du respect des droits nationaux
de I’Egypte qui I’inciteraient a reconsiderer la situation et modifier ses
plans.


Reply of the Minister of Foreign Affairs
I thank Your Excellency for your personal message handed to me
by the British Embassy on the 17th August, 1951. His Excellency the
Prime Minister has answered to-day 26th August, 1951, to a similar
message addressed to him by Your Excellency.
I have the honour to associate myself with His Excellency in the
said answer.
August 26th 1951.


BRITISH EMBASSY,
ALEXANDRIA.
21st September, 1951.
My dear Minister,
I take pleasure in forwarding you a copy of the personal message
from Mr. Morrison to His Excellency the President of the Council, which
I am this morning handing to him in person.
Believe me,
Yours very sincerely,
(Sgd.): Ralph Skrine Stevenson.
His Excellency
Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha,
Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Bulkeley.
“I was glad to receive Your Excellency’s reply of 26th August to
my message of the Bth August and in particular to note that Your Excel-
lency would welcome the timely arrival of the new proposals to which
I had referred. I can assure Your Excellency that it has been one of my
main preoccupations to bring these proposals into a final form with the
least delay. Since they involve consultation with other Governments
closely concerned, I am not yet in a position to indicate precisely a date
for these discussions with the Egyptian Government but I anticipate that
it will be in the near future. I regret Your Excellency should have felt
my remarks in Parliament on 30th July in any way closed the door to
discussion between our two Governments since such was far from my
intention and I hope we shall also shortly be in a position to make fresh
proposals regarding the future of The Sudan which will be acceptable to
the Egyptian Government as a basis for further discussion.”


(1914/161/519)
Confidential
BRITISH EMBASSY,
ALEXANDRIA.
6th October, 1951.
My dear Minister,
I have now been authorised by Mr. Morrison to inform you that I
shall not be returning to London immediately, but that His Majesty’s
Government confidently hope to be able to make a communication to the
Egyptian Government through me by October 10th.
Yours very sincerely,
(Sgd.); Ralph Skrine Stevenson.
His Excellency
Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha,
Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Bulkeley.


STATEMENT IN PARLIAMENT
b y
H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha
President of the Council of Ministers,
on Monday October 8th, 1951
When the treaty of Alliance was signed between Egypt and Great
Britain on August 26, 1936, the danger of a second World War was
rapidly increasing and the differences between the Axis Powers and
Britain and her Allies were intensifying from day to day.
The ambitions of Fascist Italy were turning to the African continent,
encompassing Egypt and The Sudan, particularly on the Western fron-
tier of Egypt and the South-Eastern frontier of The Sudan.
On the other hand, British imperialism was bestriding Egypt. It
was contesting her independence and sovereignty, assuming the right to
protect foreigners, and dominating Egypt’s most important external, in-
ternal and financial affairs, thereby obstructing the country’s progress.
This prevented Egypt from completing her independence and occu-
pying a place commensurate with her position in the concert of Nations.
Moreover, the capitulations were hampering Egypt’s financial, judicial
and administrative sovereignty, thereby wounding Egyptian dignity and
obstructing the country's progress in all walks of national activity.
Besides this, the British had exploited the murder of the Sirdar in
1924 to sever all practical relations with the Sudan by ordering out the
Egyptian Army and officials. The Egyptian Army badly needed to
liberate itself from British control and to obtain the necessary training
and equipment to undertake its all-important task of defending the
Fatherland.
In this circumstances and under the pressure of the foregoing ma-
terial and moral considerations, Egypt was compelled to sign the Treaty
on August 26, 1936.
This was to forestal the coming dangers and evils of the second
World War and to enable her to face consequences as an independent
sovereign state. It was intended to remove the stigma and harmful
effects of the Capitulations and at the same time to restore her practical
relations with The Sudan, the southern part of the Fatherland, and to
start immediately with the training and equipment of the Egyptian Army
in accordance with the British Government’s undertakings in the Treaty
in order to enable it to replace the British Forces.


When World War II broke out in 1939, Egypt rendered invaluable
assistance to Britain and her Allies, and shared great sacrifices with
them. Egypt’s contribution was an important factor in the winning of
the war, as was recognised by many leading British statesmen and mili-
tary men, including Lord Alexander, Mr. Winston Churchill, Mr.
Anthony Eden and Mr. Ernest Bevin.
With the victory of the Allied nations in the war, the international
circumstances in which the 1936 Treaty was signed, completely changed.
The Axis powers, which provoked the Treaty, had been utterly defeated
and the danger they threatened had disappeared.
On the other hand, the victorious powers considered themselves a
united bloc and participated in the setting up of a new international
organisation regulating world affairs. The U.N. Charter, signed in San
Francisco in June, 1945, served this purpose.
At the same time the Charter established a new basis for interna-
tional relations, totally different from the basis of the 1936 Treaty. It
forbids war as a means for settling international disputes and demands
their settlement by peaceful means. It also prohibits aggression on the
independence and unity of member countries and provides that member
countries are entitled to decide their own destiny.
Furthermore, it provides for complete sovereignty between member
states and, should there be any contradiction between the obligations of
member states under the Charter and those of any other instrument, then
the Charter must be supreme.
In view of all this and the unanimity of the Egyptian people in
claiming their rights to the complete evacuation of British forces from
Egypt and The Sudan, and the unity of the Nile Valley under the
Egyptian Crown, the Egyptian Government entered into negotiations
for the reconsideration of the 1936 Treaty and its substitution by other
provisions conforming with the new international conditions.
These negotiations, which ran from the beginning of April until the
end of October, 1946, culminated in the Sidky-Bevin draft treaty, in
which the two parties differed on The Sudan protocol attached to it.
The draft treaty was initialled but public opinion in Egypt was
unanimous in rejecting it on account of its failure to realise the national
demands.
On July 8, 1947, the Egyptian Government took the dispute between
her and Britain to the Security Council, demanding the complete and
early evacuation of British forces from Egypt and The Sudan, and the
ending of the administrative regime existing in The Sudan.
The Security Council held eleven meetings between August 5 and
September 10, 1947, but failed to take any decision because none of the
draft resolutions put forward in this connection obtained the necessary
majority.
Nevertheless, all the draft resolutions were unanimous in calling on
both parties to the dispute to resume direct negotiations for its settlement
by mutual agreements. The President of the Security Council then de


cided to retain the complaint on the Agenda, and there the matter
remained.
The Egyptian Government then exchanged with The Sudan Admi-
nistration and the British Government various proposals for adminis-
trative and legislative reforms in The Sudan. These were followed by
conversations between the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
the British Ambassador which began on May 6 and ended on May 28,
1948.
But all these endeavours met with failure, and the two parties could
not come to an agreement even within the limited scope which did not
cover unity between Egypt and The Sudan.
In January, 1951, a general election was held in Egypt which re-
sulted in the advent to power of the present Government. In these
elections the unanimity of the Egyptian People on their demands showed
itself once again.
The Cabinet had referred to this unprecedented unanimity in the
Throne Speech opening the first session of the 19th Parliament.
The nation was completely agreed on the necessity of liberating our
Valley, Egypt and The Sudan, from the restrictions of its liberty and
independence in order to restore its past glory and to occupy the proper
place commensurate with its position in the international field.
The Cabinet had at once begun to fulfil its promise and had consi-
dered that the first step to be taken was to attempt to come to an agree-
ment with the British. It entered on a long series of contacts and con-
versations in the hope that they would be convinced by the Egyptian
arguments and comply with the verdict of justice.
The conversations were protracted, but the Cabinet maintained
wisdom and patience. It did not show any obstinacy or haste, but faced
the problems in a practical manner and suggested measures for recon-
ciling Egypt's national rights, from which there could be no deviation,
and the international circumstances which the British advanced as an
argument in support of their case.
But none of this succeeded in convincing the British to respect
Egypt’s rights had they really wished to retain Egyptian friendship. The
Government could therefore see no alternative but to announce in the
Throne Speech, in November, 1950, that there was no alternative but
to abrogate the 1936 Treaty and that the Government would without
hesitation, proceed towards realising national objectives and would resort
to every possible step to achieve its object, thanks to the support of
Parliament and the nation.
Foremost among these measures was to announce the ending of
the 1936 Treaty and the two Condominium Agreements of January 16,
and July 10, 1899, concerning the dual rule of The Sudan.
The conversations continued and the Egyptian Minister of Foreign
Affairs went to London where he had long talks with the British Foreign
Minister. These discussions ended on December 15, 1950, in the
British Foreign Minister taking a decision to submit to the British


Cabinet, in a purely personal capacity, proposals for a new solution of
the defence problem. The Cabinet then asked its advisers to discuss
immediately these proposals and the Foreign Minister expressed the hope
that he would be able to inform the Egyptian Government of the result
of this in the middle of January, 1951, or shortly afterwards.
But the promised proposals only reached the Egyptian Government
on April 11, 1951, three months after the date fixed and even then they
were far from realising Egyptian national demands.
On April 24, 1951, the Egyptian Government sent a refusal to these
proposals, both as a whole and in detail, and at the same time made
certain counter proposals regarding complete evacuation and unity of
Egypt and The Sudan. The British promised to study these counter-
proposals and to give their reply, but this was only received on June
8, 1951.
The conversations were then resumed on the Sudan and while the
talks were proceeding slowly the British Foreign Minister made his
well-known statement in the House of Commons on July 30, 1951. In
this he announced the British Government’s insistence on occupation and
joint defence in peacetime, under the plea of international necessity, and
further announced its objection to unity of Egypt, and The Sudan under
the Egyptian Crown on the grounds that it was necessary to seek the
will of the Sudanese people.
This statement was a clear indication of the deep gulf separating the
two parties because of the British Government’s insistence on an anti-
quated imperialist policy unduly assuming responsibilities and obli-
gations and resisting national demands by various pretexts.
On August 6, 1951, the Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs replied
to the British Foreign Minister’s statement by declaring in the Parliament
that the British Minister of Foreign Affairs had, by his recent Commons
statement, closed the door to further talks. On August 17, however, the
British Foreign Minister sent a personal message denying that he had
closed the door, adding that, on the contrary, he was urgently discussing
a new proposal for dealing with the defence questions.
In reply I explained the reasons why the Egyptian Government had
considered the Commons statement had closed the door on the conver-
sations, at the same time stressing that the evacuation of British forces
was only a part of the Egyptian question : there was also the matter of
unity between Egypt and The Sudan under the Egyptian Crown, both
were one and the same question, the statement on the Sudan was alone
sufficient reason for closing the door on negotiations. Therefore the
personal message had not changed the situation. Nevertheless, would
have been delighted if his promised proposals arrived in time and were
found to respect Egypt’s right, because Egypt would then have been
prepared to reconsider the situation.
This reply was sent on August 26, but the promised British proposals
had not been received. On September 21, however, I received another
personal message from the British Foreign Minister saying that he could
not fix a definite date for sending his proposals although he expected to


do so shortly and he hoped also to be able to send new proposals about
the future of The Sudan which would be acceptable to tire Egyptian
Government as a basis for further negotiations.
I asked H.E. the British Ambassador, who handed me this personal
message, to inform the British Foreign Minister that the Egyptian Gov-
ernment was bound to announce its policy in Parliament before ending
the present Parliamentary session at the beginning of October at the
latest, and therefore the new British proposals on the basis of realising
Egypt’s national demands must arrive before that date.
This is the history of the negotiations and needless to say, the
British had not lost anything from this procrastination ; occupation con-
tinues in the Suez Canal area and The Sudan, and British administration
in The Sudan continues its endeavours to separate The Sudan from
Egypt under the cloak of dual rule.
As regards Egypt, it was impossible to remain patient any longer
and to continue negotiations which had lasted over 16 months. They
were the last link in the chain of endeavours made in vain by Egypt to
obtain her national rights and to convince Britain of the necessity of
respecting these rights.
Therefore, I considered my duty, now that the Parliamentary session
has lasted eleven months, to announce that the Egyptian Government
felt that the proper time, referred to in my reply to Mr. Morrison’s
personal message, has passed conversations must cease because it
was clear that they were futile.
Since the termination of the second World War the continued effort
for the realisation of the country’s demands by negotiation had proved a
failure, it was time for the Government to fulfil its promise in the last
Speech from the Throne, and take the necessary steps for the abroga-
tion of the 1936 Treaty and the two conventions of 19th January and
10th July, 1899, concerning the administration of The Sudan.
Therefore I deposit at the Chamber of Deputies Office the follow-
ing draft decree-laws :
I. A draft decree-law amending Articles 159 and 160 of the
Constitution to decide the constitutional position of The Sudan and to
define the title of the King.
We Farouk I King of Egypt.
After taking cognisance of Royal Decree No. 42, 1923, setting up
a constitutional regime to the Egyptian States ; of Articles 156 and 157
of the Constitution ; and upon what has been submitted to us by the
Council of Ministers.
We order the following :
Article I.
Parliament is invited to consider amending Articles 159 and 160 of
the Constitution to decide the constitutional position of The Sudan and
to define the title of the King.


Article 11.
The President of our Council of Ministers is hereby charged with
the execution of this decree.
11. A draft decree-law providing that the King shall be entitled
King of Egypt and The Sudan.
We Farouk 1 King of Egypt.
After taking cognisance of Royal Decree No. 42, 1923, setting up
a constitutional regime to the State of Egypt; of Articles 156 and 157
of the Constitution: of the Decree issued on October 7, 1951, suggest-
ing the amendment of some provisions of the Constitution ; and of the
two decisions of Parliament approving the necessity of such amendment.
We order the following :
The following draft law is to be submitted in Our name to
Parliament;—
Article I,
Article 159 of the Constitution shall be abolished and the following
substituted :
The provisions of this Constitution shall apply to all the Egyptian
Kingdom. Although Egypt and The Sudan are one country, the regime
of rule in The Sudan shall be defined by a special law.
Article 11.
Article 160 of the Constitution shall be abolished and the following
substituted :
“The King shall be entitled King of Egypt and the Sudan.”
Article 111.
The President of the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Jus-
tice are hereby charged with the execution of this law which will become
operative as from the date of its promulgation in the “Journal Officiel.”
111. A draft decree-law abrogating the 1936 Treaty of Friend-
ship and Alliance between Egypt and Great Britain signed in London
on August 26, 1936 and the Condominium Agreements of January 19
and July 10, 1899 regarding the administration of The Sudan.
We Farouk I King of Egypt.
Upon what has been submitted to us by the Council of Ministers.
We order the following :
The following draft law is to be submitted in Our name to
Parliament:—
Article I.
Law No. 80, 1936, ratifying the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance
between Egypt and Great Britain and which was signed in London on


August 26, 1936, shall be rescinded. Thus, the provisions of this Treaty
and the agreement attached thereto concerning exemptions and privileges
enjoyed by the British Forces stationed in the Kingdom of Egypt, as
well as the provisions of the Condominium Agreements of January 19
and July 10, 1899, regarding the administration of The Sudan shall cease
to be operative.
Article 11.
Law No. 13 and Law No. 24, 1941, relative to exemptions and
privileges referred to in the preceding Article.
Article 111.
Our Ministers are hereby charged with the exacution of this law,
each in so far as he is concerned and with taking the necessary measures
in the respect.
It will become operative as from the date of its promulgation in the
“Journal Officiel.”
Issued at Montazah Palace on Al-Moharram 6, 1371 (October 7,
1951).
FAROUK.
By order of His Majesty ;
President of the Council of Ministers
(Moustapha El Nahas)
Minister of Public Works
(Osman Moharram)
Minister of Interior
(Fuad Sirag Eddin)
Minister of Finance
(Fuad Sirag Eddin)
Minister of Foreign Affairs
(Mohamed Salah Eddin)
Minister of Commerce and Industry
(Mahmud Soliman Ghannam)
Minister of Social Affairs
(Abdul Fattah Hassan)
Minister of Justice
(Mohamed Mohamed El Wakil)
Minister of Supply
(Ahmed Hamza)
Minister of Education
(Taha Hussein)
Minister of Rural and Municipal Affairs
(Ibrahim Farag)
Minister of Health
(Abdul Gawad Hussein)


Acting Minister of National Economy
(Mohamed Mohamed El Wakil)
Acting Minister of Communications
(Abdel Megid Abdul Hakk)
Acting Minister of War and Marine
(Abdul Fattah Hassan)
Minister of Agriculture
(Abdul Latif Mahmud)
Minister of Wakfs
(Hussein Mohamed El Gindy)
Minister of State
(Abdul Megid Abdul Hakk).
IV. A draft decree-law providing that The Sudan shall have
a special Constitution to be drawn up by a Constituent Assembly re-
presenting the inhabitants of The Sudan.
We Farouk 1, King of Egypt and The Sudan.
After taking cognisance of Law No. , 1951, abrogating the
Treaty of August 26, 1936, and its annexes and also abrogating the
Condominium Agreements of January 19 and July 10, 1899, concerning
the administration of The Sudan and also after taking cognisance of
Article 159 of Royal Order No. 42, 1923, setting up a constitutional
regime to the State of Egypt.
And upon what has been submitted to us by the Council of Ministers.
We order the following :
The following draft law is to be submitted in Our name to
Parliament:—
Article I.
The Sudan shall have a special Constitution to be drawn up by a
Constituent Assembly representing the inhabitants of The Sudan and
shall be enforced as soon as sanctioned and promulgated by the King.
The Constituent Assembly will also draw up an electoral law to become
operative in The Sudan after its ratification and promulgation.
Article 11.
The rules and procedures of the Constituent Assembly shall be defined
in a decree.
Article 111.
The Constitution referred to in Article I is to contain the following
fundamental rules :
a) To establish democratic and parliamentary rule in the country,
whether the parliamentary body consists of one House or two, on con-
dition that one of the two Houses at least shall be entirely elective.


The King is entitled to dissolve the parliamentary body or the
elected House only if the parliamentary body is composed of two Houses.
A new general election is to be held after a short interval in order to
ensure the continuance of parliamentary control over the executive
authority.
b) To separate the legislative, executive and judicial authorities.
c) To establish a Council of Ministers composed of Sudanese.
The King shall exercise his prerogatives through the Ministers and shall
appoint and dismiss his Ministers. The Ministers shall be jointly res-
ponsible to Parliament or to the elected House, at least for the general
policy of the Cabinet and each of them shall be responsible for his
Ministry.
d) The parliamentary body shall participate with the King in
practising the legislative authority including the introduction of legisla-
tion. No law shall be issued unless approved by Parliament and sanc-
tioned by the King.
The Parliament body must consent beforehand to the imposition of
new taxes, their modification or abolition, and to the floating of loans
and to the annual Budget estimates.
e) The independence of the judiciary shall be guaranteed.
f) Rights of individuals, public and personal liberties, liberty of
belief, freedom of opinion, liberty of the Press, liberty of assembly and
of association, shall be guaranteed within the limits of the law.
Article IV
As an exception of the provisions of the preceding Articles, foreign
affairs and matters of defence, the Army and currency, shall be exercised
by the King throughout the country within the limits of Royal Order
No. 42, 1923, establishing a constitutional government in the State of
Egypt.
Article V
The President of our Council of Ministers is hereby charged with
the execution of this law.
The Government shortly will publish a Green Book containing all
documents and proceedings connected with the talks so that Parliament
and Public opinion should know the full facts of the situation and so
that the whole world may know that we have not been obstinate or
hasty, but only insisting on our rights, while the British maintains their
antiquated imperialistic ideas which are a danger to world peace.
In view of all this, I feel it is unnecessary for me to justify the
enactment of these laws and to comment on them, but I wish to cite
instances in support of unilateral action :
1) In 1871, Czarist Russia abrogated the Paris Treaty of March, 1856,
on the neutrality of the Black Sea.


2) In 1884, the United States of America abrogated the Anglo-
. American Treaty of 1850 signed on April 19, 1850. For the digging
of a maritime canal in Central America.
3) On December 9, 1905, France abrogated the Concordat of July 15,
1801, concluded between her and the Pope.
4) On October 3, 1908, Austria-Hungary abrogated the Berlin Treaty
of 1878 by annexing Bosnia and Harsak to her territory.
5) On October 5, 1908, Bulgaria abrogated the Berlin Treaty by pro-
claiming itself a free independent State.
6) On September 9, 1914, Turkey abrogated the capitulatory regime
instituted in virtue of international obligations.
7) In 1919, China abrogated the two Treaties of 1913 and 1915 with
Russia and Mongolia.
8) Between 1917 and 1924, the Soviet Government abrogated the
political and economic treaties which were concluded by Czarist
Russia.
9) Between 1926 and 1928 China abrogated the unequal treaties to
which she was a party.
10) In 1932 France ceased to pay war debts due to the United States
of America in virtue of an agreement signed on April 29, 1926.
11) In November, 1933, the Free Irish State abrogated the Anglo-Irish
treaty signed on December 6, 1921.
12) On September 13, 1934, Poland abrogated her international obli-
gations concerning the protection of minorities.
13) On March 16, 1935, Germany abrogated that part of the Versailles
Treaty affecting her.
14) In March, 1936, Germany abrogated Locarno Treaty.
15) On April 1, 1936, Austria abrogated that part of Saint Germain
Treaty affecting her.
16) In December, 1938, the Japanese Government abrogated the Nine-
Power Agreement signed in Washington on February 6, 1922, con-
cerning the principles to be followed and the attitude to be taken
to China.
17) In June, 1939, Germany abrogated the German-Polish Declaration
issued on January 26, 1934, providing that there should be no re-
course to the use of force.
18) In June, 1939, Germany abrogated the naval agreement signed
between her and England on June 18, 1935.
Here are numerous examples and precedents, which are varied
enough in dates and circumstances unilateral denunciation of interna-
tional agreements. Most of the countries, which had, it may be said,
that recourse to such a step backed their action by material force. But
this is not the case with us.
We are backing up our use with our rights, justice and the principles
contained in the Atlantic Charter. None of the precedents which have
been cited can be compared to our good cause.


Here, in brief, are our reasons :
1. This Treaty was concluded during the British occupation.
Egypt did not enjoy then complete freedom. This is not a new
point of view which we are voicing for the first time to justify our atti-
tude. It was also the opinion of a British Foreign Minister, the late Mr.
Ernest Bevin, who told the Security Council during the examination of
the Russo-Iranian dispute : “The British Government cannot recognise
any agreement forced upon the Government of Iran against its will and
while the Soviet Union continues to occupy part of Iran.”
The Security Council accepted this point of view. Its resolution
contained a paragraph which said that the presence of foreign troops on
the soil of another state hampered its liberty of action in any negotiations.
That was the decision taken by the Security Council in connection
with treaties concluded during the occupation of a country. That is also
true of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, which was concluded while
Britain was still in occupation of the whole of Egypt, and not of part of
it, as was the case in Iran.
I want to explain that I mean by pressure due to the occupation of
the country. I did not want it believed that Egypt had been compelled
to conclude a treaty. What I wanted to point out was the moral pressure
caused by occupation, the interference in the country’s affairs, which
was prejudicial to its interest and the fact that the capitulations increased
the stranglehold. We wanted to get rid of all this. We wished to find
an opening which at the same time was the first step towards unity and
independence.
2. The changing circumstances under which the Treaty was
concluded. This subject was dealt at length earlier.
3. The Treaty is in contradiction of the Suez Canal Convention
and the United Nations Charter. The Suez Canal convention was
signed before the Treaty of 1936, by a large number of states, whose
object was to safeguard freedom of traffic. This convention forbids its
signatories from gaining any regional advantages commercial or
otherwise —in the Canal. Egypt was solely entrusted with the defence
and liberty of passage of the Canal. This was completely ignored by the
Treaty of 1936 : which is Only a mass of privileges annexed by Britain
to the detriment of Egyptian sovereignty and independence. Great Bri-
tain had no right, under the 1888 Convention, from taking advantage of
circumstances to gain such privileges.
We have demonstrated the contradiction between the United Na-
tions Charter and the 1936 Treaty. It goes without saying how much
more important that Charter is, and that its provisions should prevail
over those of the 1936 Treaty.
4. ■ — Great Britain has more than once contravened this Treaty.
The English follow the Treaty only where it treats of the occupation of
the country and the lack of recognition for the unity of Egypt and The
Sudan. All the obligations and the restrictions imposed on them count
for nothing. They station their soldiers in a greater number than is


allowed by the Treaty and occupy areas greater than those laid down
under it. They refuse to submit themselves to the Customs and quaran-
tine formalities established by the Egyptian laws. They obstruct the
training and equipment of the Egyptian Army, in place of aiding and
strengthening it in accordance with their obligations. In the Palestine
question they have followed and they continue to follow a policy which
cannot be otherwise qualified than as an enemy policy. Thus exposing
Egypt to the gravest dangers.
It clearly follows from what precedes that Egypt acted within the
limits of its legal and in international rights in abolising the 1936 Treaty
and in putting an end to its provisions. Such is also the case, and for
the same reasons, where the abolition of the 1899 agreements is con-
cerned. What is more, their case is even simpler. For at the time they
were concluded, Egypt did not possess the right to conclude political
treaties. Moreover, pressure is evident as much in the contents of these
agreements as in the circumstances which preceded their conclusion.
These agreements signed by the representatives of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and of Great Britain relate to the Administration of The
Sudan, but do not envisage the date at which the situation they define
should come to an end. This situation was provisional, dictated by the
British authority in Egypt at that time.
To put an end to the application of these two agreements, a Minis-
terial decree from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would have sufficed.
But seeing that these two agreements form part of the great national
cause, we have preferred to possess your approval. Also, the end of
the application of these two agreements has been provided for in the
proposed law for the abolition of the 1936 Treaty and its provisions.
By the abolition of the Treaty on one hand and of these two agree-
ments on the other, the situation of The Sudan reverts of itself to what
it was before the Occupation. Nothing remains but the natural unity
that has tied it from the beginning of time to Egypt. It is, then, only
necessary to make provision for the legal consequences of this situation
by modifying Articles 159 and 160 of the Egyptian Constitution and to
repair what British pressure had imposed on Egypt since the establish-
ment of the Constitution.
Egypt had been obliged to suppress the text relating to the unity
of the Fatherland and to The King’s title as “King of Egypt and the
Sudan.” That is what is allowed by the decree being presented to you,
which suggests the modifications of Articles 159 and 160 of the Consti-
tution as well as the projected law which contains that modification.
OBJECT
It will also be suitable to promulgate a law for the establishment of
a government which will replace in The Sudan that which at present
exists. That is the object of the proposed law which is being presented
to you for that purpose.
It contains the essential principles and the general lines on which
agreement exists between the inhabitants of the north and south of the


country and which guarantees to the Sudanese an entirely autonomous
government and a genuine democratic constitution. The working out
of its details is being left to the Sudanese themselves, details which will
be fixed by the mediation of the Constitutional Assembly which will in
truth represent them.
It is thus that the constitutional provisions will be able to adapt
themselves to the natural unity of Egypt, and the Sudan which dates
back to the most remote times that unity which the British did
not dispute at the beginning since they stated on every occasion
that they acted in the Sudan in the name and on behalf of Egypt, that
unity is so strong that Mr- Churchill himself compared the two parts
of the Nile Valley to the palm tree whose roots are in The Sudan and
whose leaves are in the Delta. He explicitly said that Sudan and Egypt
form one and the same unity which is by its nature inseparable.
It is no longer the time for words but for deeds, for productive
and permanent deeds, deeds not made in noise and anger, but which
have as their basis a careful consideration, the ordering and bringing
together of all ranks to face all eventualities and to demonstrate that
the people of Egypt and the Sudan are not among those that can be
compelled to accept what they do not desire and that do not demand
their right to live.
PRACTICAL STEPS
As for the practical steps to follow, you will approve them one by
one. lam convinced that this eternal nation will know how to rise to
the true height of the situation with which it is brought face to face,
it will arm itself with patience, faith and the power to fight, and will
make every sacrifice to reach the highest aim.
It is fortunate that the Almighty has granted that this decisive Step
in the national struggle should be accomplished during the reign of our
great King, Farouk I, whose birth coincided with that of the revolution
which has realised the aims of Egypt and whose happy and glorious
reign has been accompanied by the great hopes and the great achieve-
ments of this country.
It is for Egypt that I signed the 1936 Treaty and it is for Egypt that
I ask you to denounce it.


STATEMENT
by
H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
and
Chairman of the Egyptian Delegation
before
The United Nations General Assembly
Mr. President,
In this general debate, each of us, in his turn, tries to make his
contribution by throwing as much light as possible on the conditions
and prospects of world peace and the welfare of the peoples of the
United Nations whom we represent.
I have no hesitation in expressing my belief that the leaders of the
world are sincerely endeavouring to serve and to bolster world peace
and world prosperity. Nevertheless, I doubt that in this endeavour they
have chosen the best and the most effective way to attain the worthy
goal which is theirs and which is that of all human society.
We are still as far as we could be from agreeing on the control
and regulations of arms, according to the stipulations of the Charter.
The result has been an appalling increase of the burdens of an already
over-burdened world, with no prospect in sight of putting an end to
the mad race of armaments which, besides its damaging effect upon
the economy of the world, is a source of more and more tension and
anxiety among the peoples of the United Nations and of the world
at large.
My Government, therefore, welcome all constructive suggestions
and efforts, with a view to the carrying out of the stipulations of the
Charter in this respect, and, to quote from Article 26 of the Charter,
“ promoting the establishment and maintenance of international peace
and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human
and economic resources, and the formulation of plans for the establish-
ment of a system for the regulation of armements. ”
We are, furthermore, as far as we could be from translating into
reality the purposes and principles of the United Nations by giving it
the moral and material strength provided for in the Charter, so that
it could fully shoulder its responsibilities and insure the prevalence of
the rule of law in international relations.


I still hope, however, that the United Nations will make another
try or even, if necessary, try again and again until it will have found
the right road to peace and the effective means to preserve it.
Among these means and, in the light of the clear and inspiring
stipulations of the Charter the “ Uniting for Peace ” Resolution which
was adopted during the previous Session of this Assembly, can usefully
be drawn upon. It is, indeed, a resolution which aims at the establish-
ment of robust areas of strength and. Charter-wise, provides for ways
and means to discourage and thwart aggression.
I feel certain that the Members of the United Nations as a whole
and, behind them, the hundreds of millions of human beings whom they
represent, share with me the feeling of disappointment at that, until
now, the spirit and the letter of the Charter are mostly unimplemented,
and the resolution on “ Uniting for Peace ” is still a mere resolution.
Mr. President,
It grieves me to report to you that recent events in the part of
the world from which I come are very discouraging to all those who
have world peace at heart, to all those who have enough insight and
enough foresight to realise the dangers which are increasingly besetting
the road to peace in and around the Middle East.
For sure, you all know a great deal about present conditions in
the Middle East and how they are becoming more and more explosive,
because of the obstinate attachment of some Colonial Powers to methods
and relationships which, even if they had a place at all in the dark
ages of the past, have no place whatsoever in our life today, and are
in complete and screeching dissonance with the Charter of the United
Nations and with what should have been the free and soulful tone of
the first year of the second half of the 20th Century.
The world knows too well how grave the situation, the disputes
and the events are in that sensitive area, ranging from the west coast
of North Africa on the Atlantic Ocean till as Far East as at least the
eastern boundaries of Iran. Many a question in that extremely sensitive
area ars calling loudly for an urgent solution and insistently appealing
to the conscience and the foresight of the wise of the world.
Among these questions I mention as an illustration and in geo-
graphical sequence some to which I have just alluded : Morocco, Libya,
the Nile Valley, Palestine and Iran.
Of the questions of Morocco, Libya and Palestine, you will hear
during the present Session of the Assembly. You have already heard
some mention of the question of Palestine by several speakers who
preceded me, and you will hear some more about it. Most of you will
have read, in this connection, the article in the Herald-Tribune on the
10th of this month by Stewart Alsop, after his visiting Egypt. Mr. Alsop
wrote, among other things : “ It is a political fact that the creation of
the Israeli State has left a festering political wound here, and that the
shameful treatment of the hundreds of thousands of Arab refugees from
Israel acts like a permanent irritant in the wound. ”


The stand of my Government in relation to this question and to
the martyrdom of the people of Palestine, right under the eyes of the
United Nations and of the “ civilised world ”, is too well-known. My
Delegation will, in due course, express the views of the Egyptian Gov-
ernment as to the long-awaited rightful solution of the question of
Palestine.
The policy adapted in relation to this and to other questions of the
Middle East by some Powers which are still enmeshed in antiquated
systems is a policy which clearly demonstrates that they say one thing
and do another ; that they speak peace and intentionally or uninten-
tionally endanger peace.
It is obvious that we cannot possibly create an area of strength,
in the Middle East or elsewhere, on the basis of earning the distrust
of the people of that area!! of denying them their rights and begrudging
them any serious, effective, honourable comradeship in the building-up
and in the preservation of peace. The people of my Country and of the
Middle East will continue adamantly to refuse a status in any way less
than that of comradeship, less than that of equal sovereinty with all
the peoples of the earth. This is our right and our due. We maintain,
and we will continue to maintain that this comradeship be real and not
mere... WORDS. We are entitled to expect that the stipulations of
the Charter relating to the equal rights of nations large and small be
carried out and be translated into palpable, constructive realities. This
equality of rights and the very peace and survival of the free world
necessitate the fullest possible cooperation in the building-up of the
bulwark of peace, so that aggression be discouraged and the peace and
the security and the freedom of the world be really safeguarded. In
all this we must remember and keep in mind that there can be no strength
where the people are deprived the means of strength, where they are
denied their rights, where some among the mighty Powers maintain a
policy of covetousness, of encroachment, of suppression and of ag-
gression.
This dark picture could indeed have been much brighter and more
encouraging, and the sources of trouble and instability could have been
made into fountain-heads of comfort and security. This is attainable
through the respect, by all, of their pledges under the Charter of the
United Nations and through the cessation by some Powers to cling to
the disruptive, domineering systems of dark ages gone by.
We certainly can all build together for peace ; we can discourage
aggression and circumvent it. We can live confidently surrounded by
righteous power and proud of our stand on justice and on the freedom
of the peoples of the world. Isn’t all this worth trying for ? I wish
to trust that we all think so, although 1 am not in this thought encouraged
by some of the recent, extremely distressing events; events which are
continuing to take place even while I am addressing myself to you in
this common forum of the United Nations.


Mr. President,
When this Assembly was convened in New York in September of
last year, heaviest among the shadows cast over the world was the
war in Korea.
This year we have two wars ; one in Korea and the other in the
country on whose behalf I have the privilege to speak to you today. It is
a real war, waged upon Egypt by a country claiming still to be an ally.
British land, sea and air reinforcements were rushed to the Suez
Canal Zone to swell the occupation forces which had already exceeded
by far the number allowed under the 1936 Treaty. These forces have
taken full possession of the whole of the Suez Canal area, placed it
under martial rule, and practically cut it off from the rest of the Country.
They took control of various public utilities, such as communications,
electricity and the water system.
Public authorities, including the judiciary, have been direly molest-
ed. Judges have been prevented from discharging their sacred duty in
that part of the homeland. Some were even interned and deprived of
food for two days.
Customs authorities and Coastguards have been prevented from
exercising their functions, with the result that the smuggling of narcotics
appreciably increased.
Health authorities have been prevented from doing their work, and
it is seriously feared that epidemics might ensue and spread from this
area to other parts of the Country.
The British have also prevented the administrative authorities from
discharging their essential duty of maintaining internal public security;
whereas, the responsibilities of these authorities have greatly increased
owing to the provocative attitude taken by the British.
Egypian labourers who, prompted by their patriotism, unanimously
resolved not to cooperate any longer with the British forces, were brutal-
ly subjected to all sorts of coercion and intimidation. Some were even
forced to work at bayonet point.
Caterers, in their turn, resolved to stop supplying food-stuffs to the
British Armed Forces, which retaliated by commandeering all kinds of
supplies.
British forces repeatedly fired at Egyptian military and police forces
and shot down peaceful civilians, not even sparing women and children.
Egyptian newspapers have been banned, and the British went so
far as to ban the “ Egyptian Gazette ”, a British paper controlled by a
Briton in Egypt.
Mr. Churchill seemed ill-at-ease when, a few days ago, he made
the following answer in this respect before the House of Commons :
“ Here is a local paper, published in English which is owned by an
Egyptian registered company, and the controlling interest among the
shareholders is held by an Englishman resident in Alexandria.”
“ This paper has only been presenting the Egyptian side of the
case, and I do not think it fair that troops should be left for several


days before the news arrives from all the papers of all the parties in
the Country, and should only receive this anti-British dope.”
I could hardly expect that Mr. Churchill would tell the House that
the real reason for banning this newspaper, which he himself admits to
be British-controlled, is but an understandable worry, lest the British
armed forces in the Suez Canal Area would know the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.
This is only a brief account of British atrocities and of British
aggression in Egypt. If all this is not war, Ido not know what war is !!
In his eloquent statement during the present debate, the disting-
uished Representative and Secretary of State of the Unitd States
expressed his great concern for human rights. He told us of certain
happenings in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, which he described as a
brutal crush of freedom. I wonder what description would he give to
the atrocities committed in the Canal Zone by his British friends and
allies !! I, for one, have no hesitancy in calling them a shameful,
treacherous aggression by the United Kingdom, which constitutes not
only a menace, but also a breach of international peace and security.
They are, indeed, a complete repudiation by the United Kingdom of
the principles and the decendies of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. President,
It can, it should be asked why ALL these happenings are made
to take place in the Nile Valley: why the United Kingdom obstinately
refuses to evacuate its armed forces from Egyptian territory ; why it
extends its armed aggression against Egypt to ever-widening areas :
why the United Kingdom intensifies this aggression against a Country
of whom it still claims to be an ally. Is it because Egypt has resolved
to live freely among the free ? Is it because the people of Egypt refuse
to be under the clumsy heel of foreign domination : or is it because the
people of Egypt claim their right to a life worth living and want to
honour their pledges under the Charter, of the United Nations ? Or is
it that the United Kingdom is desperately clinging to the crumbling
system of Imperialism, of spheres of influence and of encroachment
which, as President Roosevelt said, has been tried once and again and
failed.
The answer is obvious !
Nevertheless, our distinguished colleague of New Zealand has
found it fit to point the blame at the wrong party, at the wronged party,
at Egypt! He spoke to us on the 9th of this month about “ the duty
which falls upon all of us to honour our international engagements. ”
He indulged in the luxury of condemning Egypt for what he called the
unilateral overthrow of freely concluded Agreements, and went on to
say that “ The repudiation of treaties might have appeared more under-
standable, although still inexcusable, if done at the expense of a Country
which rigidly opposed all change and never listened to arguments for
the revision of agreements in the light of circumstances.”


Our distinguished colleague concluded his intervention in this
respect by donning clerical robes, piously praying for Article 1 of the
Charter, and asking God Almighty to preserve this world of ours from
becoming an international jungle.
It was no surprise to any of us that the distinguished Representative
of the United Kingdom readily subscribed the intervention of his asso-
ciate from the South Pacific, briefly pointing, in his turn, to the respect
for the sanctity of treaties as an obligation which binds all States both
small as well as great.
Mr. President,
It was not my intention to deal at length with the historical,
political and psychological reasons which impelled my Government to
announce on October 16th, 1951, the end of the Agreements of 1899
and 1936. In face, however, of the statements made by our distinguished
colleagues of New Zealand and the United Kingdom, I have no other
choice but to take up the challenge.
In doing so, 1 deem it necessary to look, if only for a moment, into
the past and, in the light of it, survey the present; though I well under-
stand that the standard bearers of Expansionism, Colonialism and
Imperialism dislike a retrospective survey of history, which will prove
to be embarrassingly too revealing.
The British occupation was first forced upon Egypt on July 11th,
1882, in the wake of a long schemed and contrived conspiracy. Since
that date, the British endeavoured, through an endless chain of one
pretext after another, to prolong that occupation. Thus, the world was
made to hear from the British such things as the .... protection of the
the Khedive .... the protection of foreigners .... the protection of the
poor .... the protection of minorities .... the protection of so-called
vested interests .... and the protection of British communications. To-
day, the British resort to a pompous but empty pretext, which has
nothing whatsoever to do with the world of the Charter of the United
Nations and the life and thoughts of 1951. They self-appointed and
set themselves up as the defenders of the Middle East. This is what
Mr. Morrison called the other day “ the responsibilities of Great Britain
in the Middle East, on behalf of the Commonwealth and the Western
allies as a whole.” Has this anything to do with the Charter ?
Throughout the last seventy years the British made a considerable
number of solemn promises to withdraw their armed forces from Egypt-
ian territory ; more than 60 of them. In 1946 the British conceded
that they should completely withdraw their armed forces from Egyptian
territory not later than September, 1949. If I am not mistaken, we
are now well past September 1949, and far beyond September, 1951.
Yet, the British, insteed of withdrawing, are maintaining, on Egyptian
territory, tens of thousands of their troops and are almost every day
adding to them ; whereas even the late Treaty of 1936 limited the
number of their troops which could be allowed on Egyptian territory to
no more than 10,000.


The core of the schemewhich took expression in the stationing of
British armed forces on Egyptian territory has always been to keep those
forces on our territory forever. The British have constantly maintained
this objective of theirs, and have, on purpose, created one of the most
vicious of all the vicious circles on record. They kept in mind that the
Egyptian Army must never become strong. They did this in order
to always be able to say that the Egyptian Army is still weak, and that,
consequently, British troops must stay on Egyptian territory.
Many an event, many an upheaval, have taken place in the world.
The League of Nations came into being. The League of Nations
faded away. The United Nations was set up while the smoke of the
guns and the detonation of the bombs of the Second World War were
still in the air. The Charter of the United Nations was formulated, and
the system of collective world security was institued. Kingdoms and
empires crumbled and others arose. ARMIES have risen and have
fallen. Generations succeeded one another. More and more new
armies, well equipped and well trained, came into existence. Even in
Korea, which had for many a century been completely cut away from all
martial life, we have seen created in less than five years two mighty
Armies one in the South and one in the North. Yet, 70 years have
not been long enough for the British to set up, equip and train an
adequate Army of Egypt, of the same Egypt which, less than 40 years
before British occupation, had an Army as strong as to call for the
combined action of Great Britain, Russia and France to restrain what
seemed to them to be Egyptian excesses.
Had the British been sincere in their claim that they occupied Egypt
for the good of the Egyptians: had they honoured their commitments of
1936 and before, the Egyptian Army would have today been a force
to be reckoned with and relied upon in the defence of peace, capable
of bearing its full share of responsibility under the United Nations
Charter.
But the British have never lost sight, not even for a single moment,
of their objective, namely, indefinitely to maintain their armed forces
on Egyptian territory, and, for this, indefinitely to delay all real
strengthening of Egypt and the Egyptian Army. They did everything
possible and imaginable to make a sham of the Egyptian Army and
to make a shambles of all their commitments to equip and train it.
Moreover, whenever and wherever Egypt tried to secure arms from
other Countries, the United Kingdom always plotted to deny to Egypt
access to such arms. Nor was this the only violation by the British of
the letter and the spirit of the now extinct Treaty of 1936. They had
no scruples to trample over it, to tear it to shreds. Never was it felt
by Egypt that the United Kingdom lived up to its commitments or
respected the so-called Alliance established between the two Countries.
One aggression after another was committed against Egypt; one
attempt after another against its sovereignty, by no other party than
that which claimed, and still seems to claim, to be an ally.
To give only a few illustrations, 1 would recall that they went
beyond the areas assigned under the 1936 for stationing their armed


forces, just as they exceeded the number of troops allowed under that
Treaty. They refused to comply with the health and customs measures
required by Egyptian law. In the Palestine question, they took, and
are still taking, a hostile course, which has exposed Egypt to grave
danger : though, according to the Treaty, the British are bound not
to take in their foreign relations an attitude inconsistent with the
alliance. They have pursued in the Sudan a policy calculated to separate
it from Egypt and to separate Southern Sudan from Northern Sudan.
Indeed, the happenings in the Sudan, before and after the 1936
Treaty, have been typical of British Imperialism. They constitue nothing
less than a repudiation of solemn pledges and a betrayal of trust. Allow
me to present some salient facts :
When the British occupied Egypt they had nothing to do with The
Sudan, but they took advantage of their occupation of Egypt and of
their control over its affairs to force the Egyptian Government to
evacuate The Sudan, then force it to agree to a joint reconquest of
The Sudan and then again force it to sign the two Agreements of 1899
for the joint administration of The Sudan. They did not claim then
that The Sudan had a separate status or that they had responsibilities
towards the Sudanese. On the contrary, they repeatedly affirmed that
they were acting in The Sudan on behalf and in the interest of Egypt
as illustrated by the Fashoda incident and by many of Lord Cromer’s
reports. Contrary to their declared policy they endeavoured through
the Sudan Administration dual in name but British in fact to
antagonise the Sudanese by various manouvres against their Egyptian
compatriots preparatory to separating The Sudan from Egypt. This
intention was very clearly shown in 1924 when Britain took advantage
of the assassination of the Sirdar and put Egypt out of The Sudan and
went as far as to threaten interference with Egypt’s Nile waters.
Now that national consciousness has awakened in Egypt and The
Sudan, the British adopted new tactics to meet the new circumstances.
They repeatedly declare their concern for the welfare of the Sudanese
and demand that they should be consulted and be given self-government
leading eventually to self-determination.
It can be seen, therefore, that when Egypt in the early days of
occupation could not question their actions, they made use of Egypt’s
name and of acting on its behalf to dominate The Sudan. When We
asserted the right to Egypt and The Sudan to independence, the pretext
of acting in the name of Egypt became of no use to them. The British
had to turn to another pretext which was this time that they speak
in the name of the Sudanese and defend their interests. It is obvious
that the two pretexts are contradictory for indeed there is a great
difference between administering The Sudan in the name of the Egypt-
ians and demanding from Egyptians in the name of the Sudanese that
The Sudan should ultimately have the right of self-determination.
May we ask who authorised the British to speak in the name of
the Sudanese and who asked them to shoulder the responsibilities they
claim in The Sudan? What historical, legal or moral right have they
to interfere between the Egyptians and their compatriots the Sudanese


who have been united from time immemorial by the Nile, by political,
geographical and economic unity and by ties of race, language and
religion ?
In this connection, I take leave to quote no less an authority than
Mr. Winston Churchill. In his book “ The River War ”, he wrote:
“ If the reader will look at the map of the Nile System, he cannot fail
to be struck by its resemblance to a palm tree. At the top the green
and fertile area of the Delta spreads like the graceful leaves and foliage.
The stem is perhaps a little twisted, for the Nile makes a vast bond, in
flowing through th desert. South of Khartoum the likeness is again
perfect, and the roots of the tree begin to stretch deeply into The Sudan.
I can imagine no better illustration of the intimate and sympathetic
connection between Egyp and the Southern Provinces... The advantages
of the conection are mutual; for if The Sudan is thus naturally and
geografically an integral part of Egypt, Egypt is no less essential to
the development of The Sudan.”
I would like to point out that Mr. Churchill expressed these views
at the time that the British used to affirm that they were acting in
The Sudan on behalf of and in the interest of Egypt.
The fact is that the British never had Egypt’s interest at heart when
they acknowledged that they administered The Sudan in Egypt’s name
and on its behalf, nor do they have now the interest of The Sudan at
heart when they claim that they are endeavouring to give it self-govern-
ment and self-determination. But it is only a pretext to continue their
administration of The Sudan for as long as possible so that they would
have the opportunity of independent action under cover of the will of the
Sudanese.
This is borne out by the fact that their repeated talk of self-govern-
ment has resulted in an effete Legislative Assembly shorn of all
authority whereas Egypt wanted The Sudan to have a truly repre-
sentative Legislative Assembly endowed with real power.
Wen we asked the British about the period after which The Sudan
might enjoy real self-government, their estimate was between 15 and
20 years, while Egypt maintained that The Sudan should have self-
government within two years basing her estimate on the Resolution of
the United Nations General Assembly in regard to Libya, for indeed
The Sudan is no less deserving of self-government than Libya.
It should be clear by now that there is quite another side to the
picture of The Sudan than that which the British have strenuously been
trying to portray to the world.
With all the importance and the portent of the historical facts which
I have just brought to your attention, they cannot match the significance
and the eloquence of the present events in the Sudan.
Mr. President and Fellow Delegates,
Do go and see for yourselves the swelling tide of Sudanese enthu-
siasm for the withdrawal of British forces from the Nile Valley, the


termination of the present British administration in The Sudan and for
the unity with Egypt.
Go and see for yourselves what the British do to stem the rising
tide: prohibition of public meetings, suppression of public demon-
strations, persecution of patriots, closing of schools, and flagellation
of students. This is hardly convincing as a proof of the claim so much
repeated by the British that they have at heart the welfare of the
Sudanese.
Mr. President,
The question of The Sudan has been subjected to the hugest
imaginable amount of falsification and insidious propaganda.
The British are now posing as the champions of the independence
of The Sudan. Is it a “ real independence ” or is it a “ British inde-
pendence ” for The Sudan that they mean ? Does the United Kingdom
accept to withdraw all British officials and armed forces from The Sudan
in order to allow scope for a free plebiscite there, free from British
pressure, British influence and British propaganda ?
We know beforehand what our Sudanese compatriots would opt
for. We know that they will reaffirm their loyalty to their King and
their natural unity with the rest of the people of the Nile Valley. We
know above all that the indivisibility of the Nile Valley cannot be
validly contested ; and we know, as well, that neither tradition nor law
would countenance such a plebiscite. Nevertheless, I do, from this
rostrum, and before this common forum of the United Nations, declare
as a challenge to the United Kingdom that for our part, we accept to
withdraw our officials and our armed forces from The Sudan on
condition that the United Kingdom do the same, so as to allow the
Sudanese freely to express their will through a plebisciste for which
the necessary machinery, atmosphere and preparation could be provided
with the cooperation of the United Nations. This is a frank, clear-cut
challenge which I make to the United Kingdom, and which, I am more
than sure the British will not dare take up.
Let no one therefore be deceived by such manouvres as the state-
ment in the British House of Commons yesterday by Mr. Eden. That
statement is nothing more and nothing less than an echo and a repetition
of the same old imperialistic formula to perpetuate the hold of the United
Kingdom on The Sudan and to defer for as long as possible all real
self-determination for the Sudanese. Just read the statement of Mr.
Eden and judge for yourselves. Read equally if you will the legislation
which the Egyptian Government have already on the sixteenth of
October adopted in relation to The Sudan and which in unmistakable
terms set up a truly representative body for the Sudanese and a real
system of self-government for The Sudan.
Mr. President,
I have recounted, in brief outline, parts of the ghastly record of
-British imperialism in the Nile Valley, h should,by now, be abundantly


clear why Egypt denounced those Agreements which the United King-
dom had so assidiously trampled over and torn to smithereens.
When denouncing the now extinct Treaty of 1936, and the Agree-
ments of 1899, Egypt did nothing more than announce their death.
They had already been murdered by the United Kingdom. Let no empty
talk, therefore, about the so-called ignoring by Egypt of the sanctity
of treaties deceive anyone.
We are here Member States of the United Nations, three score
or so of them. Does anyone, can anyone of us, accept to be forever
bound by a treaty to which the other signatory, would not be bound ?
And what would the answer be if the other party completely ignores
the Treaty and constantly violates it. I shall not, here, cite the many
cases in which treaties have been denounced before and the many
reasons for such denunciation, which are, in the greatest part, extremely
flimsy if compared with the reasons which have impelled my Govern-
ment to denounce the 1899 and the 1936 Agreements.
The denunciation by Egypt of these Agreements cannot fairly be
described as being done on an impulse. For 70 years Egypt has been
trying to correct the situation and get rid of British intervention in the
Nile Valley.
Our distinguished colleague of New Zealand claimed that the
United Kingdom did not rigidly oppose change and did listen to argu-
ments for the revision of agreements in the light of circumstances.
Allow me. Sir, in this respect, to recall the negotiations which Egypt
has gone into, most patiently, year after year, in recent decades. This
should suffice to show how much Egypt held back and put on the
brakes until they screeched. Ever since as far back as 1920 negotiations
followed one another in close succession. There have been the Saad-
Milner negotiations, the Adly-Curzon negotiations, the Sad-Macdonald
negotiations, the Sarwat-Chamberlain negotiations, the Mohamed
Mahmoud-Henderson negotiations, the El Nahas-Henderson negotia-
tions, the Sidky-Chamberlain negotiations, the Nahas-Lampson nego-
tiations, the Nokrachi-Stansgate negotiations, the Sidky-Bevin nego-
tiations, the Khashaba-Campbell negotiations, and lately, my negotiations
through eighteen months with the late Mr. Bevin and with Sir Ralph
Stevenson, the British Ambassador in Egypt.
In each and all of these negotiations, the British never wavered
from their traditional imperialistic policy. They did not seem in the
least aware of the high principles loudly declared and as loudly acclaim-
ed in this 20th century of ours : The Wilson Principles, the Covenant
of the League of Nations, the Atlantic Charter and the Charter of the
United Nations.
'Mr. 'President,
Two points remain which our distinguished colleague of New
Zealand has raised and which I cannot leave unanswered. Referring
to the 1936 Treaty, he clearly implied that he considers it a “ freely


concluded agreement.” Need I recall that this treaty was concluded
under the haunting and heavy pressure of British occupation ? Or shall
I recall as identical case and quote the late Mr. Bevin who stated before
the Security Council, in relation to the Soviet-Iranian dispute in 1946,
that “ The British Government would regret any arrangement which
might appear to have been extracted from the Government of Iran
by compulsion, whilst the Soviet Government was still occupying a part
of Iran.
It was inadmissable to negotiate, attempt to negotiate, or seek to
obtain concessions from a small Power in favour of a large Power,
through the occupation of that Country by armed forces.”
“We are powerful Countries; we are what is sometimes described
as the Big Three. But we do represent power, and power does count
in negotiations.”
We all remember that the Security Council espoused the concept
so forcibly expressed by the late Mr. Bevin, that the presence of foreign
armed forces on the territory of a Country deprives it of its freedom
of choice in negotiations.
The other point which I alluded to, and which was raised by our
distinguished colleague of NeW Zealand, is his reference to the Middle
East as an area of vital importance to communications. It is indeed so.
Our colleague, has, however, overlooked the basic facts of the Middle
East; as well as the meaning, the portent and impact of the problems
of the Middle East. Intertained and wholly concerned with these facts
and these problems are the teeming millions who are living in the area.
An illustrious statesman of the East recently deplored the attempt by
some to Solve the problems of Asia without taking Asiatics into con-
sideration. I do submit today that it would be futile ; it would be
cheer folly to attempt resolving the problems of the Middle East without
taking into consideration its people, their life, their aspirations and
their rights !
May I recall, in this connection, the resolution adopted on Feb-
ruary 3rd, 1951, by the League of Arab States, which reads that “ The
Arab States cannot discharge the grave international responsibilities
imposed on all nations by the Charter, unless they fully secure their
national rights and have their problems settled in conformity with the
principles of freedom, justice and equality.”
Mr. President,
Egypt can rapidly become one of the sturdy columns in the structure
of international security. It can and should rapidly become the center
of an area of strength, which robustly stands for world peace and
discourages all temptations to aggression. This would indeed be in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, and in line with the
objectives of the “ Uniting for Peace ” Resolution. We all know what
the Charter says concerning the setting up of a system of world security.
We all know, equally, what the “ Uniting for Peace ” Resolution
stipulates in this respect: namely that each Member of the United


Nations maintains within its national forces elements so trained, organis-
ed and equipped, that they could promptly be made available, in ac-
cordance with its constitutional processes, for service as a United
Nations unit or units, upon recommendation by the Security Council or
the General Assembly, without prejudice to the use of such elements
in exercise of the right of individual or collective self-defence, recognis-
ed in Article 51 of the Charter. I trust, moreover, that the Members
of the United Nations have not completely forgotten the resolution
which the General Assembly adopted on the Hth of December 1946,
and which says that no Member States should have forces stationed
in territories of any other Member States without their free consent.
Neither the Charter, nor any resolution adopted by any organ of
the United Nations, did say that the big Powers should stymie and
stifle the growth and the liberties of the less big Powers. Nor, did
the Charter, or any resolution of the United Nations, say that tyranny
should brand our generation as it did brand some previous ones. Nor
did the Charter or the United Nations give their blessings to such
betrayals as those committed by the British in relation to Egypt and
The Sudan, and to Palestine.
The Charter stipulates for the equal rights of nations, big and
small: for the sovereign equality of all the Members of the United
Nations ; for the fulfillment by all the Members, in good faith, of the
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the Charter, and for
a system of world security.
Mr. President,
Since the end of the Agreements which Egypt had with the United
Kingdom, the United Kingdom, in association with some other deluded
Powers tried to sell us the self-same dope-containing ‘broken doll’ of
Imperialism, outwardly painted in a different colour. We will not
buy it.
We will, on the other hand, stand by the Charter, by the resolu-
tions of the United Nations, and for the prevalence of the rule of law
in international relations.




CONTENTS
Page
A message from H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs to H.E. Mr. Bevin 3
A message from H.E. Mr. Bevin to H.E. the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ... 5
A message from H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs to H.E. Mr.
Bevin 6
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and H.E. Field Marshal Sir William Slim Monday, June
5, 1950 7
Record of a conversation between HE. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha,
President of the Council of Ministers and H.E. Field Marshal Sir
William Slim Monday, June 5, 1950 10
Record of a conversation between H.E. Moustafa el Nahas Pasha,
President of the Council of Ministers and HE. Field Marshal Sir
William Slim Tuesday, June 6, 1950 17
Record of a conversation between HE. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador Sunday, July 8, 1950 23
Record of a conversation Between HE. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. Field Marshal Slim July 13, 1950 39
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. .the British Ambassador August 3, 1950 34
Record of a conversation between HE, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and HE. the British Ambassador August 5, 1960 ... 41
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and HE. the British Ambassador August 10, 1950 46
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and HE, the British Ambassador August 14, 1950 50
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and HE. the British Ambassador August 17, 1950 58
Record of a conversation between HE. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador August 24, 1950 63
Record of a conversation between HE, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador August 26, 1950 ... ... ... 69


Page
Resume of a conversation between the Secretary of State and the
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs at the Waldorf-Astoria,
New York Septembre 28, 1950 75
Record of a conversation between the Foreign Secretary and the
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Foreign Office
December 4, 1950 .. 77
Record of a conversation between the Secretary of State and the
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Foreign Office
December 7, 1950 ... ... 84
Record of a conversation between the Secretary of State and the
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Foreign Office ,
December 9, 1950 : 94
f
Record of a conversation between the Secretary of State and the,
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs December 15, 1950 ... 99
• I. ■ ‘
The Joint Communique 105
A personal message from Mr. Morrison for Dr. Salah Eddin Bey ... 106
A personal message from Salah Eddin Bey for Mr. Herbert Morrison ... 107
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E, the British Ambassador April 11, 1951 ... ... ... 108
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Ij.E. the British Ambassador —"April 24, 1951 ... 11l
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador -- June 8, 1951 115
Aide-memoire 1 ... 116
Aide-memoire 2 116
Annexe Statement of principles 117
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador July 6, 1951 118
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H.E. the British Ambassador July 13, 1951 127
Record of a conversation between H.E. the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and H-E. the British Ambassador July 26, 1951 133
A statement made in Parliament by H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha,
Minister for Foreign Affairs on Monday August 6, 1951 138
A note from the British Ambassador to H.E. Nahas Pasha 148
A personal message from H.E, Sir Ralph Stevenson to H.E. Moustafa
El Nahas Pasha 149


Page
Excerpt from Mr. Herbert Morrison’s statement in the House of
Commons on July 30, 1951 150
A personal message from H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson to H.E. Moustafa
El Nahas Pasha 153
A message from H.E. Sir Ralph Stevenson to H.E. Moustafa El Nahas
Pasha 154
A personal message from Mr. Herbert Morrison for H.E. Egypt’s
Foreign Minister 155
A Press statement made on August 17, 1951 >... 157
A Press statement made on August 20th, 1951 158
A personal message from H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha to H.E. the
British Ambassador ••• 160
Reply of the President of the Council of Ministers to the British
Ambassador ... 162
Reply of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador 163
A personal message from Mr. Herbert Morrisson for the Minister for
Foreign Affairs 164
A personnal message from the British Ambassador to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs 165
A Statement in Parliament by H.E. Moustafa El Nahas Pasha, President
of the Council of Ministers, on Monday October Bth, 1951 166
A Statement by H.E. Mohamed Salah Eddin Pasha, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt and Chairman of the Egyptian Delegation
before the United Nations Assembly 179


SOCIETE ORIENTALS DE PUBLICITE
