

RECORD
Mining in the Northern Territory
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Issued by the Office of the Minister controlling the Northern Territory
(Hon. F. W. Holder. Minister of the Department).
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
IQOO.




RECORD
Mining in the Northern Territory
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Issued by the Office of the Minister controlling the Northern Territory
(Hon. F. W. Holder, Minister of the Department).
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
IQOO.


■
.
•I


MINING IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
The large area of country denominated the Northern Territory was attached to
South Australia by Letters Patent under the Great Seal in 1863 ; it contains 523,620
square miles, or 335,116,800 acres, and has been proved to be rich in minerals.
The Rev. J. E. Tennison Woods, in October, 1886, furnished a very exhaustive
report (Parliamentary Paper No. 122) describing its physical features, geology, and
minerals. He said that the country is rich in gold, and the reefs would pay well to
work were not wages and cartage so enormously high. Not 25 per cent, of the
auriferous reefs had been fairly tested, and not one of the mines hitherto worked or
abandoned had been exhausted of gold. Some of the crushings of top stone had
yielded exceedingly rich returns, thus at the Extended Union in 1877 40 tons of
quartz produced 7400z5. of gold. In alluvial workings the sinking is shallow, and
the gravel is scarcely waterworn. The fine gold appears to be inexhaustible. All
the silver lodes in the Northern Territory are of silver-lead ; and silver is associated
with gold in one or two mines, and with copper. There are few ores from which a
bead of silver cannot be obtained by means of an ordinary blowpipe ; the silver-lead
veins are found on the edge of the slate, and near the junction with the granite. Tin
will eventually be one of the great sources of mineral wealth, as it occurs in the
comparatively rare form of reef tin. No stream tin (properly speaking) has been
observed, but vein tin is abundant and rich, and the Northern Territory may be
emphatically pronounced to be a tin country. The copper ores of the Daly River
copper mines are of singular richness and also apparently abundant; and this
mineral is found also in other places. Nickel, iron, manganese, graphite, bismuth,
and gem-stones, are said to have been also found in various localities.
The Northern Territory Times Almanac and Directory for 1890 afford the follow-
ing information : —“ During 1886-9 considerable progress has been made in mining
matters, and many new discoveries of silver, tin, and copper bearing lodes have been
reported. The Eureka Gold Mine, the Eveleen, Flora Bell, and Coronet Hill Silver
Mines, and the Mount Tolmer Tin Mine, are amongst the most important recent
discoveries, and all of them give promise of a good output of ore and metal at no
distant date. At present prospecting to a depth is causing generally the suspension
of smelting operations. In gold mining very little advance has been made ; hut the
quartz-mining industry seems to languish for want of capital and enterprise and
adequate machinery, though there are millions of tons of stone that would yield
Bdwts. to lOdwts. per ton. In spite of the somewhat depressed state of the Territory
the mineral exports for 1889 exceeded those of 1888 by £13,156 in value, although
smelting operations had stopped.
As to the earlier discoveries of auriferous localities in this part of Australia, it may
be mentioned that the late Surveyor-General, Mr. Goyder, in reporting upon the
survey of the Territory, stated that gold had been discovered at Tumbling Waters,
on the Blackmore ; section 618, west of the Blackmore; at and above the bar on the
Charlotte, leading into Bynoe Harbor; on the Finniss, near section 2130; at Rocky
Waterholes, section 2193; and in the River Darwin, Mr. Litchfield made the dis-
covery in the Finniss, and subsequently over foz. was washed out by the party.
In his report of an extensive visit of inspection in 1894-5 the Government
Geologist embodies these statements: —“ It is advisable that the whole of the
northern coast be examined .... for additional areas of carboniferous rocks.
, In the neighborhood of the present goldfields the granite areas, and the
country bounding these areas on the west and N.W. towards the tableland, and
down to the McKinley and Mary rivers, are likely fields for prospecting for gold and


tin .... Deep leads are likely to exist. Also the country near Rum Jungle.
. . . . An exploration of the unknown area lying to the west of the telegraph
line .... would add considerably to what is known of the geography and
geology of the Northern Territory, and lead to the discovery of country likely to
prove auriferous The rocks at the mouth of the Fitzmaurice river are
auriferous, and may prove to be payably so when prospected. On the Alligator
river and Blue Mud Hay, and in the vicinity of Cape Arnheim, it is supposed that
there are areas occupied by rocks likely to be auriferous. On the Nicholson river I
am credibly informed that metalliferous rocks also occur.”
Ah Ching Philips. —The Inspector of Mines, reporting in 1891, stated
that there was a party of Chinese working this mine on tribute. A return of 3ozs.
per ton had been obtained from 45 tons of stone taken from a vein Sin. to 6in. thick.
From some stone it was stated 40ozs. per ton was returned. The block has been
fossicked, but not mined.
Albion Reef. —Near the John Bull; country rocks, indurated clay, and mica-
ceous slates and sandstone. Chinamen fossicking. —(Government Geologist, 1894.)
Alice Hill Gold Mining Company,— Area, 60 acres. The Inspector of
Mines, reporting in 1891, stated that a great deal of shallow sinking and driving had
been done, including a tunnel 105 ft. long, in which three lodes had been cut, averag-
ing 4ft. in thickness. From one of the shafts a crushing of 180 tons returned 3£ozs.
per ton, and from water-level the stone yielded 4£ozs. of gold per ton. The company
was unable to work the property effectively for lack of capital. It was in the hands
of Chinese tributors,.and would require good pumping gear to cope with the water.
The company had crushed 2,240 tons of stone for an average yield of Bdwts. per ton.
This property was purchased by the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia,
Limited, in 1896. A fifteen-head stamp battery is erected on this mining property.
Alice Springs Gold Mining Syndicate.— ln March, 1895, it was
reported that this association was working a very promising-looking 3ft. reef at a
place 63 miles from the township. It could be worked by open cutting to a depth of
200 ft. from the cap, and Mr. Parkinson’s assays gave 2ozs. 12dwts. and 3ozs. Isdwts.
to the ton from the samples sent to him. Cost of treatment 30s. per ton.— (Register,
25/3/95.)
Alice Union Gold Claims. —The proprietors had four leases, viz., The
Lady Alice Prospectors’ Claim (now No. 1 North and No. 1 South), and Nos. 3 and
4 South. The Lady Alice’s reef traverses the four leases, and on the Prospectors’
Claim is from 12ft. to 6ft. wide. Numerous shafts were sunk, and crushings taken
out. The reef was also opened out on Nos. 3 and 4, trial crushings giving l£ozs. to
the ton. This reef was subsequently worked by Millar Bros, in No. 10 South; it is
there, at 200 ft. deep, 11ft. wide, composed of a dark-blue quartz interbanded by black
slate,’the whole carrying gold. The reef is nearly vertical, with good walls, and is a
true fissure lode, between slate and quartzite country, and on the Alice Union No. 1
South a tunnel driven to cut the lode at the depth of 150 ft. would give a large
quantity of backs for crushing.—(Harvey.)
Alligator.— Situated west of Clausen’s ; area, 10 acres, leased to Ah Loy and
party. The inspector was informed (1891) that eight years previously a Chinaman
took from a shaft here 50ft. deep, sunk on a small leader, 10 tons of stone which
yielded 3,0000z5. of gold. No work was being done in the shafts at the time of
inspection. This property was purchased by the Northern Territories Goldfields of
Australia, Limited, in 1896.
Near to this, a claim held by Ah Loy, from a shaft 70ft. deep a bucketful of stone
yielded 1250z5. of gold. One piece of gold taken from the casing of a leader weighed
1500z5., and was called, on account of its shape, the Bullock s Tongue.


Alluvial. —Near Mount Gates, a few miles down the Catherine river. A few
Europeans and about 50 Chinese 'diggers were reported to he making fair wages in
working alluvial in 1890, A good deal of alluvial prospecting has been done on the
and in numerous unnamed localities the “ dry-blower ” has been
in use.
Anglo-French Goldfields Company.— ln 1896 it was reported that
nearly 4,000 square miles of country had been taken up on the Alligator river, with
a gold concession of 640 square miles. The intention of the promoters was, with the
assistance of a capital of £500,000, to develop the country pastorally and mmeralogi-
cally It has been recently stated that a great deal of mining work has been done in
respect to old mines which have been either abandoned altogether or simply held for
fossicking purposes, and that results were regarded as satisfactory, with a promise of
large success in mining development.
Arltunga Goldfield.— The Government plant—battery and cyanide—has
treated 1 786 tons of ore for a net result of 1,5100z5. of gold, valued at £5,102. The
last 1,039 tons of ore yielded 1,0740z5. of gold, showing an average of over loz. to
the ton.
Arltunga District. —The Government Geologist inspected the gold reefs in
1896, and reported that they were numerous, but generally small and carrying very
fine gold. No shaft deeper than 50ft. Copper pyrites and galena occur. Macdonnell
Range reef had 1630z5. from 210 tons; Great Wonder, 30ozs. lOdwts. from 60 tons ;
Star of the North, sozs. from 5 tons; Albion, 7ozs. from 10 tons; Redemption,
56ozs from 47 tons; Orient, 17ozs. from 17 tons; Beehive, 77ozs. from 110 tonss;
Russell’s, sozs. sdwts. from 15 tons; Wheal Mundi, 6ozs. from 6 tons ; Standard,
Bozs. from 12 tons; Round Hill, 33ozs. ISdwts. from 58 tons; Duffer , 40ozs. from
40 tons ; and Wipe Out, 80ozs. from 100 tons. Gold valued at from £3 10s. to £3
15s. per ounce. Claraville reef yielded 200ozs. of bullion—-one-third gold, two-thirds
silver—from 100 tons of stone. The cyanide process desirable ; would result in a
much higher total.
Arltunga Mine— A well-defined reef, Ift. to 2ft. wide; a shaft, nearly vertical
sunk 30ft.'deep on the reef. —(Correspondent.) Worked by the Robert Oldfield
Prospecting Syndicate.
"Rarrett’s Tin Mine —Pronounced by the Inspector of Mines (1891) one of
the most magnificent shows of tin ore he had ever seen. The Government Geologist
in 1894 visited this propertv. He stated that it is about two miles from Mount
Shoobridse. The tin ore is disseminated through a large dyke of quartz and mica
(greisen), associated with quartz blows, and striking N. 10° to 20 W., through
micaceous sandstone and schist. The width varies from 10ft to 50ft or more and
is irregular and branching, some portions being rich in tin. Apparently it had not
been worked to a greater depth than 20ft., but there was an open cutting 250 ft. long.
Bashi Bazouk.— Adjacent to the Enterprise; area, 19 acres. Worked by
Chinese on tribute, principally in open cuttings. The Inspector states (1891) that a
recent crushing of 32 tons yielded of gold per ton.
Beetson’s Tin Claim.— situated three miles north from Mount Shoobridge ;
area, 80 acres. In a small pit (says the Inspector) tin oxide can be seen in a lode
formation. A shaft should be sunk.
Berlin’s Creek. —Locality, about six miles south of the Howley. Alluvial
and reefs claims in the hands of the Chinese. The country has a very promising
appearance, and the indications are all of the best auriferous character. ( oo s,
1886 ) Now the property of the Brock’s Creek Gold Mining Company. A fifteen-
head stamp mill has been erected and some thousands of tons of ore treated,
averaging 15dwts. of gold.


Britannia Beef. — Locality, two miles N.E. from Brock’s Creek. Strike
N. 20° W.; rocks consist of indurated clay slate and fine-grained sandstone with
quartzose bands. The Inspector of Mines (1891) states that from one of the shafts the
stone was said to have yielded 12ozs. of gold to the ton. There is a strong lode,
but the Chinese owners prefer to work the small veins, which, as a rule, are rich.
Near the Britannia (N.W.) there is an outcrop of a copper lode, which is
3ft. wide, with micaceous schist walls. Carbonates of copper are disseminated
through the formation. This property was purchased in 1896 by the Northern
Territories Goldfields of Australia, Limited.
Another copper show exists six miles N.E. from Knutsford Railway Siding. The
lode is 3ft. wide, and is composed of kaolin with carbonates and sulphides of copper
in the form of azurite and covellite.
Bridge Creek. —Alluvial diggings on open flats. One small quartz leader is
worked (1886), the stone being crushed by hand. The gold is so fine and scaly that
it floats away in the panning. Twenty white miners and many Chinese are there.—
(Woods, 1886.)
Brock’s Creek. —The description above applies also to this property.— (lbid ./
The Government Geologist reported in 1894 that there was at this place a belt of
auriferous rock formed of three or four closely adjacent quartz and mullocky veins
striking from the north 70° to 80° west, and underlying southerly at high angles.
Water-level, 20ft. Workings not deeper than 50ft., although shafts had been sunk
deeper. The rock formation is micaceous sandstone and slate and clay slate dipping
southerly. The reefs are certain to continue downwards, and should be worked
systematically. One battery of ten stampers was at work. The property was pur-
chased in 1896 by the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia, Limited.
Bynoe Harbor. —The Inspector of Mines expressed (in 1891) a high opinion
of this tinfield, and said there was room for thousands of tin miners there.
Caledonian Claim. —A quartz and mullocky formation traversing clay slate
and sandstone, situated in a flat country. At the Prospecting Claim work has been
done down to 70ft. on a vertical reef, 3ft. to 4ft. wide, bearing N. 20° W. The
locality, in the opinion of the Government Geologist, is a very promising one and
well worthy of energetic prospecting for reef and alluvial gold.
Cement Gully. —A shallow flat close to Grove Hill; sinking, 10ft. to 12ft.
Much gold obtained, no doubt derived from the ranges on each side, in which, how-
ever, there are nothing more than a few unproductive leaders.—(Woods.)
Cemetery Claim. —Locality, east from the Golden Tree. There is a pyritous
lode of unknown width, and another lode 2ft. wide. A crushing gave Bdwts. per
ton from a parcel of 10 tons. The Inspector said this claim was lying unworked.
(1891.)
Chinese Block. —Area, 10 acres, adjoining Sagabiel’s. A parcel of 38 tons
of stone (says the Inspector) recently yielded 281ozs. of gold. The block is “ riddled
with small pits.”
Christmas Gold- Mine. —The Inspector of Mines states that the large
Kohinoor lode goes through this block. From a lode 2ft. wide crushings had yielded
2ozs. to 4ozs. of gold per ton of stone. The owner of the mine has obtained 480ozs.
of gold from 35 tons of stone, 3690z5. of gold from 30 tons, and 2890z5. from
28 tons. The mine is rich, but has been badly worked.
Claudius’ Claim. —Area, 20 acres; from a trench 15 tons of stone returned
7ozs. of gold.


1,040
.. 264
3
150
.. 469
9
148
.. 709
0
69
48
9
10
9
0
11
16
0
5
6
0
.. .. 60
.. 74
0
1,493
1,596
1
Clifton Gold Mine.— Near to Springhill Mine. Worked by Chinese since
1895 at a profit.
Copperfield Copper Mine.— Five miles from the terminus of the Palmerston
and Pine Creek Railway. Discovered in 1872; abandoned in 1880; again acquired,
and in 1887 bought by Mr. C. G. Millar. A strong lode of high-grade grey ore
exists, to open which two shafts have been sunk ; one down 50ft. carries a 4ft. lode;
the other at 20ft. in the lode does not touch either wall. During the past season
500 tons of 30 to 40 per cent, ore have been raised and shipped.—(‘‘N.T. A. and
Directory.”) Inspected in 1891 as an abandoned property; it would pay to work.
A good copper show a quarter of a mile west from the above.
Copper Show. —Six miles north from Glencoe Station there is a lode outcrop
that should be prospected to a depth of at least 100 ft. Some outcrops of lodes in
the Station Paddock are recommended to the notice of the prospector. The granite
country to the north of Glencoe is also well worth prospecting.—(lnspector of Mines,
1891.)
Coronet Hill Silver Claims.— These are situated about 15 miles south-
east of the Eveleen, on a branch of the Mary river. There are three parallel lodes
striking N.W. and S.E., and a shaft has been sunk on the main lode (which averages
12ft. wide) to the depth of 85ft. Assays of samples from the shaft taken from
surface to depth named average 40ozs. silver to the ton. (C hief Warden Nash.)
In 1891 the Inspector reported in his opinion the lode did not carry payable silvei.
Cosmopolitan Claim. —The Government Geologist reported that at the time
of his inspection (1894) there were upwards of a hundred Chinamen engaged in
reefing. There were a number of shafts and old alluvial holes and workings which
had fallen in ; but two lines of reef, one north-westerly and the other east
and west, and more or less vertical. There is a wide mullocky formation, with quartz
veins in places showing plumbaginous slate, the quartz bluish. Ferruginous vein-
stone occurs frequently. It was stated that the stone averaged from lOdwts. to
15dwts. of gold per ton. . , ,
The following were the Cosmopolitan Company’s battery returns tor a period from
July 18th to November 14th, 1884: —
J Tons. Smelted Gold.
ozs. dwts.
Cruickshank & Barrett’s Tin Claim.— Near Mount Shoobridge A
quartz outcrop on a low ridge, standing out like a wall, thickly veined with black in
ore. A beautiful mineralogical display. —(Woods, 1886.)
Daly River Copper Mine.-This property has been purchased by a Port
Darwin syndicate, and is yielding satisfactory returns. It has yielded over 2,000 tons
of 28 per cent. ore. all mined from one shaft less than 100 ft. deep and having three
levels —flhid.J The Inspector of Mines states that there has been considerable
waste of money and unnecessary work; would pay if properly mined. Ihe govern-
ment Geologist in 1894 found that the shaft was full of water below a depth of 80±t.,
and mining was confined to working out the ore from the supports to stopes and
shaft. It is a wide and permanent lode. To work it properly the shaft must be
sunk to deeper levels.


Dalh.OU.sie Company. —Holding 10 acres on the Grafton line of reef. The
Inspector of Mines (1891) reported that a trial parcel of 14 tons from a shaft 4oft.
deep on the course of the lode gave 17dwts. of gold per ion. Parcels from other
shafts gave, respectively, and Bdwts. of gold per ton. Lode not well defined.
Democrat. —Area, nine acres; held in conjunction with the Kohinoor. A
large quantity of work done.
Dog and Duck. —Locality, Arltunga. Battery treatment has yielded 16dwts.
lOgrs. per ton; tailings carried 4dwts. 12grs. per ton.
Douglas Claims. —Northward from Toby’s Luck. A considerable amount of
shallow working done. A number of veins and two well-defined lodes. All the veins
carry gold. Fifteen tons of stone from one of them yielded 45ozs. of gold, and 55 tons
returned 1 jozs. per ton; the latter parcel was not considered payable. Claim now
abandoned. —(lnspector of Mines, 1891.)
Dutton’s Gold Claim. —Locality, near Bridge Creek. Five shafts were
sunk on a leader 4in. to 6in. wide, and 43 tons of stone produced 83ozs. of gold, and
2£ tons returned 140ozs. of gold. A large lode prospected 7dwts. of gold per ton.
Pyrites struck in the south shaft.
East Clifton. —Adjoins Springhill Mine. The Mine Inspector reported (1891)
that this claim had been worked by numerous shafts and tunnels, most of which had
fallen in ; but several large lodes running through the property had not been touched.
The rocks are of a kindly nature and easily worked. A great deal of gold was got
here in the early workings. Worked since 1895 by Chinese.
Eleanor Gold Claim. —The Rev. Mr. Woods mentions that Jansen, in five
years, got 9,0000z5. of gold from this claim.
Eleanor Silver-Lead Lease. —Area, 80 acres. There is & formation of
limestone and galena, but nothing of value observable, but the place should be
thoroughly tested.
Elizabeth Mine. —Adjoins the Flora Bell. The Inspector of Mines in 1891
reported that the lode is almost vertical, of an average width of 3ft., and with leaders
running into it from both walls. From 800 tons an average of of gold per ton
was obtained, and a parcel of 70 tons averaged 6ozs. per ton. It was worked from
the surface downwards for 150 yards in length ; but the workings collapsed.
Elsinore. —Area, 13 acres. A large lode, stales the Inspector, runs through this
block, and innumerable leaders, and rich returns have been got from small veins.
Enterprise. —Locality, Pine Creek. A well-defined lode (reported the
Inspector in 1891) had been stripped to a shallow depth for 150 ft. Sixty tons
crushed for l£oz. per ton. A large lode outcropping.
Eureka Gold Mine. —Situated three miles south-east from the Eveleen
Silver Mine, and at the northern end of Houschildt’s Rush. The returns have, from
the commencement, paid working expenses. The property is large, and there are
thousands of tons of payable stuff available for an improved crushing plant. One
shaft is down 115 ft., and the drives show a well-defined reef 3ft. wide, which gives
machine returns of a little under an ounce of gold to the ton, whilst assay of tailings
shows a considerable percentage in the concentrated pyrites.—(Woods, 1886.)
The Government Geologist reported a visit in 1894, and states that the reef is
chiefly composed of quartz down to the water-level, 80ft., when it gives place to
pyrites, of which there is a considerable width in the main shaft. The lode strikes
N. 10° W., dipping 70° to 80° W., with variable width, and has an appearance of
permanency. Galena, carbonate of lead, and a little copper ore occur in this lode.
There is also a parallel reef. The mine was being worked by Chinese.


The Maybell and other claims were being worked by Chinese. The gold from
these mines is alloyed to an unusual extent with silver,
of lead proved to be very rich in silver, and the pyrites
following assays :
and the galena and carbonate
rich in gold, as shown by the
Gold per Ton.
Silver per Ton.
Lead per Cent.
ozs. dwts.
ozs. dwts.
Eureka Mine—
Tailings
(<
1 6
1 3
1 3
1 3
1 11
Pyrites (vanned) .
“ (from mine)
<< <«
2 4
5 0
3 7
2 14
7 17
u “
2 17
3 9
Galena and quartz
U
Trace
0 10
54 14
81 0
128 14
0 13
Sam Nellie Mine—
Carbonate of lead and galena
Maybell
Carbonate of lead
Trace
366 11
6 1
2 15
51 6
82 6
0 17
Gossan
0 4
Mr. Chapman, the secretary and legal
manager,
gave the
following particulars
“ The lease comprises sixteen acres, in which there are two lodes,
striking N.W.
and S.E., with a width of from 2in. or Sin. to 15ft.—average 3ft.
respectively; length of drives, 500 ft. The
There are six
quartz, and below, almost solid pyrites,with
and seventeen tons of stone crushed have
shafts, 80, 126, 80, 67, 25, and 26ft., resj
reefs above water-level show ferruginous qu:
slate walls. Four thousand six hundred an
yielded 2,8900z5. of gold, value £7,212. T
Maybell, and Eureka West Mines.” The
as a good line of reef, and that it could be
property of the Eureka Gold Mining Comj
value of £19,000 to treat the pyritiferous
hundred tons of tailings from this mine ti
profit of over £20,000.
This property adjoins the Eureka South,
Inspector of Mines (1891) regarded this
made to pay. These mines are now the
Company, who have erected machinery to the
rous ores in the mine. Eight thousand two
treated by the cyanide process yielded a
Eveleen Silver Mine. —Situated near the south-eastern extremity of the
metalliferous ranges, four miles west from the upper reaches of the River Mary, on
the junction of the metalliferous slates with the blue granites. The outcrop, called
Pinnacle Hill, shows a number of lodes, one many feet wide, containing brilliant
shoots of galena. There are an immense number and variety of minerals in the veins
and pockets, forming a sight of rare beauty. It is said, that the percentage of silver
in the lead is very high; the copper ores are poor and light.—(Woods, 1886. J
Mr. A. A. Gallagher, the secretary and legal manager, stated that the company
held 160 acres under mineral lease, and had seven lodes, which strike N.W. and
S.E., with a width ranging up to 13ft. Six vertical shafts were put down, of
the respective depths of 35ft., 65ft., 110 ft., 38ft., 18ft., and 20ft., and there are
800 ft. of drives. Above water-level the lode consists of gossan, and below of solid
galena, with dolomite walls. Two thousand two hundred and twenty-four tons of
ore yielded 601 tons of lead, and 89,391 ozs, of silver. The Inspector of Mines
described this in 1891 as the best silver show in the Northern Territory, but the ores
were refractory. In 1894 the Government Geologist found this had been abandoned.
From the appearance of the workings the ore deposit of galena, carbonate of lead,
zinc, &cc., had filled pockets and fissures in the limestone, and had therefore been of
uncertain occurrence.
Extended Union Gold Mines —Locality, about three miles S.E. from
Springhill. A great mass of stone has been taken out, and the cap of the lode
looks like an empty quarry. It was formerly a tangled mass of leaders going in


every direction, giving as much as 80ozs. of gold to the ton. Subsequently, the reef
growing poorer, the mine was mismanaged, and is now (1886) let on tribute to China-
men. With good management the mine would yield large returns. —(Woods, 1886.)
The Government Geologist reports (1894) at Roberts’s claim there were a number
of Chinese following the rich quartz leaders by shafts and cuttings, and some rich
specimens were shown in which the gold occurred in grey magnesian limestone in
the form of thin plates filling cracks in the limestone.
Faded Lily. —Locality, west of Claudius’ (Haim ; area, 10 acres. Lode 18in.
wide, strong and well defined. A parcel of 100 tons of stone yielded loz. per ton;
another just ready for the battery was expected to give 2ozs. per ton. Other parcels
have returned 3ozs. per ton. The Inspector stated that 50 Chinese were at work
when he examined the property. (1891.) This property was purchased in 1896 by
the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia, Limited. Main shaft sunk to 212 ft.
Fergusson River Goldfield. —Locality, 25 \ miles E. \ S. from Pine
Creek Railway Station, proclaimed in April, 1896.
Flora Bell Proprietary Silver Mining Company, —The property
held consisted of 60 80-acre leases of mineral land, within two miles of the Palmer-
ston and Pine Creek Railway. The Inspector of Mines reported in 1891 that the
company holding this property started in 1887, and up to the time of stopping work
expended £20,000. A nice-looking lode outcrops for a considerable length in the
property. From Bechervaise’s lode some very rich silver ore was mined, 99 tons
sent to Port Adelaide realising a net profit of £727 ss. 6d., and another 34 tons
£192 14s. 2d. A number of shafts were sunk which gave no large result, but
proved the lode to be continuous. A main shaft was put down to a depth of 210 ft.,
and a little driving was done on the course of the lode, but very little ore was
obtained. Altogether there were seven shafts sunk, and very little ore was obtained.
If the work done had been concentrated on the Bechervaise lode when the rich ore
was obtained this mine might have proved payable instead of being abandoned.
Fountain Head Diggings. The Government Geologist reported upon
these after an inspection in 1894. There is a belt of four reefs trending north-
westerly through and across micaceous clay slate and sandstone rocks. He was
informed the deepest workings were at 70ft. from the surface, and the veins were
reported to be rich.
Fountain Head Gold Claim. —There was a large quantity of gold found
in the alluvial, all worked by Chinese, of whom there were as many as 300 at one
time. It was long deserted, but, according to Mr. V. L. Solomon, had (1890)
resumed working, and a 10-head battery, with the latest saving appliances, was
treating the stone. The Inspector of Mines, in 1891, examined this property and
considered it a rich holding. Only a few Chinese fossickers are now working.
Gash’s Claim. —Area, 10 acres ; worked (reported the Inspector) by Chinese
tributors by small shallow shafts and open cuttings. A yield of 3ozs. per ton was
obtained from 60 tons of stone ; the last parcel only 1 Idwts. per ton. A well-defined
lode running through the block, but very little work done on it.
Golden Chance. —Locality, one and a half miles from the Government works,
Arltunga; reef, 4ft. wide, striking north-westerly and dipping south-easterly. The
ferruginous quartz carries a little copper, and is freely studded with coarse gold; a
return of 2ozs. per ton is anticipated. — (Register , 25/3/98.)
Golden Chance Reef. —A parcel of stone, 42 tons 12cwts. Iqr., yielded at
Arltunga Cyanide Works, in September, 1898, 25ozs. 2dwts. 3grs.
Golden Creek. —Situated west of the Dalhousie; area, 14 acres. The
Inspector did not rfecommend further expenditure upon this mine. At about 80
yards distance a strong lode shows itself in a shallow pit.


Golden Tree Mine. —Adjoining Maude Hill. From a vein Sin. thick 4 tons
of stone yielded 4|ozs. of gold per ton. Running through the claim there is a well-
defined lode with numerous parallel veins. The claim has not been properly worked.
Goodhall’s Claim. —Locality, south of Claussen’s. Formerly held by Chinese,
who worked the small leaders along the surface.
Great Albion. —Near Arltunga. It is reported that several auriferous reefs
traverse this property, and prospects obtained by dollying are stated to be very
encouraging.
Grierson’s Gully Gold Claim. —A broad flat, worked in shallow sinkings
for alluvial gold. The gravel is small, in angular fragments, and consists of blackish
quartz and schist. (Woods, 1886.)
Griffith’s & Brown’s Silver Lease.— Locality, south of Grove Hill;
area, 59 acres. A large ironstone outcrop is said to have yielded 68Jozs. of silver
per ton.
Hale River Reefs. —The principal gold reefs hitherto discovered are south of
the Hale, between and in the vicinity of Running Water, Paddy’s Hole, and the
Government Well. At the time the Government Geologist first visited the place
(Nov., 1888) there were very few men on the field, as owing to want of water they
were unable to work at the reefs. At Paddy’s Hole a shaft was being sunk on quartz
veins, with gossan and iron ore patches ; fine gold was visible in the stone, and from
crushings good prospects of this gold were obtained. The rocks here are argillaceous,
gneissic, micaceous sandstone, and granite, with quartz reefs. The groups of claims
on the Hale were some 18 or 20 in number. In all, or nearly all, fine gold could be
seen on breaking the stone, and on crushing and washing the quartz similar gold was
always visible. The reefs are composed of quartz containing gossan, iron oxide and
pyrites, and a little copper. The quartz is generally cavernous, and it is in these cavities
that the fine gold is most frequently seen ; in some cases quite freely. As a rule the veins
are small, and the exposure of reef along the surface short. In some claims there are
several parallel reefs. Some of the richest are only a few inches wide on the surface.
So little work has been done that it is very difficult to say with any degree of con-
fidence what the average return of gold per ton is likely to be. The best of the reefs
may be expected to yield in bulk from 1 oz. to Bozs. to the ton. There is no reason
to expect phenomenal yields, as the gold is very finely disseminated. No doubt,
when machinery has been erected, and these reefs come to be worked, richer stone
will be met with, and some of the larger reefs, which at present have not been pros-
pected, will be found to be gold-bearing. The bearing of these reefs is north-north-
east, north and south, &c., and they vary in width from a few inches to 2ft. The
country rock is gneiss, micaceous slate, and sandstone, diorite, epidosyte, syenite, &c.
The ranges where the reefs occur are traversed by numerous gullies and sandy creeks,
which are likely to contain alluvial gold. Mr. Benstead, of Alice Springs, informs us
that there are now (1890) three machines on the field: a Huntington mill, and two
three-head stampers ; but only one crushing has yet been had, when a parcel of 20
tons yielded 17ozs. and some pennyweights. There is a shaft on the Junction reef
which has been sunk to a depth of 50ft., and coarse gold is carried all the depth.
The Wheal Fortune has struck a reef at a depth of 90ft., which is 2ft. wide, and
shows gold. There is a Government well 4()ft. deep, which gives all the water supply
available. Since the above was written the Arltunga field has been more or less
continuously worked, and has yielded a very considerable quantity of gold. Cyanide
works have been set up by the Government, and other facilities afforded to promote
the development of this important goldfield.
Hale River Silver-Lead. —Whilst examining the Hale River Reefs the
Government Geologist was shown several specimens of silver-lead, which were said
to have been found in the neighborhood of the reefs. An assay of two samples, by
Mr. Goyder, jun., returned —silver 44ozs. 12dwts,, and 12ozs. 15dwts., and lead 48


per cent, and 13 per cent, respectively. The country rocks are similar to those of
the Barrier Ranges and the N.E., and are likely to contain both silver and copper
bearing lodes.
Hann’s and Hillson’s Tin Claim. —Locality, half a mile from the
Cosmopolitan. Tin is (says the Inspector) disseminated through the whole of a large
dyke of greisen. It is worth from 1 per cent, to 2 per cent, of tin oxide per ton.
Hann’s Tin Claims. —Locality, two and a half miles S.W. from Springhill;
area, 240 acres. Stream tin had been worked (Inspector of Mines, 1891) and a
number of good lodes and a considerable area of alluvial awaiting the prospector.
Payable tin had been obtained to a depth of 7ft.
Hibernia Mine. —Adjoins Maude Hill; area, 10 acres. The Inspector re-
ported in 1891 that three shafts had been put down, and three parcels of stone sent
to the battery. The first 2 tons yielded of gold per ton, the second 2 tons
sozs. 6dwts. per ton, and the third 42 tons yielded loz. per ton.
H, M. Solomon’s Gold Mine. —Locality, north from Maude Creek; area,
20 acres. The Inspector reported in 1891 that a shaft had been sunk on a well-
defined and strong lode, averaging 3ft. wide. Another lode outcropping near is
likely to junction with it. Gold is visible in the stone, but it is too fine to be saved
by ordinary treatment; probably dense pyrites will be met at depth.
Homeward Bound. —Situated at Brock’s Creek, on the John Bull line of
reef ; area, 12 acres. The Inspector reported in 1891, that five shafts (four vertical
and one inclined) had been sunk within a distance of 300 ft. on the line of the lode.
From 174 tons of stone 410ozs. of gold was returned ; 66 tons taken from old work-
ings returned 40ozs. The lode in the stopes is small but solid; and pyrites ore shows
in the lower levels.
Hong Kong Mine. —Locality, S.W. from Springhill. The Inspector of
Mines stated (1891) this claim gave as much as 30ozs. per ton from'small leaders.
The mine bears the appearance of having been fossicked rather than mined.
Houschildt’s Rush. —This is an alluvial and reef goldfield, about four miles
south of the Eveleen, and said to extend seven miles. The sinking is very shallow,
in a soft ferruginous slate. Chinese were working in a band of decomposed limonite
or ironstone. It must be very rich, for gold was visible in all the matrix, which is a
very red gravel. There must be many other reefs.—(Woods, 1886.)
Howley. —The Inspector of Mines, during his official examination of Northern
Territory mines in 1891, said that this showed rich gold, copper, and tin deposits.
Rich gold returns had been obtained on the Bridge Creek line of reefs. The Govern-
ment Geologist in 1894 saw a number of Chinamen reefing here down to 120 ft.
They possessed a battery. The auriferous veins are small, and the quartz usually of
a bluish color
Some gold claims at the Howley battery were being worked by about 30 China-
men, under the supervision of a head man. The deepest shaft was said to be 150 ft.;
others ranged from 40ft. to 90ft. There are four parallel vertical reefs.
Howley Prospecting Claim. —Formerly worked by a German party of
prospectors, who from 50 tons of stone obtained 104ozs. of gold; another parcel of
50 tons returned 3ozs. 3dwts. per ton. The present holders (reports the Inspector)
were getting and 2ozs. of gold per ton. (1891.) Twenty Chinese were
working on tribute in different parts of the property. The lode in the stopes is 6in.
wide. A good property, worth thorough development. It is now in the possession
of the Howley Gold Mining Company, who have erected a forty-head stamp mill and
treated some thousands of tons of ore averaging lOdwts.
Alluvial flats in the vicinity, one of which gave good returns to the diggers some
years ago.


Isabel Gold Mine. —Situated south of the Extended Union, and possessing a
fine reef of stone nowhere less than 6ft. wide, and in some places much more, 'the
owners got from 209 tons of quartz 2680z5. of gold. Influx of water stopped
working.—( W oods.)
Jensen’s Silver-Lead Lode. —On this a pit has been sunk showing a lode
of quartz and galena 2ft. wide, carrying little silver, but a large percentage of lead.
Another outcrop is near, and an alluvial flat, which the Inspector of Mines thinks
would yield payable prospects.
Jensen’s Rackarock Claim. —Locality, south of the Eleanor, near Pine
Creek Railway. The Inspector of Mines in 1891 stated that he was of opinion that
it was “ one of the best gold mining properties in Australia,” but that it had been
unskilfully worked. The Government Geologist (1894) reports a network of quartz
veins, traversing sandstone rock, followed and worked in the usual way.
The Inspector of Mines reported in 1891 that the mine, if properly worked, could
keep 60 head of stampers going all the year round. It was, in his opinion, one of
the best gold mining properties in Australia.
John Bull Gold Mine. —An alluvial and reef claim that was rendered un-
workable by flooding. Situated about six miles south of the Howley. Indications
very excellent. —(Woods.)
The Inspector of Mines considered this a property that might be made to give
payable results. The report of the Government Geologist in 1894 was that it was
not being worked, but a few Chinamen were about. It is now the property of
Daniels Bros., who have erected a ten-head stamp mill.
Jones’ Claim. —Owned by Europeans and worked (reports the Government
Geologist) by Chinese on tribute. A flat vein striking east and west, and dipping
20° to 30° S. Reef averages 15dwts. to 17dwts, per ton.
Jubilee Hill. —Locality, three miles S.E. from Howley battery. Taken up
by the Cosmopolitan Company, but reported by the Inspector in 1891 to have been
abandoned.
Knott & Burdett’s Copper Mine. —Situated about five miles E.N.E.
from Mount Shoobridge Mine. There is a lormation 3ft. wide, with veins of copper
on the footwall; and 22 tons of ore dressed by hand jigger gave 48 per cent, of
copper. From No. 2 shaft 8 tons of ore returned 37f per cent, of copper. The
lode in this shaft had (says the Inspector) been driven on 15ft. each way, and was
2ft. wide.
The same owners hold mineral licence No. 1089 a little distance away, where a
shaft has been sunk on a strong lode, which outcrops for a considerable distance. A
little ore had been raised.
Kohinoor. —The Government Geologist reports : —On this lease there is a large
reef 10ft. to 15ft. wide; strike, N.W.; underlie, S.W. 60° to 70°. Another vein dips
south-easterly. The reef shows good walls of red, green, and brown clay slate,,and
sandstone, and kaolinised clay slate. Worked to a depth of 60ft.
Lady Maude Mine. —Area, 17 acres; lode exposed in one of the shafts
(says the Inspector) is 14ft. wide; 120 tons of stone had yielded only 3£ozs. of gold,
which was very fine.
Leviathan Tin Mine. —Situated on the creek of that name; area, 80 acres.
From two shafts (the Inspector reported) 400 tons of ore, which the owners estimated
at 5 per cent, of tin oxide, had been raised from a large dyke of greisen. A number
of shafts had been sunk on this dyke.


Liberal Licence, No. 1086. —Locality, half a mile N.E. from Howley
battery. The Inspector of Mines reported in 1891 that some Chinese had unlawfully
taken possession of this property, and they would not allow an inspection of the
mine. There was a good copper lode from which some very good ore had been
raised.
Little "Wonder. —The Warden of the Alice Springs Goldfield at the end of
1897 visited this mine, the shaft of which was then down 25ft.
Lynott’s Lease. —Situated at Barney’s Creek. Some nodules of galena were
taken out of ferruginous clay vughs, a mere superficial deposit, which the Inspector
regarded as of no value.
Macarthur District. —In 1891 the Inspector of Mines directed attention to
the fact that gold, silver, and probably other valuable minerals awaited the prospector
here.
Macdonnell Ranges Reef. —At the Arltunga Cyanide Works recently a
parcel of stone 14 tons 17cwt. 2qrs. returned Bozs. 14dwts. I4grs.
Margaret Creek Gold Mine. —This goldfield has been entirely mined by
Chinese, and most wretchedly mined. It has all the indications of being a rich gold
country. A network of dioritic dykes with quartz lodes suggests important mineral
deposits.—(Woods, 1886.) The Government Geologist visited this field in 1894,
and stated that rich gold was said to have been found at the base of a table hill of
micaceous and argillaceous sandstone and slate ore capped with sandstone. The
quartz is glassy, and though the gold is found in large fiat pieces no auriferous reef
has yet been discovered.
MasCOtte. This mine sent in January, 1899, a parcel of 10 tons 3cwts. of stone
for treatment at Arltunga. The yield was 18ozs. 6dwts. Tailings assayed 3dwts.
sgrs. per ton.
Maude Creek Comstock Silver Mining Company.— Area, 200
acres. Samples taken by the Inspector of Mines showed the lode was rich in silver,
besides containing copper.
Maude Creek Reefs. —Situated abont 15 miles from the Katherine. It is
believed that the quartz contains large quantities of fine gold in conjunction with
iron and pyrites, which cannot be extracted by any but the latest improved
machinery.—(“ N.T. A. and Directory.”)
Maude Hill Gold Prospecting Company. —Holding 14 acres, with
which, states the Inspector of Mines (1891), the Lady Davis Claim has been amalga-
mated. A number of shafts and pits had been sunk, and a good strong lode proved,
as also a parallel lode 150 ft. distant. A crushing of 17 tons yielded over 2ozs. of
gold per ton; a previous crushing of 168 tons of stone yielded 2320z5. of gold. The
enclosing rock is syenite.
Maybell Gold Mine , —Situated adjacent to the Eureka; area, 60 acres.
Two parties of Chinese (reported the Inspector, 1891) were working the ground.
Three shafts sunk from 40ft. to 60ft. deep. It is now the property of the Eureka
Gold Mining Company.
McCarthy’s Claim. —'Adjacent to the Dalhousie, and worth developing.
McCallum’s Claim. —Near Victoria and Morning Star leases. Shallow
workings have yielded several parcels of stone; 40 tons gave loz. sdwts. per ton;
and a small lot of 4£ tons returned 14ozs. per ton. A good claim. It is now the
property of the Brock’s Creek Gold Mining Company.


McKinlay and Mount Wells Silver Mining Company. —Locality,
two and a half miles from Springhill and one and a half miles south from the
McKinlay Hiver ; area, five miles by two and a half miles. The Inspector of Mines
reported (1891) that two shafts were down within 20ft. of each other on a north and
south lode, which appeared to be about 3ft. wide, enclosed by walls of argillaceous
slate. It was stated that levels had been driven on the course of the lode 250 ft.,
that they were regular and well defined,’ and that samples of galena and carbonate of
lead ore on an east and west outcrop gave very high returns of silver. The lower
workings could not be examined because of the presence of water.
McKinlay Tin Mine. —Locality, a mile and a half south by west from
Burrundie, The bedrock crops out in irregular angular fragments, slaty in structure,
and the rock is crystalline, showing mica in minute crystals, and quartz in a very
hard felspathic formation.
McKinlay and Mount Wells Tin Mining Association held five
blocks, containing about 3,200 acres. A few shafts have been sunk and clearings
made on the cap of the lodes. The main lode shows exceedingly well. The tin is in
fine crystals in quartz, or disseminated in chlorite of massive character, and little or
no iron. It is stated that picked ore sent to England produced over 50 per cent, of
tin of the finest quality. On the ridges of the hill there are many quartz reefs
cropping out, indicating lodes. In the gullies leading from the hills prospecting for
stream tin has led to good results.—(Woods, 1886.) The Government Geologist
visited this goldfield in 1894, and in his report stated that it had been deserted.
The rock formation is a coarse-grained diorite, and the quartz veins which had been
worked appeared to have been small, and the sinking very hard. The gold is very
fine and filmy. It is a promising locality for gold prospecting. Little work done
upon it.
McKinlay Blocks Mining Syndicate.— Seven mineral claims, 560
acres, near Mount Wells.
Monarch. A prospecting venture by an Oodnadatta syndicate. It was
reported that assays had reached 4ozs. per ton. —(Correspondent.)
Morning Star. —Well worth developing; no work done on the lease.
(Inspector of Mines, 1891.)
Morris’s Silvor Leas©. —Locality, three miles west from Mount I odd.
There is a defined lode of quartz and galena traceable by its outcrop for a long
distance. Worth thoroughly testing.
Mount Gates. —Described by the Inspector of Mines as being in an auriferous
belt of country, with good prospects. No work done in 1891. Ihe Government
Geologist reporting his examination in 1894, said that the rock formation is meta-
morphic claystone and sandstone with serpentinous dioritic and granitoid dykes, and
he was informed that very rich gold specimens had been obtained by surfacing, but
none had been found in the quartz veins. Ihe district has undergone intrusions of
igneous rocks at various times, and to an extraordinary degree. Some shafts had
been sunk, but the locality requires more prospecting.
Mount Lynes. —The Inspector of Mines expressed a good opinion of this tin-
field.
Mount LynGS Tin ivtino. —Situated eight miles S.E. from the Leviathan;
area, 160 acres.. Three dykes of greisen traverse the property in which tin has been
found. From some of the surface workings large nodules of tin oxide obtained;
one weighing 76lbs. was sent to the School of Mines, ihe Inspector of Mines con-
sidered the property worthy of further development.
On the west of and adjoining Mount Lynes an 80-acre block has a dyke of greisen
which contains tin oxide and is worth prospecting.


Mount Shoobridge Tin Mine. —There are several parallel lodes con-
taining a fine show of black tin ore, two or three of which have been uncovered to
the extent of removing about a ton of the ore. —(Woods.) The lode, varying from
2ft. to Bft. wide, was followed to a depth of 150 ft., and was found to carry very
rich deposits of tin, somewhat patchy, but the lode formation was proved to be con-
tinuous to a depth of 180 ft., with true walls. During 1889 the company completed
the erection of crushing and concentrating machinery, and dispatched over 50 tons
of black oxide of tin to London, assaying on the average 65 to 68 per cent,
of metallic tin.—(“ N.T. A. and Directory.”) In 1891 the Inspector of Mines
visited this mine, and gave the opinion that there was in that place a splendid
run of tin country. In 1894 the Government Geologist reported that the workings
had fallen in. The ore seen is distributed through a dyke stone of quartz and mica,
and the enclosing rocks are micaceous slate, sandstone, and mica schist, striking
N. 10° W. in vertical and inclined strata. A few dishes of dirt from the creek
showed small prospects of tin oxide and colors of gold.
Mount Tolmer Tin Mine. —The Inspector of Mines stated in 1891 that
there is a splendid show of tin lodes in this property. A well-defined dyke of
grehen averages Bft. in width, and tin oxide is present to the value of 3 per cent.;
and another large dyke has been prospected that does not yield so well. During the
twelve months the mine was at w r ork 800 tons of ore treated yielded 46J tons of tin
oxide. It was lying idle for want of capital.
Mount Tymn. —The Inspector of Mines visited this place in 1891, and said
there were several lodes containing very good gold well worth prospecting. There
is an unlimited supply of stone easily obtainable, and if it averaged 12dwts. per
ton the mine would be payable. It was stated that the lowest level reached in 1896
was 90ft.
Mount Wells Tin Mine. Situated between Yam Creek and the
McKinlay river, this mine resembles the tin mines of Cornwall, but the tin in quality
surpasses anything ever found outside of Australia. There are two main lodes, and
a shaft has been sunk and an adit driven 100 ft. There is a large quantity of ore
easily accessible.—(Woods, 1886.) The “N.T. A. and Directory” gave particulars
to the end of 1889. At the 230 ft. level the contractors were still driving on the
course of the lode, which is over 4ft. wide, and steady development was proceeding,
and new stamper mills were to be erected shortly. The Inspector of Mines, in 1891,
said there was a large lode here, but it was poor. The Government Geologist saw
the mine in 1894, when it was being worked by a Port Darwin company. The lode
from which the tin was being mined is composed of brecciated quartz, quartz, and
iron ore, with a small percentage of tin, about 50ft. wide. In the lower tunnels it is
much smaller, 3ft. to 4ft. thick. Likely to continue in depth.
Mullin’S and Meek’s Claim. —Locality, near the Howley battery. The
owners were (reported the Inspector) trenching on an Sin. vein, expected to yield
well. It was stated that 6ozs. per ton was realised from a leader Sin. thick, which
was followed down to 40ft. when heavy water was struck which stopped working;
and nothing has been done there since. (1891.)
Mystery Mine. — Adjoins the Cemetery Claim; area six acres. A well-
defined lode, the gold very fine, requiring special treatment.
An adjoining claim has a small vein, and a well-defined lode worth prospecting.
JSTeate’s Gully Gold Mine. —A very good shoot of gold worked by China-
men on tribute. On top of the ridges on each side the flat there are quartz reefs.
The lode looks excellent.—(Woods, 1886.)
New Era. —Adjoins the United Gold Mine. Never worked. The Inspector of
Mines states that auriferous veins pass through the block.


New Port Darwin Tin Mine Company. Property situated at
Mount Wells; area, 240 acres. The Inspector of Mines formed a favorable opinion
of the work and prospects in 1891, and gave a very detailed report of the method
of working.
New Thunderer. —Locality, Pine Creek. In November, 1894, just sub-
sequently to the visit of the Government Geologist, it was reported that this mine
crushed 150 tons for 8720z5. of gold from a depth of 70ft. (Register, 27/11/94.)
The Government Geologist reported—The auriferous vein here consists of bluish
colored quartz, ironstone, and gossan, varying from 6in. to Ift. in thickness, and
bearing N.N.W. 10° to 15° W.; dip, 70° to 80° E. The walls of vein are well
defined, the rocks being clay slate and argillaceous sandstone. The veins indicate
continuance downwards. The mine was being worked on tribute by Chinese.
North Australian Tin Mining Company. —Locality of property,
Burrundie, where a lease of 8,544 acres of land is held from the Crown for the pur-
pose of mining for tin, silver, and gold. (1890.) The Inspector of Mines reported
(1891) that this formerly belonged to an Adelaide syndicate, and afterwards was
owned in Melbourne. Small quartz veins, containing a little tin cross, a porphyry
dyke. The leases are more auriferous than stainferous, and should be prospected for
gold.
No. 1. Claim. —On the Hibernia line. A great deal of work done. Stone taken
from the different workings gave 20£ozs. of gold from 28 tons ; 8 tons treated at
Pine Creek gave 42£ozs.; 22 tons treated at Maude Creek yielded 15dwts. per ton.
No. 6 Lady Alice Mine. —A shaft had (reported the Inspector of Mines,
1891) been sunk 100 ft. on a very large outcrop holing to a tunnel that had been
driven 220 ft. There are two distinct lines of reef, one called the Lady Alice and the
other the Union, not more than 100 ft. apart. Miller Bros, had done most of their
work on the former line ; 10,000 tons of stone had been crushed, yielding on the
average of gold per ton Six Europeans and 50 to 60 Chinese employed.
A first-class mine.
No. 1 North Lady Alice. —Area, seven acres. Two small parties of
Chinese tributing in 1891, fossicking rather than mining. The Inspector of Mines
reported that the mine had been productive in former years, but should have
received more skilled treatment than it had received recently.
No. 1 South Lady Alice. —Area, seven acres. The Inspector of Mines-
(lB9l) says that the lode outcrops very boldly, and is at least 27ft. wide, and 25 tons
taken out averaged 15dwts. per ton. Tunnels were driven, and a shaft sunk, but the
yield of gold was not so good. Chinese were working on tribute on other parts of
the claim, and 12 tons crushed gave a return of 28ozs. of gold.
No, 2 South Lady Alice. —Area, nine acres. The report of the Inspector
of Mines states that there are several old shafts on the property varying in depth
from 50ft. to 89ft., which yielded from 50 tons of stone from 9dwts. to 25dwts. per
ton. From an open cutting 500 tons returned 18dwts. of gold per ton.
No. 3 South Lady Alice. —On the Union line of reef; area 9£ acres.
Very little work done (1891); from 12 tons crushed a return of 18dwts. per ton was
obtained. The Inspector of Mines states that 20 tons from an open cutting yielded
25dwts. per ton, and 25 tons from a pit yielded I7dwts. per ton. This is a property
well worth working.
No. 4 South Lady Alice. —Area, nine acres. The report of the Inspector
of Mines (1891) was that a considerable quantity of gold had been won, but latterly
the claim had been worked on tribute by Chinese from a shaft 65ft. deep and open
cuttings. The last crushing of 120 tons had yielded 12dwts. per ton.


No. 5 South Lady Alice Reef. —Area, 9J acres, first worked in 1873;
a number of shafts on line of lode, one 105 ft., at which depth \£ater was struck. The
Inspector of Mines reported in 1891 that the lode had not been prospected to any
considerable depth though a large quantity of gold has been obtained. Owners
were recommended to thoroughly test the lode down to 300 ft.
No. 1 North Union. —Area, 10 acres. The report of the Inspector (1891)
stated that four shafts had been sunk and connected by drives, and a good deal of
other work done. A run of stone was cut that was rich in gold :—First crushing,
20 tons, 3ozs. per ton;' second, 17 tons, 9ozs. per ton; third, 17 tons, 7ozs. per ton ;
fourth, 12 tons, 2£ozs. per ton. A great deal of more or less payable work was done
elsewhere, and Chinese tributors, it was stated, got out 52 tons from old workings,
which returned 3ozs. of gold per ton.
No. 2 North Union. —Area, 12 acres. In the early days (reported the In-
spector of Mines) Messrs. Shakes and Cornelius took out 60 tons of stone from a
large lode outcrop, which gave a return of sozs. of gold per ton. There are several
open cuts, shaft, and tunnel; and Chinese were working a vein on tribute, and break-
ing good auriferous stone.
No. 3 North Union. —Area, 11 acres. The Inspector states that lOcwts. of
stone taken from this block returned 40ozs. of gold to the prospector. From another
small vein 10 tons were taken, and gave a return of 57ozs. of gold. One crushing of
306 tons returned 9440z5. 16dwts. of gold. No well-defined effort has been made to
develop this mine.
Nos. 4 and 6 North Union. —Held (1891) by the Alta Company; area
20 acres. The Inspector reports shallow workings over the whole area, and good re-
turns obtained. One of the earliest crushings of 160 tons gave a return of 3090z5.
of gold. From a shallow shafts two crushings gave respectively —12 tons, 14ozs.
6dwts., and 10 tons returned 50ozs. of gold. Some Chinese on tribute from 28 tons
of stone obtained a yield of 74ozs, of gold. From an open cutting 60 tons gave
4500z5. of gold. Chinese were still fossicking the claim.
Nos. 6 and 7 North Union. —The Inspector reported Chinese tributors
at work. He was informed that the prospector took out a small crushing for a
return of 40ozs. of gold per ton. Recently 2 tons of stone yielded 160z5., and
another parcel of 7 tons returned 6£ozs. of gold.
Nos. 8,9, 10, and 11 North Union.— Area, 32 acres. The report of
the Inspector (1891) was that this claim had been worked off and on for 15 years,
and the Chinese (24 of whom were at work) said it was very poor. A recent crush-
ing of surface stone returned only 6£dwts. of gold per ton. These several blocks
have hardly been touched so far as real mining is concerned.
No. 12 North Union. —Area, 10 acres. Held (1891) by Chinese under
lease. The Inspector relates that 15 shafts had been sunk within 100 yards on the
course of the lode, the depths varying from 70ft. to 125 ft. During the previous four
years 601 tons of stone taken out had returned 1,6580z5. of gold. From an open
cutting 770 tons of stone yielded 1,6000z5. of gold. Hedge and party, the first
prospectors, got a return of llozs. of gold per ton from 30 tons of stone.
No. 1 South Union Gold Claim. —The main shaft has been sunk over
200 ft., and the 2,000 tons of stone passed through the battery has yielded satisfactory
returns. —(“ N.T. A. and Directory.”)
No. 1 South Union. —Area, 20 acres. The Inspector (1891) reported there
were three old shafts down to an average depth of 96ft., and that the stone gave for
respective parcels as follows:—16 tons, llozs. per ton; 12 tons, 7ozs. per ton; and
7 tons, 14ozs. per ton. These were from workings covering 150 ft. on the line of
reef. Other workings had been carried on with lower results.


No. 2 South Union. —Area, 14 acres ; work done included shaft-sinking,
crosscutting, and open cuttings. The Inspector of Mines reported that the first
crushing taken out from a cutting yielded 150ozs. of gold from 11 tons of stone; the
second gave 96ozs. for 11 tons. The large bodies of stone here are comparatively
untouched.
No. 3 South Union. —Formerly known as McEnhill’s reef. In 1874 and
1875, 1,300 tons of stone crushed yielded 2ozs. of gold per ton. A large quantity of
work done is detailed in the Mine Inspector’s report, but the yields of gold were not
large. Deeper sinking suggested.
No. 7a South Union. —Area, 14 acres, and situated west of No. 4. A good
shaft (states the Inspector of Mines, 1891) had been put down 150 ft. vertical ; water
struck at 100 ft. A considerable quantity of stoping was done, and the average yield
of gold from all stone taken out was 4ozs. per ton. The property has not been
thoroughly tested.
No. 10 South Union. —Locality, west of Union or Trig. Hill; area 169
acres. The report of the Inspector of Mines was to the effect that the Chinese had
sunk a shaft 207 ft., and had done a great deal of driving and stoping, and a large
quantity of gold was got out. The mine had been purchased by Millar Bros., who
were working it in a proper way.
Northern Territories Goldfields Company. —ln December, 1896, a
newspaper correspondent stated that operations had been energetically commenced
opening up their property at Brock’s Creek and the Howley.
Nugget. —In the latter part of 1898, 8 tons of stone from this mine, treated at
Arltunga, returned at Arltunga Cyanide Works 13dwts. 21grs. per ton.
Oliffe Reef. —The second crushing (November, 1898) gave 14dwts. 17grs. per
ton for a parcel of 25 tons treated at Arltunga.
Olsen Syndicate. —Working the Wheal Mundi Mine in 1896.
O’Neil’s Claim. —North of the Prospecting Claim. It was stated that 25 tons
of stone taken from the workings have yielded of gold per ton, and 1 ton
returned 30ozs. of gold. The claim was abandoned in 1891.
Paddy’s Hole. —Mr. Benstead furnished the following information for the last
edition (1890) : —The discovery of gold at this place occurred in April, 1887, and the
largest nugget found weighed 2ozs. 4dwts. Prospectors have worked in half a dozen
gullies, but principally in those called the Kangaroo and Nuggety gullies. At the
present time there are about 40 men on the field, some of whom have done fairly well.
About half the number are prospecting for alluvial gold, which is rough and coarse.
It is probable that at the least 200ozs. have been sent away, and were there not so
much difficulty in respect to water supply for washing it is believed there would be
a very satisfactory, if not large, yield. v
Pay-me-Well Claim. —Situated east from the Hong Kong Claim. The
Inspector of Mines stated (1891) that a large amount of shallow work had been done
on different veins, and a considerable quantity of gold obtained.
Pickford’s Lease. —Situated on the Anne river; area, 80 acres. From
shallow workings on a large dyke of greisen 22 tons of ore was shipped to Swansea
undressed, and the owners received for it £l6O after payment of the large expenses
incurred, the ore having to be dressed in England. The freight charge (reported the
Inspector) was 10s. per ton from the mine to Port Darwin.


Finder’s Hill Gold Claim adjoins the Isabel. A shaft was sunk 70ft.
and 124 tons of stone got, which yielded 1690z5. of gold. Not now working.—
(Woods, 1886.)
Pine Creek. —Locality, ten miles south from the Union. Amidst the quartz
lodes, which are almost meridional in direction, there is a variety and extent of
minerals which has few parallels in other countries —gold, silver, lead, tin, and copper.
Only four claims now working. (1886.) Three hundred and sixty ounces was got
from 30 tons of stone. This will give an idea what the country is. (Ibid.)
During the Government Geologist’s examination of the Pine Creek country (1894),
he reported that the reefing claims extend in a north-westerly direction about three
miles along the railway on its south-western side. All the claims were worked by
Chinese either as leaseholders or tributors. The field was much cut up by shafts and
excavations. The belt of auriferous veins and reefs traverses the country rocks
along the strike N. 35° to 40° W., some of them being large and wide, accompanied
by small vertical, inclined, and flat quartz veins, usually richer than the large reefs,
but thinning out occasionally. Some of the wide surface outcrops of quartz seen on
the Christmas, New Year, and Democrat leases, have the appearance of being saddle
reefs— an important matter as affecting deep mining ; but good ground has been so
much broken up by the fossickers it is impossible to determine the point.
Port Darwin Gold Mining Company. —Property situated on the
Bridge Creek line of reefs, Howley district; area, 10 acres. Rich stone was found
in shallow workings by the former owners, Beetson Bros.; but the Inspector could
not obtain any information respecting the result of this company’s operations.
Princes Louise (Grove Hill) Gold Mining Company. —Locality,
the head of Neate’s Gully, on the Priscilla line of reef. A dyke of sandstone, 12ft.
wide (reported the Inspector 1891), enclosed by slate walls, has floors of veins of
ferruginous quartz from wall to wall. At the bottom of a 17Oft. shaft, dense iron
pyrites in quartz occurs, which yield from 2ozs. to 3ozs. of gold per ton; 2,379 tons
of stone treated had yielded loz. 13dwts. lOgrs. of gold per ton. A good mine.
Purchased in 1896 by the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia, Limited,
Pugh’s Claim. —Locality, north from Mullin’s. A main lode outcropping,
from which good prospects can be obtained. Claim worth developing.
Quehi —Official return from 16 tons 3cwts. of stone lOozs. lOdwts. of gold, and
in the tailings Idwt. 3grs. per ton. (January, 1899.)
Radford’s Blow (White Hill). —Locality, S.W. from Grove Hill a mile
and, a half. The lode (says the Inspector) is without doubt the main one from Yam
Creek. Abandoned by the Kapunda Gold Mining Company. It was stated that 150
tons of stone from the eastern veins had crushed loz. Idwt. of gold per ton.
A deep alluvial flat running for two miles parallel to Margaret river the Inspector
considered well worth working.
Red Castle Reward. —Locality, adjacent to the Arltunga Mine; said to
possess a good main reef.
Red Hill Gold Mine. —Locality, near Radford’s Blow; area, 20 acres.
Worked by Chinese. The report of the Inspector (1891) was that there was a large
lode running through the property, but little had been done to prove it. Extensive
work had been done on segregated veins, which were found all over the claim. The
mine would give good profits properly worked.
Republic. —Area, 13 acres. The Inspector of Mines (1891) reported that a
crushing from the western part of the claim had given 2500z5. of gold from 9 tons of
stone. Other parcels had given returns which, if not so rich, were very satisfactory.


Richardson’s Reef. —The Inspector describes a jumbled vein from which
gold could he obtained wherever tested. A well-defined lode is also in this claim,
but it had scarcely been prospected. (1891.)
River Cullen. —The Government Geologist examined this district in November,
1894, and reported that the formation is granitic, with alluvium containing gold and
tin, which would pay to sluice, as water is plentiful.
Round Hill. —The Advertiser (24/3/98) reported that stone was being raised
from rich leaders in this claim ; and in November, 1898, the official returns by the
manager of the Arltunga Cyanide Works stated that 15 tons 13cwts. 2qrs. of stone
treated returned 17ozs. 3dwts. sgrs.
Ruby Mine. —Official returns (December 23rd, 1898) from the Government
Cyanide Works, Arltunga, states that 16 tons 2cwts. of stone yielded by battery loz.
3dwts. sgrs. of gold per ton, valued at £3 13s. per ounce, and that the tailings
assayed 6dwts. Igr. per ton.
Rum Jungle Silver and Copper Show. —Locality, one and a half miles
S.E. from Rum Jungle railway siding. There is an outcrop of silicious ironstone
intermixed with cerussite and copper carbonates; and some outcrops stained with
copper show on other parts of the property.
Sagabiel’s Claim. —Area, 10 acres; being w r orked (1891) by Chinese
tributors. The Inspector of Mines stated that a crushing of 15 tons returned 52ozs,
of gold. The claim has only been scratched on the surface. It changed hands a
little later, and is worth working.
Sandy Creek, a wide open valley, with gullies in the ranges, which have all
been proved to be more or less auriferous, and some extremely rich.—(Woods.)
Snadden’s Creek Tin Mine. Situation, east of south of Mount Wells,
10 miles. The ore is a coarse tin sand, with fragments of beautiful wood tin about
an inch or so in diameter. The size of the fragments indicate veins at no great
distance.— (lhid.J
Springhill Gold Claim. —Locality, seven miles south from Mount Wells.
It is said that about B,oooozs. of gold have been taken from this claim, very fine, and
worth £3 17s. 3d. per ounce. The range is full of quartz reefs and leaders, none of
which have been at all properly tested. —(Ibid.J The Inspector of Mines reporting
on this claim in 1894 stated that the prospecting shaft was 230 ft. deep, following the
dip of the lode 55 c E. A considerable amount of stoping had been done for 400 ft.
in length at a depth of 230 f t, the lode in some places being 12ft. wide. Amain
shaft is down 357 ft. vertical, and the lode was encountered in a crosscut at 20ft.
From a nice looking vein in another shaft, at a depth of 60ft., 50 tons of stone
gave 75ozs. of gold. This property is well worth working.
Springhill Reefs. —There is a good property on this line of reefs, formerly
known as the United Gold Mining Company, containing rich leaders. It was worked
by a 40ft. shaft and tunnel, and let on tribute.—(lnspector of Mines, 1891.)
Stapleton Gold Reefs . —The stone is said to be good, and when costs of
carting and crushing have been cheapened it is believed these mines will be worked
again. (1890.)
Star of the East. —Situated near Arltunga. In a report in the Advertiser
(25/3/98) it was stated that the stone shows fine gold, and dollies well; but the
September official return from the Government cyanide works states that from over
10 tons of stone the return was only 13dwts. 20grs.


Star of the North. —A trial crushing by the Macdonnell Ranges and
Arltunga Gold Mining Syndicate, by means of the Huntington mill, resulted in a
return of sozs. of gold from 4£ tons of stone. In the offiicial returns, December,
1896, the stone from surface gave loz. 12dwts. of gold and 7dwts. of silver per ton;
and from a depth of 12ft., 6ozs. 6dwts. of gold and loz. 18dwts. of silver per ton.
In 1898 the prospectors were raising auriferous stone from open cuts.
Star of the North Telegraph Syndicate.— No information.
Star of Bethlehem. —Some patches of galena deposited on limestone. No
lode or indication of permanent deposits.
Sultana Blocks. —Locality, Pine Creek; area, 20 acres, held by the Pine
Creek and Palmerston Prospecting Company. Three parcels of stone were reported
to yield—first, 30 tons, 3£ozs. of gold per ton; second, 35 tons, per ton; and
third, 25 tons, £oz. of gold per ton. The whole width of the lode (3ft.) gave a return
of lOdwts. Not considered payable. Other blocks, states the Inspector, namely,
Monarch, Newcastle, and Enterprise, were owned by the same company.
Temperance Gold Mine. —Situated a mile distant N.W. from Princess
Louise; area, 80 acres; worked by Chinese tributors. A number of strong lodes
traverse the property worth prospecting, and alluvial ground besides.
Toby’s Luck.- Adjoining O’Neil’s claim. There are small veins inclining at
a low angle. Eighty tons of stone yielded lOOozs. of gold. In 1891 it had been
abandoned.
Union Gold District. —The following information appeared in the former
edition: —
This district, situated about 120 miles from the seaboard (with which it is connected by railway),
has reefs which have been proved to extend nearly twenty miles, the Extended Union Mine being the
most northern property worked, and the Pine Creek district is its southern termination. The mines
occur on true fissure lodes in sandstone and slate country, bounded on the east by an immense range
of granite. The railway running to the west of the line of reef is within easy distance of all the
mines. About forty gold-mining leases were taken up, the Prospectors’ Claim being situated about the
centre of the district. Acting upon the advice of mining experts, Messrs. Millar Brothers purchased and
secured more than half of this district, and engaged in developing their southern properties. A shaft was
sunk on No. 10 South Union to a depth of 300 ft., and the reef at that level was 12ft. wide, inter-
banded with black slate carrying gold. The early crushings made at the public battery from this
claim gave a return of 1,3570z5. from 266 tons. A 10-head battery was erected, and the mine con-
nected by tramway with the railway. The labor employed on this mine, and indeed on all the mines,
was Chinese, ready to take contracts for all mining work, and many of them were expert miners. The rate
of wages was 6s. per day for dry work and 7s. per day for wet ground; and the managers spoke in
the highest terms of their plodding perseverance. The Messrs. Millar Brothers had a large number of
hands employed on their leases, and were sinking a shaft with the intention of going down 500 ft. on
No. 5 south claim, where also a powerful battery was to be erected. At the Prospectors’ and adjoin-
ing claims the cap of the reef was very rich ; the first crushing gave over 800ozs. from 10 tons, and
crushings of 10ozs., 200z5., and 300z5., for small parcels were numerous. The South Union Company,
adjoining the Prospectors’ Claim, erected a Huntington mill, but this was to he replaced by a battery.
There are five reefs proved to extend through their claims, and past crushings have given large
returns. At the Alice Union Company’s claims an immense outcrop of the lode appears on the surface,
and proved to be 20ft. wide at a depth of 100 ft., showing gold in the stone. The claims adjoining to
the Alice Union were worked by a local company. Some of the other claims were worked by the Chinese
on tribute, and lOoz. and 12oz. crushings had been recorded from a small reef on their No. 12 north
claim. The great drawback to successful mining in this district in the past was the high price paid
for cartage, ranging from £2O to £lOO per ton ; and also the high rate of wages paid to Europeans
for labor, viz., 10s. per day and “ found,” equal to £6 per week. Now that the railway is constructed,
the freight is about £2 per ton. Other districts now being worked for gold are the Howley, Grove
Hill, Pine Creek, and Maude Creek; whilst some thousands of Chinese are at work on various alluvial
fields. (1890.)
Union Gold Mines. —The mines under this name may be said to be amongst
the greatest and richest deposits of gold in the Northern Territory, and the whole
line of country includes good reefs of payable stone. The caps gave wonderful crush-


ings—60, 70, 80 ounces per ton ; but the claims are idle, or nearly so, and have been
abandoned one by one, but in no ease for the want of good auriferous stone. The
Union mines may be called the Sandhurst of the Northern Territory.—(Woods, 1886.)
Union Mining* and Crushing Company. —Area held, 38 acres. The
Inspector of Mines, reporting in 1891, said it was part of an old prospecting claim
from which the party took out gold to the value of £38,000, the first crushing of 10
tons of stone yielding 77pzs. 13dwts. of gold per ton. A shaft was being sunk by
Chinese tributors, and others were working by open cutting; terms, payment to the
company of 10 per cent, on all gold obtained, and 18s. per ton for crushing. Last
yield, 2ozs. per ton. A great many workings, but no record yields ; but the property
has not been worked to any depth. Should be worked properly and vigorously.
Union Prospectors’ Claim, adjoining the Alice Union claims, gave 78ozs.
to the ton for its first crushing, and innumerable crushings from the cap of the reef
along the line have given lOozs., lsozs , and 20ozs. to the ton ; but these crushings
are phenomenal, and are what might be expected from the weathering down of a
rich reef leaving the gold on its present cap. During three years from the Lady
Alice and Union reefs 3,464 tons were crushed at a very primitive battery, which it
was estimated lost 50 per cent, of the gold, that the yield was 6,6160z5., or loz.
12dwts. to the ton. This from a reef proved at 200 ft. to be lift, wide, and a true
fissure lode, might be expected to go down to a very great depth, and would compare
with the average of any mining district in the world.
Victoria Lease. —Good position, with lodes running through ; no work being
done. (1891.)
Victory Mine. —Locality, Arltunga district. This is described as having a
big reef, from which, some time ago, very rich specimens were obtained.
Virginia Gold Mine.— Locality, a mile and a half S.E. from Stapleton
Crossing. The Inspector of Mines reported in 1891 that it had become the property
of an English company, but their battery failed to save the gold, though large parcels
previously treated had returned 2ozs. per ton. At 120 ft. in depth pyrites was struck,
and a good attempt was evidently made to develop the mine. The ore yielded
15dwts., and the tailings assayed lldwts.
"Wallaby Copper Mine. —Locality, a mile east from Wheal Banks; area,
320 acres. About 30 tons of copper taken out (states the Inspector), averaging 35f
per cent., but nothing of value in sight (1891). Emm a shallow pit ore yielding
12ozs. of silver per ton was obtained.
Wandi Goldfield . —ln January, 1896, the Register corespondent stated that
30 men were digging, some of whom were making a living by surfacing. In the
following December a number of promising shows were spoken of, compulsorily
idle for want of machinery to treat the stone. New discoveries were mentioned, and
a “ new shoot with rich gold ” was being opened up in the Wandi Belle claim.
Wandi King Reef. —It is stated by a Register correspondent (25/9/96) that
18 tons of quartz from this reef yielded 43£ozs. of gold.
Warland’s Claim. —Locality, S.E. from the Howley battery. The Inspector
saw stone raised that was estimated to go 3ozs. per ton.
Watt’s Tin Claim. —Situated six miles S.E. from Howley battery. Besides
shafts being sunk the Inspector reported that there had been a great deal of
fossicking over the surface and along the outcrop. The property had been (1891)
lying unworked for a considerable time, but if properly rained it would give imme-
diate returns.


Wheal Danks Copper Mine. —This adjoins the Daly River Mine, and a
considerable quantity of work has been done. The main shaft is (January, 1889)
180 ft. deep, and levels are driven. Ores range up to 30 per cent., and some parcel
have been sent away which have realised good prices. The property was in 1890
held by an English company. —(Chief Warden Nash.) The Inspector of Mines
reported in 1891 that 500 tons of ore sent to Newcastle averaged 28 per cent, of
copper. Several piles of ore at grass would pay for treatment, and the mine is
worthy of further development. It was stated that 400 tons of ore had averaged
35 per cent, for fine copper.
Wheal Fortune (Silver). —Situated on the Hale river. A sample from
the Claraville Reefs, tested by the Government Assayer, yielded 93ozs. 7dwts. of
silver per ton and per cent, of lead.
Wheal Fortune Gold Mine. —A parcel of 20 tons put through the Hun-
tingdon mill returned I7dwts. to the ton; the gold being very fine, it was supposed
that an equal quantity lost in the tailings. Two tons of similar stone treated at Port
Adelaide yielded 2£ozs. per ton. Three reefs on the property, all carrying good gold
— (Register , August, 1896.) In an official return in October, 1888, the gold yield was
Bozs. 15dwts. 16grs. from 11 tons 15cwts. of stone. In following December 11 tons
llcwts. 2qrs. yielded llozs. lOdwts. 15grs. of gold, valued at £3 15s. per ounce.
Wheal Mundi. —The official return (November, 1898) for 4 tons 3cwts. of
stone, treated at Arltunga Cyanide Works, was 2ozs. 1 Idwts. 4grs. of gold.
White Range Reef. —Large bodies of quartz exist which are said to give
good prospects wherever tried.
White Range Extended. —The product of a parcel of 41 tons, treated at
the Arltunga Cyanide Works, in November, 1898, was lOdwts. Bgrs. of gold per ton.
In the return for January, 1899, from 14 tons there was extracted 16ozs. 17dwts.;
tailings assayed 2dwts. 22grs. per ton.
White Range Excelsior. —The official return from the Government Works
at Arltunga, for 69 tons 9cwts. 2qrs., in December, 1898, was 33ozs. 9dwts. 18grs.,
valued at £3 12s. 9d. per ounce; the tailings assayed 4dwts. 19grs. per ton.
Wooloonga Reefs. —These (states the Government Geologist, 1894) core,
prise a belt of four or more auriferous veins, striking N. 30° W. to N.W. through
clay slate, micaceous slate, and sandstone, with plumbaginous slate in places.
Numerous shafts and excavations; worked by Chinese. The Inspector of Mines
reported in 1891 that several parcels of stone taken from the shafts yielded well —
the first (70 tons) gave loz. of gold per ton; the second (15 tons) 32ozs. of gold;
and the third (32 tons) 52ozs. The main lode had not been touched. The parallel
vein, which was being worked in a most unminerlike fashion, is 2ft. wide. The claim
had only been fossicked. The property was purchased in 1896 by the Northern
Territories Goldfields of Australia, Limited.
Yam Creek. —This is an extensive mineral or gold-bearing area, including the
Margaret, Stuart’s, Cement, Neale’s, and many other creeks and gullies, from some
of which remarkably rich results have been secured. (See the several mines named
—Woods, 1886.)
Zapopan Mine. —Situated at Brock’s Creek. The Register (May, 1896)
states that the result of a clean-up of about 500 tons of quartz was !25ozs. of free
gold. The blanketings averaged 2£ozs. per ton, and assay showed that the tailings
carried 13dwts. per ton. In the following September it was stated that the free gold
was averaging from 15dwts. to 30dwts. per ton. The company was then working
15 head of stamps, and were obtaining a cyanide plant to treat tailings, which it
was thought would largely increase the total yield of gold. The property was pur-
chased in 1898 by the Brock’s Creek Gold Mining Company.


GEMS.
Garnets are very common in the sands of some of the creeks and rivers, and are
also often seen embedded in the granite and metamorphic rocks of the Hale river
region. Some time ago these gems, which were said to be Oriental rubies and
considered very valuable, were collected in large quantities on the Maude, Florence,
and Hale rivers, and sold in some cases for large prices, the sand being burrowed
into and the garnets picked out by blacks. When, in course of time, people became
convinced that the gems were not rubies, but really garnets, the industry ceased, and
at the time of the visit of the Government Geologist none of the hundreds of claims
which had been taken up were being worked. It is doubtful whether any true rubies
have been found here associated with the garnets, although the rocks are favorable
to the occurrence of these and other gems of a similar composition. When sub-
jected to fire or prismatic analysis the best of the gems are harder and the color
differs from the ordinary garnet. On this account the gem has been termed the
Australian ruby. Beryl, or aquamarine, as previously mentioned, occurs in quartz
at Lindsay’s Mica Mine. Some green stones, which may be beryls or emeralds, are
said to have been found at Ruby Gap.
The following is a list of claims taken out and companies formed during the time
of the ruby excitement: —Australian Ruby Company, Capricorn Ruby Mining
Company, Central Australian Exploring and' Prospecting Association, Elder Ruby
Mining Company, Esmeralda Ruby Syndicate, Excelsior Ruby Company, Great
Matrix Ruby Company, Hale River Ruby Company, Hart Ranges Ruby Mining
Company, Junction Ruby Mining Company, Lizzie River Mining Syndicate, Mac-
donnell Ranges Ruby Mining Company, Maude River Ruby Mining Company, Mid-
Australian Ruby Company, Oliver’s Ruby Company, Oriental Ruby Company,
Orient Company, Pearson’s Extended Ruby and Precious Stones Company, Pennell
and Florence Junction Ruby Mining Company, Rosella Ruby Mining Company, Ross
Ruby Company, South Florence Ruby Company, Telegraph Ruby Mining Company,
and Wallis Ruby and Precious Stones Company.
MICA.
Benstead’s Mica Mining’ Company. —Locality, six miles W.N.W. from
Mount Brassey. The Government Geologist reported in 1891 that the mica is
associated with a boulder-like outcrop of quartz, with bedrocks of gneissic granite
and coarse eruptive granite. Garnets are common in the rocks, and beryl occurs
occasionally. In trenches plates of mica are exposed, some of which are 12in. by
18in. in size. The prospects of a permanent yield he regarded as uncertain.
Lindsay’s Prospecting Company, Limited, hold three 40-acre
blocks, situated in the Macdonnell Ranges, from which they were extracting mica,
which was associated with quartz. As far as can be seen on the surface, the deposit
was 30ft. wide, and outcropped on its course for a distance of about 30ft. The main
outcrop carries blocks from 6in. to 15in. square. The deposit appeared to be very
large. Another outcrop included in this property showed sheets from 3in. to 4in.
square.—(A. Champion.)
Mica Claims. —Locality, Mount Brassey, Hart Ranges. Here, as in other
places, the Government Geologist found (1894) that the mica-bearing rock was a
coarse eruptive granite in dykes traversing gneissic granite rocks, with associated
blows or reefs of quartz. The mica is distributed through the dykes in patches, and
often most largely developed in the vicinity of the quartz. The area over which


mica-bearing rocks are found is very large, and comprises a considerable portion of
the Macdonnell Ranges, and the discoveries of deposits have been numerous. In
1897 the Government Geologist again inspected some of the mica fields, and said
there was abundant scope for the employment of capital in mining for this mineral.
The Inspector of Mines, ere closing his report, felt himself constrained to say —
and that without hesitation—that the Northern Territory is phenomenally rich in
minerals, but more especially gold and tin. Copper is to be found over a large area
of country, the ore being rich as a rule; and an abundance of ironstone is to be
found all over the Territory, but especially to the east of Burrundie. Timber is also
abundant, and is suitable both for mining purposes and for fuel.
GOLDFIELDS AND MINING.
[. Report for 1898.]
Chief Warden’s Office, Burrundie, January 30th, 1899.
Sir—l have the honor respectfully to furnish you with my report on the progress
of gold mining in district “ A,” Northern Territory, for the year ending December
31st, 1898.
As prognosticated by me in my last annual report, the treatment of tailings by the
cyanide process has proved a success and augmented the yield of gold considerably;
about the same quantity will be won by such process this year.
I regret to have again to report a considerable decrease in the yield from the
batteries This falling off can be principally attributed to the fact that though large
sums were spent by English companies here last year in developing their mines only
a small quantity of stone was put through their mills. There should be a large
increase in the yield from this source this year, as three of these mines will be large
gold producers, besides increased yields from the Woolngie, Driffield Extended
Union, and John Bull mines.
Of the mines held by the English companies here the Howley has quite 60.000
tons of low-grade ore ready for stoping: the Eureka, 5,000 tons of rich solid pyrites,
besides about 40,000 tons of surfacing and lode formation which will pay to treat;
the Brock’s Creek Company has about 5,000 tons of refractory ore in sight fairly
rich. Of the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia mines the main lodes at
the Faded Lily and Woolwonga mines are, as far as opened up, rather poor and
refractory, but there is every indication that the Yam Creek will open up well. With
the exception of the Howley Mine the greatest difficulty that has to be contended
with is the heavy water. 1 understand from the managers of these companies that
during this year a large quantity of mining machinery will arrive and be placed on
their mines.
Nine gold mining lease applications, comprising 130 acres, were received and
granted last year. Of this number four leases, comprising sixty acres, were forfeited
on application and re-leased to the successful applicant. On a large number of gold
mining leases the labor conditions were not complied with.
Though fifty quartz claims were registered in this office only about a dozen were
worked during part of the year, and nearly all those by Chinese tributers for Euro-
pean holders.
The only discovery of any importance was a new reef at the Driffield, close to the
old Chinese township; 14 tons of stone from it was carted to and crushed at Pine
Creek and yielded llOozs. of gold.


During last year the proclamation prohibiting Asiatic aliens from mining on the
Pine Creek and Woolngie new goldfields expired ; the only restricted ground now is
the area within a radius of three miles from Aston’s Hill, Wandi.
The mining population on the goldfields has decreased from 1,753 to 1,533. For
years past we have been losing some of our best Chinese miners, numbers having
travelled overland to Queensland, and some returned to China, having made a little
money. Europeans working on wages at the mines receive from 10s. to 15s. per
diem and Chinese ss. to 7s. per diem.
Two fatal mining accidents occurred during last year. In both cases the sufferers
were sorely to blame; they were Chinese miners working in main shafts on the John
Bull line of reefs.
The goldfield revenue is, £727 Us. 6d., an increase on the previous year of
£ll7 Os. 3d. You will observe that, though our mining population has since 1894
decreased nearly one-fourth, more than double the revenue was collected than in that
year.
It is very difficult to get returns from Chinese holders of leases, claims, and mills
even when personally collecting the material; the gold mining laws do not give a
warden any power to compel them to furnish him with correct returns, and I have
received but few authenticated accounts from them.
I herewith beg to enclose returns of machinery, gold, and others, and will now
give a short detailed account of the progress made in gold mining in the different
localities.
Pine Creek, —The two batteries on this line of reefs crushed 1,981 tons for
2,3600z5. of gold; 14 tons of this (yielding UOozs.) was carted from the Driffield.
All the stone treated was obtained by Chinese tributers from shallow workings on
the different reefs and claims. The only systematic development was the extension
of the crosscut from 72ft to 142 ft. at the 200 ft. level in the Dashwood shaft. The
manager of the Cosmopolitan Gold Mining Company expects to cut the lode by con-
tinuing this crosscut another 20ft. The cyanide plant owned by Mr. Finlayson
treated all the tailings at Yet Loongs Chan’s battery and has been shifted to Mount
Ringwood.
]/lcmdi. —This field has clearly retrograded, the population having decreased to
twenty four, and of this number fourteen make a poor living by cradling the surface.
Nearly all the leases and claims are deserted, and I hear that the battery is hung up
for an indefinite period. Of the stone crushed 40 tons, yielding 80ozs , was obtained
from the Klondyke claim, twelve miles south of Wandi, the remainder being sur-
facing and stone from claims and leases near the battery. The little capital that has
been expended on this field has given unsatisfactory results, and if the proclamation
restricting Chinese be extended from next March this year’s return of gold will be
very small.
Driffield. —A few claims in this locality were taken up by European prospectors,
who obtained UOozs. of gold from 14 tons of stone. These claims are now let on
tribute to Chinese, for Asiatic aliens are again allowed to mine on this field. I
understand that the Flora Belle battery is to be erected here as soon as the roads are
fit for traffic.
Woolngie. —The three-head prospecting battery erected on this mine crushed 82
tons of stone, obtained from lease 609, for 2200z5. of gold. Two tunnels have been
driven along the lode, which average 3ft. thick, and a shaft sunk 90ft., cutting the
lode on the underlay. This mine is opening up well, and, with efficient management
and the expenditure of little capital, it should give very satisfactory results.
Union. —No progress has been made in mining on this line of reefs during the
year; 2,668 tons of stone were treated by the four mills for a return of 2,0220z5.
The stone was rooted out by parties of Chinese tributers, being obtained principally
from the Man Yet Co.’s leases.
Eureka. —The Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia Eureka mining proper-
ties were last June sold to a subsidiary company with £50,000 working capital, Mr.
D. D. Rosewarne continuing in charge. During last year good and systematic mining


has been done under his management. The main pump shaft has been deepened to
143 ft. and at the 132 ft. level a crosscut driven to the pyritiferous lode, thence a drive
along the course of the lode for 200 ft. to the underlay winding shaft, which was
enlarged and deepened to that level. Six winzes were sunk connecting the 66ft. and
132 ft. levels. At the 66ft. level a crosscut has been driven about 180 ft. west, cutting
a rich 6in. leader with 3ft. of reef formation. On the Eureka West lease a shaft has
been sunk 70ft., and at that depth a crosscut has been driven 50ft. to the western
reef. On lease 500 the Maybell shaft has been sunk 120 ft. and a crosscut driven
40ft. Four Huntingdon mills, capable of treating 1,000 tons of stone a month, have
been erected, boilers and engines have been carted from the Union (thirty miles) and
placed in position, and by the end of last year everything was in readiness to start
crushing. Of the 12,000 tons of tailings put through the cyanide vats 6,400 tons
were of the original heap of 8,200 tons, 5,240 tons were tailings previously treated
with cyanide, and 300 tons were tailings from the trial parcels of hopperings and
surfacing put through the mills last year. As the mills recovered 4dwts. of gold and
cyanide 15dwts. per ton from this 300 tons the manager intends to put through some
thousands of tons of surface this year, there being quite 30,000 tons close to the
mills
Extended Union. —The leases and battery hr this locality are let on tribute to
Chinese, who crushed 637 tons of stone for 3490z5. of gold. All the stone treated
was obtained within 50ft. of the surface. At the 60ft level in main shaft on the
prospecting claim these tributers have just driven into a rich dyke formation, so the
probabilities are that the output of gold will this year show an increase.
Flora Belle, The Elizabeth lease and claims here are deserted, the stone crushed
by the battery being obtained from the Spring Hill leases.
Spring Hill. - A large number of Chinese are mining on this line of reef, but no
good honest work has been done during last year. The stone crushed by the Rosalie
and Flora Belle batteries was obtained from the numerous reefs and leaders in the
different leases within 60ft. of the surface.
Yam Creek. —During all last year these mining properties were let to Chinese,
who worked them at a profit. The bulk of the stone crushed by the Grove Hill
battery was obtained from leases 337-8 at a depth of from 50ft. to 70ft. The
general manager for the holder of these leases sank a large shaft 98£ft. deep on
lease 338, and is awaiting the arrival of steel shaft lining, hauling and powerful
pumping machinery.
Brock's Creek, John Bull Line. —The manager of the Brock’s Creek Goldfields
Company has vigorously proceeded with the development of his company’s mines,
though for two months the main shaft and workings were flooded through the creek
adjacent to them overflowing its banks. The 150 ft. level in main shaft has been
extended to 550 ft. along the course of the lode, 250 ft. of which is stoped to the
upper level. At the 150 ft level a crosscut has been driven north for 100 ft. through
a large mullocky lode 30ft. thick, and from this crosscut about 200 ft. of driving has
been done. Prospecting shafts have been sunk on leases 475, 470, and 607 to the
depth of 60ft., 40ft., and 45ft. respectively. All the stone crushed by the battery
was obtained from the lower levels, and was so refractory that more than half the
gold was left in the tailings. On the Northern Territories Goldfields Brock’s Creek
leases the Faded Lily main shaft has been deepened to 212 ft., the manager having to
use, besides the 9in. lift, a 6in. Cornish pump and a 3in. steam Knowles to cope with
the heavy water. At the 212 ft. level a large chamber has been excavated, and from
this a crosscut driven north 58ft., and another crosscut driven south-south-east 30ft.
to the main lode, which was then driven on south-east for 170 ft. At the inter-
section of the last-mentioned crosscut and level another crosscut has been driven
south for 95ft. At the 150 ft. level the north crosscut has been extended 150 ft. to
the main lode, which was then opened up in a north-west direction for 148 ft. Near
the eastern boundary of the Faded Lily lease the old Chinese shaft has been
deepened to 106 ft., and at that depth levels have been opened up to the east and
west on a rich 6in. leader and a crosscut driven north to cut the main reef. On


the Alligator lease 40ft. of sinking and 123 ft. of driving have been done. On the
Crocodile lease the crosscut in shaft near southern boundary was extended to 200 ft.
and an air shaft sunk 40ft. The main shaft John Bull lease has been sunk 125 ft.,
cutting the main lode at the end of the 200 ft. drive from the shaft.
Howley. —Early in last year the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia sold
their Howley mining properties to a subsidiary company, and Mr. Cann, who then
took the management, continued the development of the mines and the erection of
machinery. During the year the Howley No. 1 shaft has been deepened to 171 f t,
and at the 160 ft. level a plat has been excavated and a level driven south-east 125 ft.
At the 110 ft. level the main level has been extended north-west to 637 ft., and then
a drive back south on east leg of saddle reef 100 ft. The eastern crosscut has been
extended to 130 ft. and the western 298 ft. Two levels were driven from eastern
crosscut 50ft. and 30ft. along two separate reefs. On main body of saddle formation
at the 110 ft. level the floor has been extended 100 ft. x 100 ft., and quite 60,000 tons
of low-grade ore is now ready for breaking down. On lease No. 544 the No. 2
Howley main shaft has been sunk 80ft. (this shaft is 650 ft. north-west of No. 1 main
shaft). On battery lease the adit has been continued to 300 ft. A complete ten-head
stamp Californian mill has been erected, which crushed 860 tons of stone from the
massive saddle formation for 4520z5. of gold. As this is practically a dry mine
a concrete tank capable of holding s,ooogalls. and a dam with the capacity of
3,000,000ga115. have been made. On old battery lease 96 a new shaft has been
sunk 40ft. and in shaft No. 2 at 50ft. a crosscut driven west 110 ft.
The stone crushed by the Cosmopolitan (Howley) batteries was obtained from
open shallow workings, no good mining having been done on this portion of the
Howley line of reef.
Woolwonga. —On the Northern Territories Goldfields of Australia Woolwonga
leases the main shaft has been sunk to 150 ft., and at that depth a chamber excavated
and a crosscut driven north-east 95ft. From this crosscut 240 ft. of driving has been
done, principally in a southerly direction. A winze has been sunk from the 74ft. to
the 150 ft. level. In this mine great difficulty had to be contended with on account
of heavy water. The battery and leases were let on tribute to Chinese, who also
crushed stone obtained from the leases held by them; some very good crushing
being obtained from lease No. 358.
Mount Ringwood. —Early in last year the owner of the battery and leases in this
locality sank two 50ft. shafts on lease No. 535 and imported machinery to open up
the saddle reef on lease 584; but, through some contention between him and the
Chinese, work was discontinued and the field deserted. A cyanide plant has been
erected to treat the battery tailings.
Other Localities. —At the Great Northern, six Europeans have been raising stone
from the leases during the dry season and cradling during the wet. About 160
Chinese, mostly old men, worked the alluvial at Fountain Head, Sandy and Bridge
Creeks, and Bond’s Rush, but they only eked out an existence A party of Chinese
tributers raised a crushing from a rich mullocky leader on Brampton’s Margaret lease
of 7| tons, which yielded, when crushed at the Grove Hill battery, 110|ozs. of gold.
Nothing has been done during the year on the Mount Tymn and Stapleton leases.
There has been no mining for tin and silver during the year, and only about 40
tons of copper ore were obtained from some mineral licences three miles north-east
of Wandi.
I have, &c.,
E. COPLEY PLAYFORD, Chief Warden, &c.
His Honor Mr. Justice Dashwood, Government Resident, Palmerston.


1ST ORTHERN TERRITORY.
Year.
G(
ILD.
Silver Ore.
Copper Ore.
Tin
Ore.
Mica.
Silver Lead.
Gold Ore and
Concentrates.
Total Value.
Ozs.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
1880 ..
1881 ..
1882 ..
1883 ..
1884 ..
1885 ..
1886 ..
1887
1888 ..
1889 ..
1890 ..
1891 ..
1892 ..
1893 ••
1894
1895 ••
1896 ..
1897 ••
1898 ..
31,5094
23,016
21,806
21,675
19,606!
17,490
18,846!
9,713
13,957
23,235
28,629
3i,7o8
3i,276§
3G543I
29,581
22,979
23,5774
29,163!
£
680
1 11,945
80,720
77,195
77,935
70,414
63,139
68,774
34,802
47,339
80,524
98,149
109,228
108,110
109,392
102,732
81,178
81,024
84,467
*644
54io
*6444
*93-&
2
1 *4ao
10
5
22^
£
303
1,491
3,849
3,720
20
1,640
150
**5
1,230
7
*,03645
8o8 2 -%
566-21J
81
8762%-
402j§
256H
168^
*35
156
5244
£
206
*3,775
9,492
5,888
1,360
**,565
4,600
3,619
2.155
1,190
*,204
410
0^20
20
*844
3
11
28
84
89^0'
1*441
29*
39^
2844
3 2 2%
69^0"
*420*
45
£
1,650
87*
814
*35
78
1,322
3,i59
4,36o
6,140
1,870
2,433
*,595
*,251
*,815
530
100
2%
tons. cwt. qrs. lbs.
13 19 2 25
7 iny
*44
£
*34
4,808
2,638
732
2952*0
228
33
9a%
98/0-
£
13,675
*5,463
2,3*0
647
4,120
9io
5
22*0
7 IS.
/ 20
£
229
50
22
277
£
680
***,945
82,576
78,066
78,749
84,324
73,012
89,659
56,275
69,423
95,631
107,778
*15,456
111,179
116,999
*07,645
83,692
81,024
84,844
Totals
429,312^
*,487,747
5834 ;
12,518
4,54641
55,464
660-/0-
28,123
23 5 2 25
8,3*2
66 3 4f
36,215
24
578
1,628,957




fcibUO
f 11+70




