

RECORD
OF THE
FIFTH ANNUAL COMMEMORATION
OF THE
REV. JOHN ALEXANDER DOWIE
And MRS. DOWIE’S
MINISTRY OF
Healing through
Faith in Jesus
HELD IN THE
FREE CHRISTIAN TABERNACLE, FITZROY, MELBOURNE,
ON
LORD’S DAY, DEC. 4TH & MONDAY, DEC. 5TH, 1887.
CONTAINING TESTIMONIES FROM THOSE HEALED
AND
EBENEZER ADDRESSES.
“ CHRIST IS ALL."
PRICE: SIXPENCE,
Rae Bros., Printers, 21 & 23 Elizabeth-street North, M elbourne.
Melbourne:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 Collins Street West.
1887.




RECORD
OF THE
FIFTH ANNUAL COMMEMORATION
OF THE
REV. JOHN ALEXANDER DOWIE
And MRS. DOWIE’S
MINISTRY OF
Healing through
Faith in Jesus
HELD IN THE
FREE CHRISTIAN TABERNACLE, FITZROY, MELBOURNE,
ON
LORD’S DAY, DEC. 4th & MONDAY, DEC. 5TH, 1887.
CONTAINING TESTIMONIES FROM THOSE HEALED
AND
EBENEZER ADDRESSES.
“ CHRIST IS ALL ”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Rae Bros.. 23 Elizabeth-strect North. Melbourne.
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 Collins Street West.
1887.


DIVINE HEALING.
The Free Christian Tabernacle, Fitzroy, Melbourne, was the scene of a
very unusual and most important series of meetings on Lord’s Day, 4th,
and Monday Evening, sth December, 1887, conducted by the Rev. John
Alex. Dowie and his wife, who on such occasions always assists in a very
graceful, sympathetic and intelligent manner. These meetings were held
to celebrate “ The Fifth Annual Commemoration of Mr. and Mrs.
Dowie’s fhinistry of Divine Healing,” as set forth in the announcements
printed on the cover of ten thousand copies of two interesting tracts,
written by Mr. Dowie, which were widely and gratuitously circulated.
As early as 7 a.m. a consecration meeting was held, as is usual on the
Lord’s Day, in the Healing-aoom of the Tabernacle, to specially seek
divine blessing on the day’s proceedings. At 11 o’clock, Mr. and Mrs.
Dowie ascended the spacious platform, which was most beautifully
decorated with festoons of flowers, a large wreath of white flowers on the
central front railings, and a bouquet of white flowers on the table, being
conspicuous. The Church choir led the hymn—“ Beulah Land ” —with
fine effect, and the people heartily sang, as if they realized it—
“ Oh Beulah Land ! sweet Beulah land 1
As on thy highest mount I stand,
I look away across the sea,
Where mansions are prepared for me I
And view the shining glory shore :
My heaven, my home for evermore!”
Psalm 67, and Matthew 8, 1-17, formed the lessons, and the prayers and
hymns were all appropriate to the occasion. After the addresses were
delivered, which are reported in the following pages, the service closed
with the beautiful hymn—
, “ In God I have found a retreat,
Where I can securely abide,” &c.
Then a Communion Service followed—a most refreshing time—and at
half-past one o’clock this portion of the proceedings ended.
A number who had come from distant suburbs partook of lunch with
Mr. and Mrs. Dowie in one of the rooms attached to the Tabernacle, and
also of tea in the afternoon ; and these Love Feasts were not the least
pleasant part to many of a very pleasant day ; bright, sunny, cool weather
being graciously granted after many stormy days.


In the afternoon, every available spot of the platform was filled with
nearly fifty Christian friends, who gathered around the pastor and his wife
to begin the first of “ Three praise and testimony Meetings and the
large audience sang with stirring earnestness the hymn
“ Be glad in the Lord and rejoice,
All ye that are upright in heart;
And ye that have made Him your choice
Bid sadness and sorrow depart,
.Rejoice I Rejoice !”
Mrs. Dowie’s reading of Isaiah 43, B — l 3 (“ Ye are My Witnesses,,
saith the Lord”) and of Mark 5, 22—34, was very effective ; and this
was followed by a few words from Mr. Dowie, introducing the Witnesses,
to Christ’s Healing Power who were around him, representative of “ a
great cloud of witnesses ” in these and other lands who had been healed
through faith in Jesus. Everyone seemed ready to sing—and they did-
sing,—
“ She only touched the hem of Thy garment
As to Thy side she stole,
Amid the crowd that gathered around Thee,
And straightway she was whole.
I’ll touch the hem of Thy garment*
And I too shall be free !
Thy healing power this very hour
Shall give new life to me.”
Then, for the remainder of the two hours, there followed a stream of
wondrous testimony from mature men and women ; from youths, maidens
and little children ; from persons of varying degrees of intelligence, coming
in some cases from distant places, and from many living in the city
around —“ all manner of sicknesses and all manner of diseases were
represented it would have seemed ; and it was glorious to hear, amidst
expressions of gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. Dowie, that the key note and
the final note of all the testimonies was — to God alone be all the
glory. Then with one heart and voice the sacred Doxology was sung,
and the audience at 5 o’clock separated, to meet again at 7 o’clock.
In the interval (or as the reporter calls it “ the interlude ”) a striking
case of instantaneous healing occurred, which is narrated in its proper
place. , ,
At 7 o’clock the platform was again filled with the W itnesses ; and the
audience sang Twell’s touching hymn,
“ At even, ere the sun was set,
The sick O Lord around Thee lay ;
Oh, in what divers pains they met!
, Oh, with what joy they went away!*
And as the setting sun of the lovely Australian day streamed with
golden rays over the people, an onlooker could not find it difficult to go
back to that Sabbath evening in Capernaum when Jesus “laid His hands
on everyone of them and healed them all.”
So near did He seem, that it was natural to sing, as they did.—
“ What if Thy form we cannot see,
We know and feel that Thou art here.”
4


Many a heart longed once more for “ perfect rest,” and when the
pastor gave out the last verse with the chorus
“ Oh, I’m glad there is healing
Through the Saviour’s precious blood ;
Tell the world there is healing n
Through the Saviour’s precious blood;
There were many who felt that, as of old, it was indeed at that moment
true once more, that “ the power of the Lord was present to heal
them.” Reading of Luke IV 14—44 by Mrs. Dowie, and a few intro-
ductory words from Mr. Dowie, and prayer opened the
Then again a stream of testimony followed, as in the afternoon,
which is all duly reported in its place, until 9 o clock, when the public
service was closed by the grand Doxology to the ever-blessed Tn y.
A prayer and thanksgiving meeting, to which many remained, broug
to a close, about 10 o’clock, this Day of Commemoration, the last hymn
sung upon their knees, ringing in the hearts of all :
“ One sweetly solemn thought
Comes to me o’er and o’er —
I’m nearer home, to-day, to-day
Than ever I’ve been before.”
Nearer my home 1 Nearer my home 1
Nearer my home to-day, to-day,
Than ever I’ve been before.
So ended this “ great day of the feastbut there was more to follow.
On the Monday evening at 8 o’clock the closing scenes of this Com-
memoration took place in the Tabernacle ; and, after prayer, P™ 196 ’
reading of the precious Word, Mr. Dowie specially addressed himselt to
the subiect of healings through the prayer of faith without human touch ;
and read memoranda concerning such cases. Mrs. Dowie read a striking
letter from a youth in Sydney, who was healed instantaneously, i en
once more the stream of testimony flowed on from the living witnesses
to the ever-living Christ; and with difficulty Mr. Dowie
Commemoration to a close about half-past ten o clock, with a burst o
praise from every heart to our Immanuel. .
V Throughout the two days, over one hundred persons were present in the
Tabernacle prepared to testify to their healing through faith m Jesus, had
time permitted ; and Mr. Dowie had in his hands hundreds of written
testimonies from persons healed, both in these colonies and in distant
lands, through his ministry, which there was no time to read.
It may be mentioned here that it is Mr. Dowie’s intention, if the Lord
permit, during his proposed American and European Divine Healing
Missions’ Tour, to write and publish a volume, containing, first, his
doctrinal teachings in full; and, secondly, a carefully selected and
arranged series of testimonies from those healed, with remarks on the
various classes of healings he has seen. He contemplates this as
necessary to the extention of the work in which he is engaged almost
night and day, believing that it will reach tens of thousands of suffering
homes (D.V.) where his voice can never be heard, and his bodily presence
can never come. He invites the kind co-operation of his friends in these
colonies to enable him to set these great and glorious truths, and tacts,


before the Church of Christ throughout the world, and add one more
volume to the literature of this subject, a contribution for which he
believes there is a place. He humbly hopes that the Lord will thus enable
him to fulfill his heart’s desire ; and to return to Australia to proceed
with the work, in a few brief years, if the Lord tarry.
And now the following pages which contain the reports of the Com-
memoration written by Mr. Morton, a short-hand writer on the staff of the
metropolitan press, and revised by Mr. Dowie, are placed before every reader,
wherever they may go, with the earnest prayer that they may promote the
glory of God, and the good of all in spirit, soul and body, opening up
the glorious Evangel of Healing through faith in Jesus to multitudes
of the sick and suffering in many lands. To God be all the glory forever
and forever—Amen !
MORNING SERVICE.
he Revd. Mr. Dowie founded his discourse upon a passage of Scripture,
1 Samuel vii, 12. “Then Samuel took a stone and set it between
Misspell and Shen, and called the name of it Eben-ezer, saying
hitherto hath the Lord helped us.” He said that he felt deeply
™P or tance.of this fifth annual commemoration of their Ministry
o ivine Healing in that city. He felt its importance for many
reasons, but more especially because it would, in all human proba-
bility, be the last in which he and his wife would take part. As
t e people were aware as they would see by the tracts issued in
connection with the commemoration—it was his intention to leave the
colony in February next, and to depart from Australia in the following
month tor the United States, Canada, Great Britain and Europe, if God
so willed, for the purpose of conducting missions and attending con-
ferences. They hoped to come back at some future time, but human life
was uncertain, and circumstances and the glorv of God oftentimes caused
one to alter one’s determination ; and therefore they felt—knowing that
t ey might never have an opportunity of taking part in such another
celebration—the deep importance of the present occasion. When they
looked back upon the work of the past five years they might well
exclaim, “ Ebenezer,” and wish to erect a stone between Mizpeh and
Shen, between the place of watching and the place of sleep. In thank-
fulness to God. who had helped them through to that day, they would
wish to raise such an Ebenezer, During the past five years, in con-
jeelo? Ministry of Healing, they had encountered many
dimculties, dangers and trials. They had to thank God for using them
m connection with the salvation and temperance work of the church ; and
jhey desired to raise an Ebenezer as a special mark of gratitude to the
Most High for using them in the ministration of Divine Healing through
taith in the Lord Jesus Christ. That ministration was as yet in its
infancy. He regarded the movement of Divine Healing as having special
reference to the preparation being made by the Spirit in the Church of God
throughout the world for the coming of the Bridegroom. It was part of
“ tiie midnight cry” ringing through the world, the cry of the watching


and waiting virgins, “ Behold the Bridegroom !” It was also a note of
warning to the slumbering virgins bidding them to get ready their
lamps, to place oil in the vessels, to have their garments clean, to be in
readiness for the next portion of the solemn cry—which would come not
from earth but from heaven, the shout of descending angels and
archangels—“ Come ye forth to meet Him!” Those that will be ready
shall go forth to meet Him. Those that will be ready ! The Ministry
of Divine Healing was the cry of the Church of God to get ready ; for
when the second portion of the alarm was heard—“ Come ye forth to
meet Him !”—there would be no time for getting ready. It would then
be time to go. And if unprepared they would, like the foolish virgins
who had no oil in their lamps, wake up to the fact that the Lord had
come for his own, that his own had entered the heavens—caught up in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air ” —that the great door of the
heavens had been closed, and that they (the unprepared) were on the
outside. The Lord is coming ! Jesus is coming ! They had sung it
that morning—
Jesus is coming 1 the promise is true ;
Who are the chosen, the faithful, the few,
Waiting and watching, prepared for review ?
Jesus is coming again !
The word of God taught them that even the church of the living God
would have among its members vast numbers who would not be ready for
the coming of the King. The “ garments ” of some would be stained
with sin. The “ robe of flesh ” was permeated with disease ; the vessel
of the body was unclean. The Holy Spirit may dwell in their spirits,
but He dwells not in such souls and bodies. Such bodies are not
temples of the Holy Ghost, but temples of disease—temples of
patent medicines, temples of vegetable and mineral poisons—
perhaps of alcohol—bodies saturated with nicotine and all other
kind of poisons. This Ministry of Divine Healing had been going
on throughout the world—especially during the past twenty-five years,
and there were in Europe and America many ministers of the gospel,
and there were in Asia and Africa and in the islands of the sea many
missionaries enrolled in this work—a ministry which an eminent man
described as “ having the future for its inheritance,” and as being likely
to “ open up the vast mission fields of the world to the Gospel of Grace.
They were there that morning not merely to speak as to the value of
the Ministry in which they were humble workers, but also to say some-
thing of what the Lord had done by their Ministry during the past five
years. In the very brief space of time at his disposal he could not
attempt to give even an outline of the work in which they had been
engaged, but in the tract entitled “ Leaves of Healing” they would find
some particulars of their ministration, concerning which further testimony-*
would be afforded in the course of the afternoon. They claimed during
the five years to have laid hands upon 7,000 persons. Their
ministry was entirely gratuitous ; and they had never charged
anyone, rich or poor, a single penny—remembering the Lord’s
command, “Freely ye have received ; freely give.” During that time


people had come from New Zealand, Tasmania, Queensland, New South
Wales, South Australia, from all parts of Victoria and even from
England, and they had received requests for prayer from Europe and
America, and, recently, from India. In addition to the wide corres-
pondence entered into, they had conducted healing missions in New
Zealand, where they spent five months of the past year, conducting ser-
vices in Invercargill, Dunedin, Timaru, Nelson, Christchurch, Wellington
and Auckland ; also in New South Wales and South Australia. Their
two missions in Sydney, New South Wales, extended over a period of
six weeks. In the colony of Victoria they had been privileged to conduct
missions in Prahran, Geelong, Ballarat, Sandhurst, Castlemaine, Mary-
borough and Hawthorn, and to continue the work at all times at their
home in that city, and during the last three years and a half in the
Healing-room attached to the Tabernacle. They have had the joy of
writing, printing, and distributing 350,000 copies of tracts, gratuitously,
bearing on Divine Healing, some of which have been republished in
other countries, and translated into other languages. They also
had the great privilege of founding Associations for the promotion of
the work in five or six different places, and, indirectly through their
efforts, Bethshans, Christian Homes of Help, had been established in
three of the Australian colonies. Their friends had established two
monthly magazines, one in New Zealand and one in South Australia.
The time would come, it was hoped, when there would be a federation of
all these Associations, and many yet unborn, in Australasia. They looked
forward hopefully to the future history of these Associations, in
expectation of their carrying their doctrines into every section of
the Church of Christ, and that, eventually, large numbers of
ministers and teachers would become participators in the joy of this
blessed ministry. Already many ministers and prominent Christian men
and women have embraced the doctrine and maintained the
standard of Divine Healing through faith in Jesus. The work, as he
had already stated, was but in its infancy. It had been carried on under
great difficulties ; they had to feel their way step by step, without the
sympathy or help of their brethren of other denominations, in the face of
the apathy or antagonism of the churches, and the scorn and contempt of
the world. But amidst storm and sunshine they held fast to the truth,
and now could testify of the great and glorious things God had done
—for they gave Him all the glory—and looked forward to the brighter
future when others should “ reap in joy ” when they had, often, “ sown
in tears.” Throughout the whole of this ministration they had made
teaching and preaching the foremost part of their work, even as Jesus had
done (Matt, iv, 23 ; ix, 35). Christ went about (he cities and villages
teaching in the synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
healing all manner of disease and sickness. They had followed the
method of their blessed Lord —teaching came first, preaching second, and
healing last. Our Lord did not lay His hands on people promiscuously.
He went about eliminating truth from error, enlightening men’s minds
and awakening their consciences. He set before them the glorious truths
of Divine revelation, which had been hidden by theological tradition and


destroyed by the hypocritical doctrines of the false teachers of that; day.
They had felt the necessity of adopting a similar course, masmuc i y
modern theological teaching the ministry of Divine Heahng M been
exnlained away, and the Church of God had come—sad to tell!—to
accept the baneful doctrine that the diseases that afflict mankmd were the
wTo! their Father in Heaven. He (the preacher), on contrary, had
pinnhatically taught that disease was the work of batan, that it w
SS(wlJh is. primarily, the work of Satan) ; that Satan’s work
could never be God’s will, since the Son of God was manifested that he
Xht destroy tne works of the Devil ”-in other words, He came into
world to destroy disease. In the first sermon preached by Chratm
the Synagogue of Nazareth, Jesus said that He came to fnlfi the
prophecy which declared that He would be the great healer of mankind.
They had especially called attention to that summary of Christ s work, as
given by thT Apostle Peter in Acts x, 38, They showed that the gospel
taught what Peier affirmed, namely, that everyone whom[Christ law and
healed nineteen centuries ago was “ oppressed by the Devil ,and th y
asked the question—lf Satan was the oppressor nineteen ‘-'■ntur es a o,
every format sickness and disease was then his work, was he not also still
the oUDre«sor and was not every form of disease his work to-day. And
wa'sSn Tf’Satan be not the oppressor that God was now doing the w A
which Satan used to do nineteen centuries ago? They believed
taught that as Christ came to save and to heal all those who putth
trust in Him ,so would He continue to save and to heal afii trusted
Him They taught that Christ was unchanged, that He was the san
stottws xrijwasi
were engaged in glorious unity, and winch operation worked on the spirit,
Tonis and bodies of men in fulfilment of the promise given by Christ at
the Cst of the Tabernacles (John vii., 37 to 39).
the Holy Ghost was given after Jesus had been glorified by H
ascension into Heaven ; that the apostles and members of the Church of
Christ were filled with the Holy Spirit, and received the nine B> f £
Spirit (1 Corinthians xii„ 4-10) in perpetuity. They had taught that these
„:L „,, re in the Holy Ghost, that the Holy Ghost was in the Church,
«,d that, therefore, “the gifts of Healings ”Ibeing in the Holy Ghost
were also in the Church. Those who maintained that the gifts■ ot_ the
Holy Spirit had ceased might do so iron, ignorancj-they mght er
not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God —or they mtg
promulgate the doctrine, wilfully knowing it to be false. Hei ( •
Dowie/oontended that Christ’s redemption extended to the destruction of
sin and all its consequences—and disease was one of the consequences of
sffl ' The supplication to God the Father, “ Thy will be done,’ did not
stop at those P particul«t words, but went on to say “ in earth as it isdone
in Heaven” In Heaven there was no sin and no disease and it was
manifestly God’s will that His children should now be delivered from
toth on earth, in the same way as in Heaven, It was impossible that
the words of the Lord’s Prayer could have any other meaning. Christ
would never teach us to ask for anything the Father was not prepared to


grant. A word or two in reference to the sympathy of Jesus The
world was full of suffering there were perhaps at that very moment more
than thirty millions (30,000,000), of human beings writhing in all
nations, and of all ages and conditions, in the throes of countless forms
of disease. Did Christ not care? Was Satan always to oppress with
sic nesss iMay, He still cared, and He still was ready to save from
Sf* 4 ?? fl ° m dlsease all who obeyed His loving call. Thev felt
that He was unchanged in sympathy, that He still sent forth the
invitation— “ Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I
WILL give von BEST.” There was rest from sin, rest frL pain, rest
from disease rest from the oppression of the Devil, in Christ the Lord •
and it was their duty to publish the glad tidings wherever they went. ’
The healing of Thy seamless dress
Is by our beds of pain ;
We touch Thee in life’s throng and press
And we are whole again.
They were duly conscious of the overwhelming importance of the
ministry in which they had engaged during the past g five years, and they
thanked god that, notwithstanding all their imperfections and short-
comings, He had used them for that particular work. They thanked God
abo that the word taught was being 'confirmed everywherT by th sSns
that Jesus sa'd should - follow them that believe and of that fact there
would be abundant proof given by living witnesses, from that platform,
that day and the following evening. He would only say, hi closing
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name be glory, foi
Thy mercy and Thy truth’s sake. Wherefore should the uatfons say
whe eis now their God ? But our God is in the heavens. He hath done’
JforyT” 6 P leB3ed ’ - Psal “ HS-l-S.-To Him be all the
Mrs. Dowie then delivered an address to the following effect
Ebenezer ! When they thought of the past five years spent in this
Ministry, and of the many trials and discouragements they had
ZSr. ’M y T? 0Bld r*. b . Ut “'-"J Lo'rd hath helped ns
might ly ! Mr. Howie had been speaking of the doctrines they had
taught in their Ministry, and she would press on their attention the
n —*• “ ll ™'f K ought to give the more earnest
Hi?” She ro iif i W ! f “In . hea , rd i I s * at anJr time we should let a™
p. She could testify that trod had confirmed the word they had
proekimed ‘with signs and wonders and with divers miracles and gifts of
he Holy GhostJ’-Hebrews 11-4). They had seen many wonderful
things wrought by God—things that were not of man but of God. Mr.
twTi ha “ een J; ea(dlin g for man y years, but he never varied the teaching
that the gifts of healings were from God. She could testify before the
Lord that such was the case. If the Healing came from Mr. Dowie it
he°waVh Ve a . weal ; eiun g effe f , u P on physically, but instead of that
he was becoming stronger. And those who were witnesses of the work of
Tbp al b i^r re aS ° ATImmg 1 mmg st T% er in bodies, as well as their spirits.
Ministry She d’f ? from on high during the years oFtheir
Ministry. She did not purpose bearing testimony as to the work which had
10


been done ; a large number of persons would crowd that platform who would
tell them of how they had been healed. Her purpose was to ask them not
to let these doctrines slip—not to let them “ drift away ”as the revised
version had it, or “ run out,” as out of leaky vessels, as in another
rendering. They must keep their vessels —their bodies —whole, pure and
holy. And how were they to do this ? By looking at all times, and
under all circumstances, to Jesus, and to Him only. He was their
Saviour, their Healer, and they must look to Him for strength and
salvation. They must ever bear in mind the motto of their church
“Christ is All, and in All.” It was beautiful to picture Christ
sympathising with their infirmities. He was the same now as when upon
the earth in the flesh. He looks upon us all with a brother’s eye. IE He
were present in bodily form, would we not go to Him to be healed ? Of
course we would. And why not now? He is present. Did he not say,
“ Lo, I am with you always ?” If they did not receive Healing in
answer to their prayers then let them “ send for the elders of the church.
The means to be used were set forth in James v., 14-16. They must
not use any medicines nor rest in any human means. This command of
God was a beautiful means appointed for the children of God, so that they
should go to Jesus for Healing. They hoped that God would make good
use of the elders of this church, in this way. To keep their vessels from
running out, to prevent the word from drifting or slipping away from
them, they must be fully consecrated to God in spirit, soul and body.-
(1 Thess., v 22 to 24). Let them ever remember these words which Mr.
Dowie used so constantly as a benediction to the Church ; let them
obey the command therein and they would realise the blessing : -
“ Abstain from every form {or all appearance) of evil. And the God of
peace Himself sanctify you wholly ; and may your spirit, and soul, and
body be preserved entire without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.”
PRAISE AND TESTIMONY MEETINGS.
THE AFTERNOON MEETING.
At three o’clock in the afternoon a Testimony Meeting was held, the
proceedings commencing with hymns and prayer. In the course of a
brief introductory address Mr. Dowie said that it might be urged by some
that certain cures—such as those of cancer —could only be tested by time.
He agreed with his critics on this point, and the first he would ask to
testify would be one of those cancer cures which had been fully tested by
time. There were on the platform forty-five persons who professed to
have been healed by faith in Jesus Christ, and the audience might
depend that these people would not be there if they did not know what
they stated to be true. These would testify not of his (Mr. Dowie) having,
healed them—because he never healed anybody in the whole course of his
life ; he was but the agent in God’s hand —but of God having healed
them, and to God alone they and he, himself, desired to give all the
glory.
11


Mrs, PARKER, 340 Napier Street, Fitzroy.
_ Said : My friends I was suffering with a running cancer in my left eye for some
time, and had become quite blind in it. No one but God and myself knows what
I suffered. My mother was anxious that I should come to Mr. Dowie, as she had
heard of his laying hands on some one who received Healing of Cancer through
faith in Jesus. Mother persuaded me to come and she came "with me. Mr. Dowie
said—“ You don’t expect me to heal you?” I said “No.” Mr. Dowie said
Do you believe the Lord Jesus will heal you ?” I replied that I did. I did believe
that J esus could heal me because I knew that He is the same yesterday, to-day
and for ever, and that if He healed other people He would heal me, Mr*
Dowie asked me if I could see with my eye (the left eye), and I said that I could
not, but when I got home I said to my mother “ I can see you now.” Imavine my
feelings when I found that sight was restored. I who have so many little ones
depending upon me. Mr. Dowie laid his hands upon me and I received my
sight instantaneously; and from that moment an internal c ncer which
threatened my life ceased to pain me—l never felt it again. Thank the Lord for
It! To-day He is my Healer, my All. This was on the 28th July, 1888. I had
been two years and nine months under the care of doctors. There was a running
cancer in the eye, and the doctors talked of an operation. Now I can see perfectly
(here Mrs. Parker read an extract from a book printed in small type, the right eye
at the time being covered; and I could see as well as this the moment I opened my
eyes after Mr. Dowie ceased praying with me.
Her mother Mrs. Powell of St. George’s road, Mrs. Davies of Rae street,
Korth Fitzroy and Mrs. Dowie, who were present when she was healed,
added their endorsement of Mrs. Parker’s testimony.
Mrs. Parker’s husband corroborated the statement made by his wife.
Mr. Dowie then asked Mrs. Parker several questions concerning the
details of her healing to which she gave clear and satisfactory answers,
and finally he asked her “ Have you read the accouut which I wrote of
your case to the International Conference on Divine Healing and True
Holiness, held in the Agricultural Hall, London, from June Ist to sth
18§5, which is also published in my tract of last week entitled “ Things
God wrought by my ministry ?” Mrs, Parker replied, “ Yes, I have.”
Mr. Dowie said, “ Will you kindly tell this audience, if that is a fair and
true statement?” Mrs. Parker answered “Yes, it is.”
This account of the case is, therefore, added here, as being in some
respects fuller than the above, and for other sufficient reasons.
Case 11, Mrs. Parker: Cancer in left Eye, Blindness, and Internal Cancer, —
This lady lives at 340 Napier Street, Fitzroy, In July, 1883, she came to see me,
accompanied by her mother, Mrs. Powell, senr., of St. George’s Road, North
Fitzroy, and my dear wife. For two years and nine months she had been under
the care of some of the ablest surgeons in Melbourne, of whom she specially named
Dr. George Teague and Drs. Ray, senr. and jun. The cancer in the eye had totally
destroyed sight, and for many months the left eye was totally blind. No hopes of
recovery were held out. O jeration in the eye was both impossible and useless, and,
in her then condition, operation would have been fatal; and Dr. Ray said to her
husband that she must die when her child was born, if not before. The agony she
suffered was extreme, and, being comparatively young, with a large family and a
delicate husband, she had a natural desire to live. Moreover, being an active
Christian worker, she desired to be useful in God’s service here. She was then, and
is, a fully consecrated believer, enjoying the blessing of holiness of spirit, and
desiring purity also of body.
Hearing the case of Mrs, Coates, already referred to, she came expecting
immediate healing. After prayer, I laid hands upon her left eye, in the right
corner of which there was a large swelling, with a small opening, through which
an offensive cancerous discharge was always oozing, the principal tumour being an
12


encysted one behind the eye, extending towards the brain. Then happened, in a few
minutes, a miracle of healing The cancer burst, and poured out at the small
opening,’ in a stream of cancerous matter, quickly tilling two large pocket-handker-
chiefs. Then the swelling disappeared, the opening closed, and after anointing the
eye T asked her, did she expect to see clearly wh-n she opened her eye? She
replied, “ Yes.’, In the name of the Lord Jesus, I then bade her open her left eye,
whilst I covered her right with a handkerchief. She did so, and could see perfectly,
looking at once out at the window into the bright sunlight, and reading a small
type Bible and even its marginal references. The restoration of sight was
immediate, perfect, and remains until this day. On the anniversary of her healing,
she quilted with that oue eye—bandaging up the other—the outline of a sprig of
leaves in black thread, on a piece of black linen and icadding, by a kerosene lamp at
night, on her sewing machine, with which she earns her living as a tailoress- The
internal cancer disappeared from that day, and a few months later she became the
happy mother of a healthy child. This lady has frequently testified in public, and
her case has been published far and wide in many newspapers, and never once
challenged.
MISS TRICKETT, Villamanta-street, Geelong,
Said : I thank God for what he has done for me. 1 thank him most for salvation,
and next for healing. From quite a little infant, twelve months old, I have
known what suffering is. I almost bled to death when I was twelve months old.
I was a weak child up to my thirteenth year, when I had scarlet fever and brain
fever, and my friends had no hopes of my recovery. Up to my seventeenth or
gighteenth year I was weak in health, and next came a very seiious illness
hydatids and enlargement of the liver. I also had severe fits of palpitation of the
heart and inflammation of the liver and kidneys. All these diseases prostrated
me. For about four years I was a confirmed invalid. I could neither stand nor
sit,"and nobody thought I would be able to stand again. I had no more power in
my limbs than a little infant would have. When Mr. and Mrs. Dowie came to
Geelono- in October, 1884, my father and my physician (Dr. Robinson) were
anxious that I should attend one of their meetings. I was wheeled in an invalid
chair to the Mechanics’ Institute Hall on the first Friday of their mission, but
0-rew very weary and exhausted, Mr, Dowie asked me after the meeting if I
believed the Lord could heal me ? If I believed He was willing to heal me? If I
believed He would heal me there and then ? I answered “ Yes ”to the first two
questions, but I burst into tears, and had to answer “ No ” to the third question,
I was terribly exhausted. Mr. Dowie sent me home, and asked me to come again
he next week, when he would again visit Geelong. By this time all my unbelief
was swept away. At the meetings I got comfort and help. On Friday they said
they would see me in my own home the next morning. By this time I fully
believed that the Lord would heal me, and my sister’s faith was as strong as my
own, I had no fear, but calmly waited, and trusted in Jesus, and was full of
expectancy. Mr. Dowie came, accompanied by Mrs. Dowie, prayed with me, and
I was AT once healed when he laid hands upon me. My back —I suffered
from muscular paralysis of the spine—was healed instantaneously. From
that time my strength seemed to come hour by hour —every day I became stronger.
In about a fortnight I walked a distance of two miles. I had a rest during the
walk. One month after I began to visit the sick. Up to the present time I have
kept" wonderfully well and strong. I visited the sick privately for about
seventeen months, and then I was Bible woman in Geelong for eighteen months.
I can walk great distances. I ought not to be the least nervous or afraid in testify-
inor this afternoon. I have asked God to remove all fear from my heart. Ido
praise God, and I thank Mr, and Mrs. Dowie for being the agents in my cure.
I cannot praise Him or thank them sufficiently, lam not half thankful enough
for what He is doing for me every day. Anyone who comes in simple faith God
will not turn empty away. I was attended by Drs. Wallace, Robinson, and Reid,
during my illness. The latter attended me for hydatids. Dr. Robinson strongly
advised me to go to the Mission, and I feel grateful to him for it. After I was
healed I gave up riding in my carriage, never got into it again. lam just a living
wonder, raised up to tell others what the Lord can and will and is waiting to do
13


for you all, if you only come in simple faith, believing and expecting the blessing.
He is able, He is willing ; let us not dishonour Him by mistrusting Him.
H. W. DDMMETT, Barkly-street, North Fitzroy.
Nearly all my children were sick at different times. The. one that is here, who
is seven years old, was taken ill of scarlet fever and measles combined. The lodge
doctor, Dr. Wilson, of East Melbourne, attended her, but instead of growing
better she got worse, I had lost two children under him before, and you parents
know what it is to lose your little ones. I didn’t want to lose this, Mr. Dowie
came after midnight when the child was suffering dreadful agony, and was
covered with an eruption. She was delirious and unconscious. The bouse had
been disinfected and reported to the health authorities. He asked, “Do you
believe the Lord will heal her 1 My wife and I said “ Yes.” He knelt down and
prayed. He asked the Lord to restore the child’s health. He laid hands on the
child, who immediately went into a quiet sleep, the fever entirely leaving her. My
wife and I had been up for several nights before, and had never taken off our clothes
That night we slept ourselves. Next morning when the child awoke, quite well
all eruption had disappeared, and she said she was hungry. The same morning the
doctor came. •He could not make it out. My little girl was healed
instantaneously. When the doctor came he could not find a spot of the eruption on
her body, although the previous night, before Mr. Dowie came, she was covered with
eruptions from head to foot. When my other little boy was bad I took him
straight to the Lord, and he was healed by the laying on of Mr. Dowie’s hands,
instantaneously. We never gave them any medicine from the moment Mr. Dowie
touched them, and they have been well from that day to this. I thank God, and
am deeply grateful to our pastor ; both for teaching and healing in which he has
been used to so many.
ALBEET PRESTON, Mersey-street, North Fitzroy.
A young man in my employ was taken very ill. His sister came to my hous,
and said he was dying. Mr. Dowie was living close by, and I asked him to go
with me. I took him to pray for the young man, as I didn’t understand anything
about the healing then. Mr. Dowie asked him if he would give his heart to the Lord
and repent of his sins. The young man said “ Yes,” After prayer the young man
gave himself fully to Christ. Mr, Dowie then asked him if he could trust the
Lord to heal him. The young man said “ Yes.” Mr. Dowie knelt down and
prayed, and the pain left him all at once, and the inflammation and fever ceased.
In a few minutes he fell into a quiet sleep, and the next day he (the young man)
was down to the shop again. It was a wonderful case that. The doctor said that
he would not be out of bed for weeks and weeks, if ever ; for the case was pro-
nounced most dangerous. He was raised up in answer to prayer. He is still in
my employ, and I hope to get him down to the meeting to-morrow.
Mr. Dowie : “ The child our brother has referred I;o was isolated by the
direction of the doctor, and it was thought by some that the case was one
of small-pox. It was about the time small-pox was raging in Fitzroy,
about three years ago, in August, 1881. The little girl is now present
with her brother, who was healed at the same time. Let them both
stand up.”
The children both stood up on their seats in the midst of the Tabernacle,
looking particularly strong and healthy.
Mrs. Davis, of JRae-street, North Fitzroy, an aged lady, with clear
ringing voice, got up and spoke as follows :
I thank God I was there when Mrs. Parker was healed of blindness and of
internal cancer, and I saw all that happened from the moment she entered the
room until she went out healed and seeing, rejoicing in God. The Spirit of God
led me to Mr. Dowie’s house that morning. Before that I was like Thomas, I
could not believe without seeing. Whon God’s ministers come and throw cold
water on the Healing I call it cruel. I heard that a certain minister of
14


a church in this neighborhood said, “If I only found one case I would believe.”
I would say to that, or any other minister, “ If you only come to me I will find you
fifty or sixty cases.” At that time I was of opinion that such things were past since
the times of the Apostles, but when I saw Mrs. Parker come in blind and go away
seeing, bowed down with internal pain and go away free, all mv unbelief
departed, and from that moment I never doubted. Now I see the healing every-
where in my Bible, and wonder how I failed to see it before ; and I thank God‘it
has led me to love my precious Saviour more than ever, now that I know he is my
Healer, for I have been healed myself of a long standing complaint, from which at
my time of life, I scarcely thought before was possible. I wonder how it is
Christians do not read their Bibles.
Mr. Dowie then read the following letter relative to the healing of a
girl named :
MARY L. PHILBIN, formerly of 43 Johnston-street, Fitzroy, but now of
Essendon.
Essendon, December 4, 1887.
Me, Dowie. —Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in testifying to my little
daughter’s perfect healing through your prayer of faith. She was very ill of
rheumatic fever in November, 1886, and had lost the use of her limbs, excepting
one hand, which she could move a little. Her limbs were very much swollen, and
she _ suffered great agony. Her cries were dreadful to hear when she would be
having hot bandages applied. On the Sunday night on which you offered prayer
on her behalf the pain in her feet and ankles was so great that she could not bear
the bedclothes to touch them, but she fell asleep at the time you prayed for her
in the Tabernacle, and during the night all pain left her and the swelling disap-
peared, and she could move her limbs freely, and never had any pains after.
Two or three days after, you held your fourth annual commemoration in this
Tabernacle, November 27, 1886, and I brought her over then, when she stood upon
your platform well and strong. I may also add that the doctor who had been
attending pronounced it a very bad case, but I am thankful to say that she is now
stronger and better than she ever was before. I also received healing of ery-
sipelas in my hand and arm, and which was extending through my body, this day
fortnight, Lord’s Day, November 20, and on last Wednesday another little
daughter, seven years of age, received healing of very severe neuralgia, who is
here to-day quite well. —Yours very truly,
LAVINIA PHILBIN.
The little girl then stood up in the meeting, and her grandmother, who
had asked Mr. Dowie to pray for her, confirmed the mother’s letter as to
the instantaneous nature of the healing without any human touch.
MRS, MOON, 77 Church-street, Richmond.
Four years ago I suffered from hydatid tumours on the liver, a long standing
case for many years, which I and others thought would prove fatal. I came to see
Mr. Dowie in November, 1853, and in the following month it had been arranged
for Dr. Balls-Headley to perform a surgical operation. While I was waiting that
event, which I was told by the doctor was my only chance of living, I heard of
Mr. Dowie, and came to him. The morning I came to him I could not bear a
hand laid over the region of the affected part. I had very little hope from the
operation, and the doctor took the same view as myself. Mr. Dowie taught me,
as he has taught others, in his patient way, that it was God’s will that we should
be without disease. He asked God to remove the disease. He laid hands upon
me. Ido not remember ever feeling anything more of the hydatids ; for in
passing away they gave me no pain or uneasiness of any kind. It must have been
very instantaneous. This was four years ago this month, and since then I have
been perfectly free from the disease, and as well as any woman can wish to be. 1
saw Dr. Balls-Headley shortly afterwards, but at that time I was not quite sure, or I
would have told him what the Lord did for me. I was not conscious of any pain
or inconvenience at the time of the healing. When Dr. Balls-Headley examined
15


■ae after my healing, he could give no trace of the hydatids. I cannot express my
gratitude to God or to Mr. and Mrs. Dowie, for words seem to be too poor to
express my feelings.
MRS. LACEY, Bloomfield Road, Hawthorn.
Dear Friends. —l am happy to say that I was first healed through faith in
Christ Jesus, the Divine Dealer, and not by the touch of any man or wcman. I
was taken very ill one Sunday in this Tabernacle. I had heard of the healing by
faith, but had not realised it. I was just waiting at that time, as I thought Mr.
Dowie might have come and spoken to me, but he was very busy, and 1 did not
tell him how I felt. When I went home I was taken very ill with pains all over
my body. It was internal inflammation of the severest kind, and I was swollen
up so that I could not rise in bed or turn around. The pain became more severe
every few minutes. Dr. G. was engaged, but he sent his son ; bnt I didn’t care
to see him, and I asked Mr. Lacey to go and ask Mr. Dowie to pray for me. 1
felt sure that God would, for Christ’s sake, answer the prayer of faith and heal.
There was a prayer meeting on that Monday evening, conducted by Mr. Dowie,
in this Tabernacle. I received instanteous relief at the very time prayer was
offered here. Before that my skin was turning quite purple, and my sister, Mrs.
Kant, who is a qualified nurse, thought I was about to pass away; and then,
suddenly, I was healed and set free. When Mr. Lacey came home from the
meeting, at about ten o’clock, I felt so well that I thought 1 could have got up,
but, for that matter, it was too late, and I went to sleep. Next day, although the
internal inflammation had passed away, I had an attack of neuralgic pains in my
head, to which I had been subject for many years. Mr. Dowie came down and
saw me, and after he laid hands on me and prayed every bit of the soreness went
away entirely. Ever since I have been in good health, and able to do all my
duties, many of which I could not perform for many years ; and to God I give the
glory, Mrs, Lacey then bore testimony as to the healing of her son Ernest, who
was threatened with an attack of lockjaw following an accident caused through
his falling on a garden rake, two prongs of which went deeply into his knee,
requiring a strong man to pull them out. Mr. and Mrs. Dowie came out to Hawthorn
and prayed for the boy, and the fever left, him and he quite recovered from that
moment.
Mr. Lacey, husband of the foregoing, corroborated the testimony of
his wife, and gave another instance of the efficacy of prayer, without the
laying on of hands, in the case of one of his family.
MRS. COLLEY, Rotherwood-street, Richmond.
This little one of mine (producing a sweet little girl of about five years old) has
great faith. She had the measles, and wanted me to send for Mr. Dowie. It
being Saturday I didn’t like to send for him, but I sent a telegram requesting his
prayers. Three hours afterwards she was entirely healed, and in a few hours
there was not a spot on her body. Before that she was quite delirious. She slept
well that night, and got on wonderfully.
Mr. Colley (of Messrs. Troedel and Co.’s, Melbourne), then stood up,
and corroborated the statements of his wife. My two other children (who
then stood up) have also been healed, and Christ has now been for some
years our only doctor.
Mrs. J. Brown, Learnmouth House, Rathdown-street, Carlton, then
gave testimony as to her perfect healing from hereditary consumption.
The following letter from her to Mr. Dowie contains the substance of
what she said :
To the Rev. J. A. Dowie. —Dear Sir, —It is about three years since I first
heard your teaching on Divine healing, and I thank God he has healed me—my
complaint being hereditary consumption , of which all my brothers and sisters
had died. I had been a sufferer for years, and while living in St. Kilda
grew much worse, with extreme nervousness and difficulty of breathing.
16


We had been to three different doctors, but gained no good. After hearing of the
Divine healing and enquiring*, we were informed Mr. Dowie held occasional meet-
ings at Prahran. We walked there slowly, and enjoyed the service very much, and
God added his blessing. While you were speaking of sin being the cause of suffering,
and our heavenly Father’s willingness to forgive and heal all who come to Him,
and now was the time, I sought and found forgiveness and perfect freedom from
disease, even as you had said. We walked home happy and rejoiced. All things
seemed new. Daily I asked God to keep me in health. A year passed away, and
after the birth of a little one I took a severe attack of coughing, and was getting
worse daily for three months. I was brought up from St. Kilda, in a very low,
almost dying condition, to your house in Fitzroy, on December 6, 1884, where you,
sir, and Mrs. Dowie, received us most kindly, though we were strangers. I thank
God after talking with us, and laying your hands upon me and prayer, I never had
another return of the cough, and grew stronger daily ; and to-day I am free from
every sign of consumption, and able to attend to all my duties. Trusting God
will bless and prosper you both, I am, faithfully yours,
MARTHA BROWN.
Mr. Dowie read an extract from a letter he had received from Miss
Rosalie Macgeorge, a lady attached to the Zenana Mission in Furreed-
pore, East Bengal, India, to the following effect:—“ The other Sunday a
Hindoo lady, whose child’s life was despaired of, was taught God's way of
healing ; and we with her prayed to the Christian's God, and the child
recovered.” He very much amused his audience by reading a postscript
to another letter from Miss Macgeorge, wherein she says:—“The
Bengali word for medicine is ‘ Dowie’!! ”
MES. DICK, of Mcholson-street, Fitzroy,
Said : Kind friends, I was a great sufferer from spasmodic asthma and bron-
chitis, with palpitation of the heart and nervous debility, for 19 years, and was
treated by a number of doctors in Sandhurst and Melbourne, who could not cure
me. But thank the Lord on the 17th of May, 1886, I was led to this blessed
Tabernacle by my neighbor, and got healing that night, 17th, and thank the Lord
I am now able to say I feel no trace of my many diseases, and I am able to go out
in all changes of weather and never feel it on my lungs, and I thank the Lord Jesus
for his mercy in healing me. Mrs. Dick said ; I have also to give thanks to God
for the healing of my little grand-daughter, on the 27th of September, 1886, of
blood-poisoning. After the vaccination erysipelas set into the arm, and the doctor
told me there was great danger, in fact Dr. Snowball said the child could not live
till the following Wednesday. I took her to Mr. Dowie, and he laid his hands on
her and prayed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and thank the Lord she got
healing at once, and has continued quite well ever since.
At this stage of the proceedings Mr. Dowie requested those present
who had been healed through his instrumentality, and who desired to
testify that day, to stand up. In response, sixty-eight persons arose
from their seats.
The next testimony was that of Mr. James M‘Corkill, from Levuka,
Fiji, who said he suffered from a skin trouble up to three weeks ago, when
someone said to him, “ Have you heard Mr. Dowie ?” He took the first
opportunity to come to the Tabernacle, When he got home he went to
Christ, the Healer, and asked Him to heal his body, soul and spirit.
Mr. M'Corkill continued :
Now the skin disease from which I suffered for so many years is all gone. I
have never suffered anything since then. I give glory to God, who heard and
answered my prayer, and I am grateful to you, Mr. Dowie, for showing me that
Jesus was my Healer.” i
17


Mr. M‘Corkill gave his testimony from the body of the Tabernacle. Mr.
Dowie said that it was the first time he had heard of this case of
healing ; but he would give in this, as in all the other cases, all the
praise to the Eternal Triune God. They would now separate for two
hours, and at 7 o’clock that evening the Commemoration would be
continued, and opportunities given for further testimonies.
(End of Afternoon Meeting.)
[INTERLUDE.]
ELIZABETH BARNETT’S EXPERIENCE. 55 George-street, Fitzroy.
(As related to the Reporter about 5.30 p.m.)
I was suffering some time from hydatids—the doctors called it that last week—
a large lump here (indicating the locale of the disease). I sought the Lord since
the Testimony Meeting closed (the 3 o’clock meeting), and I asked Mr. and Mrs.
Dowie to pray for me. Mr. Dowie laid hands upon me in the Healing-room, and
I don’t find the slightest sign of the lump. I was bad about eight years. I
didn’t feel the slightest inconvenience while the lump was passing away. Now I
feel quite well, and I give all glory to God, and am deeply grateful to Mr. and
Mrs. Dowie.
At the request of Mr. Dowie the girl ran across the floor of the hall in
front of the platform. She seemed overjoyed at being rid of her burden.
At the evening service Madame Foveaux, the mistress of the girl, stood
up in the Tabernacle and gave evidence of the genuineness of the case.
She stated that she had examined the girl, who had come home full of
joy, and there was not the slightest evidence of the tumour. Mrs.
Foveaux afterwards informed Mr. Dowie that so ill was the girl that it
had been arranged that she was to go into the hospital the following day,
as she could work no longer.
THE EVENING MEETING.
After a short address touching on New Zealand, and New South
Wales, experiences, during their recent Six Months Mission Tour, from
Mr. Dowie ; the following letter was read by the Pastor’s wife, with the
explanation that it had been publicly read by the lad himself (who is
about 14 years of age), at a public Testimony Meeting held in the
Protestant Hall, Sydney, on June 6th last, before a very large audience.
Mrs. Dillon, the boy’s mother, also gave on that occasion confirmatory
evidence ; and there were many present who saw him before and after his
healing and heard him publicly deliver his first testimony in the New
Masonic Hall, Sydney, in October 1885, a few days after the restoration
of the broken elbow. Mr. Dowie said they had only two other such
cases, one of which had been publicly testified to in that building ; but
time would only permit of this case being given in detail, so that it might
be fully recorded in the proceedings of the day.
164 Elizabeth-street, Sydney, June 6th 1887.
To Rev. J. A. Dowie, —Dear Sir. I now write you this statement as to how I
broke my arm, and how the Lord healed it through your agency, October 16th,
1885. 1 was a telegraph messenger, attached to the William-street, Branch Office,
18


iDarlinghurst, at the time the accident happened. On 6th October 1885, I was
sent with a message in the afternoon to Sir James Martin’s residence ; when
enquiring for his house I went to Percy Lodge, Wylde-street, Potts’ Point, and in
(Coming away I slipped to the ground a distance of about five feet, severely bruising
my left arm, and breaking it at the elbow joint. I was carried in by the servants,
.and, a cab being sent for, I was sent to the office in William-street. Mr. Booty the
post-master sent an assistant with me to Dr. Crago’s surgery in William-
street ; he examined my arm and said it was a very serious break for which he had
not the proper splints. He then sent me in the cab with a lady to the Sydney
Infirmary, but I asked the lady to take me home to my mother and she took me
there, about an hour and a half after the accident. A doctor there whose name I
do not know asked mother in what position she would have it set, at the same
time telling her that it would always remain in the same position, as the joint
would always be stiff, it was set L at a right angle in front of me. My mother was
not satisfied, and took me to Dr. Marsden in Elizabeth-street, who expressed a
similar opinion, and would not do anything, the same evening my mother took me
to Dr. Brady, Liverpool-street, who also agreed with the other doctors. My
mother then took me to see Dr. Westrum, who saw me frequently during the next
ten days. I was in great agony, and the arm was much inflamed, and it was
thought by the Doctors that it might be necessary to amputate it above the elbow.
As I came from the hospital crying with pain on the last day I went there for
treatment. My mother said “ Johnnie, we will ask God to heal you,” and hearing of
your Mission in the New Masonic Hall, Castlereagh-street; she took me to your
meetings, for several days you were very busy, and I could not see you until 16th
October. Mrs. Dowie happened to hear me crying with pain in the Hall, and told you
of my case, and you sent for me and my mother. I told you that I had given my
heart to the Lord, and believed He would heal me, for He had healed my mother
when she was very ill. You then took off the cradle, splints, and bandages, and
after prayer, you in the name of the Lord Jesus, took my arm and pressed the
bones of the elbow into position, and held them there for a few minutes. You then
told me to move my fingers and close my hand, which I did. You then moved the
arm slightly, working it from the joint. I then moved it myself ; and the next
day found all the pain was gone, and I Could move it freely. It grew strong very
quickly and is now stronger than THE other ; and I can lift heavy weights. A
few days after my healing, my mother took back the splints with me to the In-
firmary, and showed the doctors my arm. Dr. Westrum admitted it was perfectly
healed. I gave all the glory to God, who used you to my healing, and I want to
live to His glory.—-I am respectfully,—yours in Jesus.
JOHN THOMAS DILLON,
ROSE SPINKS, Moreland Grove, Moreland.
For six months I suffered from an internal tumour, which gave me much pain
and grew at last to a great size. Drs. Danne and Singleton said it was no use
thinking of getting better without undergoing an operation. It was arranged
that I should go to Ballarat for four weeks to get strength for the operation. One
Saturday night I made up my mind to seek the Lord for Healing. On Sunday,
October 17, 1886, I was crying in the Tabernacle at an after-meeting with pain,
Mr. Dowie heard me, and asked me what the matter was. I then told him about
the tumour, which was so large in front of me that I was ashamed. He then
called Mrs. Dowie, and asked her to take me into his room and pray with me.
Mrs. Dowie prayed, and the pain went away. In three days every particle
of the tumour was gone ALTOGETHER. I am perfectly well to-night, better than
ever. On Thursday, 22nd October, five days after my healing, I went to see Drs.
Danne and Singleton, by appointment, who said they could not find any trace of
the tumour, and that it had gone quite away.
ABRAHAM ABRAHAMS, 3 Charles-street, Collingwood.
It was in 1884 that I went to the Alfred Hospital and went under a serious
operation by Dr, Blair. He extracted a stone from my bladder. It resembled a
small cauliflower, or piece of a coral reef, as the Evening Herald said at the time.
I remained eight weeks, and when I was well I was very anxious to go home —
19


which I did. In a few weeks I started to work. I worked for twelve weeks, I
think. I took very bad again, and went to see the lodge doctor, Dr. Peacock, of
Brunswick-street, Fitzroy. He told me that there was another stone, and said
that I was not to work. I was taking medicine for three or four weeks, I think.
I tried to work, but could not continue; I felt too ill. Dr. Peacock told me not
to think of work, that I was never meant for work any more. I thought it very
hard that I, a young married man, could not work when I was willing. I tried to
work again, but failed. The last time I tried to work I broke an internal blood-
vessel, and was bleeding very much. I was carried home to my bouse and put to
bed. The doctor told me I was not to move, or he could never stop the bleeding,
and he said my case was critical. He gave prescriptions, and my wife went and
got them made up. In the meantime I thought of speaking to Mr. Dowie,
Some years ago my dear father, who is a Jew, advised me to go to Mr. Dowie, and
when I was lying in the hospital I wanted to see Mr, Dowie, but a rev. gentleman
in the Alfred Hospital told me not to. He was not a believer in Divine Healing,
and persuaded me to undergo the operation to which I have referred. My sister
and a friend, who is a member of this Church, went and told Mr. Dowie of my
condition and of my wish. Mr. Dowie came down. Mr. Dowie knelt down and
laid hands upon me. I felt the bleeding had stopped that moment, and that I was
healed instantaneously. After he had gone, I told them how well I felt, I wanted
to get up there and then, but they would not give me my clothes—not till next
day. I got up next day, to my great joy. I forgot at the moment that I had not
thanked God. I went back to my room and did so. From that moment till now
I have been well. I never felt so well as Ido now. Dr. Peacock thought it was
the last two bottles of medicine that did it ; but I had touched neither. Mr.
Abrahams testified to the healing of his little boy, who suffered from a low fever, and
upon whom Mr. Dowie laid hands ; also of the healing of his wife by faith in the
Lord Jesus.
Seven relatives stood up to corroborate the truth of Mr. Abraham’s
testimony.
Mr, Dowie mentioned that Mr, Abrahams originally belonged to the
Jewish persuasion, but that he had embraced Christianity under his
Ministry, and was baptized in the Tabernacle. Mr. Dowie said that
every member of Mr. Abraham’s wife’s family were now members of the
Church meeting in that Tabernacle.
MISS WINTER, Burwood Road, Hawthorn,
I was suffering from eczema. I was born with it. At the age of seven, I be-
came very much worse, and remained in that condition for about 80 years, until
about 3| years ago. I was covered from head to foot; my mother took me to all
the best doctors, and got the best medical advice ; but it was all in vain. The
doctors said I was the worst case they had ever seen. The disorder was eating my
life away. My heart was affected for nearly seven years. I was healed instant-
aneously when Mr. Dowie prayed and laid hands upon me. To-day my flesh is
as pure as that of a little child. I am very thankful for what God has done for
me. The doctors who attended me were—Drs. Gunst, Ray and Teague, of Mel-
bourne ; and Drs. Madden, and Holman, of London, and many other doctors. I
went to England for medical advice, but received no benefit,
Mr. Dowie added some thrilling details concerning this case, and said
that he had received from Miss Winter a written testimony of many
pages, giving the fullest particulars, which could only be read in a meet-
ing for ladies only by Mrs. Dowie. They had many healings of this
dread disease ; but of all its innocent victims he had never seen a worse
case than that of Miss Winter’s ; and none more gloriously healed,
through faith in Jesus.
20


Mr. D. C. CAMPBELL, 33 Bell-street, Fitzroy.
[ln introducing Mr. Campbell, Mr. Dowie said that his was a case of
• epilepsy—a case of demoniacal possession. He never asked the Lord
to heal anyone of epilepsy ; he asked, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that
the devil should come out, and he never knew of a case in which the de-
liverance was not instantaneous.]
“ Four or five years ago I had the first fit of epilepsy. I was then in the Alfred
Hospital. At that time I was under the power of the devil—in fits—for the
best part of three days. Dr. Blair, Dr. Hedley, and four other doctors said it was
the severest case they had ever seen. They gave me up, expecting death
every moment, A green screen —the sign of a dying man—was around me for
three days ; but I came to life again—the devil was driven out of me—and I
saw Dr. Hedley standing at my bedside. I have a praying mother, and I believe
her prayers to God were on that occasion the cause of my recovery. Even after
that signal mark of God’s mercy, I gave way to drink again. Six months ago I
was deeply impressed with what I heard in this place, and I tried to give up the
drink, but, unfortunately, I was engaged selling colonial wine. Going into hotels
was a great temptation to me, for when I got an order I invited anyone who was
around to take a glass. For three months I abstained from taking anything—
relying in my own strength—then for three or four days I drank heavily of
whiskey. On the morning of the fourth day I ran up stairs to get a handkerchief.
That is the last I remember uutil I came to life again—till I was dispossessed of
■devil. When I became conscious, I found Mr. Dowie’s hands on me, and I could
hear the words of his prayer. I opened my eyes and found myself entirely free.
Since then I have registered a vow with God, that I will have nothing more to
do with selling drink or touching it myself. I trust God will accept me into His
family, make me what I ought to be here, and take me to happiness and glory
hereafter.
Mrs. Campbell corroborated the statement of her husband, and added,
in reference to his last epileptic attack :
I sent for Dr. Hewlett, to save, as I thought, trouble after his death. Dr.
Hewlett’s brother came, and said he could not do anything for him. Then both
the doctors Hewlett came again, and the older one said he was very sorry for me,
but he could do nothing. Didn’t think he could live through the night. * * *
Mr. Dowie was then sent for, after Mr. Campbell had been ten hours in the Jits,
.and he came and prayed for him, and immediately prayer was answered. He
breathed several times quickly, recovered consciousness, and became almost at
once quite well. He has been very well ever since, and I hope and trust he will
keep so. I give God all the glory, and we are both deeply grateful to Mr.
Dowie.
MRS. MARWICK, 17 Johnston-street, Collingwood.
I was very bad with bronchitis and inflammation of the lungs. Mr. Dowie
came. The fever was so strong I did not know him. As soon as he touched me
knowledge came back, and I knew him. He placed his hand on the part where
>the pain was raging, and it went away directly. I was weak but had no pain.
The sweetest hour that ever I spent was when that pain went away. None can
testify but those who feel that holy influence which comes from God alone. I
was perfectly restored to health. On one occasion Mrs. Dowie happened to visit
me, when I had a strange sensation as if I was dying, and I fainted away. She
prayed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and I was instantly restored, and felt the
same sweet blessing as when Mr. Dowie prayed for me. I am now, although old,
in very good health, and rejoice to be able to stand here to-day to add my humble
testimony to that of the many who are present to give praise to Christ as our
Healer, and I desire to thank our dear pastor and his wife for all their wise words
and good deeds. To God be all the glory now and for ever.
(End of Evening Meeting.)
21


MONDAY EVENING’S MEETING.
On Monday evening another Testimony Meeting was held in the-
Tabernacle. After a few words of introduction Mr. Dowie proceeded to-
refer to cases of Divine Healing without human touch ; and read memo-
randa first concerning a most interesting case of paralysis, healed at
Ballarat, and then he gave details of another at Auckland, New Zealand;
In neither case was he present, nor had he ever at that time seen the
persons who were healed. These cases, he said, were typical of a large-
number known to him, of which he could give details if there were time;
The points they proved were (1) the willingness of the Lord to hear and
answer the prayer of faith at any distance, without anointing or laying on
of hands, and (2) that the healings were Divine, and apart from human
power of any hind.
Memo, re Mrs. E. Parker’s healing without human touch in the Ballarat
Hospital; vouched for by Dr. John E. J. Moffitt, Resident Surgeon,,
in Ballarat Courier ol March 2nd, 1885.
The following request for prayer reached me on November 28rd, 1884 ;
Camberwell, November 23rd, 1881.
Mr. Dowie—Dear and Reverend Sir, —While Mr. Mulder was up in Ballarat last
week he saw Mrs. Parker, who tried unsuccessfully to see you during
your mission up there, and who asks that the prayers of your church may
be asked, that she may be healed. She says that she is sure the Lord will hear and.
answer the prayers of His faithful people. I remain yours in Lord Jesus.
M. A. MULDER.
From that time forward we kept the case weekly, and sometimes daily
before the Lord in prayer, corresponding also respecting the case witE
Mr. J. M. Gregory, and urging her and others to accept instantaneous■
healing , and rise up at the Lord’s command.
We were rejoiced to hear that a number of Christian friends who had
been with us throughout our Mission in Ballarat, in October, 1884, were-
visiting her in the Hospital and were urging her to accept Christ,
as Healer,
On Wednesday, 25th February, lßßs, our principal weekly Divine
Healing Day in the Tabernacle, she was specially remembered in
prayer, at all our meetings, and early in the morning. On that day,
Mrs. Harvey, one of the sisters above referred to, now in charge of the
Bethshan in Ballarat, visited her, prayed with her, and had the joy of
seeing her rise healed instantaneously in the manner Dr. Moffitt describes.
(The Ballarat Courier , Monday, March 2nd, 1885.)
A case of faith-healing in the Ballarat Hospital, vouched for by Dr.,
Moffitt, the resident surgeon, will be found described by that gentleman,
in a letter which appears in another part of to-day’s issue,
FAITH-HEALING IN THE BALLARAT HOSPITAL.
To the Editor of the Courier.—Sir, —lt is customary to publish accounts
of severe cases that have been healed through the agency of various drugs. There
are some cases, however, which yield to no human means, as is evidenced by the
numerous people who are now to be seen lying on beds of sickness never expecting
22


to get up. Go around our hospitals and benevolent asylums, and cases of this kind
will be seen every day, and are evident even to unprofessional eyes. Cases that
have been long prostrated, and cases that have been lying helpless for a shorter
period, but both kind at the same time knowing that they perhaps continue
thus for many years without any apparent signs of restoration. To hear of such a
case as the preceding being suddenly restored to health cannot but be interesting
to all, and such has been the case with Mrs. E P , an inmate of this
institution for eleven weeks. In the beginning of December she was brought to
this Hospital unable to walk or stand, and she was put to bed. Her previous-
history was that about two years ago she had received a blow on the back, but it
was not until about eight months ago that symptoms of spinal disease began to'
come on. These continued more or less until her admission early in December,,
when she presented the helpless condition above alluded to. Her sight was
impaired, and she had the sensation so usually described as “ a sensation of a cord
around the waist.” Her legs were quite helpless, and perfectly insensible to touch,
even when a pin was pushed into them. She had to be removed from one bed to
another and was sometimes quite unconscious. Her helpless condition continued,
until the 25th of this month, when a lady visitor, who is much esteemed by the
patients, and who is a believer in faith-healing by simple trust in Christ, urged her
to take Christ as her healer. This good lady prayed with her, and on the day
mentioned had the satisfaction of seeing her get out of bed and walk out of the
ward. Signs of returning health began to come to this formerly helpless invalid,.,
and as I went around this morning, I was pleased to see her walk quite well. I
may as well mention that the usual remedies were resorted to in this case, but
without avail. Ido not wish to enter into any controversy about faith-healing,,
and indeed have no time to do so, but I merely give the facts of this case, which
has made quite an impression on all around —Yours, &c.,
JOHN ERNEST J. MOFFITT, Resident Surgeon.
Ballarat Hospital, 27th February.
Dr. Moffitt was in full sympathy with us during our visit to Ballarat ini
October, 1884, and sent us many persons whom he knew to be humanly
speaking incurable, among them Mrs. Denman, whose case is given in full,
in the Ballarat Courier of November 29th, 1884.—J. A. D,
Mr. Dowie spoke further as follows :
During a recent five months’ mission tour in New Zealand there were 1
many similar direct answers to prayer for persons whom we had never seen..
One "of these, which occurred in Auckland, on April 14 of this year, 1887,
is a typical case, well known to the whole community there, investigated
by special reporters, published in all the daily newspapers of that city, and
publicly testified to by the persons concerned.
The following is a copy of the request for prayer :
Prayers are requested for a dear sister in Christ (Mrs. Robinson, Freeman s Bay) v
who had been suffering for sixteen months from paralysis.
This was presented at half-past 3 o’clock in the afternoon in earnest
prayer to God at an open meeting in the Choral Hall, Auckland; and the
next morning I received the following note from the lady who had brought
the petition. A , pril 15th , 1887.
Dear Sir and Brother, —T just write in haste to tell you that Mrs. Robinson,
who was prayed for yesterday, who has been paralysed sixteen months, -
PAST THREE O’CLOCK YESTERDAY AFTERNOON, GOT UP AND WALKED ABIUT. i
saw her myself this morning, she is free from pain and full of faith Thanks be to*
God.—Yours in Christ, . ELIZA COLLINb.
Please pray for the dear little girl who is coming again this afternoon.
23


On Saturday evening, April 16th, the husband of Mrs. Eobinson rose
in the public meeting held in the Choral Hall, and asked me to allow him
to give public thanks to God for His answer to our prayer ; and amongst
those present at that meeting I observed Sir William Fox, the well known
New Zealand statesman and philanthropist, and Mr. T. W. Glover, who
is known throughout Australasia as an eminent temperance orator, I
mention these facts to show that “ this thing was not done in a corner,”
Then, again, the following letter, from the lady herself, written sixteen
■days after her healing, speaks for itself :
Auckland, May Ist, 1887.
Dear Mr. Dowie,— l would give thanks and praise to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ in having directed your steps to Auckland to educate us in the bless-
ings and privileges that we have in Christ Jesus, He being our Physician and
Healer. I was paralysed for sixteen months, having lost the use of the whole'of
my left side, and could hardly speak. Having got somewhat better, about a fort-
night before you came to Auckland I had a relapse, mv speech again being affected
and losing the whole use of my body, having to b c bodily lifted"from bed to chair
m fact as helpless as a baby. Thanks be to God, I am much better through the
prayer of faith and accepting Jesus as my healer. I never felt better in health than
Ido at present; no pains or aches ; I have a good appetite, which I have not had
for years, and I have good nights’ rests, and all I want now is bodily strength and
with God’s help I will be thoroughly restored.—Yours respectfully,
ELIZA MARY ROBINSON.
Tliis testimony was read by Mr. Robinson before more than a thousand
persons in the Choral Hall, Auckland, at the Praise and Testimony
Meeting which closed the Mission, on Lord’s Day, May Ist ; and he
added striking and touching details of the healing.
It appears that Mrs. Robinson was cjuite alone at tne moment when she
■experienced the Lord s healing power, and feeling that we were praying,
she expected the answer at the hour fixed. Instantly she received the
power to rise ; and without a moment’s hesitation she rose and walked
into the kitchen and spoke to her daughter , who was for the moment greatly
frightened. A day or two after she came to the Choral Hall, spent the
whole day, from 10 a.m., at the healing meetings, and was seen and
spoken to by large numbers of persons.
Mr. Dowie said he had received many letters from persons healed by
his agency in various parts of Victoria, who were prevented by distance,
and other causes, from attending this Commemoration. He would read
•the two following as specimens of these interesting testimonies :
TESTIMONY.
Olinda Street, Quarry Hill, Sandhurst, December 2nd, 1887.
Dear Mr. Dowie and Christian Friends, — I have great cause to praise the
Lord for guiding your footsteps to Sandhurst. No doubt you remember on the
last Tuesday afternoon you were in Sandhurst 1 came to your meeting, weary,
worn, and sad, and my body full of pain, as I told you I had been suffering more
■or less wiih one thing or another for several years. But for Jive months I was
very had with rheumatic inflammation of the muscles of both sides. I was not able
to lie on either. It was brought on by a straining cough. Also liver
■complaint and a very weak back and chest. Oh, I shall never forget the
beautiful lesson you gave us that afternoon. That Jesus was the Tree of Life, and
the “ leaves were for the healing of the nations.” And I want to thank God that
24


1 learnt my lesson well that day, for when you laid hands upon me in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ I received the healing instantly. Oh, what a
blessing I did receive, body, soul, and spirit. I have been quite a different person
ever since, for it was two years last month when I took the dear Saviour at His
word, “ Seek and ye shall find. Ask in my name and it shall be given unto you.”
And since then the Lord has taught me how to trust Him with my four little ones.
I have had many answers to prayer for them of late. My baby was very ill, I
must say it was a great trial of my faith, because the tempter tried to witn me
.away ; but praise His own dear name He has given his own children powera over
sin and Satan. I have found in our Saviour all we need while here on earch. If
I was with you I could tell you more than I can write just now. May this
testimony, with God’s blessing, help some poor weary one like I was to come to
■Jesus, and cast all their burden on Him who is able and willing to help us in all
■our temporal And spiritual wants. May we do all with a single eye to His glory,
for He is worthy, and may our prayer be to be kept faithful to our calling in
Christ Jesus. Amen. God bless you all in Christ Jesus, and those not in Christ,
may we help them to enjoy the same privilege as we do is my earnest desire.
Yours in Christ, ANNIE RAKE.
Mr. Dowie said :—the next two letters I shall read are from a young
man who is in the Postal Department in this colony ; and his case is one
of the most remarkable of its kind which I have ever known—(l) because
the rupture was from birth, and (2) because no rupture could be more
terrible to contemplate, much more to endure. Mr. Decide also informed
me that his healing was a direct means to the salvation of his father when
far advanced in years.
To Rev. J. A. Dowie. —Dear Brother, —With joy and gratitude to God I
furnish you with my very humble testimony. Oh that God will bless it to some
poor sufferer. I oft times have felt the desire within that my testimony should
be made known throughout the world, to let the unbeliever see that our Jesus is
the same yesterday, to-day and forever. I have proved that His loving kindness is
far better than life, but He has given me eternal life. May God bless you, my
dear brother, your wife and little ones, and that He may use you all to his glory
as long as breath remains with you, and then may we all meet in glory to praise
;and crown Him Lord of all. If you can remember anything that transpired, add
M. C. L.
it, or if you wish to erase it in any way, do so. —Yours, &c.,
MY EXPERIENCE.
“ Oh how precious dear Redeemer, is the love that fills my soul,
It is done ! the word is spoken ! I am every whit made whole. ’
From my infancy yea, from the very hour of my birth I had been troubled with
rupture of the left intestine, and while a baby in my mothers arms 1 was
r eated by different doctors, but without effect. At the age of nine I was taken to
me Ballarat Hospital, and was fitted with a truss ; and from that time I have tried
various kinds of surgical instruments, but all human aid failed to give me any
reliefwhatever; and as I grew in years so my complaint grew worse, so great was
my suffering that f was compelled to stand upon my head, very often nine or ten
times a day between bags of chaff, hay, or anything I could get at hand to support
me in that position, so as to allow my bowels to go back into my bodju None but
God and myself know how I suffered. One night when I was upon my knees at
my bedside, I opened my Bible (which is the dearest treasure on earth to me,)
My eyes lighted upon the XI chapter of John 40th verse, where Jesus said to
Martha ; “ If thou wouldst believe thou shouldst see the glory of God,’ and after
He had thus spoken, He cried in a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, and he which
was dead came forth. I believed it all, and that Jesus was as mighty and as
powerful as He was in those days. So hearing of the Rev. J. A. Dowie as a believer
and instrument in Gods hands of Divine healing, I determined to have a talk with
him on the subject. We met, and after telling my mission he said, “ According to
25


your faith my brother so shall it be done unto you ; Jesus alone can heal you, I
can do nothing for you. Do you believe it is God’s desire to make whole your broken
temple just now as you lift up your heart to Him ? ” Oh, that was the moment of
the trial of my faith. He then repeated the Lords Prayer, and as he came to Thy will
be done in earth (in me) as it is done in Heaven, just then a stream of light broke
in upon my soul; I then and there clung to the promises. Mr. Dowie then said “Do
you believe that God the Holy Ghost wishes to dwell in a broken temple,in a ruptured
temple ? ” “ No, no,” I cried, I believe, Ido believe,” and as Mr. Dowie and myself
breathed our hearts desires before God, He there and then answered our prayers.
In a few minutes I found that I WAS heals d ; I knew His promises were true,
and in a few hours afterwards when I woke from sleep, I was as whole and asperfect
as any man could possibly be. Three years and seven months have passed since then,
and I have never felt the slightest effects of that which was bringing me to an early
grave, and to-day I am as well and strong as I could possibly be, enjoying the best oft
health, and the blessing of God, continually. My own desire is that my humble
testimony may be the means in God's hands of some poor sufferer like I was, to'
come and bring your afflictions to Jesus, who is the great physician that can heal
all diseases of the body, soul and spirit. lam now married happily in the Lord,,
which it was impossible for me to have been, bad I not been, healed. lam 26.
years of age.
I am, yours faithfully in Christ Jesus,
M. C. LECKIE.
MISS EVA TRESSIDER, Elm Cottage, Rathdowne street, CarltotL
I have been healed several times, and have a great deal to be thankful for.
Five and a half years ago I first gave my heart to the Lord, and shortly afterwards
I was led to see Jesus as my Healer. My first trouble was an internal abscess.
Mr. Dowie invited me when I was suffering from the pain to come to him, and he
would go with me to the Lord in prayer. 1 was then a little unbelieving in
Divine healing. I had never seen any cases of the kind. Thern was a little un-
belief ; and if I feel doubtful about a thing I like to be sure whether it is right
or wrong. This led me to search the Scriptures, where I was surprised to find so’
many promises for our healing ;so I could not doubt it again. In the 103rd Psalm,,
verses 3 and 4, you will find the words which God blessed specially to me, namely :
“ Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, and forget not all His benefits, who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases.” That was quite enough without
seeing any more. After Mr. Dowie spoke to me again about taking my trouble to‘
the Lord, I felt it was all right; for Jesus is the same now as when He was-
in the flesh. When I went to Mr. Dowie, I was in great pain, and I feared
the abscess would burst inwardly. He told the Lord all about it, and IN-
LESS THAN A MINUTE I was quite well Then I had been suffering for'
twelve months, off and on. I have not felt any symptoms since that time. I was
ill with measles and a feversome time afterwards. Mr. Dowie came to see me on a
Monday morning. I felt better then ; but I must have lost the blessing, through
some fault of my own ; and I became so much worse that in three days I was quite
unconscious. Mr. Dowie came to see me again, and I was healed insimn-
taneously, I got up, and there was no internal pain, and 1 continued well for a-
long time. But most miraculous was my last healing in the beginning of January
this year. I was ill of typhoid fever. I took the case to the Lord myself. I
knew He would heal me, Yet, to my sorrow, 1 was not answered ; I was in trouble ;
something seemed to have come in the way. Mr. Dowie was then in hew Zealand,
so I could not send for him. and I continued ill for ten days, and got very
low. The members of the church at last heard of my ’illness, and, thank
God, when I got to the worst state two friends—Mr. Grierson, a steward of
this church, and Mrs. Williams, a member, came to my room. I felt that
the power of God was there. They sang very softly the hymn—The Great
Physician now is here,” and then they prayed. Mr, Gri rson laying his hands
upon me in the name of the Lord, and in a moment my pains, and fever, and
suffering Went away. Some friends came up again that night, and found
I was quite well. My mother is in Heaven, and lam housekeeper ; and I started
to attend to my household duties next day—doing my work with ease. I
thank God that I know Jesus as my Healer. I was ten days ill with typhoid. I
26


came to the Tabernacle quite well on the following Sunday, and I am resting still
in Jesus to keep me whole.
fAs Miss Tressider was concluding her testimony, a young woman in
the body of the hall was seized with a fit—apparently of epilepsy. There
was some excitement. Mr. Dowie asked the choir to sing a hymn, and
commanded the congregation, to keep their seats The choir the
hymn commencing, “ She only touched the hem of Thy garment while Mr.-
Dowie laid hands upon the young woman, who instantaneously was re-
stored to consciousness, and walked quite firmly with her mother and
Mrs. Dowie into the “ Pastor’s Hoorn.” Mr. Dowie resumed his place;
on the platform and continued the meeting. In a few minutes the girl
and her mother came back and took their seats, the former apparently
Pe Mn t Dowfel'ere said, 1 asked Miss Tressider to give very fully her
testimony to her healing by our brother Grierson’s agency, for several
reasons, and, particularly, because I am about to ask that deal brother,
who is a steward of this church, and «• my own son in the faith, to addie 3
vou Before he speaks, I wish to say how greatly I rejoice that the Lord
answered two petitions which I offered here before we departed on our
recent long Mission Tour in New Zealand and New South Wales ihe
first was that all our dear people should triumph over disease through
Christ, during our absence; and the second that He would_raise up
“ elders” who would be used to the sick. I rejoice to say that the Holy
Ghost has specially indicated two brothers, Joseph Grierson and John
Wellington, whom I purpose, if the Lord will, fully to ordain to this wore,,
ere we leave Australia. I will now call upon our brother, whom God has.
to my great joy used in other cases beside that of Miss iressider.
MR. JOSEPH GRIERSON, Station Street, North Carlton.
My dear friends in the Lord Jesus-I thank God lam able stand before you-
to offer my humble testimony to His loving kindness to me. I was br o"g ht
the Wesleyan denomination by a praying mother. The Holy Spirit s <(
me early in life, but I did not give in. I went year after year till I was 33, an
alien from the commonwealth of Israel." I often think of the truth of the lines
“ God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to perform,
He plants His footsteps in the sea, and rides upon the storm.
Certain circumstances induced me to leave Richmond, and I became located
in North Carlton. One day I read in the newspaper of strange doings
in the Free Christian Tabernacle, Fitzroy, where a man, said to be very
eccentric, was said to be doing some wonderful things, I came here and heai d the
man sneak of One who, although He hateth sin yet loveth the sinner. It
Semed as if some of the words were spoken to me ; but in going away I tohmy
wife that " I would not go that crib again.” However, I came again, and it was
not lono- before our dear Pastor took me by the hand and pressed me to decide for
Chr st and l made a promise that I would remain for the enquiry and prayer
Seetin"after“he evening service. Then the word of God took hold upon my
heart °1 felt more than ever what a sinner I was, and the danger of dl ”P r ™|
into perdition. Fear filled me, and a longing- to know Jesus, 1 came here I had.
a holiday—one Wednesday afternoon to the Healing Meeting. I chdn t altogct e
, •_ + v TToaiino- thpn I had been taught— Whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth ” and I was told that meant “ Whom the Lord loveth He maketh sick.
Here I heard different, and came to see for myself. The pastor asked me, afte
to come into his private room, and there he taught and prayed with
27


.
me, and when I went home I prayed in my own room and asked the Lord to give
me a new heart. I told the pastor I felt no better, and he told me I must believe
that every word in I. John i. 9 was for me, and take God at His word. There was
still doubt—l needed assurance. On the 2nd February, 1885 (my wife’s birthday),
I was at the warehouse marking off some stuff, and all the time I was going through
the argument, and all at once I did take God at His word, and I rejoiced in His
pardoning love. I did not at once receive Christ in the fulness of light, and some-
times my joy grew dim, but light gradually streamed into my soul. Like the
beautiful rays of the sun, first peeping over the hill-tops and then rising in all its
glory and chasing away the darkness, so the Sun of Righteousness arose and shone
into my heart I came here Sunday after Sunday, and sought more fully to know
the Lord. By-and-by I was able to receive all the light, and Christ became from
thenceforth my all. But before that I made an entire surrender to Him. I gave
up tobacco and drink, for I found that I could not ask the Lord’s blessing upon
them, and the pastor told me that my bodv was to be “ the Temple of the Holy
Spirit.’ By-and-by I was able to take all my complaints to the Lord. As
the Holy Spirit worked through me. I felt His quickening power. I grew
stronger and stronger in spirit, soul, and body. I improved in physical as well as
spiritual strength ; my chest, which was weak and growing in, increased in
■strength and girth. When the pastor was called away by God into New Zealand,
some of us vvere left by Him in the Tabernacle to carry on the work. According
to His promise, the Lord blessed the few, and they learned to lean on Jesus instead
of on the pastor, which was just what he desired. With regard to the illness of
bister Tressider. We missed her welcome face. I asked her little sister, who
told me she was unwell. Sister Williams and I went to see her. She was very
much changed—thin, emaciated with fever, and looking very bad. When she saw
us she wept like a babe. She was weak in body and spirit. The dear ones in her
home had been pressing her for many days to see a doctor. She was almost
wavering when we came—indeed, she had consented to see the doctor next day.
I said we will have no doctor here but the Great Physician.
[ihe narrative was interrupted at this point by the choir singing, in
low, sweet tones, the hymn “ The Great Physician now is here.”]
Sister Williams, who is a sweet singer in Israel, sang a verse and we prayed.
Then I put my hands on her—the action was involuntary, it was the first time I
ever did so and prayed to God, for Jesus’ sake, to take away the fever. She felt
a shock pass through her—it was the Holy Spirit’s power—and the fever was
gone. Although I was not a doctor, I felt her pulse—
Mr. Dowie : Oh yes, we are doctors —Doctors of Divinity !
and saw that there was a great difference. She said there remained a weakness in
the chest, and I laid hands on her again. The weakness soon went away. We
came again in the evening. Sister Tressider opened the door for us. She was
then quite herself again, and the following Sunday she came here to testify. We
give God all the glory.
Mr. JOHN S. WALLINGTON, 81 Dight Street, Collingwood (one of the stewards
ot the church) then delivered a brief address, thanking God that through Mr.
Howie they had learned to know Christ as their Healer, and that the Holy Spirit
had used them to others.
Mr. Dowie said—There is a class of healings to which I feel that I
ought to call your attention for the glory of our Immanuel, namely, that
of persons who were instantaneously healed in meetings where I was
praying and speaking, but upon whom I never laid hands, and of whose
complaints I had no knowledge whatever.
In November, 1883, occurred one of the most striking of these cases—a miracle
ot healing, of which many persons were witnesses. My rooms were crowded one
morning with believers seeking healing. That morning I expounded Matthew
28


viii. 1-17, and when I had finished the beautiful story of the healing of the
centurion’s servant, verses sto 18, I paused and spoke as follows ; —“ You do not
need to wait for my hands to be laid upon you, if you will only exercise the very
simple, but truly great faith, and deep humility of the centurion.” I continued
—“ Now we shall pray silently for a few minutes, and let each afflicted believer
say in their heart, “ Lord, speak the word only, and i shall be healed.’’
Silence reigned for a few minutes, and then, hearing some whispered words and
movements in the left corner of the room behind me, I said, ‘ Amen !’ and was
about to continue my exposition, when a little German lady, whom I did not
know, rose and said in an excited manner, “ Sir, can I speak ? ” Before I could
answer, she exclaimed, “My maid say she can see—Catherine, can you see ? Are
you sure ? ” I asked her to explain. She said that her name was Mrs. Burgmeier,
of No. 26 Napier Street, Fitzroy, and that Mr. Elijah Stranger of 56 Rose Street,
Fitzroy, a well-known Christian gentleman long resident in this city, had advised
her maid Catherine Cairns, who had been quite blind for twelve years, to
come to our meetings. I then asked Catherine to stand up. She was a tall young
woman of about 21 years old, and seemed to be almost stupefied with delight, but
she confirmed what her mistress had said. I tested her power to see in various
ways, and one little mistake she made caused much amusement. In counting the
number of persons on one side of the table, she counted always one more than the
correct number. When I said she was wrong, she firmly contended there were
seven, counting them again with outstretched finger, and saying, “ the seventh is
pointing her finger at me ! ” Everyone laughed ; because it was then seen that
she did not recognise herself, for she was pointing at her own reflection in
the looking glass. She soon began to read, and saw everything clearly.*
Will some of my critics, who attribute the healing to my touch, kindly explain
what part I took in this case when I did not know the girl, or that she had been
blind, until after her sight was restored 1 Truly such facts make it more difficult
to disbelieve, than to believe, that Jesus is a present Healer to all who come in
faith.
But these are not solitary, nor even rare cases, in our experience ; for in nearly
every Mission there are many such.
Recently in Sydney, a man from Casino, Richmond River, N.S.W., was similarly
healed of humanly-speaking incurable maladies, and he gave public testimony in
the Protestant Hall in that city on the evening of June 7th last, before a large
audidnce. He was saved and healed in the same hour, after hearing the teaching
in our meetings, when he was alone with his sin, his sorrow, his diseases and his
•[ Whilst these pages were being prepared for the press, it occurred to Hr, Dowie that it would be
interesting and helpful to get a declaration from the mistress of Catherine Cairns concerning this
remarkable case. Accordingly Mrs. Burgmeier was invited to come to the Tabernacle on Monday
evening, I2th December, where, in the presence of a number of persons, she gave many interesting
details concerning it; and, thereafter, made the following statement in the presence of nine persons.
A fuller statement is also in Mr Dowie’s possession, relative to Catherine Cairns, who came from
Nunawading; but it is too long for insertion here. There is one fact in it, however, which it may
be well to record, namely, that some months before her restoration she was taken to the Eye and
Ear Institution, Melbourne, by Mrs. Burgmeier, where the doctors could do nothing for her. Some
time after her restoration, I was told she went into the country, and I do not know her present
address. She was able to read before she left, and there are many living witnesses who saw her
when she was blind, who were present when she received her sight, and who saw her afterwards
when she could see perfectly.]
Free Christian Tabernacle, Fitzroy, 12th December, 1887.
This is to certify that I have read the above narrative of the restoration to sight of the girl
named Catherine Cairns, which was first published by the Rev. J. A Dowie in his tract entitled,
“Some Wonderful Works of God” I now desire to declare that it is QUITE true in evert
PARTICULAR ; and I stated this to-night, in the Free Christian Tabernacle, before more than forty
persons, and now sign this declaration in the presence of nine of those, as witnesses thereto. My
object in making this statement is to glorify God and His Son Jesus Christ as our Healer; and to
encourage others to trust Him with their spirits, souls, and bodies.
CATHERINE BURGMEIER, 24 Napier Street, Fitzroy.
Witnesses to the above : —John Brown, Learmouth House, Rathdowne-street, Carlton; Thosi
Henderson, Kay-street. Carlton ; Joseph Grierson, Station-street, North Carlton ; George Wilkins,
No. 1 Bedford Street, Collingwood ; John Samuel Wallington, 81 Dight-street, Collingwood; Ellen
M. Brown, 196 Johnston-s reet, Fitzroy ; Elizabeth Williams, 196 Johnston-street, Fitzroy; Elizabeth
Mary Trickett, M‘Nicol-street, off Villamanta-street, Geelong W,£ Jane Dowie, 37 Barkly-street,
North Fitzroy.
29


God. As late as the evening of Tuesday, September 20th, at a meeting held in
this Tabernacle, Mr. J, A. I). Adams, a Christian barrister from Dunedin, New
Zealand, gave a very touching account of the instantaneous and perfect healing
of his wife, after fifteen years of medical treatment and hopeless suffering.
It occurred during our mission in the Garrison Hall, Dunedin, in December, 1886,
and whilst we were speaking of one “who touched the hem of Christ’s garment,”
(Mark v. 25, 34.,) she, by faith, received in a moment a perfect healing.
MRS. JOHN W. SMITH, Derby Street, Kew.
I may say that I never before stood on a platform, so I hope you will excuse my
imperfections as a speaker. I thank God that He brought me to Mr. and Mrs,
Dowie’s healing-room. When I came to Mr. Dowie I was in great pain from
jheumatism ; I was not able to lift my arm without great pain. I had suffered
from rheumatism for six or seven years. Mr. Dowie laid hands upon me and the
entirely left me. I had an attack of asthma, and when I came to Mrs.
Dowie I was in great pain. I have felt nothing of it since he laid hands upon me.
1 suffered from sore hands, the skin was much cracked, as soon as one sore would
heal another would break out. I tried several kinds of ointments without relief.
1 came to Mr. Dowie, and now there is not the slightest trace of the disease. My
eyesight is very much better also. I give God all the glory, while thanking Mr.
Dowie, His agent. When I went to him there was something like a skin growing
on my eyes, but when I got home all of it was gone. My eyesight is now much
clearer and stronger. I can do without glasses which I had used for more than
twenty years, in fact I broke them in pieces, and I feel younger instead of older.
MRS. WM. THRELKELD, Junr., 211 Wellington-street, Collingwood.
About four years ago I had a poisoned leg. It was gradually spreading from my
ankle upwards. I began to fear that I would lose my leg. I had been to the
chemist, and had got advice from various doctors at other places; but nothing
did me any good; I suffered great pain. One day Mr. Dowie asked me if I
believed the Lord could heal, and was willing to heal me, and I said “ yes.” I
had just heard him preach from the words, “Wilt thou be made whole”?” He
prayed with me ; and laid his hands upon the numerous open sores. Immediately
Mr. Dowie prayed the pain went away, and the ulcerations ceased to trouble me.
In less than three weeks the flesh on my legs was perfectly sound and well. That
was over four years ago, and I have never seen the least sign of the ulcerations
since. I give God all the glory ; and am grateful to Mr. Dowie who has been used
so much to us all.
MR. CHARLES. ROBERTSON BEWICK, Clear Lake, near Horsham,
Dear friends, I am very glad to add my testimony to that which has been
given. For several years I suffered from a pain in the side and indigestion. I
believed in healing though at the time ; but I could not receive it, for I had not
fully surrendered to God. A Mrs. Ballinger in our part of the country had
returned with her left eye, which had been blind, restored to sight; and she told us
all that Mr, Dowie had prayed with her, and laid his hands upon her. I went to
town, I started to pray, and when I came down Mr. Dowie prayed with me, I
resolved to serve the Lord and give up sin. From that time to now I have been
free from the disease which had so long troubled me. God has blessed me, healed
pae, and used me to others.
The following testimony was handed in by a lady who was on the
platform daring the afternoon but had no opportunity to speak ; and as
it is a clear case of healing of valvular disease of the heart, it is here
inserted. The lady looks the picture of health and has been recently
married.
30


MRS. WEBSTER, 228 Madeline Street, Carlton.
Dear Sir —For a few years I had been a great sufferer, and for two years had
not been able to lie on the left side. Latterly I became so ill that I thought it
advisable to consult a medical man. The first I consulted pronounced it heart
disease ; but not being satisfied with this opinion I went to another, and he pro-
nounced it disease of the valves of the heart. I gradually became worse and
worse, and for three months I was entirely laid aside from work, and the doctors
gave up all hope of my recovery. One gave me six weeks to live, and the other
three months. I then took my case to Jesus as the Great Healer, and on
November 6th, 1883,1 was healed, and since then I have enjoyed good health. Any
Tittle cold I have I just take to Jesus, and I always get immediate relief.
ME. ALFRED CARPENTER, 155 Brunswick Street, Fitzroy.
lam very glad to give my testimony. On the 4th of August last, I pricked
;my finger with a needle. 1 took hold of a brass instrument, which was
covered with verdigris, and the verdigris got into the prick in my finger. I
thought no more about it till it got very sore. In a day or two my finger was very
had. A week and three days afterwards I spoke to Mr. Dowie. He prayed
and laid hands upon me. All the pain went away, I started to work in the
middle of the we-k, and I jambed the same finger on the following Saturday.
I saw Mr. Dowie again on Saturday afternoon, and the pain again left. One day
when I was going to St. Kilda I fell down in the road and fainted from loss of blood.
I was taken to the Homoeopathic Hospital; but left when I became conscious. I
went to Mr. Dowie; and after prayer, I became well and strong. I have
also been healed of a carbuncle, through Mr. Dowie’s prayer, and the laying on of
his hands. It withered away from the moment he touched it, and never gave
me any more uneasiness, and soon entirely disappeared. I give God all the glory
and praise ; and I am deeply grateful to our dear pastor.
Mr. Dowie said : The next is a case of epilepsy, one of the worst I have
■ever seen.
MR. THOMAS HOGG, Hawick Cottage, Palmer Street, Collingwood.
Dear Friends, I thank God that I can bear testimony to the healing power of
the Lord Jesus Christ. I had been subject for many years to epileptic fits, and
their terrible after consequences. About two years ago I was five hours in a fit,
and it took five strong men to hold me down ; they could do nothing with me.
The doctor prescribed for me, said I was very bad, and went away, leaving me in
the fit. My dear mother, who is present, went long after midnight for Mr. Dowie.
He came and prayed with me, in the name of the Lord Jesus, commanding the
devils to come out of me, and, friends, instantaneously I was delivered, and the
fits went right away. Mr. Dowie asked me to open my eyes. When I did so I
saw it was Mr. Dowie. I arose immediately, changed my clothes, which were
much lorn, had a cup of tea and went out into the fresh air about two o’clock in
the morning with Mr. Dowie for a walk. I thank God for that. During the time
Mr. Dowie was in New Zealand the Lord kept me wonderfully. After he came
back I started to sin again. That was through smoking a pipe. It is a sin to
smoke, and so defile the body ; and I advise any one who smokes to give it up.
Directly I began to sin the devil got hold of me that minute; and I felt very
unwell. One Lord’s Day evening I staggered into the Healing Room, intending to
see Mr. Dowie ; and I was thrown down in a fearful fit, and it required several
persons to keep me down. Mr. Dowie was called, bade them all leave me alone,
as he always does in such cases, prayed with me, commanded the devils to come
out, and I was instantly set free. To-night I feel stronger and better than ever
Some ask me “ When Mr. Dowie goes away what will you do 1 ” I will trust in
Jesus and keep from smoking. If I trust in Him all will be well. God bless Mr.
and Mrs. Dowie.
Mrs. Hogg, an elderly Scotch lady, corroborated her son’s testimony
and mentioned that his elder brother had been healed of rheumatic fever ;
31


and that her son Thomas had also forgotten to mention that he had one
Sabbath Day been healed instantaneously of pleurisy, a disease from
which her husband had died. All these were through Mr. Dowie’s agency,
and no one could tell the grief she had to think that he was so soon going
away. May God bless him and Mrs. Dowie.
MR. H. WOOD, 91 Toorak Road, South Yarra.
I suffered a good deal with my liver, and used to spit blood, my lungs being
affected. God healed me of both. One night in August, after returning home
from a meeting in the Tabernacle, I became very feverish. I vomited a good
deal during the night and began to think I had typhoid fever. I prayed to God
to heal me, but for three days I remained very weak. I then came over here to
Mr. Dowie, who prayed for me, and thank God the fever and the pain went away
immediately, I earnestly thank God for the mighty blessings received since I was
converted here, and I desire to live for His glory in all things.
MR. W. FOXCROFT, 196 Johnston Street, Fitzroy.
I thank God for my healing. I had large and painful boils on my arms. Mr..
Dowie prayed and laid hands upon me—all pain departed and the boils speedily
disappeared, and my blood was cleansed by the power of God.
MISS SARAH HEARNDEN, 110 Campbell Street, Collingwood,
Thank God Jesus healed me and gave me power. One time when Mr. Dowie
was away I was taken bad with neuralgia. I don’t think I ever had such a severe
attack. Mr. Grierson prayed and instantly it went away. There have been no
signs of it since. I leave myself always in the hands of Jesus for everything.
MISS ALICE HEARNDEN, 110 Campbell Street, Collingwood,
Four years ago I was led to attend Mr. Dowie’s ministry, and here I have
received the touch of God’s healing power through our dear pastor. I was suffering
very much from indigestion. The Lord opened my eyes to see that He was able
and willing to heal me. I don’t get ill at all now ; the Lord keeps me. I think
every child of God can be kept well if he asks God to keep Satan out of his body.
Oh that we might all be filled with the Holy Spirit.
MISS BLANCHARD, 21 Reilly Street, Collingwood.
Thank God that I know His healing power. I was never healed of anything
more serious than severe neuralgia. I had it for three months and was in great
pain. Mr. Dowie laid hands upon me and it went away, but through unfaithful-
ness in some Way it returned again and I was in pain all that night. After that
I took it to the Lord myself, and I thank Him to-night that I have not had it since.
MISS MEWAH FETCH, 3 Charles Street, Collingwood.
I am very thankful to acknowledge the sweet healing power of the Lord
Jesus Christ. I received the blessing when Mr. Dowie came back from New
Zealand. The evil one prevented my recovery from rheumatic fever, which
I then had for the third time in my short life. Praise God, to-night, I feel
quite well. Mr. Dowie prayed with me, and, after a severe struggle, I
received the blessing of a perfect healing. I pray that God’s works may be
made manifest, and that people may acknowledge them. I was a sufferer for
five years from that terrible disease, and I thank God and Mr. Dowie (as His
agent) with all my heart. May God bless Mr. and Mrs. Dowie.
MISS MAUDE FETCH, sister of the foregoing, said she had been healed
of bronchitis through the instrumentality of Mr. Grierson, during Mr. Dowie’s
absence in New Zealand.
32


Miss WILSON, 228 Madeline Street, Carlton.
I have trusted in Jesus these 20 years. I often take my little complaints
to the Lord, and He always removes them. My mother always taught me
that Jesus was my Healer. Some time ago I took a bad cold, and had
rheumatics in the leg and knees. I took it to the Lord myself, and for some
time I was eased, but it came back again. It was a very severe attack. I
came into Mr. Dowie’s room. He said it was a very bad case, that it was in
the blood and might lead to paralysis. I believed that the Lord, the Healer,
did not want His children to suffer. I asked Mr. Dowie for a text to cover
my case, and he gave me the last verse in the prophet Joel—“I will
cleanse their blood which I had not cleansed ; for the Lorddwelleth in Zion,”
I wanted a whole body. I took God at His word, Mr. Dowie prayed, I was
immediately healed, and I stand up to tell you that He is my Saviour and
Healer. Now, there is not one person stronger every way than I am. The
pain never returned, and to-night I thank the Lord for His healing power. I
ask Him to keep me free from Satan, and preserve me and all God’s people
in <( spirit, soul, and body.’’
MISS CLARA WEARE, ‘ Bethany,” Riversdale, Rd., Hawthorn, said :
The first time that I remember that the Lord healed me was when I was
ten years of age. I was very ill with an affection of the heart, liver and
brain ; so ill, that at last dropsy set in, and my body and face were so swollen,
that it was expected every moment that the water would touch either the
heart or the brain, and that I should die instantly. I was living at
that time with my aunts in Swindon, England. The doctor, Dr. Knaggs,
said that I must either die or become an idiot. My relatives prayed for my
recovery, but I am afraid they did it very much as many other dear Christians
do, not expecting their prayers to be answered. However, the Lord led me
by His Spirit to pray for myself, and I asked him in my simple childish way
to make me well. I then felt as I prayed, a strange sensation pass through
me, which I did not then understand ; but now know to be God’s Life-giving
power. I said to myself in astonishment, “ Why, I feel so fresh and new, I
am sure I am going to get well.” Eventually I recovered, much to the
amazement of all my friends, doctor and relatives ; in fact the whole town,
who were watching daily for my death. The universal cry of my praying
friends was, “ Who ever expected to see her about again?”
It was not however until three and a half years ago (1884) that I knew the
Lord as my Healer. Through the prayers and laying on of hands of a dear
Christian friend, I was then healed of many disorders. Hip-disease of eight
years standing, lumbago, sciatica, &c. I then was in perfect health for a
full year, after which however, I overworked myself, and in consequence of
a mental shock, was laid low with brain fever, Mr, Dowie was then requested
to visit me. The moment he had laid hands upon me in the Name of the
Lord, the pain left, and the fever also ; but owing to want of knowledge on
my part of how to grasp my full freedom, and perfect health, I steadily sank.
At last one night as ray sister sat by my bedside, I moaned, and on looking
at me, she saw a change come over my features, the grey hues of death.
There was no thought of sending for a doctor, and no time to send for Mr.
Dowie. My sister raised me in her arms, but I suddenly grew heavy, so that
she had to lay me down. As she did so, my head fell back on the pillow my
breath ceased and my jaw dropped. The Lord led her by His Spirit to lay
her hands on me, and plead with Him to pour through me His own Life-
giving power, that I might be restored. In a few moments she felt warmth
come back, and soon I opened my eyes, and in a short time was able to take
nourishment. In a few weeks I was about again, doing my Master’s work.
Again, six months later I overworked myself, and consumption showed
33


itself. Once more Mr. Dowie was sent for, who when he came aid hands on
me. He asked me if I thought Jesus would heal me now? 1 said, yes,
for I knew He would, He always does heal the sick, if they will only trust
Him. Directly hands were laid upon me, and the prayer of faith pronounced
the matter from the abscess in the right lung was shot out like a bolt, and my
breath rushed through the cavity (which felt to be about the size of a two
shilling piece) like a torrent of wind through a tunnel, and could feel all tbe
rawness of the wound. In a few hours this healed up, and in a short time i
was once more about my Master’s business. It is two full years since then,
and I have not been laid aside for a single day during that time, for i now
understand better how to claim deliverance from the Evil One; and the Lord
has kept me, as He ever does, every hour, and every moment. Praise Mis
name for ever and ever.
MISS MARY A. WEARE, Sister of the Previous Speaker,
I have been witness to the truth of all that has been recorded here by my
sister. Ido so thank the Lord that He has enabled me to witness for Him.
Dangerously ill some four years ago, and opening my Bible at Luke xin. 11-
13 the thought came to me that Jesus was the very same now as then.
Instantly I became conscious of the close presence of the Lord, come as my
physician, I just placed my whole case in His hands. That moment the
cure began, it grew rapidly perfect. f „•
Then the Lord went on so sweetly to teach me that Healing was part of His
sacrificial work. He showed me that the work of Jesus on the cross tor
spirit, soul, and body, was so absolutely finished, that there was nothing for
me but the Freedom! And well might it be nothing but the perfect
Freedom for us, when we are told that Is. 53-4, in the original Hebrew,
reads—“ Surely He hath borne away our sicknesses and carried away our
pains.”
The following briefly testified :
Mr. HARRY SEXTON, 4 Reilly Terrace, Nicholson Street, Carlton, who
had been healed of a number of complaints.
MRS. KING, of the same address, whose daughter was cured of fever
and inflammation of the lungs.
Mr. JOHN RAY, 278 George Street, Fitzroy, of a bad leg and deafness.
MRS. KANT, Bloomfield Road, Hawthorn, who had been healed of
rheumatism of 12 years standing.
MISS SMITH, of Victoria Street, Fitzroy, who had suffered from
indigestion, carbuncle, and a severe cold, and been healed through faith in
MRS. WILLIAMS, 196 Johnston Street, Fitzroy.
Thank God that I can testify that the Lord is my Healer and my Saviour.
For the last four and a half years I have known the Lord. I was converted
under Mr. Dowie’s ministry. One great miracle was that God rid me of an
internal rupture, caused by carrying a great weight. I wrestled with the Lord
(in prayer) and was healed without human touch. I had not been able to stand
on my feet’or walk, but I was perfectly well the following morning. I had an
ulcerated foot. Mr. Dowie laid hands on the part, and the pain left. I was
able to put the boot on next day. I have never known what it was to taste
medicine since I have become a member of this church. I think I ought to
magnify the Lord. I have seen many hundreds of cases of healing through
Mr Dowie’s agencv in this Tabernacle. I have seen tbe blind receive sight;
34


the deaf hearing; the lame lay aside their crutches and walk. I don’t know
what I have not seen done in this place by the power of the Lord, Some
have received healing while prayers were being offered for them. It cannot
be magnetism, for persons miles and miles away, whom Mr. Dowie never
saw, have received healing. Christians must accept the Lord as their
Healer. They must take Him for all—“ Christ is all.”
In concluding the service, Mr. Dowie said that the testimony of
Mrs. Williams was of great value ; seeing that she had been the Caretaker
of the Tabernacle since its erection. Their dear Caretaker was a most
competent witness. The testimonies which had been given represented
only a fragment of those healed. He took no glory to himself, and
claimed no power in connection with their cures. “ Power belongeth
unto God,” to whom alone let all the glory be given. He would close the
Commemoration with the words with which they had begun it the previous
morning from the 67th Psalm.
“ God be merciful unto us, and bless us;
“ And cause His face to shine upon us.
“ That THY WAY may be known upon earth,
“ Thy saving health among all nations.”
THE END OF THE COMMEMORATION.
APPENDIX.
Free Christian Tabernacle, Fitzroy, Melbourne,
December 15tb, 1887.
To all our Beloved Friends in Christ owr All.
The facts in the foregoing pages are humbly recorded, with deep
gratitude to God, and a very keen sense of my own utter unworthiness
and weakness apart from His grace, which has truly been sufficient for me.
I record them also on the eve of retiring from my pastoral charge of the
Church in the Tabernacle, which I only now hold for a little more
than two months at the unanimous request of its members, who have kindly
accepted ray resignation and acquiesced, although reluctantly at first,
in my decision, believing that T am following the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, and obeying the will of the Lord. It is our intention to
leave Australia in March next, via New Zealand, for the United States of
America and Canada, where we hope to get good by conference with
those whom God has used so mightily in these great nations, and where we
shall conduct Missions in various cities as the Lord may direct. There-
35


after we hope, if the Lord will, to visit Great Britain and the Continent of
Europe, returning after some time to prosecute the work in Austialasia.
By night and by day the Macedonian cry, “ Come over and help us ’
is ringing in our ears, and burdening our hearts, rising into a world-wide
wail of anguish from millions who arc sick and sad. We want to
help to show to those of God's children who as yet know it not, that this
Beautiful Gate of Divine Healing is still open for all who are wilhng to
enter and receive, and we believe that to do so will be to open as of old, the
Door of Salvation to multitudes who do not see Christ as He is,
because the Church so largely presents Him as He is not, for eis
the healer, and not the defiler of the bodies of His People, who
sinfully attribute disease to His hand, a hand which never touched but to
he The work of Divine Healing is rapidly spreading, by the agency of
many highly gifted fellow-laborers, holy men and women throughout the
whole Body of Believers, the true Church in every part of the world ,
and our part of the work is but a small fragment of this niig i y move-
ment, which is certain to take a foremost position in winning multitudes
to Christ, in the near future. It is God’s answer to the infidels sneer at
first century miracles, and to those who dare to impugn the work of the
Holy Spirit, and the Divinity of Chwst as the risen Son of God.
the answer of the unchanged Christ to the cry of His suffering ones who
are groaning beneath the oppression of the devil (Acts x. 38), and w
are now being set free for joyful service. . . , ...
For nearly sixteen years I have exercised my ministry in Austra i .
Ordained in South Australia in May, 1872, as the pastor of a Congiega-
tional Church, I continued in that denomination for six years, when 1
resigned in 1878, the pastorate of the Newtown Congregational Church,
Sydney,’New South Wales, and retired also from the Congregational
Union, after a unanimous request from my ministerial brethren to wit i-
draw my resignation. For nearly ten years, therefore, I have been a re
Christian minister, conducting Missions in Sydney (for three years) m
Adelaide (for one year), and in Collingwood (nearly a year), and at last
founding the Free Christian Church in Fitzroy, Melbourne, of which I
have been the pastor for nearly five years. I have exercised my numstry
amidst many strange and stirring scenes ; and it is not without m y
feelings of love and regret that I have determined to leave Australia, at
least for some years, if the Lord will. , . nll .r,-
Knowing that we have many friends in all the churches, and in all t
Australasian Colonies, who are deeply interested in our
forth this letter as an appendix to this Record, as my on y y
munieating with many of them. I earnestly request them to remember
us in their prayers, both now and in our future work for our Lord and
Master ; and also to pray tor and help the Church in Fitzroy, whic i we o
dearly love, and which may God preserve and greatly bless.
We are at no man’s bidding, and yet at all men’s service, to motto
is still that which shines in golden letters over our platform in the iaber-
nacle, “ Christ is all.” , , , . r , .
We are going out on no selfish errand, and we are undertaking no light
36


responsibility—seeking only the glory of our Lord, and the good of all
“ the household of faith.”
We are going out on our Lord’s work, at His charges, trusting Him
ALONE FOR ALL THINGS, AT ALL TIMES, AND IN ALL PLACES, He is
Jbhovah-jirbh as well as Jehoyah-rophi (Provider as well as Healer.)
“ So on we go, not knowing ;
We would not if we might,
We would rather walk in the dark with Thee,
Than go alone in the light.
We would rather walk by Faith with Thee,
Than walk alone by sight.”
Once more asking the prayers of all our friends in the lands we are
leaving, and also the prayers of unknown friends in the lands whither, by
God’s help, we are going ; and with the united love and prayers for you
all, of my dear wife and myself, I am,
Ever yours in Jesus,
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
Eae Broi., Printers, 21 and 23 Elizabeth Street North, Melbourne,
37


