

RECORD-OF-SERVICE
MEMBERS OF THE STAFF OF
Sfie S YDNEY MORNING HERALD
and SYDNEY MAIL
\VTho (Served In. t/ie Gjrecz£




This Rerord
HAS BEEN COMPILED TO COMMEMORATE
THE SERVICES OF THE MEMBERS OF
THE VARIOUS STAFFS OF
®ljp i>giumj HHimttng ffirralit
AND
®lrp iMatl
WHO WENT FORWARD TO FIGHT FOR
AUSTRALIA AND THE EMPIRE
IN THE GREAT WAR.
ALL OFFERED THEIR LIVES IN
OBEDIENCE TO THE CALL OF JUSTICE
AND FREEDOM IN THE SERVICE OF THEIR
COUNTRY AND HUMANITY; AND SOME
MADE THE SUPREME SACRIFICE.
1914- 1918


‘‘For this offering of their lives made in common by
them all, they each of them individually received that
renown which never grows old, for a sepulchre, not
so much that in which their bodies have been deposited,
but that noblest of shrines, wherein their glory is laid
up, to be eternally remembered upon every occasion on
which deed or story shall call for its commemoration.
For brave men have the whole earth for their tomb,
and in lands far from their own, where the column with
its epitaph declares it, there is enshrined in every breast
a record unwritten, with no tablet to preserve it, except
the tablet of the heart.” —
Pericles.


In Memoriam
Sleeping in Soldiers’ Graves
C. S. ALLERDICE
G. A. K. BUSKIN
C. A. COOMBES
R. F. CHRISTIANSON
*E. H. CORBETT
*A. T. CLAXTON
A. GRAY, D.C.M.
W. B. GRAHAM
H. M. HERROD
G. H. HOGAN
J. HEADY
T. A. HANNAY
O. HOGUE
R. T, JARVIS. M.M.
*R. M. KING
A. H. LIVINGSTONE
J. B. V. MOORE
A. A. McGILL
E. F. ORPIN
C. V. REYNOLDS
H. E. CLUNIES-ROSS
*A. G. SEMPLE
W. A. TWEEDIE
•W. K. WILLIS
R. Y. WRIGHT
*Son« of employees.


FOREWORD
THE achievements of all ranks of the A.I.F. have created imperishable
traditions for Australia and contributed much toward winning for
us an honoured place in the fraternity of nations.
In 1914 the German onslaught found the Allies unprepared.
France and Belgium faced the first shock with courage and devotion.
Our own Motherland, to her everlasting honour, at the fateful hour turned
against the voices that bade her purchase ease with shame, and rose to the
occasion with a spirit more magnificent than ever before displayed. Con-
vinced of the justice of the cause, her Overseas Sons rallied in their teeming
thousands to her aid and to ours..
In grateful remembrance of the men from our own office who went
forward to fight for Australia and the Empire, this record of their services
has been compiled in a spirit of reverence and pride. No such task can
be undertaken without the shadow of sorrow being cast around; but this
shadow is largely dispelled by the sunshine of proud memories of the deeds
done and death endured in the stress and storm of the greatest struggle the
world has ever known.
Of those who of their own free will offered themselves and went on
active service, the staffs of the "Sydney Morning Herald” and the ’Sydney
Mail” supplied their full quota. Out of the roll of approximately 400
employees nearly 100 enlisted. Many others volunteered, but were not
accepted. This record is a very gratifying one when it is remembered that
those who went on service comprised practically all of the eligibles, the
greater number of the employees of the Herald and Mail being unable,
on account of age and family ties, to join their younger associates. The
majority of these, however, it is pleasing to state, engaged in various forms
of patriotic work, and thus maintained tha spirit of the nation at home,
while assisting their gallant comrades abroad.
Five members of the staff were decorated, and several others were
mentioned in despatches.
The soldiers who left these shores worthily upheld the honour of
Australia, and have brought to their country’s shrine a tribute from every
nation. They have made their own grand monument; we can but decorate
it. May this tribute to some of her brave sons remind the children of
future generations of the sacrifices of those who served and died that
Australia might be free.
JOHN FAIRFAX & SONS. LTD.


THE HONOUR ROLL
CHARLES EDWIN WOODROW BEAN,
Official War Correspondent with the A.I.F.
Mr. Bean, who was a member of the editorial staff of the “S. M, Herald” when
he left to go to the Front, was nominated by the journalists of Australia for the
position of official war correspondent with the A.1.F., because they knew him to be
one of the best descriptive writers, a man of fine character, and in every sense
a good Australian. He fully justified his appointment.
Mr. Bean was born at Bathurst on November 18, 1879, being the son of the
Rev. Edwin Bean, then headmaster of All Saints' College, in that town. He was
called to the Bar in 1903. Two or three years later he joined the literary staff, and
in 1909 was appointed London correspondent of the “S. M. Herald,” and upon his
return to Sydney in 1913, he resumed work as a leader writer.
Shortly after the outbreak of the war he was selected as the official corre-
spondent, and though graded as Captain, he remained rigidly a civilian for the
sake of the freedom which it gave him. He went with the first drafts of troops
for Egypt, sailing from Melbourne in the “Orvieto” with the late General Bridges
and his staff on October 24, 1914, and was all through the Gallipoli campaign.
He was wounded in the Lone Pine fight on August 7, 1915. After the evacuation
he went to France, where he acted as official correspondent for Australia, with a


few intervals of work in London connected with war trophies until just before
the armistice was signed. He edited the well-known "Anzac Book” and “The
Rising Sun,” but the achievement of which he is proudest is the record of 300
volumes of notes and diary which he kept from the sailing of the First Division
till the end of the war. He shared the risks taken by the men in the actual
fighting line, and in a fine tribute paid to him by General White was described
as “one of the bravest of our men.”
At present Mr. Bean is engaged in writing the history of the A.I.F. in Gallipoli
and France, and in editing the remaining volumes relating to our national history
of the war.
JOHN THOMAS ADCOCK
Was born in July, 1893, at Ropsley,
Lincolnshire, and educated at the Rops-
ley Public School and the Grantham
Technical College. He arrived in Aus-
tralia in 1909, and three years later
was appointed to the reading staff.
At the end of the year 1915 he en-
listed, and was drafted to the 25 th
battery of the 7th Field Artillery. He
sailed from Australia in May, 1916,
and after about six months' further
training in England went to France.
He was first in action at Armentieres
early in January, 1917, and took part
in the engagement at Messines Ridge
in the following June, and was also
at Passchendaele. He was in the
operations on the Somme from March,
1918, till the end of hostilities. He
returned to Australia in October, 1919.
CHARLES STEWART ALLERDICE
Was born at Bowral on August 31,
1893, and was educated at the Hurst-
ville and Cleveland Street Public
Schools. He was the youngest son of
Mr. William Allerdice, now of Hurst-
ville. He entered the linotype engi-
neering department as an apprentice
at the beginning of March, 1910.
A member of the old Scottish rifles,
he was one of the first to enlist from the
office. He sailed with the rank of Lance-
Corporal in October, 1914, with the
First Infantry Brigade, and proceeded
to Egypt. He took part in the memor-
able first landing on Gallipoli, and was
in all the heavy fighting which ensued
till the Lone Pine engagement, in which
he was killed in August, 1915.


WILFRED JOHN BOGAN
Was born at Neutral Bay in 1888,
being the eldest son of Mr. E. J. Bogan,
of Denman. He was educated at the
Denman Public School. He joined the
stereotyping department in 1912.
Volunteering in July, 1915, he went
as a Driver in the I sth Battery of the
Field Artillery, and, later, became a
Bombardier. He was constantly en-
gaged on the Western Front, taking
part in the fight on the Ypres sector,
at Pozieres, Bullecourt, Bapaume,
Amiens, Albert and Villers Bretonneux.
He served until the signing of the
Armistice.
a
CHARLES CRISPIN BOTTOMLEY
Was born at Bradford, Yorkshire, in
1874, and arrived in New Zealand with
his parents four years later. After hav-
ing served his time as a compositor
on the Christchurch "Press,” he went
to South Africa, and afterwards to
South America, working at his trade
in both countries, and came subse-
quently to Australia, joining the read-
ing staff in October, 1915.
After being twice rejected he was
accepted for service in the following
year, enlisting as a Private in the 7th
Battalion. Upon arrival in England he
was transferred to the 67th Battalion,
and went with that unit to France, and
was engaged in several important ac-
tions. After the Messines battle he
was transferred to the 3 7th Battalion,
with which he remained. He was in
the fight at Passchendaele and at Pro-
yart, and was severely wounded at
Clery Wood, on the Somme, on August
29, 1918, and captured by the Ger-
mans. After three weeks in Munster
Camp he was detailed for farm work
at Tychow and Rarfin, on the borders
of Poland and Russia, and knew nothing
about the signing of the Armistice till
his liberation on December 28, 1918.
Three days later he was sent back to
England by way of Sweden.
ALEXANDER JAMES BOYD
Only son of Mr. Alexander Heron Boyd,
a well-known London journalist, wat


born in London on April I 1, 1889, and
educated at Dulwich College, England.
He arrived in Australia, after a period
spent in the Federated Malay States, in
1912, and joined the reporting staff in
June of that year.
Enlisting in June, 1915, in the 20th
Battalion, he first saw service in Gal-
lipoli. In November, 1915, he joined
General Birdwood’s staff, and remained
on it till July, 1916. He then returned
to the 20th Battalion with the rank of
Sergeant, and served through the
Somme campaign. He was wounded at
Bullecourt, and came back to Australia
at the end of 1917, resuming duty in
the office in February, 1918. He re-
signed in March, 1919, to join the
staff of the Brisbane “Daily Mail.”
RICHARD JOSEPH BROWN
The younger son of Mr. Charles Brown
of Granville, was born at Parramatta
in 1894, and educated at the Parra-
matta Public School. He joined the
clerical staff in September, 1910.
Enlisting as a Private in the Army
Service Corps on December 31, 1915,
was shortly afterwards made a Lance-
Corporal and proceeded to France,
where he saw a great deal of fighting
at Messines, Ypres, and Armentieres
till the end of 1917, when he was in-
valided to England on account of rheu-
matism. After six months' home ser-
vice in England, he was transferred to
the Australian Flying Corps as an air
mechanic, and returned to France at
the end of June, 1918, with the Second
Flying Squadron, remaining on service
in this capacity till the end of hostili-
ties.
a
GEORGE ARTHUR KEITH BUSKIN
Was the second son of the late Mr.
Alexander Buskin, planter, of Gorak-
pur, India, and of Mrs. Laura Buskin,
now of Longport House, Canterbury,
England. He was born in 1894, was
educated at the Fort Street School, and
was on the clerical staff when he en-
listed.
Upon the outbreak of the war he
offered his services, and was accepted
as a Gunner in the Field Artillery, be-
ing? attached to the Third Battery and
sailing from Australia in October, 1914.
He served through the Gallipoli cam-
paign, after which he was invalided
to England. He rejoined his unit in
France in August, 1917, and fell in
action at Anzac Ridge, Polygon Wood,
on November 3 of that year.
His only brother, Lieutenant Frank
Buskin, of the 6th Light Horse (a son-
in-law of Mr. S. H. Fairland) was
killed in Gallipoli, while the husband
of his only sister, Lieutenant Antram,
R.N., also lost his life while in command
of a British submarine.
GEORGE FREDERICK CAMPBELL
Only son of Mr. George Joseph Camp-
bell, of Oatley, was born at Grafton
in 1893, and educated at the Kogarah


Public School, joining the clerical staff
in May, 1914.
Enlisting as a Signaller with the 3rd
Battalion, on August 17, 191 4, he left
Australia in the middle of October,
and was present at the original landing
on Gallipoli. He was constantly under
fire, and during the third week on the
Peninsula was wounded. He returned
to Australia on Christmas Day, 1915,
after long spells in hospital at Malta
and at Wandsworth.
RICHARD FRANCIS CHRISTIANSON
The younger son of Mr. James Chris-
tianson, was born at Bendigo in 1891,
educated at Fort Street School, and
was employed in the stereotyping de-
partment.
For a number of years he had been
connected with the Garrison Artillery,
holding the rank of Lieutenant, and at
the outbreak of the war was mobilised
and put in charge of a section of the
harbour defences. As soon as he was
demobilised he enlisted for services
abroad, but was retained for some time
on the instructional staff. He left
Australia as officer in command of
the 18th reinforcements for the 2nd
Battalion. He saw much service on the
Western Front, and fell in action at
Polygon Wood on October 4, 1917.
His only brother, Warrant-officer J.
W. Christianson, and the husband of
his only sister (Sergeant Cooper)
served throughout the war.
GEORGE FRANCIS CLARKE
Only son of Mr. George Clarke, of Par-
ramatta North, was born at Padding-
ton in 1 894, and educated at the Crown
Street Superior Public School. He
joined the clerical staff in 1913.
Early in 1916 he enlisted as a Pri-
vate, and sailed with reinforcements
for the 53rd Battalion, which he joined
in France on the Somme in October
of that year. At Flers he was inca-
pacitated for a little while on account
of trench feet. He rejoined his bat-
talion again in May, 1917, and saw
continued fighting at Ypres, Wytschaete
and elsewhere until the beginning of
the final offensive in August, when he
took part in engagements from Villers
Bretonneux to Peronne.
He acted as despatch runner at Pe-
ronne, having meanwhile been made
a Lance-Corporal, and was awarded
the Military Medal for gallantry on the
field.
a
CHARLES ARNCLIFFE COOMBES
The second son of Mr. W. H. Coombes,
of Bay Road, North Sydney, was born
at Arncliffe in 1893, and educated at
the Arncliffe Superior Public School.
He joined the advertising staff in 1911.
In August, 1915. he enlisted as a
Gunner in the sth Field Artillery.' Af-
ter a period of training in Egypt, he
proceeded to France, and took part in


much heavy fighting. He was killed
in action at Bullecourt on May 13,
1917.
A brother, Gunner W. H. Coombes,
also served, and was in the original
landing on Gallipoli.
II
STANLEY ROBERT CRICHTON
Is the eldest son of Mr. 1. P. Crichton,
of Wairoa, near Rotorua, New Zealand.
He was born at Wanganui in Septem-
ber, 1893, and was educated at Wel-
lington Public School. Arriving in
Australia in May, 1914, he shortly
afterwards joined the clerical staff.
In August, 1914, he enlisted as a
Signaller in the Ist Australian Light
Horse, and sailed with the first con-
tingent on October 19. After serving
in Egypt he proceeded to Gallipoli,
where he arrived about a week after
the original landing. Being wounded
after he had spent about five months
on the Peninsula, he returned to Aus-
tralia, where he was discharged.
Ho rejoined the office staff, but re-
enlisted a few months later, and after
studying for some time at the Officers
Training School at Duntroon, passed
the necessary examinations for a com-
mission. Without waiting for a com-
mission, however, he sailed for Eng-
land, and, after spending some months
as an instructor on the army gymnastic
staff at Aldershot, went to France. As
the result of an accident he spent some
time in a hospital, and at the end of
1917 was again invalided home to Aus-
tralia, where he has since been on
home service with the rank of Lieu-
tenant.
H
WILLIAM CUMMINS
Was employed as a storeman for about
eighteen months prior to going on Ac-
tive Service at the outbreak of the war.
A member of the Naval Reserve, he
was mobilised in August, 1914, and
proceeded with the First Expeditionary
Force to New Guinea.
REGINALD WILLIAM DAVENPORT
Only son of Mr. Thos. Davenport, of
Ryde Road, Gordon, was born on May
20, 1899, at Balmain, and was educated
at the Gordon Public School. He
joined the office staff in 1913. and was
later apprenticed as an electrical me-
chanic.
Enlisting on January 7, 1916, as a
Sapper with the I st Division of the
Signalling Company attached to the En-
gineers, he was transferred in April of
the same year to the Ist Signalling
Squadron (Anzac Mounted Division).
He saw service in Egypt, Palestine and
Syria, and was in a number of engage-
ments. notably those at Romani, Bir-el-
abd, El-Arish Maghdaba, Rafa, Gaza and
Beersheba, where he was wounded. He
was also at the occunation of Jerusalem
on December 9, 1917. He was after


wards in several engagements up to
the Jordan Valley, and was in the big
advance from Damascus to Aleppo.
He was also engaged in connection with
the Egyptian rising.
H
WILLIAM ALBERT DONNELLY
Eldest son of Mr. W. A. Donnelly, was
born at Surry Hills on May 30, 1897,
and educated at St. Francis School. He
joined the night messenger staff in
1915.
He enlisted on August 31, 1915,
sailing with reinforcements for the
30th Battalion. He saw several
months’ service at Ferry’s Post, near
the Suez Canal, and then, exhausted in
a march across the desert, became
seriously ill and was invalided back to
Australia.
ARTHUR EDWARD ELFORD
Was born at Redfern in 1890 and edu-
cated at St. Mary s School. He joined
the composing staff in 1913.
Enlisting in September, 1915, he
sailed in the following December with
reinforcements for the Ist Field Com-
pany of Engineers, and upon reaching
France in April, participated in a num-
ber of engagements, including Pozieres,
Moquet Farm and Bullecourt. Pro-
moted to the rank of Corporal he was
transferred to the 2nd Field Ambu-
lance, and later, after being attached
for some time to Divisional Headquar-
ters, acted as a driver in the Ist Motor
Transport Company.
NORMAN HYMAN HIRCH ELLISON
Eldest son of Mr. Joseph Ellison, was
born at Moore Park in 1895, and edu-
cated at the Mosman Superior Public
School. Entering the clerical depart-
ment in 1912 he became a cadet on
the reporting staff two years later.
Enlisting in June, 1916, as a Gun-
ner in the I 1 7th Howitzer Battery, he
went to France, where he was trans-
ferred to the 3rd Field Artillery Bri-
gade, and was in due course promoted
to the rank of Corporal. He was con-
stantly in action on the Somme, at
Messines, on the Yser Canal, and at
Ypres, until severely wounded in the
right leg in the fighting around Pass-
chendaele on September 30, 1917. He
was in hospital in England for five
months, and was then pronounced un-
fit for further active service.
a
WALTER ROY EVANS
Only remaining son of Mr. and Mrs.
P. J. Evans, of Long Nose Point, was
born at Arncliffe on December 16,
1891, and educated at the William
Street Superior Public School and the
Sydney Collegiate School. He joined


the reporting staff in May, 1911. He
left at the end of the following year,
and after a year or two in Brisbane
went in June, 1914, to England, re-
joining the staff on his return in May,
1915.
In September, 1916, he enlisted, and
was at first attached to the Bth Light
Horse. In December of the same year
he was transferred to the Australian
Naval and Military Expeditionary Force
and sent to Rabaul. He was for three
years on the out station of ICaewieng,
carrying out patrol and administrative
work. He contracted malaria and was
finally returned to Australia in the lat-
ter part of June, 1919, after having
been promoted to the rank of War-
rant-officer.
m
WILLIAM THOMAS EVANS
Was born at Kogarah in 1896, being
the eldest son of Mr. George Evans, of
Summer Hill. He was educated at the
public school at Goulburn, where his
parents resided for some time. He
joined the machine department at the
beginning of 1914.
At the outbreak of the war he en-
listed. when barely 18 years of age,
as a Signaller in the 3rd Battalion. He
took part in the original landing on
Gallipoli, and participated in the Lone
Pine and other engagements. On ac-
count of illness he was invalided to
Malta in 1915, and was afterwards
transferred to the 55 th Battalion, with
which he fought in France for two
years, experiencing all the discomforts
of the winter campaign on the Somme
in 1916 He was engaged in a num-
ber of actions, including Fromelles.
In February, 1918, he became ill with
trench fever, and after several months
in hospital returned to Australia in
September, 1918.
SIDNEY DELLAR FAIRLAND
Only son of Mr. S. H. Fairland, was
born at Drummoyne on January 22,
1897, and educated at the Church of


England Grammar School, North Syd-
ney. He joined the clerical staff in
19 L 3.
One of the first to enlist from the
office he joined the No. 1 Battery of
the Field Artillery, First Australian
Division, as a trumpeter, and sailed
from Sydney by the “Argyllshire” on
October 17, 1914. H e saw service in
Egypt, Gallipoli, and France, and was
twice gassed, losing his voice and eye-
sight for some weeks in consequence.
At the front he acted as despatch
rider, a hazardous and difficult task,
and was offered promotion, but, like
many others, preferred to remain in
the ranks with his comrades.
ARCHIBALD ERNEST BASIL GILDER
Is the son of Mr. S. A. E. B. Gilder, of
Mosman, and was born in Sydney in
March, 1894, and educated at the
Cleveland Street Public School. He
joined the reporting staff as a cadet in
1912.
In February, 1915, he enlisted as
a Private, and in the following June
was gazetted as Second-Lieutenant and
appointed to the command of the 7th
reinforcements for the 2nd Battalion,
leaving for Egypt in July. In Galli-
poli he acted as machine gun officer for
the 2nd Battalion. After the evacua-
tion he spent a few weeks in hospital,
and in January rejoined his unit at
Tel-el-Kebir, being gazetted as First-
Lieutenant shortly afterwards. When
the I st Machine Gun Company was
formed at Serapeum he was seconded
from his battalion as second in com-
mand. Upon his gazettal to the rank
of Captain in March, 1916, he re-
turned to the 2nd Battalion as a com-
pany commander, and proceeded to
France. He was wounded at Pozieres.
After acting for two months as aide-
de-camp to the General Officer Com-
manding the First Division, he went
to England for seven months to assist
in the training of reinforcements from
Australia. He rejoined his battalion
about the middle of 1917 with the rank
of Major, and took part in the fighting
at Passchendaele, Hazebrouck, Hill 60
and Verbranden Molen, and was in the
final battles in which the first brigade
was engaged at Villeret and Hargi-
court, on the outer defences of the
Hindenburg line. At the signing of
the armistice he was at Bazeul, in front
of Le Cateau, and then proceeded with
the battalion to Charleroi in Belgium.
At the beginning of 1919 Major
Gilder assumed command of the 2nd
Battalion, and remained in that posi-
tion till March, when the Battalion was
disbanded.
H
ERNEST JAMES GOODALL
Is the son of Mr. Henry H. Goodall,
of Darling Point, and was born at
Newtown on May 10, 1893. He was
educated at the Newtown, Enmore and
Chatswood Public Schools, and joined
the office staff 12 years ago.
Enlisting as a Private on July 28,
1915, with the 15th Field Ambulance,
he saw considerable service in France,
notably in campaigns at Fromelles,
Bapaume and Ypres. He was wounded
once and slightly gassed on another
occasion. His period of active ser-
vice extended practically over four
years.
II
THOMAS JOSEPH GRAHAM
Only son of the late Mr. John Graham,
of Newtown, was born on March 4,
1891, at Newtown, and educated at
the Fort Street School, joining the
clerical staff in 1907,
Volunteering in September, 1915,
he was drafted with reinforcements to
the Army Service Corps and proceeded
to France. He served throughout the


Somme campaign in 1916, and in the
subsequent operations up to the sign-
ing of the armistice. Enlisting as a
Private, he was shortly afterwards
made a Corporal. He returned to
Australia in August, 1919.
WILLIAM BOYCE GRAHAM
Younger son of the late Mr. William
Graham, who was on the composing
staff for over 40 years, was for about
nine years employed in the office. He
was born at Paddington on December
29, 1889, and entered the linotype de-
partment as an apprentice on Decem-
ber 29, 1904.
He was accepted for active service
in July, 1915, after two previous un-
successful attempts to enlist, and sailed
in October of that year with the I Ith
reinforcements for the Ist Battalion.
In Egypt just before he sailed for
France, he was transferred to D Com-
pany. Ist Battalion. At Pozieres he
was wounded and sent to England.
Shortly after returning to the Front he
was killed in action on the Somme at
Flers on November 5, 1916, during
a raid on the German front lines.
ARTHUR GRAY
Was the second youngest son of Mrs.
George Gray, of Dulwich Hill, formerly
of Goulburn, was born in 1 884, and
educated at the Goulburn and Gun-
dagai Superior Public Schools. Ho
was employed in the machine depart-
ment.
One of the first to enlist from this
office, he went to Rabaul under the
late Brigadier-General Holmes, with
whom he had served as a bugler in the
Boer War, and on the return of that
officer proceeded with him to the Dar-
danelles, and subsequently to France
in the capacity of Bugler Staff-Sergeant-
Major. In October, 1916, he was
awarded the Distinguished Conduct
Medal for gallantry in carrying ammu-
nition under heavy fire. He was killed
in action two months later.


THOMAS AUDLEY HANNAY
Was born in 1896, being the only son
of Mr. T. A. Hannay. He was edu-
cated at Penrith and Sandringham Pub-
lic Schools, and at the Sydney Boys’
High School, and entered the clerical
department at the beginning of 1914.
In July, 1915, he enlisted, and at
the end of September sailed with rein-
forcements for the I 7th Battalion, hold-
ing the rank of Corporal. He took
part in a number of actions in France,
and was killed at Noreuil, near Lagni-
court, on April 15, 1917.
STEPHEN CALVIN HAYHURST
Was born in 1879 in London, and edu-
cated there. He joined the machine
department in 1907.
In June, 1916, he enlisted in the In-
fantry with two other comrades from
the machine room E. Webster and
the late Joseph Heady and took part
in much fighting on the Western Front
till wounded at Bullecourt in May,
1917. He lost the sight of his left
eye.
JOSEPH HEADY
Son of Mr. Joseph Heady, of Forest
Gate, Essex, England, was born in
1881, and came to Australia in 1912,
joining the machine department in
1914.
He enlisted with reinforcements for
the I 7th Battalion, and after having
been constantly engaged in fighting for
some months, was killed at Bullecourt
on May 16. 1917.
11
DAVID HENDERSON
Only son of Mr. H. Henderson, of Cow-
ra, was born in that town in I 892, and
educated at the Cowra Superior Public
School. He joined the clerical staff
in 1914.
He enlisted as a Gunner on May I,
1916, and was first attached to the
107th Howitzer Battery, and afterwards
to the 13th Battery of the sth Field
Artillery, arriving in France in De-


cember. He was first in action at
Martinpuich and next at Bullecourt.
The battery was then transferred to the
Ypres salient, and while there he had
an attack of trench fever. He re-
joined his unit in November, 1917, and
was in the fierce fighting that took
place at Ploegsteert. After that he
returned to the Somme and was in that
sector till the Allied advance in August,
remaining in action till September 29,
when he was slightly wounded and
gassed at Bullicourt.
HARRY REX HENEY
Son of Mrs. E. M. Heney, of Crow’s
Nest, was born at Paddington in 1890.
He was educated at the Public School,
Glenmore Road, and afterwards at-
tended a private class with the object
of qualifying for a University course.
He joined the clerical staff in 1910.
In July, 1916, he enlisted and left
shortly afterwards with reinforcements
for the 3rd Battalion, being promoted
to the rank of Corporal. Upon arrival
in London he was, on account of his
expertness as a shorthand writer and
typist, attached to the administrative
staff; and though he made repeated
applications for release in order to go
into the fighting line he was, much
to his disappointment, retained in that
capacity till the end of hostilities.
HORACE MERVYN HERROD
Was born at Paddington in 1891, being
the youngest son of Mrs. R. Herrod.
He was educated at the Paddington
Superior Public School. He began his
apprenticeship in the linotype depart-
ment in 1907.
In December, 1915, he enlisted as a
Sapper in the 7th Field Company En-
of the follwing year. He was en-
gineers and left for France in March
gaged principally in building dug-outs
and light railways. He was killed on
January 8, 1917, near Albert.
A brother, Quartermaster-Sergeant
Victor Herrod, enlisted at the outbreak
of the war and saw considerable ser-
vice.


GEORGE HENRY HOGAN
Elder son of Mr. S. H. Hogan, former-
ly of Woollahra, and now of Melbourne,
was born in Sydney in 1 889, and edu-
cated at the Crown Street Public
School. He joined the machine de-
partment in 1906.
In July, 1916, he enlisted as a Pri-
vate, and was posted to the 22nd rein-
forcements for the 3rd Battalion, sail-
ing from Australia in November. He
participated in a number of notable en-
gagements in France, including Bulle-
court, Ypres, Passchendaele and Villers
Bretonneux. He was killed by a bomb
explosion at Amiens on April 12, 1918.
HARRY AUGUSTUS HOGAN
Younger son of Mr. S. H. Hogan, and
brother of the late Private G. H. Hogan,
was born in 1894 and was also em-
ployed in the machine department.
He enlisted at the same time and
with the same Battalion as his brother,
and the two were together till the en-
gagement at Bullecourt, when H. A.
Hogan was wounded.
OLIVER HOGUE
Was born at Glebe in 1880, being the
second son of Mr. J. A. Hogue, ex-
Minister for Education. He was edu-
cated at the Superior Public Schol at
Forest Lodge, and was captain of the
school cricket team when it won the
schools’ competition. For two years
he represented Glebe in first-class
cricket. He was for many years a
member of the Glebe Presbyterian
Church and took an active part in
the Fellowship Union connected there-
with.
Joining the staff as a junior reporter
in July, 1907, he soon worked his way
up to a responsible position. He was
an able writer, and his press contribu-
tions during the war under the pen
name of 'Trooper Bluegum wer ®
highly appreciated by a wide circle of
readers. He has in each of his three
books “Trooper Bluegum at the Dar-
danelles,” "Love Letters of an Anzac,
and “With the Cameliers” left un-
forgettable descriptions of famous fights
and famous scenes.


When the war came he was one of
the first to drop his pen for the sword.
He enlisted in the 6th Light Horse.
From the rank of Trooper he speedily
rose in the service, obtained a com-
mission, and, as Second-Lieutenant, was
chosen orderly to Brigadier-General
Ryrie. He spent five exciting months
on Gallipoli, and after the evacuation
was transferred to the Imperial Camel
Corps, and by reason of his good work
attained the rank first of Captain and
then of Major. He went with the
victorious army into Palestine, was in
most of the important engagements,
and was at Jerusalem when it fell. At
the conclusion of hostilities he left for
London to supervise the publication
of his third book, and there fell a vic-
tim to influenza, passing away on March
3, 1919, at the No. 3 London General
Hospital.
SAMUEL HERBERT IRWIN
Eldest son of Mr. S. R. Irwin, of
Oamaru (N.Z.), was born at Auburn
(N.S.W.) in 1887 and educated at the
Auburn and Caversham (Dunedin)
Public Schools. He joined the machine
department in 1908.
Enlisting in August, 1915, he pro-
ceeded overseas with reinforcements
for the 1 7th Battalion and took part in
heavy fighting on the Western Front
from March 16 onwards. In the bat-
tle of Pozieres he sustained shell shock.
He was next in the fighting around
Bapaume, and there suffered from
trench feet. Light work at the base
at Etaples followed. He rejoined his
battalion and went into the line again
at Ypres, being severely wounded in
September, 1917, and declared unfit
for further service.
RUSSELL THOMPSON JARVIS
Son of the late Mr. C. M. Jarvis and
of Mrs. Jarvis, of Drummoyne, was
born in 1884, and educated at the
Fort Street School. He joined the
reading staff in 1913.
In August, 1915, he volunteered and
was drafted to the 9th Field Ambu-
lance, with which he proceeded to
France, with the rank of Lance-Cor-
poral. He took part in the operations
at Messines, being awarded the Mili-
tary Medal for gallantry on the field.
He was killed in action at Menin
Road on October 4, 1917.
II
WILLIAM FRANCIS JOHNSON
Eldest son of Mr. W. F. Johnson of the
stereotyping department, was born at
Auckland in 1896 and educated at the
North Sydney Superior Public School.
He joined the composing department
as an apprentice in 1910.
He enlisted on June 25, 1915, going
as a Private with the fifth reinforce-
ments of the I 9th Battalion. He spent


three months in Egypt on the defen-
sive work in connection with the Suez
Canal. Landing in France on March
25, 1916, he was in the thick of the
fighting at Bois Grenier and at Pozieres,
where he was wounded. He rejoined
his battalion in the Ypres sector, and
took part in the engagements at Ploeg-
steert, Messines and Amiens. He was
gassed at Hangard Wood. On his re-
covery he joined up once more, and
was with his battalion at Mont St.
Quentin, being on service till the sign-
ing of the armistice.
II
E. BEYNOR JONES
Was born and educated in England,
and, prior to settling in Australia, had
several years’ experience in newspaper
work in Canada. He joined the re-
porting staff in August, 1915.
Four months later he enlisted, and
subsequently embarked for service
abroad. Upon his return he entered
mercantile life in Brisbane.
a
THOMAS HAROLD KERNOHAN
Youngest son of Mr. David Kernohan,
of Balmain, was born on January 1 5,
1885. and educated at the Forest Lodee
Public School. His connection with
the office beean in 1909, when he en-
tered the publishing denartment.
In March, 1915. he enlisted and was
allotted to the 2nd Battalion. He
figured in several important engage-
ments in France, notably at Pozieres.
He was in the severe fighting at Hill
60, where he was wounded. For five
months he was in hospital at Newcastle-
on-Tyne, and had subsequently to un-
dergo treatment at Harefield and other
hospitals. He was invalided home at
the end of 1917 and resumed duty in
the office in February, 1918, in the
paper-cutting department.
ALFRED WILLIAM VERNON KING
Was born at Newtown on February 19,
1897, being the eldest son of Mr. Wil-
liam Edward King, of Dulwich Hill.


He was educated at the Sydney High
School. He joined the reporting staff
as a cadet in January, 1915.
Enlisting in November of the same
year he sailed on January 15, 1916,
as a Gunner in the Australian Field
Artillery. After five months’ train-
ing in Egypt, he left for France with
the 115th Howitzer Battery, and first
went into action early in July. He par-
ticipated with the sth Division in the
battle of Fleurbaix, and went through
the 1916-17 winter on the Somme with
the 103rd Howitzer Battery of the 3rd
Mobile Brigade, taking part in the Mes-
sines and Passchendaele battles. He
was wounded in November, 1917. He
returned to the battery in February,
1918, and remained in the fighting
line until September, when he entered
one of the officers’ training schools in
England, and secured a commission.
In August, 1919, he returned to Syd-
ney and resumed duty in the office the
following month.
NORMAN HAROLD LANGFORD
Eldest son of Mr. Albert Langford,
who has been in the service of the
firm for many years, was born at Neu-
tral Bay on September 9, 1894, and
was educated at the Mosman Public
School and afterwards at the North
Sydney Grammar School. He joined
the process engraving department as
an apprentice in October, 1910.
He enlisted in July, 1915, sailing
from Sydney with reinforcements for
the 2nd Battalion, and in Egypt was
transferred to the Ist Battalion of the
Ist Infantry Brigade, which was one
of the units selected to guard the Suez
Canal. In March, 1916, he went to
France and saw considerable fighting
there. He was in the actions at Fleur-
baix, Pozieres, Hill 60, Wytschaete,
Ypres, Flers, and at Chuignolles, being
mentioned in despatches for his good
work in the last-named engagement.
He held the rank of Sergeant, and
was sent as instructor to the 1 17th
Regiment of the American forces in
their first fight around St. Quentin.
Though luckily not wounded during
his service of nearly four years, he had
one serious illness, which necessitated
hospital treatment for several months.
m
FREDERICK LANSDOWNE
Was born in England and educated at
the Reading Grammar School. He was
employed as an assistant reader.
At the outbreak of the war he joined
the Light Horse and left with one of
the first contingents. He saw but lit-
tle service on account of illness, which
necesitated a long course of treatment
in hospitals.
HARRY DISCOMBE LEIGH
Was born at Summer Hill in 1893 and
educated at the Forest Lodge Public


School. In 1913 he joined the stereo-
typing department, in which his father
has for many years been employed.
He enlisted on September 5, 1916,
as a Sapper in the Field Engineers.
He was severely injured in mining
operations, on works that were be-
ing carried out in connection with the
defences on the East coast of England,
and after several months in hospital,
was, much to his disappointment, re-
turned to Australia without seeing any
of the actual fighting in Europe.
A brother, Sydney William Leigh,
who also enlisted with the Field En-
gineers, was wounded in France and
severely gassed.
11
WALTER F. LEYS-SMITH
Was born in England in 1887 and edu-
cated at the Barton Grammar School.
Originally a motor engineer he joined
the contributing staff in April, 1913,
and was in charge of the motor and
cycling columns of the Herald.
Enlisting as a Private in the Army
Service Corps in August, 1915, he
was attached to the motor transport
division. In Egypt he was transferred
to the 4th Australian Pioneers and
promoted to the rank of Second-Lieu-
tenant. After service in France, he
was discharged in September, 1917, on
account of a strained heart.
VAINO HILLEL THOMAS LILJEBLAD
The eldest son of Captain Liljeblad,
was born at RozeUe in | 898, and edu-
cated at the Rozelle Public School and
the Sydney Technical High School.
He entered the composing department
as an apprentice in 1913.
Volunteering for active service in
April, 1916, he enlisted as a Gunner
in the Field Artillery, 38th Battery, and
was made Acting-Sergeant. In England
he attended a signalling school, and
went to France as a Signaller, and saw
a great deal of fighting, especially at
Ypres and Passchendaele. Suffering
from shell shock and trench feet he
was invalided to England, and returned
to Australia in June, 1918.
ARTHUR HENRY LIVINGSTONE
Eldest son of Mr. Daniel Livingstone,
of Bombala, was born at Cooma in
1894, and educated at the Bombala
Public School. He was a member of
the clerical staff, which he joined at
the beginning of 1913.
Voluntering in September, 1915, he
sailed at the end of that year with
reinforcements for the sth Field Artil-
lery as a Driver. After a period of
training in Egypt he arrived in France
in March, 1916, and was engaged most-
ly in the Ypres and Armentieres sec-
tors, being for some weeks almost con-
tinually under fire. He was incapaci-
tated for a week or two on account
of a slight wound, and, upon rejoin-
ing his battery, participated in the bat-
tle of Passchendaele, and fell in, that
actjpn pn October 12, 1917.


JAMES ALFRED LOCKREY
Was born at Glebe in 1896 and edu-
cated at the Glebe Superior Public
School. He joined the electrical de-
partment in July, 1915.
Enlisting in February, 1916, as an
electrician in the Mining Corps he was
on arrival in France attached to the
Electrical and Mechanical Mining and
Boring Company, which was formed
out of that corps, and was engaged on
the electrical work for the mining ope-
rations on different parts of the front.
The principal operations in which he
took part were those at Armentieres,
Givenchy (near La Bassee), Arras and
Loos. He was slightly wounded at
Givenchy. He was on the Western
Front until practically the end of hos-
tilities.
A brother, Ernest Herbert Lockrey,
who went as Sergeant with reinforce-
ments for the 2nd Battalion, was pro-
moted on the field to the rank of
Lieutenant.
11
GEORGE LORENSON
Was employed in the machine depart-
ment as a casual hand for some years.
He enlisted with Private Hayhurst and
the late Private Heady with reinforce-
ments for the I 7th Battalion, and after
several months' service in France be-
came ill. Ater being some time in hos-
pital he was invalided to Australia,
where he died soon after arrival.
THOMAS ALBERT LUDLAM
Eldest son of Mr. A. Ludlam, was born
at Orange in 1 899, and educated at the
Christian Brothers’ College, Waverley.
He joined the linotype department, in
which his father is employed, as an
apprentice in January, 1915.
Enlisting as a Sapper in the Field
Engineers in August, 1917, he went
to Egypt, and after a couple of months’
service there, proceeded to England, and
thence to France, where he arrived
in April, 1918. He saw fighting at
Villers Bretonneux, and took part in
the advance preceding the armistice,
being wounded at Mont St. Quentin on
September I. After five months in
hospital at Manchester he embarked
for Australia, arriving back on April
2, 1919.
a
HAROLD GLYNN MASSEY
Second son of Mr. Richard Massey, of
Bondi, was born in Melbourne on May
24, 1887, and educated at St. Joseph's
College, Sydney. He entered the com-
posing department in 1913.
He enlisted on August 20, 1915, in
the Field Engineers, being attached to
the Ist Company on arrival in France
on April 1, 1916. He participated in
a great number of engagements, in-
cluding Pozieres, Moquet Farm, Bulle-
court, Polygon Wood, Passchendaele,


Merris, Villers Bretonneux and Hargi-
court, remaining on service till the
signing of the armistice.
11
JOHN MATTHEWS
Who was born in October, 1900, and
educated at the Fort Street School,
joined the clerical staff in June, 1916.
In the following year he enlisted,
and was for 12 months with the Army
Service Corps at Victoria Barracks,
not being sent overseas on account of
his youth. He later proceeded to New
Zealand with the intention of volun-
teering there for service abroad, but
again his age stood in the way. He
was, however, engaged in connection
with work on transports.
1!
ERIC STUART McDONALD
Youngest son of the late Mr. F. J.
McDonald, at one time Mayor of Ka-
rori (N.Z.), was born at Invercargill
on July 28, 1896, and came to Aus-
tralia with his parents in 1903. He
was educated at St. Leonard’s Superior
Public School, and joined the reading
staff in February, 1916.
On October 30, 1916, he enlisted
and was posted to reinforcements for
the 2nd Battalion, sailing from Aus-
tralia in November. He was in action
in the Ypres sector in the autumn of
1917, this embracing the battles of
Polygon Wood, Broodseinde Ridge and
Passchendaele, and later at Wytschaete
and Hill 60. His unit was afterwards
removed to the Somme sector, where
it remained till the armistice was
signed. McDonald was a Signaller and
was afterwards appointed Lance-Cor-
poral.
ARTHUR ALSTON McGILL
Was born in July, 1896, and was the
only son of Mr. Godfrey G. McGill,
of Mpsman. He was educated at the


St. Leonard’s Superior Public School,
and joined the clerical staff in 1911.
Volunteering in September, 1915,
he sailed as a Private in the 13th rein-
forcements of the Ist Battalion. Upon
arrival in Egypt he had to undergo
an operation, and on his recovery was
given light duties and clerical work.
He went to France in due course, and
died at Rouen of broncho-pneumonia
on November 17, 1918.
JOHN VERNER LLOYD MOORE
Was the eldest son of Mr. and Mrs.
Verner Wise Moore, of Rose Bay, and
was born at Strathfield in 1895. He
was educated at the Church of England
Grammar School, North Sydney, and
was for several years prior to enlist-
ing in September, 1916, a member of
the clerical staff.
He was accepted for active service
in the Artillery as a Gunner, and sailed
with reinforcements in May, 1917.
Upon arrival in England he was posted
to the 39th Battery, Australian Field
Artillery, and, proceeding to France
in October, saw considerable service.
He was in action before the end of
the year at Hannabeke, Zonnebeke and
Passchendaele, and subsequently at
Hollebeke, Albert, Dernancourt, Villers
Bretonneux, Bellewaerde Ridge, Morlan-
court, Mericourt-L’Abbey, Hamel,
Vaire-sur-Somme, Murcourt, and Belli-
court. He died from wounds received
in the last-named engagement on Sep-
tember 28, 1918.
PHILLIP ERNEST WILTON MOORE
Was born at Grafton in 1 894, being the
youngest son of Mr; A. W. Moore, and
was educated at the Fort Street School.
He joined the publishing department
in 1913.
Enlisting in August, 1915, as a Pri-
vate in the I Ith reinforcements for the
3rd Battalion, he proceeded to Egypt,
and thence to France, having, while
in Egypt, been transferred to the 55th
Battalion. He took part in the fight-
ing on the Somme, at Fromelles and
at Bapaume, where he was wounded in
April, 1917. After the period in hos-
pital he rejoined his battalion in Sep-
tember, and was in the engagements
at Polygon Wood and at Villers Bre-
tonneux. He contracted trench fever
at the end of June, 1918, and was in-
valided to England and then home.
11
ARCHIBALD JOHN MULLINS
Was born at Portland in 1892, being
the second son of Mr. Peter Mullins,
and was educated at the Lithgow Pub-
lic School. He joined the clerical staff
in September, 1911.
Enlisting in May, 1915, he was at-
tached to the 20th Battalion as a
stretcher-bearer, and went to Gallipoli.
After a few weeks’ service there he had
an attack of enteric fever, and was
sent to the hospital at Malta, and thence
to England. Proceeding to France


later he took part in the operations
at Pozieres, Ypres, Bullecourt, Lagni-
court, Villers Bretonneux and others,
being almost constantly in action. He
was wounded in May, 1916. He re-
mained on service till the armistice.
JOHN MATSON NICHOLAS
Who was born at Ballarat, Victoria, in
1886, was employed as a motor lorry
driver, and was one of the early volun-
teers, going into camp in September,
1914. He was attached to the Army
Service Corps, holding the rank of
Corporal.
After service in Egypt he was in-
valided home on account of ill-health
in November, 1915, and upon receiv-
ing his discharge in the following month
resumed duty in the service of the
firm, but subsequently left.
EDWARD FRANCIS ORPIN
Was born in 1884 in England, where
his parents reside. He joined the
stereotyping department in 1910.
On four occasions he volunteered
for active service and was rejected.
He was then, on account of special
training he had received, accepted for
service in the Garrison Hospital at
Randwick. Eventually, after repeated
efforts, he was posted to reinforcements
for the Light Trench Mortar Battery,
but upon arrival in England, was trans-
ferred to the 3rd Battalion. He fell
in action on August 23, 1918.
a
GORDON VICTOR PATERSON.
Was born at Glasgow in 1890, being
the seventh son of Mr. John Paterson,
now a resident of Croydon. Arriving
in Australia about 10 years ago he
entered the service of the firm on Jan-
uary 4, 1914, being employed in the
engineering department.
He enlisted in January, 1915, in the
Field Artillery as a Gunner, but was
soon promoted to the rank of Bomba-
dier. He took part in a considerable


number of important engagements, in-
cluding the fighting at Messines and Ar-
mentieres, and was gassed, which ne-
cessitated hospital treatment for four
months.
Then he joined the Australian Fly-
ing Corps as a second rate mechanic,
being graded within a few months as
a first class mechanic. On August
21, 1918, he met with a severe acci-
dent, being struck by an aeroplane
propeller, which smashed his arm and
leg, besides causing other injuries. He
returned to Australia in May, 1919.
WILFRED PEIR
Eldest son of Mr. W. G. Peir, was born
at Enmore in 1888, and educated at
the Enmore and Petersham Superior
Public Schools. He joined the process
department in May, 1907.
Enlisting at the end of 1916, he went
as a bomber with reinforcements for
the Light Trench Mortar Battery. Upon
arrival in England he was transferred
to the Infantry, and after some months
training there, went to France with
reinforcements for the 36th Battalion.
He took part in the strenuous actions
around Ypres, where he was severely
wounded, necessitating a long spell
in hospital. He returned to Australia
in July, 1918.
RONALD ROY RAMAGE
Eldest son of Mr. J. W. Ramage, of
North Sydney, was born at Young in
1894 and educated at the Superior
Public School at Hay. He joined the
clerical staff about eight years ago.
He enlisted on April 15, 1915, with
the 18th Battalion, being attached to
the machine gun section, and after
training in Egypt, served in the Galli-
poli campaign until the near end of
that famous adventure. He was in
both the Lone Pine and Suvla Bay
engagements. Proceeding afterwards
to France he took part in much fight-
ing on the Western Front, being gassed
at Villers Bretonneux and wounded at
Flers. He returned to Australia at the
end of May, 1919,


ALFRED REDHEAD
Was born at Chorley, Lancashire, on
March 9, 1884, and educated at the
Wellingbo rough Grammar School. At
1 8 years of age he entered the army,
joining the Northumberland Fusiliers.
He came to Australia in 1907. His
connection with the office dates from
March, 1914, when he began work
in the machine department.
At the outbreak of the war the Im-
perial reservists were mobilised, and he
left with the first contingent of them
that sailed by the Miltiades in October,
1914. In the beginning of January he
was in France with his old regiment.
He was made a motor-cycle despatch
rider, and was attached in this capacity
to the 9th Brigade. He was in the
heavy fighting around Ypres, Kemmel
and St. Eloi, and was gassed. In Au-
gust, 1915, his services as a reservist
having expired, he returned to Eng-
land, and rejoining the army, was
posted to the signalling branch of the
Royal Engineers as a despatch rider
and promoted to the rank of Sergeant.
He took part in the fighting on the
Somme, and at Festubert, Bethune and
Hooge Chateau in 1916, and was in
charge of a corps of despatch riders
at Vimy Ridge. Later he proceeded
to the East African theatre of war in
charge of despatch riders, and from
there was transferred to Egypt, where
he acted for some time as Sergeant-
Major of the school of instruction at
Zeitoun. He was in Palestine when
General Allenby's final assault took
place, being attached to the 60th Di-
vision as motor-cyclist Sergeant, and
remained there till the end of the war.
CLARENCE VICTOR REYNOLDS
Was the fourth son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Reynolds, of Leichhardt, and a
grandson of the late Mr. F. McGrath,
who had been employed on the "Her-
ald” composing room for over 60 years.
He was born at Balmain in 1895, and
educated at the Rozelle Public School.
He had just completed five years of a
six years’ apprenticeship in the com-
posing department when he enlisted.
He was accepted for service in 1916
after having been rejected no fewer
than eleven times on account of de-
fective eyesight. He took part in
much fighting on the Western Front,
and was gassed. After a few weeks he
returned to the trenches, and was
killed at Strazeele on April 24, 1918.
A brother. Gunner Reginald Rey-
nolds, also served.
SI
GEORGE REX ROBINSON
Son of Mr. Ben Robinson, of Newtown,
was born at Newtown in 1899 and
educated at the Petersham Commercial
School. He joined the office staff 3\
years ago, and soon after entered its
machine department. He enlisted on


July 29, 1918, as a Private in the 23rcl
general service reinforcements, but
got only as far as Capetown when the
armistice was signed.
JOHN W. ROBINSON
Was born in 1896 at West Hartlepool,
England, and is the only son of Capt.
J. W. Robinson, late of Whitby. He
was educated at the West Hartlepool
Secondary Day School, and, shortly
after leaving school, came to Sydney.
He joined the reporting staff as a
cadet in June, 1914, and in July of
the following year enlisted for active
service.
On arriving in Egypt some little time
later Private Robinson transferred from
the Infantry ( I Oth reinforcements of
the 17th Battalion) to a cyclist corps
attached to a squadron of the 13th
Light Horse, and was despatched to
the Eastern side of the Suez Canal.
While in this zone he was stricken with
fever, which eventually necessitated his
return to Australia towards the end of
1916. He rejoined the staff imme-
diately he was freed from military ser-
vice, and in September, 1919, was ap-
pointed to the office of the S. M.
Herald” at Newcastle.
m
H. E. CLUNIES ROSS
Was born at Bathurst in 1891, being
the second son of the late Mr. W. J.
Clunies Ross, lecturer in chemistry and
metallurgy at the Sydney Technical
College. He was a nephew of Major
Martin Donohoe, the well-known war
correspondent, and a grand nephew of
the late Mr. Clunies Ross, owner of
Cocos Island. He was a member of
the reporting staff.
Enlisting in the ranks in 1914 he
went to Egypt with the 19th Battalion,
and, after several months’ service there
received his commission. He was in-
valided home in October, 1915, with
enteritis. On his recovery in Australia
he was promoted to the rank of Cap-
tain and placed in command of the Ist
Cyclists’ Company with which, in May,
1916, he went to France. There he
was engaged at Messines Ridge and
elsewhere. In 1917 he was trans-
ferred from the A.I.F. to the King’s
African Rifles. He contracted malaria
in German East Africa after serving
there for several months. For a time
he was in hospital at Nairobi, and
then was removed to the Queen Alex-
andra Hospital in London, where he
died on September 27, 1918.
11
PHILIP HARVEY RUNDLE
Was born at Meroo, near Mudgee, in
1875, being the youngest son of the
late Mr. Richard Rundle. He joined
the composing department in 1909.
He enlisted as a Private with the
ninth reinforcements of the Ist Pioneer


Battalion in July, 1916. On arrival in
England he was transferred to the 6th
Field Company Engineers and was at-
tached to them till his discharge. He
saw considerable service, being in most
of the fighting at Passchendaele, Ypres,
Messines, Villers Bretonneux, Peronne,
Mont St. Quentin, Armentieres and
Amiens. He was wounded at Mes-
sines. He returned to Australia in
March, 1919.
LOUIS SAMUELS
Was born in Sydney on June 4, 1891,
and educated at the Fort Street High
School and at Heriot College, Edin-
burgh. He joined the clerical staff in
1909.
Enlisting in the latter part of 1915
he left Australia early in the following
year as a Gunner in reinforcements
tor the Ist Brigade of Artillery, and
after a period of training in England,
proceeded to France. He was in the
fighting on the Armentieres front in
April, 1916, and in that at Pozieres
three months later. He remained on
the Somme during the whole of the
offensive up till the time the Germans
evacuated Bapaume. In April, 1917,
he was chosen to attend the Royal
Horse Artillery Cadet School, and re-
ceived his commission six months later.
Returning to France he was posted
to the Ist Brigade of Artillery as a
subaltern on the 1 0 I st Howitzer Bat-
tery, and remained with the battery
till the cessation of hostilities. He
acted as forward observation officer
during the attack on the Hindenburg
outposts at Jeancourt in September,
1918, and for gallantry and devotion
to duty on that occasion was awarded
the Military Cross. Of him the Gen-
eral Officer Commanding his brigade
wrote: “This officer was in charge of
the forward observation party and
maintained communication throughout
the whole advance with Group Head-
quarters, both by telephone and wire-
less, his line often being the only one
for both Artillery and Infantry to use.
He captured nine prisoners himself.
He was stunned by a machine gun
bullet striking his helmet early in the
day, but when he recovered he carried
on. Advancing with the Company
Commanders he sent valuable and cor-
rect information as to the progress
made and the whereabouts of enemy
artillery and infantry.”
11
EDWARD OLIVER SAUNDERS
Only son of the late Mr. E. O. Saun-
ders, of Parramatta, was born at Sin-
gleton in 1892, and educated at the
Parramatta South and Crown Street
Public Schools. He joined the process
engraving department _at the end of
1914.
In September, 1915, he enlisted as
a Private in the Army Service Corps,
and after a stay of five months in
Egypt proceeded to France. He went
through the Somme campaign, and was


in most of the principal engagements
in which the Australians participated
until July, 1918, when he was stricken
with illness, a long spell in hospital
following. He returned home in Sep-
tember, 1919.
ALFRED GEORGE SEMPLE
Son of Mr. Alfred Semple, of the com-
posing staff, was born at Petersham on
December 9, 1 890, and educated at the
Chatswood Superior Public School. He
entered the linotype department as an
apprentice in January, 1906.
Shortly after the declaration of war
he volunteered, was accepted, and en-
tered camp, but was discharged owing
to an injury to his foot. He underwent
an operation and, when he had re-
covered, again offered his services, and
again was accepted, and went into
camp in company with the late W. B.
Grahame, a fellow apprentice. The
foot trouble that he had originally suf-
fered returned, and he was discharged
for the second time. Nothing daunted,
he made a third attempt, and this time
was successful. He was attached to
the 7th Field Company of Engineers,
and sailed for Egypt at the end of April,
1916.
From Egypt he went to England and
thence to France. After some months
participation in the Somme campaign
he was invalided to England, and was
offered his discharge, but preferred,
as he said in a letter home, “to see
the job through." He rejoined his
unit in August, 1917, and took part in
the Ypres offensive during September,
being killed in the Zonnebeke attack
at the battle of Passchendaele on Oc-
tober 4 of that year.
A younger brother, Cyril, joined up
at the age of I 8 years, and was under
orders to sail when the armistice was
signed.
CLAUDE JOSEPH SHAW
Was born at Newtown in 1897, and was
educated at the Newtown Superior Pub-
lic School, He entered the clerical
department in 1911.


He enlisted as a Private with rein-
forcements for the 2nd Battalion in De-
cember, 1916, but did not see any ser-
vice abroad. He became ill on the
voyage before the transport had left
Australian waters and was landed in
Western Australia where he was given
a position on the Quartermaster’s staff
of the Field Engineers. After two
months’ service there he was trans-
ferred back to Sydney and was at-
tached to the Quartermaster’s staff at
the depot at Moore Park for a period
of nearly three years. His father, Mr.
Edward Shaw, of Newtown, was on ser-
vice for more than four years with the
Divisional Ammunition Column.
SYDNEY BERNARD SHEERMAN
Was born at Lidcombe in 1899 and
educated at Lidcombe and Burwood
High Schools, being the youngest son
of the late Mr. and Mrs. S. A. Sheer-
man, of Lidcombe. He joined the of-
fice staff on March I, 1915.
Of three brothers who enlisted, the
eldest, Lance-Corporal F. R. Sheerman,
was killed at Gallipoli; Lieut. Sheerman,
another brother, had four years’ ser-
vice to his credit and gained his com-
mission at Gallipoli; while the third
brother, Gunner H. J. Sheerman, served
in France.
Upon Lieut. Sheerman’s return to
Sydney, Sydney B. Sheerman enlisted
on July 11, 191 8, in the composite bat-
talion then formed, entering camp as a
Private and gaining the rank of Ser-
geant. He was in camp upon the sign-
ing of the armistice, and was one of a
small party then selected to proceed
to Rabaul, but was considered too
young for service in the tropics ana
was discharged.
His eldest sister. Sister E. Sheerman,
tried unsuccessfully to enlist for nurs-
ing work abroad, the authorities, how-
ever, preferring to retain her for ser-
vice at the Garrison Hospital, Victoria
Barracks, by reason of her experience.
HARRIE WEBSTER SHERRING
Eldest son of Mr. G. W. Sherring, of
Mosman, was born at Bourke in 1895,
and educated at the Fort Street School,
and joined the computing staff about
nine years ago.
He enlisted in August, 1915, as a
Private in the Infantry, and on reach-
ing Egypt was attached to the 54th
Battalion. He saw several months’
service in Egypt and on the Sinai
Peninsular, and, later, proceeded to
France, where he took part in various
engagements, being wounded at Fleur-
baix. He was invalided to England,
and, having been pronounced as unfit
for further active service, returned to
Australia in July, 1917,


VIVIAN LANCELOT SIMPSON
Eldest son of Mr. W. J. Simpson, of
Haberfield, was born at Auckland in
1894, and educated at the Bondi and
Fort Street Public Schools. He joined
the clerical department in 1910.
In June. 1915, he enlisted as as a
Private in the Infantry, being drafted
to the 30th Battalion. He had three
years’ service on the Western Front,
going through the battle of Fromelles
in July, 1916, the Somme campaign,
and the engagements at Bapaume, Poly-
gon Wood, Broodseinde, Passchendaele
Ridge and Bellicourt. He was wound-
ed at Broodseinde.
He attained the rank of Sergeant,
and was for some time attached to the
Intelligence Branch.
II
CYRIL JOHN SMITH
Youngest son of Mr. T. S. Smith, of
Essex, England, was employed in the
publishing department when he en-
listed for active service in September,
1916.
He went to France with the 60th
Battalion as a Lewis machine gunner,
and was in the actions at Bapaume,
Bullecourt, Polygon Wood and Ypres.
Upon his discharge he left the ser-
vice of the firm to take up another
occupation.
WALTER ERNEST RUSSELL SMITH
Second son of Mr. Smith, of Cen-
tennial Park, was born at Redfern on
September 24, 1892, and educated at
the Cleveland Street High School. He
joined the clerical staff in 1912.
On June 1, 1917, he enlisted as a
Private in the Infantry, and was posted
to reinforcements for the 5 7th Batta


lion. He arrived in France in Decem-
ber, and took part in the fighting at
Peronne and Villers Bretonneux. He
was then attached to the Australian
base at Havre. He returned to Aus-
tralia in October, 1919.
11
HENRY CLIVE ST. JOHN
Only son of Mr. H. B. St. John, of the
reading staff, was born in London in
1895, and educated at Kent House
College, Kent,. Arriving in Australia
with his parents in 1912, he also joined
the reading staff in the following year.
Enlisting in May, 1915, as a Signaller
in the 4th Battalion he went to Egypt
and then to Gallipoli, where he re-
mained until the evacuation. He then
saw almost continuous service on the
Western Front for nearly two years,
taking part in the heavy fighting at
Pozieres, where he was wounded, and
at Flers, Bullecourt, Doignies and
Hermes, as well as in other notable
operations. He was discharged on
Christmas Day, 1917.
HENRY WILLIAM G. STOCKLEY
Eldest son of Mr. C. J. Stockley, of
the linotype department, was educated
at the Cleveland Street Superior Pub-
lic School and at the Sydney Grammar
School. He joined the clerical staff
in 1914.
In September, 191 6, he enlisted for
active service, and was attached to the
108th Howitzer Battery of the Field
Artillery as a Gunner, being promoted
later to the rank of Bombadier. He
saw heavy fighting at Passchendaele
and in the operations around Villers
Bretonneux, and took part in the final
Allied advance.
At the termination of hostilities he
received an appointment on the staff
of the A.I.F. Headquarters in Horse-
ferry Road.
LOUIS JAMES STOCKLEY
Second son of Mr. C. J. Stockley, who
had three sons on active service, was
born at Darlington in 1894, and edu-
cated at the Cleveland Street Superior
Public School. He joined the reading
staff in March, 1914.
Enlisting on October 25, 1915, he
went as a Gunner with the I 4th rein-
forcements for the Ist Field Artillery
Brigade, and subsequently attained the
rank of Bombadier. He arrived in
France on March 27, 1916, and was
in a number of engagements on the
Somme and in the Ypres sector. He
was wounded at Zillebeke on Septem*
ber I, 1917. Rejoining his battery on
November 5, he remained with it till
the end of hostilities.


RUPERT HAMBLEDON SWALLOW
Was born at Cairns, Queensland, in
1897, being the youngest son of the
late Mr. W. H. Swallow, and was edu-
cated at St. Andrews’ Cathedral Choir
School and later at the Fort Street
School. He joined the clerical depart-
ment in 1912.
Volunteering for active service in
June, 1915, he enlisted as a Private
afterwards becoming Lance-Corporal
with the reinforcements for the 3rd
Battalion, and proceeded to France, af-
ter undergoing training in England, in
March, 1916. He was in action on
numerous occasions, and was twice
wounded, on the first occasion at Po-
zieres and on the second at Passchen-
daele. With the object of qualifying
for a commission, he was at an officers
school in Devonshire when the armis-
tice was signed. He returned to Aus-
tralia in June, 1919.
m
HENRY JOSEPH SYKES
Only son of the late Mr. F. W. Sykes,
of North Sydney, was born at Waterloo
in January, 1888, and educated at the
Fort Street School, entering the cleri-
cal department at the age of 1 5 years.
In August, 1916, he enlisted as a
Private in the machine gun reinforce-
ments for the Fifth Company, and went
to France. He took part in the fight-
ing in the Ypres sector till he was
gassed. Upon his recovery he returned
to France, and was in the actions around
Villers Bretonneux, and was in the
trenches till the signing of the armis-
tice. Then he went to Belgium, re-
turning to Australia in the early part
of 1919.
JOHN EDWARD THOMSON
Only son of Mrs. John Thomson, of
Aberdeen, was born at Edinburgh in
1882 and, arriving in Australia in
1908, entered the service of the firm
two years later, being engaged in the
linotype department.


Enlisting in August, 1915, he was
sent with reinforcements to Rabaul,
where he remained till June, 1916. In
December of that year he left for
France with the Ist Machine Gun Com-
pany, and saw much fighting, taking
part in the operations at Bullecourt,
Passchendaele and Strazeele. He was
actively engaged during the German
offensive of 1918, and the subsequent
Allied advance, remaining on service
till practically the end. He returned
to Australia in May, 1919.
WILLIAM HENRY TOMBS
Was born at Crumlin, South Wales, in
January, 1876, and came to Australia
in 1899. He was connected with the
advertising staff for some years prior
to enlistment.
Joining the Australian Imperial
Force as a Private in March, 1916, he
sailed with reinforcements for the 34th
Battalion. Reaching France in April,
1917, he saw fighting at Armentieres,
Le Touquet, Passchendaele, Morlan-
court, and from Villers Bretonneux to
Bony. He attained the rank of Ser-
geant early in his military career, and
finally acted as Quartermaster Ser-
geant.
s
STANLEY EDWARD TOPHAM
Son of Mr. Frank Topham, of Summer
Hill, was employed for some time on
the reading staff. He was accepted for
Active Service, after being twice re-
jected, and got only as far as Western
Australia when, on account of sick-
ness, he had to be invalided home.
WILLIAM ALFRED TWEEDIE
Was the eldest son of Mr. and Mrs. G.
R. Tweedie, of Croydon. He was edu-
cated at the Cowra Public School, and
afterwards at the Bathurst High School,
and joined the clerical staff.
In August, 1915, he volunteered
and was accepted for service as a Sig-
naller, and was posted to reinforce-
ments for the 2nd Battalion. A few
months later he was in action in
France, being in the engagements at
Armentieres and Pozieres, and thence
through the Somme. He was killed in
the Battle of Arras at Hermes in April,
1917.
Two brothers also served throughout
the war.
a
ERIC REGINALD WARD
Was born in I 894, and educated at the
North Annandale and Fort Street
Schools. He joined the electrical de-
partment in January, 1915, as a motor
attendant.
Two months later he enlisted as a
Sapper in the Engineers. He saw ser-
vice on the Western Front during the
German offensive and the subsequent
Allied advance.


JACK COSGROVE WATKINS
Second son of the late Mr. Charles
Smith Watkins, of Waverley, was born
at Surry Hills on February 12, 1893,
and was educated at the Surry Hills
South Public School. Fie has achieved
fame as a footballer, having represented
New South Wales and Australia in
1914 against the English team, and
New South Wales against Queensland
and Australia against New Zealand in
1919. He joined the clerical staff in
February, 1909.
Enlisting in 1916 as a Gunner with
reinforcements for the sth Artillery
Brigade, he proceeded to France and
was in the heavy fighting at Ploegsteert,
Villers Bretonneux, Mont St. Quentin
and Peronne. He remained with the
brigade till the signing of the armis-
tice, when he went with the A.I.F.
football team to England.
1!
ERNEST WEBSTER
Was born in London and joined the
machine department in June, 1914. In
June, 1916, he enlisted in the Infantry
with two other comrades from the
-machine room the late Joseph Heady
and S. C. Hayhurst and saw consider-
able service in France.
LEONARD THOMAS WEST
Was born in England on August 9,
1897, and educated at the West Square
School. His connection with the of-
fice began in November, 1916, when he
was engaged as an assistant stereo-
typer in place of one of the men who
had enlisted. He remained in the po-
sition till April, 1918, when he him-
self volunteered for service, sailing
shortly afterwards with reinforcements
for the Field Engineers. He was only
a week or two in France when the ar-
mistice was signed.
ROBERT MELVILLE WEST
Was born at Camperdown in 1897, be-
ing the eldest son of the late Mr. Ro-
bert W. West, and was educated at the
Kogarah and the Fort Street Schools.
He joined the clerical department at
the beginning of 1915.
In April, 1916 he enlisted and was
posted to reinforcements for the 4th
Battalion, but, on account of his father’s
death, was released from service. He
volunteered again in March, 1918, and
left Australia with reinforcements for
the 13th Battalion, arriving in France
in October. He was in the Amiens
sector when the armistice was signed.


GEORGE CLARKE WESTMORE
Was born at Broken Hill on October 9,
1892, being the younger son of Mr. J.
W. Westmore, of Burwood. He was
educated at the Mosman and Waverley
Superior Public Schools, and joined the
advertising department in March, 1911.
He enlisted in August, 1915, in rein-
forcements for the 7th Light Horse
Regiment, and sailed with them at the
end of October as Acting-Corporal.
In April, 1916, he was transferred to
the I Oth Field Artillery, and, on ar-
riving in France, went into the line
near Armentieres. He was engaged
in the actions at Fleurbaix, Flers, and
in the Somme area generally, including
Bullecourt, and also took part in the
operations at Messines Ridge and Pass-
chendaele. In the latter battle he re-
ceived injuries that necessitated a long
soell in hospital, and was afterwards
declared to be permanently incapaci-
tated.
His only brother, R. D. Westmoje,
saw three years’ service at the front.
a
AUSTIN BEDE WHITEHAIR
Eldest son of Mr. W. J. Whitehair, day
overseer of the composing staff, was
born at Surry Hills in 1888, and edu-
cated at the Sacred Heart School at
Darlinghurst. He joined the compos-
ing department as an apprentice in
1904.
Enlisting in November, 1915, as a
Sapper in the Field Engineers, he went
to France, after the' usual period of
training in England, and was posted
with the 7th Field Company. He took
part in much heavy fighting, and was
awarded the Military Medal for par-
ticularly good work at Zonnebeke. He
went through the Somme campaign,
and was in the actions at Bapaume,
Bullecourt, Armentieres, Villers Bre-
tonneux, and played his part in the
Allied advance through Belgium, re-
maining on service till the end of hos-
tilities.
WILLIAM A. WHITEHAIR
Youngest son of Mr. A. J. Whitehair,
was born at Surry Hils on December


29, 1895, and educated at the Chris-
tian Brothers’ College, Waverley. He
joined the composing department as
an apprentice in 1911.
Volunteering in December, 1915, he
enlisted in the Field Artillery as a
Gunner, subsequently becoming a
Driver.- After undergoing training in
England he went to France in Decem-
ber, 1916, and saw fighting at Armen-
tieres, Ploegsteert, Messines and Ypres,
being wounded in an action in the last-
named sector. Rejoining his battery
in November, 1917, he returned to
Ploegsteert, and took his share in the
fighting associated with the last Ger-
man offensive and the subsequent Al-
lied advance, one of the hottest bat-
tles in which he participated being that
of Hamel. He served until the sign-
ing of the armistice.
ARTHUR GILES WILLIAMS
Was born in 1897 and educated at
the Dulwich Hill Superior Public
School, joining the clerical department
in 1913.
At the age of 18 years he enlisted,
and was drafted to the 13th reinforce-
ments for the 2nd Battalion, but was
discharged as medically unfit after be-
ing several months in camp. He then
proceeded to New Zealand, and in
April, 1916, was accepted for the New
Zealand Transport Service.
GEOFFREY WOOD
Only son of the late Mr. Reginald Wood,
was born at Parramatta in October,
1895, and was educated at the Kogarah
Superior Public School. He joined
the reading staff at the end of 1 909.
He enlisted on March 28, 1915, in
the sth Field Ambulance, and first saw
service in Gallipoli, where he remained
until the evacuation. He was in the
famous fight at Hill 60 (Suvla Bay).
He was sent to France in March, 1916,
and was in the fighting at Armentieres,
Fleurbaix, Bois Grenier, Messines, Po-
zieres, Ypres and Le Sais. In the ac-
tion at the last-named place he was
badly wounded in the right arm, ampu-
tation being necessary. After a period
in hospital at Southall (London) and
Plymouth, he returned to Australia,
resuming duty in the office in Novem-
ber, 1917.
11
ROBERT YOUNG WRIGHT
Was born in 1888 at Invercargill
(N.Z.), where his parents reside. Be-
fore coming to Sydney in 1912 he was
employed at the Southland Times
office. He joined the stereotyping de-
partment in 1913.
He sailed from Sydney with the 19th
Battalion on June 25, 1915, and pro-
ceeded to Gallipoli, where he was killed.
A sister served as a nurse with the
New Zealand forces.


MEMBERS OF THE STAFF
OF THE
morning ijrralft anti S>yimrg mail
WHO ENLISTED FROM THE OFFICE
ACCEPTED FOR SERVICE. /
m
“ . merit has each honoured name
To shine untarnished on the Rolls of Fame,
And add new lustre to the historic page.”
a
fGRAY, A. (D.C.M.)
REDHEAD, A.
CUMMINS, W. T.
♦CRICHTON, S. R.
FAIRLAND, S. D.
fBUSKIN. G. A. K.
fALLERDICE, C. S.
♦CAMPBELL. G. F.
EVANS, W. T.
fHOGUE, OLIVER
♦BEAN. C. E. W.
NICHOLAS. J. M.
LANGFORD. N. H.
fROSS, H. E. C.
♦WOOD. G.
♦RAMAGE, R. R.
GILDER. A. E. B.
♦ST. JOHN, H. C.
DONNELLY. W. A.
fCOOMBES, C. A.
•J LIVINGSTONE. A. H.
WILLIAMS. A.
MASSEY, H. G.
i TWEEDIE, W. A.
♦KERNOHAN, T. H.
♦MULLINS. A. J.
♦KING, A. W. V.
ADCOCK. J. T.
i HERROD, H. M.
♦WHITEHAIR, W. A.
♦PATERSON, G. V.
BROWN. R. J.
DAVENPORT, R. W.
LILJEBLAD, V.
•(ORPIN, E. F.
WEBSTER. E.
i HEADY. J.
HENEY, H. R.
♦RUNDLE, P. H.
♦ELLISON. N. H. H.
1 WRIGHT. R. Y.
♦JOHNSTON, W. F.
IHANNAY, T. A.
♦SIMPSON. V. L.
♦SWALLOW, R. H.
WESTMORE, G. C.
tGRAHAM, W. B.
♦GOODALL, E. J.
THOMSON. J. E.
BOGAN. W. J.
fCHRISTIANSON, R. F.
♦SHERRING. H. W.
WARD. E. R.
ROBINSON, J. W.
LANSDOWN, F.
♦MOORE, P. E. W.
LEYS-SMITH, W. F.
♦IRWIN, S. H.
1 McGILL, A. A.
♦BOYD. A. J.
SAUNDERS. E. O.
ELFORD, A. E.
GRAHAM. T. J,
SAMUELS, L (M.C.)
fJARVIS, R. T. S. (M.M.)
♦Wounded.
♦STOCKLEY, L. J.
1 SEMPLE, A. G.
WHITEHAIR, A. B. (M.M.)
SHAW. C. J.
JONES. E. B.
LOCKREY, J. A.
CLARKE. G. F. (M.M.)
TOPHAM, S. W.
♦HAYHURST, S. C.
♦BOTTOMLEY, C. C.
HENDERSON. D.
WEST. R. M.
fHOGAN, G. H.
♦HOGAN, H. A.
STOCKLEY. H. W. G.
LEIGH, H. D.
SMITH. C. J.
LORENSON, G.
EVANS, W. R.
TOMBS. W. H.
♦PEIR, W.
♦SYKES, H. J.
1 REYNOLDS. C. V.
McDonald, e. s.
•(MOORE, J. B. V.
WATKINS, J. C.
MATTHEWS, J.
WEST, L. T.
SMITH. W. E. R.
♦LUDLAM, T.
SHEERMAN, S. B.
ROBINSON. G. R.
'{'Dead.
53#*


Soldier Sons of Employees.
The Sons of the following Employees also
“Shouldered Arms!” for Liberty’s Sake.
Mr. W. Ball’s son, wounded
Mr. G. Bell’s son, wounded
Mr. G. Butcher’s son, wounded
Mr. R. Butcher’s son
Mr. B. Broadbent’s son
Mrs. Baverstock's son
Mr. A. J. Claxton’s two sons, one
killed, and one wounded twice
Mr. E. Corbett’s son, killed
Mr. R. Deverall’s son
Mr. W. Duncan’s son, wounded
Mr. W. R. Eggleton’s son
Mr. A. K. Evans’ two sons, one wound-
ed four times, and the other once
Mr. C. B. Fletcher’s son
Mr. Greenlee’s son
Mr. J. J. Goldsbrough’s son, wounded
Mr. T. W. Heney's son
Mr. H. Hargrave’s three sons, one
wounded
Mr. J. Hilder’s two sons, one wounded
Mr. Allan Harris’s son
Mr. A. P. Hanlon’s son
Mr. A. Hook’s son
Mr. G. King’s son, killed
Mr. A. Ludlam’s son, wounded
Mr. A. Langford’s son
Mr. C. Leigh’s two sons
Mr. F. J. McDermott’s son
Mr. J. McMillan’s two sons
Mr. H. Middleton’s son
Mr. S. W. Mackay's two sons
Mr. G. Metcalf’s son
Mr. E. Mulford's son (D.C.M.),
wounded
Mr. T. Powers’s son (M.M., Bar to
Medal)
Mr. H. Rogers’s son, wounded
Mr. Colin Stockley’s three sons
Mr. Alfred Semple’s two son, one
killed
Mr. William Smith’s son, wounded
Mr. H. St. John's son
Mr. James K. Small’s son
Mr. T. H. Todd’s two sons
Mr. J. W. Ward’s son
Mr. T. Willis’s son, killed
Mr. William Whitehair’s two sons, one
an M.M.-, the other wounded
(55 Sons: Five killed, fifteen wounded, one a D.C.M., one an M.M. and
bar to medal, and one an M.M.)
Deaton & Spencer, Print., Sydney.


