

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SCIENCE.
RECORDS OF QUEENSLAND
BOTANISTS.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ABOVE ASSOCIATION
I3Y
J. IT. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist of New South Wales, and Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
BRISBANE:
By Authority : AhtmokY James Gumming, Govern meat Printer, Street.
1900.


RECORDS OF QUEENSLAND BOTANISTS
By J. U. MAIDEN, Government Botanist of New South. Wales, and Director of the
Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
I have used the term “ botanist ” in a somewhat wide sense,
having included collectors of note whether they described their finds
or not, notable horticulturists, and, in my general list (6) botanists
who have described Australian plants whether they visited this land or
not. I have included no living man, so far as lam aware. It will be
seen how imperfect is the record of some who have worked amongst us
and who have not been removed by the hand of death very long.
Records of departed botanists form a branch of Australian
history of practical value to working botanists. They afford a guide
to their published works, and indicate where their observations were
made.
The lists of species named after the various botanists and col-
lectors are valuable (so I have often found) for tracing particulars of
botanical journeys, biographical notes, and other useful information.
Select Bibliography.
Bailey, F. M. “ A Concise History of Australian Botany.” (Proc. Roy.
Soc., Queensland, viii., p. xvii., 1891.) Quoted as (1).
Hooker, J. U, “Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania,” cxii.-
cxxviii. (“ Outlines of the Progress of Botanical Discovery
in Australia.”) Quoted as (2).
Britten and Boulger. “ British and Irish Botanists.” Quoted as
(8).
Mejnnell, Philip. “The Dictionary of Australian Biography .
from the inauguration of Responsible Government down to
the present time (1855-1892),” London, 1892. Quoted as
(4).
Maiden, J. H. Address of the President, Section D, Biology, of this
Association, Adelaide Meeting, 1907. Contains Biographical
Notices of South Australian and some other Quoted
as (5).
Maiden, J. H. “ Records of Australian Botanists— (a) General, (h)
New South Wales” (Proc. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., xlii., 1908).
Quoted as (6).
Maiden,, J. H. “Records of Victorian Botanists.” (Viet. Nat., xxv.,
97-117, 1908.) Quoted as (7).
Maiden,. -I. H. “ Records of Western Australian Botanists.” (Journ.
W.A. Nat. Hist. Soc., 1909.) Quoted as (8).
Maiden, J. H. “Records of Tasmanian Botanists.” (Proc. Roy. Soc.,
Tas., 1909.) Quoted as (9).
The veteran Queensland botanist, Mr. F. M. Bailey, in his “ Con-
cise History of Australian Botany,” already referred to (1), included
notices of living workers, and I hope that the information which
follows wull usefully supplement Mr. Bailey’s references. In some
cases one must read the State-name broadly, as I have included in it
a few men engaged in Polynesian botanical exploration.


Armit, William E. D. M. —
An extract from a letter of the Secretary, Commissioner of
Police, to Mr. W. C. Brennan, Secretary, Public Service Board,
Brisbane, say«: —
Mr. Armit’s name appeals as William E. D. M. Armit, but the full
Christian name cannot be given, nor is it known where and when he was born
and died; the last communication from him is dated April, 1883. He was
appointed a sub-inspector on sth June, 1872, and served at Murray River,
Waterview, Cashmere, Georgetown, Dunrobin, Brisbane, Bynoe, and Carl
Creek. He left the service on the 14th April, 1882.
He was an officer of the Queensland Mounted Police. He became
a New Guinea official.
He collected largely in Northern Queensland for Mueller— e.g., on
the Gilbert River, Lynd River, Herbert River, head of Burdekin, Ac.
His botanical papers include “ Notes on certain Plants of North-
Western Queensland possessing valuable Medicinal Properties,” which
was published in abstract in Joum. Linn. Soc., xx., 69. He read a
paper, “ List of Plants noticed on Moresby, Basilisk, O’Neill, and
Margaret Islands, S. Eastern New Guinea,” on 19th March, 1885, Proc.
Linnean Society (1883-86), p. 74 ; but it was not published.
His ethnological papers include—“ Notes on the Philology of the
Islands adjacent to the South-eastern Extremity of New Guinea ”
(Proc. Roy. Soc., Queensland, ii., 2); “The Papuans: Comparative
Notes on Various Authors, with Original Observations ” ( ib ., 78).
He is commemorated by the following plants;— Bossiaea Armitii,
F'.v.M. (Fragm. ix. 44); Gondenia Armitiana, F.v.M.; Eriachne
Armitii, F.v.M.; Sarcochilus Armitii, F.v.M.
Backhouse, James (1794-1869). See (6) —
Ho was a Quaker missionary who visited Australia on a philan-
thropic mission. He arrived at “ Brisbane Town ” 29th March, 1836;
and in chapters xxxii. and xxxiii. of his “ Narrative of a Visit lo the
Australian Colonies ” are interesting notes on the botany of Moreton
Bay.
Bancroft, Joseph (1836-1894) —
Born at Stretford, near Manchester, England, February 21st,
1836. Arrived in Brisbane, 1864. Died at Brisbane, June 16th, 1894.
M.R.C.S. Eng., M.D. St. Andrews’, 1859.
He worked at the pharmacology of some Queensland plants— e.g.,
Duhnisia myoporoides and I). Hopwoodii. He also worked at the
hybridisation of plants; produced new varieties of the grape, castor
oil plant, strawberry, Ac. He discovered a rust-proof wheat. Ho
proved that wheat, barley, and rice could be grown in Southern
Queensland on poor coast country. Was interested in diseases of
plants— e.g.. Banana (Tylenchus), Sugar-cane, Ac.
Following are some of his papers : — “Pituri and Duboisia,” Bris-
bane, 1877, Bvo. “Further remarks on the Pituri group of plants, Ac.”
(Ib. 1878), Bvo. “Contribution to Pharmacy from Queensland”
f 1886 V “Duboisia Pituri ” (Wing’s Southern Science Record, ii. 221).
“ Food of the Aborigines of Central Australia ” (Proc. Rov. Soc., Q.,


*^i£$ r ~ *' ,,: ■ 1 * h
P Jw 1 -4. r jkgH
■f JK ».:,>** W^ ri S^E^^ : 'S
•iBr A >. 1? ** • h^i^™BPn't?£ • - './ 1 ■ ;/ ff v
Joseph Bancroft (183G 1894).


i., 104). “ Experiments with Indian wheats in Queensland ”{ib. i., 176).
Presidential Address before the Royal Society of Queensland {ih. ii.,
67). “An Inquiry into the Maize Diseases of the Caboolture District
{ih. iii., 108).
See a notice of his work by the then President of the Lmnean
Society, Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods, in Proc. Linn. Soc., N.S.W., iv.,
482, 1880.
See a biographical notice of him in (4)- For obituary notices see
“ The Telegraph,” 18th June, 1894; “The Queenslander” (Brisbane),
23rd June, 1894; “Australasian Medical Gazette,” 15th July, 1894
(with portrait). See also “Obituary notice of Dr. Joseph Bancroft”
by Eugen Hirschfeld (Proc. Roy. Soc., Q., x., 102).
He is commemorated by the following plants;— Strychnos
Bancroftiana, Bail.; Dendrohium speciosum var. Hillii , forma
Bancroftianum, H. G. Reichb.f.
A portrait of Dr. Bancroft will be found in this volume.
Bernays, Lewis Adolphus (1831-1908^
Born in London, 3rd May, 1831, died in Brisbane, 22nd August,
1908 He was the son of Dr. Bernays, Professor of the German
Language and Literature at King’s College, London, and arrived in
New Zealand, 1850. When Queensland became a separate colony, with
her own Parliament,- Mr. Bernays, in 1859, was appointed Clerk of the
Legislative Assembly. He was made C.M.G. in 1892. He was the
first honorary secretary of the Queensland Acclimatisation Society,
and was its leading spirit for veiy many years. He was a Fellow
of the Linnean Society of London, and a prominent member of the
Royal Society of Queensland.
He was an assiduous collector of our native plants, and was
specially interested in the introduction of economic plants into Queens-
land. He was a successful cultivator of many useful and ornamental
plants.
He was author of the following w r orks: The Olive and its
Products . . . the Habits, Cultivation and Propagation of the
Tree, &c.” Brisbane, 1872. Bvo. “Cultural Industries of Queens-
land. —Papers on . . . useful plants suited to the climate.” Ist
series. Brisbane, 1883. Bvo.
He is commemorated by;— Phaius Bernaysii, Rowl.; Nepenthes
Bernaysii, Bail.
Bidwill, John Carne (1815-1853) —
Government Botanist and Director of the Botanic Gardens,
Sydney (the first on wdiom these two titles were conferred), Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands at Wide Bay. He botanised much in the Wide
Bay and Brisbane River districts. See (6).
Bowman, Edward Macarthur (1826-1872) —
Bora at Sydney, died 30th June, 1872, at Clermont, Peak Downs,
Queensland.
Eldest son of Dr. James Bowman, who was Colonial Surgeon in
Sydney for some years.


Owed his botanical training to Sir William Macarthur, of Camden
Park, N.S.W., whose nephew he was. He occupied his time chiefly on
Queensland stations, and collected for Mueller and for others. A
number of plants collected by him are referred to in the “ Flora Aus-
traliensis” and the “ Fragmenta.”
There is an account of some of his botanical discoveries, from the
pen of the late Rev. Dr. Woods, in Hort. Mag., Sydney, v. 127 (1868),
and the following account is given of a man concerning whom little is
known, and who did much to advance a knowledge of Queensland
botany four decades ago. Specimens are extant from him from Herbert
Creek (Broadsound).
Amongst those who have contributed to the advancement of botanical
science in Australia, the name of Mr. Edward Macarthur Bowman should be
remembered with gratitude, for (says the “Sydney Mail”) the specimens
which he collected in North-east Australia have proved highly serviceable to
the learned authors of the “Flora Australiensis.” In the introduction to the
first volume of that work Mr. Bentham expresses his obligation to Mr.
Bowman for his collections in Queensland; and Baron F. von Mueller, in a
recent letter, characterises him as a most disinterested collector, who will be
much missed. This indefatigable naturalist was the discoverer of Ptychosperma
A lexandra:, one of the most splendid palms in Australia, a figure and description
of which will be found in the fifth volume of Baron Mueller’s “Fragmenta.”
He was also the first to collect Ricinocarpus Bowmanii, Pimelea Bowmanii
and many other interesting plants; and it was principally through his
exertions that the properties of 0 astral obium yrandiflorum, the Poison Pea of
the .Minders, were investigated. . . . For some years past he resided
in various parts of North-east Australia, devoting much of his leisure time to
the collection of new and rare plants, and corresponding with Baron von
Mueller and other scientific gentlemen in the Australian colonies. (“Gardeners’
Chronicle, 1873, p. 177, based on .an article in the “ Sydney Mail,” by Rev
Hr. Woolls.) ’ J
Ho is commemorated by the following species:— Eucalyptus
Bowmanii, F.v.M.; Eremophtla Bowmani, F.v.M.; Dendrohium
Bowmanii, Benth; Pimelea Bowmani , F.y.M. j Ricinocarpus Bow-
mani, F.v.M.; Ci/perus Bowmani, F.v.M.
Brown, Robert (1773-1858) —
Travelled much along coastal Queensland, 1800-4, and described
many Queensland plants. “Botanicorum facile princeps.” Sec (6).
Cunningham, Allan (1791-1839) —
King’s Botanist and Superintendent, Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
See (6). Discoverer of the Darling Downs. See Hon. Arthur Morgan's
paper (Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Austral. Q.). An eminent botanist who
botamsed much in the Moreton Bay district and South Queensland
generally.
Dietrich, Amalie—
This lady collected largely between 1863 and 1873 for the
Museum Godeffroy. of Hamburg, Germany. Specimens collected by
her are extant from Rockhampton, Port Mackay, Lake Elphinstone,
Gladstone, Brisbane River, Curtis Island, and other places.


See a paper “ Zur Flora von Queensland, Yerzeichniss der von
Frau Amalie Dietrich, in den Jahren, 1863 bis 1873, an der Nordost-
kiiste von Neuholland gesammelten Pflanzen ” von Dr. Chr. Luerssen,
in “ Journal des Museum Godeffroy,” Heft viii., pp. 101-122, Taf. 12-18.
There is another paper based on material from the same collector in
pp. 1-22 of the same Journal (Heft 1) There is also an account of
Mrs. Dietrich’s travels in Catalog, iv. of the same Museum, pp.
xviii., xix. (1869), but the notes are almost entirely zooloogical.
She is commemorated by the following plants: — Carer
Dietrichice, Rneckel =?; Cyperus Dietrichice, Boeckel= 1 ; Heleocharis
Dietrichiana Roeckel =1 ; Scirpus Dietrichice, Roeckel =S. squarrosus,
Linn.; Scleria Dietrichice, Roeckel = S.hehecarpa, Nees.
No biographical details appear to be available in regard to this
admirable collector.
Gilbert, John ( -1846) —
Explored both in Queensland and Western Australia; killed by
the blacks in Queensland, near the Gulf of Carpentaria. See (8). He
was in the employment of John Gould, the celebrated ornithologist,
and although lie mainly gave attention to birds, he did good botanical
collecting.
Hill, Walter (1820-1904)
Rorn at Scotsdyke, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, 31st December, 1820.
Died at Canonbie Lea, Eight Mile Plains, Brisbane, 4th February,
1 ° o4 *
Having received a thorough training as a gardener, he was two
years in the Royal Botanic Gardens, Edinburgh, under Mr. W.
McNab, and then was nine years at Kew (1843-51). There is a notice
of him in the “ Journal of the Kew Guild,” 1904, based on the
“ Queenslander” notices of 13th February and 9th July of the same
year, which contain portraits.
He came to Sydney in February, 1852, by the ship “ Maitland,
bearing a letter of introduction to Mr. William Sharp Macleay. He
went to the gold diggings at Bendigo, Beechworth, the Turon, and
other places with the late P. L. C. Shepherd, of Sydney. ( See 6 )
Mr. Macleay introduced him to Mr. Frederick Strange (see 6),
with whom he entered into partnership for the purpose of collecting
natural history specimens, on the occasion of the unfortunate expedi-
tion when Mr. Strange was speared by the blacks on Percy Island
No. 2. They had purchased the ketch “ Vision” for the purposes of
this expedition, and Mr. Hill returned to Sydney in this vessel.
He was appointed first superintendent of the Botanic Gardens,
Brisbane, on 21st February, 1855, by the Imperial Government (soon
after Separation, in 1859, he was also appointed Colonial Botanist),
and retired from his post on a pension on Ist March, 1881. The
garden originally consisted of 6 acres, a considerable portion of it
swampy, and it did not extend to the river.


From the “ Queenslander” of 13th February and 9th July, 1904,
some of the following notes have been abstracted:—
For four years previous to his retirement Mr. Hill also had charge of the
forest reserves. He has always been considered by those in a position to
judge of his work as a highly competent gardener, and to him is due the
credit for the introduction of and acclimatisation of many valuable trees and
plants formerly quite unknown to Queensland. It was he who introduced
the mango and other fruits now common objects in every garden. He also
initiated a useful system of exchange with other botanic gardens, especially in
the East. The work of acclimatisation was for many years carried on by him,
even after the present acclimatisation gardens were established, as the work
of the latter was at first mainly the acclimatisation of animals.
In 1862 Mr. Hill accompanied the Governor, Sir George Bowen,
in an expedition to Cape York, in H.M.S. “ Pioneer,” Commodore
Burnett, with the object of reporting on the feasibility of establishing
a settlement there, Somerset being established as the result.
In the work of exploration Mr. Hill also did good work. In 1873, he
went with an expedition to explore the North-east coast in company with
Mr. G. Elphinstone Dalrymple (who was. in command) and Inspector Johnstone.
During this trip the following places were visited, namely:—Cardwell,
MourUyan Harbour, Moresby River, Gladys Inlet and Johnstone River,
Trinity Harbour, Endeavour River, Mulgrave and Russell Rivers, and the
Mossman and Daintree Rivers. When starting on this expedition Mr. Hill
took with him a useful collection of seeds and growing plants, which he sowed
and planted in suitable positions on the mainland and islands. Included in
the list of these plants and seeds were rice plants, guinea corn, millet, buck
wheat, guinea grass, Angola grass, prairie grass, ground nuts, loquats, custard
apples, mangoes, Chinese date plums, bread fruit, jack fruit, coffee, cocoa,
nutmeg, cinnamon, clove, black pepper, ginger, vanilla, arrowroot, tapicoa,
pineapples (6 varieties), mulberry (6 varieties), sweet potatoes, American
vines (12 varieties), and many other plants. Not the least interesting part
of this exploring party was the ascent of Bellenden-Ker. A party consisting
of Inspector Johnstone, Mr. Walter Hill, and eight troopers started on 25th
November, 1873, from Expedition Bend on the Mulgrave. On the following
day they reached a height of 2,100 feet and on 27th November, at noon, the
highest point of Bellenden-Ker was attained.
Mr. Hill did not write much. His works include:—“ Catalogue of
specimens of woods indigenous to Queensland” (London International
Exhibition, 1862). “ Narrative and reports of the Queensland north-
east coast expedition (under command of G. Elphinstone Dalrymple),
1873” (Pari. Paper, 1874). (Botanical Report by Walter Hill at pp.
48-52.) “ Catalogue of the plants in the Queensland Botanic Gardens,”
Bvo., 1875. “ Botanic Gardens, Brisbane. Collection of Economic and
ether plants, &c.” (Brisbane, 1*880.) Bvo. “ Collection of Queensland
Timbers. Botanic Gaidens, Brisbane” (Brisbane, 1880). Bvo.
The following species commemorate him: — Acronychia Hillii,
F.v.M. —A. Baueri, Schott; Akania Hillii, Hook.f.; Harpullia Hillii,
F.v.M.; Keraudrenia Hillii, F.v.M.; Kuhus Hillii, F.v.M , R.moluc-
canus, Linn.; Myrtus Hillii, Benth.; Greviilea Hilliana, F.v.M.;
Claoxylon Hillii, Benth.; Musa Hillii, F.v.M.; Dendrohium Hillii,
F.v.M . = Thrixspennum Hillii, Reichb. = Sarcochilus Hillii, F.v.M.;
Saccolahium Hillii, F.v.M. ; Polypodium Hillii, Bak.
I am indebted for some of the above information to his niece,
Miss Mary Hill, and to Mr. W. C. Brennan, Secretary of the Queens-
land Public Service Board.


Li:\dj-ey, John—
The describe! - of Mitchell’s Queensland and other Australian
plants. See (6).
MacG-illivray, John ( -1867). Usually spelled McG-illivray in
error—
Son of William, Prof, of Botany at Aberdeen. Dr. P. H.
Gillivray, of Bendigo (the well-known authority on zoophytes), was a
brother.
He died at Sydney 6th June, 1867. The notice of him in (3)
confuses father and son through a slip of the pen.
Mr. John MacGillivray, late naturalist of H.M.S. “ Rattlesnake,” died at
Sydney on the 6th June. He had just returned from an expedition to the
Richmond River, and was preparing to leave for the islands of the South
Pacific, when his career of usefulness was cut short by death. John
MacGillivray was the eldest son of the late William MacGillivray, Regius
Professor of Natural History, Marischal' College, Aberdeen. He spent his
early years in Edinburgh, and exhibited from boyhood a taste for those
branches of natural science which his father cultivated with so much success.
He was intended for the medical profession, and had all but completed his
studies when the late Lord Derby offered him the appointment of naturalist on
board H.M.S. “Fly,” which was about to make the voyage round the world.
On his return to England he was appointed naturalist to H.M.S. “Rattle-
snake,” employed on the Government survey, and recorded the results of a
three years’ cruise in two interesting volumes, which were favourably received
by the public and the leading literary journals of the day. His next appoint-
ment was to H.M.S. “Herald,” and brought him to Polynesia and Australia.
Owing to his intemperate habits this appointment was cancelled. He spent
nearly five years among the savage inhabitants of the South Sea Islands,
where he had many strange adventures and hairbreadth escapes. He had a
wonderful power of gaining the confidence and adapting himself to the manners
of the cannibal tribes among whom he lived. (Seemann, Journ. Bot. v. 316,
[1867].)
See also (5), under Armstrong, J.
In 1842, Captain Blackwood wa£ sent out in H.M.S. “Fly” and “Bramble”
to make a further survey of the tropical coasts of Australia.
The narrative of the expedition was written by Mr. Jukes (Geologist to
the expedition), and contains no botanical matter. The coasts and islands
visited by the “ Fly” and “ Bramble” had been previously explored by
Cunningham, and subsequently by Mr. MacGillivray, a skilful naturalist, in
H.M.S. “Rattlesnake.” ....
In 1847, H.M.S. “Rattlesnake” was fitted out by Captain Owen Stanley,
to discover openings through the Barrier Reefs in Torres Strait, to the north-
ward of Raine Island passage, to examine Hervey Bay as a site for a new
settlement, and to make a general survey of the Lousiade Archipelago.
Many places were visited between Sydney, Cape York, and Port Essington,
and excellent collections made at Port Curtis, Rockingham Bay, Port Molle,
Cape York, Goold, Lizard, and Moreton Islands. The expedition was
accompanied by Mr. MacGillivray, upon whom the task of editing the narrative
of the voyage devolved, owing to the death of its commander in Sydney. Mr.
MacGillivray’s narrative abounds in interesting observations on the vegetation
of Australia. Among the most noticeable discoveries are —that of a clump of
cocoanuts on Frankland Islands, whence, no doubt, the nuts and husks were
washed to the mainland, where they had excited the curiosity of Cook, King,
&c., of Caryota urens and a native Musa, on the peninsula of Cape York, and
of the Balanophora fungosa in Rockingham Bay. The author also mentions
the existence of the Pomegranate on Fitzroy Island, where (if no error exists)
it has no doubt been planted. . . . (2.)


In 1853 Captain Denham surveyed the Pacific Islands in H.M.S.
“ Herald.” He was accompanied by Mr. MacGillivray and a botanical
collector, and sent some interesting collections from Lord Howe’s
Island, between Australia and New Zealand, and from Dirk Hartog’s
Island and Shark Bay.
See the Lord Howe Island bibliography, by Maiden, in Proc.
Linn. Soc., N.S.W., xxiii., 119 (1898).
Then we have: —
Captain .Denham has, fortunately for science, two naturalists on board
H.M.S. “Herald,” now employed surveying that group of islands in the South
Pacific Ocean, of which those of Feejee may be considered the centre—Mr.
MacGillivray and Mr. William Milne, assistant naturalist. These gentlemen
have not been idle, as we can testify by the arrival of the collections of plants
which they have formed at the several places they have touched at on their
way to Sydney, and as is shown by the following extract from Mr.
MacGillivray’s latter addressed to us from that Colony, dated 23rd February,
1853.
***** * *
Milne has been actively employed collecting at all the places he has
visited, and improves much in his way of preparing specimens. (Hook. Journ.
Bot. v. 279 [1853].)
In 1852, the British Admiralty determined to recommission H.M.S.
“ Herald” (Captain Denham, E.N.) for the purpose of surveying some of the
little known groups of islands in the South Polynesian Ocean. Mr. John
MacGillivray and Mr. William Milne were appointed to her as naturalists, the
latter as assistant to the former. No connected narrative of this voyage has
been published, but a sketch of an excursion made (14th August to 24th
September, 1856) in Fiji has been described by Mr. Milne (Hooker’s Journ.
Bot. ix., p. 106 [1857].) (Seemann’s FI. Vitiensis VII.)
Both MacGillivray and Milne were excellent collectors. The former was a
man of great promise, but for some weighty reason he was dismissed the
service, and after returning to New South Wales and accepting engagements
there for exploring the flora and fauna of several Polynesian islands, he joined
some sandalwood traders and died, still a young man, 6th June, 1867.
(Seemann FI. Vitiensis VII.); (Seem. Journ. Bot. 1867, 163.)
Mr. MacGillivray’s herbarium was given to Sir W. Hooker, and contains
several hundred species in excellent preservation. (2.)
The following MS. Catalogue at Kew refers to these:—
‘‘MacGillivray, John. Voyage of H.M.S. ‘Rattlesnake.
Catalogue of botanical specimens, collected in 1846-9. sm.
8 vo.” See also ;
“ MacGillivray, John. Narrative of the voyage of H.M.S.
‘Rattlesnake,’ commanded by . . . Captain 0. Stanley
. . . 1846-50 ... to which is added . . . E. B. Kennedy’s
Expedition for the exploration of the Cape York Peninsula.
London, 1852. 2 vols. 8vo.”
Seemann only took up MacGillivray’s plants, of which there is
also a set in the British Museum. He did not touch Milne’s plants.
While in private employment he wrote:—“ Some remarks on the
Sandalwood of the South Sea Islands.” Read before the Horticultural
Improvement Society of N.S. Wales. (Syd. Mag. Sci. and Art., 11,
196.)
He collected for many years for Mr. M. Guilfoyle, of Double Bay,
Sydney. There is an account of MacGillivray under the title of “ A
Martyr to Science,” by the Rev. P. C. Beaton, in “Good Words” for
1868, p. 425, with a portrait.




He is commemorated by the following plants: — Cochlospermum
Gillivrcei, Benth.; Gardenia Macgillivrcei Benth.; Nothopanax
Macgillivrayi, Seem . = Panax Macgillivrcei , Benth.; Euphorbia Mac-
gillivrayi, Boiss.
Note. —A portrait of Mr. MacGillivray, taken from “Good Words,” will be-found
in this volume.
Macpherson, Alexander —
See (1).
He is commemorated by the following plant: — Saccolabium
Macphersonii , F.v.M. = Cleisostoma Macphersoni, F.y.M.
Milne, William ( -1866) —
See “MacGillivray.”
MacGillivray and Milne were at Lord Howe Island in 1853, in
H.M.S. “ Herald.” Some of Milne’s specimens are described by Mueller
in his “ Fragmenta.”
Milne, who succeeded MacGillivray in his post (on H.M.S. “ Herald”) did
not keep the situation very long, but was dismissed as his predecessor, and
having returned to Scotland, and engaged once more as a plant collector,
died on the West Coast of Africa in May, 1866. (Seeman, Journ. Bot., 1866,
272; FI. Vitiensis, VIII.)
Some of his Fijian plants were described by Seemann in Bon-
plandia, X., 253 (1861).
He is commemorated by the following plants: — Angianthus
Milnei, Benth.; Litobrochia Milneana, Bail. = Pteris Milneana, Bak.
—P. marginata, Bory.
Mueller, Ferdinand von (1825-1896) —
His services to Queensland botany were of the highest order. See
<6).
Pettigrew, William —
A timber-merchant and Member of the Legislative Council of
Queensland.
He was a close student of -the timbers and trees of his State.
He wrote a paper: —“ On the Curative Properties of the Cunjevoi
( Colocasia macrorrhiza).” (Proc. Roy. Soc., Q., ii., 211.)
Prentice, Charles ( -1894) —
Died at Woolloongabba, Brisbane, 20th April, 1894.
There is a brief obituary notice of him by F. M. Bailey in Proc.
Roy. Soc., Q., x., 50.
Scortechini, Rev. Benedict ( -1886) —
He lived and botanised in Queensland from 1871-1884. He died
near Calcutta, India. He was one of the best botanists who has ever
lived in Queensland. See (1) ; also, for many details of his work :
“ Rev. Benedict Scortechini, LL.B., F.L.S., &c., Obituary Notice,” by
Henry Tyron (Proc. Roy. Soc., Q., iv., 2).
In addition to the plants enumerated in (1) he is commemorated
by Mezoneuron Scortechinii. He did excellent work in the Malay
Archipelago, and is, I believe, commemorated by many plants from
that region. Amongst them is Ficus Scortechinii, King (Ann. Bot.
Gard. Calcutta, i., 112).


O’Shanbst, John (1834-1899) —
Born July, 1834, at Ballybunnion, Co. Kerry, Ireland, died at
Rockhampton, July, 1899. Was a trained Irish and Scotch gardener.
Landed in Brisbane, April, 1861. He obtained work in the Botanic
Gardens, under Mr. Hill. Here he remained until the discovery of gold
at Gympie, but he soon returned to the Botanic Gardens and left
again in 1864 to take a place with Mr. John McGregor, of Rockhamp-
ton, laying out a large pleasure garden near where the Rockhampton
Cemetery now is.
In 1866 he started a nursexy of his own in Rockhampton and, in
1870, removed to Kangaroo Park (Kabra), where he had selected a
lai’ge area of land. Here he entered into fruit growing as well as
establishing a nurseryman’s business. In 1876 he started farming,
and continued the three businesses together up till his death.
He assisted in the collection of grasses, woods, Ac., and specimens
of them were sent on to Baron von Mueller, Melbourne, with whom
he kept up a regular correspondence.
He wrote many articles on the growing of lucerne and cereal
crops in the Central District for the “ Morning Bulletin,” Rockhamp-
ton.
O’Shanest, Patrick Adams (1837-1884) —
Bom at Ratto, Co. Kerry, Ireland. Died at Rockhampton, De-
cember, 1884. He was trained as a gardener in Scotland. Left for
Australia in 1864, and landed in Brisbane. Coming to his brother
John he was employed by him in his nursery both at Rockhampton
and Kangaroo Park, Kabra, till 1876. He then entered into business
for himself.
He was an earnest student of the botany of the Central District,
and gave considerable attention to the collection and arrangement of
specimens of grasses and other plants.
He was a constant correspondent of Mueller. He made a fine
collection of timbers for the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876. In or
about 1880 he was elected a Fellow of the Linnean Society.
He was the author of: —“ Contributions to the Flora of Queens-
land, with an Epitome of Botany for Beginners,” pp. 82, Rockhamp-
ton, 1880;” also “The Botany of the Springsure District.'” (Proc.
Linn. Soc., N.S.W., vi., 730.)
Solanum Shanesii, F.v.M., commemorates him.
Thozet, Anthelme (?1826-1878) —
Bom in France (Departement d’Ain, near Lyons); died at Rock-
hampton, 31st May, 1878, aged 52 years.
He was F.L.S. and Officier de FAcademie, Paris. He was a most
assiduous collector of the botany of his district, most of his specimens
going to Baron von Mueller. His end was hastened through his
botanical exploration of Expedition Range. He also cultivated many
economic plants, and prepared them for commercial use. His private
garden was an experimental garden of great value, in which he
introduced many plants to Central Queensland, and even to the
colony. He did much in extending a knowledge of Queensland in
France.


He was author of the following: —
(1) “ Notes on some of the Roots, Tubers, Bulbs, and Fruits used
as Vegetable Food by the Aboriginals of North Queensland.”
(“ Bulletin” office, Rockhampton, 1866, pp. 16.)
These notes have the botanical and aboriginal names, and were
incorporated by Brough Smyth, in his “ Aborigines of Victoria,”
i. 227.
(2) “ In the Catalogue of the Natural and Industrial Products of
Queensland,” exhibited in the Local Exposition by the Commissioners,
29th October, 1861, Mons. Thozet exhibited tobacco in the leaf, cigars,
cotton, wheat, various native tree barks possessing medicinal pro-
perties, fibres.
(3) “ Sketch of the Residence of James Morrill among the Abori-
ginals of Northern Queensland for Seventeen Years, being a Narrative
of his Life, Shipwreck, Landing on the Coast, and Residence among
the Aboriginals; also an Account of the Natural Productions of
Northern Queensland, and Manners, Customs, Language, and Super-
stitions of its Inhabitants,” by Edmund Gregory. “Courier” office,
Brisbane, 2nd Edn., pp. 23, 1865.
This remarkable man, whose name was really James Murrells,
as pointed out by Mr. Gregory, gave an account of the seeds, roots,
Ac., he fed upon while he lived like an aborigine, and, in the “ Rock-
hampton Bulletin” of 14th March, 1863, M. Thozet gives a valuable
account of Murrell’s food-plants, and it is copied in Mr. Gregory’s
pamphlet.
He is commemorated by the following species:— Acacia Thoze-
tiana, F. v. M. Alhizzia Thozetiana, F. Muell.; Terminalia Thozetii y
Benth.; Ixora Thozetiana, F. v. M. = Randia densiflora, Benth.;
Jambosa Thozetiana, F. v. M. Eugenia myrtifolia, Sims; Aristo-
lochia Thozetii, F. v. M.; Cladodes Thozetiana, Baill. = Alchornea
Thozetiana, Bail!.; Eucalyptus Thozetiana, F. v. M.
I am indebted to Madame Thozet and also to Mr. Thomas V.
Nobbs, the town clerk of Rockhampton (M. Thozet’s son-in-law) for
some of the above information.
Tbnison-Woods, Julian E. (1832-1889) —
See (5 and 6). See also a paper “On a Fossil-plant Formation
in Central Queensland.” (Wing’s “ Southern Science Record,” iii., 77.)
He devoted much attention to the botany of Queensland.






