

BE'.a y^i-*lftgjj|!ig$?aijWiMfrffl||MM^
I
I h'rlu ;’
.. y ' /■ ; f y^.y'yyy : -- ’•> ’’,
III * \:\*< *• ’ • * ": ■ ' •• ; : % ~ .
I'j •."• sBb:


(Tlie I.Ji.C. (Guttte.
FIRST NUMBER. PUBLISHED AT SEA ON BOARD
THE
S. S. "BRITANNIC,”
WHILST CONVEYING THE IMPERIAL REPRESENTATIVE
CORPS
FROM
ENGLAND to AUSTRALIA.
EDITED BY C. RUSS E L L - BRO W N.
DECEMBER 22nd, 1900.
EDITORIAL NOTES.
This first printed Edition of the I.E.C. Gazette includes the two type-
written numbers which were published on board the s.s. “Britannic ” during her
outward voyage, with certain revisions and alterations, which bring the contents
up to date, and which, we hope, will add to the general interest of the paper.
It is proposed to publish three numbers in all, the first dealing with the
period of the outward voyage, the second with the doings of the Corps in Austra-
lia, and the last with the homeward voyage. These three numbers of the
Gazette would then form a connected, and, we trust, an interesting record of
events.


TH€ “ I.R.C. <SRZ€TT€.”
DIARY OF THE OUTWARD VOYAGE.
i Nov.—The Imperial Representative Corps and other passengers
embarked on board the S.S. Britannic at Southampton amidst
damp and gloomy surroundings. The “ Times ” sent down
their well-known correspondent lately returned from South
Africa, who appeared to be one of the few representatives of the
Press, but he fully made up for this deficiency by making an
excellent lunch and taking copious notes. After a noisy musical
“send off” by nn undaunted cornet player, we dropped down
Southampton water and anchored for the night off the Needles
owing to a dense fog.
Nov. —An uneventful day was followed by a disquieting night,
with gloomy forebodings of bad weather in the Bay.
Nov.—A heavy sea greeted those who were able to rise, among
these being two unfortunate men of the Fusiliers, who were
severely injured by a fall this morning.
Nov.—A calmer day, but the ship was still feeling the effects
of the late bad weather.
Nov.—Weather completely changed for the better. During the
evening, the fine band of the H.L.I. treated us to a well chosen
selection of music under the able guidance of Mr. Evans.
Nov.—Anchored off “ Gib.” in the early morning. The summit
of the Rock, in spite of the glorious day, was covered in mist.
Notwithstanding this defect, many “snap-shots” were taken,
both of the Rock and of the new breakwater under construc-
tion. Cricket was started in the afternoon, bringing out talent
both promising and otherwise, affording much amusement to
players and lookers on.
Nov. (Sunday).—Parade services were held on board this morning,
the band taking a prominent part. During the day a good view
was obtained of Algiers and the Atlas Mountains.
Nov.—All on board were busy making preparations for their
expected march through Yaletta on the following day. Numerous
were the arguments —some supported by strong language—as to
where helmets, puggaries and various splendours of war-attire had
disappeared. A case of head gear was found in the bold broken


and its contents supporting the wheels of a field gun, not to
mention lighter articles, such as pontoons and steel gas tubes for
the “ balloonatics.”
20th Nov.. —Reached Malta in the early morning and anchored
in the grand harbour. Soon after our arrival, the Governor-
General (Sir Erancis Grenfell, K. 0.8., G.C.M.G.) boarded the
vessel and was received with a royal salute. The men were all
drawn up on board and marched through several of the streets to
the Palace Square, where they formed up in review order. They
were here inspected by Admiral Fisher, Commander-in-Ohief of
the Mediterranean Squadron, and Lord Charles Beresford, second
in command. By kind permission of the Governor, the troops
were next given an opportunity of viewing the magnificent interior
of the palace, formerly the abode of the far-famed Knights of
Malta, after which the force marched back by a circuitous route
to the Quay, from whence they re-embarked.
The following General Special Order was issued before leaving :
“H. E. the Comrnander-in-Chief had much satisfaction in receiving
in Malta the troops forming the Imperial Force on its way to
Australia, and was greatly pleased with the soldier-like bearing
and smartness of this fine body of troops, selected from all branches
of H.M.’s Service. The Commander-in-Chief wishes them good
luck, a pleasant voyage and a safe return home.”
21st Nov. Physical drill now takes place daily ; even Field Officers
are often seen capering round the deck in various attitudes, all
ranks deriving the utmost benefit from this invigorating exercise.
Owing to the splendid equipment of gymnastic gear provided by
our sporting Commanding Officer out of funds granted by the War
Office, various bouts of strength and skill took place this afternoon
on the hurricane deck, and were well attended.
22nd Nov.—Sports were again held in the afternoon, including several
spirited tugs-of-war between various detachments, our Yeomen
holding their own creditably against all comers. The officers
engaged in a keenly contested cricket match—“ Mounted v. Dis-
mounted ” —which, after a hot struggle, the “ Mounted ” men
won by a narrow margin.
23rd Nov.—Arrived at Port Said, where the vessel was at once
besieged by numerous “lighters” of coolies and barges of coal.
After a short interval, the spick and span appearance of the boat
was utterly spoilt by a thick layer of coal dust, the same calamity
befalling a few officers in their eagerness to get ashore, much to
the benefit of the Port Said barbers. During the day the ship
took in about 1000 tons of coal in eight hours, breaking the
record “as usual.” What was of more importance, we had the
pleasure of adding another bride to the passenger list.


We started steaming down the Suez Canal about 9 p.m.
Everyone was glad to leave the coal-begrimed “ Gate of the East ”
behind them.
ISTov.—Passed through the Canal and anchored off Suez this
morning. Many purchases of fruit, photos and curios were made,
the most amusing feature of the stay being the pelting of the
unfortunate vendors of limes with their own goods. Started on
the journey down the Red Sea with the prospect of cool weather
for these latitudes. A concert was held on board this evening, an
account of which appears in another column.
Nov. (Sunday).—This being the “ day of rest,” nearly a dozen
services were held on board, the band as usual taking a prominent
part.
i Nov.—The hot enervating weather is the everlasting topic of
conversation. Enough energy, however, is found in the afternoon
to hold a few sports. These consisted of the first ties in the
Bayonet v. Bayonet competition, for which there were thirty-one
entries.
Next followed a “ boot ” race for trumpeters and boys which
caused great excitement, the result being :
Ist, Trumpeter Bennett, R.F. A.
2nd, „ Cook, 7th Hussars
3rd, Bugler Smalley, R.W. Fusl.
4th, ~ Broadbridge, R. Fusl.
A cricket match was played at the same time—Right Wing v.
Left—the former winning easily.
. Nov.—Weather fairly cool, the thermometer reading just under
120° F. ! Sports were again held after lunch. The “three-legged ”
race drew quite'" a large audience. A scratch game of cricket also
took place.
Nov.—Arrived at Aden this morning at 10 o’clock, and dropped
anchor about one mile from Steamer Point.
After a visit by the Health Officer of the Port, a few of the
passengers went ashore for the day. The one-horse American
“ Gharris ” were in great demand. The Post Office was the first
place to be besieged, after which the majority drove off to see the
“Tanks,” These are situated in Aden proper, about four miles
from the landing pier, and are well worth visiting. A description
of these tanks may be had on application.
Everyone was on board again by 7 p.m., and coaling went on
until nearly midnight. Aden is the last port at which the ship
will call before reaching Australia. This will necessitate a sixteen
days’ run with scarcely a sight of land.
Nov.—Much cooler to-day; thermometer 140° C. ! Sports again
took place this afternoon. Two ties of Bayonet v. Bayonet were


fought, and a “ Potato and Bucket ” race, for which there were
twenty-four entries, resulted as follows :
Ist. Pte. Kimberley, N. Fusl.
j ~ Thorneycroft, N. Fusl.
2nd. < ~ Stanway
( Bandsman Armstrong, H.L.I.
30th Nov.—The first cricket match of die Inter “ Group ” Tournament
took place this afternoon. The Rifles playing the Aux. Forces;
the latter won after a hard fight.
Ist Dec.—A smart shower fell this morning. The ties of the Sword
v. Bayonet competition (28 entries) were fought this afternoon ;
also the first ties of the “Cock fighting ” (18 entries). The teams
of the latter consisted of three men from each detachment.
2nd Dec. (Sunday).—Great surprise was caused by heavy rain which
fell at mid-day, entirely disorganising the n th service of the
Imperial Representative Corps.
3rd Dec. —Thanks to the energy of the Commanding Officer and
the Sports Committee, who supervised the general arrangements,
an excellent programme of sports was well carried out, with the
following results :
Bayonet y. Bayonet. (Final).
First : Private Bonsey, Grenadier Guards.
Second : Private Walsh, Grenadier Guards.
Third: Private Corell, Middlesex Volunteers.
Sword v. Bayonet. (Final).
First; Private Bonsey, Grenadier Guards.
Second: Sergeant Goode, K. D.G.
Third : Sergeant Swarbrick, 21st Lancers.
Sack Race. (Final).
First : Driver Wade, Royal Engineers.
Second : Private Sawyer.
Third : Private Mitchell, Royal Fusiliers.
First-Class Certificate Competition
First: Sergeant-Major Felgate, A.S.C.
Second : Sergeant Dines, “ Queen’s.”
During dinner many anxious enquiries were made as to who
would be honoured by a presentation at King Neptune’s Court on
the following day. Many “ innocents ” suddenly discovered that
they had crossed “ the line” in their infancy, and so thought them-
selves exempt from the honour which was to be forced upon them-


Punctually at 9.30 p.m. King Neptune and his staff “ boarded”
the ship, making their first appearance on the fore part of the
vessel. An illumination of red and green lights gave a weird
effect to this romantic scene. The King and staff then made a
tour of the boat, finishing-up immediately under the Captain’s
bridge ; here, surrounded by his court, His Majesty made a speech
in which he extoled the virtues of our popular skipper. Three
hearty cheers were then given for the Duke and Duchess of York,
Captain Hayes, and Colonel Crole Wyndham. After partaking of
light refreshment, His Majesty and suite retired for the night.
Dec.—Crossed the Equator to-day. After the Cavalry v. High-
landers cricket match, in which the latter won, the great
event of the day took place in the appearance of King Neptune,
Queen and staff at 3 p.m. His Majesty was at once intercepted
by a vast gathering of “ camera fiends,” to whose general request
for a sitting he graciously acceded. When this ordeal was over he
ordered the Court to assemble on No. 3 hatchway on the main
deck, where a large sail bath had been prepared ; here he opened
the proceedings by a long inaugural speech, which was loudly
cheered. By this time an enormous crowd had assembled, and
every point of vantage was occupied from which to watch the
presentation ceremony.
His Majesty’s secretary next called over the roll of those who
had been summoned to appear before the Court. Nearly all
answered to their names. An escort of the King’s bodyguard was
then sent to search the ship for absentees, and these were brought
forward with other “ innocents ” for presentation. Sergt. Major
Longley, R.E., was the first to be selected for this honor, next
followed several officers and men.
The official routine of the presentation ceremony was somewhat
on the following lines. The “ patient ” was asked to sit on the
edge of a large sail bath, where he was examined by the Court
doctor. The medicine-man then sounded his lungs with a speaking
trumpet, looked at his tongue, timed his pulse by a hand-made
clock, and finally ordered him a large pill. He next reported the
state of the case to the King and invariably recommended that
the patient should be shaved. At a nod from His Majesty, the
Royal barber immediately set to work and gently lathered his
victim with an enormous brush. Occasionally, through an over-
sight, the lather got into the patient’s eyes, mouth or nose. Next
the special hollow ground razor, some four feet in length, was
stropped and the patient carefully shaved. No pains was spared
by this experienced “ coiffeur ” to complete his task according to
the latest and most approved fashion. Thus the most expensive
preparations for the preservation of the hair were used in large
quantities, and great care was taken to apply the powder puff to
the face (and eyes) of those who had been shaved. This last


st.
lbs.
Lt. Williams Freeman, D.O.L.I.
... 11
1
Lt. Dick-Cunyngham, 21st Lancers
... 11
11
2nd Lt. McLean. A.S.C.
.. 11
11
2nd Lt. Hill, R.F.A
... 12
7
Captain Mathew, A.O.C.
... 13
0
2nd Lt. Wayte Wood, K.D.G. ...
... 13
3
Lt. Hon. G. Baring, C. Guards ...
... 13
3
Lt. Collins, K.D.G.
... 13
10
Total weight ...
... 100
4
operation invariably necessitated a washing ; with the assistance of
the barber the patient was induced to make a sudden backward
plunge into the big tank, on the edge of which he was sitting; he
was then assisted by four stalwart guardsmen to wash himself
under water. When all the patients had thus been initiated into
the “mysteries of the deep,” King Neptune’s staff, headed by the
Queen, made a wild dash into the big bath, which brought the
interesting ceremony to a conclusion.
Our thanks are due to those good sportsmen who provided the
day’s amusement at their own expense, and showed us a ceremony
which is seldom witnessed now-a-days.
Dec.—The speed of the ship was greatly accelerated to-day, owing
to the additional supply of “ cole ”to the stokers. We thought
at times that “ cole ” was “cheap,” though we know full well it is
expensive. This apparent paradox is accounted for by the fact
that there is much latent energy in “ cole,” though it frequently
lies “ dormant.”
The cricket match, Staff v. Guards, was played this afternoon,
the former winning by six wickets. The fine batting of Captain
Hill was most noticeable. This evening an excellent concert was
given by the W.O.’s and Sergeants, who kindly invited all on
board. An account of this concert appears among our “ Musical
Notes.”
Dec.—Soon after lunch, the port side of the promenade deck began
to fill, the attraction being the tug-of-war between Officers and
Sergeants. The teams appeared well matched, but the Officers,
owing, no doubt, to the enormous lunch they had just eaten,
pulled over their opponents somewhat easily.
The following list gives the names of the tug-of-war teams and
their weights:—
Officers.


Sergeants.
Cpl-Major Engleton, R.H. Guards .. ... 15 0
Sergt. Bray, R.E— ... ... ... ... 1111
~ McKenzie, 8. Guards ... ... ... 1111
„ Miller, 21st Lancers ... ... ... 12 2
~ Sullivan, G. Guards ... ... ... 12 7
~ Marrow, “Norfolks” ... ... ... 12 12
~ Wrights, R.H.A. ... ... ... ... 13 3
~ Garrott, 2nd L. Guards ... ... ... 17 7
Total weight ... ... 106 11
The foils and pole-fighting competitions were also held to.
day, the final results being :
Foils (Final).
Pte. Howden, Middlesex Volunteers... ... ... 1
~ Hunter, R.H. Guards ... ... .. ... 2
Sgt. Swarbrick, 21st Lancers... ... ... ... 3
Pole Fighting (Final).
Pte. Walsh, G. Guards ... ... ... ... 1
~ Webb, S.L.I. ... ... ... ... ... 2
~ Lockyer, H.L.I. ... ... ... ... ... 3
~ Armstrong, H.L.I. ... ... ... 4
In the evening, Lieut. Collins gave an amusing magic-lantern
show, which was largely attended by officers and men. The first
part of the entertainment consisted of views of the ports at which
the S.S. “ Britannic ” has called on her outward voyage. There
was also a photo of the vessel herself, which, however, appeared to
be minus a funnel and mast.
The second series consisted of views of the recent war in South
Africa. The description of these slides was treated in a light and
jocular manner by Capt. Evelyn Wood. The next was a series of
alphabetically arranged pictures, for which appropriate and
descriptive verses were specially composed and recited by Sergt.
Major Laughton and the lecturer.
Finally an excellent picture of Her Majesty was thrown upon
the screen; this drew forth loud and hearty cheers, and the
evening’s amusement then ended by singing the National
Anthem.
Dec.—lnter-group cricket match played to-day; R.A. and R.E. v.
Militia, Yeomanry and Volunteers ; the latter won by two runs.


Bth Dec.—First ties of the Tug-of-war took place. Also, a cock-
fighting competition, in which the Middlesex team won, the Welsh
Fusiliers taking second place.
9th Dec. (Sunday)— Divine Service held on board.
10th Dec.—lnter-group cricket match—Fusiliers v. Line—was played ;
the Line won by six wickets.
11th Dec. —In spite of rough weather, the first ties of the boxing
competition took place ; also, a most interesting Inter-group
cricket match Staff v. Militia, Yeomanry and Volts.; the Staff
won by an innings and twenty-two runs. The match was note-
worthy for the long stand and excellent batting of Colonel Crole
Wyndham and Capt. Evelyn Wood, who made six and eight runs
respectively, and who also run fifteen byes, thus putting on a total
of twenty-nine runs between them.
12th Dec.—The Inter-group cricket match—Line v. Highlanders—was
played this afternoon, resulting in a win for the Line by three
wickets.
The ship rolled badly all day. A rumour was circulated on
board to the effect that the White Star Line proposed selling this
vessel to the L.C.C. as a steam roller.
13th Dec.—The ship rolled heavily all day. At 10 p.m. we sighted
the lights on Rottnest Island, off Fremantle, and anchored under
the lee of the island till dawn.
14th Dec.—Put into Fremantle harbour early this morning. The
troops landed at mid-day and received a magnificent reception in
Fremantle and Perth. A description of this is given in a separate
column.
15th. Dec.—Steamed out of Fremantle at 8.30 a.m. Even at this
early hour a large crowd had assembled to witness our departure.
As the vessel left the quay, amid the deafening cheers of the
people, the band on board responded by playing “ Auld Lang
Syne ” and other patriotic tunes.
In the evening we saw the flare of a great bush fire on the
S.W. coast; we heard that this conflagration was raging rapidly
and yesterday covered an area of five square miles.
16th Dec. (Sunday)— Very rough weather. In the evening a few brave
souls collected on the promenade deck for evening service and sat
themselves down round the padre. In the middle of a plaintive
hymn, a heavy sea caused the whole congregation to toboggan
across the deck and the hymn came to an abrupt ending, though
the service was afterwards carried through with true British
perseverance, many additional members coming to swell the con-
gregation in order to share in the perils of such an unfortunate
gathering.


17th Dec.—Very rough weather. Passed an homeward bound steamer
in the afternoon.
18th Dec. Weather finer, but the sea was still very rough. Neverthe-
less two impromptu cricket matches were held on board.
19th Dec.—Weather fine but cold. Sea still rather rough. Cricket
again took place this afternoon.
20th Dec. —Sea calmer to-day than it has been for the last fortnight
The final of the inter-group cricket matches was played this after-
noon—Staff v. Line -in which the Line won by six wickets. Also
the semi-finals of the tug-of-war were pulled off.
The following were the scores of the final “ Inter-group ”
Cricket Match :
Staff—lst Innings. 2nd Innings
Col. Crole Wyndham, not out ... ... 1 runout .. 1
Capt. F. Hill, st. Churcher, b Williams ... 0 b Williams 0
~ C. Mathew, run out ... ... 1 b Williams 1
~ Evelyn Wood, runout ... 0 b Williams 0
Lieut. Hyde, b Williams ... ... ... 0 not out ... 0
Sgt.-Major Laughton, run out ... ... 0 run out ... 1
~ Felgate, b Williams ... ... 0 b Williams 1
Extras ... ... ... ... 0 Extras ... 0
Total ... ... ... ... 2 Total... 4
Line—lst Innings. 2nd Innings
Lieut. Williams Freeman, b Wood ... 3 notout ... 1
C. S. Williams, b Wood ... ... 0 not out ... 0
„ B. T. Churcher, b Wood ... ... 0
Lee. Cpl. Chambers, b Wood ... ... 0
Corpl. Grooch, b Wood ... ... ... 0
Lee. Cpl. Chichester, run out ... ... 0
Corpl. Thresher, not out ... .. ... 0
Extras ~ ... ... ... 2 Extras... 0
Total 5 Total... 1
The final rounds of the Boxing competitions resulted as follows :
Lee.-Cpl. Galley, after being nearly knocked out, made a brilliant
finish in the Middle Weights final.
Boxing.
Middle Weights Final.
Ist, Lee. Corp. Galley, “Queen’s.”
2nd, Pte. Paryant, R. Fusl.


Light Weights Final.
Ist, Dr. Hearn, R.E.
2nd, Pte. Armstrong, H.L.I.
21st Dec. The finals of the remaining Sports Competitions were held
this afternoon, resulting as follows :
Tug-of-War.
Heavy Weights Final.
Ist, Team of the Household Cavalry
2nd, „ „ Irish Guards.
Light Weights Final.
Ist, Team of the Camerons
2nd, ~ „ Royal Engineers.
22nd Dec.—Steamed into Sydney Harbour early this morning. The
troops disembarked soon after mid-day, and met with a magnifi-
cent reception.
I.R.C. PARADE at PERTH and FREMANTLE.
The enthusiastic reception accorded to the Imperial Representative
Corps on the 14th inst., by the Westralians of Fremantle and Perth,
was truly a grand opening to the celebrations which are to be held in
connection with the inauguration of the Australian Commonwealth.
Our special correspondent, for this occasion, himself assisted in
the celebrations, and, on his return, was only able to give a very
incoherent account of the ceremonies. We are indebted to “The
West Australian ” for much of the description which follows.
The S.S. “ Britannic ” entered Fremantle harbour early on the
morning of the 14th inst. The fear that the troops would not land
soon gave way to satisfaction when the announcement was made that
the men would march through Fremantle and Perth. Then
disappointment again occurred. Our Australian hosts fully expected
that we should appear in full war-paint, but, to their intense regret,
particularly among the members of the fair sex, the troops turned out
in the aggravating, monotonous khaki. Under the circumstances, this
was unavoidable. The disembarkation of the Imperial contingent at
Fremantle was not originally anticipated, and was only decided upon
on the day of arrival. The full dress uniforms of the men were stowed
away in the hold of the steamer, and could not be excavated in time
for parade that day. However, this fact did not damp the enthusiastic
and cordial reception shown to the troops. At mid-day the I.R.C.


fell in on deck, and reformed again on the quay. A dense crowd had
assembled by this time, and cheered the troops lustily as they came
ashore. The Fremantle Artillery and Infantry, with their band, were
also present, and formed a welcome escort to their brothers-in-arms.
At 12.45 p.m, the troops moved off, headed by the Mayor of Fremantle
in a carriage. The Fremantle Infantry Band marched in front of the
column, while the Fremantle Artillery and Infantry brought up the
rear. The force marched through Cliff and High-streets, where a
crowd of many thousand people lined the route. The martial music
of the bands, the skirl of the bagpipes, and the regular tramp, tramp,
tramp of the soldiers set the spectators cheering wildly as corps after
corps appeared in sight.
The march proceeded round the Fremantle Oval and thence to the
Artillery Drill Hall, where ample refreshments were in readiness for
all. These were most welcome after the hot march. Our thanks are
due to the Fremantle Council, who made these excellent preparations at
such short notice. On all sides we heard expressions of appreciation
and gratitude from officers and men at the hospitable way in which
the troops had been received. Before leaving the Drill Hall the
Mayor of Fremantle made a short speech of welcome and concluded
by calling for three cheers for Her Gracious Majesty, to which a hearty
response was made. Colonel Crole Wyndham replied on behalf of the
troops in a few well chosen words and led off three hearty cheers for
the people of Fremantle. Shortly after this, the men forraed-up out-
side the hall and were marched to the railway station. Large crowds
again lined the route, the excitement displayed being even greater than
was shown on the way to the Oval. Arriving at the station at 2.30
p.m., special trains were found ready to convey the troops to Perth.
AKRIYAI i AT PERTH.
TRIUMPHAL MARCH THROUGH THE CITY.
It was a great welcome. The people of Perth abandoned themselves
to enthusiasm. Long before the troop trains arrived in the station,
the thousands of people who thronged the buildings on either side of
the railway commenced a wild cheer, which grew into a roar as the
trains arrived at the platform. To swell the paean of acclamation, every
steam whistle in the vicinity was shrieking with deafening shrillness.
There was a large gathering on the platform to welcome the troops,
among whom we noticed the Premier and Lady Forrest. After a
formal welcome to Col. Wyndham, the men were marched out into the
front of the railway station. As they filed out into the open the cheer-
ing was renewed, but great disappointment was felt by the assemblage,


■who had been expecting a sight of the gay uniforms which win the
ladies, tempt the recruits and attract everybody. Not even the
picturesque uniform of the Highlanders, with their kilts and tartan
stockings, surmounted by a khaki tunic, could make up for the study
in yellow ochre which had been substituted for the kaleidoscopic effect
they had conjured up. Occasionally a few criticisms were heard among
the crowd regarding the small stature of some of our men. These
remarks referred to the drivers and hussar troopers who, as the better
informed portion of the assemblage knew, are selected for their light
weight and are not intended for dismounted work. Again a few in-
vidious comparisons were made between the smart appearance of the
West Australian contingent, lately returned from the war, and the
Imperial troops. It should be remembered, however, that the latter
had only just come off a long sea voyage, where they had little chance
of exercise for five long weeks. Many of them had not recovered their
land legs and, in addition to that, were wearing old khaki uniforms
which had seen a great deal of service.
Led by the head-quarter’s band, the troops marched from Perth
station up William and George Streets. Cheer after cheer went up,
flags and banners were waved from windows and housetops and the
people went almost mad over the soldiers of the Mother Country,
From George Street the line of march was down the principal
thoroughfares, where the traffic was well-nigh blocked, and the soldiers
had to push and elbow their way through the crowd. The turning
point at the corner of Hay and Barrack Streets was a scene of superb
enthusiasm, which lasted until the tail of the line of white helmets
disappeared into the drill hall in Francis Street. Here the troops
found a most excellent lunch waiting them. Our thanks are due to the
Defence Department, who kindly made the arrangements for this
welcome entertainment, to which the troops did full justice after their
hot march through the City. The provisions were laid out on tables
which extended the full length of the main hall.
The scene in the drill hall was animated and remarkably interesting.
Relations of a highly cordial character had quickly been established
between the Imperial and Colonial soldiers, and there was an incessant
hum of conversation mingled with laughter. At the head of the table
His Excellency the Administrator (Sir Alexander Onslow), the
Premier (Sir John Forrest), Lady Forrest, the Commandant (Col.
Chippendall), Sir George Shenton, Major Campbell (Chief Staff
Officer), the Mayor of Perth (Mr. W. G. Brookman, M.L.C.), and
many prominent members of Parliament formed a group with Col.
Crole Wyndham and the officers of the Imperial troops.
It had been thought impracticable to have any speech-making at
the function, but the occasion was of too historic a character to be
allowed thus to pass. His Excellency the Administrator gave the


toast of Her Majesty the Queen, which was received with cheers. The
Commandant subsequently passed the remark that he would have
trembled for the safety of the roof had the National Anthem been
started and taken up by so many lusty soldiers.
Sir Alexander Onslow was somewhat dismayed by the scant
success which attended his first effort at speaking in a voice loud
enough to reach the ears of those present; but when prompted by the
Premier, and reminded that at least the reporters could hear him, he
was emboldened to make a few remarks.
His Excellency said : —“Colonel Wyndham : I wish on behalf of
the colony to express to you the pride with which we have welcomed
you and your men on this short visit to onr shores. It is a day which
we, as colonists, and as sui jects of the Queen, shall remember all our
lives. (Applause.) The proudest day of our lives is this day when
we have seen such a magnificent specimen of the ever victorious
English army. (Cheers.) Soldiers do not want many words said to
them. I can only repeat that we are glad and proud to have seen you.
(Cheers.) We wish we could have had a little more time in which to
welcome you than the few short hours of your stay will allow us to do.
(Hear, hear.) We wish you on behalf of this colony a happy and
prosperous career.” (Prolonged cheers.)
Three cheers were then given for his Excellency the Administrator,
Colonel Wyndham, in replying to Sir Alexander Onslow’s speech,
said :—“ Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, —On behalf of the
Imperial Representative Corps, I beg to thank your Excellency for the
kind words which you have addressed to us, and also to say how
delighted and pleased we are to be in this part of the colony. Our
first welcome has been so splendid that I wonder what others will be
like. (Laughter and applause.) This is the first time that such a
representative corps has ever visited the colony ; in fact, I may say
that it is the first time that any Imperial troops have visited Western
Australia in such numbers. I hope it is a tribute of affection from the
Home Government and the people of England—(cheers)—and, more
than that, a mark of appreciation for the excellent work done by that
noble band of Australians—(cheers) —who have helped to re-establish
British dominion in South Africa. Not the least part played by those
heroes was that borne by the West Australian contingent. (Cheers.)
We admired the enthusiasm with which they responded to the call of
duty in coming forward to volunteer in such numbers. (Applause.)
We respect them for their patient endurance in a campaign where
there was a great deal to put up with, and we feel sure that their
gallantry, in the face of the enemy, will be written in the book of
history. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, I call for three cheers for the West
Australians.”


The cheers called for by Colonel Wyndham were heartily responded
to, followed by three more for Sir John Forrest, and the proceedings
then terminated.
The troops then fell in outside the Drill Hall, and started on their
return march to the strains of “The Frongesca March,” superbly
played by the Highland Light Infantry band. The return route was
vid Beaufort and Wellington streets A great crowd had assembled
round the station and cheered the troops again and again until the last
of them had entered the gates of the railway station. The engines
then took up the theme of salutation, and to a series of long-sustained.
ear-splitting “ hip-hip-hoorays,” perfoi med on the whistle by the loco-
motives, the return journey to the ship was commenced. The reception
had been “ immense.” We hear that the wave of patriotic fervour and
enthusiasm has never been equalled in Western Australia, nor has so
great a concourse of people ever been attracted for any previous cere-
mony. And this, be it remembered, was a function whose celebration
was only decided upon during the morning of the day in question.
Words would fail to describe the scene, had it been the result of long
premeditated arrangement. But the spontaneous enthusiasm of this
impromptu reception was to many the most welcome proof, if any was
required, of the bond of good fellowship which unites all members of
our great Imperial race.
MUSICAL NOTES.
A successful concert was held on board on the evening of the 24th
November. The following was the programme :
Piano—Overture Capt. Evelyn Wood and Mr. Williams.
Song—“ The King’s Own” Mr. Dick-Cunyngham.
~ “The Amateur Whitewasher ” Sergt. Hennah.
~ “It hasn’t come off yet ” Pvt. Phillips.
~ “ Long ago in Alcala” Mr. Becher.
~ “The Anchor’s Weighed” -. Cpl. Viechins.
~ “ Beauty’s Eyes ” Mrs. Hill.
(With Violin Obligato Capt. Wood).
~ “Three Beggars” Mr. Dick-Cunyngham.
~ “ Medley ” Sergt. Dines.
~ “ The Yeoman’s Wedding ” Mr. Becher.
~ “Paralyzed Alley” Pvt. Thornycroft.
„ “Yuss” Capt. Evelyn Wood.
„ “The Piccaninnies” Mrs. Hill,
~ “The Orderly Man” Cpl. Smith.
Cello Solo—“ The Broken Melody ” ..Bdsmn. Moir,
God Save the Queen,


The overture was brilliantly played by Capt. Evelyn Wood and
Mr. Williams on a fine “ Godfry ” piano. We thought the beautiful
“motif” in the first movement was played with much pathos and
feeling, though at times the subtle harmonies were lost by the heavy
handling of the bass, strongly supported by the loud pedal and
muscular arms.
Among the singers, Mrs. Hill contributed two songs which were
both excellently rendered, though our musical critic thinks she was
inclined to be nervous and did not do herself full justice. This we are
not surprised at, considering the large and distinguished audience
before which she had to appear for the first time.
The Press representatives occupied all the front seats and sat with
ears cocked and eye glasses firmly fixed. This ordeal, however, did
not affect our versatile Adjutant, Capt. Evelyn Wood, who was in
good all-round form. After playing a violin obligato to one of Mrs.
Hill’s songs, he gave us the coster song “ Yuss ” in a manner worthy
of Chevalier at his best. Mr. Becher sang two songs, both of which
had a real “go” about them. [Our fault finding critic thought that
the last song “In Alcala ” might have been vaken a little faster. I
pointed out to him that in this case we should not have heard the
excellent words. He replied, “ The words do not matter so long as
they are well sung.” I told him to go to the .... He gave a
“ back answer,” and is now no longer on the staff of this brilliant and
popular paper ! Therefore, kind friends, continue to warble your sweet
refrains without fear of any more harsh criticisms. Ed.]
Mr. Dick Cunyngham sang two capital songs. Even our late
captious critic was forced to acknowledge that this officer possesses
a fine manly voice.
Bandsman Moir’s cello solo was played with great taste.
Among other items on the programme was a comic song by Sergt.
Hennah of the xvoyal Fusiliers, entitled “The Amateur White-
washer,” and an old favourite of the soldiers’ concert “ The Orderly
Man,” by Corp. Smith, both of which were loudly applauded.
The singing of “ God save the Queen ” brought this excellent concert
to a close.


PROGRAMME OF CONCERT
To he given at Sydney hy the I.R.G.
Song—“Up I comes with my little lot” Col. W m.
Song—“They’re after me” 2nd Lt. McL n.
Duet—“Cavalleria Rusticana ” Maj, G d & Lt. F r.
Song—“ A little bit off the top Private Me h.
Part Song—“TheWarMarch of the Priests” from Athalie...The Rev. T...d, Rev.
C...n, Rev. A ..n, and Father F.
Song—“ Where did you get that hat” 2nd Lt. Me t.
Concerted piece—“ The Lost Chord ” The Sergeants tug of war team.
Song—“ Up in a Balloon boys” Capt. P 1.
Song—“ The Johnny” 2nd Lt. H 1.
Song—“ Sleep my pretty one, sleep” Lt. C e.
W.O.’s AND SERGEANTS’ CONCERT
A most successful concert was given by the Warrant Officers,
Staff Sergeants and Sergeants on the evening of the sth Dec. In a
programme which was carried out with sucli uniform excellence, it
would be invidious to make any distinctions, but in case the large
audience did not all catch the words of the Topical Recitation (The
I R.C.) by our senior chaplain, we print them in a separate column.
Programme
Opening Chorus —Selections.
Song—“ Love’s Old Sweet Song ” - - - Sgt. Jupp, R.G.A.
Song—“l’m in the Chair” - - B. S. M. Hart, R.H.A.
Song—“ Anchored” ----- Sgt. Whitmore, A.S.C.
Topical Recitation—“Thel.R.C.” - - Sen-Chaplain Townend
Selection—“ Dervish Chorus” ----- Band H.L.I.
Song—“ Bonnie Loch Lomond ” - - - Miss Skinner
Topical Duet—“ Wireless Telegraphy ” | | m’. Longffiy, R.E.
Character Sketch—“ True Love Never Fails ” Sgt. Dines, “ Queens ”
Song—“ The 4-7 Gun” - - - Lt. Dick Cunyngham, 21 L.
Song—“ Everyday Life ” - - - - T. S. M. Longley, R.E.
Pizzicato—“ Frou, Frou ” - - - * - - Band H.L.I,
Song—“ Arrah Go On ” ----- Sgt. Hooper, Yols.
Song— “Sour Apple Tree” - - Capt. Evelyn Wood, Sc. Rif,
Song—“ Girl with Golden Hair ” - - B. S. M. Hart. R.H.A.
Song (by Chairman) —“Ding Dong” - Cpl. Edmonds
God Save the Queen.


THE IMPERIAL REPRESENTATIVE CORPS
We’re “ going away for a week and a day,”
To quote from an old, old song.
It is partly duty and partly play,
A sort of order ’tis nice to obey,
Though the journey is somewhat long.
We’re the pick of the army, a thousand or more,
The Imperial Representative Corps !
We’re going to sail half across the world,
To the parts on the under side;
Where the kangaroo jumps and the boomerang’s hurled,
The Queen of the South, where our flag’s unfurled,
Australia, mighty and wide !
We’re going—the Empire’s representation,
The Empire’s salute to a grand Federation,
Australia, one in one new glorious nation!
Provinces, Kingdoms, vast and free,
Clasping hands together in unity,
Linked with each other, and linked with Home,
That home mother country which bade us come,
This our mission! What want we more—
We, th’ Imperial Representative Corps ?
We’re rightly named “ Representative Corps
This may certainly be declared.
We’ve every uniform known, and more;
Even down to that of the chaplains—four;
For there’s no expense been spared.
We’ve Horse, Foot, Artillery, Engineers,
Guards, Highlanders, Riflemen, Fusiliers,
And though last, by no means least, say I,
Volunteers, Militia, Yeomanry. '
Just wait till you hear how the Cornstalks will shout
And their ladies applaud at our gay turn-out!
And we’ll not forget, in our red, blue, and green,
That we represent our country and Queen ;
And we’ll do ourselves credit, on sea and on shore,
We, th’ Imperial Representative Corps !
The Imperial Representative Corps,
It sounds uncommonly grand !
But there came a day—a rollicking day—
On a certain unpleasant tumbling Bay,
When I’d rather have been on land.
Oh, the waves they rolled high, and the I. R. C.
Went rolling too, and one’s dinner and tea—
I speak for myself—rolled out of me !
To belong to the Corps is a joy and pride,
But not with gymnastics in one’s inside;
And just at that time I thought it a bore
To sail with the Representative Corps.


We’ll have lots to relate, by and bye when we meet,
At home with our sweethearts and wives;
They’re the “ units ” just wanted to make us complete.
Oh my, if we had them on board, ’twere a treat
To remember the rest of our lives.
But we’ll tell them such stories —and some of them true—
How the Guv’nor said, “ Lads, I’m delighted with you,”
When at Malta we marched and paraded, galore,
Sure that Bock never saw such a wonderful Corps!
We’ll yarn them a regular nautical log,
How we hopped on one foot, and jumped round like a frog ;
And drilled, pretty nearly in Nature’s own suit,
Till we sw (Ahem ! perspired) sufficient to make a recruit t
We’ll talk of the palace we each had below,
So spacious and cool, quite delicious, you know!
And of crossing the Line, how it fouled our propeller,
And the mermaids hung on it and winked at a feller!
And of dolphins and sharks, and they’ll think it absurd,
Of fish which got up and flew like a bird!
But, Oh! what’s the use of going on in this way ?
Only just let us see them! we’ll know what to say
For no lads are better at love, as at war,
Than th’ Imperial Representative Corps.
The Imperial Representative Corps !
Not the first nor the only one
Which has crossed these seas from its native shore.
The more it was needed, giving the more,
Nor halting till all was done.
Australia’s grand Representative Corps !
One thousand in number? Nay, ten times more !
Saluted with plaudits, as ours may be ?
Yes, but plaudits won by their gallantry !
Gallant to fight, to endure and to die !
We’re going to greet them, boys, you and I!
(You may greet them to-night, for there’s one standing by)
When cheered by their country, we’ll cheer them in turn—
A cheer they have perilled their life’s blood to earn—
A cheer which shall echo the whole Empire wide,
For Briton and Cornstalk have fought side by side,
And the link this has forged no foeman shall sever—
It shall last, it shall strengthen our Empire for ever !
So three cheers and three cheers, and another three more,
For our brave double Representative Corps !
A. J. Townend,


THE LOG OF THE S.S. “BRITAKNIG.”
Sailed from Southampton on Monday, Nov. 12th,
1900.
Anchored the night off the Needles.
Date.
Nov. 13 th
„ 14th
„ 15th
~ 16th
„ 17th
Latitude.
50° B'N.
46° 21' N.
41° 14' N.
36° 41' N.
To Gibraltar.
Longitude. Miles run.
2° 48' W. 56
7° 52' W. 318
9° 56' W. 324
8° 5' W. 318
1164
„ 17th 36° 10' N. 4° 54' W.
„ 18th 36° 51' N. 2° 16' E.
„ 19th 37° 24' N. 10° 1' E.
~ 20th To Yaletta Harbour. (Malta)
~ 21st
„ 22nd
„ 23rd
34° 41' N.
20° 0' E.
26° 30' E.
33° 15' N.
To Port Said.
„ 23rd At 8.30 p.m. entered the Suez Canal, 1 RQ
„ 24th At 11.30 a.m, anchored off Port Tewfik. j
„ 25th 25° 20' N. 35° 35' E. 329
„ 26th 20° 10' N. 38° 35' E. 350
„ 27th 15° 29' N. 41° 47' E. 337
„ 28th To Aden. 303
1319


Nov. 29th
„ 30th
12° 48' N. 47° 5' E.
11° 43' N. 51° 54' E.
Dec. Ist
„ 2nd
„ 3rd
„ 4th
„ sth
„ 6th
„ 7th
„ Bth
„ 9th
„ 10th
„ 11th
„ 12th
„ 13th
8° 56' N. 56° 11' E.
5° 57' N. 60° 47' E.
2° 49' N. 65° 24' E.
0° 16' S. 70° 13' E.
3° 48' S. 74° 57' E.
7° 30' S. 79° 35' E.
11° SI'S. 83° 40' E.
14° 59' S. 88° 2' E.
18° 30' S. 92° 31' E.
21° 51' S. 97° 23' E.
25° 19' S. 102° 12' E.
28° 8' S. 107° 29' E.
31° 4'S. 113° 3' E.
To anchorage off Fremantle.
At Fremantle (W. Australia).
„ . 14th
4955
„ 15th 32° 19' S.
115° 16' E.
117° 43' E.
123° 55' E.
130° 11' E.
136° 52' E.
143° 36' E.
150° 5' E.
„ 16th 35° 21' S.
„ 17th 35° 57' S.
„ 18th 36° 52' S.
„ 19th 37° 46' S.
„ 20th 39° 9' S.
„ 21st 37° 19' S.
~ 22nd To Sydney Harbour.
2150
Total distance, Southhampton to Sydney, 11,594 miles.
THE S.S. “BRITANNIC.”
The s.s, Britannic (now Transport No. 62) was built by Messrs.
Harland & Wolff at Belfast in 1874.
Her length is 467 ft., breadth 45ft., depth 26ft., and gross tonnage
5004 tons.
As a Royal Mail Steamer she has accommodation for about 200
first-class and 1000 third-class passengers.
Her regular running is between Liverpool and New York.
The s.s. Britannic has made 542 voyages across the Atlantic, and
five voyages to Cape Colony as a transport during the great Boer war.
This is her first trip to Australia.
Inclusive of her present voyage, she has steamed about 1,700.000
miles.


DO WE EAT TO LIVE OR
Nob long ago I received the following account of a scene witnessed
by a fellow passenger on board one of H.M. transports:—lt was
towards the close of dinner. Two officers, who had been chatting and
laughing together, suddenly became grave, and were apparently lost in
thought, like those who meditate something great. Suddenly, with
glistening eyes, they grasped each other’s hands, and, with choking
voices, wished each other farewell. What was the reason ? Why this
paroxysm of grief? Why were these two glad hearts, so full of youth
and hope, about to part? I will tell you. These two brave fellows
had stormed, single-handed, a kopje of lobster mayonnaise, and had
passed through the danger unscathed. Now a more serious danger
presented itself, but both immediately determined to do or die in the
attempt. It was the Saratoga pudding ! Gallantly they hurled them-
selves at the obstacle until it had totally disappeared. But what a
change had come over them ! Their faces, which before were bright
and glowing with health, now became pale and bloated, and their eyes
lost their sparkle. Kind friends suggested “Dr. Williams’pale pills for
pink people,” but no heed was taken, and for days these two noble
warriors lingered on in agony, though I believe that now they are
recovering from the effects of their marvellous act of heroism.
I would gladly publish their names to the world, but both are of a
retiring disposition, and are adverse to having their glorious feat
published ; but 1 feel sure that such a deed as theirs cannot be lost to
posterity, but will live among the splendid instances of pluck and
endurance which only England can produce.
IN THE SMOKING ROOM.
Many of our officers may remember the days of the old Indian
“ Troopers,” certainly those who have slept in the “Pandemonium” of
such a vessel will not easily forget this delightful privilege, which was
generally reserved for the junior subalterns, the officers’ wives and
children receiving rather better accommodation in the ladies’ cabin and
“ dovecot.”
It was on one of'these “troopers” that a certain newly wedded
couple were making their first journey to India. The bride had a berth
in the ladies’ cabin next the door opening on to the saloon. The


beloved took advantage of this fact to arrange the following plan for
wishing his lady-love a nightly farewell;—
When the coast was clear, he would stroll along the saloon, on his
way to bed, whistling “ White wings, they never grow weary.” At
this signal it was arranged that the fair one should put her hand through
the curtain to receive her lover’s nightly greeting.
This little game was finally noticed by one of the übiquitous sub-
alterns on board, and like all thoughtful subs., he took good care that
his discovery should not be lost to the world. Accordingly, the follow-
ing night, when the newly married man was about to retire,
he was kept in close conversation by other conspirators, while
three of the subs, took it in turns to go past the bride’s cabin,
whistling “ White Wings.” Each time a little hand came out through
the curtain and was greeted with a kiss and a “ good night, darling.”
At first a sweet voice echoed back: “good night, dear,” then “good
night,” but the third subaltern only received a jerky hand, which he
had hardly time to kiss and a“go to bed ! ” Finally, when the bride-
groom came along whistling the old refrain, he was greeted with a slap
in the face, and a voice which was no longer sweet remarked : “go to
bed, you idiot! this is the fourth time you have done this ! ”
The following true story is related of a certain officer of the
Veterinary Department, whose zeal for big game shooting was well
known. Soon after he joined the army, he received orders to accompany
a field battery on a march through the Punjab. His eagerness for
sport led him to make repeated enquiries as to the probability of
finding game in the neighbourhood of the main trunk road on which
they were marching.
His brother officers at last formulated a plan for saving further
questioning, and for providing themselves with a little harmless
amusement at his expense.
The keen shikari was informed that on the following day they
would come into good game country where tiger was to be found, and
that one of their number would lead him to a place where he would be
sure to find sport. Accordingly, the following day after dinner, our
zealous friend was taken by a roundabout route to a spot which was
reached in the dark, where he was told to lay in wait for tiger. The
sportsman was then left to shift for himself, as he was told that
company would spoil his chance of success.
He had not been waiting more than a quarter of an hour, when he
heard the soft tread of some animal, but, owing to the darkness, could
not see to shoot. Suddenly the loud roar of a tiger within a few yards
of him made his heart stand still for the moment. He could now
frequently hear the pacing of the animal quite close to his sangar, but


could not see a yard in front of him in the inky darkness of the night.
Petrified with fear, the hapless man could do no more than keep his
gun aimed in the direction from which the sounds proceeded. In this
position he remained until daylight, straining every nerve to catch
sight of the animal. At last, when anxiety had almost worn him out,
the dawn broke, and he found himself—not in the jungle, but in the
beautiful Zoological Gardens of Lahore—within a stone’s throw of a
tiger’s cage ! They say he no longer makes enquiries for game on the
march.
A party had assembled in the smoking room for an after dinner
chat and among them was one who hadn’t much to say. After a good
deal of persuasion he was induced to talk. He said the most exciting
incident he could remember took place at an hotel fire in his town.
The building was twenty stories high and the nineteenth story was
burning when a man appeared at the top of the building. Some of the
crowd shouted “ jump ! ” others “ don’t jump ! ” The man waved his
hand and disappeared. In a minute or two he reappeared wrapped in
rubber life preservers, rubber water bottles and rubber cushions. Then
it was remembered that he was a traveller for a rubber firm. He
jumped, and when he struck the pavement he bounced up higher than
the hotel and went on bouncing for a whole week ! Eventually they
had to get a sharpshooter to shoot the apparatus in order to prevent the
man from starving ! After that, the light went out and the company
retired thoughtfully to their rooms.
GIRLS’ GOSSIP.
Dear Madge—
It is now nearly six weeks since we left home, and life on board
ship is beginning to get rather monotonous. I shall indeed be glad
when we get to Sydney. Even the men, who have the advantage of
joining in the sports on board, are beginning to feel tired of sea life,
so you may imagine that we poor, women folk have more real cause
for “ ennui,” 1 think it is this want of amusement which makes a
woman look old sooner than a man, although, when I told Mr. A-^——
so, he very rudely remarked that he had a sneaking suspicion it was
caused by the awful anxiety and searching worry of the next door
neighbour’s private affairs. Between you and me, this may be the
case on board ship, but then, there is little else to talk about. I must
tell you of a little episode which occurred the other day, and which did
much to relieve the monotony of my time on board. You know what


an interest I take in all domestic affairs. Well, that handsome
Captain was telling me how the troops on board were fed, or
“ rationed,” I think he called it. This naturally led up to the engross-
ing subject of cookery, and I remarked how much I should like to see
the culinary department on board. I was more than delighted when
he said he would show me round next day. On the following morning
he carried out his promise, and I spent one of the most amusing halt-
hours in watching the soldier cooks at their work. I cannot exactly
say that I was favourably impressed. In fact, when you get home you
may tell Jane that there are worse cooks than her in the world. You
would have laughed, dearest, had you heard the glowing description of
one young soldier chef of the Yeomanry, who gave us a detailed
account of his experiences as a military cook. He was evidently a
well-educated young fellow. Captain afterwards told me that
this man was an old public school boy, who had enlisted during the war
to avoid a dull University career. This promising chef said that the
only active service he had seen so far, was of a domestic nature, and he
then described his first attempts at cookery in a satirical way, which
amused us greatly. It was just what a school-boy would do, and yet,
when I think it over, our dear old Jane must have been a shade worse,
if possible, in her younger days. I will try and give you the young
man’s description, in his own words, as far as I can remember them :
“ Well, sir,” he said to Captain , “ One morning I woke up
to find myself orderly man ” (I do not quite know what this means,
but I presume it corresponds to scullery maid or general). “In this
capacity,” he continued, “I had to look after twenty hungry men in
my barrack-room. I managed my first breakfast fairly well, The
menu was ‘‘Greased Rooty and Splash ” (Captain afterwards
explained that these were technical terms for bread, butter and tea).
“This was simple, and I began to fancy that chefs should be classed
with editors and others who enjoy absolute sinecures ” (This last
remark evidently pleased him, for he repeated it several times. I
believe he mistook Captain for the editor of the I.R.C. Gazette.
Next followed a flowery remark, which I. feel sure was borrowed from
some popular novel). “ But cruel fate was doggiug my every footstep,
and the shadow of a dark unknown future blackened my whole life. I
actually had to make a batter pudding the same day for dinner. Great
shades of ‘ the many servants in my father’s house,’ how they would
have laughed to see my preparations. I first threw some dry flour into
a large tin dish, and dumped in a pound of suet in its entirety ; then I
added some water. This was not a sympathetic medium —it dis-
appeared, in fact, lost itself in a waste of dry flour. Nothing daunted,
I poured in more water until finally the suet floated ; that was pro-
mising. Then I banged the mixture with great vigour and many
sanguinary epithets, but the flour and water turned lumpy at such
treatment. I persevered until my arms ached ; then the lumps floated
and formed a defensive alliance with the suet. I chased a few of the


biggest lumps, and vindictively smashed them with the rolling-pin,
ultimately succeeding in producing a mixture of the consistency of
treacle ; but that suet was heart-breaking, it would not dissolve ; so I
concealed it in a corner of the baking-pan, and trusted to Providence.
I then waited until the dinner bugle sounded, when, with a guilty
hangdog mien, I placed on the table a baking tin containing an alleged
batter pudding—a wrinkled, horny, blackish mass spread thinly over
the bottom of the dish, while in the corner the remains of the suet
floated in a pool of grease. 1 suggested treating the batter pudding as
‘ sweet skilly,’ but the troops would have none of it. They held a
barrack-room court martial, and I felt hurt, or rather I was hurt
afterwards.” Poor young man, I hope he wasn’t really hurt. I am.
sure he did his best. But don’t you think his description is delicious.
You must tell Jane about it when she gets into one of her heavy
baking moods.
This little visit to the cuisine on board has afforded me much food
for reflection. I told Captain that one of the first reforms
which our silly old War Office ought to consider was the introduction
of domestic servants (feminine) into the army. They should be
enlisted, voluntarily, of course, and I am certain that any number
could be obtained without difficulty. Captain thinks my
suggestion is a very good one, and says that if the authorities have any
difficulty in finding a recruiting officer for this special service, he thinks
that, for the sake of his Queen and country, he might be persuaded to
sacrifice himself at the sacred shrine of beauty or duty (I forget which
he said). Isn’t this nice of him ; he really is a most unselfish man.
Well, dearest, I won’t weary you with any more now, but will
write again from Sydney. Ever your loving
GIRTY.
P.S.—(Here follow several pages of decidedly personal gossip, which is quite
too too ! Unfortunately the press censor has prohibited their publi-
cation. —Ed.
FROM THE REGIMENT.
Two prisoners were waiting outside the orderly room to be told
off for absence—an old soldier and a recruit. The O.S. tells the
recruit that he has a fine yarn to spin to the C.O. That he was walking
along the canal bank when he saw a little girl struggling in the water
and jumped in to save her. The recruit is marched in first and tells
the old soldier’s story, is highly complimented by the Colonel and gets
off. The old soldier knowing nothing of this, is marched in and tells
the same story. Old soldier gets ten days C.B.


During the Ashanti war two officers volunteered for service. On
meeting abroad, said one to the other:
“ What on earth are you doing here ? ”
“Well,” replied the other, “I have neither wife nor children and
am fond of war ; but what brings you in foreign lands? ”
“Just the opposite reason,” replied his friend; “ for, you know
I have both wife and children and love peace,”
Scene : Orderly-room, Militia Barracks, Salisbury Plain.
C.O. : “ Why weren’t you at battalion parade, Murphy ?”
Private Murphy: “Well sorr, them parades I’ll not attend;
what with dhrink and dhrill I’m fairly bothered.”
A short time ago the sergeant-instructor of a certain volunteer
corps was giving a recruit some instruction at the butts. The “rooky”
seemed to be fairly smart, so the sergeant tried him at the 200 yards
range, but he failed to hit the target at all; so he shifted him up to the
100 yards, with the same result. To the sergeant’s surprise he failed to
score anything even then ; however, he still persevered and took him up
to the 50 yards range, but “ nary a hit.” This did for the instructor,
who remarked to the “ budding Queen’s prizeman,” “Look here, my
man, you’d better draw your bayonet, go right close up to the target,
and stab the bally thing.”
“My proudest boast,” declared the lecturer, who expected this
statement to be greeted with cheers, “is that I was one of the men
behind the guns!” “ How many miles behind ?” piped a voice from
the gallery.


25
Household Cavalry...
Capt. J. C. Wilson, Royal Horse
Guards.
25
1st Dragoon Guards
2nd Lieut. Wayte Wood.
25
7th Hussars
Lieut. Viscount Cole.
25
21st Lancers
Lieut. R. H. Dick-Cunyngham.
a.
58
Royal Horse Artillery, “V”
Battery.
Major J. B. H. Ask with.
Lieut. B. Dickson.
a.
57
Royal Field Artillery, 10th
Field Battery.
2nd Lieut. G. A. H. Hill.
46
Royal Garrison Artillery ...
2nd Lieut. W. D. Warrington
Morris, No. 3 Co., Southern
Div.
h.
56
Royal Engineers
)> ... ...
Capt. S. H. Powell.
Lieut, C. Russell-Brown.
2nd Lieut. T. H L. Spaight.
24
Grenadier Guards ...
Capt. G. C. W. Heneage.
24
Coldstream Guards...
Lieut. Hon. G. V. Baring.
24
Scots ,,
2nd Lieut. Lord Falconer.
24
Irish ,,
2nd Lieut. R. C. A. McCalmont.
e.
25
Royal Highlanders
2nd Lieut. Green.
d. 62
Highland Light Infantry ...
Capt. S. W. Scrase Dickins.
c.
25
Sealorth Highlanders
Capt. E. A. Cowans.
c.
25'
Cameron Highlanders
2nd Lieut. J. M. Dougall.
THE IMPERIAL REPRESENTATIVE
CORPS.
all T ranks. Detachments.
Names of Officers.
Col. W. G. Crole Wyndham, C.8.,
9 Staff. In command —Lieut,
21st Lancers.
Adjutant —Captain
Scottish Rifles.
A. H. Evelyn Wood, 2nd Bn.
Quarter-Master —Quarter-Master (Hon. Lieutenant) W.
H. Collins, Ist Dragoon Guards.
Sergeant-Major, Quarter-Master-Serjeant, Clerk and
three rank and file.
a. The R.H.A. and R.F.A. detachments have two field guns
and one ammunition waggon each.
b. The 11. E. detachment consists of part of a Pontoon Troop,
with two pontoons.
Telegragh Section, with 1 cable cart, and 1 aii’-line waggon.
Field Company, with 1 double tool cart.
Balloon Section, with 1 balloon waggon, and 1 gas waggon.
c. Includes one piper.
d. Includes band-mahter, band-sergeant, pipe-sergeant, and band
of the H.L.I.


24 Scottish Rifles
24 King’s Royal Rifle Corps ...
24 Royal Irish Rifles ...
24 Rifle Brigade
24 Northumberland Fusiliers ..
24 Roval Fusiliers
24 Royal Welsh Fusiliers
24 Royal Irish Fusiliers
24 Royal West Surrey Regim’nt
East Kent Regiment
Somersetshire Light Infantry
Duke of Cornwall’s Light
Infantry
11 Army Service Corps
Royal Army Medical Corps
5) 5 J
Army Chaplains’Department
Army Ordnance Corps
Army Pay Department
Militia—4th Bn. Norfolk
Regiment
Militia—4th Bn. Norfolk
Regiment
Yeomanry Royal Wilt-
shire Yeomanry
Yeomanry Royal Wilt-
shire Yeomanry
Volunteers—Vol. Bn. De-
vonshire Regiment
Volunteers—lst Middlesex
V.R.C.
Capt, R, Oakley.
Capt. J. H. G. Fielden.
2nd Lieut. C. M. L. Becher.
Lieut. R. P. H. Bernard.
Major J. R. Riddell.
2nd Lieut. A. C. S. Chichester.
2nd Lieut. A. R. H. Rycroft.
Lieut. M. B. C. Carbery.
Lieut. B. T. Churcher.
Lieut. M. S. Williams,
Lieut. C. E. Chichester.
Lieut. A. P. Williams Freeman.
2nd Lieut. F. W. D. McLean.
Capt. P. H. Whiston.
Lieut. D. 0 Hyde, M.B.
Church of England—The Rev. A,
J, Townend, B.A.
Presbyterian The Rev. T. H.
Chapman, B.D,
Roman Catholic The Rev. T.
Foran.
Wesleyan The Rev. R. W
Allen.
Capt. C. M. Mathew, D.S.O.
Capt. F. W. Hill.
Major O. H. Fisher.
Lieut R. 0. Sutherland.
Major Fitz A. P. Goddard.
2nd Lieut. W. F. Fuller.
Captain and Hon. Major F. W
Harding, Y.D.
Lieut. A. R. Davies.
F. Cunnimrhame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt Street, Sydney.


COMMONWEALTH NUMBER
OF THE
I.R.C. Gazette.
Edited by C. RUSSELL-BROWN.
SYDNEY:
January 14, 1901.
Christchurch, N.Z
LYTTELTON TIMES COMPANY, LIMITED, GENERAL PRINTERS,
Gloucester Street.


(picforia (R.J.
Queen of an Empire wide as the World, Queen of the hearts of all,
The greatest Monarch that Earth has seen hath answered the
Master’s call;
The hand of the Angel of Death hath closed the gate of her golden
years,
And the cloud of a nation’s sorrow breaks in the rain of a nation’s
tears.
Queen by more than a royal right—beloved for herself alone ;
Peasant and Peer proclaimed her Queen, and each as his very own.
She reigned by the right of love, enthroned in her people’s hearts
secure,
By right of her noble womanhood, by right of her sceptre pure.
Her gracious rule over land and sea to the ends of the world hath
spread,
And the light of Truth and of Liberty in the Earth’s dark places
shed,
Till millions of many a dusky race that never her face had seen,
Had learned to speak with a loving pride the name of “ The Great
White Queen.”
The Mother of all her people, well they knew that her tender heart
In all their sorrows and all their joys took ever a loving part,
And her people loved their Queen as queen was never beloved before,
And the cup of their sorrow is full because they shall see her face no
more.
The hush of a grief too deep for words is over the land and sea,
The flags droop low, and the busy throngs move softly and silently ;
For the shadow of death, like a deep black cloud, hangs dark over
all the scqpe,
And in lowly cottage and lordly hall the Empire mourns the Queen.
Yet mourns with a thankful heart to God for her great and glorious
reign,
For the precious memory that henceforth is her people’s lasting gain ;
For the certain hope that the diadem of her earthly throne laid down
Is but exchanged in the Land of Light for a never-fading crown.
Wii, J. Steward.




The Editor of this Journal wishes to explain that
the “Commonwealth Number ” of the I.R.C. Gazette
was prepared before receiving the sad intelligence of
the death of our beloved Queen.
It will be seen that the contents of this number deal
only with events which 'took place in Sydney up to the
14th January, 1901.
The final issue of the I.R.C. Gazette (which will
probably be published in England ) will contain a record
of how the news of the great bereavement reached us,
and of the ever-to-be-remembered Service by which the
Corps and people of Tasmania sought to express their
sense of the loss which they, and the whole Empire, had
sustained in the death of Her Most Gracious Majesty
Queen Victoria.


cih " i.rx.” Gazette.
Sydney, January 14TH, 1901.
OUR COMMONWEALTH NUMBER.
In the present number of the I.R.C. GAZETTE, our readers are
presented with a souvenir of that important political movement
which has effected the federation, under the Crown, of the six
Colonies of Australia. With the first day of the twentieth century
Australia may be said to have attained her majority, and to be
entitled to the fullest measure of freedom of action consistent with
her position as a member of the British Empire.
It may fairly be conceded that, as an adjunct to the official
accounts of the Federation Ceremonies, the Commonwealth
number of the I.R.C. Gazette, will form an appropriate memorial
of particular interest to all members of the Imperial Representative
Corps, as will also our final number,, describing the visits to New
Zealand and the various parts of the newly Federated States, and
the return journey to England. Owing to the number and variety
of interesting events and festivities which have recently taken
place in Sydney, and to the diminution of our small though brilliant
staff of reporters, we have been obliged to fall back on the daily
press for much of the information given in these pages. We
gratefully acknowledge our indebtedness to the “ Sydney Morning
Herald,” “ Daily Telegraph,” “ Town and Country Journal,” and
to others who have assisted us in completing a record of the great
events connected with the inauguration of the Australian Common-
wealth.


ARRIVAL OF THE I.R.C. AT SYDNEY.
At daylight on Saturday, December 22nd, 1900, the transport
Britannic entered Sydney Harbour, and berthed at the Circular
Quay.
The official landing of the troops was fixed for 2 p.m., and as
the time for falling-in approached, a crowd assembled as near the
wharf as an efficient guard of police would allow them, every point
of vantage being occupied. Splendid order prevailed throughout
the proceedings. When the bugle sounded the order to fall-in, the
men came off the Britannic in a stream, and formed up outside
the P. & O. wharf.
As the men moved off to the lively strains from the Highland
Light Infantry Band, the enthusiasm of the public was extreme.
From the Dalhousie came the men chosen out of the best
fighting tribes of India. The 100 men were selected from Sikhs,
Goorkhas, Mahrattas, and all the tried troops of Her Majesty’s
Indian Army. The quaint uniforms with the elaborate turbans,
and the many medals of which they were all proud possessors,
gave the Indian troops an appearance equal to any in the procession.
The great concourse of people who lined the road to the
Victoria Barracks, gave a hearty and most gratifying welcome to
the troops of the Old Country.
The hot humid day was somewhat trying to our men, who had
just come off a long sea voyage, and who had been employed all
the morning in the necessary work attending disembarkation, but
in spite of these disadvantages, the march to Victoria Barracks
was well executed. On arrival there, the troops were formed up
in the square and inspected by Lord Hopetoun, who was accom-
panied by Major-General French, and several prominent Ministers
of State. After the inspection, the troops were marched to the
comfortable quarters provided for them in the Agricultural
Grounds and Victoria Barracks. Most of the officers of the Corps
were quartered at the R.A.A. mess, the remainder at the
Agricultural Grounds. The majority of the non-commissioned-
officers and men were also quartered at the Agricultural Grounds,
the Artillery and Foot Guards, at the Victoria Barracks. The
satisfaction evinced by the rank and file after six weeks on board
ship was quite unmistakeable. The accommodation was every-
where excellent, nothing being left undone which might conduce
to the general comfort of the troops.


DIARY OF EVENTS.
From 23rd to 31st December , 1900.
. 23rd. —Parade Services were held for the troops in the
morning. During the afternoon most of the men went on
pass, or busied themselves settling down in their new quarters.
. 24th.—During the morning, the Imperial troops paraded
under their group and company officers. The Cavalry, Horse
and Field Artillery were given riding and driving drill. The
Royal Engineer detachment proceeded to the Britannic
and conveyed their balloons, stores, and other materials to
the Agricultural Grounds in the afternoon. The Infantry
practised bayonet, manual and physical exercises in the
grounds. At 2.30 p.m. the whole of the Cavalry paraded in
the Agricultural grounds, the main object being to get the
new mounts accustomed to martial music. The Cavalrymen
rode bare back, with the result that a few were thrown, some
of the horses having shown a shocking disregard of military
discipline. The band of the Highland Light Infantry played
selections for an hour and a half in the enclosure.
. 25th (Christmas Day).—Religious Services of the ordinary
military character took place this morning. Contingents from
New Zealand and from various Australian States arrived by
train to-day. They are capital types of soldiers, and made a
good impression upon those who saw them as they marched
to the Centennial Park, where an encampment for the
Colonials had been formed. Colonel Taunton, who is largely
responsible for the excellent arrangements made for the
accommodation and reception of the Colonial troops, was
present to welcome them officially.
. 26th.—Boxing Day was observed as a holiday by the troops.
General leave was granted. Blue skies at Christmas, an
extremely hospitable public to deal with and everybody in a
holiday mood, are conditions exceptionally agreeable to men
who had just escaped the severity of an English winter and
had done a long sea voyage. A few of the troops visited the
harbour pleasure resorts, others were to be seen in town, but
the great majority of officers and men from the Imperial,
Colonial and Indian Contingents went to the races at the
beautiful Randwick course, where Mr. Clibborn, the energetic
race secretary, and others, looked after the comfort and
welfare of the visitors.


. 27th. —At noon, a guard of honour, composed of the brigade
of Guards under Captain Heneage, paraded in review order at
the officers’ mess, Victoria barracks, to receive the Admiral
His Excellency, on arrival, minutely inspected the guard and
made some complimentary remarks in reference to it. He
subsequently visited the officers’ mess. The bands of the
Royal Australian Artillery and Highland Light Infantry were
in attendance. Before leaving, his Excellency also inspected
a New Zealand Guard of Honour. This included a detach-
ment of Maoris, who, after the Admiral’s departure, caused
much amusement by performing a “ haka” or species of war
dance, for the benefit of the Imperial officers. A great feature
of the New Zealand Guard of Honour was their fine pipe and
drum band.
28th. —At mid-day Lord Hopetoun visited the Agricultural
Grounds. His Excellency and party were met by Colonel
Wyndham and Captain Evelyn Wood. Escorted by Sergeant-
major Laughton and others, Lord Hopetoun inspected the
whole of the grounds, including the sergeants’ mess, the men’s
barrack rooms, the coffee shop and the canteen. His Excel-
lency was well satisfied with the condition of the camp. He
also inspected the Indian Contingent, which was drawn up in
review order under the command of Colonel Peyton. Lord
Hopetoun walked along the lines and Colonel Peyton
presented to him the officers of the contingent. In the after-
noon the attendance of the public largely increased. The
grounds presented an animated appearance. The Imperial
and Indian cavalry and the New South Wales troopers
paraded. Two lines of Infantry were formed in the main
enclosure, the object being to accustom the horses to the
shouts and gesticulations of the street crowds. The Infantry-
men were supplied with pocket handkerchiefs, towels, clothes
of all descriptions, tin kettles, everything in short likely to
interfere with the equanimity of an untrained horse. The
troops passed the two lines whilst the Infantrymen did their
best to create disorder. It was a struggle between the
mounted and dismounted men, the latter did their best to get
the Cavalrymen thrown from their spirited steeds, and in
many cases they were successful. After this proceeding had
continued for about an hour, however, the benefit of the lesson
soon became manifest. The horses passed between the lines
with apparent facility, and the enthusiastic Infantrymen
cheered, hooted, beat their drums and tin kettles, waved their
flags, towels and handkerchiefs, and made the wildest demon-
strations in vain. The public greatly appreciated the
exhibition, and cheered as lustily when a Life-Guardsman was
thrown as when a whole troop got safely through the danger-


ous lines. Of course it is only fair to explain that the men,
who where unwillingly dismounted, were riding bareback.
Afterwards the members of the Imperial Contingent gave the
public an exhibition of wrestling on horseback. The rival
teams consisted of Yeomanry, Lancers, Hussars and Guards
picked indiscriminately. The spectators entered heartily into
the spirit of the contest and cheered the victors in every in-
stance. Whilst those exercises were being carried out the
band of the Highland Light Infantry performed selections in
the main pavilion. Subsequently some of the New South
Wales Lancers indulged in sports on the same ground.
. 29th.— The feature of to-day’s proceedings at the Imperial
Camp was the work done by the Royal Engineers, who pre-
pared their balloon and made several successful ascents.
. 30th. — Church parades were held during the morning. The
Rev. A. J. Townend conducted a Service, at which a large
number of Colonial troops attended. The Presbyterians held
a Service outside their quarters, and the Roman Catholics
marched to St. Mary’s Cathedral, where special High Mass
was held. The Rev. R. W. Allen conducted a Service in
Burke St. Church for the Imperial and Colonial troops of the
Wesleyan persuasion. This being the last Sunday of the
century special Services were held in all churches, both in the
morning and evening.
. 31st (New Year’s Eve). —The Imperial troops were occupied
this morning in brightening their swords and accoutrements,
cleaning saddles and harness, and generally getting everything
ready for New Year’s Day. This being a half-holiday, most
of the men went on pass during the afternoon. The main
thoroughfares of Sydney were thronged all day by thousands
of persons who had come from all quarters to see the gorgeous
and elaborate decorations; after night had fallen it was
difficult to do anything but move with the human tide which
was passing in dense columns up and down theprincipal streets.
The passing of the old year and the dawn of a new century
was marked by an enthusiasm which, under the circum-
stances, was not at all surprising. Late in the evening,
patriotic songs, principally of a military character, were in-
dulged in, and for some time the night was made hideous by
the blare of trumpets, ringing of bells, and other discordant
sounds. Special Watch-night Services were held in St.
Andrew’s and St. Mary’s Cathedral, also in the Centenary
Hall and in all the principal churches of the city. At mid-
night a peal of joy-bells , rang out a welcome to the new
century.


AUSTRALIAN CLUB DINNER.
One of the most enjoyable entertainments in Sydney was the
dinner given by the Australian Club to the officers of the I.R.C.
and the Indian Contingent on the evening of the 27th December.
There were 115 members and guests present, and the Hon. F.
Suttor (President of the Club) was in the chair, with His Excel-
lency the Lieutenant-Governor (Sir Frederick Darley) on his
right, and Lieutenant-Colonel Wyndham on his left. Over forty
of the I.R.C. were there. The dinner was an excellent one, in
spite of the fact that the three French chefs of the Club had taken
advantage of the occasion to demand the dismissal of the Austra-
lian cook, and when this was refused, took “French leave” and
absconded.
After the usual loyal toasts, including that of the Governor-
General and the Lieutenant-Governor, had been enthusiastically
honoured, Mr. Suttor rose to propose the health of the visiting
officers in eloquent and eulogistic terms.
Colonel Wyndham, in reply, said ; —“ Your Excellency, Mr
President, and Gentlemen, - I regret to say that the tongue of a
ready speaker is, alas! not included in the qualifications con-
sidered necessary for a military officer. We are taught a little
riding and shooting, we dabble in drill, some of us can take the
altitude of the sun by day or by night, one or two can make a
balloon, and even sit in it, we can dig ravelins and javelins—in
fact, I should weary you if I continued the long list of our accom-
plishments. (Laughter.) I must ask you, therefore, to accept the
rough but heartfelt thanks of the Imperial Representative Corps,
and to forgive the feeble manner in which they are conveyed.
Our hearts feel more than our lips can speak ; we would thank
you in fitting words if we could. It is not merely your public
reception of us and the enthusiasm which attended our arrival and
march through the streets, but your private and individual hospi-
tality and greeting which has touched us most deeply. You have
made us feel that this is England beyond the seas —(cheers) —and
that we are as much at home here in this splendid club as we
would be in the Service Club.: of London. (Applause.) The
Americans have a saying at billiards, when one man puts too
much screw on the ball, his partner tells him he has put too much
“English” on it, meaning I suppose that we English put on
“side” ; of course we don't, and even if we do, surely we have
that right. (Hear, hear.) I saw it stated the other day that a
foreign attache brought home the magnitude of our operations in
South Africa to the European mind by saying that it was as if an
army had started from Calcutta, landed at Marseilles, and from


that base had operated against Hamburg. Could any other nation
in the world conduct operations on that scale ? (Voice —“ Devil
a bit.”) Our frontiers are enormous, and the important lesson we
learn from the war is the necessity for the consolidation of our
Empire. (Cheers.) Its dormant resources are vast, but the con-
stitutional machinery lacks power to call them out, to organise,
and to combine them. I venture to think that the Federation of
Australia will supply a powerful engine in that machinery.
(Cheers.) Our hope and trust is, that this new Commonwealth
of yours may prove, not merely a binding link between province
and province, but a link which shall bridge over the dividing
12,000 miles of salt water, and make Englishman and Australian
one in heart and soul, one in feeling and nationality, one in fealty
and faithfulness of service to our Queen —God bless her. (Great
applause.) Gentlemen, the Imperial Representative Corps thanks
you from the bottom of its heart, and the hearts of all its members
beat as one in crying out “ Long life and prosperity to the Com-
monwealth of Australia, to the Province of New South Wales, to'
the City of Sydney, as beautiful as it is hospitable, and as hospi-
table as the day is long, and especially to our kind host this even-
ing.” (Prolonged cheers.)
After this Colonel Peyton responded for the Indian Contin-
gent. He said that the welcome and hospitality of the Sydney
people had gone straight to the hearts of the Indian Contingent, and
tha,t the effect of it would be greater than they could imagine. These
native representatives would go back to their villages in India and
there tell the story of their welcome —a tale that would be repeated
from generation to generation. (Applause.) He then proposed
the health of the President and members of the Australian Club,
which was drunk by the visitors with musical honours.
The Hon. F. Suttor, Dr. McLaurin, and Sir Julian Salamon
responded.
After this, a move was made to the smoking and billiard
rooms, and as they left, many members of the Club raided the
dining-room decorations, and several Union Jacks and shields,
bearing the Australian Coat of Arms, were presented to the
visitors as souvenirs of this memorable dinner.
NEW SOUTH WALES LANCERS’ DINNER.
The Annnal Regimental Mess Dinner of the Officers of the New
South Wales Lancers, was held on the evening of December 28th,
at Tollemache’s Cafe. There was a very large attendance, and
the function proved a great success. They had for their guests
the officers of the Imperial Troops.


After the loyal toasts had been honoured, Lieut.-Colonel Burns,
gave the toast of “Our Guests.” He said he had much pleasure
in welcoming their Imperial comrades to Sydney, and hoped that
the local forces would benefit greatly by their presence. He spoke
of the work done by the Lancers and other Australians in South
Africa, and said that he hoped, if ever it fell to their lot to meet
again in action, they would endeavour to uphold the honour and
glory of their Queen and Country.
Major-General French, in supporting the toast, referred to the
work performed by the Australian troops in South Africa, and laid
special stress on the fact that the New South Wales Lancers were
the first Australian troops to arrive at the seat of war.
Colonel Wyndham responded. He spoke in high terms of the
welcome accorded to the Imperial Troops on their arrival here.
He was very pleased that the first invitation they received, was
from their comrades the New South Wales Lancers. In England,
the Lancers were as well known as any Cavalry Regiment there.
(Cheers). He congratulated Colonel Burns, the officers, and men
of the regiment on being able to send a contingent to Aldershot,
by public subscription for training, and he greatly admired the
work they had performed at the front. He referred to the
magnificent training grounds in Australia, and felt that it explained
why the Australians could beat the Boers at their own game. He
hoped that before long an interchange of troops would be made, so
that the Australian troops would learn what wrinkles they could at
home, whilst the British troops could take advantage of the
magnificent training grounds in Australia. (Applause). In
conclusion, he proposed the toast of “ The New South Wales
Lancers,” which was responded to by Major Vernon.
During the evening the band of the regiment played a well-
chosen selection of music.
MILITARY PICNIC TO THE HAWKESBURY.
On Dec. 31st, at the instance of the Government of New South
Wales, a military picnic was given to the Hawkesbury River, and
was very largely attended. A special train left Redfern Station
shortly after 10 a.m., and reached the Hawkesbury River about
noon. There the party embarked on board the steamer General
Gordon, and were conveyed as far as Milsom’s Island On the
way up a light luncheon was provided, which was thoroughly
appreciated, and on the return down the river the steamer w T ent up
Cowan Creek to Refuge Bay to give the excursionists an oppor-
tunity of admiring the picturesque surroundings of that sequestered


inlet of the Hawkesbury River. During the water Journey the
band of the Highland Light Infantry, which had been placed at
the disposal of the Government by Captain Scrase-Dickins, played
an excellent selection of music, and the beauty of the trip was
acknowledged by everyone on board, especially those to whom the
scenery was new.
In the afternoon an admirably-arranged banquet was served on
the commodious upper deck of the General Gordon , Mr. Wood
(Minister for Justice) being in the chair. About a dozen officers of
the I.R.C. were present. The local and inter-colonial military
forces were we\\ represented, and several members of the
Legislature also attended. The toast of “ The Queen ” having
been honoured with great enthusiasm, the Chairman gave “Our
Guests/’ and in the course of his speech dw r elt upon the fact that
the Australian, Canadian, and New Zealand troops had fought
gallantly shoulder to shoulder with the British troops in South
Africa, and he also referred in appropriate terms to the federation
of the Colonies. Major Askwith, R.H.A., Captain Campbell, and
other military officers responded, and advantage was taken of the
opportunity to express to the Government the thanks of the military
for the admirable arrangements made for their comfort, and also
for the day’s pleasant outing. The Navy was also warmly
recognised, and the toasts of “ Our Hosts ” and “ The Chairman ”
having been given and acknowledged, three hearty cheers were
given for the federation of Australia, and the proceedings termi-
nated. The party reached Redfern Station on the return journey
shortly after 6 p.m., the function having proved quite as successful
as could have been wished, though until the north-easter com-
menced to blow the weather was very trying.
COMPLIMENTARY DINNERS AND
ENTERTAINMENTS.
N.C.O.’S. OF THE I.R.C.
On the evening of Dec. 27th, the sergeants of the Ist Infantry
Regiment entertained the non-commissioned officers of the Imperial
Contingent in the Oddfellows’ Hall. Warrant-officer Conway pre-
sided. After the usual loyal toasts, the chairman proposed the
“ Imperial Troops,” which toast was enthusiastically honoured.
Other toasts were “The Officers of the Ist Regiment,” “The
Colonial Troops,” “ Absent Comrades in South Africa ” and “ The
Chairman.” During the evening musical contributions were
rendered by Sergeant Hadwick (Yorkshire Regiment), Sergeant
Jupp (Royal Field Artillery), Sergeant-Major Hart (Royal Horse
Artillery), Warrant-Officer Muckleston, and others.


Royal Artillery.
On the evening of Dec. 29th, the R.A. detachments of the I.R.C.
were the guests of their confreres of the Royal Australian Artillery
at the Freemasons’ Hall. Owing to the unfortunate accident in
the morning, whereby three gunners had been seriously injured,
the visitors had not found themselves able to accept an invitation
to an afternoon harbour excursion, but in the evening were enter-
tained with the utmost cordiality at a dinner, followed by a
smoking concert.
Royal Engineers.
The New South Wales Corps of Engineers in like manner enter-
tained the detachment of Royal Engineers at a banquet and
smoking concert on the evening of Dec. 27th, where nothing could
have been more hearty than the welcome given to the visitors.
Major Stuart-Cansdell presided : Major Lee proposed the toast of
the R.E., to which Captain Powell replied; Captain Copeland and
Sergt.-Major Barton also spoke, and their reference to the good
fellowship that has always existed between these k ndred corps
provoked the greatest enthusiasm.
Highlanders.
On January 29th, in response to an invitation from the Mayor and
the principal residents of the suburbs, a number of Imperial Troops
visited Ashfield. The regiments represented were : —The High-
land Light Infantry, the Seaforth Highlanders, the Cameron
Highlanders, and the 42nd Highlanders (Black Watch).
They joined in the sports onlthe local park during the afternoon,
and in the evening were entertained at a smoke concert held in the
Town Hall, a very pleasant time being spent by the troops, who
returned to barracks by a late train.
H.L.I, Band.
On Dec. 29., a complimentary dinner was given to the band of the
H.L.I. at the Manchester Unity Hall by the National Guard Band.
Bandmaster Palmer presided. The guests of the evening included
Bandmaster Evans, and Sergeants Inglis, Riley, Boyan and
McDonald. The gathering, which was a very festive one, num-
bered nearly a 100. The customary toasts were honoured, and the
evening closed with an enjoyable smoke concert.
Royal Engineers.
On the evening of Jan. 3rd, the officers of the New South Wales
Engineers entertained the officers of the Royal Engineers at Her
Majesty’s Theatre, and afterwards at a supper party at the
Australian Hotel; there was a large gathering of all the officers of
the New South Wales Corps, and the welcome extended to the


visitors by Major Lee and Major Stuart-Cansdell was most cordial.
Captain Powell, after thanking his hosts on behalf of his brother
officers, congratulated the State on having its engineering experts
organised for military service, and pointed out what invaluable
aid the corps of Royal Engineers had received in South Africa
from the volunteers among the telegraphists, railway, electrical
and other engineers, who were so ready to offer their services in
the field.
Scotch.
A harbour picnic was tendered on Saturday, Jan. sth, by the local
Scottish Rifles to the members of the Imperial and intercolonial
Scottish regiments who are at present in Sydney. Three steamers
were secured for the outing. The party on board the three vessels
numbered about 500 persons, and included many ladies. A run
was first made round Middle Harbour to see the picturesque
scenery for which this part of the harbour is well known. After-
wards the party landed at the military depot, Middle Head, where
an excellent luncheon was served. During the afternoon sports
took place, during which the visiting men entertained the company
with selections on the bagpipes. The day was perfect, the
warmth of a brilliant summer’s day being tempered with a pleasant
breeze. Middle Harbour was therefore seen in its best aspect,
and on the return journey to town the Imperial men expressed
their thanks to the local company and to Colonel Campbell for the
hospitality shown them generally, and especially for the excellent
picnic which had been given to them that day.
Irish.
A harbour excursion was given on Wednesday, Jan. igth, to the
officers and men of the Irish branches of the Imperial troops at
present in Sydney, by Major Freehill and the officers of the Bth
Regiment of Irish Rifles. The Government placed the steamers
Dawn and Dayspring at the disposal of the troops, and about 70
Imperial representatives and 200 members of the Bth Regiment
were present. Trips were made up the Parramatta and Land
Cove rivers. Clontarf and Chowder Bay (where the party lunched)
were then visited. At the luncheon the loyal toast was honoured,
and “ The Defence Forces of the Empire” was proposed by Major
Freehill, Lieutenant Becher, of the Royal Irish Rifles, responded,
and expressed the great pleasure which the excursion had afforded
to all the visitors.
Welsh.
The Welsh citizens of Sydney having formed a committee for the
purpose of entertaining the soldiers representative of the princi-
pality now on a visit to New South Wales, the men of the Royal
Welsh Fusiliers and Welsh soldiers in other regiments were invited


to attend a harbour picnic on Jan nth. A considerable number
of them attended at Princes Stairs at 11.30 a.m., where they were
met by a large number of Welsh gentlemen and ladies. The whole
party then embarked upon the steamer Dayspring , which had been
chartered for the occasion. The course taken was up the Parra-
matta River to Correy’s Gardens, where a first-class lunch was
set. Alderman Evan Jones took the chair, having the Mayor of
Sydney (Alderman Dr. Graham) on his right, with the Rev.
Warlow Davies.
After justice had been done to the meal, the first toasts
honoured were those of her Majesty the Queen and H.R.H. the
Prince of Wales.
Mr. Hanbury Davies then proposed the health of the 23rd
Royal Welsh Fusiliers amidst general cheering, and referred to the
very name of the State of New South Wales as a means of keeping
the old land always in their memories.
Sergeant Gibbons replied in suitable terms.
Dr. Graham, MW.A., Mayor of Sydney, said that he thought
the Welshmen of Sydney had done a very kind, friendly, and
proper thing in welcoming in so nice a manner their fellow country-
men of the Imperial Forces, whose visit to Sydney had given so
much pleasure to the citizens. After dinner the men of the regi-
ment and their entertainers were photographed together, and
re-embarking, returned to the city.
Army Service Corps.
The warrant officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of the
New South Wales Army Service Corps entertained their visiting
comrades from England and Victoria at a smoke concert, held in.
the 2nd Regiment’s officers’ mess tent, on the old Paddington Rifle
Range, on Saturday, January 15th. Several toasts were honoured,
including “ The Queen,” “ Visiting Comrades,” “ Army and Navy,”
and “ Our Officers,” to which the guests suitably responded, and a
very pleasant evening was spent.
Middlesex Rifles.
On Thursday evening, January 10th, the non-commissioned officers
and privates of the D Company, 7th Regiment (St. George’s Rifles )
entertained the members of the Ist Middlesex Rifles at a smoke
concert at Sharland’s Hotel, Chatswood.
The collation provided was much appreciated, after which a
presentation was made by the chairman, to Staff Colour-Sergeant
Sloan, who has acted as instructor for some time past. A pleasant
evening was spent, many of those present contributing songs and
recitations. The health of the visitors was drunk with much
enthusiasm.


New South Wales Engineers.
On the afternoon of the sth January, a large number of the officers,
non-commissioned-officers and men of the New South Wales
Engineers, visited the camp in the Agricultural Grounds, and
were shown the vehicles and equipment of the Royal Engineers.
The wind was too high for a balloon ascent but the laying out of a
balloon, and its preparations, up to the actual point of inflation,
were shown by Lieutenant Spaight. The pontoon equipment was
inspected, both packed for travelling and in “ light infantry bridge."
The Royal Australian Artillery had kindly provided teams ena-
bling the Royal Engineers to show the working of the double tool
cart, and to give an illustration of the erection of a field telegraph
air line, and of fast work with the telegraph cable cart. Unfortu-
natel}N on this day there was a muster meeting of the friendly
societies, and the ground was thronged with sight-seers, which
made the carrying out of this part of the programme somewhat
difficult. Those who were interested in telegraph work were able
to see offices connected up with the latest service equipment, after
which the officers visited the mess, and the non-commissioned-
officers and men were entertained in camp.
Major Lee and Major Stuart-Cansdell, on behalf of the New
South Wales Engineers were good enough to express the interest
of all in what they had seen and the occasion was throughout one
of great cordiality.
Ascent of a War Balloon.
January 10th. —Advantage was taken of a calm morning to bring
the balloon into the central enclosure, and many officers and men
of the Imperial and Colonial troops made ascents. Representatives
of the press took photographs of the balloon and views from the
car. After breakfast a good number of visitors, including several
ladies, made ascents and obtained a bird’s-eye view of Sydney,
from a height of about 300 feet.
Royal Engineers.
On January nth, Major Lee invited the Royal Engineers detach-
ment to visit the submarine mining station at George’s Head, and
in spite of a strong north-easter, all ranks enjoyed a pleasant
harbour picnic, and a most interesting visit to the well equipped
submarine mining depot in Chowder Bay. Returning to Sydney,
the Royal Engineers were again the guests of the New South
Wales Engineers at a smoking concert, at which they welcomed
their returning comrades from South Africa.


PRIVATE ENTERTAINMENTS.
Mrs. Mackenzie’s “ At Home.”
On the afternoon of December 28th, the officers of the I.R.C.
were invited to Mrs. Mackenzie’s enjoyable “At home.” An
unusual feature was the appearance of the Maoris of the New
Zealand Contingent, who went through their various quaint dances
for our amusement. Few, if any of us, had before seen a Maori
“ haka ” or war dance. None who then witnessed it, will ever
forget it Several of the guests had the honour to be introduced
to the Maori Chief. After tea, we said good-bye to our kind
hostess, having thoroughly enjoyed her delightful “ At home.”
Visit to Gowan Brae.
On Sunday, December 30th, a large party of the I.R.C. went to
Gowan Brae, the palatial country residence of Colonel Burns, the
popular commanding officer of the New South Wales Lancers.
Leaving Sydney by the 10 a.m. train, we were met at
Parramatta by our host and several four-horse drags. After a
pleasant drive through orange gardens and peach orchards we
arrived at Gowan Brae, where we had a sumptuous lunch of many
courses. The house was beautifully decorated and full of lovely
sculpture and paintings. During the afternoon we paid a visit to
the museum on the top of the house, which contained a large
collection of savage weapons, idols and curios, mostly collected
from the South Sea Islands by our host, who is a great traveller.
The Colonel generously insisted on everyone taking away
some souvenir of this interesting visit, in the shape of Australian
pearls, uncut opals and other curios. After tea a walk round the
beautiful grounds brought this pleasant day to a close and we
returned to Sydney in a comfortable carriage, specially reserved
for us by our thoughtful host.
Mrs. Cruickshank’s Dance.
On the evening of Tuesday, January Bth, Mrs. Cruickshank gave
a most successful dance at. Need’s Rooms. A large number of
officers were present and numerous guests from Sydney and
Melbourne. The evening was fortunately cooler than usual, and
no inconvenience was felt from the heat. The ball was a good one,
and there were plenty of comfortable places for sitting out.


Dancing was kept up till 3 p.m. The ball was a great success
and we owe a debt of gratitude to our kind hostess who, in spite
of the opinion of the blase ones that it was “ far too hot to dance,”
gave an entertainment which proved to be one of the most
enjoyable events of our stay in Sydney.
Miss Walker’s Ball.
On Friday, January nth, Miss Walker gave a dance at her house
on the Parramatta River. Unfortunately, during the afternoon,
indications were observed of a “southerly buster.” However,
nothing daunted, some dozen officers of the I.R.C. sallied forth to
Prince’s Steps, where the steamer vnas waiting to convey us
and several other guests, including many lovely ladies, up the
river. We left the quay at about 8 p.m., and had hardly begun
our perilous journey up stream, when the rain came down in
torrents with half a gale of wind. All on board being good sailors,
no inconvenience was felt from the lively motion of the boat,
although several passengers looked somewhat thoughtful. At
about 9 p.m. the vessel reached Miss Walker’s landing stage. On
arrival, a horrible fact dawned upon us. One hundred and fifty
yards of open pathway, which had now been transformed into a
foaming torrent, lay between the ship and the shelter of the house !
“ Was there a man dismayed? Was there a girl afraid?” Not
a bit of it! Off came the shoes and socks of the men, and many
ladies were hesitatingly induced to follow their example, with the
result that quite a pretty display of ankles, and —er —other things,
were observed. Some of the fair sex preferred to be carried, and
for this privilege there was keen competition. One brave fellow
surpassed himself; he carried a lady for fifty yards, and then,
overcome by emotion, he staggered and —deposited her in a
puddle! Alas! how deceptive is the weight of woman. On
arrival at the house, the ladies made a frantic rush for the curling
tongs and other aids to beauty (this we heard on the best authority),
and, by the time we met in the ballroom, they looked as if they
had just stepped straight out of a band-box. The house was
beautifully decorated with banks of roses, palms, and flowers.
The floor was perfect, the band excellent, and the supper —well,
even the Dwarf of Blood himself could not do it full justice in
mere word-painting. The gardens were beautifully lit up with
coloured lamps, but, unfortunately, the weather prevented us
from going outside. However, there were plenty of cosy corners
for sitting out. The dancing was kept up in a most animated
manner until 1 a.m., winding up with a mad set of lancers, a wild
gallop, and three hearty cheers for our popular hostess.


PROGRAMME OF THE OFFICIAL
CELEBRATIONS.
January i.
Day. —Procession starts from the Domain ; Swearing-in Ceremony
at Centennial Park.
Night. —State Banquet at Town Hall at 7.30; League of Wheel-
men cycling carnival, Sydney Cricket Ground, 8 p.m.
January 2.
Day. —Highland Gathering, Sydney Cricket Ground, 10 a.m. ; fire
brigade procession through city streets at 10.30 a.m. ;
swimming carnival, Fitzroy Dock, at 11 a.m. ; fire brigade
display in Prince Alfred Park at 3 p.m. ; conversazione, Town
Hall, at 2.30 p.m.
Night. —Continental in Domain, 7.30 p.m.; Highland concert,
Town Hall, at 8 p.m. ; military tattoo at Agricultural Ground,
8 p.m.
January 3.
Day. —Military review by his Excellency the Governor-General in
Centennial Park at 10.30 a.m.; commerce luncheon, Town
Hall, 1 p.m. ; Public schools gathering, Sydney Cricket
Ground, at 2 p.m.
Night. —Command night at theatres, 8 p.m.; Philharmonic
concert, Town Hall, 8 p.m.; cycling carnival, Sydney Cricket
Ground, 8 p.m.
January 4.
Day Athletic and cycling sports, Sydney Cricket Ground, at 9
a.m. ; harbour aquatic demonstration at 1 p.m.; theatrical
matinees for the poor at 2 p.m.
Night. - Continental in Domain at 7.30 p.m.; harbour fireworks
display at 8 p.m. ; amateur orchestral concert, Town Hall, at
8 pm.
January 5.
Day. —New South Wales Defence Force Rifle Association
Meeting, Randwick Rifle Range, at 7.45 a.m.; trades-unions
and friendly societies’ procession through the city streets at


10.30 a.m.; sports and demonstration of above bodies at
Agricultural Ground at noon ; New South Wales v. South
Australia, cricket match, Sydney Cricket Ground, at noon.
Night. —Naval and military banquet, Town Hall, at 7.30 p.m. ;
continental at North Sydney Oval at 7.30 p.m.; cycling
carnival, Sydney Cricket Ground, at 8 p.m.
January 6.
Day. —Military Church Parade at 10 a.m.; special Church
Services at 11 a.m.; United Church Service, Hyde Park,
3 P- m -
January 7.
Day. —New South Wales Defence Force Rifle Association meeting,
Randwick Rifle Range, at 7.30 a.m.; military sports at
Agricultural Ground at 10 a.m. ; New South Wales v.
South Australia cricket match, Sydney Cricket Ground, at
noon ; municipal and civic luncheon at Town Hall at 1 p.m.
Night. —Harbour excursion with bands on steamers at 8 p.m. ;
Liedertafel concert at Town Hall at 8 p.m.
January 8.
Day. —Military sports at Agricultural Ground at 10 a.m.; New
South Wales v. South Australia cricket match, Sydney Cricket
Ground, at noon.
Night. —Press dinner at Town Hall at 7 30 p.m.
During these celebrations the city was illuminated every
evening from 8 p.m. till midnight.


BIRTH OF THE AUSTRALIAN NATION.
THE INAUGURAL CEREMONIES.
The Commonwealth was inaugurated on the first day of the new
century, amid a scene of magnificence without parallel. With all
the splendour of a bride of high degree, Sydney was dressed for the
most important ceremonial of Australian history. The city
presented a spectacle worthy of the occasion—a spectacle that will
be for ever memorable in the minds of all who saw it, and one
which would tax the powers of the greatest imaginative writer to
describe.
The Scene in the Domain.
The orders issued in connection with the formation of the pro-
cession provided for the mustering of the whole of the troops and
carriages in the Domain at 9.30 a.m. The Imperial and Indian
troops were formed up on the grassy central space, facing the
National Art Gallery, while at the sides and rear, upon the slopes
of the hills, were the intercolonial visiting troops, and squadrons
and detachments of the local forces. Around the drives spaces
were marked off for the carriages of those taking part in the pro-
cession, the position of each being indicated by a small notice
board. After an hour spent in marshalling the various component
parts of the procession, the bugles sounded the advance and the
first portion of the procession moved away. One by one the
different regiments, headed by their respective bands, filed past
the General-Officer Commanding, who had taken up a position,
with his staff, near the gates opposite the cathedral. From the
time the Mounted Police escort emerged from the gates, until the
last file of troops had left the Domain, just an hour elapsed.
The Procession.
The procession was led by 200 well-mounted police. After the
Police came the trades union representatives. Then followed the
representatives of the friendly societies, and then the fire brigades,
who, with their resplendent fire engines, made a very fine show.
Then came the press, and then the Italian car, which was intended
to represent the greeting of Independent Italy to United Australia,
Next came the Canadian car. The design of this vehicle was most


graceful. The car bore the words in gold letters “ Canada
welcomes her sister Australia.” Next came representatives of the
Church, mayors of the chief Australian cities, premiers and
ministers of various colonies and states, judges and mertibers of
the civil services. The Archbishop of Sydney, Primate of
Australia, and his chaplains, brought up the rear of the civil
procession. Then came the military contingents in the following
order:—
New South Wales Lancers.
Public School Cadets.
Troops returned from South Africa.
Soudan Contingent.
Retired officers and men of H.M. Services.
Colonial Infantry, under the command of Colonel Penton, including
contingents from Queensland, Tasmania, West and South
Australia, Victoria and New Zealand.
Next came the Indian Contingent under Colonel Peyton, and the
Imperial Representative Corps, under the command of Colonel
Crole Wyndham, C.8., followed by strong detachments of the
Royal Navy and Royal Marines.
Next came the visiting officers and the following commandants :
Major-General Downes (Victoria), Colonel Gordon (S.
Australia), Colonel Finn (Queensland), Colonel Legge
(Tasmania), and Colonel Chippendall (W. Australia).
The last section of the procession was composed as follows
A.D.C’s of G.O.C.
New South Wales Headquarters staff.
Major-General French (General Officer Commanding).
Admiral Pearson (Naval Commander-in-Chief) and staff.
Advance escort of Lancers.
His Excellency the Governor-General and staff.
Rear escort of Lancers.
The Route.
After passing St. Mary’s Cathedral, the procession wound
through Queen’s Square, thence along Macquarie Street, a
thoroughfare straight as the proverbial “bee line,” and by reason
of its elaborate decorations, perhaps the most picturesque section
of the route. Every building on either side of the street was
crowded with human beings—verandahs, balconies, windows, and
even the roots of the highest structures being simply packed with
men, women, and children, dressed in their best array, and enthu-
siastic in the highest degree. As the pageant wended its way


along, the people cheered, waved their hats and handkerchiefs, and
clapped their hands as their excitement increased, or they grew
more enthusiastic over some individual or section of the procession
which particularly took their fancy. A cordial reception was
given to almost every portion of the procession ; sections of it
elicited the warmest enthusiasm—notably the English and Indian
troops, the visiting contingents from the other States and New r
Zealand, the South African soldiers, and the Metropolitan Fire
Brigades —while the Federal Premier (Mr. Edmund Barton) and
the Right Hon. G. H. Reid, P.C., were lustily cheered as they
passed along. Opposite the entrance to Government House
Grounds, the procession wheeled into Bridge Street, where the
number of spectators grew larger, and the excitement and enthu-
siasm appeared to increase in fervour. Here, too, the buildings to
their topmost heights had their windows and balconies crowded
with sightseeis. In addition to the street decorations, the Govern-
ment Buildings, the Exchange, and other structures were gaily
decorated. The wool and wheat arches were generally admired,
and deservedly so, for they were- exceedingly handsome, and were
set off to great advantage as the procession moved through them.
The Governor-General, who seemed to have improved considerably
in health, was enthusiastically cheered, his reception being of the
most cordial character. Cheer after cheer arose as the front of
the great procession appeared in Pitt Street, and passed under the
French arch. Thenceforward there was a continuous cheer,
increasing in degree of loudness and heartiness as the different
regiments passed by. But the big cheer was kept for the
Governor-General. As the state carriage passed under the arch
•which submitted the greetings of France to the Federation, the
Governor-General received the good wishes of Fa Belle France
(accompanied by a loud British cheer). Thence along Pitt Street,
through the beautiful arcade of colours, under the greetings offered
by America, and so through to George Street, the heartiness of the
cheers for his Excellency was undoubted.
An unexpected feature of the procession in this part of the
route was the absence of any dangerous crushing. There was
plenty of room for everyone to see, and with the exception of the
intersections of streets for everyone to pass freely enough. This
fact was, no doubt, due to the great length of the route of the
procession, as well as the large numbers absorbed by such spaces
as Martin Place, Hyde Park, Centennial Park, &c.
At the Commonwealth arch, at the intersection of Park and
Elizabeth Street, a great crowd had gathered. The slopes along
Hyde Park at either side of the road, and all along College Street,
were black with sightseers, though there was no uncomfortable
crushing. The trees in the Park furnished opportunities to other
sightseers, while the top of the Museum and the houses along that


side of College Street seemed literally alive with spectators The
view from the Museum corner up along College Street, to its
termination at the beautiful classic military colonnade, was one of
unusual brilliance, and of rare delight to the eye. It was doubtful
if in any part of the city the procession looked to greater advantage
than when passing along Park Street, between Elizabeth and
College Streets. There was the majestic Commonwealth arch at
one end, while at the other was the handsome German arch.
The procession next passed along Oxford Street and Glen-
more Road, to the Centennial Park. The scene along this part
of the route was extremely picturesque. The stand, extending
the whole length of the Victoria Barracks wall, was taxed to its
utmost capacity, and on each side of the street stands had been
erected in front of private dwellings and over shop verandahs, and
these were crowded with people anxious to see the great and
memorable procession.
The immense concourse of people in the Centennial Park waited
anxiously for the procession to appear. At about 11.30 a.m. the
advance guard came in sight, and immediately there was a great
outburst of enthusiasm.
In the Centennial Park.
The scene in the Centennial Park was one of unparalleled
beauty and grandeur. From the slopes on the northern side over-
looking the seeming white marble building which was to be the
coronation site, as it were, of the Dominion of Australia, the
effect was most picturesque. The broad review ground, edged by
the lakes appearing in the middle distance, away on the outlines
were the heights of Randwick and Kensington, and, further on,
were the waters of Botany Bay. The beautiful Park looked at its
best. The rain of the previous night and morning had improved
the spectacle, though it had somewhat interfered with the early
attendance of the public. The chaste white pavilion wherein the
swearing-in ceremony was to be performed looked artistic in the
extreme. It is, perhaps, too severe in its uncoloured whiteness,
the only relief to the marble-like structure being the Royal
Standard that floated in the breeze. Upon the floor of this
pavilion rested the elaborate gilt table upon which the Queen had
signed her assent to the Act constituting the Commonwealth of
Australia. Upon the table was the inkstand used by Her Majesty
on that historic occasion, and that instrument of destiny was used
at the great ceremony. Partly beneath the table, and placed for
the Governor-General to stand on when he took the oaths of
office, was a specially beautiful piece of Colonial marble, which is
presumably to become, like the great coronation stone in West-
minster Abbey, the ‘‘ stone of destiny ”in Australia. At the red-
carpet entrance to the main enclosure were two guards of honour.


About ii o’clock Sir William Lyne arrived, in his capacity of
Premier of New South Wales, to receive the Governor-General
on his arrival. Half-an-hour later, the Lieutenant-Governor of
New South Wales, Sir Frederick Darley, arrived. He was
escorted by ist Australian Horse, and was received with a salute
from artillery and from the guards of honour. It was only about
a quarter of an hour later that the first of the procession entered
the Park. There in the distance, winding along the tree-bordered
main avenue, were the plumed troops, the tramp of soldiers, the
neighing of steeds, “ the spirit-stirring drum,” the glitter of brass
helmets, and "all quality, pride, pomp, and circumstance” of
glorious pageantry. It was fully three-quarters of an hour later
before Lord Hopetoun entered the pavilion.
On his entrance the Governor-General was received by Sir
Frederick Darley. The Royal Australian Artillery battery
boomed out a salute of 19 guns, and the “ Nation Anthem ” was
played by the assembled bands. By this time the enclosure had
been filled by the Imperial, Indian, and Colonial soldiers, some of
whom had already started scrambling for buns thrown them by the
school children, and then the ceremony which was to make
Australia a Commonwealth commenced. •
The Swearing-In Ceremony.
As the distant boom ot the 1 o’clock gun was borne upon the
breeze, his Excellency stepped into the pavilion and stood upon
the Commonwealth stone, amid the loud plaudits of the assembled
multitude. The religious part of the ceremony at once began, and
the choir of St. Andrew’s sang a hymn. The Archbishop then read
the prayer for the Commonwealth of Australia composed by Lord
Tennyson, and also a special prayer for the Governor-General,
concluding with the Lord’s Prayer.
The Queen’s proclamation, as gazetted in London, and
establishing the Commonwealth of Australia on January 1, 1901,
was next read by Mr. Blackmore in a loud voice. The reading of
the letters patent followed, while his Excellency again stood on
the Commonwealth Stone, and remained standing there during the
conclusion of the ceremony.
Then followed a most impressive scene, during which his
Excellency first took the oath of allegiance and then the oaths of
office, in which he swore with God’s help to serve her Majesry well
and truly as Governor-General of Australia. It was this act which
consummated the union of Australia. A salute of twenty-one guns
was fired by the Artillery. As the guns boomed, the tens of
thousands of people assembled burst out into a tumultuous cheer
which might nave been heard miles away, and from that moment
what has so long been the dream of Australian statesmen now


dead and gone, became an accomplished fact, and the six States
of Australia and Tasmania stood united in an “ indissoluble union ”
for ever.
His Excellency’s proclamation notifying that he had taken the
required oaths of office and assumed the Governor-Generalship of
Australia, was next read by Mr. Blackmore, and this concluded
the principal part of the day’s function.
The Federal Ministers were next sworn in, beginning with
Mr. Barton, Prime Minister, the others following in order of the
importance of their respective offices.
The “Te Deum Laudamus ” was afterwards splendidly sung
by the St. Andrew’s choir of 400 voices. Then the Governor-
General, stepping to one of the sides of the pavilion read messages
from Her Majesty, and also from the Imperial Government, con-
gratulating Australia on the consummation of its union. His
Excellency then bowed to the people from the sides of the pavilion.
Sir Frederick Darley now stepped forward, and called for three
cheers for the Governor-General, which were heartily given, and
three more for Lady Hopetoun, and amid the booming of another
salute of cannon his Excellency was escorted to his carriage, and
the ceremonial portion of the proceedings ended. Meanwhile the
assembled public school choir of 10,000 children sang the
“ Federated Australia ” chorus, the volume of sound being magni-
ficent. The “ Hallelujah ” chorus was next given in grand style
by the choir of 1000 adult voices. “ God Save the Queen,” by the
combined choirs, closed the musical portion of the proceedings,
and the crowd then quickly broke up.
State Banquet.
A GREAT State banquet took place in Sydney Town Hall on the
night of Jan. Ist. The splendid interior of the building was finely
decorated for the occasion. There were nearly a thousand guests.
The chair was occupied by the Lieut-Governor of New South
Wales (Sir Frederick Darley). A large number of ladies in the
gallery gave additional eclat to the occasion. A glittering effect
was produced by the handsome uniforms of the Knights of various
Orders and the Privv Councillors, the naval and military officers,
and last, but not least, the gorgeously arrayed Consuls.
During the banquet the Royal Australian Artillery Band
played a well chosen selection of music.
The Speeches.
At a quarter past 9 o’clock a bugle call announced that the toast
list had been reached. Before opening out in that direction, an
apology from Lord Hopetoun was read, his Excellency pleading


extreme fatigue, while expressing his keen disappointment at being
physically incapacitated from completing the day’s ceremonies by
attending there. He paid an eloquent tribute to the loyalty
evinced during the day by the vast crowds who had thronged the
route of the procession.
The toasts of “ The Queen,” “ The Prince of Wales and the
Royal Family,” were proposed by the chairman, and enthusiasti-
cally honoured.
Sir William Lyne proposed “ The Governor-General,” and
Mr. Lewis (Premier of Tasmania) gave “ The Navy,” coupled with
the name of the Admiral.
Sir William Lyne was loudly greeted, and so was Mr. Reid, on
rising subsequently to propose the health of the Lieut-Governors.
Sir Samuel Way responded, but the buzz of conversation and
the general noise indulged in made him inaudible.
Sir Samuel Griffith (Chief Justice of Queensland), next pro-
posed the toast of the evening. —“The Commonwealth”—to
which Mr. Barton (Prime Minister of the Commonwealth) replied.
One of the finest speeches of the evening (to quote “ The
Sydney Morning Herald”) was that by Colonel Crole Wyndham
in response to the toast of “ The Army and Volunteers,” proposed
by Mr. John See (Colonial Secretary). “I am encouraged,” he
said, “ to think that the army is popular in Australia, and I think
you have a right to be proud of your own army in Australia. I
thank you for the magnificent welcome to the delegates of the
British Army, and from its hearty and spontaneous character I feel
that it stands for the welcome of the continent.” He added that
the standards of the visiting troops were emblazoned with all the
victories that had helped to build the Empire, and that the Aus-
tralian soldiers were respected in every garrison in England, for
they were brothers in arms in suffering and in death. He
delivered an eloquent message from the British army to the
Australian troops, who had won their right to fight side by side
with those of the motherland. It was hoped in England that
Australian representatives would be sent home to obtain the latest
ideas concerning drill, tactics, and staff duties, and that, with the
■soldiers of the Empire so consolidated, the nation would be able to
checkmate any Power which crossed its path when engaged in a
righteous cause. That was the message he had come half across
the world to deliver. In conclusion, he said, “The Army salutes
the Commonwealth, and wishes you all prosperity and happiness.”
The Illuminations.
On the evening of Commonwealth Day, Sydney and its surround-
ings were illuminated in a manner worthy of the importance of


the occasion. To describe the illuminations in detail would re-
quire the space of a volume. Perhaps the most attractive portion
of the city was Queen’s Square, where gigantic festoons of electric
light, suspended from the central obelisk to the Grecian pillars
around the Square, gave the place the appearance of an enchanted
garden. Macquarie Street, with its alternative rows of white and
red electric globes, and its neatly arranged and multi-coloured
strings of smaller lights, was among the most attractive of the
main thoroughfares. Martin Place was a brilliant sight, the
gorgeously illuminated fagade of the Post Office casting the bright-
ness of day over the surroundings. The Town Hall was easily
first among the great public buildings, the various architectural
features of the handsome pile being worked out in myriads of
electric lights, extending right up the tower, and interspersed
with innumerable glow lamps, arranged in picturesque designs.
The Botanical Gardens were also beautifully illuminated. Seen
from a distance, the most prominent objects were the towers of
the General Post Office and Town Hall, also a great crown of
light on the Colonial Secretary’s buildings ; in fact, there was
light everywhere, the whole making a scene never to be forgotten.
The city was illuminated for eight nights, and each night the
crowds were enormous.
The Highland Gathering.
The Highland Society of New South Wales held its thirty-third
Annual Gathering on the Sydney Cricket Ground on January 2.
Two representatives of Her Majesty were present during the
afternoon —Lord Hopetoun, the Governor-General of Australia,
and Sir Frederick Darley, the Acting State Governor. Approx-
imately 20,000 people attended the gathering, including a large
number of visitors from the regiments in the Imperial and Inter-
State Contingents, who were received with true Scotch hospitality.
The Luncheon.
The luncheon was held in the hall underneath the new pavi-
lion, and Dr. McLaurin, President of the Society, occupied the
chair. The speeches were of a somewhat political character, and
w r ere curtailed as much as possible by request of the President,
owing to the shortness of time available.
Mr. Reid (Leader of the Opposition of New South Wales)
in his speech paid Colonel Wyndham a well-deserved compliment,
in saying that all who had heard him speak once were only too
anxious to hear him again. He (Mr. Reid) had listened to Colonel
Wyndham the previous night, and had learnt much from him in
the art of oratory.


Colonel Wyndham, who was received with great applause, in
reply said: —“ Your Excellency, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, I
owe you half an apology for venturing to respond to this toast.
Half an apology because I am only half a Scotsman—(Voice :
“ And a good half too.”) That sounds like a drink! But half a
loaf is better than no bread, and the strong firm outside crust is
my Scotch half, while the soft crumb inside is English. (Ap-
plause.) There are some things we Scotch and half Scotch can't
do. For instance, we can't play golf. (Cries of “Oh! oh !”) After
years of practice some of us may know good play when they see
it, but only few of us can play a good game. (Laughter.) Another
thing we can’t do is to tell good whiskey when we get it (laughter),
and then there is no doubt of the fact that a Scotchman can’t see a
joke. I was talking to one the other day, and in trying to explain
something to him said, “ That’s not the point,” as the man said to
the assassin who tried to stab him with the hilt of his dagger.
(After a long pause some laughter. Well, you gentlemen don’t
see the joke any more than he did. (Loud laughter.) But there
are some things that we Scotch and half Scotch can do: We can
fight (tremendous applause), and when Her Majesty has any par-
ticularly difficult or dangerous job for her soldiers, she puts her
Scotchmen at it. (Cheers.) The only pity is there are so few of
us. (Cheers.) I beg to thank you all for the honour you have
conferred in asking me to reply to this toast, and the hearty way
in which you have responded to it.” (Applause.)
The Sports.
After lunch a capital programme of sports was carried out in
which the members of the I.R.C. were singularly successful in all
the competitions for which they entered. In every case they took
first prize against all comers. The following is a list of the events
won by them :
Best Dressed Highlander.— ist, Pipe-Major'Ross (Black
Watch). 2nd, Corporal Murdoch (Seaforth Highlanders).
PIPING-PIBROCHS. ist, Pipe-Major Ross (Black Watch) ;
2nd, Pipe-Major Paterson (Highland Light Infantry).
Piping Marches, —ist, Pipe-Major Ross (Black Watch);
2nd, Pipe-Major Paterson (Highland Light Infantry).
Strathspeys. —ist, Pipe-Major Paterson (Highland Light
Infantry); 2nd, Piper McLean (Highland Light Infantry) ; 3rd,
Pipe-Major Ross (Black Watch).
Marches. —ist, Boy Haywood (Seaforth Highlanders).
Reels. — ist, Pipe-Major Ross (Black Watch).
Pipe-Major Ross also secured the gold medal presented bv
the Pipers’ Association of New South Wales for most points
gained in the piping competitions.


Highland Society’s Concert.
An immense audience attended the New Year’s concert given
by the New South Wales Highland Society at the Sydney Town
Hall on the night of January 2nd. The chief event of the evening
was the rendering of the new “ Ode to the Commonwealth,”
verses by Mr. Hugh Macdonald, M.L.A., music by Mr. Alfred
Hill. This was imposingly rendered by the Burns’ Club choir and
orchestra of 200 performers, assisted hy the Highland Light
Infantry band. With the aid of the grand organ a massive and
majestic effect was obtained. There were numerous ballads,
recitations and part songs, also selections by the band of the High-
land Light Infantry, under Mr. R. G. Evans, which were thoroughly
enjoyed.
NAVAL AND MILITARY TATTOO.
The naval and military tattoo which took place on the evening
of January 2nd, on the Agricultural Grounds, was in point of mag-
nificence and general success in keeping with the whole of the
important functions that have taken place during the present
celebrations. The main enclosure was illuminated by clusters of
incandescent lights, and to add to the pleasant and picturesque
surroundings the night was very agreeable. The attendance of
the public was large, the spacious grounds being well filled, and
interest in the proceedings never flagged from the gunfire at 8
o’clock to the sounding of the last post. As each band marched
to its allotted place, heralded by trumpeters and escorted by a few
members of its own regiment carrying torches, a popular demon-
stration was made in its favour. The band of the Highland Light
Infantry, under Bandmaster Evans, was vigorously applauded.
The following bands took part in the tattoo :-New South Wales
Lancers, Ist Australian Horse, Mounted Rifles, Highland Light
Infantry, Royal Australian Artillery, New South Wales Police,
Victorian Commonwealth Band, Queensland Headquarters Band,
Ist Regiment, 2nd Regiment, 3rd Regiment, 4th Regiment, sth
Regiment (Scottish Rifles), 6th Regiment (Australian Rifles),
7th Regiment (St. George’s Rifles), Bth Regiment (Irish Rifles),
National Guard, Public Service Volunteer, Naval Brigade, and
Naval Artillery Volunteer Bands.
When the whole of the musicians were in their allotted places,
the grounds, illuminated by many torches, examined now and then
by an inquisitive searchlight, and bestarred by occasional rockets,
presented a magnificent spectacle.
The trumpeters of the Imperial Corps, the Royal Australian
Artillery, and the Army Service Corps performed a fanfare with


admirable ensemble and effect, and a collection of reed bands
played a medley of airs which were essentially reminiscent of
Scotland. The New Zealand Pipe Band was also among the pro-
minent contributors. The performances by the massed bands
were on the whole admirable, and it was only in isolated cases and
extremely rarely that a slight lagging behind the conducting baton
was perceptible. Mr. Hutchinson’s “ Australian Commonwealth ”
March and the “ Tannhauser ” March were amongst the successful
renditions. The finale was “ Soldiers of the Queen,” which was
performed by the whole of the bands as they marched off the
grounds. The tattoo was said to have been one of the finest ever
held in Australia, and it deservedly had the highest appreciation
of the vast audience.
THE REVIEW.
A grander military spectacle has never been witnessed in
Australia than the great review of Imperial, Indian and
Australian troops by his Excellency the Governor-General in the
Centennial Park on January 3rd. The enormous crowd of people
who witnessed the review was estimated at from 200,000 to
250,000.
No finer day could have been obtained for the display. The
pavilion at the saluting point was filled with guests —political,
judicial, clerical, naval and military —and among them were
representatives of the Governments of Cape Colony, Natal, New
Zealand, and the recently united Australian States. The ladies,
too, attended in force, and their bright dresses added greatly to
the gaiety of the scene. It was a glorious spectacle and a splendid
demonstration of the military might of the Empire, and for the
second time in history the armies of the Empire were shoulder to
shoulder. Since the Diamond Jubilee, British, Indian and Colonial
soldiers had not been together. The Infantry were drawn up on
the far side of the ground, a mass of glittering steel, scarlet and
khaki. The Cavalry were formed up behind the hill, and were able to
make a very effective entry as they rode over the crest on to the
parade ground. Punctually at 10.30 a.m. Lord Hopetoun arrived,
and was received with a royal salute. His Excellency was
accompanied by Major the Hon. Claude Willoughby (Military
Secretary) and his A.D.C.’s, Capt. Corbet and Capt. Duff.
The Cavalry were first inspected, and then the Infantry.
This over, His Excellency rode up to the saluting point, where he
was loudly cheered by the thousands of spectators in the enclo-
sures. The glittering army then began to move. General French,


R.A., with his staff, including Colonel Mackenzie, Lieut.-Colonel
Taunton, Majors Boam, Owen and Baynes, and the three A.D.C.’s,
Major Knox, Capt. Dangar and Lieut. Russell-Brown led the
march past, and then joined His Excellency at the saluting base.
The Mounted Brigade, under the command of Colonel Crole
Wyndham, C.8., was the first to be reviewed. The three bands—
Lancers, Australian Horse, and Mounted Rifles—advanced at the
head ot the Royal Horse Artillery, who came rumbling along with
their guns. The Household Cavalry, the King’s Dragoon Guards,
yth Hussars, 21st Lancers and Wiltshire Yeomanry came next.
Tremendous applause greeted this fine body of horsemen as they
swept by.
The New South Wales Lancers, who followed, made a brave
show, and for some minutes it was a continuous procession of
fluttering pennons. The men rode admirably, and kept their
dressing well. Another striking body of horsemen were the
businesslike Ist Australian Horse and the Mounted Rifles, who
appeared to be immensely popular, and were loudly cheered as
they passed the saluting base.
Emu-feathered wiry-looking Queenslanders and the smart
Contingent of New Zealanders pressed each other hard in popular
favour, the Maoris being especially singled out.
The Indian Contingent, led by Colonel Peyton, in their
gorgeous uniforms and trappings, took the people by storm. They
sat their horses well, and looked dignified and commanding.
The scene was a stirring and picturesque one. From the
pretty slopes of the spacious park, which carried its legions of
gaily dressed spectators, there was great applause and cheering.
The Field Artillerymen and the Royal Engineers with their
pontoons, telegraph waggons, balloon gear &c. —“the army handy
men,” made way for the tars who came striding along to the tune
of “ A Life on the Ocean Wave.” They marched well, as did also
the Marines, who came after them. Another fine body of troops
was the Royal Australian Artillery. Next came the Imperial
Footguards. The Grenadiers went by in an unbroken line, and
the enthusiasm of the vast audience was worked up to a high pitch
as the Scots, Irish and Coldstream Guards came swinging along in
grand style.
Then came the line regiments, the Queen’s, “The Buffs,”
Duke of Cornwall’s and Somerset Light Infantry, all marching
with alertness and precision. The “Fighting Fifth” and Royal
Fusiliers, the “ Faugh-a-Ballaghs,” and Royal Irish Fusiliers
followed next.
A skirl of the pipes, and the Highland Brigade came marching
along, the representatives of the famous “ Black Watch,” and the


quaintly shakoed Highland Light Infantry claiming special atten-
tion.
Scarcely had the strains of “Highland Laddie” died away,
than the band struck up a quick march, and the short striding rifle-
men came along in typical style.
The procession of Imperial men ended with the picturesquely
dressed Middlesex Volunteers.
This brought in the Federal Brigade, and a magnificent re-
ception was given to them, especially to the warriors who had
recently returned from the war. The splendid detachments of
Queensland, Victorian and New Zealand troops were heartily
cheered.
The New South Wales troops then streamed past in an
almost continuous procession of well kept thin red lines. Each
regiment was honoured with approving applause. The stately
pageant, which for brilliance, picturesqueness and animation, had
exceeded the procession of January ist, was wound up by the local
naval forces, who marched actively and well. Just one hour had
been occupied in the march past.
The Infantry Regiments marched off to their private parade
grounds, and the whole field was left to the Mounted Brigade,
which trotted past the saluting base in magnificent style, and
formed up again on the original alignment. Finally, headed by
Colonel Crole Wyndham, the 1,800 brilliantly arrayed horsemen
advanced in one line towards the Governor-General, halted, and
gave a royal salute. The band played the National Anthem, and
this magnificent review came to a conclusion.
The field state showed nearly 10,000 troops, of all ranks, on
parade. The exact totals being 555 officers, 181 warrant officers
and sergeants, 8,873 rank and file, 34 guns and waggons, and 1,819
horses.
The Govern or-General was evidently deeply impressed with
the display. This will be gathered from the following special
General Order which was subsequently issued from headquarters.
The following letter from H.E. the Governor-General is pub-
lished for information :
Government House,
Sydney, Jan. 4th, igoi.
The Governor-General begs that the Honourable Minister for Defence of the
■Commonwealth will be so good as to inform the Major-General commanding the
forces of New South Wales how much pleasure and satisfaction it gave His [Ex-
cellency to be present at the great review which took place yesterday in,, the
Centennial Park.
The Governor-General understands that he had the honour of taking|lthe
salute from representatives of 150 regiments. The occasion was one never to be
forgotten, and the presence of detachments of so many different corps drawn from
all parts of the Empire was most symbolical of the unity of Her Majesty’s
dominions.


He ventures to congratulate the Major-General upon the perfection of the
arrangements, upon the precision with which all military movements were carried
out, and upon the soldierly appearance and fine physique of all the troops on
parade. (Signed) Hopetoun, Governor-General.
In notifying the above the G.O.C. desires to thank all the officers, N.C.
officers, and men of the land and naval forces, who by their presence and move-
ments on parade have evoked this handsome acknowledgment of their services
from His Excellency the Governor-General.
He would especially thank Lieutenant-Colonel Crole Wyndham, C.B. 2;st
Lancers, for the very efficient manner in which he handled a large brigade of
mounted troops on such a small space of ground ; Captain Dicken, R.N., who
commanded the splendid contingent representing the Royal Navy and Royal
Marines ; Captain Lindeman, of the local Naval Forces ; Colonel Peyton, com-
manding the Indian Contingent; Colonel Penton commanding the Inter-colonial
Brigade; Colonel Holborow, C.M.G., and Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, commanding
Infantry Brigades of the New South Wales Forces ; and lastly, Colonel Mackenzie,
A.A.G., who was mainly responsible for the rapid formation of the troops on
parade. (Signed) G. A. French, Major-General.
HARBOUR FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
Of all the gorgeous spectacles which Sydney has recently pre-
sented, one of the most magnificent was the harbour fireworks dis-
play on the evening of January 4.
A large number of the officers availed themselves of the kind
invitations of Admiral Pearson and General French to view the
display from their respective grounds, where they found every
comfort awaiting them, both indoors and in the gardens, which
command a fine view of the harbour. The cloudless night had no
other fault than that it was, if anything, too bright, the full moon
shining down gloriously upon the rippling surface of the water.
By 8 o’clock that portion of the harbour lying between Garden
Island, Fort Macquarie, and Neutral Bay was so crowded with
vessels of all kinds and sizes, from mail steamers to rowing
dingeys, that it appeared as though the shipping of Australia had
gathered together in one huge federal fleet.
Every point of vantage on the foreshores of Farm Cove and
the Northern suburbs was crowded. On the Domain heights was
a teeming crowd of spectators covering the grassy slopes.
At half past 8 o’clock, the firing of guns from H.M.S. Royal
Arthur was the signal for a brilliant spectacle. Coloured lights
burst out along the bulwarks of seven or eight warships, which
had been formed up in line, giving them the appearance of ships
on fire. Then, from a number of punts moored in Farm Cove,
and near Macquarie Point, the real showers of fire began. In-
numerable rockets of indescribable beauty and wealth of colour
were projected into the air, each bursting into a fresh design.


For over two hours this went on, the designs of the fireworks
changing continually. At intervals, the display with which the
warships had opened the programme was repeated, the colours
being frequently changed. Towards the close of the display the
flagship H.M.S. Royal Arthur was outlined in electric lights from
water-line to masthead, with excellent effect. The pyrotechnics
closed with a superb shower of 3,000 rockets, and a set piece
“ Good night.”
NAVAL AND MILITARY BANQUET.
The naval and military banquet given by the New South Wales
Government on January 5 was successfully carried out in every
respect. The Town Hall was handsomely decorated with English,
American and New South Wales flags. As at the State banquet,
ladies had the privilege of seats in the galleries, and a considerable
number were present. The band of the Royal Arthur and
Herr Vollmar’s orchestra furnished the music for the occasion, the
Meistersingers also rendered some enjoyable songs. The Hon.
John See (Colonial Secretary and Minister for Defence) occupied
the chair The Premier and a large number of celebrities, civil,
naval and military, were present. Apologies were received from
the Governor-General and Lieutenant-Governor.
The chairman proposed the toast of “ The Queen,” and it was
cordially drunk, the orchestra playing the National Anthem.
The chairman then proposed the health of “ The Governor-
General. ’ He said it would generally be conceded throughout
Australia that the people had been exceedingly fortunate in
securing the services of a gentleman so distinguished and
experienced in British politics. (Applause.) All were glad, too,
that he was rapidly recovering his health. (Applause).
The toast was cordially received, and the chairman then gave
the health of ” The Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales,
Sir Frederick Darley.” He expressed the opinion that the
appointment of Sir Frederick Darley to the position of Governor
of the State would be a worthy tribute to the ability of that
gentleman, and would give universal satisfaction in the State.
Sir Robert Stout, Chief Justice of New Zealand, in proposing
the toast of “ The Ministry of the Commonwealth,” coupled with
the name of Mr. Edmund Barton, referred to the magnificent
displays in connection with the inauguration of the Common-
wealth.


Mr. Edmund Barton, on rising to reply, was greeted with
hearty and prolonged cheering. After thanking Sir Robert Stout
for his generous remarks, he said the events of the week had been
great in their suggestiveness. They had been a lesson that union
of Australia and the Empire meant Might, Glory, and Peace.
Sir F. Sargood proposed “ The Ministry of the State of New
South Wales, coupled with the name of Mr. B. R. Wise, Attorney-
General.” (Applause.) He said that there was a large amount
of valuable work still to be done by the State Ministry apd Par-
liament, and he trusted that not only in New South Wales but in
all the States of the Commonwealth, care would be taken to see
that good men and true came forward to hll the responsible posi-
tions of State Ministers.
Mr. B. R. Wise, Attorney-General, said that during the few
days remaining of the soldiers’ stay in the State the merits of the
Ministry, if it had any, would show themselves by what was done
rather than by what was said. Of all the pleasant, though onerous
duties cast upon the State Ministry during the last few weeks,
none had been more agreeable than making arrangements for that
significant gathering, and in the execution of none were they more
convinced that they were expressing the sentiment of the people
whose mouthpieces they were. (Applause.) Every man there
was a servant of the Queen in one capacity or another, whether
military, naval, or civil. That was the note of unity in the gathering.
He would on behalf of the Ministry welcome to the State the re-
presentatives of the Imperial Army —(loud cheers) —both British
and Indian —(renewed cheers) —whose presence had added so
greatly to the splendour and interest of the celebrations. So also
he had to thank the troops of the different colonies, who had, he
hoped, met together under independent commands for the last
time. (Cheers). He trusted the visitors from England would
return feeling that what Australia had done during the last twelve
months had not exhausted her resources, but that there were men
enough and to spare ready to bear their share in any just quarrel
the British Empire might have.
The chairman proposed the toast of “ The Royal Navy, the
Army, and the Volunteers.” He reminded his hearers of the power
of the British Navy in maintaining commerce and the integrity of
the Empire. The present was an apt time to propose such a toast
as that entrusted to him. Where they saw the flag of England
flying at the main they knew that protection would be afforded,
justice done, and the rights of the Empire protected. (Cheers).
Captain Dicken, R.N., responded on behalf of the navy. He
said that he must express how much the navy rejoiced in having
been associated with the imposing ceremonies that had just taken
place in Sydney, and in meeting so many gallant representatives


of the sister service who represented the fighting traditions of the
nation—(Cheers) —and many of whom had recently been in active
service against the Queen’s enemies. He trusted that the navy
would ensure peace and prosperity to the trade of the great
Commonwealth of Australia—(hear, hear) —and be associated
with the advancement of the Empire in the Southern Seas.
(Applause).
Major-General French responded on behalf of the Colonial
Forces. He had been connected with those forces for some twenty-
five years, and had always considered that the Australians were
just as much a part of the British Empire as the English them-
selves. (Cheers). The South African war had confirmed his
opinion. He drew attention to the fact that the South African
war was not the first time that Australians had aided the Empire ;
New South Wales had sent a force to the Soudan in 1885.
(Cheers). The Indian troops had also done great service to the
Empire. We had 300,000,000 people in India, and if we had a
great war in Asia, we would have to depend upon them for
support. Reverting to Australia, he considered that it was in the
backblocks of this country that England should look for her
cavalry and reservists in time of trouble. (Cheers).
Colonel Wyndham (who was received with great cheering),
returned thanks on behalf of the Imperial army. He said that
the Australian army had given up the old column formation, and
it was now “ Advance Australia, in line, shoulder to shoulder.”
(Applause). By that means they were adopting the soundest
form of tactics and need fear no foe. In the name of the Imperial
representative force, he thanked the people of Sydney for the kind
way in which they had been received. They had assisted in their
humble way in the celebration of the birth of a new century, and
also in the birth ot a new Commonwealth, and he hoped that in
time to come the visit of the Imperial troops would sometimes be
associated in their minds with that great event, He hoped that
they had enkindled in their hearts the same warm friendship that
the Imperial and Indian troops felt for them. (Cheers).
Sir George Dibbs responded on behalf of the Australian
Volunteers, who, he said, had done more to bring the federal form
of Government into existence than any other people.
The toast of the “ Press of the Commonwealth of Australia ”
was proposed by Mr. J. Carroll, and this having been suitably
acknowledged, the proceedings closed.


ASSAULT=AT=ARMS.
The naval and military assault-at-ams, wherein the Imperial,
Indian and Colonial forces, and local police were engaged, com-
menced at the Gaiety Athletic Hall, Sydney, on the evening
of Jan. 7th and was continued on the 9th and 10th at the
Town Hallj being brought to a most successful conclusion on
the nth, at the Gaiety Athletic Hall. Some of the finest
exponents in Sydney competed in the sword v. sword, bayonet v.
bayonet, and foil v. foil events, while the single-stick section of the
programme attracted competitors from among the British visitors,
as well as from all the men-of-war in port A clever exhi-
bition of club swinging by Corporal McNeil was an attractive
item on the programme and the single-stick contests for the
officers of the Indian Contingent, which was won by Rissaldar
Ram Singh, who defeated Ram Chunder, was received with
great applause. The displays too, of the Queensland blacks were
productive of much amusement. A military band was in attend-
ance every evening and gave an excellent selection of music.
A O O , , , , ITTTI
Amongst those present, by special invitation, were the Hon. John
See (Colonial Secretary), the Hon. F. B. Suttor, Colonel Crole
Wyndham, C.8., Sir John and Lady Quick and a great number
of ladies. The results of the finals were as follows, in which it
will be noticed that Corporals Eggleton and Cameron found their
way to most of the finals.
Final Results.
FOlLS Corporal Eggleton beat Corporal Cameron by 5
points to 4.
Lightweight Boxing Competition.— Final : Parbury
(Sydney Squadron Lancers), beat Carruthers (Newcastle Garrison
Artillery) in seven rounds.
Singlesticks. —Final : Corporal Eggleton (Royal Horse
Guards), beat Corporal Cameron (of the Cameron Highlanders)
by 5 points to 3.
Middleweight Boxing Competition.— Final: Staff-Ser-
geant O’Connor (Bth Regiment), beat Martin (N.S.W. Irish Rifles)
in six rounds.
Sword v. Sword. —Semi-finals: Corporal Cameron (Cameron
Highlanders), beat Corporal Cowell (Middlesex Volunteers), 3
points to nil; Eggleton (Royal Horse Guards), beat Grosch (Duke
of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 3 points to 1. Final ; Eggleton
beat Cameron, 5 points to 3.
Heavyweight Boxing Competition.— Final : Musician
Vercoe (R.A.A.) beat Sergeant Kelleher (R.A.A.).
Bayonet v. Bayonet. —Semi-finals : Cowell beat Cameron,
Grosch a bye. Final; Cowell beat Grosch, 5 points to 1.


NAVAL AND MILITARY SPORTS.
ASCENT OF A WAR BALLOON.
Fierce Miniature Battle.
A MOST attractive programme drew enormous crowds to the
Agricultural Grounds on the 7th and Bth January, and also on the
12th, when a repetition of the most interesting events was
given in aid of the gunners injured in the recent accident. In a
horse-loving country like Australia, the keenest interest was
naturally aroused in the mounted competitions, particularly in the
contests between the Imperial and Colonial Cavalry and Indian
Contingent. Great applause greeted the displays of bayonet
exercise by the Guards and of free gymnastics by the Rifles, the
naval gun drill, the Artillery driving, the Sappers with their
telegraphs and balloons. The great feature of the sports, however,
was the realistic display of a successful foray by the British troops
against a small stronghold of tribesmen on the Indian frontier.
The results of the competitions on the first day were as
follows:
Cuts AND Points, as laid down in the cavalry drill.—Section
A (for officers) : Colonel Crole Wyndham, 1 ; Lientenant M'Mahon
(N.S.W. Lancers), 2. Section B (for non-commissioned officers
and men) : Trooper Watts (21st Lancers), 1 ; Sergeant Haggarty
(N.S.W. Lancers), 2; Sergeant Williams (N.S.W. Lancers), 3.
Cutlass Exercise.— H.M.S. Royal Arthur, team 1., 1.;
team 11., 2 ; N.S.W. N.A.V., 3.
Lemon Cutting (in files). —Section A ; Lieutenant Dangar
(N.S.W. Lancers), 1 ; Colonel King (Queensland), 2 ; Lieutenant
V. Wayte-Wood, 3. Section B : Trooper Macgregor (Australian
Horse), 1; Farrier-sergeant Inglis (7th Hussars), 2; Lance-
corporal Tarlington (Bega Mounted Rifles), 3.
Gun Wheel Race, 100 yds.—T. Gussington (Royal
Arthur ), 1 ; H. Sleeman {Royal Arthur') 2.
Cavalry Sword Exercise. —Singleton Half Squadron,
N.S.W. Lancers, 1 ; King’s Dragoon Guards, 2 ; 7th Hussars, 3.
Riding and Jumping Competition. —Section A: Lieut.
Normal Hall (N.S.W. Lancers), 1 ; Lieutenant V. Wayte-
Wood (King’s Dragoon Guards), 2; Lieutenant B. Dickson
(Royal Horse Artillery), 3. Section B : Corporal Hoskin (Ten-
terfield Mounted Rifles), 1; Trooper Morris (N.S.W. Lancers),
2 ; Sergeant-major Baxter (Australian Horse), 3.


Tug of War on Horseback. —A Battery, Royal Aus-
tralian Artillery, 1 ; South Australian Mounted Rifles, 2 ; Captain
Forsyth’s Queensland team, 3.
Tent-Pegging (open to officers of the Indian Contingent).—
Rissaldar Ram Singh, 1 ; Rissaldar-Major Thakur Singh, 2;
Rissaldar-Major Misri Khan, 3.
Tent-Pegging by Sections (open to members of Indian
Contingent). —Rissaldar-Major Misri Khan, Rissaldar Ram
Singh, Rissaldar Mahomad Abad Khan, and Kot Dafedar
Ibrahim Khan, 1 ; Rissaldar Agar Singh, Rissaldar Ismail Khan,
Jemadar Sayad Ahmad, and Kot Dafedar Chulam Rasul Khan, 2 ;
Dafedar Dhulip Singh, Kot Dafedar Pahar Singh, Saijir Rao, and
Khiwan, 3.
Naval Field Gun Competition. —A. Company N.S.W.
N.A.V., 1 ; C. Company N.S.W. N.A.V. 2. Two teams from the
Royal Arthur unsuccessfully competed.
The exhibition given by the balloon section, the laying of the
field telegraph by the Royal Engineers, and the Artillery driving
display was highly appreciated by the spectators.
On the second day of the sports, visitors had every reason
to be satisfied, for the weather was perfect, clear sunshine, with a
cool easterly breeze all day, and there was no lack of amusement
and excitement provided in the competitions. Early in the day
the Singleton Lancers, under Sergeant Williams, scored a popular
win in the tent-pegging competition. In the lance exercise, the
King’s Dragoon Guards, who secured first prize, and the 21st
Lancers, who came second, were loudly cheered. The competition
in the Wantage race was followed with keen interest. Each team
of four men was required to gallop over two hurdles. Then three
of the soldiers had to dismount, and, at the word of command, open
fire on the invisible enemy, while the third man rode with all the
horses in tow undercover. “ Cease firing” was then ordered, and
after mounting, the whole team had to gallop back to the starting
post, jumping each hurdle together. Sergeant-Major M'Gillivray’s
team, from the South Australian Mounted Rifles, secured first
prize.
Some idea of the gruesomeness of war, though modified by
the atmosphere of amusement and peace, was given by the Royal
Army Medical Corps, who, finding two recumbent figures on the
ground badly wounded, quickly and gently bound each up with a
dozen bandages, and conveyed them to the waiting ambulance
waggon. This done, however, the wounded were just as gently
removed again, and released amid cheering, as the corps marched
smartly off the enclosure.


Sergeant Brady again led his Singleton Lancers to victory in
the Balaclava melee, in which the Imperial men had to give way
to the fierce and determined attack of the New South
Welshmen.
In the Tug-of-War for heavy weights, the Royal Artillery
were the winners, the Brigade of Guards taking second prize,
while in the Tug-of-War for teams under 12 stone, the Marines
from the Royal Arthur , and the Royal Engineers, took first and
second prizes in the order named. A novelty, which drew much
applause, was the display of free gymnastics by the Rifle group of
the Imperial Corps.
There were a great many entries for the Victoria Cross race,
in which the troopers after racing over several hurdles, had, in the
face of the fire of the enemy, to secure a dummy figure lying
helpless on the ground, and after discharging all the chambers of
their revolvers, to gallop back again over the hurdles.
Rissaldar Mahomad Abud Khan, of the 2nd Bombay Lancers,
gave an interesting exhibition of horsemanship. Going at full
gallop, he stooped and picked up a handkerchief from the ground,
but he was not so successful in his several attempts to grasp a
lance in the same way. Again, at full gallop, he stood on his head
on the horse's neck, and, being chased by his fellow-countrymen,
he disappeared on the offside of the horse, and opened fire on
his pursuers. These and other equestrian feats were loudly
applauded.
The proceedings closed with the representation of a fight on
the Indian frontier, which proved a great success. A square
watch tower, about 30 feet high, with a loop-holed enclosure
around it about 20 yards square, had been erected in the centre
of the ground, exactly reproducing a typical Pathan fort. A few
tribesmen in their picturesque dress were sitting idly outside their
walls, smoking under the shade of a tree that overhung the
enclosure, when suddenly there appeared a patrol of British
Cavalry. At once from the tower of the fort came the warning
shot of the watchman, and the tribesmen quickly took refuge m
the enclosure, when a brisk fire followed the patrol as it galloped
off to report; but not untouched ; a trooper falls wounded from
his saddle, and a yell of triumph from the tower, warns his com-
rades of his fall; at once one of returns, and succeeds, in
spite of a heavy fire, in bearing him off. Shortly after this, in
rushes a sentry of the tribesmen, and with shouts and waving of
sword, gives warning that a large body of British troops are
approaching from another quarter. The alarm having spread,
from every side the Pathans stream in to defend their homes, and
with banners flying they post themselves on the ridge, against
which the British Infantry is already advancing. The crack of
the Lee-Metford contrasts sharply with the dull report of the


tribesmen’s Martinis, and their firing line is soon wreathed in
smoke, while none betrays that of the British marksmen. Soon a
few heavy volleys show the strength* of the attack, and the de-
fenders rush for the shelter of their fort, a few assailants reaching
the ridge as soon as they leave it. With their fire they drop
several tribesmen as they run, but most of these are carried into
shelter by their friends. The Infantry then attempts an assault,
but the enemy’s fire is too heavy, and the remnant are glad to
take cover on the flank. The tribesmen’s triumph is short; already
a gun is in action on the rocky kopje that lies at some distance to
the east; the first shell tears up the ground on the right, a second
on the left, while the third bursts on the parapet of the tower, and
the effect is at once visible in the slackened fire. The Infantry
again close in, and open a heavy fire on every loop-hole ; two
more shells strike the fort, inflicting heavy damage, but still the
defenders hold out.
From the nearest cover dash up the sappers with powder bags ;
nearly every man is hit, but at last the charge is placed and fired,
and the gate of the fort is blown in amid a cloud of dust and smoke !
“ Charge ! ” sounds the bugle and the khaki boys and Highlanders
rush to the assault, the pipes playing “ Cock o’ th North ! ” The
Pathans do not wait for close quarters but run for dear life and are
mown down by a heavy fire —a few desparate spirts turn and charge
down in a fanatical rush, but none reach the muzzles of our rifles.
After the enemy has disappeared picquets are posted, the
wounded looked to, and for a few minutes a wild chase takes place
as the Tommies hunt down the chickens and sheep that form their
share of the loot.
The display terminated by a grand march around the arena by
the troops engaged, the tribesmen receiving a great ovation.
No pains were spared by Captain Powell, R.E., who was
responsible for this item of the programme, to make it as realistic
as possible. Among the tribesmen were Pathan native officers
and soldiers, whose clothing, arms and tactics were correct in every
detail ; among the British troops, all the officers and many of the
men had been campaigners together on the Indian frontier. No
rancour was felt by the native troops who represented the losing
side, as they had a British officer (disguised as an Afridi) to lead
them and they entered most heartily into the spirit of the fight.
After they had got over the surprise of being so repeatedly blown
up without apparent damage, they decided that it was the best
“ tamasha” that had ever been seen.
The most attractive items of the first and second day’s sports
were repeated on the 12th inst., and resulted in a gate of £BOO,
which was handed over for the benefit of the injured gunners. On
this occasion the Agricultural Society generously gave the use of
their ground.


A fine day and a public half-holiday ensured a complete
success. The wind was rather too high for a captive balloon, but
the display nevertheless wa§ given, and it certainly illustrated
some of the discomforts an aeronaut has to put up with. It was
estimated that about 30,000 spectators visited the grounds on
the 12th, including the Premier, the Archbishop of Sydney,
Major-General French and many other prominent persons.
NAVAL AND MILITARY CONCERT.
On the evening of January 12th. the Citizens’ Commonwealth
Committee invited the Imperial Troops and the Naval Squadron
to a Smoking Concert, which was acknowledged by all to have
been a conspicuous success.
The floor of the hall was crowded, whilst the galleries were
filled with ladies and gentlemen in evening dress. Probably not
less than 3,000 persons were included in the assemblage, and
owing to the brilliant and varied uniforms to be seen on all hands,
the occasion appeared to be one of special distinction. The en-
tertainment was in the nature of a smoke night. Refreshments
were liberally served at a number of round tables in the hall. A
large central table, at which the more important guests were
seated, bore a massive silver punchbowl. The Mayor of the city,
Dr. Graham, M.L.A., clad in his civic robes, presided. With
him were Colonel Crole Wyndham, C.8., Captain Rich, R.N.,
of H.M.S. Ringarooma (representing his Excellency the Admiral),
Colonel McKenzie, A.A.G., Mr. E. Barton, Q.C. (Federal Pre-
mier), Sir W. J. Lyne (Premier of New South Wales), Mr. J.
See (New South Wales Colonial Secretary), Mr. F. B. Suttor
(member of the New South Wales Ministry), Sir G. Dibbs, and
Colonel Bell. Besides the Imperial Troops, there were present
as guests a large number of sailors from the warships on the
Australian station. A commencement was made by the playing
of Rossini’s overture to “ William Tell ” on the grand organ, by
Mr. A. R. Mote.
Dr. Graham (Mayor of Sydney), then said he had been asked
by the committee of citizens who had organised the entertainment
to say a few words. It was very difficult for any man to find
words to sufficiently express the intense pleasure which the
visit of the Imperial troops had given to the people of Sydney.
(Hear, hear). Whatever city in Australasia they might happen
to visit, the same generous, hearty welcome, he was sure, would
await them as they had received here. (Cheers). Australians


would be a very sour, apathetic people if the visit of the Imperial
troops did not fire their imaginations with national pride. The
glorious traditions of their regiments were well known to Austra-
lians. It was hoped that when the visitors returned to their
comrades and friends in the Old Country they would tell them
what kind of people Australians were ; above all, that they were
distinguished for pride of race. (Hear, hear). They were proud
*of this. (Cheers). Recently, when the call for help came,
Australians very willingly put on their bandoliers, raised their
rifles, and leapt into their saddles to go to fight for the flag. The
great Commander-in-Chief (Lord Roberts) had been pleased to
say the Australian soldiers were splendid fellows. They were
proud of the character which Lord Roberts had given them.
Australians trusted that in the future nothing would be done
which would tarnish the good name which the Commander-in-Chief
had given them. (Cheers).
Mr. E. Barton, Q.C., the Federal Premier, who was greeted
with much applause, said he did not know he would be required to
speak until he came into the room. The notice was too short.
There ought to be a placard over his head such as Mark Twain
described as being placed behind an entertainer in an American
backwoods lecture-room, saying, “Do not shoot at the professor,
he is doing his best.” (Laughter). It was a very great honour to
be asked to speak at what he supposed was almost a farewell
meeting with the representative Imperial forces, who, by favour
of our gracious Queen, had come here to grace the inauguration of
Australia’s Commonwealth. The English visitors present had
come to mark the congratulations of the Empire on federation, to
assure us that when Australians had mingled their blood with the
blood of men of the United Kingdom in a common stream, they knew,
as Australians knew, that their blood would be known by no other
name than British. The recentpast had been marked by magnificent
scenes of which Australia might be proud, and of which he as a native
of Sydney might be forgiven if he were very proud. The greatest
perhaps of those scenes was the noble review of last week—(Cheers)
in which over 150 corps were represented. There had been many
greater reviews within the Empire in point of numbers. Few
would be found to say that there had been one review which had
been more representative or more calculated to touch every
patriotic chord in the heart of the Empire. (Cheers). Another
nation had now been formed under the British flag, which the
Empire recognised was an accession to it, and added much to its
general strength. Australia was not suffering, he hoped, from
swelled head, or setting too much store upon the conduct of Austra-
lian troops in the field or the spirit of the Australian people in
supplying them. He did not want their expressions to be taken in
that way. He wanted it to be understood that without ink and
without parchment there was a noble fact between Australia and


the other parts of the Empire to the effect that when any part of
the Empire was attacked every nerve, sinew, and muscle would be
strained in all the other parts to repel that attack. (Cheers).
Australians, without being unduly proud, ought to lay to their
hearts the feeling that if they had shown that an attack upon the
integrity of the Empire had called for immediate assistance from
them, they were but reciprocating a noble and generous declaration
from the United Kingdom that in the event of attack, to the last
man and the last shilling Great Britain would see that Australia
was preserved to the Empire. (Cheers). However slow Austra-
lia might have been in the past to recognise some of its obligations
it would not be slow to do so hereafter. The result would follow
that for defence, not for aggression, there would be welded together
an alliance which would welcome assistance from every nation,
but could proudly say, if such assistance were refused, the British
Empire could stand alone. (Cheers).
This was followed by several songs and choruses by the
Meistersingers, which were well received.
The Rev. A. J. Townend gave a spirited rendering of his clever
poem, “The Imperial Representative Corps,” the words of which
appeared in our first number.
Colonel Crole Wyndham, who, amidst a perfect storm ol
applause, rose to speak, said he had the honour to move a vote oi
thanks to the Worshipful Mayor of Sydney. He would, on second
thoughts, ask permission to add a little to the motion by making it
a vote of thanks tendered in the name of the Imperial Represen-
tative Corps to the Mayor and Citizens of Sydney. (Cheers). The
vote was tendered in appreciation of the kindness which had
accompanied every hour of their stay in this beautiful city, a kind-
ness which was ever increasing, a kindness to which no speech of
the readiest, most eloquent speaker could possibly do justice, and
a kindness which the Imperial Representative Corps would never
forget. (Cheers.) The corps was composite, representing many
regiments and many departments of the British Army. For the
moment they were all bound together like one regiment, but the
time was approaching, alas, very soon, when the corps would be
broken up and its units would be scattered through various
garrisons. Then the Imperial Representative Corps would exist
only in memory—in the memories of Australians, he trusted, with
some thoughts of kindness for the members of the corps, and in the
memories of the soldiers who were now visiting Australia, most
certainly as connected with the proudest and pleasantest period
of their lives. The story of their residence in Sydney would go,
through their scattered units, to every garrison throughout
England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. (Cheers.) It would be
published as no newspaper report could publish it, for every


Tommy Atkins paid much more attention to what his comrade told
him in the barrack-room or the canteen than he paid to anything
he read. (Hear, hear.) The details of the kindness of the Sydney
people, of their hospitality, and of their welcome, would be
repeated again and again with the true, although, perhaps, rough
eloquence of the soldier’s tongue. (Cheers.) The thousand
members of the corps would form a band of 1000 missionaries, who
would preach the doctrine of peace and unity between Mother
England and her daughter Australia—(Hear, hear)—with goodwill
to kinsmen of the Southern Seas. When the Imperial Represen-
tative Corps ceased to represent the Army of England it would
represent Australia in Great Britain. (Cheers.) It would bear
witness to the power and to the true patriotism of the daughter for
the mother, and its representations would never cease so long as
one of the members of the corps was left alive to tell how Sydney
and New South Wales inaugurated on New Year’s Day, 1901.
“ Sailors and soldiers,” called Colonel Wyndham, “ get up on
your hind legs and give three such cheers as only British Tars and
Tommies know how to give, for the Mayor and Citizens of
Sydney.”
And then from a thousand vigorous throats there went up a
round of cheers that nearly moved the roof, such cheers as those
in the gallery will long remember.
The Mayor having called for cheers for Sir William Lyne and
the Government of New South Wales, the singing of the National
Anthem brought the proceedings to a close.
DEPARTURE OP THE I.R.C. FROM SYDNEY.
On January 14, the streets of Sydney were unusually crowded,
thousands of people being attracted to the city by the announce-
ment of the departure of the Imperial Troops. About 11.30 a.m.,
after parade, the men were ordered off into steam trams, and the
public only realised that they were on the move when four tram-
loads of men in British uniforms were seen careering down Oxford
Street. Although taken by surprise, everyone cheered involun-
tarily at first, but afterwards they did so of set purpose and with
enthusiasm. Opposite the Metropole the soldiers were ordered
put of the trams, and on the slope of the hill towards the Educa-
tion Office they were formed into a procession, headed by the
local forces, The troops marched down Young Street to the


Quay, amidst hearty cheering from the crowds upon the sidewalks,
and persons at every window, balcony, and parapet upon the
route. Colonel McKenzie, A.A.G., on horseback, escorted the
colonial portion of the procession. Colonel Crole Wyndham, C.8.,
on foot, led the Imperial Troops. The Federal Premier (the
Right Hon. E. Barton, Q.C.) and many other celebrities were
present during the embarkation of the troops.
At 2.30 p.m., units from each of the Imperial regiments were
drawn up on the wharf representative of the remainder who were
kept on the Britannic. His Excellency the Governor-General
then drove up. He was cheered by a vast multitude of people who
had gathered in the roadway, as well as by those on the troopship
and at the wharf. Followed by Colonel Crole Wyndham, Major-
General French, and staff, Lord Hopetoun went on board the
Britannic. After a short stay, his Excellency returned to the
wharf and addressed the soldiers there drawn up at attention.
The Governor-General said : —“ I think I may venture to say
for the people of Sydney and New South Wales what I say most
heartily for myself, that it has been a great pleasure to see you
here. All wish you a pleasant time in the other States of
Australia, and a safe and prosperous passage home.” (Cheers).
At the call of Colonel Wyndham the Imperial troops gave
three cheers for his Excellenc} 7 the Governor-General and three
cheers for Lady Hopetoun. His Excellency then took his leave.
Colonel M'Kenzie, A.A.G., read to the Imperial men on
parade a special General Order, in which the Governor-General
expressed his pleasure and satisfaction in having been present at
the military review m Centennial Park on January 3.
Mr. E. Barton, P.C., Q.C., the Federal Premier, who was
greeted with cheers, said the whole of Australia would be as
sincere in its sorrow at parting from the Imperial soldiers as it
was warm in welcoming them. The Representative Corps, which
had been sent from Great Britain and from India, had made a deep
impression upon the hearts of the Australian people, and had
convinced them more than ever of the power and majesty of the
Empire of which they hoped for ever Australia would be a com-
ponent part. Australians could look after themselves pretty well
on land. He thought the Navy was pretty confident it could look
after Australia at sea. If there were future occasions when
Australian troops had to serve far from their own land for the
sake of defending the Empire, they would again welcome the
great honour of standing in the field and fighting side by side with
troops of such British corps as those to which the men he was
addressing belonged. (Cheers.) Australians were glad the


Imperial soldiers had come here, for they were proud of them,
and they hoped the Imperial soldiers were proud of the Austra-
lians. (Cheers.)
Sir W. J. Lyne, the Premier of New South Wales, who was
also cheered, said when the idea was conceived by the State
Government of New South Wales ol asking the Imperial Govern-
ment to allow a number of officers and men of the British Army
to visit Australia and take part in the Commonwealth celebrations,
it was adopted with a view of showing representative men of the
army what Australia and Australians were like, as well as of
investing the celebrations with due dignity. He trusted they had
found that New South Wales had not been wanting in cordiality
at their reception, and had entertained the Imperial Troops in a
manner worthy of the visitors’ reputation and of the State of New
South Wales. In saying good-bye to them on behalf of the people
of New South Wales, he wished them a safe and speedy return
to their native land. (Cheers )
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales (Mr. J. See)
said he desired to express the extreme satisfaction which he felt
as head of the military department at the manner in whicffihe
understood New South Wales hospitality had been received by
the visiting soldiers of the Queen. There was one regrettable
incident in connection with the visit, and that was the accident
which happened a few days ago to some of the soldiers. They had
perhaps heard that some provision had been made by the people
of New South Wales towards compensating the unfortunate men.
At an entertainment given on Saturday last in the Royal Agricul-
tural Society’s Grounds, upwards of was raised towards
providing for their future. (Cheers). That sum was made up of
sixpences contributed by the public, and it was a good indication
therefore of the nice feeling entertained by them towards the
visitors. Such feeling, he thought, was characteristic of Austra-
lians. The British soldiers would leave behind them pleasant
recollections Australians knew that the visitors represinted
regiments which had helped to build the British Empire. He heartily
joined in the wish that the Imperial troops would have a safe
journey back, and he was sure their experiences of New South
Wales and other parts of Australia would live in their memories as
long as they lived. ( Cheers).
The Mayor of Sydney (Dr. Graham, M.L.A.) said the Prime
Minister of Australia had addressed the British soldiers on behalf
of the Commonwealth, and the Prime Minister of the State had
addressed them on behalf of New South Wales. It was his great
privilege also to thank them for their conduct whilst here on behalf
of the citizens of Sydney. The citizens all deeply regretted that
their visit was about to become a memory. So far as the citizens


of Sydney were concerned it would be a memory they would always
cherish. He trusted their visit had equally well impressed the
departing troops. (Cheers).
Major-General French, addressing the troops as “ comrades
and soldiers of the Imperial Service,” said, as an old soldier, he
thanked them all for what they had done during the time they had
been in Sydney. They had added lustre to the grand parade in
which so many regiments of the Empire were represented. He
would not detain them longer, but would only ask them to give
three hearty cheers for the great Queen who reigned over the
Empire. (Great cheering).
Colonel Wyndham, C.8., said, on behalf of the Imperial
Representative Corps, he begged to tender their warmest thanks
for the kind words which had been said. He begged Australians
to believe that those words went straight to the visiting soldiers.’
hearts, and that they did not want any further reward than the
words they had heard for anything they had done for Australia.
If their arrival here had been, as he ventured to. think it was, a
somewhat memorable event in the history of Australia, it was no
less a memorable event in the lives of the members of the
Imperial Representative Corps ; one that they would always look
back upon with pride and pleasure. They would look back upon
it with pride at the thought that they had assisted at the imposing
ceremonies attending the inauguration of the Commonwealth,
which was the inauguration of a new era most important in the
annals of Australia. They would look back upon it with the
pleasure which only those could feel who properly understood and
appreciated New South Wales hospitality after having known it
and received such a welcome as they had done. (Cheers.) He
begged further to tender to the citizens of Sydney warmest thanks
on behalf of the men of the Imperial forces who were injured, for
the munificent contribution the citizens were sending to England
for their future support. He might add that the total sum con-
tributed was more than £BOO. It came to nearly £l, lOO. (Hear,
hear.) The Imperial troops were not going away with swelled
heads. (Laughter.) Their heads might be sore, but they were
not swelled, for they knew that the welcome which had been given
to them was no personal tribute ; they knew that they had been
feted and welcomed because they were the representatives of the
Old Country. (Hear, hear.) They hoped that their visit might
inaugurate an era of increasing prosperity throughout the
Commonwealth, and that it would bind Great Britain and Australia
together, if possible, in an even closer union than that which now
existed, in a closer brotherhood, a closer patriotism, and a closer
loyalty to our Queen —God bless her. (Cheers.) Once more he
thanked Australians for their kindness, on behalf of the Imperial
soldiers. Their thanks came from the bottom of their hearts.
(Cheers.)


Sir William Lyne called for three cheers for Colonel Crole
Wyndham. These were heartily given. Colonel Wyndham then
called for three cheers for Sydney, and “ one more for the beautiful
harbour ” (Laughter and cheering.)
Directly the speeches were over Colonel Wyndham and those
of his officers who were on the wharf shook hands with the leading
Australians in the vicinity, whilst the Imperial soldiers passed up
the gangway on to the ship.
At about 4 p.m. H.M. Transport Britannic , left the quay
amidst a scene of indescribable enthusiasm.
The Imperial troops lined the bulwarks, leaned over the rail-
ings of the hurricane deck, and mounted the deck-houses and the
rigging, waving handkerchiefs and vociferating farewells. The
Highland Light Infantry Band took up a prominent position and
played l( Auld Lang Syne.”
The R.A.A. Band played all the appropriate valedictory music,
from “ The Girl I Left Behind Me” to ” Home Sweet Home,” and
the cheering was tremendous, not only from the P. and O. Wharf,
which, being set aside for privileged people, was not overcrowded,
but from all the purlieus, which were thronged with gesticulating
well-wishers of the departing contingent Steamboats out in the
harbour also added their greetings to the demonstration in the
shape of shrill squeals. The Britannic was followed by quite a
large number of crowded launches as far as the Heads, where the
citizens gave the British troops their final send off. On passing
the warships the sailors manned forecastles and yards and lustily
cheered their military brethren who responded with equal power.
The departing Imperial troops were provided with two homing
pigeons, by Mr. J. Wright, Secretary of the Sydney Homing
Pigeon Society.
The birds were released off Sydney Heads, about 6 p.m.
One message was sent to Lord Hopetoun, and read as follows :
” To the Governor-General.—The Imperial Representative Corps
beg to thank your Excellency for your kindness to them and wish
you and Lady Hopetoun all happiness and prosperity. C Wynd-
ham.”
Another message was, “ Colonel Wyndham, officers, non-com-
missioned officers, and men of the Imperial Representative Corps
send their heartfelt thanks to the people of Sydney for the magni-
ficent hospitality which they received during their stay in New
South Wales.”
Printed at the “Lyttelton Times” Office, Gloucester St., Christchurch, Canterbury, N.Z


THE
I.R.C. Gazette.
THE IMPERIAL REPRESENTATIVE CORPS
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
THIRD NUMBER.
LONDON:
ARMY AND NAVY CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY, LIMITED, 105, VICTORIA STREET, S.W.
1901.




Cbe “ 1.R.C.” Gazette.
London, May Bth, 1901.
EDITORIAL.
This, the closing number of the I. R. C. Gazette, takes up the story
of our tour after the Britannic left Sydney, on the conclusion of the
ceremonials and festivities which marked the Inauguration of the
Australian Commonwealth.
It deals with our visit to Queensland and Tasmania, and tells how
we received there the news of the death of our beloved Queen. The
character of our tour was changed ; at Hobart and at Melbourne it was
for us to greet our kindred as common mourners in a sorrow that all
must share.
Then, after a stormy passage, we reached New Zealand, passed
through the colony from South to North, returning to Adelaide to be
present at the ceremony of the proclamation of the King’s accession.
Finally, we conclude our Odyssey with an account of our doings
on the homeward voyage, a glimpse at Ceylon, a shipwreck “pour rire ”
in the Suez Canal, a call at Malta with a sad accident in the harbour,
and a peaceful journey home to Southampton.
In Australia we left the Editor of this Gazette, who employs the
unwelcome leisure that a Boer bullet enforces in completing the tour
of the world ; with him go our hearty wishes for his complete recovery.
With him goes also the responsibility for the literary merit of this
publication which only hopes to be a record of the gay festivities, the
solemn scenes of mourning, the new experiences and the splendid
hospitality that we found in the lands beneath the Southern Cross.
Should this, our booklet, fall into the hands of any of our
Australian hosts, we would have it tell them that we leave their land
to tell at home the story of their staunch loyalty and the unstinted
kindness with which they welcomed the soldiers of the old country.


DIARY OF EVENTS.
15th.—After the gay festivities of Sydney and the stress of pre-
paring for our departure thence, it was a welcome change to spend
a peaceful day at sea, and in pleasant, fine weather we steamed up
the Eastern coast, always in sight of land. There is nothing
especially inviting about this coast line; occasional cliffs of sand-
stone or basalt break the level, but the shore is mostly low rocks
and sand beaches, rising in' the distance to swelling hills covered
with gum forests, in many places blazing fiercely. Except the
houses of the coastguard, signal staff, and lighthouse
there is little sign of habitation. About 7 p.m. we overtook the
Dalhousie, which had left Sydney several hours before us, and the
British and Indian troops exchanged hearty and spontaneous
cheers, mingled on our side with chaff at the speed of the little
white ship. However, it will be seen that the laugh was not long
with us.
16th.—In the early morning we entered the tortuous channel
that leads to the Brisbane Eiver, and brought up in shoal water
in Moreton Bay more than twenty miles below the city, and
outside the actual river bar which the Britannic was unable to
cross. In the afternoon the Cavalry and Artillery sent up parties
to take over their horses, fit saddlery, etc. The trip up the river
does not lack interest. After leaving the artificially-dredged
channel over the bar, with its long line of beacons, low banks and
mangrove swamps line the shore. Then the banks rise in higher
slopes, and the scenery is brightened by semi-tropical plants and
trees. Nearing the city the river winds considerably among
higher hills. At first sight one is surprised at the size of the
vessels that find their way up to the wharves; among them, the
Dalhousie had found a berth, having passed the Britannic lying
in the bay. On arrival at Brisbane the officers were most com-
fortably quartered in the F arliament House and in the Queensland
Club, the members of which were so good as to vacate their
quarters to receive them. In the evening we were entertained by
the Queensland Government, and as we happened to arrive on the
same day as the Orient, which was bringing back from S. Africa
contingents of Queensland and New Zealand troops, the officers of
all the corps met at the dinner. The Premier of Queensland pre-
sided, having on his right His Excellency Lord Lamington and


the Rt. Hon. R, T. Seddon, Premier of New Zealand, and on his
left Col. Crole Wyndham. All the members of the Ministry and
prominent members of Parliament were present. After dinner
the toasts of the Queen and of His Excellency having been
honoured, the “Army and Navy’’ was proposed, and replied to
by Col. Crole Wyndham, who spoke of the doings of the Colonial
corps in South Africa, and of our great privilege in being sent
out to thank the Colonies for what they had done and what they
had borne for Britain’s honour and for Britain’s Queen. Captain
Campbell responded for the Indian contingent. In acknowledging
the toast of his health, Mr. Seddon made a vigorous speech, in
which he rejoiced that the advice of those, who in the past wished
to “cut the painter,’’ had not been taken. He pointed to
Australian Federation as a stepping-stone to Imperial Federation,
and looked forward to the time when the Colonies should have a
voice in the Councils of the Empire. Lieut.-Col. Ricardo replied
on behalf of the returned Queensland soldiers, and spoke of the
high regard that the Home and Colonial soldiers had for each
other in the field. Mr. Seddon spoke again to the toast of
“ Prosperity to Queensland,” and a very memorable dinner con-
cluded by the vociferous singing of “ Auld Lang Syne.”
. 17.—This being the occasion of the procession of the Imperial
and Indian troops through Brisbane, it required an early start
from the Britannic to assemble in time in the Government
Domain, where the troops formed up on landing from the
steamers. Some of the horses w T ere not prepared for the appear-
ance of such resplendent riders, and some spirited circus per-
formances took place, but all were formed up in time before the
time fixed for the procession to start, a very welcome second
breakfast having fortified our bodies for the march. At about
10 o’clock the Premier, Mr. Philp, with the Mayor of Brisbane,
•drove into the Domain and were received by the Commandant,
Colonel Finn, and his staff. The corps having been formed up,
Mr. Philp read an address of welcome, a copy of which, in
handsome binding, was handed to Colonel Crole Wyndham. An
address was then made to the Indian contingent, and an
illuminated copy of this, written in Hindustani, was presented to
Colonel Peyton. Suitable acknowledgments having been made,
the procession moved off, passing through the Government
House grounds. His Excellency the Governor received the salute
of the troops as they defiled past the house and out at the main
gates. In the streets we had a most enthusiastic reception. All
along the route of the procession the city was gay with bunting
and drapery. Triumphal arches had been erected, and motto-
bearing banners stretched across the street welcoming the
contingents, while enthusiastic but orderly crowds lined the
pavements and filled every window. There could be no doubt of


the absorbing interest that was shown, or of the heartiness of the
welcome by which the crowd desired' to show T its loyalty to the
Motherland.
The sun of a Queensland summer is hot, but it was mercifully
tempered by a cool breeze, and the march from the Domain to
the station, nearly 2-| miles, was not as trying as we had been led
to expect it w r ould be. Entraining in two trains, the dismounted
troops proceeded to Ascot Station, and w r aited there until the
arrival of the mounted portion, when all formed up for a march
past on the race-course.
Our friends the New Zealanders had sailed in the morning,
and so were not seen in the parade, but strong contingents from
the country-side swelled the numbers on parade, and the public
interest was heightened by the presence of their own contingent
that had just returned from the war.
Space does not permit of our reproducing the glowing accounts
in which the Brisbane journals chronicled the enthusiasm that
the parade evoked, but the dense crowds and the unmistakable
demonstrations of loyalty showed how the hearts of the people
were stirred by the sight. It was for them a real visible symbol
of the cult of “brotherhood through the Empire” that has so
recently roused Australasia to such splendid efforts. At the
head of the troops rode Colonel Wyndham and his Staff, then
followed the Royal Horse Artillery, Household Cavalry, King’s
Dragoon Guards, 7th Hussars, 21st Lancers, and the Wiltshire
Yeomanry. Splendid as was their reception, the enthusiasm
seemed to increase as the Indian Cavalry, led by Colonel Peyton,
came in sight. The dark impassive faces of the veterans who
represented India’s army, and the striking brilliancy of their
uniforms and turbans completely conquered the excited spectators.
The Field Artillery brought up the rear of the mounted troops.
Next followed the Royal Garrison Artillery and the Royal
Engineers. At the head of the infantry came the Household
Brigade Grenadiers, Coldstreams, Scots Guards, and Irish
Guards. As the tall bearskins moved past, the spectators
cheered themselves hoarse. Among the remainder of the infantry
groups, Rifles, Fusiliers, Highlanders, and Line, the kilted
soldiers, as usual, were the favourites ; but there was enthusiasm
enough for every one, and a plenty to spare for the infantry of
the Indian contingent. The mounted corps then returned at the
trot to the music of the Toowomba Mounted Infantry Band.
Preceded by the Headquarters Band came the contingent of
Queenslanders, who had just returned from South Africa ; very
workmanlike they looked, and one would have thought that the


cheers would never stop. After marching past they were turned
about, and, returning to the grand stand, Lord Lamington
addressed them, welcoming them home after their arduous services,
and congratulating them on the reputation that their gallantry
had won. The remainder of the Queensland troops now marched
past the Mounted Infantry leading, followed by the Naval
Brigade and the-Naval Cadets, the Field Artillery, the Submarine
Miners, and two regiments of Queensland Infantry. All looked
very well, and there is no doubt that Queensland can congratulate
herself on the material of which her citizen corps are formed.
Five hundred of the State School Cadets formed the last but
not least interesting unit in this very interesting parade.
After the march past, the troops tiled in to a stand on the right
of the course where dinner was provided for them, the officers
also finding lunch in rooms under the grand stand. For the
afternoon a programme of such events as bayonet exercise by the
Guards and physical drill by the Fusiliers had been arranged, and
several interesting competitions—such as high jumping for horses,
riding of buck jumpers, and a hunter’s contest—were for decision.
The crowd, however, which had grown to forty or fifty thousand
people, was beyond the control of the police, and such events as
were brought off were hidden, and in some cases hindered by the
thronging spectators. Before the jumping competition was closed
the bar had been raised to 6 feet, and two horses had cleared it.
At the conclusion of the sports the I. E. C. marched to the
floating jetty at the Hamilton breakwater, and were transported
to the Britannic in the steamers Lucinda and Otter.
In the evening the officers of the I. R, C, and the Indian contin-
gent were the guests of the Queensland Club, and about a hundred
sat down in the fine club house. His Honour Judge Cooper was
in the Chair, his Excellency on his right and Col. Crole-Wyndham
on his left. In replying to the toast of his health Lord
Lamington welcomed the officers of the contingents and assured
them that their visit would be beneficial to the Colony. Captain
Seymour, the vice-president of the club, in proposing the health
of the visitors said that this was not the first sight that Brisbane
had had of Imperial troops, for—nearly forty years ago—he was
the first to land there with his company, and was encamped on
the ground where now stands the Treasury Buildings. In reply.
Col. Crole-Wyndham thanked our hosts for the kindness of our
welcome and referred to the memorable reception we had met
with. “ What pleased me most in the march through your streets
to-day—more even than the enthusiastic greetings of the Queens-
landers—was about a mile of boys lining the road near the
railway station. Hundreds of sturdy youngsters, every one of
them devouring our men with his eyes and doing his best to look


like a soldier himself. I thought as I looked at their bright, keen
young faces, there are our future Australian contingents.”
18th. —Three attractions offered themselves for the entertainment
of those of the officers who could get away to them, a visit to
Gympie and its gold mines, of which we give a separate apcount,
a military race meeting at Sandgate, and a picnic given by
Colonel and Mrs. Finn. Those who went to Sandgate saw a
typical bush meeting, and enjoyed an excellent day’s racing,
while the picnic party had a pleasant drive and boating on the
river. In the afternoon the corps was invited to a Cafe Chantant
in the Exhibition Grounds, where they had the rare opportunity
of seeing a corroboree or aboriginal dance. As the ship was to
sail at daybreak next morning all had to be on board that night.
His Excellency Lord Lamington entertained the officers on board
the Lucinda, where they had supper as she steamed down the
river, and it was not until after midnight that the Britannic was
reached. In consequence of the difficulty of catching the boats
which brought the men aboard, no fewer than fourteen men had
to be sent after the ship by train to Melbourne.
Before the ship left, the Queensland Government sent on board
as a present for the men a thousand pines, a thousand pounds of
grapes, and bananas in profusion. It is needless to say how
much this kindness was appreciated.
19th, 20th, and 21st were spent in an uneventful passage down
the East coast, generally within sight of land. The weather was
fine, and each day it became distinctly cooler.
22nd. —ln the morning we passed along the well-wooded
Eastern shores of Tasmania, the clouds hanging low upon the,
mountains which rise in ranges from the coast. The sea was
smooth, with large masses of floating weed, and here and
there shoals of small fish. Shortly after noon we passed close to
Schouten Island, and at 5.30 rounded Cape Pillar and Tasman
Island. Here in the setting sun we saw to admiration the strange
formation of this table-topped bluff of columnar basalt. Like the
Giant’s Causeway, the cliffs are fretted into walls of close-packed
pillars. Under the ceaseless warfare of the elements the outer
columns have been shortened, where nature has denuded and
broken them, until the whole mass resembles a vast assemblage
of the pipes of a colossal organ.
Rounding into the estuary of the Derwent, the beauty of
this inlet appealed to all. Unmistakable was the feeling that
this little island is more like Britain than any other land we
have seen, and every one was prepared to enjoy to the full
our visit to it. It was dusk before we were met by the launch
that came off as we neared the port of Hobart, and then to
all the usual groups of careless talkers came a rumour with


the suddenness of a blow —“ The Queen is dying.” The ship
was hushed when it was known that this was true ; there was
no thought of cheering when she brought up at the quay;
everyone had to think awhile to realise that the sovereignty
through which one name had stood for us above all others in the
world, was to be ended, and that no longer were we to be able to
boast our fealty to the Queen under whose rule our lives had been
spent. Later news gave less hope. Orders were in abeyance, the
festivities prepared for our reception were abandoned. We must
wait to hear the worst.
28rd. (Wednesday), —The early cable messages gave less
immediate warning, and we were all ashore when, before noon,
the news flew round —“ The Queen is dead,” and the Eoyal
Standard at half-mast confirmed what was at first a rumour. By
mid-day the ship was filled again, as each returned to ask and be
again convinced. Soon orders reached us —in place of the hearty
welcome of cheering crowds as we march in procession through
the streets, to-morrow we shall take part in a solemn memorial
service, to be held in the Domain, and in the afternoon the ship
will sail for Melbourne. The remainder of the day was spent
quietly ashore, walking or driving with friends in the beautiful
scenery that encircles the town of Hobart.
24th.—At ten o’clock the troops fell in, as for Divine service, and
marched through the streets of Hobart. There were no decora-
tions, only the flags at half-mast; there was no cheering from
the crowd that filled the footways; in silence the troops passed
through the town and ascended the slopes that lead to the Domain.
On the grassy upland that looks over the harbour three sides of a
hollow square were formed by the Imperial and the Tasmanian
troops. In the centre were the massed bands and the piled drums
that form the lectern and pulpit of the soldiers’ church, and for
fourth side to the square a line of stands filled with a sombre-
dad gathering. Outside, and beyond the enclosure, the townsfolk
who had followed the troops were massed in thousands. Of the
simple but profoundly impressive service that followed, we give
an account elsewhere.
The service concluded, the troops marched back to the ship,
and leave was given to go ashore until 4 p.m.
Before leaving Hobart many of the officers drove to take leave
of the Administrator of Tasmania at the beautifully-situated
Government House, around which lie the Botanical Gardens.
Mr. Morton, the courteous curator of the Museum, walked with an
appreciative party through the gardens, which are especially rich
in beautiful flowers, and show a fine collection of indigenous and
exotic trees. Everything, except the exclusively tropical species,
seems ready to grow in luxuriance in Tasmania, and flowering


plants that in England are content with a height of a foot or so
here grow to the size of bushy shrubs. Geraniums in great
clumps were covered with beautifully-distributed bloom; gladioli
were in tine profusion ; towering cannae, bouvardias, veronica,
linaria, and riotously luxuriant heliotropes and carnations com-
bined to make up the blaze of colour. Among the flowering
shrubs were beautiful specimens of the trumpet-flowered brug-
manzia, while the gums, wattles, pines, and auraucarias of
Australasia blended with the forest trees of the old w r orld.
Leaving the gardens and returning to the town, Mr. Morton
showed a few officers over the museum, and it was a revelation
to them to see the rich mineral ores that are now being
so actively worked to the advantage of the island. Indeed, it
seemed to us, short as was our stay, that few countries are so
favoured by nature as this southern outpost of the Empire. Blest
with a splendid climate and lovely scenery, great mineral wealth
and agricultural advantages, fine timber forests, lakes, mountains
and rivers, w T e could understand Tasmania’s attraction to the
settler.
The warm cordiality of the people of Hobart completed
our regret that our visit had not been in happier times and of
longer duration. When the time approached for the ship to sail,
the Mayor of Hobart, accompanied by the Mayor of Launceston,
and the Committee who had been working to arrange the reception
of the troops, came on board and, in the absence of Col. Crole
Wyndham, presented to Captain Wood a wreath that had been
prepared as a memorial of the occasion. Later on the Premier
(Mr. N. Elliott Lewis) thanked Col. Crole Wyndham for having
afforded the local forces the opportunity of joining with their
comrades of the Imperial troops in the impressive memorial
service held in the Domain, and referred to the regret of the
Tasmanian people that, owing to the nation’s sad loss, their
intended hospitality had been necessarily curtailed. Colonel
Wyndham, in reply, spoke in terms of praise of the local troops,
and of the kind treatment received by himself, his officers, and the
troops from all classes of the community. Col. Legge, the Com-
mandant of the local forces, and many others, were on board to
wish their friends good-bye, while the quays were thronged with
silent, waiting crowds.
As the ship moved off, farewells were waved from every point,
and responded to by the soldiers who lined the ship’s sides and
filled the rigging to its top. At first in silence, but as the water
space widened between ship and jetty, a great cheer broke out
from the men, and with tongues let loose, the wave of farewells
was echoed and re-echoed from the quays. As long as they
could be distinguished the waving handkerchiefs were fluttering,
and with many regrets we saw fade under the shadow of Mount


Wellington our last view of the little city that has surely grown
in as fair environments as any in the world.
Jan. 25th.—A quiet day at sea, coasting along the East shore of
Tasmania, and passing between the islands that lie at the Eastern
entrance to Bass’ Strait. The sea was smooth and the weather
delightful.
Jan. 26th (Saturday).—Entered the Heads in the early morning, and
steamed slowly up to Port Melbourne, but dull, rainy weather
prevented our seeing much of the harbour and its shores. At
9 a.m, we were alongside of the railway pier at Port Melbourne,
our old friend the Dalhousie being berthed opposite to us, while at
a neighbouring pier the Orient liner Ormuz was repairing the
damage caused by her recent collision at the entrance to this
harbour. Colonel Hood, Colonel Hughes, and Major Hartnell
were awaiting us, and Colonel Crole Wyndham drove to visit the
General, and ascertain the arrangements for to-morrow’s service.
When we went ashore we found that here, as elsewhere, the clubs
with their usual kindness had opened their doors to us, while the
married officers and their wives were most luxuriously housed in
the Menzies Hotel as guests of the Government.
Jan. 27th (Sunday).—A gloomy, rainy morning, but we were fortunate
in that it changed to fine weather for our march through the
streets to the Memorial Service. Parading at 2 p.m. we railed to
Spencer Street, and there formed up outside the station. The
procession inarched the whole length of Collins Street, past the
Parliament House to the Exhibition, a distance of over two miles.
The troops paraded without arms as for divine service. Nothing
could have been better than the arrangements for keeping the
streets. Warned by the exuberance of the crowd on a recent
occasion, when a contingent returning from South Africa was
welcomed, the authorities had placed barriers down the whole
length of the street, leaving open in the centre a space sufficient
for the clear passage of the troops and for the men of the local
forces who, extended at intervals of several paces, lined the
streets.
But the solemnity of the occasion, and the evident consciousness
thereof that the crowds displayed, were sufficient guarantee of
order. In masses unbroken from end to end of the route the
crowd lined the barriers waiting for the troops. If, as we defiled
past them, shrill comment broke from women and children whose
interest defied restraint, this was only to be heard by reason of
the silence of the men, whose hearty welcome we knew would, in
other circumstances, have made the city ring with sound.
No bands played as the troops marched through; the monotonous
tap, tap of the side drummers setting the step was alone to be
heard above the sound of the marching feet.


The great commercial houses of Collins Street, the Clubs and
public buildings were heavily draped with hangings of black.
The only note of colour in the scene was given by the uniforms
of the soldiers and the flags that flew at half-mast. At
the Treasury, great sweeping folds of crape hung from
every window and doorway. The lamps, lamp-posts, and parapets
were enveloped in black. The front of Parliament House was
almost hidden in black, streamers of crape wreathed its pillars
from capital to base. A gloomy sky completed the contrast
between this solemn procession and the bright pageant at Sydney.
In the Exhibition building, the balustrades of the naves and
transepts were hung with draperies of black muslin, each column
was swathed in black, and between the capitols swung broad
festoons relieved by large bunches of Imperial purple. Below the
great organ to the transept floor the Cadet Corps formed an
unbroken bank of khaki. In the naves and transepts were seated
the Imperial, Colonial, and Indian troops ; above and around, the
galleries were filled with people in sombre mourning.
On a central platform draped with black and purple were the
officiating clergy, the state functionaries, guests, and other
notabilities. On the front of the platform fell the folds of the
British flag. On another page will be found a description of the
memorial service, which followed the lines of that which had been
held at Hobart.
28th.—A small party of officers went to Bendigo, and another to
Ballarat, and visited the gold mines there, A larger number
lunched with Sir Frederic and Lady Sargood. The officers and
men of the Royal Engineers were entertained by the Victorian
Engineers under Major Parnell, who, with his officers, showed
their visitors round the excellently equipped head-quarters of
their corps, and afterwards pioneered them round the sights of the
city.
Much interest was taken in the Central Fire Station, where
others of the I. R. C. were found enjoying the spectacle of two
completely equipped engines turning out in nine seconds from the
receipt of the call. Few of us had seen this perhaps not unusual
spectacle, and it was repeated until the horses must have been
quite tired of darting out of their stalls and into their harness at
the false alarm.
29th. —Troops walked out in the morning; during remainder of
the day we awaited the orders that were hourly expected by cable.
Both cable connections between Australia and Singapore having
failed, until the repairing ships could get the “ faults ” repaired,
no news could come through. This was especially inconvenient,
as the ship should have sailed at 6 p.m. for New Zealand. In the


afternoon communication was re-established, and orders received
to stand fast.
30th. —Two cable messages, received in the morning, conveyed
orders for us to sail for New Zealand on the following day. The
men had had two days to themselves to see the city of Melbourne
owing to this difficulty regarding the cables, and the abandonment
of public functions gave them time to see much of Sydney’s great
rival.
31st.—At 7 a.m. we left the pier at Port Melbourne. Not many
people were present to see our departure as it had been understood
that we would leave at daybreak. Passing out through the South
Channel we had an opportunity of seeing Port Phillip and
the Heads, and some of the defences of the harbour. Outside we
found a fresh breeze and a long swell, but the weather was fine.
Ist.—A cold S. W. wind blew during the day, with some rain ;
the evening sky was rather threatening.
2nd.—At sunset there was no mistaking the forecast of the sky
and rising wind, which now blew from S. E. The sea rose
during the night, and as a good deal of water was coming on
board, the ship was slowed down to meet the gale.
3rd. —A fresh gale, with hard squalls and heavy cross sea. For
the first time we had the seas on to the hurricane deck, and the
vessel was in a cloud of spindrift, which flew like thick white
smoke. A boat on the starboard side of the hurricane deck was
stove in, and a horse-box, fortunately untenanted, was smashed
to pieces by the sea. But the ship was remarkably steady, and at
a reduced speed made very little fuss about it.
4th, —During the day the wind fell lighter, and the sea, though
high, was less than yesterday. Made land in the late afternoon,
and were soon under the lee of Stuart Island.
sth. —The stormy weather had abated when the Britannic
dropped anchor off the Bluff harbour, in the very early morning,
and all hands were glad to be in smooth water again.
At about seven the Tutanekai, the New Zealand Government
despatch boat, came alongside, bringing the Hon. J. G. Ward
(acting Premier), Colonel Pole Penton, commandant of New
Zealand troops, and representatives of the citizens of Dunedin.
We learnt that all arrangements had been made for our pro-
gress by rail from this southern extremity of New Zealand to
Christchurch, passing through Dunedin, where the citizens had
most hospitably offered to billet the men in their houses.
It was thought best not to take the Britannic into the harbour,
so arrangements were made to tranship the men and kits into
the Tutanekai. This proved a slow business, as there was enough


sea to make the connecting gangway hoist itself into the air
with the roll of the vessels, and each man had to watch his time
to cross. It was after 10 o'clock before the little ship, crowded
with humanity, came alongside the wharf.
Here, amongst the cheers of the Colonials, we were welcomed
by a robed Maori. With effusive gesture he delivered a long
harangue in his own language, to the great delight of the
men, who, it is to be feared, did not take him seriously. ,We
entrained at once, and saw little of the Bluff, which, besides its
convenient harbour, is noted for the size and succulence of its
oysters. Even the horse that shunts the trucks on to the pier eats
those oysters and can appreciate them.
Just at noon we steamed into Invercargill, and found a large,
expectant crowd thronging the open spaces round the station.
The local troops were drawn up, and Mr. Ward, as soon as we had
formed up, bade us welcome to New Zealand in an eloquent
speech. He contrasted the present landing of Imperial troops
with the last occasion, when we were at war with the Maoris.
The people of New Zealand, he said, looked forward with the
greatest satisfaction to seeing representatives of the regiments
side by side with which their own contingents were fighting.
Even if the troops were put to inconvenience by the hurried
way in which they had to go through the country, he knew that
they would never be sorry that they had come, for the New
Zealanders would do their utmost to convince them that although
they were many thousands of miles from the old land, they were
among brethren still.
The Mayor, having extended to us a hearty welcome to
Invercargill, we marched in procession through the streets to the
Queen’s Park, where the men had lunch in great marquees, while
the officers were entertained in the pavilion.
Here it chanced that for the first time was given to the officers
of our corps the toast, “ The King,” and as the National Anthem
was sung, it was evident how deeply the feelings of everyone
were stirred.
Another kindly speech by Mr. Ward afforded Colonel Wyndham
an opportunity to acknowledge the cordiality of our welcome,
which, as he said, sprang from the patriotism of the people of
New Zealand and their affection for the Old Land. He explained
how glad we were that, in spite of difficulties, our visit had been
arranged, and thanked our hosts for the reception that the troops
had received.
As we marched back through the crowds, the people were as
enthusiastic as ever, and we reached the station and were soon
away on our journey amidst an ovation of cheers and good wishes.


Leaving in two trains, we passed through a fine grazing country,
with streams that made our fishermen remember all that we have
heard of New Zealand trout fishing. Every station on our route
was crowded with people. We detrained at Gore, and found in
the Show Ground another crowded reception, and tea and
refreshments for the troops. It did one good to see the excellent
material of the newly-raised Mounted Rifles, and no one could
help admiring the splendid spirit that has called the manhood of
the country side into their ranks. Yet another halt was made at
Milton, which we did not reach until after dark; but here again
we moved through cheering crowds to the Halls, where men and
officers were entertained. As they returned to the station it was
with difficulty that the men could file through the masses of
people who wished to shake hands with everyone, but once
entrained, we had no further stoppage till Dunedin was reached
shortly before 11 p.m.
Lists of the billets had been prepared en route, and by the time
we arrived everyone knew where he was to go. The Mayor of
Dunedin, in whose hands the arrangements had been, was present
to welcome us. Outside the station a large open space was kept
clear, and although it was a fine moonlight night, several lofty
flare-lights assisted to illuminate the scene; beyond the cleared
space the whole population of the city seemed to be standing in
the streets or filling the balconies and windows that overlook
the place.
As the foremost troops filed out and formed up, the cheering,
shouting, and singing was simply deafening. The local volunteers
were detailed as guides; as soon as each unit was ready to move
off they conducted the men to their billets—-that is to say, they
arrived ultimately ; struggling through a narrow opening in the
seething crowds, hailed with Maori war cries on one side and
patriotic songs on the other, their hands almost shaken off, it was
a desperate struggle to win through to the houses that had so
hospitably thrown their doors open. The arrangements made by
the Mayor, Mr. Chisholm, were excellent; every detail had been
thought out, and in spite of the late hour and the difficulties
inseparable from the scheme, everyone was away from the station
by midnight. Parties of the officers were most hospitably taken
in at the “ Fernhill” and “ Otago” Clubs, the remainder being
guests in private houses.
6th.—ln arranging the billets the town had been divided into
sections, each corps or group was billeted in a section, each
section had its central rendezvous for parade. The general parade
for the procession through the streets was fixed for 11.80 ; in some
of the more distant sections ‘ fall-in 7 had to sound an hour earlier
than this.


It was amusing to see the men coming up to parade escorted
by their hosts —here one arrives in the best of company with
a fair belle of Dunedin on either side, the next is accom-
panied by an unmistakable Town Councillor, before whom the
youthful hope of the house proudly carries the guest’s rifle,
carriages and traps are full of red coats, just in time a smart
tandem dashes up and completes the party. All were full of their
experiences, all were delighted with the kindness shown them,
and hints of many quaint incidents were passed round.
The general parade took place in the “ Triangle.” Outside the
station the crowd was densely packed. The march through
the town was a triumphant reception, the gaily decorated
streets being thronged by town and country folk. It is
of course difficult for the uninitiated to appreciate the
difference between a four mile walk and a four mile procession
in full dress, with cameras in every window, and to this we
attribute the mistake of choosing such a long route, which led us
into suburban roads, whereas the crowd was in the city streets.
Unfortunately, on our return, the weather failed us for the first
time, and a heavy shower drenched everyone before we could get
shelter.
The parade dismissed, the N.C.O.’s and men marched to
the Agricultural Hall, where dinner was waiting for them.
Excellent was the fare, the hall and the tables were prettily
decorated, and charming ladies had volunteered their services as
waitresses. It is needless to say that the fete was a great success.
The Mayor (Mr. Chisholm) and Mr. Ward made cordial speeches
of welcome, to which Mr. Evans (the bandmaster H.L.1.) replied
by thanking, on behalf of the men, their hosts of Dunedin.
At the Grand Hotel the officers were entertained by the local
Volunteer Officers, Colonel Webb presiding. The toast of the
Guests was most enthusiastically received, and, in acknowledging
this, Colonel Wyndham spoke of the great services rendered by
the loyal soldiers of New Zealand in South Africa. He assured
our hosts of the pleasure with which we looked forward to our
visit to the Colony, and referred to the enthusiastic welcome and
the unbounded hospitality with which we had been received in
Dunedin. As a memento of the occasion each officer was
presented with a prettily mounted charm of the celebrated New
Zealand greenstone.
During the afternoon, the weather having cleared, we had an
opportunity of exploring this beautifully situated town, and
admiring the fine scenery of the mountains, on whose foot slopes
it lies. It is no wonder that Scotchmen chose this spot to settle
in, where firths and inlets, rugged hills, and jutting promontories
reproduce the features of the northern coast.


In the evening an entertainment was given at the Agri-
cultural Hall, but naturally most of the men were in the billets
wTiere they had found such good friends. The programme,
however, was an excellent one, and most successfully carried out.
It was pleasant to see so many hearty old veterans of the Army
and Navy who had fought in the Crimea, Indian Mutiny, and in
the Maori War. At the “Otago ” and “ Fernhill ” Clubs,officers were
entertained by the members, and in reply to the toasts and speeches
of welcome, were able to assure their hosts that the hospitality
and loyalty of Dunedin would never be forgotten by their visitors.
7th. —To leave Dunedin at 7 a.m. necessitated an early start for
the men. The corps was divided up in two trains, every branch
of the service being represented in each. About 7.30 the second
train drew clear of the station, amid the cheers and farewells of a
large crowd.
The line passes above _Port Chalmers, the neat harbour where
lie vessels too large to find their w r ay up to Dunedin. A halt
was made to pick up the band, who had been billeted here.
For the next hour the scenery was very beautiful. The railway
coasts round the upper end of the firths that indent the coast,
and is cut out of the hillsides ; sharp curves, heavy grades, and
steep slopes that often drop from the track right into the sea,
make the line appear dangerous, and high speed is not possible.
At Hampden we left the train for breakfast, which w T as provided
for officers and men close to the station, and it was with some
misgivings that the former (who had had an early breakfast at
Dunedin) found themselves perforce drinking toasts in champagne
before 10 a.m.
Still coasting the shore, the second train stopped at Shag Point
in order that the detachment of Seaforth Highlanders might visit
the house of the Hon. John McKenzie, to whom the successful
“ Land Settlement ”of New Zealand is chiefly due. He has now
retired from active participation in public affairs on account of
advanced age. With pipes playing, the detachment marched up
to the house, where Captain Cowans and his men were received
in the heartiest fashion by Mr. and Mrs. McKenzie.
Resuming our journey, tbe next item of interest was provided
by an Irish Fusilier who, as the train passed without stopping
through a station, indulged in such a demonstrative greeting to
the crowd on the platform that he fell off into their midst, and,
with singular good fortune, landed at the feet of a bevy of hospital
nurses. Fortunately he fell upon his head, and when the train
arrived at Palmerston anxiety as to his fate was allayed.
At Oamoru there was not much time to spare, but we detrained,
marched through the streets, and were entertained by the


Mayor and citizens at lunch ; and again at Timaru the same,
including the lunch, was repeated. In one of the many
speeches that Colonel Wyndham made on this eventful day, he
remarked that New Zealanders had given us everything there was
except an unlimited appetite, and by this time we began to feel
the force of the remark. However, the day was not nearly
ended, and we detrained again at Ashburton and inarched to the
Public Gardens, where the reception given us Avas so charmingly
pretty that even the most satiated fell to again out of compliment
to the fair ladies who had come themselves to ensure the success
of their fete.
Between Timaru and Ashburton we passed through the
great alluvial tracts of the Canterbury plain, where harvesting
had commenced. Far and near all the harvesters knocked off
work to wave a welcome, and it was a common sight to see men
rush bawling to the track and deliver a volley of cheers at point-
blank range as the train moved by. (Trains in New Zealand are
never in an undignified hurry). All the length of the plain, its
background was the high mountain range of the New Zealand
Alps, with here and there a peak on which the snow still lay.
Long girder-bridges cross the wide beds of the rivers that have
formed the plain, and reminded many of the crossings of the
Punjab rivers in the cold weather.
It Avas after 8 o’clock when Christchurch Avas reached. The
Mayor and his reception committee and Colonel Pole Penton, with
his staff, Avelcomed Colonel Croie Wyndham on the arrival of the
first train. As soon as the second train had arrived we formed up
in the large flare-lit square outside the station, and met with an
enthusiastic reception. Marching through the croAvded streets to
the Canterbury Hall, it Avas very difficult to get through the people,
who pressed closely round us. An excellent supper Avas ready for
the men, and many of the local volunteers kindly assisted in handing
round the good cheer. The officers were invited to dinner at the
“ Christchurch ” and “ Canterbury ” Clubs, but the time was so
short that they Avere obliged to leave their hosts much sooner
than they Avished in order to get back to the troops. Leaving the
Hall, the crowd was found denser than before, and we were glad
to get clear away to the station for our last entrainment for
Lyttleton, Avhich was reached just before 11 o’clock, after passing
through a long tunnel filled Avith a penetrating, choking smoke.
We detrained on the Lyttleton Quay, and marched to the
Britannic , which Avas lying at a pier close by. Once on board
the men did not take long in disposing themselves for sleep.
Bth.—Parading at 12.80, Ave marched through the main street of
Lyttleton to the station, and entraining, passed through the
tunnel which seemed even more sulphurous than before. At


Christchurch Station we found the mounted portion of the corps
which had gone on ahead. Horses were found by the local troops
for the Cavalry and Horse Artillery, and very well mounted they
were. We marched through the gaily decorated streets to Hagley
Park, an excellent review ground, though there was the usual
difficulty in keeping clear a space of as large an area as was
required. The troops marched past, after which they formed up
again, and displays were given of manual, firing, and bayonet
exercise by the Guards, sword excercise by 7th Hussars and
Royal Horse Artillery, lance exercise by 21st Lancers, physical
drill by Fusiliers and the Norfolks. Returning to the Canterbury
Hall, an excellent lunch was ready for the men, the officers lunching
in the concert room where they found themselves in very pleasant
company. The Mayor of Lyttleton, Sir John Hall, and Mr. Ward
made speeches, and Col. Wyndhanr replied on behalf of the
Imperial Troops, making especial reference to the excellent
mounted troops of the Colony, and their kindness in lending their
horses. At the men's luncheon Mr. Evans acknowledged the
toast and called for cheers for the Mayors and Citizens of
Christchurch and Lyttleton. As we were due to embark at once,
there was little time to spare, and we returned forthwith to
Lyttleton whence the Britannic sailed at 7 p.m., leaving on the
quay an enthusiastic crowd which had come down to wish us
good-bye.
. 9th, —After a smooth passage we entered Wellington Harbour at
8 a.m., and were alongside of the Queen’s Pier by 9. During the
forenoon Col. Wyndham and the officers called on the Governor,
Lord Ranfurly, and saw, with great interest, a wonderful collection
of Maori and Pacific Island curiosities. A visit was also paid to
Mr. R. J. Seddon, the Premier of New Zealand, whom we had
already met in Australia and who had just returned to Wellington.
In the meanwhile preparations were going forward for the parade,
for which we fell-in at 2.30. The march through the streets was
a pleasant one as the crowd was cordial and good natured and
gave us plenty of room. Nearing the Basin Reserve we found the
local troops drawn up and marched through their ranks. They
made a very good show, especially the permanently enlisted men,
and here, as elsewhere, we found the Cadet Corps mustering in
force.
It was interesting to see the white bearded but still stalwart
form of old Colour - Sergeant Atkins of the 78th, who, in
full uniform wearing the medals for Persia and the Mutiny, and
the clasp for Lucknow, marched at the head of the men of the
old regiment in whose ranks he had fought nearly fifty years ago.
At the Basin Reserve (which m passant would have been a dock
had not nature unexpectedly hoisted the level of the land a few


years ago) we formed up on the cricket ground, and Mr. Seddon
welcomed us in a speech that fairly fulminated with robust loyalty,
irrepressible energy, and sturdy good fellowship. Ultimately the
ground was cleared, and the Guards and other corps gave the
same displays of drills and exercises as at Christchurch. The
local troops were closed and brought up into hollow square to have
a better view, and the spectators, military and civil alike, were
delighted with the display which they applauded vociferously.
After cheers had been interchanged between the Imperial and the
Local troops, we marched back to the ship.
The men were entertained at dinner in the Drill Hall by the
Mayor and Citizens, a special vote of thanks being again due to
the ladies who took up the task of honorary waitresses. The
officers were invited to an evening party at the Club, where they
had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Wellington
society. The club house attracted much interest as few of us had
seen before such a large and handsome wooden building, though
here in Wellington there are many others, including Government
House itself.
10th.—During the day the men were free to go about with their
friends, but, unfortunately, the weather failed us. A trip across
the harbour, which had been arranged for the officers, fell
through in consequence, and we met our friends instead at the
Club, the members of which had entertained the officers at lunch.
The Royal Artillery detachment drove out along the shore, and
were the guests of their friends of the Colonial Artillery.
11th.—To-day the corps were divided into two contingents, one
under Major Askwith, R.H.A., going to 'Wanganui, there to stay
for the night ; the other, under Major Riddell, N.F., went to
Masterton, returning in the evening. The train for Masterton
left at about half-past seven. Mr. and Mrs. Seddon, with a party
of friends, occupied one of the carriages.
The scenery and the railway proved most interesting. At
first the line skirts the edge of the harbour, then, turning-
up the fertile Hutt Valley, it rises to cross the watershed,
beyond which lies the Wairarapa Plain, our destination. The
ascent lies through thick bush, which has been cleared here
and there by burning ; the charred tree stumps and prostrate
trunks make these recent clearings a dismal sight. The track
is steep and the curves are sharp, but it is the descent on
the north side that is most remarkable. In the three miles of
descent to Cross Greek the gradients are as steep as lin 15. For
this length there is a centre rail, and the engines and brake
vans grip this rail on either flange. This necessitates a change
of engines at the summit. Our train had three engines and three


“gripper” brake vans on it for the descent, and as we passed
through the tunnels the showers of sparks from the brakes on the
centre rail were like fireworks.
New Zealand has a good reputation for her steam coal, but the
sulphurous, mephitic vapours in those tunnels literally seize the
unsuspecting passenger by the throat —as we found out, more
particularly in the ascent. Here, too, we saw the unusual sight
of wind-screens on the line. When tributary ravines are crossed
by bridges, it has, by dire experience, been found necessary to
raise a screen on each side of the track, to prevent the gusts
that blow down, as through a pipe, from overturning the trains.
We arrived at Masterton at 12.80, the journey after the descent
from the range being over a large flat valley encircling the
Wairarapa Lake, obviously once of much greater extent than now.
At Masterton the local mounted infantry, the majority of whom
are Maoris, was drawn up to receive us; the Mayor was at the
station with his reception committee and the band; the Maori
“Wahinis” were waving their willow branches and bowing to
the ground as they sang their greetings.
Dinner in the Town Hall was the first item in the programme,
and nobly had the ladies of the district worked to make this the
success it was. They took their own toll, however, in payment,
and armed with large scissors snipped outlying buttons off the
tunics of N. C. O’s. and men, and took samples of their braid ;
even locks of hair were forcibly shorn off as keepsakes. The
officers lunched at the Club Hotel, where the usual toasts were
honoured, Major Riddell responding to the toast of the Army and
Navy. Mr. Seddon proposed the health of the ladies who had
organized the fete, and this toast was drunk with acclamation.
At the Park we were treated to a dance by the Maori Wahinis,
and to complete the show the Maori mounted infantry danced
an impromptu “haka.” It was absurdly incongruous to see
khaki uniforms, European in cut, on the stalwart forms of the
dark dancers, whose contortions and gestures express their
defiance in this delirious war dance. Following this, the
Guards detachment went through the manual, firing and bayonet
exercises, at which the eyes of the Maori soldiers nearly left
their heads, so enraptured were they at the sight. The sword
-exercise of the 7th Hussars and the physical drill by the Norfolks
were markedly popular with the whole assemblage of many
thousands who had come together from all over the country side.
After marching past we made our way to the station and left
this hospitable little township amidst a most demonstrative storm
of farewells. It required four engines to pull our train at a foot’s
pace to the top of the range, but from the summit we soon ran
down to Wellington and to the ship.


The other party left by an earlier train and reached Wanganui
at 2.80; the weather was perfect, and the beautiful valley scenery
of cornfields and pastures made a charming panorama all along
the route. At the roadside stations Colonials and Maoris vied
with each other in their greetings, while at Palmerston an
excellent lunch was provided on the station platform. At Levin
lines of willow-wreathed Maori girls were waving branches in
welcome. On arrival one' of the first persons seen was Mr.
McKenna, the station-master, who wears the Victoria Cross that
he won in the Maori war. Indeed, many of the men of Wanganui
represent settlers or the children of settlers from amongst the
six to ten thousand troops who w x ere quartered there in the war
time, and this, no doubt, added yet more to the warmth with
which our soldiers were received. Arriving at Wanganui, the
troops marched to the race-course, preceded by the local
volunteers, and all were struck with the beauty of the lawns and
watercourses with their weeping willows. The arrival of the
Imperial troops was the signal for cheers of welcome from the
thousands present and yells of exultation from the bare-shouldered
Maoris who thronged the lawn. A “ haka ” and other dances
were given, and watched with intense interest by our men, who
certainly had never seen anything to compare with this per-
formance. Speeches followed, Mr. Katrick, the Mayor, welcoming
the guests, while Mr. Ward made a few happy allusions to the
success of the gathering.
After the singing of the National Anthem, Major Topia,
an ancient Maori, stepped forth. Hoary and bowed in years,
yet retaining much of the fire and eloquence of his ancestors,
he bade the soldiers welcome in the name of a departing race,
“The chiefs are gone,” he said, “only Tongariro and Ruapehu
are left to welcome you here. I, like them, am old and snow-
capped, lamenting with you the death of our Queen. Be
comforted; even as the fair superba of the forest dies away,
but dying, throws forth a leafy shoot to take its place, so the
Queen, though dead, leaves one behind to rule her people.”
Then, in the Maori custom of offering gifts, he laid a valuable
mat of Kiwi feathers at the feet of Major Askwith, as a present
for Colonel Wyndham, and upon it a bunch of the rare huia
feathers for himself.
Tea was then served under the willows and in the kiosks, the
ladies of Wanganui acting as hostesses at the prettily decorated
tables. Afterwards the troops fell in and gave displays of drills
and exercises, to the great joy of the Maoris. They then marched
through the streets and were dismissed to their billets in the
hotels and boarding houses and the principal public halls.
12th.—In the morning all Wanganui was out to say good-bye


and the scene at the station was as enthusiastic as ever. Again
the weather was fine and clear and the landscape with Euapehu
shining clear against its cloudy background Avas a delight to the
eye. When Marton was reached the whole country-side seemed
to have turned out to cheer “ the Imperials” on their way, and it
was the same at Fielding where the children distributed fruit
along the train. Here the troops got out and Avalked round
to the evident enjoyment of the spectators.
At Palmerston North, great things were doing. At least ten
thousand people Avere in the square when the train arrived, and
Avhen the troops, headed by the band, and preceded by the local
volunteers, marched out to the slioav grounds every place in the
stands and round the grounds Avas taken up. After the SAVord
exercise and other drills had been keenly Avatched and heartily
applauded, lunch was provided in the pavilion, and the usual
speeches were made and toasts honoured. The Maoris next
danced an “ haka,” and their leader made a speech of Avelcome.
At Shannon Avhere the next stoppage took place Taran Nga
Whenua appeared as the spokesman of the Maori people, and
handed to Major Scrase Dickens as a present for Colonel Crole
Wyndham a historical carved “ taiaha.” “For four hundred
years” he said “this spear has been handed doAvn from father
to son, from son to grandson. But you, and we alike are sons
of our King who rules in the place of the Queen Avhom Ave have
lost. Let your commander take this spear that it may descend
in turn to his children’s children.” Again at Levin Europeans
and Maoris Avere assembled to wish the men good-bye, and fruit
and refreshments Avere given by the ladies of the place. Yot
again at Otaki a large croAvd Avas assembled and once more
a “ haka ” was danced. By the time the troops reached Wellington
they had been feted till nothing more seemed possible, but as Avill
be seen there Avere evening entertainments in plenty in store for
them.
During the day, those Avho did not go to Wanganui AA r ent to
a picnic in the Lower Hutt, the fertile valley Avhich Avas one of
the earliest settlements in Nbav Zealand. Lest Petone should
feel left in the cold the train halted there to alloAv the troops
to march through this place also. At the Hutt, the Mayor,
Mr. Bunny, Avelcomed his guests in a kindly speech and reminded
the men of records of gallantry that the army had left behind in
New Zealand, The party then marched to McNabb's Gardens,
where a prettily arranged tea Avas laid out. Mr. Seddon avlio had
come out in the train, soon proved a hgst in himself—every form
of amusement Avas organised, from dancing on the laAvn to sports
in the fields, with the best of company for those who preferred to
wander through the gardens. Every one had enjoyed the outing
when the time came to leave, and hearty cheers were given for


the ladies who had organized the fete. By evening both parties
had returned to the ship. There were Entertainments for the
Lancers, Guards, Highlanders and the band. The hosts insisted
on seeing their guests on board at midnight with the result that a
considerable crowd of enthusiasts piled up on the quay, and
serenaded the ship.
13th.—The ship sailed at 3 in the afternoon ; a large crowd were
gathered on the pier to wish us good-bye, and there was much
cheering and singing of Auld Lang Syne, The weafher outside
was perfect. Colonel Pole Penton, Commandant of the Forces,
and Major Tarranaki joined the ship for the voyage to Auckland.
14th.—We arrived at Napier early in the morning, but did not
land, as we had to wait for the New Zealand Government boat
Tutanekai to take us ashore, the Britannic not being able to come
alongside the Hawkes Bay pier, to the north of which we were
lying. At about 10 we were ashore, and began our march
through the streets.
The little town was very prettily decorated with flags and
greenery, and we had the kindest of receptions. The responsible
people had made a mistake in wanting the troops to walk too
far, and we hope we looked as if we enjoyed the standing round
a large kiosk on the sea front, where speeches were delivered.
It was an exceedingly hot day, and the tar pavement of the
streets churned up under the feet of men and horses as we waited
for the termination of the eloquence that could have reached but
few of the people present. Resuming our march we reached the
Public Gardens, where we formed up, and, after seeing the men
settled down to a sumptuous feast, the officers drove to the
Hawkes Bay Club, where the members entertained us at lunch,
and gave us a most hospitable welcome.
Back again to the Gardens, we saw a most elaborate “ haka.”
The men were stripped to the waist, kilted with reed or feather
mats, and crowned with circlets of the black and white huia
feathers. In their hands they brandished the jade or carved wood
“miris,” flat, sharp-edged trjnicheons, used for close fighting.
When they began to dance it was as if the fiend possessed them,
distorting their faces with outstretched tongues and jerking eyes,
they yelled in savage discord. As their arms were thrown out
the fingers quivered as if eager to clutch and tear to pieces—
every gesture suggested rage and defiance. They do not mind if
the spectators laugh, and if the dance did not terrify, the utter
grotesquenesss of it made the men cheer and shout with laughter.
At the end the old Maori Chief, dashing forward, made an
impassioned speech, and threw before Colonel Wyndham his
tasselled spear. Then the “ Wahines ” danced and sang, and four
girls danced the poi dance, the feature of which is a swinging,


circling ball, that is held by a short string and twirled and
whirled in and out as the dance goes on. The girls were pretty,
and the dance graceful.
When, the Maoris had finished and were all seated again on the
grass, Colonel Wyndham, spear in hand, went up to them and
received their greetings. He was immediately robed in a
flowing skirt with a lovely kiwi feather mat about his shoulders.
To the officers presents were given, kilts and spears, and mats
and feather chaplets—everything was pressed upon us. When the
Colonel had replied through the interpreter and thanked the
Maoris for their hearty greetings, we again took our seats on the
grass, and the military displays were given. The large crowd
were delighted with the spectacle, and cheered each detachment
to the echo. Before we left Mrs. Donelly presented Colonel
Crole Wyndham with a handsome horse, a noted prize winner
at the shows in the district. We marched through the town
back to the pier, and embarking on the Tutanekai, were conveyed
to the Britannic, not without a little excitement ai route.
On board speculation was rife as to whether we should have any
time to stay at Auckland, as we knew that the frequent extensions
of our time had passed the limits expected by the home
authorities, and that orders had been received that we were to sail
for Adelaide without delay.
We brought with us from Napier one noteworthy passenger,
the Primate of New Zealand, and we were proud to have the
company of one who has so strong a hold on the affection of the
Colony. This is indeed a land of veterans, the Primate wears the
Mutiny medal with the Relief of Lucknow clasp, and the Fiontier
medal with the Umbeyla clasp. Long may he wear them, say we
all. We were also joined at Napier by Captain Hughes, of
the New Zealand Mounted Infantry. He had met us in Sydney
as he was returning, covered with honour and glory, from
South Africa, and we were all very glad to see him again.
15th.—Steamed up the N. and N.E. coasts of the North Island,
passing rocky cliffs, bush-covered hills, and ancient volcanic
ranges ; many bush fires were seen on the hillsides. This coast
line and the near hinterland is occupied only by Maoris, who are
in this tract almost undisturbed. Major Tarraiiaki, the Maori
officer on board, spent the morning teaching the men some of the
movements and words of the “ haka.”
16th. —In the early morning we entered the channel leading
between the outlying islands to Auckland, and brought up at
the railway pier at 7.30. Here again, but for the last time, we
found the Dalhoude lying opposite to us, and our friends the
Indians, in their gay turbans, attracting as much attention


as ever. We paraded at 11, horses being provided for-
th e cavalry and artillery and the Indian cavalry by the
Iceal mounted corps.
One newly-raised detachment attracted our attention in par-
ticular ; they had not got their uniforms yet, but they were all
turned out in white shirts with black arm bands and Panama
hats. Each man was a sinewy, long-shanked bushman, with
that look that marks a real “ workman.” They had ridden in
from a country district on their own horses—as workmanlike as
themselves—not to take part in the big parade that everyone
was talking about, and would remember for years, but in order
to lend m their horses. Those are the sort of people we shall
never forget.
The procession through the streets was a hot march for all on foot,
and as the crowd was dense in the principal lower streets and
many had already taken their places in the Domain, there were
few people in the upper streets wdiere the hottest hill climbing
took place. It was very pleasant to find ourselves at last on the
green turf of the Domain —a natural amphitheatre surrounded by
wooded slopes—on which crowds of people had already stationed
themselves. After the troops were formed up the Mayor spoke,
welcoming the Imperial and Indian contingents, and Mr. Seddon
followed with a long speech, interspersed with the reading of
many telegrams. Lunch was ready for the men in marquees, and
they trooped off very ready for it. It was rather unfortunate that
the question of liquid refreshment on this occasion got mixed
up with local “Prohibitionist” politics, and “beer,” “no beer.”
and “ how much beer,” had become planks in parochial platforms,
for which the hot and thirsty soldiery cared nothing at all.
This was not likely to escape the sledge-hammer eloquence of
the Premier, and at the officers’ lunch, Mr. Seddon explained his
ideas of hospitality in unmistakable terms, and regretted the
intrusion of political prejudice into such a matter. He assured
the Imperial troops of the sincerity of the welcome tendered
by the people of Auckland—of which indeed there could be no
doubt.
Colonel Wyndham, speaking now at the last of the capitals of New r
Zealand, was able to thank not only Auckland, but the whole
Colony for their hospitality. The New Zealanders, he said, had
treated the troops as if they w r ere their own kith and kin. The
troops would return home with the kindliest memories in their
hearts for the people of New Zealand, and he hoped that, on the
other hand, the troops had left an impression on the hearts of
the New Zealanders. The next toast being “ The Premier and
Ministers,” we drank Mr. Seddon’s health.


As we left the luncheon tent there was but one exclamation
of surprise, the people had crowded into the enclosure and filled
the slopes that rose round the central space until on every side
there was not an inch of space vacant. It was estimated that
there were forty thousand people present.
When the military display was given the crowd cheered
and applauded each corps in succession with the heartiest
enthusiasm. One very pleasant episode now occurred. The
veterans of the Crimea, Mutiny, and Maori wars, were collected
at one point. In order that they might see better, way was
made for them through the crowd, and they marched into
the open arena where our men were lying on the grass. No
sooner were the rows of medals seen than the young soldiers
sprang to their feet and cheered the veterans till the valley rang
with sound. It was an unrehearsed effect, unprompted, and
unexpected; but that it touched the hearts of the old warriors
was easy to be seen, and a letter received afterwards by Colonel
Crole Wyndham told how they had felt the tribute that the
troops had paid them. In order that the whole crowd might see
the displays they were given on each side of the ground. On
this occasion the Rifles’ group repeated the free gymnastics which
had found such favour in Sydney, and it was equally well received
here ; the remainder of the events as before, being bayonet,
manual, and firing exercises by the Guards, sword exercise by
7th Hussars and R.H.A., lance exercise by 21st Lancers, and
physical drill by the Fusiliers and by the 4th Norfolks. Tug of
war, a flag race, and a race for the band, completed the pro-
gramme. The City of Auckland presented prizes for the different
events, and the competitors fully appreciated this act of
generosity. Returning in the evening to the ship we took a short
cut which soon brought us to the quays.
The officers were entertained at supper at the ‘‘Northern”
Club, of which we were, as usual, made honorary members, and
where we found a hearty welcome. During the day many plans
had been mooted for a trip to Rotorua, and it was finally decided
that all the troops should start early next morning in three trains
for the wonderland of New Zealand. So as to comply with orders
that the ship was to sail without delay, our plans were to start at
6 a.m., arrive at Rotorua at 2, spend the time sight-seeing until
dusk, and return by night so as to be able to sail at daybreak
next morning.
17th —After a long and tiring experience on the previous day
the men were not sorry to hear soon after starting, that yet
another cable had reached Mr. Seddon (who, it need hardly be
said, was in the first train exhorting, encouraging and enlivening
every one), that the Britannic was to stay another day. This


relieved us of the pressing hurry which our programme had
otherwise involved.
Leaving Auckland, the principal interest of the grazing country
through which we passed lies in the extinct volcanic cones, often
retaining well defined craters, which stud the country. Most
of them show signs of terraces on their sides, for they were
palisaded and used as -pahs or forts in the days of Maori inter-
tribal fighting.
Further on we passed through the position which was so
strongly held by the Maoris at the time of our advance —small
hills with marshy bottoms and rivers—now celebrated for their
duck shooting. Here it was that in the war-time for nearly nine
months the advance of our forces w T as checked.
Further on we enjoyed lovely views of the Waikato river, a placid,
navigable stream, flowing through a country that reminds us allot"
home. At Frankton there was a short stoppage of the trains, the
Mayor and some of the citizens having provided a glass of beer
and refreshments for every one. Not that the commissariat of
the trains had been neglected—the Auckland and the Northern
Clubs had very kindly sent food, wines and waiters, in the trains
for the officers, and the men were also well provided for.
A curious industry, of which we saw traces as we went along, is
the digging for Kauri gum. The value of this is so high and the
quantity exported so large that it ranks high among the products
of the North Island. The gum is found in large or small lumps
in ground that once was covered by forests of the giant Kauri
pine; the trees are gone, but the gum which fell from them is
still to be found under the covering of soil that has since
accumulated. The gum digger is armed with a sharp metal probe
with which he pricks the ground until the point touches a lump
of gum. Recognizing this by the feel he digs it up. We passed
a few camps of the diggers, but did not see them actually at
work.
Our journey was a dusty one owing to the friable pumice-
like stone with which the line is ballasted, but dust was forgotten
while we passed through 20 miles of virgin forest in our ascent to
the water-shed of the range that has to be crossed. What New
Zealand calls “ Bush ” and further insults by the epithet “ Scrub,”
must be just about the most beautiful forest growth in the world.
More delicate and feathery than their European cousins, the tall
pines, of many varieties, rise to a magnificent height, and throw
out great limbs that would make each tree a picture in itself,
but these are backed and interspersed with leafy trees as high as
they, and all amongst them luxuriant creepers festoon the trunks
and rope the trees together. And such undergrowth forms the
lowest storey of this primeval tangle; certainly, we saw fuchsia


bushes higher than is likely to he believed. But the gems of the
forest are the ever present, never wearying tree ferns, clustering
in perfect groups in the ravines, or raising on graceful bending
stems their vivid coronets to lighten the gloom of the forest depths.
In this forest near Okariri may be seen the curious “rata”
tree. Starting as a creeper, it climbs the trunk of a well-grown
tree, which it enfolds in clasping branches, ultimately.killing its
support when it has no further need of it.
Equally strange is the fate of a caterpillar also to be found
dead in this forest; it is believed that the ill-fated beast eats the
seed of the “ rata,” which germinates and sprouts from its head,
eventually killing it and filling its body with woody fibre.
(N.B. —It is all right about this caterpillar ; w r e brought some
specimens away with us).
Through this forest the trains toiled to the summit. The grades
are heavy, and it is a solid fact that the occupants of the second
train, 800 British soldiers, had on one occasion to get out and
push their train up the hill. From the top of the grade we ran
down through steep cuttings in the pumice rock till w r e left the
forest and came into view of the great open valley and the
Eotorua lake, with its islands. Beyond stands out against the
skyline the mountain, Tarawera, whose eruption, some ten years
ago, caused the destruction of the pink and white terraces and
robbed the wonderland of its greatest marvel.
Soon after two o’clock the first train reached Eotorua. On
the platform were a number of Arawa chiefs, dressed in their
Maori mats and feathers, carrying carved spears and greenstone
“miris.” After we had been received by Captain Turner and
his reception committee, the Premier, Colonel Wyndham, and
Mr. Ward were introduced to the Maori chiefs. Anaha-te-Eahin
recited, in welcome, the ancient incantation of the famous priest,
Ngatowirangi, which, as the legend tells, saved the Arawa canoe
from perishing in a storm when the Maoris migrated across
the Pacific from the mythical Hawaiki. As we formed up to
march to tbe town hall a band of Maori women and girls
preceded us, decked in their gayest, waving branches of manuka,
and dancing a “ peruperu ”as they went. Turning to face their
guests, waving the branches in signal of amity, they sang this
song of welcome
A toia mai
Te waka
Kite urunga
Te waka
Kite takotoranga
I takoto ai te waka
Haere mai. Haere mai
Hoea mai te waka
Ki uta-a.


(Oh, haul up
The canoe
To the resting place—
The canoe !
To the abiding place
Where shall rest the canoe
Welcome ye ! welcome !
Paddle the canoe
To the shore.)
With this unwonted advanced guard we marched to the Hall,
where the men rested and were refreshed while waiting for the
other trains, in whose honour the same ceremony was repeated.
As the second train was delayed by its difficulties en route, those
who had first arrived started out to go round the sights. Eotorua
is a Spa—a resort for the rheumatic —where many wonderful
cures have been effected. From the top of a hill to which we
first went we saw the Government Sanatorium, with its hot
springs and its gardens laid out below us at the edge of the lake.
Then we went to the old Maori Pah of Ohinemutu, and here it
was time to go warily. Cutting off a little promontory which
juts into the lake were once the Maori defences, but of them
nothing remains, and we walked straight among the hot springs.
On one side pools like boiling cauldrons of water, on the other
quaking ground from which spurt unexpected jets of steam, curious
springs, in the steam of which the Maoris cook their food, hot
stones on which they sit luxuriously, and a warm, moist,
sulphurous smell pervading everything —these are the natural
attractions of Ohinemutu. Here too is to be seen a sharp-roofed
Maori house with many weird carvings, a high, carved flagstaff
with a historic effigy at foot, a wooden church, and on a carved
pedestal a fine bust of the Queen, whose loyal subjects the Maoris
are so proud to have been.
With so many following in single file, there was a fair
prospect of some one getting boiled, and it was a relief
to get to the Sanatorium Gardens, where the springs are
fenced in. While keeping their natural appearances these springs
supply the pipes that fill the baths. The two largest swimming-
baths were kindly put at our disposal, and the men fairly rioted
in the joy of a swim in the warm water.
With reluctance we left those delightful waters, and set out on
a dusty trudge of two miles to the geysers of Whakarewarewa.
To induce the great geyser Wairoa to work to time, a shredded
bar of soap is thrown into the blow-hole, and in a
few minutes the effect is produced. As Wairoa’s energy
appears to be diminishing the public are not allowed to
administer this stimulant, but, the occasion being a special
one, Mr. Seddon took command of the geyser and in went


the soap. The water seethed and hissed with many subterraneous
gurglings, then seemed to gather force, and shot up in a great
steamy column which fell splashing on the sulphur encrusted
rocks. Rising and falling, but with force that lessened at each
discharge, the boiling jet continued to vent itself for about a
quarter of an hour, then sank to rest with discontented grumbling.
Distrustfully we peeped into the reeking hole, but a short look at
the gurgling spitting surface convinced us that no liberties are to
be taken with a geyser, and we waiidered round to see the other
uncanny manifestations of this little Inferno. There was one
little cauldron called the Brain Pot, where legend tells of the
boiling of the heads of the defeated in war. The great geyser
Pohutu is quiescent now, and its vent-holes can be examined
without misgivings ; one pool called the “ Torpedo ” gains its
name by little intermittent explosions in the mud; in another
corner there is a stream of boiling mud, and all round and about
is the sulphurous smell usually associated with the Prince of
Darkness.
Before the hotel the Maoris were ready to give a “ haka,”
and while the men fortified themselves for the walk home,
they danced their fill with much primitive savagery.
It was dark before all the troops were back in Rotorua, where
they found temporary lodgings in the Town Hall and in the
hospitable houses of the townspeople. One train load returned to
Auckland at once, the remainder following in the morning after
another visit to the baths.
18th.—The return journey of the morning trains was not without
incident. More than one representative fell out of the train,
presumably entranced by the beauty of the forest scenery. The
little platforms at the ends of the carriages are responsible for
much of this, but, on the other hand, the speed of the train is
not sufficient to make falling off as dangerous as it sounds.
During the halt at Frankton the officers of the first train were
being hospitably entertained at lunch when it was discovered that
their train had gone on, taking with it the Premier and his party
and the troops. Fortunately Major Riddell was on board, and
before the detachments marched off he was able to thank Mr.
Seddon on behalf of all ranks for the interesting trip that we had
all enjoyed so much, and for his unwearying interest in the men’s
enjoyment, to which we owed so many of the pleasantest
memories of our tour.
Three cheers for the Premier were given with the heartiest
goodwill; and we hope the men succeeded in convincing
Mr. Seddon how popular he has made himself.


During the day several officers from the Britannic said Dalhousie
went down the harbour to one of the outlying islands, Motutapu,
for a day with the fallow buck. Mr. Eeed, the owner of this
beautiful island, is most generous in offering sport to visitors to
Auckland, and those who went down had a delightful experience
of a New Zealand-Scottish welcome. Colonel Crole Wyndham
brought back a nice head, and Colonel Peyton w T as unfortunate in
finding one very good horn only on a buck that he bagged. The
fallow deer were in large numbers on the island, which consists
of steep grassy downs, with good cover in the “ scrub ” in the
valleys and ravines that run down to the sea. Wheels being
impracticable, the transport of the “run” is done by sleighs.
Most people are unaccustomed to this class of vehicle, and it was
comical to see the rueful faces of the “ new chums ” as the
sleighs bumped at a smart trot over rough and smooth, or
threatened to turn over on a steep slope.
The return trip up the harbour was delayed, and owing to this,
and to the contretemps on the railway, the officers were unavoid-
ably late for the dinner at the Auckland club, but our hosts were
good enough to forgive us, and we spent a most pleasant evening.
Looking at the fine buildings and the spacious quays of Auckland,
it was strange to be told that at the table with us was one of the
original settlers who were attracted by the magnificent harbour,
and camped as the first pioneers on its shore.
19th. —Our original order was to sail at 8 a.m., but this was
postponed owing to a case of scarlet fever having been diagnosed
among the officers. The sufferer, Lieut. Warrington Morris, was
landed and taken to the Auckland hospital, where he was com-
fortably installed. We did not in consequence sail till 12, and,
owing to the delay, the crowd on the quay to see us off was not
so large as usual —the public, who were not admitted to the pier
until the ship was on the point of sailing, had naturally got tired
of waiting outside the gates. However, the gates once opened,
the pier head was soon lined with our friends, who gave us the
heartiest of farewells ; prominent amongst them being the stalwart
form of the Premier, who, with Mr. Ward, had come to wish us
good-bye.
It w r as very fitting that our last scene in the lovely land
of New Zealand should include as a central figure the man to
whose tenacious determination our coining was greatly due, and
whose undefeated energy had made most memorable to ourselves
and, we hope, to the Colony, the pleasant visit that we had all
enjoyed so thoroughly. As an instance of the good feeling between
the Colonials and the “Imperials” (by which high sounding
nickname we were known), we give here a telegram sent by the


Mayor of Dunedin to Colonel Crole Wyndham, apropos of the
success of the billeting arrangements at that place :
“ Many thanks for your letter conveying kind expressions, which I
assure you are highly valued by the citizens of Dunedin. No one can
be more delighted with the triumphant success that has attended any
efforts to entertain your admirable corps and make their stay in our
city memorable than myself and co-workers. Our confidence from the
inception of this movement in the behaviour and conduct of “ Tommy ”
has not been misplaced, and we have reaped a sufficient reward in the
genuine gratitude expressed by every soldier, and the high eulogium by
yourself as Lieutenant-Colonel Commanding the Corps.
E. Chisholm,
Mayor.”
19th to 25th. —We had an uneventful passage from Auckland to
Adelaide, with smooth sea and clear weather until the last day,
when rain fell.
25th.—The Britannic only arrived off Largs Bay. at about
midnight, and the energetic Press representatives who boarded
her after that hour found that, somewhat naturally, everyone was
asleep; however, Lord Falconer, as the son of an ex-Governor
of South Australia, was made the prey of one interviewer, and
with that they had to be satisfied.
26th.—In the early morning Lieut.-Colonel Hampson came on
board to make arrangements for us. The ship lay out in the
stream over a mile from Largs Bay pier, and as it was not
thought advisable to take her up the narrow channel to Port
Adelaide, tugs w ere arranged for to take us ashore. Brigadier-
General Gordon, who commands the South Australian forces,
came off during the morning, and as the parade for the proclama-
tion of the King took place on the morrow, there were no official
fixtures for the day. This gave us a day to ourselves to see the
town, and officers and men proceeded on shore accordingly. The
officers were made welcome by the Adelaide Club, where the
“ kus-kus tatties ” dripping with water, reminded old Indians of
the expedients of the shiny East. It was very hot—the ther-
mometer was 100° in the shade—but we were assured that this was
a cool spell compared to the weather of the past week.
In the afternoon the Curator of the Botanical Gardens con-
ducted a party round his gardens, which are well worth a visit,
and, being the oldest in Australia, have a finer show of trees than
any other.
27th.—The troops were landed in tug boats in two or three
parties, and trained up to Adelaide, where we found the Cavalry
and Artillery mounted and provided with guns by the local
Artillery. The Household Cavalry (for whom, of course, it has
never been possible to ensure a full number of black weight-


carrying horses), were all mounted on greys belonging to the
police, the effect being distinctly good.
As we marched off, a few untrained horses gave trouble, and
Captain Dickson, E.H.A., was lucky to escape without serious
injury, as his mount reared and fell back with him. It was
terribly hot marching in European review-order under a tropical
sun, and the air was humid and muggy. Our reception was
very hearty and the city was gaily decorated. After passing
through the principal streets, which in this well-planned city are
very wide, and admitted of excellent arrangements for the pro-
cession, we arrived at the Exhibition buildings, where lunch was
ready for the men. The Minister for Public Works and several
of the staff officers assisted in seeing to the entertainment of the
men, who were very glad of a rest in the shade. Nothing is so
trying as a ceremonial march in great heat, as we had already
found out, but this occasion was more severe than at any other
place.
Lord Tennyson had invited Colonel Crole Wyndham and a party
of officers to luncheon, and after they returned, the troops
marched off to the Victoria Park, where we formed up in two
lines on the track of the race-course with all the military forces
of the State.
At about three o’clock His Excellency the Governor arrived,
drove through the troops, receiving their salute, and then returned
to the special pavilion, from which he read, in a clear voice and
with appropriate dignity, the proclamation of the accession of
King Edward VII. In front of him were the lines of troops,
in the centre of the course the whole populace of Adelaide were
assembled, while the stands were crowded with spectators. Two
or three of the largest stands were kept for the school children,
who were dressed in white and divided into sections, having
alternately red, white, and blue flags, which they waved vigorously,
the effect being pleasing even if it did reproduce the tricolor flag
of another nation.
The troops then formed up and marched past, after which they
quitted the ground. It was extremely hot and trying for those
who had to remain long at “attention,” and several were over-
powered by the heat. During the parade the war balloon had
been brought into the centre of the enclosure, but as the afternoon
drew on heavy gusts of wind made ballooning impossible, and as
the balloon was being hauled down, after three ascents, the wind
caused the envelope to tear, and the descent of the aeronaut, though
fortunately harmless, was rather abrupt.
A few cases of sunstroke occurred during the day, and sufferers
had to remain in the Adelaide hospital; fortunately they made good
recovery, and were able to rejoin the ship before she sailed.


In the evening the officers were the guests of the “Adelaide”
Club at a pleasant dinner, where there was plenty of cordiality
and no speechifying.
Feb. 28th.—Another day spent in visiting Adelaide and the country
around. Many excursions were arranged to the hills which over-
look the city, and those who drove round to Mount Lofty or
Marble Hill went through beautiful scenery, and avoided the heat
and glare of the city. The officers of the South Australian forces
entertained the officers of the I. E. C. at dinner at the South
Australian Hotel, and we enjoyed a most interesting function. As
this happened to be the last day of the existence of these troops as
a separate organisation (they passed under the control of the
Commonwealth on the morrow), the Minister of Defence, the
Commandant, and the Commanding Officers, naturally spoke of
their mutual relations, so, what with the speeches in which we
were made welcome, and the reply of Colonel Crole Wyndham, we
had a considerable flow of oratory.
The speech of Mr. John G, Jenkins, Minister of Defence, caused
uproarious hilarity. Having disposed of the serious matter of his
discourse, he fenced lightly with topics likely to encourage his
friends to interrupt him. When they were so indiscreet as to do
so, he flashed out at them with a repartee that invariably brought
the house down, and left his opponent utterly discomfited.
As the ship was to sail before midnight we had to tear
ourselves away, and left Adelaide not thinking that the corps
would land at no other port in Australia.
March Ist to sth. —We were fortunate in our weather in the
Australian Bight, and did not find the heavy sea that we
encountered when outward bound. For the greater part of the
time we had a light, following wind.
On the evening of the sth we made Fremantle, having been
busy during the day with preparations for the parades at
Fremantle and Perth.
But as soon as communication with the shore was opened we
learnt that plague had broken out in the port. Although only a
few cases had occurred, it was thought best that the troops should
not land, and the vessel remained in quarantine.
March 6th. —We lay in the roadstead, and steamers and sailing boats
from Fremantle came out and circled round us. Several people
had come oft' in the hopes of paying us a visit, but had to shout
their greetings across the water.
In the morning the transport Devon with a contingent of West
Australians for South Africa, steamed out of the harbour, and
brought up not far from us. She passed close alongside of us


and gave us an opportunity of cheering her on her way; the
men lined the side and filled the rigging, the band played “ Eule
Britannia,” and the cheers from both ships were loud and long.
Sir John Forrest came out to wish the contingent good-bye,
and also came alongside the Britannic and expressed his regret
that we could not land. We, too, were very sorry to fail our
West Australian hosts, who, as we heard, had made all prepara-
tions to receive us.
March 7th to 16th.—After strong, fair wind for a day or so, we enjoyed
fine weather all the way to Colombo, nothing eventful occurring
on the journey.
March 17th.—Made Galle Light before dawn, and came into Colombo
harbour shortly after 10 a.m. There was a large and varied
collection of ships in the harbour. The British cruiser Blake
came in soon after we did. A large Japanese battleship was
coaling, two Russian destroyers had called in en route for China,
the transport Atlantien, retained for service in connection with the
Boer prisoners, was lying at her moorings. Among the liners
were vessels of the P. and 0., Nord Deutcher Lloyd, British
India, and other lines, and there were a number of cargo boats.
We were soon surrounded by shoals of bumboats loaded with
tropical fruits and all kinds of curiosities. During the whole
time we lay at anchor business was very brisk in this market, and
the strangest purchases were hauled up in baskets to the decks.
The officers who went ashore visited the messes and the club*
and spent most of their time exploring curio shops and looking at
costly gem stones that may or may not have been worth the
startling prices asked for them.
In quite a short time every one was talking in most learned
fashion of spinel rubies, Alexandrite, star sapphires, and
chrysoberyl.
In the afternoon a sudden tropical storm came up and burst in
a terrific downpour over Colombo.
March 18th.—The day was spent by officers and men exploring the
bazaars and driving about in rickshaws and carriages. A few
officers penetrated as far inland as Kandy.
March 19th. —We took on board! officers and about 40 men, the latter
mostly invalids and “ time-expired.” Sailed soon after mid-day,,
having taken on enough coal to carry us to Port Said.
March 20th to 29th.—Our luck held out, and we had fair weather all
across the Indian Ocean. We passed Aden early on the 26th,
and Perim at about mid-day. In the southern part of the Red
Sea we found a strong following wind, but the ship was steady


enough for the worst sailors. The usual parades, sports and
games went on, with the occasional variation of dancing to the
band.
March 30th. —We brought up at Suez in the early morning, and lay
at anchor till 11. It was a hot, hazy day, and many sharks were
swimming round the ship. We entered the Canal, and at 6 p.m.
changed pilots off Ismailia. The new pilot had not been on
board a quarter of an hour before the ship took the ground about
half a mile from the Northern outlet of Lake Timsah. The
channel curves at this point and in the hope of rushing the ship
over the obstruction, the pilot rang up “ Full speed ahead.” But
the ship was a little by the stern, and not such a good jumper as
the pilot appears to have thought, and so we remained fast on a
stiff clay bottom, on the West side of the channel, and not in
such a position as to block the traffic. Our own efforts to get off
were fruitless, so we had to wait for the arrival of tugs, which,
however, were not likely to come to us, as they were in attendance
upon the Ophir.
March 31st (Sunday).—ln England, before we left, and again in
Australia, our corps was often spoken of as a sort of bodyguard
for the Duke of York, though, as a matter of fact, there was no
intention of keeping us out until H.E.H.’s arrival. It was a
strange freak of fate that when the Ophir took her stately way
down the Suez Canal, their Eoyal Highnesses should have their
first view of this bodyguard, which gossip had assigned to them,
homeward bound, but securely perched upon a mud bank. From
an early hour we had watched for the Ophir's coming, and more
than once it had been announced by amateur experts that the
masts of a coming steamer seen over the canal banks were hers.
Then excitement grew intense until the craft came out into the
lake and stood revealed—a “ ditcher! ”
At last the Eoyal Standard, bearing on its centre the rose of
York, was recognized, and all hands were on deck before the
great, white yacht rounded the bend and came into view. As she
came on our whole ship’s company was at the side, and when
she passed, Colonel Crole Wyndham led off three cheers for the
Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York.
Our corps had made a good deal of noise on several occasions
in Australia, but those three cheers were the best we were
•capableoonef —ne plus ultra. The Duke and Duchess, on the upper
bridge acknowledged our loyal greeting, and the full crew of blue-
jackets gave us back our cheers. Nobody thought about the
mudbank, and it was not until we watched the tug Titan , follow-
ing in the Ophir's wake, that we remembered that we must stay
until she returned to pull us off, or even longer.


Other steamers passed us, and we had a good deal of genial
chaff to endure, but Mr. Atkins always turned it off with the grim
advice, “ Keep your eye on the pilot. *
In the evening we heard that the Ophir had not got through as
a dredger was in difficulties ahead of her, so no tugs came to us.
April Ist.—Lighters were brought alongside, and we started to lighten
the ship. The Titan, the promised tug of 2,400 horse power,
arrived in the afternoon, but failed to move us. It seemed strange
to us land folk that, our ship having gone aground head first,
the canal authorities should pull at that end of her in order to get
her off. The men were landed in the afternoon, and practised
field firing in the desert.
April 2nd.—A dredger arrived, but the clay proved too stiff for the
suction pipe, which had little effect. A party of officers went up
to Cairo, another party visited Tel-el-Kebir. The tugs pulled
fruitlessly first at one end then at the other.
April 3rd.—The men landed and spent the day in the desert, bathing,
rifle shooting, and football being the chief amusements. The
labours of the tugs were still unavailing, though, in order to
leave nothing untried, they pulled at both ends at once.
April 4th, sth, and 6th.—Still lightening the ship, dredger at work,
and tugs making daily efforts to pull us off. The men landed
each day.
April 7th (Easter Sunday).—Services were held in the desert. A
bucket dredger started to cut a channel astern of us.
April Bth.—We were ashore as usual, and most of the men had
returned from bathing, some were on the canal bank, others
playing or watching rounders and football. The tugs were
pulling at the ship. Suddenly there was a shout from those
watching on the bank that brought all the rest up. The Britannic
was afloat again ! When we returned to the ship it really did
one good to see Captain Hayes’ smile.
Our sympathies had been with him from the first; he and his
officers had brought us twenty thousand miles without accident
or mistake, into many harbours and in all kinds of weather, and
we knew how galling it must have been for him that his ship
should be piled up on the ground when another man had absolute
control of her.
April 9th.—While we were aground, baggage, stores, coal, and
almost everything movable had been unloaded out of the ship
in order to lighten her. Anchors, cables, and coal were got


aboard as soon as she was floated, and at 6 a.in. the crew and
the troops were at work on the remaining stores. By 10 p.m.
everything w r as loaded up.
April 10th. —Proceeded up the canal and reached Port Said without
further adventure. Took on coal sufficient for the return voyage
to Southampton.
April 11th.—Left Port Said at 7 a.m. for Malta, and had fair weather
until the night of the 18th, when we met a gale of wind right
ahead which delayed our arrival.
April 14th. —Arrived at Malta and were moored in the Quarantine
harbour by 11 a.m. The corps and regiments in garrison were
most hospitable in entertaining our various detachments. The
King’s Royal Rifles, Rifle Brigade, and 21st Lancers had the
honour of an invitation from His Excellency Sir Francis Grenfell.
The ship should have sailed at 6 but was delayed by a sad
accident. As the men were coming on board, a “dysa,” in
which were four of the Cameron Highlanders, was capsized close
to the ship’s ladder. Three men were picked up without
difficulty, but the fourth, Private Stevenson, was unfortunately
entangled in the boat’s mooring rope, and when he was hauled to
the surface he was unconscious, and though the medical officers
at once commenced artificial respiration, and continued their
efforts for nearly two hours, he never regained consciousness.
The unfortunate man, who had been through the Egyptian and
South African campaigns, leaves a widow and two children.
The ship started for Gibraltar at about 8 p.m.
April 15th, 16th, 17th.—Fine weather and smooth seas. In order
not to reach Gibraltar before daybreak, we slowed down on
the 17th.
April 18th.—Brought up in the harbour at Gibraltar in the early
morning, and only stayed enough time to take on board some
homeward bound officers and families. Under weigh again at
1 p.m., and stood out through the straits, the wind having risen
to an easterly gale—fortunately a fair wind for us. We had a
clear view of the hull of a steamer, wrecked a few days previously
on the Pearl Rock. She was broken cleanly in two, and from the
way the seas were breaking over her, she would not long remain
visible.
April 19th.—The weather having moderated, we again had a smooth
sea and a fair wind.
April 20th and 21st. —We crossed the Bay of Biscay in calm weather.
The old ship was quite satisfied with the display of her rolling


capabilities which she had made on the way out, and in spite of
a slight swell, she was very steady.
April 22nd.—By 8 a.m. we were off the Southampton Docks, and saw
upon the quay the well-known form of Colonel Stacpole, the man
who rules the coming and the going of the British army. He
was soon on board ; special trains were arranged for London,
Aldershot, Netley, and the North, and in the course of the day
the Imperial Representative Corps, its mission finished, was
dispersed once more among all the garrison towns of the country.


MEMORIAL SERVICES AT HOBART AND
MELBOURNE.
When the sad news reached us at Hobart that the Queen-Empress was
no more, with a wise and true instinct it was decided to hold a
memorial service in which all might participate ; so that in stately
fashion, worthy of the occasion, the citizens of this outpost of the
Empire and the I. R. Corps might commemorate the virtues of our
beloved Queen, and invoke God’s blessing on the King her son, and the
Empire, in their bereavement.
The service was held in the Domain, than which it would be
impossible to find a more suitable gathering place for such an occasion.
A wide plateau sloping away to the north, with Hobart lying at
its feet, Mount Wellington and the other hills commanding it, and
with the Derwent and the harbour encircling it, it was itself a splendid
sight to behold. Here the I. R. Corps with the Colonial Forces
assembled, and a great multitude of the citizens gathered round them
or stood in crowds on the surrounding hills.
The Chaplains of the Corps assisted by the Chaplains of the
Colonial Forces conducted the service.
The service was opened by the Highland Light Infantry Band
playing the Gaelic “ Song of Death,” a most weird and plaintive
composition. The Rev. F. G. Copeland, Chaplain to the Tasmanian
forces, read the opening sentences of the Church of England Burial
Service. The Rev. T. H. Chapman, Presbyterian Chaplain to the
I. R. C., read the 90th Psalm, and never was its pathos more felt,
especially in the verse “ and if by reason of strength they be four score
years, then are they labour and sorrow, and we are soon cut off and flee
away.” The Lesson (i. Cor., chap, xv.) was read by the Rev. R. W.
Allen, Wesleyan Chaplain to the Corps, and its closing words “not in
vain in the Lord ” were felt to be an apt and impressive description of
the life of the Queen we mourned.
After the well-known hymn “ Days and moments quickly flying ”
had been sung, the Rev. J. B. W. Woolnough, senior Chaplain to the
Tasmanian Forces, read the closing collects of the burial service.
Then followed one of the most impressive portions of this
historic service. Father Foran, the Roman Catholic Chaplain of the
Corps, offered up a prayer, in which he rendered thanks to God for all
the blessings we had received under the gentle rule of our great and
noble Queen, who had ever been a mother to our nation and a model
to all her numberless subjects throughout the vast empire over which
she ruled. He rendered special thanks on behalf of all who were
soldiers of the Queen for all she had done for their spiritual and


temporal welfare, especially for giving to every soldier, in peace and
in war, the help and consolation of his own religion. He concluded
by praying that her great example in private and public life might be
her people’s inspiration, and by invoking God’s blessing and guidance
upon the King who would now succeed her.
The Rev. A. E. Townend, the senior Chaplain of the 1.R.C., now
delivered an address. He reminded us of that other historic service
at Khartum, in memory of the hero who died for the emancipation of
the Soudan. That service, like this one, was truly representative of
the Empire and the army. Then the memory of a hero was
honoured, now we commemorate the life and mourn the death of our
Queen. He concluded by emphasising the lessons to be learnt from
the great example of the life that had just closed.
Then followed another hymn and the Benediction ; and with the
solemn “ Dead March ” in “ Saul,” never sounding more impressive or
evoking more tender emotions than on this occasion, this memorable
service closed.
At Melbourne, also, where the corps proceeded on leaving
Hobart, a similar Memorial Service was held. In this instance
the Bishop of Melbourne, the Rev. Dr. Goe, associated himself with
the Chaplains of the Corps who officiated, and delivered an appreciation
of the Queen and enforced the lessons of her life.
The order of the service was otherwise the same as at Hobart,
except that the Rev. A’. E. Townend read the opening collects and
gave an admirable address.
One of the most impressive incidents of the service was when the
vast assembly rose, as the band of the Highland Light Infantry played
with great effect the “ Dead March ” in “ Saul.” Many not usually
given to emotion were deeply stirred.
But, after all, the most impressive fact was the assembly itself.
There could hardly have been less than 12,000 persons present, all of
whom evidently shared a common sorrow, in which they had brought
home to them the fact that goodness and virtue are the great powers,
seeing that by them, and not alone by her great abilities, the Queen
had achieved that unique position and influence which will cause her
ever to be regarded as the greatest monarch of our race.
Two incidents in connection with the service bear eloquent
testimony to this fact. As the I.R.C. marched through the streets to
the service, on the facade of the Parliament House they saw this motto,
as summing up the Queen’s life and character. “ God her strength.
Christ her hope.” And when the men of the Indian contingent were
asked how they could attend a Christian service, their reply was :
“It is not a matter of this or that religion ; we must all join in doing
honour to the memory of the Queen.”


SPORTS ON THE HOMEWARD JOURNEY.
Wednesday, March 20th.
Diving Competition.— Competitors ran down the deck, with hands
tied behind their backs, had to kneel down, and take an orange out of
a bucket of water in their mouths, and carry it back to the starting
post. Eun in heats ; 16 entries : Private Webb ( Somerset Light
Infantry), 1 ; Private Lewis (Ist Middlesex Volunteers), 2 ; Lance-
corporal Galley (Queen’s), 8.
“Are You There ” Competition.— Competitors blindfolded, and
on their hands and knees, to find their adversary and hit him with a
roll of newspaper. Best of three hits. 12 entries : Private Lynch
(Cameronians), 1; Private Eoberts (Ist Middlesex Volunteers), 2;
Private Webb (Somerset Light Infantry), 3.
Potato and Bucket Eace (18 entries). —Lance-corporal Hancock
(Army Service Corps), 1; Private Bailey (Somerset Light Infantry), 2 ;
Driver Hearn (Eoyal Engineers), 8; Lance-corporal Littleboy (4th
Devons), 4.
Potato and Bucket Eace (officers). —Lieut.-Col. Wyndham, C.8.,
1 ; Lieut. Freeman (Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 2; Capt.
Heneage (Grenadier Guards), 3; Lieut. Hyde (Eoyal Army Medical
Corps), 4.
Friday, March 22nd.
Foils (Best Man-at-Arms Competition).—l 3 entries : Corporal-of-
Horse Eggleton (Eoyal Horse Guards), 1; Lance-Corporal Goosch
(Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 2; Private Howden (Ist Middle-
sex Volunteers), 3; Private Gallagher (21st Lancers), 4.
Grinning Through a Horse-collar.— This would have been an
amusing competition had there not been so much shyness in com-
peting. Driver Haysett (Eoyal Engineers), 1 ; Driver Webb (Eoyal
Artillery), 2 ; Private Ferriss (Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 3.
Diving Competition (officers only).—Mr. Gerrard (s.s. Britannic),
1; Lieut. Hyde (Eoyal Army Service Corps), 2; 2nd Lieut. Dongall
(Cameron Highlanders), 3; Lieut. Chichester (Somerset Light
Infantry), 4.
Monday, March 25th,
Tug of War.— Light Group. 7 entries. Ist ties : Highlanders
beat Auxiliaries ; Eifles beat Eoyal Engineers ; Line beat Light
Cavalry ; Fusiliers a bye. These tugs of war were pulled with the
rope through two blocks, one team being on either side of the ship.


Bayonet v. Bayonet. —l 2 entries ; Ist ties were fought off.
Dart Throwing (Sergeants only). — 4o entries : Sergeant Adwick
(Gymnastic Staff), 1 ; Sergeant Swarbrick (21st Lancers), 2 ; Ser-
geant Ridgwell (Royal Engineers), 3.
Wednesday, March 27th.
Bayonet v. Bayonet.— Private Bousey (Grenadier Guards), 1 ;
Corporal-of-Horse Eggleton (Royal Horse Guards), 2 ; Private Lynch
(Cameronians), 3 ; Corporal Butler (Royal Wilts Yeomanry), 4.
Dart Throwing (officers, 20 entries). —Lieut. Hon. G. Baring
(Coldstream Guards), 1; Lieut. Rycroft (Royal Welsh Fusiliers), 2;
“ Tommy,” 3.
Tug of War (2nd ties). —Heavy Group : Royal Artillery beat
Yeomanry. Light Group: Line beat Rifles; Highlanders beat
Fusiliers.
Dart Throwing (Match ; Officers v. Sergeants).—Sergeants won
easily.
Friday, March 29th.
Tug of War (Finals). —Heavy Group : Royal Artillery, 1 ;
Guards, 2. Light Group : Highlanders, 1 ; Line, 2.
Bugler’s Competition (11 entries, to sound 3 calls). —Bugler
Havill (4th Devons), 1; Bugler Maxwell (Seaforth Highlanders), 2 ;
Bugler Dolner (King’s Royal Rifles), 3; Bugler Kelly (Irish
Guards), 4.
April 3rd.
On the Desert, opposite Ismailia
Shooting Competition (31 entries). —10 men per detachment;
10 rounds per man. Independent firing at unknown range, about
550 yards. Time, 3 minutes Band Highland Light Infantry
(38 points), 1 ; Detachment Highland Light Infantry (26 points), 2;
Detachment Seaforth Highlanders (24 points), 3.
Putting the Shot ■ (18 entries). Gunner Deegan (Royal
Artillery), 1; Corporal Whyte (Grenadier Guards), 2 ; Sergeant-Major
Wright (Royal Artillery), 3.
Owing to want of time, the long jump and high jump did not
take place.
April 6th.
On the Desert.
Group Competition (10 men per group; 10 rounds at unknown
distances, from 800 to 500 yards; 7 entries). Highlanders, 1;
Rifles, 2.


Saturday, April 13th.
Bayonet y. Sword (Finals).— Private Bousey (Grenadier Guards).,
1 ; Private Cowell (Ist Middlesex Volunteers), 2; Corporal Goosch
(Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 3; Corporal Butler (Royal Wilts
Yeomanry), 4.
Single Sticks. —Private Bousey (Grenadier Guards), 1 ; Corporal
Goosch (Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 2; Corporal-of-Horse
Eggleton (Royal Horse Guards), 3; Corporal Butler (Royal Wilts
Yeomanry), 4.
Best Man at Arms Competition.— (Foils, Single Sticks, Bayonet tv
Bayonet, Sword tv Bayonet). —Private Bousey (Grenadier Guards), 1 ;
Corporal-of-Horse Eggleton (Royal Horse Guards), 2 ; Corporal Goosch
(Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry), 3 ; Corporal Butler (Royal Wilts
Yeomanry) and Private Cowell (Ist Middlesex Volunteers), 4.
On the afternoon of the 29th March a tug of war was pulled off
between the officers and sergeants. This was a return match, the
officers having won the pull on the outward journey. Unfortunately
for them two of their heavy-weights had left for South Africa, and the
sergeants’ teaur was the heavier. The first pull ended in favour of the
sergeants who were about two feet to the good at the call of time. In
the second pull neither side seemed to have much advantage, till
suddenly something went wrong on the officers’ side and the sergeants
fairly walked away, thus avenging their former defeat.
The Cricket Competition between teams of six from each Detach-
ment was brought to a close on Wednesday, the 18th of April, the day
before we arrived at Gibraltar, just in time, as the weather precluded
any play afterwards. There w r ere originally 32 entries ; the matches
were commenced on leaving Auckland, one being played every
afternoon. The successful competitors at the end of the third round
and therefore left in for the semi-final were the Field Artillery, the
Buffs, the Rifle Brigade, and Highland Light Infantry Band, the two
last teams being returned the winners. The final between the
Rifle Brigade and the Highland Light Infantry Band ended in favour
of the Rifle Brigade who thus won the competition.


IN THE STOKE=HOLD.
“ What do those stokers want on deck here ? I’m hanged if they
haven’t gone down the officers’ companion ! Well, of all the ships I
ever was in,” etc., etc. The gallant field officer did not recognise two
of his own friends in the coal-black, bare-armed, sweat-grimed objects
who had just popped up from the engine-room and down again by the
nearest stairs, like two rabbits bolted by a ferret.
We were in the tropics, nearing the Line, and people were
grumbling at the temperature of the saloon, where the electric fans
didn’t seem to give half enough air. Every day, in the afternoon
watch, six enthusiasts were finding out for themselves what the work
of a fireman in a liner’s stoke-hold is really like—and also getting quit
of the spare energy that food without exercise generates on board ship.
It is a good thing to go behind the scenes occasionally. We are apt
to take everything for granted now-a-days, and are content to remain
placidly ignorant of the machinery that fulfils our wants. Mankind
knows nothing of the means by which dinner is evolved from the
unseen, madame gracefully accepts the miracle by means of which
there is always hot water at the top of the house—neither of them
could tell you why the electric bell rings or does not ring.
And so it is on board ship. Of course the screw goes round, why
not ? If you will spend an hour with me in the stoke-hold you will
look with more respect on the trade of fireman for the rest of your life.
Leaving the breezy deck we go down the corkscrew staircase,
and with every step the temperature rises. On the centre platform of
the engine room we find the engineer on watch. He looks at the dials
of his gauges, and if the needle of that steam gauge falls below its
mark it will not take him long to be in the stoke hold getting more
steam. He has a reputation in the company’s service for getting
steam. This means a lot more than meets the eye, and on the
Western Ocean the man who earns it is pretty sure to be “a hard
case.” Down we go again to the lower platform, where the rythmic
clang and rumble is loudest. Here are the great connecting rods and
cranks and the shaft, turning, turning with all the embodiment of
strength and force that makes the stranger feel very small indeed.
Now we go through to a gloomy inferno. In front of us is a
narrow alley between the boilers, whose top is hidden in the gloom;
to right and left are stoke-holds. Their darkness is lit by the glare


round the doors of the fires and through the holes. Under a canopy,
which is really a “ down-take,” sits a short, sturdy individual with a
very black face. The fire-light catches the whites of his eyes as he
turns to look at the stranger. He is reposing on an upturned bucket
and seems to have nothing to do.
In the central passage black figures are wheeling barrows of coal
and dumping their contents before the furnace doors. A clanging
signal is heard, and our fireman rises and takes his broad-bladed
shovel. A touch of the shovel blade unlatches a furnace door, throws
it wide open and presses it back to a catch. The blaze of light from
the fire throws into stronger darkness all except the man and his
work. He stands in the fierce heat, and as he drives his shovel into
the piled-up coal, a glance into the fire tells him exactly how it burns.
As each shovelfull goes in, a turn of the wrist spreads the coal
exactly where it should fall; no more than will burn brightly at once ;
just enough to bring out the full heat.
As there is style in driving a golf ball, so it is with firing. See
the expert; he stands with bent back and both hands low; there is
no check, no jerk in his movement; his swing is perfect and his aim
exact. In this way each of his four fires is stoked. He pauses at the
last and rattles his shovel blade against the angle iron of the bulk
head. This is the signal to the next stoke-hold to start firing. Our
artist makes no bungling even here; his shovel rattles to a clear,
sharp tune like the rolling of a drum. He takes from the pit below a
fire, a long, heavy bar with flattened point, and thrusts it through the
hole in the door, along the fire bars to the back of the grate; then,
bearing down, he breaks up through the crust of the fire. Slicing a
fire seven feet long is warm work. When the four fires are sliced he
sits, running with sweat, upon his upturned bucket under the strong
draught of cold air.
Little time has he for rest; the signal calls him up again.
Again each fire door is thrown open, and with a long rake he rakes
over the top of his fires, distributing, turning over and pushing back
the glowing coal. This is hotter work than slicing. Now he can
rest until the turn comes round again. If a mail boat is pressed, the
turn comes round as fast as the men can handle the tools, and then it
is real grit that keeps the steam up.
A good fireman is as proud of his fires as any other craftsman.
As the conditions vary so he varies his firing. Every coal demands a
different treatment, whether it be Welsh, Pocahontas, North Country,
New Zealand, or the inferior coals of Australia and India.
You can tell a good coal by the small amount of ash it leaves.
No coal burns up completely ; when all the goodness has burnt out, a
glowing mass remains, and this ash must be cleaned out or the fire
will be choked up with it and nothing else. When the new watch


goes down, and the men are fresh, each man cleans a fire. This is
the hardest work that you will see dowm here. The fire for cleaning
is allowed to burn lower than usual, then all along one side the
glowing ash is raked out. Like a stream of fire the ash pours out,
and the stoke-hold is filled with glare from the burning pile that lies
upon the foot plates. Eight to the end of the tunnel-like firegrate the
fireman must work his rake, and drag the ash from the furthest end of
the fire. When one side is clean he must turn the fire over, keeping
it alight the while, then draw the ashes from the other side. Next
the ashpit belotv the fire is emptied, then our small fire is coaxed up
to its best heat as soon as possible. In its second hour the clean fire
should give more heat than any other. Once let a fire go wrong, and
it may be an hour before it can be brought round ; and the bad
fireman has a poor chance of escaping the keen eye of our energetic
engineer, wdio will speak winged words, not to be mistaken.
On the work of the firemen depends the speed of the ship ; this
brings our grimy shipmate into the circle of our own interestsw If
you see him asleep on the deck or in his hammock slung from the
rail, do nothing to w r ake him for he has earned his rest. It is not
everyone who can say as much.
VISIT TCL THE GOLD FIELDS OF QYMPIE
AND BENDIGO.
It is probable that most of us, since our arrival at years of discretion,
have embarked more or less on the uncertain seas of speculation and
invested a portion of our hard earned pay in gold mines. A short life
and a merry one, some of them have probably only existed on paper,
and, after paying up a few calls, we have generally been content to let
them slide. It was, therefore, not to be wondered at that a large
party accepted readily the invitation of the Hon. J. F. Foxton to pay a
visit to some real gold mines about 80 miles from Brisbane.
Alas for the change in the morning ; the start was an early one
and only nine gold seekers turned up for the special train at 7.80 a.m.
out of some twenty-five who had expressed their anxiety to go only
the night before.
The railway ran through magnificent bush country, tree ferns,
she oaks, iron bark, stringy bark, blood wood, messmate, many kinds
of eucalyptus, and so forth ; but the most interesting sight on the
journey was the “ Glass Houses,” a series of isolated hills rising


straight out of the plain some 400 feet, with steep, almost precipitous
sides, which glistened in the sun like glass. Captain Cook is responsible
for their curious name. Sailing off the coast he saw these wonderful
hills, and christened them.
We arrived at Gympie about 1 o’clock, to find the station platform
packed with people who had come to see the Imperial troops. Some-
one had spread the report that a strong contingent in full uniform was
on the way, and much disappointment was shown when only nine
officers in mufti appeared. The big Mayor fought a way through the
crowd; we struggled after him, and he addressed the people outside,
welcoming the officers to Gympie. Colonel Wyndham said a few Avords
in reply, and there was much cheering. The party then embarked in
brakes, headed by a band, also in brakes, paraded through the toAAm,
and arrived eventually at the Northumberland Hotel. Here the
Mayor again Avelcomed the officers to Gympie, and Colonel Wyndham
said a few more words in reply, the gist of Avhich Avas “ our visit to
Australia would not be complete without this visit to Gympie.”
A most excellent champagne and oyster lunch Avas then attacked,
after Avhich the usual toasts were gone through ; the member for the
district proposed the health of the Imperial troops, he welcomed the
officers to Gympie, and said he hoped before they left they would be
shown lioav gold was extracted from the quartz from first to last.
Colonel Wyndham, in reply, said that their welcome, like the.weather,
had been extremely Avarm. They regarded their visit as an education,
for it was an education to cross the ocean and see this Greater Britain
of the Southern seas, the Britain they iioav looked forward to to assist
them in the future. As they travelled, they Avere struck by the fact
that here were no blood-stained battle fields, no subjugated race to be
a constant source of anxiety and menace to a Government, but a
country won from nature by the hardy, earnest pioneers and prospectors
of old. He thanked them most heartily for drinking the toast, and,
recognising that time Avas short, was about to resume his seat, when
he was met by loud cries of “Go on.” Continuing, he said they were
all very anxious to see lioav they got the stuff to make the yellow boys
which were unfortunately so A T ery scarce in the British army.
After lunch a start Avas made for the mines, a visit being paid on
the Avay to the bank, where Ave Avere shown some gold in bars, a loav
millions Availing for the cart to go to the station. The Scottish
Gympie mine had been selected to show the visitors ; a hundred
stamps at work were worse than a battlefield for noise, and after
inspecting the batteries and retorts, Ave quickly changed into miner s
clothes and descended the shaft, nearly 1,600 feet in depth. Here
was a new Avorld to most of us, and Ave were surprised to find it even
warmer than the one on the surface, though equally Avell provided
with roads, trams, and electric light. The manager kindly shoAved us
all round, and gave us a most interesting account of the workings.


We were shown how the rock was bored with diamond drills, worked
sometimes by hand and sometimes by compressed air ; how the shots
or charges of dynamite were put in, fired, and the rock blasted, the
fragments of gold-bearing quartz carried in small trollies to the foot
of the shaft and whisked up to the surface while one took a breath ;
there it was put in the batteries and pounded by the stamps to a fine
dust, a stream of water, constantly flowing, washed the quartz dust
through a very fine sieve over the plates of quicksilver where the gold
dust is deposited, and the quartz is carried away. At certain times
the quicksilver is taken from the plates and passed through a retort
when the gold is separated. If an ounce of gold is extracted from a
ton of quartz the mine pays well.
There was one thing, however, that we did not see in the mine,
and that was gold. It was absolutely invisible to an unskilled eye,
and we searched in vain for any traces. Our kind hosts, however,
did not allow us to go away without it, and as a souvenir of our visit,
we were all presented with beautiful specimens of quartz showing
visible gold from the Scottish Gympie and the Glanmire and
Monkland mines.
On returning to'the surface, the band and brakes were waiting to
take us back to the station. Before the train started the Mayor called
on the Colonel once more for a few words. Recognising that the
train would not start without the few words, and speaking with some
difficulty from the carriage door, he again thanked them for their
reception, and said he was afraid they were disappointed because a
Detachment of the troops had not been sent, but they would understand
the difficulty when he stated that the ship was anchored twenty miles
from Brisbane. He might add that he was rather glad he did not
bring them, because he was afraid he would not have been able to get
them away again, so friendly would have been their reception. They,
the officers, all understood that their welcome was no personal one,
but a real tribute of affection for the Old Country, to which they were
attached by the line of kinship. That line was no rigid iron bar, but
a flexible chain forged with the metal of sound common sense, giving
and taking with every strain, but never breaking. (Loud cheers.)
The train was then allowed to proceed, and, several hours late, we
arrived at Brisbane about 9 p.m.
On January 28th a party of the Imperial and Indian officers went
by train to Bendigo, 100 miles from Melbourne, to see the famous gold-
fields, The journey was through the country so much written about
in the early days of the gold discoveries, and many traces of the work
of the old diggers can be seen from the train ; even now, here and
there a few Chinamen are at work on the old diggings. Bendigo was
reached soon after 11 o’clock, and the visitors were driven round to see
the sights of the town. A fernery and conservatory, an Art gallery and
an avenue of English trees, were amongst the attractions, but our


return train was leaving at 3 o’clock, and time was too short to see
everything our hospitable entertainers wished to show. Light refresh-
ments were provided at the Town Hall, and the health of the visitors
drunk, to which Colonel Wyndham responded.
The party then went to the Garden Gully United mine, where the
manager, Mr. John Pryor, showed us over the underground workings.
So interesting was the visit below that nearly two hours were spent
crawling about the drives, climbing up and down ladders, and follow-
ing the line of the reef in all its intricate course. Repeated messages
were sent down from the surface, 1,500 feet above us, that if we did
not hurry up we should miss our train, so most unwillingly we
returned to the foot of the shaft and were whirled up to the open air
again. Of course we were late for lunch at the hotel, but with great
forethought our friends kindly packed it up and put it on the train for
us. On the way to the station a halt was made at “ Fortuna,” the
residence of Mr. Lansell, well known in Australia as the “ Quartz
King.” Here the party was photographed and toasts were drunk,
Colonel Wyndham acknowledging that of the Imperial officers.
One thing that struck us particularly was the fact that the mines,
which were pointed out to us as paying the best dividends and being
the most valuable property, are not among those whose shares are
quoted on the London Stock Exchange. Our Australian cousins
know a good thing when they see it and stick to it.
RANDOM NOTES.
When the ship left Melbourne for New Zealand, the strangest
menagerie of animals went with her. Emus, kangaroos, wallabies,
’possums, rats, cockatoos, magpies that are black where they ought to
be white and vice versa, parakeets, finches of all the colours of the
rainbow, and gaudy birds with strange names ; but the weirdest of all
were the “ laughing jackasses,” top-heavy birds like great sombre
kingfishers, with an evil habit of indulging in satanic laughter at
4 a.m. One of these freaks was the pride of an officer whose servant
was no sympathiser with the prevailing fad.
When we fell in with a gale that seemed to be coming fresh from
the South Pole, the seas broke over the ship, and dire was the
mortality among the pets, many of whom found a watery grave. The
servant came to make his report—“ That there bird, sir, you call a
jackass,” he said “he aiut got nothing to laugh at this morning,”


The 6th Contingent were being enlisted for South Africa, one
unmistakable bushman had passed all his tests, he had caught and
saddled the horse pointed out to him among several running loose in a
paddock, and he had ridden him round over the jumps in a way that
the critical Melbourne crowd could not find fault with. He had hit
the target a sufficient number of times, and he had been to the office
and passed as sound. Going out jubilantly into the street he had to
pass through the Staff, who were standing round the General in the
porch. Our man after feeling fruitlessly in his pockets, stopped in
front of the General and looked at him. “Here,” he said, “got a
match on yer ?’ ’
The General gave him a match.
One of the officers of the Bushmen’s Detachment was wandering
round his men’s bivouac in the dark, but the fire gave light enough
for him to see something lying about on the top of an ammunition box
—it was a packet of candles. Candles were scarce on the veldt, and
without thinking much he drew one from the packet. A long form
raised itself in the firelight. “Boss! Put that candle down.” The
candle was put down in silence. “ Boss, if you like to ask for a candle
I will give you one.”
When our men were distributed to their billets at Dunedin they
did not leave the railway station until nearly midnight. In passing
through the crowded streets one stalwart Highlander became separated
from the guide who was convoying his detachment to their hosts.
Having made his way to a quiet street he sat himself down in complete
ignorance of his whereabouts. A sympathetic townsman found him
and offered to see him home. “ D’ye ken Muster Wulkinson ? ” said
Jock. The good Samaritan did happen to ken ;he took the Highlander
to the house, they rung the bell, and Mr. Wilkinson appeared. He
was confronted by the great kilted stranger, “ Muster Wulkinson,” said
Jock, “ Gie’s your hand. I’m your guest. I hope we’ll not quarrel! ”
It was one of the distractions of a day in the Desert to watch the
camels and goods being taken across the canal at the ferry just below
the Emperor Napoleon’s Pavilion. The gawky beasts on the floating
bridge knocked each other down in their fright. One was lying legs
uppermost, his long neck hanging over the side, and his hea.d flopping
foolishly in the water. Three more had succeeded in falling off and
were swimming vaguely in different directions. One small camel,
entangled in the ferry chains, was nearly dislocating his pliant neck in
the hope of avoiding the blows that a Bedouin boy was raining on his
nose by way of helping matters.


On the far bank two horses were dragging up the sandy road a
waggon piled with boxes and bales. Suddenly the treacherous edge
of the track crumbled under the wheel, and the waggon turning slowly
over seemed to hesitate, and then shot its contents deliberately down
the bank, amid the execrations of the Arabs and the laughter of the
soldiers. One of three gunners laughed so loud and long that his
companions who had exhausted the humour of tlae accident, turned
on him, “ What’s the matter with you ? ” said they. “ Haw ! haAV !
haw ! There’s a nigger underneath ! ”


Date.
-Latitude.
Longitude.
Mls. Run. Remarks.
Jan.
15th
Kith
30° 57' S.
153° (>' E.
203
. 288
Arrived Brisbane.
17-18th
.—
—
—
At Brisbane.
19th
27° 18' S.
153° 36' E.
75
Overcast and hazy.
n
20th
31° 54' S.
152° 59' E.
289
Fine and clear.
n
21st
37° 3' S.
150° 38' E.
382
Overcast.
()
22nd
42° 9' S.
148° 28' E.
324
Arrived Hobart, 7.41 p.m.
n
23-24th
—
—
—
At Hobart.
25th
26th
27-B0th
40° 36' S.
148° E.
215
254
Fine and clear.
Arrived Melbourne, 7.20 a.m.
At Melbourne.
Jlst
38° 30' S.
144° 45' E.
57
Left Melbourne, 7.22 a.m.
Feb.
1st
41° 22' a.
150° 17' E.
310
Fine, Moderate sea.
u
2nd
43° 10' S.
156° 35' E.
300
Fresh breeze —Overcast.
3rd
44° 30' S.
161° 11' E.
215
Moderate to fresh gale.
4th
45° 20' S.
164° 29' E.
150
Fresh gale—Squally.
5th
—
—
184
Arrived Bluff, 9.10 a.m.
6th
—
—
285
Arrived Lyttleton, 8.35 a.m.
7th
—
—
—
At Lyttleton.
>)
8th
—
—
—
Left for Wellington, 9.40 p.m.
9th
—
—
165
Arrived Wellington, 8.38 a.m.
10-lBth
—
—
—
At Wellington. Left Welling-
14th
ton, 3.40 p.m., 13th.
Arrived Napier, 7.17 a.m.
,,
15th
16 th
37° 31' S.
178° 28' E.
165
206
Fine and clear. Left for
Auckland, 9.53 p.m.
Arrived Auckland, 5.30 a.m.
17-18th
—
—
—
At Auckland.
19th
—
—
—
Left Auckland, 1.42 p.m.
20 th
21st
34° 43' S.
35 J 52' S.
171° 1' E.
164° 26' E.
294
330
Fine weather.
Fine Weather.
Fine Weather.
22 nd
36" 57' S.
157° 52' E.
324
Fresh breeze — Cloudy.
? >
23 rd
38° 3' S.
151° 24' E.
315
Fresh breeze — Cloudy.
24 th
39" 2' S.
144° 48' E.
318
Fresh E. wind, moderate sea.
25 th
36° 35' S.
138° 49' E.
320
Arrived Adelaide, 11.11 p.m.
Mar.
26-28th
—
—
135
At Adelaide.
1st
—
—
120
Left Adelaide, 2.52 a.m., line.
2nd
35° 33' S.
130°17' E.
294
Fine.
3rd
35° 39' S.
124° 57' E.
260
Moderate to fresh winds.
? t
4th
35° 35' S.
119°10' E.
283
Moderate, S.W. swell.
5 th
33° 40' S.
114° 54' E.
273
Calm and misty, Arrived
6th
127
Fremantle, 11.25 p.m.
Left Fremantle, 8.40 p.m.
,,
7th
29° 47' S.
110° 11' E.
180
Moderate breeze — Overcast.
THE LOQ OF THE 5.5. “BRITANNIC.”
Sailed from Sydney 14 th January , 1001.


Date.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Mls. Run. Remarks.
Mar. 8th
26° 15' S.
109° 35' E.
285
Fresh breeze, moderate sea.
,, 9th
22° 32' S.
106° 4' E.
297
Fresh breeze, moderate sea.
„ 10th
18° 46' S.
102° 38' E,
297
Fresh breeze, moderate sea.
„ 11th
15° 3' S.
99° 7' E.
301
Fresh breeze, moderate sea
„ 12th
11° 25' S.
95° 25' E.
309
„ 13th
7° 54' S.
91° 47' E.
301
„ 14th
4° 11' S.
88° 39' E.
291
„ 15th
0° 21' S.
85° 49' E.
286
,, 16th
3° 18'N.
82° 23' E.
301
Crossed the Line.
„ 17th
—
—
275
Arrived Colombo, 10 a.m.
„ 18th
—
—
At Colombo.
„ 19 th
—
—
—
Left Colombo, 1 p.m.
„ 20 th
8° 1'N.
74° 38' E.
317
,, 21st
9° 29'N.
69° 15' E.
331
,, 22nd
11° O'N.
64° 18' E.
306
„ 23rd
12° 5'N.
59°12' E.
307
„ 24th
12° 46'N.
54° 5' E.
301
„ 25th
12° 54'N.
48° 39' E.
318
„ 26th
12° 33'N.
43° 35' E.
301
Passed Aden and Perim.
„ 27th
17° 5'N.
40° 29' E.
331
„ 28th
21° 42'N.
37° 43' E.
318
„ 29 th
26° 20' N.
37° 46' E.
320
„ 30th
—
—
252
To Suez.
,, 31st to
April 7th
—
■—
Aground in Lake Timsah.
April 8-9th
_
—
—
At anchor off Ismailia.
„ 10th
—
.—
89
Reached Port Said.
„ 11th
31° 48'N.
31° 24' E.
59
„ 12th
33° 13'N.
25° 18' E.
59
„ 13th
34° 34' N.
19° 5' E.
320
„ 14th
—
—
240
Arrived Malta
„ 15th
37° 12' N.
10° 52' E.
202
„ 16th
37° 6'N.
4° 10' E.
324
„ 17th
36° 40' N.
2° 21' W.
310
„ 18 th
—
152
Arrived Gibraltar 5.52 a.m.
Left Gibraltar 1.45 p.m.
19 th
38° 41'N.
9° 39' W.
305
„ 20th
43° 45'N.
9° 28' W.
314
,, 21st
48° 32'N.
6° 28' W.
320
„ 22nd
234
Arrived Southampton.
Since this Gazette has been in the printer’s hands, Messrs. Ismay,
Imrie & Co. have presented each of the officers of the I. R. Corps with
a record of our memorable cruise in the Britannic, giving, on a hand-
some card, the dates of our arrival at and departure from our ports of
call and the distances run. The whole is embellished with views of the
Britannic at Southampton and Sydney, and forms a most acceptable
memento of the good ship that transported us for nearly 30,000 miles
with no accident or delay for which she or her officers were responsible.
We cannot better close our paper than in wishing the best of
good luck to Captain Hayes and all his officers, for in the words of
the old song that we used to sing (every man in the key that pleased
him best) —They are jolly good fellows.


<M4-Oi+j
N tOpAj


y* ' - '• i>J -• ■ ’t in’ ’
* TTaI f *v ’ * PMaTm/m a rAMAWABA A ABAmMMm ! m. *. i
HHraAwifilPIri jT &- ; - "a A A f\ iMMMf T - - - /
BIIH8B^cnrTnTTWTffl«BMffM^


a
j % , S
•■*■*>:* ,gS
> ' ,; ':M:V' •:
\ . »: ■' -
i ••■. •• '*it- '■ •'/
1 ,
1 ipiBife' '^||||
* • 1
}J ; * ; -v^g
■■:f- )S
i ; >M,, ■ ' :^
i
?'.- ','l^'if - k •; V:*
v 'mmm ' ' ss
few ■waSreMi
> • .*V ■ . •*. » \'.jr, I '>'■•''■.■■' rv.'
fev,...;
Of A ■ M '% ‘,-^i
ri
. b
v-
Ppgfrv?' , .v. *S®'l
S|S&>: & 1
KE?v «-t-r ; - ■' Vi ' ••t;.^s^'*s-^P'.-
IK^B
BB&' vAjlsSraSagli.
P
■fe: .a
*, ...i' ,;t 33|P| f *
avfs#
A -V'. -V *
HI cJppaR 1
.£*&•*. X , i•‘j.*’-.'- - : ■s\ SSaiisKak *r : -
B® - ■ s?* 3
i-'V'.'.' '• ■ > *'» 'l.. ’
':' ... ':, N ‘ , : t'
fife S i| i mmm 4
tgl‘^>. V •' ■' '' t '* ; ' ~ ^, v S 'CJ >;
1 ■ 1 .£'.* >;V .I'
