





Recollections of a Visit to Port-Phillip.




RECOLLECTIONS
OF A
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP,
AUSTRALIA,
IN 1852-55.
BY WILLIAM WILSON DOBIE.
“Hoc est
Vivere bis, vitâ posse priore frul."
GLASGOW:
THOMAS MURRAY AND SON.
EDINBURGH: PATON AND RITCHIE.
LONDON: ARTHUR HALL, VIRTUE, AND CO.
MDCCOLVI.




TO
JOHN SHED DEN DOBIE,
BUREUMBEEP, PORT-PHILLIP, AUSTRALIA,
m)i* mo tft
18 DEDICATED, WITH MUCH AFFECTION,
BY HIS BROTHER,
THE AUTHOR




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER FIRST.
PAGE
The Voyage —Prospects on Board—Jonahs—Disaster—Tremendous
SweE —The Tagus—Lisbon—Visitors—The Count—'The Cafd
—Old Moustache —Theatres—Churches—Toleration—Concert
—Dancing, 1
CHAPTER SECOND.
First Excursion to Cintra—Second Excursion—The Adjuda—The
Road—Lisbon Boatmen —Antonio—Convent of Nosa Senora
de Pena —Cork Convent—Colares —Monserrat —Mafra—Palace
at Cintra —English Burying-Ground at Lisbon—Departure—
Malcontents on Board—Amusements and Discomforts^—Tristan
D’Acunha —Arrival in Hobson’s Bay, . . . . .18
CHAPTER THIRD.
The Yarrow-Yarrow—Melbourne—Early Experiences—Grapeshot
, —The Furor of Money-Getting—Lucky Diggers—Geelong—
Joumey into the Bush—Bush Inns—Bushrangers—Castlemaine
—Beardies—-The Hodden—'The Avoca—The Richardson, . 37
CHAPTER FOURTH.
Monotony of Bush Life—The Imagination at a loss—The Deserted
Hut—The Black’s Mimas —The Enthusiast and
Squatter—His Advantages—Unlocking the Lands—His Diffi-
culties—His Job-like Calamities—Comforts of the Bush—
Squatters’ Hospitality—Working Men—Married Couples, . 55


PA'iE
CHAPTER FIFTH.
Bush Servants—The Winter—Angels’ Visits—The Medical—The
Manager —The Policemen—The Parson—Squatters—Bill the
Native—The Steamer—The Little Doctor—Ennui, . . 74
CHAPTER SIXTH.
Spring—lts Nights and Mornings—Night in the Rainy Season-
Black Fellows—Dr Syntax—Dr Cobham—Sir Astley Cooper—
Prince Jamie—Duck Shooting—Black Swans—Sheep-Shearing
—Shepherds—A Pastoral, 88


Recollection of a Visit to Port-Phillip
CHAPTER THE FIRST.
THE VOYAGE —PROSPECTS OK BOARD—JONAHS —DISASTER —TREMENDOUS
SWELL—THE TAGUS —LISBON—VISITORS—THE COUNT —THE CAFE —OLD
MOUSTACHE —THEATRES —CHURCHES, TOLERATION —CONCERT-DANCING.
On the afternoon of the twenty-first September, eighteen hundred
and fifty-two, the ship Typhoon left the Clyde, on her maiden
voyage, bound for Melbourne, Australia. She was an iron ship of
about 1500 tons burthen, having iron masts, then quite a novel
experiment in ship-building; and as she was considered a perfect
model, and looked as if she meant it, great things were expected
of her. She was to beat every clipper afloat, and to make “the
fastest voyage to Melbourne on record.” Her passengers, of all
sorts and sizes, numbered upwards of three hundred—about forty
of which were first-class passengers, the same number second, and
the remainder third-class or steerage passengers—all bound, in ex-
pectation at least, “ for the new and happy land,” where gold is
dug up like potatoes —where old age is renewed into youth—-where
sickness is unknown, and where peace and plenty are the unfailing
lot of all. lam sorry to say that cases of del. trem. were rather
prevalent at first among our enterprising passengers, some of which
caused quite a scene on deck. A blacksmith, who had a wife and
a small family, lay on deck on the broad of his back, quivering by
all the world like a huge fish out of water. He got so purple in
the face, and his eyeballs rolled about in so frightful a manner,
that the cautious doctor had him bled, and other scientific means
used, to restore him to his wife and children, who were indulging
in the most head-splitting lamentations. The poor woman wanted
to be put on shore after her husband had regained the use of his
legs, and would willingly have given up the search after fortune,
•which had commenced in so inauspicious a manner. The black -
B


smith seemed to look upon himself as a distinguished public char-
acter during the remainder of the voyage.
The weather was cold and cheerless when the ship left her
anchorage, and when the steam-tug left her at eight o’clock at
night, a smart breeze was blowing, and a dark starless sky over-
head. The prospect on board was miserable enough, when con-
trasted with the comforts left behind. Everywhere the most
distressing confusion prevailed—this, that, and the other thing
being just exactly where they shouldn’t have been. It was but
too apparent that the ship had been sent to sea before she was
ready, (to elude the operation of a new Act, I believe,) and cargo,
passengers’ luggage, and ship’s stores were jumbled upon the decks
in every body’s way. Every one who has been a voyage in a
crowded ship has experienced the restless misery of the first days
at sea. How like it is getting into your cofiin when you turn into
your narrow bunk for the first night or two! There you are lying
in one position, as if waiting for the undertaker to put on the lid
and screw you down. How very jolly!
When we got out of the firth, the wind was such that the Skipper
had to take the North Channel, and we got a good “ heazing” going
round old Ireland. It was soon discovered by the passengers that
the rolling of the ship was one of her most prominent qualities, and
hundreds of mouths and stomachs gave vent to their disapprobation,
in that peculiar but most inimitable manner made use of at sea,
and which seems to have a most powerful effect upon the animosity
of most people who practise it. Sea-sick people are all more or
less Jonahs—tremendous fellows for fish. Some leaning over the
bulwarks gave a general invitation to the inhabitants of the deep
to turn out and supper, and despairingly invoked a fate similar to
that of the runaway prophet of Nineveh- —the sea was ready for
an encore, but the whale would not oblige—while others lay on
the broad of their backs in the lee scuppers, and convulsively
gasped, “Oh, why left I my hame?” but no one attempted to
reply to such a pitiful question. Of course, it was all “ included
in the passage money,” if one could believe that rascally head
steward. Whilst this reign of terror, remorse, and despair lasted,
the iron clipper was rolling on and on to the great delight of the
crested waves, and the ship’s purser and stewards found a wonder-
ful economy prevailing among the passengers, both fore and aft-
breakfast, dinner, and supper untasted, and thought of with a
shudder. A few hard-stomached cosmopolitans seemed all right,
and amidst shrieks, and sighs, and sights unholy, tucked into 1
2
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


whatever was going in the shape of grub, washing down with
copious draughts of stout and brandy and water; and oh! hardened
sinners, winding up with cigars and pipes! Unsympathising
wretches! they seemed to mock at the calamities of their prostrate
companions; and dared even to laugh and joke at their expense.
Why should one be made a martyr of and not another? “ Oh
fickle Fortune! why this cruel sporting?” To add to the discomfort
of all and sundry, rain came on, and made the cup of bitterness a
brimmer. Golden dreams of Australia were dispelled, and like
Ralph the Rover, many a sick-hearted soul “tore his hair, and
cursed himself in his despair.” This dismal state of matters lasted
for some days, and until the most of the passengers had arrived
at the very jaws of the whale, when they suddenly determined that
they would go no farther, resolved to look up, smile, speak, drink,
eat, and give up disturbing their fellow-passengers to leeward, by
turning their insides outside in face of their noses.
This improvement in our community was gradually being effected
without almost a dissenting stomach, when one afternoon, during
dinner, the Skipper was summoned on deck to learn that the mizen-
royal mast had been carried away. This announcement did not
affect our appetites much, little imagining that it was only a
prelude to what was to follow. After sundown, the wind increased
into a gale, and on this, the twelfth night that we had been at sea,
a change came o’er the spirit of our dream. The whale appeared
more prominent than ever to all our Jonahs. It was eight o’clock.
The evening meal had just been concluded, when a noise was heard
above the storm, as if all the water-casks and ship’s gearing on the
main deck had suddenly broken from their moorings and had gone
with a crash overboard. A loud cry of human voices succeeded,
the shriek of women, and the hoarse shout of men. Immediately
a rush of frightened beings, as if fleeing from the avenging angel,
was made towards the door of the saloon, which would have been
speedily filled but for the hard-hearted stewards, who, standing
sentry at the pantry door, sternly repulsed those who, terror-stricken,
sought out a city of refuge in the region of the aristocracy. At
first all was consternation and suspense. What had happened,
could any one tell ? The ship had been struck by lightning, so
said an old woman in black, who had gained admittance to the
saloon in spite of the doorkeepers—some one had seen the fiery fluid
quivering on the foremast. She had struck on a rock, said another,
and was going down. Ladies crowded together, pale with terror,
calling upon every one for information. “ What would they do ?
3
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


was there danger ? and what was the matter ?” But those to whom
they appealed were equally alarmed and unable to give consolation.
Some besought Heaven for mercy, and gave up all for lost, while
others would not admit of the existence of such danger, and rushed
on deck to learn the worst. Outside, amidst the storm of wind,
and waves, and driving sleet, was a scene fearful enough, hut
rendered more so by the mirky darkness of the night. The fore-
mast had given way close by the top, and all hands, assisted by
some of the more hardy passengers, were engaged in cutting away
the wreck. The ship careened considerably on the side on which
the broken mast and spars had fallen, and great anxiety pervaded all
until she was lightened. This was done as speedily as circumstances
would permit, and then she righted. But this was not all. The
mainmast was found to be sprung, and, to add to our miseries, the
main-top-gallant-mast was carried away. When the truth came
to be known, the despairing were relieved by hope, and the doubt-
ful by the knowledge that though there was danger, it was not
imminent. Only one man, one of the crew, was injured by the
fall of the mast, and he had got off with a bruised leg. The
Skipper acquitted himself manfully in his trying position, and
comforted the hearts of all by his assurances that there was “no
danger.” So much for iron masts; and how grateful we felt to the
owners for experimenting on their efficacy at our expense ! If we
had all perished, it would have been in the cause of science, and our
reward would have been found in the additional security bequeathed
to a grateful posterity; but pray what had posterity ever done for
us that we should be made a sinking fund of for its especial benefit ?
(Let posterity answer this if it can.—Communications to be ad-
dressed prepaid to the Dead Letter Office, care of the D.P.M.G.)
Luckily the wind began to moderate soon after w r e were dismasted,
and towards morning the weather had improved beyond the
expectations of the most sanguine. But there was little sleep on
board the unfortunate ship that night. Drawn closer to each
other by the dangers of the night, the passengers clustered together
for sympathy, comfort, and encouragement. There is a certain
amount of pleasure in the excitement of such moments, caused,
doubtless, by the idea that there is danger not insurmountable.
An old Port-Phillip squatter, a brother Soot, invited me into his little
cabin, where he regaled me with ginger-bread and honey-comb,
and whisky, a feast fitted for immortal stomachs who digest am-
brosial diet by royal patent, and put the nectar discreetly through
a small still. I found it too much for a commonplace mortal stomach,
4
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


and was obliged to partake sparingly of the heavenly feast. Mean-
while we discussed the storm, our altered circumstances, and the
uncertainties of to-morrow; all of which we found ourselves equally
unfit to digest, masticate them as we might. Many were our
grave speculations regarding the future. The damaged ship must
make for some port, but whether that would be Cork, Lisbon, or
Gibraltar, could not be decided on till the ship’s position was
ascertained by observations. The prospect of visiting a strange port,
and seeing a strange people, was not displeasing to some, and a
matter for congratulation to others. If a show of hands had been
called for, putting back to Cork would not have carried the palms.
Lisbon or Gibraltar would have been the favourite, though there
were some who were in such a funk, that they would have been but
too glad to get out of what they considered a doomed ship, and
wojild have hailed “ Paddy with his coat buttoned behind ” with
joy. So we discussed matters over our grog until, one by one, our
little coteries dispersed to meet again, it was to be hoped, but not
in thunder, lightning, nor in rain, but when the hurly-burly was
done, and the battle not lost, but won.
Morning brought with its sunshine, renewed hope and confidence.
The wind had quieted down considerably, but there was still a
heavy sea running, wjjich made the crippled ship roll on its swell-
ing bosom. The jagged iron stump of the foremast presented a
mournful spectacle in the bright morning sun, while the loosened
and crippled mainmast jerked madly to and fro as the ship rolled
with the heave of the sea. Sea-sickness was again predominant
among the passengers. A tremendous swell on the land is a very
harmless thing compared with a tremendous swell on the sea. The
one innocently gets up the outside in an extensive manner for your
admiration, the other wickedly gets up the inside extensively to
your infinite disgust. Go it,‘ye Jonahs! deck your insides; the
whale’s a-coming! Every exertion was made to repair damages,
so as to enable us to make for Lisbon, which was found to be our
nearest port, on consulting a very high authority, whose exalted
position makes him very much looked up to in the science of navi-
gation, but whom it is necessary to consult before the binnacle is
lighted up, as by that time he is always more than half-seas-over,
regularly going drunk to bed from the numerous mornings, meri-
dians, and nightcaps that he is daily compelled to take part in, and
never reappearing till next morning a little after daybreak, when
he pops his jolly face above his bunk, as rosy as Bacchus, and
shouts, “Steward! Morning.” A jurymast was rigged up forward,
5
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


andall hands set to work to stay the mainmast, no easy matter,
from its swaying violently with the roll of ship. Hands aloft could
with difficulty keep themselves there, and one poor fellow was, in
less than “ a hrace of shakes,” pitched from the maintopsail-yard
into the sea. A life buoy was immediately thrown to him, which
he fortunately got hold of, as he was soon far astern of us; and
when the lifeboat was making towards him, his whereabouts could
only be discerned by the wave of his arm, as he floated on his
buoyant preserver. All eyes were eagerly turned towards that
little speck, and the boat, manned by sturdy and willing fellows,
bounded o’er height and hollow, till it rescued him from his perilous
position. When the boat got alongside again “we hailed her with
three cheers,” and every heart throbbed double quick with joy as
we welcomed the poor fellow on board.
The storm now gradually abated, and the sea quieted down. If
the elements were satisfied with their sport, we were more than
willing to come to a compromise, and cry, “ Hold! enough.”
Four days after our grand disaster, we made the Portuguese coast,
and lay off and on during the night, opposite the Rock of Lisbon,
firing guns, and burning blue lights, and altogether looking rather
blue on the subject. We had one companion during the night, in
the shape of a brig, bound for Lisbon, but, like us, waiting for
daylight to proceed up the Tagus.
In the morning early, a pilot came on board at the mouth of the
Tagus, who was immediately surrounded and stared at by our
Johnny Raws as if he had been an Ojjibbeway Indian, or some
such day’s wonder, other than a dark-skinned Portuguese, in a
Guernsey shirt and striped nightcap. We got well up with the
tide, and anchored opposite to the Fort at Belem. We were
immediately surrounded by the gaily-painted boats which ply in
the Tagus, and received many pressing and courteous invitations,
in Portuguese and broken English, to “go shore.” But the
health officer, desirous, like most men in office, to exercise his little
brief authority, forbade all communication with our company, and
we were put under quarantine for some days, during which we
had to content ourselves with the view which lay before us—
picturesque, certainly, but only making us long the more to get
on shore. We were, however, destined to have more than suffi-
cient time to make a traveller’s acquaintance with Lisbon and its
environs, our stay being lengthened out, from one cause of delay and
another, to nearly two months, and ere they had expired, we were
all anxious to be off again. But there is no hurrying Portuguese
6
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


craftsmen; and had it not been for the valuable services furnished to
us by the officers and crew of Her Majesty’s (Britannic) steamers,
Retribution and Inflexible, it is not at all improbable that we
might have lain there for six months instead of two. Our visit
■was a considerably expensive one, either to owners or underwriters,
but with such speculative characters I have no sympathy. Having
at length satisfied the sanitary authorities, we moved farther up
the river, and lay opposite the city, with full permission to go on
shore, either singly, in couples, or bodily.
Lisbon loots very well from the river. Situated on seven hills,
the gay architecture, mingled with brilliant verdure, covering the
declivities and crowning the heights, affords to the eye a highly
pleasing picture. It singles out among these, solemn churches and
stately palaces, and
“ Towers and battlements it sees,
Bosom’d high in tufted trees,
Where perhaps some beauty lies,
The cynosure of neighbouring eyes
while outside of the city, are posted along the ridges outlying
pickets in the shape of windmills, worthy of the valorous knight of
La Mancha. In the foreground, a forest of masts, displaying flags
of all nations, and in particular, that of his Brazilian Majesty, com-
pletes the picture. One dark night, after a heavy fall of rain, I
witnessed from the deck of our ship this panorama, illuminated in
the most brilliant manner by frequent flashes of the most sublime
lightning, accompanied with rolling’ peals of thunder, between the
intervals of which the most awful stillness prevailed, giving to the
scene a spirituality, as if the gates of eternity were opening and
shutting before me, and I was obtaining glimpses of the heavenly
city. Thunderstorms are by no means unfrequent in this city of
volcanic convulsions, and there were several magnificent displays
while we were there.
During the first week after our final anchorage in the Tagus, I
stuck to the ship as my head-quarters. The steerage and inter-
mediate passengers were all sent on shore previous to the ship’s
being put under repair. The Skipper was desirous to get us out of
the saloon also; but few of the passengers would accept of the
allowance per diem which he offered us as an equivalent to our
expenses on board, and which was a little more than “ twopence and
find yourself.” Only myself and another took the bounty and
vacated the ship pro. tem. I was too glad to get out of her, and
to escape the noise and confusion on board. Before leaving her, I
7
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


visited the Retribution once or twice, some of the officers having
come on hoard of our wreck to taste our grog and look at the
ladies. She left the Tagus long before us for the Mediterranean,
being replaced by the Inflexible. The Retribution rendered us
most efficient aid in our forlorn state; and when she rushed past
ns in gallant trim on her way down the river, we felt her departure
as that of an esteemed friend. Since then she has been in the thick
of the strife—may her shadow never grow less! Among our most
frequent visitors on board were a Portuguese count, and a captain
in Her Majesty’s service—the former the son of the chief minister
of the kingdom, the latter of English parentage, either by the
father’s or mother’s side; but the oblivion on this point is mine,
not his. They got wonderfully attached to our company, the
Scotch lassies doubtless being the chief attraction, though it was
said that the count got completely floored one night by a deep
potation of usquebaugh, and small blame to him if he liked it.
Fiat justitia, mat ccelum. Both he and the captain were in general
patterns of sobriety, perhaps too much milk and water men; but
some of our men, like the deceitful enchanter, overcame his vir-
tue, by presenting to him a cup of the pure mountain dew, and
persuading him that one drink of it “would bathe the drooping
spirits in delight beyond the bliss of dreams.” “Be wise and
taste,” they said. The count unsuspectingly took a big drink of the
poison, which immediately had the effect of making him perform
some of the most unaccountable evolutions in a direction,
and suddenly place himself in direct antipodes to the Portuguese
side of the globe by standing on his head. Whether he saw any
Kangaroos in that favourable position or not, I never heard; if that
saying be equally true as trite, that “ attitude is everything,” the
count must have been a far-seen fellow. Such practical jokes are
open to censure, and the count’s good-nature, like his great progeni-
tor Adam’s, was the cause of his fall. Eve looked on and smiled.
Eve is still fond of a practical joke. Next morning a splitting
headache reminded the count that he had been mortal. The result
of this was his calling out , not the savage perpetrators, but the
ship’s soda water, which readily met the summons, and fired in
the air to his great relief. Both he and the captain were very
sorry to part with us, and actually shed tears on our departure.
I found quarters good enough for a shipwrecked Australian
adventurer, at a cafe not far from the river, and kept by a German
whom I used to distinguish by the sobriquet of “ Old Moustache,”
from the great length and fierce appearance of that hairy ornament
8
EECOLLECTIONS OF A


of his face. He was of middle stature and of slight build, and
wore, except on gala days, a fawn-coloured coat, light waistcoat,
and black' pantaloons, his red locks surmounted by a little blue cap.
When I first made his acquaintance, he wore also the pointed
beard; but a despotic order from the Portuguese Horse Guards
came one afternoon to the effect that all in the Portuguese service
(and Old Moustache held rank in Her Majesty’s army,) were to
shave their chins and confine the cultivation of their cherished
facial hairs to the upper lip. How woebegone the old fellow looked
after he was shorn of his ruddy beard, and he vented his wrath
against the powers that be, by talking,of treason, stratagem, and
strife! A beggarly government, he would say, who paid you
with paper three months after your miserable allowance was due,
and which paper orders were payable three months after date!
But Herr Moustache’s affections clung all the more to his red
mouse-catchers, which he consulted in all his difficulties, twisting
and twirling them on all serious occasions. In particular, at the
counting out of his till, and the frequently unaccountable defi-
ciency of its contents —for sometimes it would be minus a vintin or
two, (a vihtin being equal to our halfpenny,)—and then would the
moustache be twisted and twirled till it stood right out on either side
of his face, like the yard-arm of a Hamburg merchantman; the little
blue eyes would twinkle distressedly, and Herr would look as
despondingly as if he had suddenly become a ruined man. John,
his head man, a dark bull-headed Portuguese, would be called and
interrogated, but would depone, like all faithful servants, that he
knew nothing about it. The slate would be referred to, and
reis, vintins, and crusadoes summoned into existence to explain
the defect in the sum total. A discovery would be made, and then
the “ light on Marmion’s visage spread” would say to all present.
Rejoice with me, for I have found that which was lost. Adjoining
and communicating with the cafe, were two small bed-rooms and a
sitting-room, which I shared along with a fellow-voyager. Here
we breakfasted and sometimes dined, when we preferred sending
out for viands, to indulging in a greasy interminable* dinner at a
caso de pasto, or restaurant, of which there was a variety in Lisbon.
Old Moustache kept a billiard-room, and his cafe was frequented
in the evenings by representatives of all nations, from “ Russian
bears to Cockatoos.” One of the principal actors in the French
theatre, who was as polite off the stage as amusing when on, and
I became great admirers of each other. I went’ to see him at the
theatre, and he came to see me at the cafe, and when we parted, it
9
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


may be for years and it may be for ever, he embraced me a la mode,
and with many professions of attachment and esteem, we wished each
other all sorts of good things. A Portuguese gentleman, who wore
spectacles and a military cloak, was a frequent attendant at the
cafe. We were mutual admirers of Liberty. He was vehement
against the government of his country, and spoke like an intelligent
man who had not travelled from Dan to Beer-sheba with his eyes
shut. He expressed a warm friendship for me. Another, a little
pale-faced elderly German, who visited the cafe nightly, and spoke
in a very quiet voice, which was scarcely audible midst the Babel
sounds of billiard balls, dominoes, and living lingos, was appar-
ently looking forward philosophically to an attack of dysentery to
end his days. His candle looked very much as if it would have
gone out in the snuffing. He and Old Captain Squaretoes, as we
facetiously would call our underwriter’s man, were intimate friends,
only the German did not drink. What a contrast his pale face was
to Old Squaretoe’s purple phiz! When I was laid up with dysentery,
the captain frequently came to my bedside to condole with me,
and on one occasion comforted me, by assuring me in a low voice
and with a lugubrious face, that he did not want to alarm me, but
that dysentery was a complaint of which people very .'frequently
died in Lisbon. He was rather funky about himself at times, and
seemed anxious to get back alive to Glasgow. Old Squaretoes and
I lived to discuss some glasses of grog together after my recovery.
Upon these occasions I had sometimes to show him that the window
was not the door, when he had made up his mind to retire to what
he invariably termed “ his virtuous couch.” He would get won-
derfully confidential in his communications over “another,” aad
would assure me, entre nous, that he would not let the ship away
until she was better than ever she had been before. We had visits
from Yankee and British Naval officers, and a very fast lady from the
Braganza Hotel appeared one evening, smoked cigars, played bil-
liards, betted, and swore, in company with her temporary lord and
his companions, and all from England! A harper was usually in
attendance of an evening, and would strike up the Marseillaise, or
Rule Britannia, as it suited his purpose. My companion and I
were the only inhabitants of the place at night after the cafe was
shut, except two boys who attended to the kitchen and the menial
department of the cafe. One of them, Antonio, was a good-looking
boy, a Portuguese, the other, Jose, whom I always called, to his great
delight, Sancho Panza, was a little dark-skinned Spaniard, with
short smooth black hair coming down over his brow. They slept
10
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


in a cockloft near to our rooms, looking down upon us in a state of
nudity in the candle-light like young cannibals. They were very at-
tentive to me when I was sick, and looked as if they compassionated
my state. They would address me in Portuguese with “ You must
not die, Senor; you must live;” and seemed anxious to do what ser-
vices they could for me. Old Moustache was very attentive also, and
evidently did not wish me to hick just then. He was always much
alarmed when we showed any symptoms of being more than usually
elevated in spirits. One night we took it into our heads to get up
and have a game at billiards after the cafe was shut. Antonio
took the alarm, and rushed out of the house across the street to
where Old Moustache was slumbering connubially. He made a
great row at the door, telling his master that the “ Inglese” were
going to play old Harry with his property. We meanwhile put
out the lights and lay as if fast asleep, in a twinkling. Old Mous-
tache next morning was very nervous about our conduct, but I
soon got him into good humour by telling him that the English
did these sort of things when they could not sleep.
Old Moustache had a very pretty daughter who lived on the
opposite side of the narrow street in which my rooms were. We
carried on an extensive flirtation together from our respective bal-
conies. “ The maid was on the eve of womanhood,” fast blossoming
under the warm sunny skies of her native land. Her brown hair fell
in rich tresses over a clear olive skin, which told of the mixture of
southern blood which beat in her veins. Dark liquid blue eyes
beamed with heaven, and her graceful little figure was perfection
itself. Withal my charming vis-a-vis was a modest little beauty.
But oh! alas! alack! ah! well a day! as the English grammar
says, man that is horn of a woman, is hut a grub without wings.—
She had a vigilant dark-eyed mother, a dark-skinned Madeira lady,
begirt in a shawl, whose jet black locks and intensely Portuguese
ensemble , made her quite a contrast to her comparatively fair
daughter. This lady had possessions in Madeira, doubtless in the
shape of rich vineyards. How nice to sit under your own vine or
shady fig leaves with yonder Eve! Old Moustache, who was an
artist of no mean pretensions, if I may be allowed to judge from
the specimens which adorned the walls of the cafe, consisting of
views of Cintra, etc., promised to show me a battle piece in which
he was then engaged, and which he expected would be a chef-
doeuvre when completed. His studio was at his dwelling-house
across the street. A convenient season for this, however, the old
vagabond never found, and latterly he would treat the subject very


shyly, to my great chagrin, as an amateur, and I left Lisbon with
the overwhelming regret that I had never been introduced to Old
Moustache’s chef-d'mnvre; but “ ’twere vain to speak, to weep, to
sigh.” Old Moustache entertained some liking, if not for me per-
sonally, (and I shall give each of us the benefit of the doubt,) at
least for my orusadoes; and when I bade him a final adieu on the day
previous to our leaving the Tagus, he presented me with some
bottles of port wine and Geneva, to drink to his memory when
crossing the -line, which I promised to do most loyally. To my
shame and confusion of face, be it said, that both wine and spirit
were drunk long before we reached the Equator. I was persuaded
that they would not keep, and owing to the quality of the liquors
and surrounding circumstances, I found it to be too true. But
Old Moustache and his belongings were not forgotten.
“And thou, whose smile must greet my eye
No more, nor voice my ear—
Who hreath’st for me the tender sigh,
And shed’st the pitying tear;
“ Oh! do not quite your friend forget—
Forget alone his faults;
And speak of him with fond regret,
■Who asks your lingering thoughts.”
Lisbon is emphatically a town of smells, and the general run of
its inhabitants look like people who would take pleasure in scenting
the air. These odours neither resemble rose water nor eau de
Cologne, but may best be distinguished as eau de Lisbonne.
The free-and-easy habits of the inhabitants do not come up to an
Englishman’s ideas of decorum, and cleanliness, either in or out of
doors, is far from being a characteristic of the Portuguese. The
gaily-painted houses, bringing to recollection the scenery of the
stage, are in strange contrast to the mass of the people, as tawdry
finery is on an unwashed slattern, or silks and satins throned on a
dung-heap. The weather while we were there was most delight-
ful, cool in the shade, and hot enough in the sun, but not so hot
as to forbid moderate exercise. Visiting churches and palaces, pro-
menading amidst a gay, well-dressed people, who came to see and
be seen, and to listen to the concord of sweet sounds issuing from
a brass band in the public gardens, or indulging in wine and cigars
in a cool marble-paved cafe, in Black Horse Square, to which I
usually resorted for my mid-day allowance of “ vigour and stupe-
faction,” to the tune of Rule Britannia, played by a blind harper,
with an attendant boy, or a match at billiards, in one of the


numerous rooms for that game, are nearly all that a stranger can
find to do with himself during the day.
In the evening the theatres and opera-house open their attrac-
tions, the latter three or four nights in the week, and I very often
made myself one of the audience. A hox in the third tier, con-
taining a set of rather jolly fellows, not over particular in their
dress, might be distinguished amidst those containing the dark-
eyed ladies and swarthy-visaged black beards of Lisbon. Her
Majesty, Queen Maria di Gloria, and the King Consort were
frequent visitors to the royal box, and generally accompanied by the
two young princes. Some of us had the assurance to imagine that
the royal party took particular notice of the Australian adventurers,
doubtless envying our golden prospects, and reflecting with remorse
on the lead which their predecessors once took in the path of con-
quest and colonisation, now, alas! only matter of history. Where
are your diggings now, oh house of Braganza! The queen was
not popular, and the unheeded manner in which the royal party
was received in public, struck me as so very different from the
hearty huzzaing of our own countrymen on similar occasions.
Here scarce a head •would be bared. When that splendid duet
in I Puritani, “Suoni la Tromba,” was sung, the pit, upper
boxes, and galleries would rise en masse , with shouts of “ Bravo!
bravo!” applauding the sentiment more than the singers, and
the queen looked displeased with these ebullitions of popular feel-
ing. The opera was well attended, particularly on Sunday nights,
when the house would be crammed. The boxes then displayed
all the beauty and fashion of the capital, and amidst very
many dark plain-looking people there were not a few stunning
beauties.
The theatre where Portuguese pieces were performed was too
much for my risible faculties, having entered there once in an
almost empty pit, where “ laughter holding both his sides,” got so
completely the better of my companion and me, that, for fear of
offending both actors and spectators —and some of them looked very
glum at us—we were obliged to take ourselves off to prevent the
chance of our being put out by the neck for our want of propriety.
The piece was the Siege of Jerusalem, and in some of the scenes
the stage was so crowded with bipeds and quadrupeds, men and
horses, with no end of war panoply and mock finery, that I do
believe the actors were nearly as numerous as the audience.
Among other absurdities, the old goat of a high priest was
endeavouring to propitiate the Divine Being by the exhibition of


the wanton gestures of some thirty ballet girls, who temptingly
made a display of their agility in the Holy Temple—
“A fair female troop that seem’d
Of goddesses so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good , wherein consists
Woman’s domestic honour and chief praise,
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the tongue, and roll the eyes.”
I could easily understand such a tempting display being highly
approved of by such noted gallants as Jupiter, Mars, and the gods,
great and small, of the Grecian Mythology, but something very
like blasphemy when adopted as a propitiatory offering to the
Jehovah of the Israelites. If a burlesque of a sacred subject, and
nothing easier, the sublime and the ridiculous being so near each
other, had been intended, a better could not have been got up; but
I acquit the company of intentional impiety, and am confident the
audience considered it quite comme il faut. lam very fond of a
good ballet, but everything in its place. It is common on the
Continent to represent Scripture subjects on the stage—a pro-
fanation of which I hope England will never be guilty.
Lisbon can boast of some very fine churches, rich in marbles
and paintings, and possessing many exquisite gems of art—the
church of San Koque containing some of the most beautiful speci-
mens of Mosaic work in the world. The church and monastery
of St Jeronymo, at Belem, among others, are sublime pieces of
ecclesiastical architecture, stretching along the river. The church
has a magnificent portal, and an interior grand and solemn, midst
the dim religious light admitted through stained windows, which
cast their rich colours on the gorgeous marble shafts of the still,
awe-inspiring edifice. On ordinary occasions the most frequent
worshippers are a class of wretched beggars, in strange but not
unbecoming contrast to the grandeur of their places of worship.
The appearance of so many squalid wretches, in tattered garments,
diseased, and poverty-stricken, kneeling before the rich shrines in
devout attitude and with supplicatory looks, is, I think, a beautiful
illustration of the general invitation which our religion gives to all
to come, and that the God we worship is no respecter of persons.
How much more appropriate is the figure of Lazarus than of Dives
as a kneeling, humble, penitent worshipper! lam no advocate for
superstitious worship; but the Catholic Church is undoubtedly the
church of the meanest as much as the highest, and none of her
children, however poor and squalid, are excluded from her shrines.
14
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


It were well if the same could be said of our Protestant churches,
where the ready excuse for non-attendance by our humbler classes
is the want of decent apparel; and so great an obstacle does this
seem to present, that few, very few of the class so common in
Catholic churches are ever to be found within the walls of our
exclusive Protestantism.
During our stay in Lisbon, the steerage passengers of the ship
were lodged in an old convent, granted by the Government for
their accommodation while the ship was refitting. Several displays
of an intolerant spirit were made by some of these followers of Knox
and Calvin. The procession of the host was not met by them with
becoming reverence or respect; in some instances from ignorance of
the regard exacted by the church for its ceremonies, but more
frequently from a doure determination to give no countenance to
the Mystery of Iniquities. ■ This led to altercation, which generally
ended in a scuffle, when Catholic and heretic rolled over each other
in front of the procession, to the horror of the pious passers-by. In
some instances, my brose-fed countrymen, under the devil-may-care
influence of agua ardente, a Portuguese John Barleycorn, entered
churches, while the priests were at the altars, and disturbed the
services of the church, taking the officiating priest by the robe, and
insolently expressing their contempt for the whole proceedings, to
the no small wrath of priests and worshippers. Some of them
were taken up and imprisoned for their indecent conduct, but at
the intercession of the British Consul were soon liberated. They
merited much severer punishment than was awarded to them. If
such scenes had taken place in Scotland with Roman Catholics for
offenders, what a cry about Popery would have arisen throughout
the country. How far Scotch religious toleration goes, the king of
Sardinia can tell. Credite posteri!
An attempt was made by the steerage passengers to get up a
concert for the purpose of raising a fund among the ship’s company
for obtaining fuel for their own use. It took place in the refectory
of the convent, but turned out a very lame affair. A very miserable
display of vocal and instrumental music it was—the latter emanating
from a flute and a fiddle. . I would rather have seen the refectory
filled with the jolly monks of old, when “they laughed, ha! ha! and
quaffed, ha! ha!” One of the favourite performers, of whom great
things were expected, and whose praises his brother was busy ring-
ing in my ears, saying, “ Wait till ye hear our Jock,” repeatedly
broke down in his attempt to get up “ The Lass o’ Gowne,” who,
after she had got on “ her braw new goun,” would not budge
15
VISIT TO PORT-PIIILLIP,


another step, in spite of Jock’s clearing the passage of his throat
for her. He was equally unsuccessful with “Annie Laurie,” who,
in spite of “ her promise true,” which Jock squeaked out would
never he forgotten, would not stand on her pins, but would insist,
contrary both to song and sentiment, in “ laying herself down” and
kicking the shins of her weak-kneed troubadour, to the no small
amusement of us all. The applause was, after repeated failures
and oft-renewed attempts, so overwhelming, that “ our Jock” was
obliged to withdraw from behind the table, a broken-hearted can-
didate for popular favour. His brother tried to assure me that
“ if Jock had had got time, he wad hae gotten into the key; ” but
I declared myself perfectly satisfied with the performance. A
tailor-looking fellow favoured us with a specimen of his elocutionary
powers, by murdering Roderick Dhu and Fitz-James in the most
savage and outrageous manner, and when breathless all, Fitz-James
arose, and the wonder is, how the he ever got up again, the
knight of the thimble appeared to have as much need of wetting
his whistle, as he of Snowdon had, when he got out half-choked
from under the Gaelic kilt. After “ the performances” were over,
an attempt was made to get up a dance, but the scarcity of fair
partners, and the want of refreshments, together with the hard
pavement of the refectory, made it anything but “chasing the
glowing hours with flying feet.” The movements of the ball would
be truly characterised as dragging the tedious hours with glowing
feet to the tune that the old cow died of. Some of us went on a
voyage of discovery along the corridors of the convent, and visited
sundry of the cells, with an invitation to the fair inmates to join
the dance, but it was “no go.” In one cell we found a party who
were apparentlyMormonites, menand women at prayers, en chemises ,
and on whose proceedings we were no welcome intruders—the men
scowled and the women looked, I suppose, as spiritual wives ought
to do when considering their latter end. In another we were pre-
sented with a cup of kindness, but met with a refusal to go down
stairs; while in another we were suspected of coming in search of
a skulker from the ship, and met with anything but a glad-to-
see-you. If the audience, which consisted of two or three of the
officers of the Retribution and a goodly number of our passengers,
had taken the precaution to invite some of the warm-blooded
maidens of Portugal, we might have had no end of dancing. In
one of the casinos in Lisbon, I witnessed some of the most extra-
vagant dancing I have seen anywhere. There is but a slight move
from rude clownish gallantry to that of a fiercely exquisite character,


as maybe exemplified in the respective ball-rooms of a Scotch country
fair, and a Lisbon bal national. Jock, at a penny reel, rigged out
in his Sunday best, grasps Jenny with his horny hand by an arm
as plump as the calf of a courtier’s leg, and hauling her with rustic
gallantry into her appointed position in the dance, chases her through
the uproarious reel, until her shining red cheeks are at bursting point
with heat and excitement. With long strides, heavy heels, and
body lumberingly thrown backwards, he flounders before her like a
huge whale dancing with a fishy partner on a sandy beach. Joaquim,
decked out in a loud explosion of tailorism and haberdashery, pre-
sents his dangerously captivating ensemble before his brown-skinned,
raven-haired Dulcinea, whose black eyes sparkle like diamonds, and
pressing his exquisitely proffered arm close to her many-loving
heart, she clings to him through all the exciting movements of a
highly burlesqued and most inelegant polka. Sometimes separating
from his fragrant partner, Joaquim will figure before her with
most ludicrous gesticulations and grimaces, rushing towards her
sideways with his arm doubled up before him, as if he meant to run
into her bows, but retrograding fiercely, to her great delight, and
his own most perfect admiration. Such is life—fast life!
c


CHAPTER THE SECOND.
FIRST EXCURSION TO CINTRA —SECOND EXCURSION — THE AJUDA—THE
ROAD — LISBON BOATMEN —ANTONIO —CONVENT OF NOSSA SENORA DE
PENA—CORK CONVENT — COLARES —MONSERRAT —MAPRA—PALACE AT
CINTRA — ENGLISH BURTING-GROUND AT LISBON —DEPARTURE —MAL-
CONTENTS ON BOARD AMUSEMENTS AND DISCOMFORTS — TRISTAN
D’-ACUNHA—ARRIVAL IN HOBSON’S BAT.
My first excursion to Cintra was a failure. Too many cooks, it
is said, spoil the broth: every one adds her idea of salt, till the mess
becomes as savoury as the brine. So was it with our arrangements for
a day’s trip to Cintra—too many directors made a salt enough mess
of the whole proceedings, and when we got back to Lisbon, we were
consequently in a most decided pickle. Our party mustered about
twenty —ladies and lords. It became a matter of dispute among some
of our gay cavaliers, who was to have the grey mare, or the bay horse
—who was to have a seat in a carriage, or who was to bewitch the
Portuguese world with swell horsemanship outside of a Lisbon ten
shilling-a-day hack. Before these important matters were ad-
justed, the forenoon was well nigh exhausted—quite worn out with
our beastly disputes; and so late was the cavalcade of carriages and
saddle-horses of starting, that the shades of evening had descended
on us before we reached our destination. To add to our pleasures,
it rained the greater part of the way, and when we got to the hotel
at Cintra, (opposite the palace gates,) wet and hungry, the cry was
for dinner. It became pitch dark very soon, so that we could see
nothing outside, unless we held our fingers very close to our noses,
and every Scotchman knows where that can be as successfully
done if a dear, impenetrable, native, porridgey mist do not come
between the keen visual organs and the upraised freckled digit
of the Caledonian. The inner man being refreshed ala Cintra—
and we had a very fair dinner at somewhere about seven shillings
a-head, the only fault of which was the multiplicity of cooks, but
then there were so many mouths among us, that “ the gravy on our
talers ” was loudly called for —it was debated—the rights of women
to be heard, being gallantly admitted, nem. con.; in truth, they had
the decision of the matter in their own laps, and, to do them justice,
they did not shy any discordant crab apples at our deliberative
heads; whether we should remain all night or return with “ hang-
ing lugs and faces lang” to Lisbon, and after many pros, and cons.,


it was decided, the ladies most agreeable, that we should return
from whence we had set out in the morning. “To fill up our cups
and our cans,” and turn them bottoms upward, was done “in the
twinkling of a bed-post,” if I may be allowed the use of an expres-
sion, the figurative meaning of which I must confess my entire
ignorance of, except that it is meant to convey an idea of some-
thing very fast; but “to saddle our horses and call out our men,”
I can assure the Deil o’ Dundee, if he be not beyond reach of my
clavering, was not the work of five minutes ; and when we did set
out on our backward journey, the night was rainy and black as
Erebus, who, be it known to the ignorant, was a natural son of
Old Chaos and Mother Nox, and a very blackguard sort of a chap
he is, as are all the ancients, from Lucifer, the inventor of spunks,
downwards. {Ex fumo dare lucem. This Old Mother Hox above
mentioned, though unfaithful at times to the nocturnal couch, yet
has a great respect for her lord’s nightcap, which she keeps con-
stantly on his head, like an extinguisher on a candle. She has
never parted with her mangle, which she still keeps for the
benefit of the rebellious offspring of her unnatural son, John Nox,
whom she produced in Scotland. John was a very noisy boy, and
made a great shift to stop his mother’s mangle, which he in
some measure accomplished. His descendant Nox, still continues
at the door of Old Grand Papa’s Room, with the view, it is said,
to lighten his dark premises by destroying the mangling machinery,
wax dolls, candlesticks, and other family relics which his large
establishment contains. But the Old Governor is said to be yet
intoxicated from the proceeds of the mangling formerly done on
the premises, and only answers the importunate sTox by singing in
a maudling voice, “ There is no use knocking at the door any
more.” He will only show his old chicken-pocked nose sometimes
at dinner, when the family declares it to be a very foul affair.
Having lighted my cigar, let me return to the issue of the night.]
Some of our party of excitable temperaments —like their immortal
countryman, Tam o’ Shanter, on that memorable night, when, with
approving gaze and Bashan bull roar, he beheld and applauded that
tail-disturbing wanton Cutty Sark —imagined they saw devils or
brigands among the dark trees and American aloes that lined the
road; but whether these were “spirits of health, or goblins
damned,” we passed on scathless until we reached the gates of the
City, which we found “barred and all secured.” We did not
follow the example of that importunate old gentleman from “ the
west countrie,” on his visit to royalty, of whom it is sung, that.


“he thumped and bumped with his oaken club” at the gates of
Windsor Castle, swearing that there was room enough for him
inside; but mustering our Babel vocabulary, which consisted of
about two words of Portuguese, more French, and a torrent of
English, we begged for admittance, which was granted after an
interchange of mutually unintelligible questions and answers. We
got to the Braganza Hotel sometime in the morning, in twos and
threes, none of us being able to say that he had seen Cintra, but
some apparently satisfied that they had “ got it over.” It was too
late to go on board, so we had to content ourselves with the ac-
commodation afforded by the public room in the Hotel, the re-
maining unoccupied beds being pressed by the ladies, and on sofas, on
tables, on chairs, on sideboards, and in all sorts of out-of-the-way
and in-the-way places, we coiled ourselves for a snooze, like soldiers
in a bivouac, under arms all night. The experience of the day
made me resolve, as I lay dog-like on the hearth-rug, and therefore
in a very good position for forming a dogged resolution, that, de
future , I should go no more with the multitude,
“ Strange countries for to see, see, see,
Strange countries for to see.”
Some days after this unsuccessful and most unsatisfactory ex-
cursion to Cintra, I' set out again with a small party on foot.
Number seven has long been a favourite, and it was ours—a week
of the ship’s passengers on the road to Cintra, with light hearts and
thin breeches. On our way we visited the unfinished palace of
Ajuda, which is situated on the summit of the rising ground
beyond Belem, and commands a splendid view of the river Tagus
and the adjacent city. The palace itself is a grand instance of the
folly of commencing to build before sitting down to count the cost.
Only one wing of it is completed, and that is on so large and magni-
ficent a scale, that it is most likely to remain a solitary wing for
many a day, unless a wonderful change come over the hard-up
kingdom of Portugal. As it is, there is quite enough of it, I
should think, for all present purposes. We admired the noble
apartments after our own fashion, and these, as one of our party
observed, presented a dismal want of soft seats. Furniture of any
kind there was almost none. Seated on an enormous throne in
Her Majesty’s throne-room, and heedless of the dignity which is
said to form a hedge (of thorns) around a king—there was no hedge
about me, nor fence of any kind—l summoned all our party, who
came kneeling one by one, and, with ashen stick, drubbed them
knights of the Most Honourable Order of the Holy Elbow. Having


“ paid the piper ” at the foot of the stair, we took the high road to
Cintra, with enlarged minds and extended views from our visit to
the Ajuda. In the immediate neighbourhood of the desolate
building, all is neglect, rubbish, and poverty —the whole place
having an appearance of proud conception, untimely birth, and
premature decay. We could have wished it otherwise, as a small
sensation of melancholy hung over us as we looked our last look ;
and, like true knights, we breathed a prayer in conformity with
our vows, that the Ajuda might have more power given to its
elbow!
The Palace of Necessidades, where the Court resides, is infinitely
inferior, both in situation and structure. It is situated between
Belem and Lisbon, and its buff exterior is surrounded by beautiful
gardens—which my footsteps never profaned.
The road to Cintra, for some miles after leaving Lisbon, is bare
and uninteresting—nothing in the surrounding landscape more
striking than a windmill, and nothing more remarkable than a
dark-bearded agriculturist driving an antediluvian plough, drawn
by a couple of oxen. We did not lack company on the road, as
many and various were the vehicles, some of them of the most
primitive construction, which we either overtook or met with.
The tinkling sound of the mules’ bells accompanied us all the way.
As for the specimens of humanity we encountered, I cannot say
much, either for their appearance or civility. Dark-visaged,
sinister-looking fellows: they seemed to me to have a hang-dog
look—such sort of characters one would not fancy meeting with in
a dark night at the end of a wood. Ignorance of their language,
however, prevented me from forming any intimate acquaintance
with the Portuguese with whom I came in contact, but I
frequently received cautions from those who knew them well, not
to confide in them. .Very few will entrust themselves to the
tender mercies of the boatmen at Lisbon, after a certain time of
night—deeds of darkness having been committed by them on the
Tagus, of which night and the river left no evidence behind. I
recollect going off to the ship, in company with a fellow-passenger, a
young Irishman, at rather a late hour on a very dark night,
shortly after our arrival at Lisbon. My friend was rather in a
funk about risking his precious life at such an hour, so far from
human ear, eye, or aid. He sat beside me in the stem of the boat,
silent, suspiciously eyeing, through the gloom, the two men at the
oars, as they pulled us over the dark waters, amidst the silent and
wide a-part shipping which lay at anchor in our course to the ship.
21
VISIT TO POET-PHILLIP.


The men talked to each other in low tones in Portuguese.
Suddenly we found the boat alongside of a barge with a raised
deck, which lay outside of that part of the river most frequented
by shipping. This to us seemed a most unaccountable proceeding,
my friend evidently thinking that all was up, and apparently
making ready for a desperate “struggle-go-guggle.” We could
get nothing like an intelligible explanation from “the first” or
“ second murderer,” who jumped out of the boat on to the barge,
to which they made it fast. My companion whispered to me that
our time was up, unless we made off with the boat while the mur-
derers had disappeared in the deck-house of the barge, with the
object, no doubt, of returning with murderer number three, and
all armed with purpose-like knives, giving us a Portuguese pass-
port to the next world. The prospect of a thundering knock on
the head, followed by a slash across the windpipe, and a naked body
floating down the Tagus, was most disagreeably exciting, so much
so that we sat like a couple of captives feelingly alive to our
helpless position. The murderers, numbers one and two, after
some little absence, which appeared a week to their victims,
re-appeared, and without explanation better than some unintelligible
Portuguese, rowed us safely out to the ship. No doubt, said my
companion, as we sped over the gloomy waters, they have changed
their murderous intentions “ for this night only.” We told our
tale of horror to the skipper, who laughed heartily at the mys-
terious barge, which he said was a custom-house night-office,
which all boats must visit after a certain hour of night. I once
had a row with a boatman about the boat fare, when he got quite
savage, and threatened me with a dig in the ribs on some dark
convenient night. Ido not recollect seeing the digger again, and
came away without such a painful reminiscence of the noble Tagus;
“ Poor paltry slaves! yet bom midst noblest scenes!
Why, Nature, waste thy wonders on such men ?”
We found our walk both hot and dusty, and were glad to avail
ourselves of the shelter of an occasional wine-shop, where a cup of
red vinegar might he had to cool our coppers , and take the dust
out of our throats. Sometimes we pulled up at a roadside fountain,
overlooked by a stone cross, for pious travellers to worship as they
drank, and there refreshed our thirsty bodies, and cooled our
burning soles. By and by, the heights of Cintra appeared, and
the country had a richer and more cultivated appearance. Our
road, before bare and exposed, became an avenue of luxuriant
trees, affording to the travellers a highly agreeable shade from the


glare of the sunshine. As we descended towards the town of
Cintra, the scene was most beautiful, repaying’ us fully for our
warm and rather toilsome walk. But a man with an empty
stomach, has no eyes for the picturesque. I remember going with
a friend, a clergyman of the Church of England, to visit the land
of Burns. During the whole of the time occupied on the journey
to Burns’ Monument, my friend made no observation about the
scenery, and not until we had got inside of the hotel there, and
had some luncheon, in the shape of bread and cheese, and stout,
when all of a sudden he exclaimed with great enthusiasm, rubbing
his hands and smacking his lips, “ Well! this is really a delightful
spot; I shouldn’t mind, coming here every day.” The distance
from Lisbon to Cintra, though not more than five or six leagues,
we found quite sufficient for one day’s feat, and were glad to come
to anchor at a hotel situated on the Lisbon road, on the outskirts
of the village, the windows of which overlooked the village, and
embraced in their view a large extent of the surrounding scenery
of varied beauty. In addition to these outward attractions, the
hotel presented to our ravished gaze the substantial comforts of a
table loaded with attractive fare, and good Colares; and after din-
ner we enjoyed the luxury of the cool evening and our cigars,
beyond expression.
We wereattendedonbyaPortuguese waiter, Antonio by name, who
spoke a little “Inglese,” and was very communicative, and unfailing in
his attentions. Antonio took us for gentlemen of the Navy, and on
making arrangements for our night’s rest, inquired at some of our
party if the captain would like to have a room by himself. He was
told that the captain would occupy a double-bedded room with the
first lieutenant, as he had a decided dread of ghosts, and never
slept alone when on shore. The portly Antonio looked unutterable
things at the haunted seaman, but said nothing, doubtless con-
cluding that the gallant captain could unfold a tale or two which
might have rather an unpleasant effect upon the regular flow of
his, Antonio’s, blood, and upon the quiescence of each particular
hair of his head.
Next morning we hired ponies and mules, each quadruped ac-
companied by an attendant biped, owner, groom, or guide, philo-
sopher and friend, as the case might be, whose sole business was to
grin at the rider, and poke his beast with a long stick, accompanied
with a rowting noise like an uneducated bull stirk. Stumbling
brutes some of our animals were, and one .of them, on descending a
steep part of our road, came down by the run, sending his rider


spinning to some distance, and nearly causing a general wreck of
those who were in the rear. We ascended the hill leading to the con -
vent of “Nossa Seflora de Pena,” which is situated on its summit
in a striking position, and surrounded on all sides by “ horrid
crags” in the wildest disorder. Here we dismounted, and left our
tripping animals to the care of the guides, grooms, or owners, while
we examined the ancient convent —a curious building, with galleries
encircling the inner court, in the Moorish style. It was undergoing
some repair, and the frugal monks who were wont, as Byron tells
us, “to show their little relics, and sundry legends to the stranger
tell,” were to be seen nowhere. We then visited the old Moorish
Castle, which is approached by a rugged pathway among huge
boulders hurled together in grand confusion. The view from
these heights is extensive, taking in the course of the Tagus and
the sea. High above the busy haunts of men the eye wanders o’er
the varied landscape with intense delight. “ Palaces and gardens
rising in the midst of rocks, cataracts and precipices,” and vegetation
in extreme beauty and endless variety, lay beneath us. On one
side, the river and ocean bound the prospect; and, on the other,
a vast stretch of level and sometimes undulating country extends
inland. Nature has done much for Cintra—man but little, and that
little in a sad state of neglect. In the hands of our own countrymen
what “a glorious Eden” might be made of such natural combina-
tions of all that is beautiful and picturesque! What strikes one is
the endless variety of tree and shrub, as if Nature had contributed
from many climes to enrich a favourite garden. The dark foliage
of the cork tree—-the gnarled branches of the stately oak—the
refreshing verdure and golden fruit of the orange and lemon,
mingle with different species of northern and southern vegetation.
Having remained at our lady’s solitary house as long as our time
would permit, we descended “ the many winding way,” frequently
stopping to linger o’er the loveliness of the scene, never to be re-
visited, I fear, and soon to fade in a faithless memory.
Mustering our forces at the foot of the hill, we then proceeded
for some miles across heath-covered hills to visit the Cork Convent,
and the cave in which "
“ Honorious long did dwell.
In hope to merit heaven by making earth a helL”
We found the convent had but few attractions, the place being
in an utter state of neglect and consequent decay. This did not
prevent us, however, from enjoying the noonday shade in the
gloom beneath the aged cork trees, and delighting in the prospect,


fresh and fair, from the gardens above the convent, from whence a
fine view of Colares was to be had. The building seemed more
indebted to its site, than to any intrinsic merits of its own, as an
attraction to visitors. As for Honorius’ “hell upon earth,” a
dive into it was sufficient to satisfy us that the miserable devotee
had chosen a very appropriate hole for carrying out his self-imposed
task of horror. After gratifying our curiosity, and enjoying
both prospect and shade, we descended the hill to Colares, where
we put up for an hour at a small inn, and invested in some
of the staff of life, and in wine that cheereth the heart. Colares
is a quiet, pretty lying village, inhabited principally by vine-
dressers and tillers of the ground.
Having invigorated ourselves with the above-named props of
existence, we made our course for Cintra, by a road around which
Nature seemed to lavish all her store of variety of tree, shrub,
and plant. The cork tree overshadowed the road with its wide-
spreading boughs and evergreen foliage—its huge trunk covered
with graceful ferns, and misleto hanging in rich profusion from its
branches forming a most delightful protection from the heat
of the afternoon sun. The vines seemed luxuriant, and there was
no end of orange and lemon groves, and of fruit trees of every de-
scription. There appeared to be an inexhaustible variety of vegeta-
tion, someof the trees being over-run with the most beautiful parasites,
in whose meretricious embraces they seemed choking for want of
air, and struggling for existence. The change from the bare heather
hills over which we crossed in going to the Cork Convent, to the rich
luxuriance of vegetation, was highly agreeable, and notwithstanding
the absurdities of the little beast on which I was astride, which was
a collateral descendant of Sancho Panza’s immortal ass —for the
verity of which I must refer the incredulous to the owner, who is
the most agreeable person to converse with imaginable, as he never
contradicts you—l have seldom-, if ever, enjoyed a ride more than
on that afternoon. We paid the usual tribute of a, visit to what was
at one time the villa called Monserrat, where “ England’s wealthiest
son once formed his Paradise,” of which, “ etiam periere ruinae,”
roofless, and its walls fast crumbling away, soon little will remain
hut a heap of unsightly rubbish to mark the ruined splendour of
the princely building;
“ Fresh lessons to the thinking bosom, how
Vain are the pleasaunces on earth supplied;
Swept into wrecks anon by Time’s ungentle tidel”
It was near sundown when we got back to Cintra, now glorious in


the setting sunlight; and ascending the hill to our inn, and leaving
our philosophic mules to the tender mercies of their proprietors, we
were welcomed by the portly Antonio with a profusion of smiles
and bows, and polite expressions of his anxiety that Senhor Capi-
tano and the gentlemen had enjoyed themselves.
Our next day’s excursion was to Mafra, and we set out in our
usual force and mount after breakfast, the owners, grooms, or
guides being all in attendance at an early hour, bent upon more
cmsados. The day was lowering when we left the hotel, and gave
to the bleak country through which we travelled a still darker, un-
relieving hue. But the absence of the cheering rays of the sun on the
landscape, was compensated by the comparative coolness of our ride.
The road, over which our poor beasts kept religiously bowing and
making genuflections to some unseen evil spirits, and on which I
had considerable difficulty in bridling my temper, was of such a
purgatorial character, and so great a novelty to me, that I hope to
remember it as such, henceforth and for ever. What with the
stumbling of the brutes on whose outsides we were astride, rendered
a momentary occurrence from the close array of diabolical stones
between which they had to pick their steps, and the consequent irrita-
tion of bile to which their movements gave rise, I never knew till
then what it was to perform penance in the saddle. Our guides had
made choice of this infernal causeway in preference to the high
road, on account of its comparative shortness; and it is a marvel to
me that our short cut did not contribute to our party some rather
disagreeable cuts, long or short, across the nose or brow. As for
the mules, they seemed so much accustomed to cuts of all kinds,
that they took everything most philosophically. Some times in
mulish meditation they would come to a stand still in spite of ad-
monishment from heel or hand, while at other times they would find
homilies in the rugged stones which rudely thrust their sharp points
into the cavities of their noses. It was therefore no small relief to
the riders to get upon the macadamised road for some miles, and
when we got to Mafra, the road over which we had been scampering
for the last mile or two, made us speedily forget the fretful mood
to which the first part of our ride had given rise.
Alighting at the little inn close by the palace, and condemning
our bestials to barley and water, we got admittance into the im-
mense building, which comprises a palace, a convent, and a church.
These form a quadrangle, and are built upon the most magnifi-
cent scale, the church being situated in the centre. The convent
seemed to be interminable, and the whole place had an air of cold,


melancholy, solitary grandeur about it. The library is very exten-
sive, but monk or student was nowhere to be seen. Our guide
not understanding English, we were left entirely to our own con-
jectures and reflections, and we could not complain of want of room
for either. We got on to the roof, and here we were able to form
an idea of the vast extent of the magnificent pile. In the centre
of the quadrangle is a garden, intersected by gravel walks, but
in the usual state of neglect which is characteristic of the country.
The palace is said to be so extensive, that it might conveniently
contain all the courts of Europe. Having descended from our
exalted position, and satisfying ourselves that we had seen every-
thing worth while, which is a great relief at the time, and a
wonderfully pleasing reflection afterwards, we betook ourselves to
the inn, and had something to sustain and cheer after the exhaus-
tion consequent upon “ such a getting up of stairs.” By the time
we were ready to get under weigh, the weather showed determined
symptoms of rain, and we had not got very far from Mafra when
down it came with a good will, and we enjoyed our gentle ride
over the stones, with the additional gusto furnished by a thorough
soaking. The geological homilies were now rendered more attrac-
tive by the slippery character given to them by the moisture from
above, and my beast at last got so devoutly inclined, contrary to
my own inclination, to kick against the pricks, that I resigned
him to his own meditations, resolving that if he would take to
his knees, he should have all the merit to himself. There is no
hurrying the slow coach, as the hare doubtless observed when he
got upon the back of the tortoise, and patience being an acknow-
ledged virtue, I amused myself by stepping off and on, accordingly,
as the road suited my fancy, and by and by was rewarded by a
safeiarrival at Cintra, in company with the advanced guard of our
party. Having brought but a slight change of raiment with us,
the incomparable Antonio opened his wardrobes to our admiring
gaze, from which we fitted ourselves out to the admiration of
all who had the good fortune to see us in our change of costume.
The garments adapted to the figure of a big-bellied Portuguese
hung upon us in graceful folds, and we, left to the freedom of our
fancy, imagined ourselves exceedingly like eastern magnates, lords
of Harems, very much as Yankee Doodle did with the feather with
which he decked himself, and called it Maccaroni. 111-natured
observers might have suggested vulgar comparisons, such as Jeremy
Diddlers, etc., but happily for our self-complacency, all eyes saw
but to admire, attracted by our beauty, in speechless gaze. Had


we been exposed to a gale of wind, we should, I fear, either have
lost canvas, or found it necessary to double reef both fore and aft.
Antonio was in ecstasies, and brought us some of the very best
brandy in the house (which was villainous) to drink to our ducking.
We did not disgrace our first and last appearance in the Portuguese
costume. Our honours sat lightly upon us, and we wore them
with becoming ease and grace. The evening was spent with more
than our usual merriment,
“ And the short brilliant folly that flashes and dies.”
Kext morning we went to have a look at the Queen’s Palace,
which was of easy access in the absence of royalty. It has a very
peculiar appearance from the outside. Two enormous pyramidical
chimnies pertaining to the kitchen, give it an air of singularity;
and if one were to judge of the character of the culinary depart-
ment as a physiognomist does of the human temper, the size of
these particular features would lead him to form very extensive
ideas of its doings. But alas! no savoury smells greeted our nostrils
as we entered the then desolate region, which is expected to furnish
blackbird pies and other dainty dishes to set before the queen.
There was no cook, no fire, no nothing, except a huge copper ladle
which might have served for a table-spoon at a banquet of Royal
Ogres. The remainder of the palace did not disappoint expectation,
for although there is not much, so far as I recollect, to excite
admiration, yet the suit of rooms is good and tastefully ornamented,
without much pretension to display. Part of the building seemed
ancient and in the Moorish style. Outside were prettily laid off ter-
races, where flowers of all hues opened their beauties to the bright,
warm sun, but as usual it was evident that the gardener was abroad—
in fact, the want of funds pervaded the whole place from kitchen to
boudoir. Hard-up palaces are but miserable exhibitions, and excite
the same sort of feeling that one entertains for an ex-monarch or
decayed nobleman, whose crownless headpiece or bootless hereditary
dignity, makes his position anything but enviable. In a courtyard
were concealed fountains, which excited some fun among our party
—the water gushing out suddenly on all sides, and causing us to
disperse in every direction. Escaping from one waterspout only to
fall into anpther surprise, Moses with his rod seemed to have got
among us, as wherever our conductor put forth his hand, out came
a stream.
With this ended our proceedings at Cintra. We returned to the
inn, settled our scores—the most disagreeable part of all—and
28
RECOLLECTION’S OP A


bidding Antonio a hearty adieu, set out tor Lisbon, where, on my
arrival, I was welcomed by Old Moustache,” vyho clapped his hands*
and shouted, “ Ho, Francisco! ho, Jose! vat vill,you mein her£.?'
von glass shin?” with great vehemence. ' -
It was ever a matter of the greatest uncertainty with the passen-
gers when the ship would be ready for sea. We knew as much about
it as we did of the exact day fixed in the programme of the future
for the coming off of the next Lisbon earthquake. If it had not
been so, and that each week as it commenced was given forth as
decidedly to be our last —like the peremptory daily announcements
of a fingering sixpenny worth of panorama which cover our town walls
with bare-faced lies—l might have become better acquainted with
Cintra, and seen much more of the country there and elsewhere,
than I did. But there is always an air of mystery about the
movements of nautical men, and we could never come at anything
like the truth till the last day of our stay at Lisbon, when there
seemed to be no mistake about our going. So Tom, Dick, and
Harry were obliged to be in waiting on the Captain, who might
agitate the communicator any minute, and woe be to him who
was not ready to obey the summons. Better for him had he never
been borne in a Typhoon!
The English burying-ground at Lisbon, from its elevated situa-
tion, overlooks a considerable part of the town, and is kept in very
becoming neatness—a quiet, melancholy garden, where the tall
cypress whispers sadly in the ear of the passing visitor, that “ the
weary are at rest.” Two of our passengers died while we were at
Lisbon, and were buried there. They were brothers, both approach -
ing manhood, and had left home in very delicate health, hoping
everything from a warmer climate. They were not long separated
from each other—only a few days intervening their funerals. But
“ There is a calm for those who weep,
A rest for weary pilgrims found—•
They softly lie and sweetly sleep
Low in the ground."
I visited the graves of Fielding and Doddridge. The great novel-
ist’s tomb is easily discovered, but I had to search among the
surrounding tombstones for that of the divine.
On the 28th of November, word was sent abroad among us that
we were all to be on board next morning by ten o’clock, on pain
of being left behind, as the ship was positively to sail on that day.
The announcement was by no means unwelcome, and bidding adieu
to all my friends in Lisbon, I was pulled on board the Typhoon


on the morning of the 29th. Here soon arose a squall—for what else
could happen to a ship with such a stormy name. The crew, hacked
by some of the passengers, stoutly refused to go to sea without
additional hands, and the skipper, after applying to the Inflexible
for aid to enforce subordination, was obliged to yield. This delayed
us another day, and with the addition of two Portuguese and a
German to our crew, we weighed anchor on the day following, at
noon. It was Sunday, and a lucky day among sailors. On that
day, a bull fight, which had been postponed from week to week
during our stay, much to my disappointment, was to have come off,
but alas, time and tide! we were not permitted to witness the spec-
tacle, and had to console ourselves with the reflection that in
Portugal it is a very tame affair—the bull having his horns muffled
by royal command, ever since an old woman had made her exit on
the horns of an enraged dilemma. The day was bright when we
passed down the river. Her Britannic Majesty’s screw ship Sans-
pareil, 71 guns, was coming up the river in gallant style, and
saluting Fort St Julian as we passed, the Fort booming the return.
It was a fine set-off to our departure, and we took the honour of
the salutations as much to ourselves as our flag entitled us to —
Lisbon, adieu!
“ Once more upon the waters! yet once more !
And the waves bound beneath me as a steed
That knows his rider. Welcome to their roar'.
Swift be their guidance, whereso’er it lead!
Though the strain’d mast should quiver as a reed,
And the rent canvas fluttering strew the gale,
Still must I on.”
All who have been any length of time at sea have found the
monotony—which is the prevailing characteristic of a long voyage—
in some measure insupportable. Happy when it is not broken in
upon either by storms from without, or, by what are equally to be
dreaded, storms from within; hut it is a fact that there is
scarcely a ship which sails on a voyage of any length with
the usual complement of combustible materials on board in
the shape of passengers, hut its monotonous routine is varied
at times by scenes both of love and of war. We had a little
of both. One of the passengers was a Highland 'minister,
who condemned dancing as a graceless occupation; and in his
devotional addresses, which he called prayers, described the
passengers as spiritually ugly, and ready for damnation—a mode
of intimating his private opinion of our present state and future
prospects which, to say the least of it, was most unbecoming and ill


natured, and in no way calculated to make us either respect him or his
services. In the common affairs of life, society treats intimations of
this sort hy pulling the noses of offenders —a summary mode of
punishment which has been found to be salutary; but the preacher,
who considers that his licence to libel mankind is as great as that of a
poet or painter in his respective art, also considers that he is entitled
to command his hearers by what, certainly, cannot be called messages
of , good tidings. The youthful passengers rebelled, particularly
the fair sex, and voted, with an unanimity rarely to be found afloat,
that his reverence was not only hideously ugly himself, but a
regular Highland drone, and a complete nuisance. A large
majority looked upon him as the Jonah who had brought ill-luck
to the ship. A young Irishman, a Roman Catholic, and he, were
from words nearly coming to blows, but Celt and Gael wound up
their polemic strife by hurling anathemas at each other, and spitting
down each other’s throats—the most harmless missiles they could
have used, no fatality attending their wounds, as there might have
been if they bad had recourse to dirk and shillaleh. In fine
weather the reverend Gael would on Sundays threaten an audience,
gathered from all parts of the ship, for the space of two hours,
with true Highland nasal eloquence, denouncing, with visage sour,
all carnal indulgences, such as dancing, singing, flirting, card-
playing, and laughter. The respect with which he was listened to
might easily have been gathered from the countenances of his
congregation. "If the weather was unpropitious, these services
were conducted in the saloon, but then the audience was necessarily
greatly diminished in numbers, and his reverence could make his
discourse apply more directly to those who,heard the sound of his
bagpipes. Another of the passengers, who went hand in hand
with the minister in his labour of love, and who, it was said, first
instigated his reverence to condemn the innocent amusements of
the other passengers, was the principal disturber of the peace of
the ship. With a face a yard long, he looked at a waltz or a polka
as if he saw Lasciviousness mingling in the dance, and the dancers
themselves showing their cloven feet. Happy devils!—How he
would mutter his hatred at such movements! Miserable man! he
■would neither pipe nor dance, but sat and looked on like a bear
with a sore head. He was successful in getting up rows with some
of the passengers, and with the skipper, and other officers of the
ship, about its navigation, victualling, and general management;
and it was rumoured in private circles that “he had a book,” in
which he made notes of all and everybody’s proceedings. At night


he -would take the altitude of our tumblers, and edify himself with
our discourse on things in general, and old Denmark in particular,
who wouldn’t go to bed drunk or sober. If the worthy /ify/h-errant
had pre-determined to make himself generally disagreeable during
the voyage, he must have acquitted himself to his entire satisfaction.
Upon one occasion he was threatened with confinement to his
cabin if he persisted in disturbing the peace of the ship, which he
said would be “a consummation;” to which a bystander added,
“ devoutly to be wished.” It is an easy matter for a mischievously-
disposed person to find daily opportunities for indulging in his
unamiable propensities. There is no escape from each other’s
company in the narrow limits of ship accommodation. On deck,
in the saloon, at meals, and at exercise, all are brought together,
and, in a greater or less degree, must be affected by the conduct
of each fellow-passenger. Comfort and order depend greatly
upon the captain; and if he be a man of firmness and decision,
and, at the same time, courteous and judicious, he may do much
to control and appease those who must, for the time being, submit
to him in many things, as to a dictator. Under such a rule,
though time must generally move tardily, much may be accom-
plished to render the voyage in some degree pleasant. Of the
love-making amongst us, I know of no other results than that a
few marriages took place after the ship got to her destination.
I never heard of any duelling between rivals, or cases of felo
de se by despairing or forsaken lovers.
In the warm latitudes our life on board was agreeable enough,
although we had no variety except in the little occurrences among
ourselves, or the meeting with a strange sail, the capture of a
shark, or the spouting of a whale. One of the passengers of the
intermediate, a saddler by trade, was, according to his own account,
a bit of a naturalist, but according to mine, more of a natural.
He was told, and firmly believed, that Mother Carey’s chickens
built their nests in the hollow of the waves—that the albatross
slept on each other’s backs whilst on the wing—that alligators,
abounded at the line, which line could not be got over at low water
when it was quite visible—and that sailors had frequently, in con-
flicts with sharks, got upon their backs while in the water, and
cut away at them with their knives, —and many other yarns of the
sort he gulped over with marvellous avidity. He took an
especial interest in the fishing-lines which were usually towing
a-stern, and when we came to the latitudes, where alligators were
said to abound, his interest, not unmixed with fear, was great.


One evening after dark some boards were quietly got out by the
stem windows, and attached to one of the fishing lines, the saddler
being, as usual, not far from his customary post of ■watching. Some
one in the secret suddenly cried out that an enormous fish was
at one of the lines. By this time the line was again at its full
stretch in the wake of the ship, with the boards attached. The
excitement of the poor saddler was tremendous. He shouted,
“An alligator! an alligator! ” and roared for assistance as he seized
hold of the tugging cord. As the line was of considerable length,
it took some time and not a little physical exertion to haul the
monster alongside, and this the excited, panting, and perspiring
saddler got to do nearly single-handed. When many stood back,
from pretended fear, the alligator-fisher seemed not altogether
confident of his safety. A shout of laughter, as the deception
became too apparent, completely astounded the fisherman, and he
retired from the scene of excitement pale and exhausted, cursing all
who had had a hand in the trick. He got the honourable sobriquet,
of “ the Alligator” during the remainder of the voyage, and never
again ventured on the poop. Othello found that his occupation
was gone. Farces of this kind served to keep us alive when
books, cards, backgammon, or chess grew flat and stale. Judge and
Jury trials were got up at times, and afforded considerable merri-
ment. The judge, rigged out in a cooked hat, red gown, sword,
and green spectacles, attracted “a full house,” and the absurd
cases, the simplicity of some of the witnesses, who really seemed to
consider the affair in a serious light, and the eloquent and emphatic
summing up of his most grave and ludicrous lordship, who
generally imposed fines of beer and cigars, which were not altvays
submitted to, were the subjects of long and loud laughter.
On Christmas-day and Hew-Year’s-day there were general jolli-
fications on board. At a soiree in the second cabin, in one of
the small side berths, I found a company as closely packed as her-
rings in a barrel. They were all very jolly. One was attempting
to make a speech, another to sing “ the Gay Cavalier,” and a third,
a rump-fed Scotchman, was spouting, with rustic eloquence, “Lord
Ullin’s Daughter.” The end of the feast was nearly becoming the
beginning of a fray. Some of the steerage passengers got out-
rageous; and I regret to have it to record, that the brother of
“ Our. Jock,” the Lisbon convent vocalist, was gagged, and put in
irons. I thought his usage was harsh; and who would gag a lark
or its brother ? but skippers are despots, and are fond of putting
D


out pipes, even those of Scottish nightingales, having no taste for
their
“Skirmish and capricious passagings,
And murmurs musical, and swift jug-jug.”
The jug-jugging having heen put a stop to, “ Silence was pleased,”
and sobriety again prevailed throughout the ship.
As loud complaints were made in a certain quarter of the bad-
ness of the water on board —and the water was not good—the
Skipper was induced to make for the island of Tristan d’Acimha,
which we sighted early on a Sunday morning. We lay off and
on for an hour, hut not a living soul presented itself. Governor
Glass and his subjects must either have been all in bed, or at
church, or perhaps, fearing that we were a hungry ship, his
Governorship had whistled all his children into their houses, calling
out to his private secretary and custos rotulorum, “ Shut, shut the
door, good John, tie up the knocker, say I’m sick, I’m dead.” The
ship missing stays unfortunately , though the Skipper did not think
so, I guess, we bore away again, without any communication with
the jumped-up little island, much to the chagrin of the Fresh
Water Committee. A fresh breeze blowing, the lone desolate-
looking island was soon far astern of us, its peaked outline becoming
fainter and fainter as we sped on our course.
Cold weather came, and the scene changed from gay to grave,
from lively to severe. Three deaths occurred among the passengers,
two in the second cabin, men in infirm health at the commence-
ment of the voyage, and one in the steerage, a child; and all were
consigned to the deep with the usual solemnities. The rude coffin
of the child did not sink under water, to the mother's great
distress.
A ship is only enjoyable on deck, and wet weather, driving all
below, makes the consequent discomfort indescribable. Crowded
with passengers from stem to stern, as we were, the ship became
dirty in every corner. Kennelled in a small cabin, in which it was
no more than practicable to turn oneself, or seated in the saloon,
where all was confusion, how the imprisoned soul longed for land!
As eating and drinking were the chief amusements of the day, the
eagerness with which the appointed meals were looked forward to
was prodigious, and when, from the length of voyage and the
improvidence of those in authority, some of our usual comforts
altogether disappeared, the chop-fallen passengers looked far gone
in consumption. But from head winds, wet decks, cold and sunless
skies, roast pork and American beans, half-baked bread, and


mahogany-coloured tea, there was no escape. Truly the last end
of a voyage is worse than the first!
Every day heart-breaking announcements were made by the
steward. The last of the long-legged, hairy-fleeced sheep, from
the burnt-up pastures of Portugal, had yielded its feeble remains of
life to the pitiless knife of the butcher. Of a long line of lordly
porkers from the fertile vale of Clyde, the last had terminated his
dying squeal with a farewell emphatic grunt—the crest-fallen cock,
whose half-choked morning crow led drowsy passengers to dreams
of home and inspiring dunghills, had shared the fate of his strangled
concubines—the last of the noisy geese and gabbling ducks had
long ago given up their ghosts for the good of society—the snow-
white sugar, which sweetened the uninebriating cup, had given
place to the coarse dark brown—the remaining flour was of a
doubtful character—the butter (good Lord!) was a mixture of
bad lard and something else—the cheering beer, which had helped
to wash down many a grief, became hopelessly exhausted with its
furious efforts—and the brandy, oh horrible! most horrible! was
all but used up! “Steward! bring me a cigar and a glass of
water,” “ The Captain has given orders, sir, that as the water is
getting scarce, the passengers must drink less of it.” “Damn the
Captain!”
Deputations from the steerage, petitions from the intermediate,
remonstrances from the cabin —all, all were of no avail. The
hard-up Skipper argued, combated, and swore. From a corner of
the saloon issued threats of damages; and the parson, in calling for
a blessing on our restricted meals, confessed with a groan that “ we
were but clay in the hands oPh Potter! ” (Potter was the ship-
owner’s name.) The most dreadful selfishness prevailed: all the
ties which bound us to each other while plenty prevailed were
rudely wrenched asunder. At meals a daily scramble took place
as soon as the viands appeared; and in these instances the race was
to the swift, and the battle to the strong. The remaining Lisbon
oranges and some kernelless nuts, which a company of baboons
would have chucked over their left shoulders with a melancholy
wink and expressive grimace, no sooner appeared in scanty num-
bers, by way of dessert, than, “up guards and at ’em!” they
disappeared before the most fluent speaker could have had time to
invoke his friend, Jack Robinson. The timid were beginning to
look forward to the time when they too would be served up, and
the brave were evidently training their stomachs for any change of
diet that might befal them. At this crisis in our affairs, Provi


dence, who had delivered us from the raging of the sea, and from
imminent danger, sent us a fair wind. Soon the high lands of the
Australian continent hove in sight, and discomfort and discontent
were all hut forgotten. By and hy a pilot came on board,
and his report of this new land of ours was received with varied
feelings. Accounts from the diggings, the state of Melbourne, and
the prospects of the merchant, farmer, and artizan—all had their
peculiar interest. As we entered Port-Phillip Heads, the health
officer, in a straw hat, and white dress, and wearing a long beard
and moustache, came on board, as did a living digger, a German,
with real nuggets in a leather purse, and a merchant’s clerk, who
told to gaping inquirers everything that came uppermost, for their
information. ’ These specimens of the genus homo were looked upon
with intense curiosity, just as one would examine strange animals
in cages which had come from “ a far countrie.” At sunset, on the
Cth of March, 1868, wo dropped anchor in Hobson’s Bay, amidst
a large fleet of merchantmen of various tonnage and appearance,
having been out 166 days from England, and 97 from Lisbon.
Now that the voyage was over, a certain degree of doubt and
uncertainty regarding the future, served to abate the pleasure with
which I looked for the first time on the scene which surrounded
us. The meeting with friends in a country, which, from all
accounts, presented not afew difficulties to a newly-arrived “ chum,”
was a pleasure to be looked forward to with peculiar interest.
Come what might, it was no small comfort to have a prospect, so
immediate, of leaving a ship which had not only been so long a
prison, but which had become filthy in every corner, and swarming
with vermin, “ inter politas non nominandum.” We lay opposite
to Williamstown, and next morning a steamer was to be alongside
to take passengers up to Melbourne. So I turned in for another
night of it.


CHAPTER THE THIRD.
THE YARRA-YARRA —MELBOURNE—EARLY EXPERIENCES —GRAPESHOT—
THE FUROR OF MONEY-GETTING — LUCKY DIGGERS — GEELONG —
JOURNEY INTO THE BUSH—BUSH INNS — BUSHRANGERS — CASTLE-
MAINE —BEARDIES —THE LODDON —THE AVOCA —THE RICHARDSON.
Next morning, after breakfast, the small steamer left the ship with
the first lot of passengers for shore. On board of her, we found
individuals ready to give us all sorts of information about the
colony, but particularly fond of descanting on the great expense of
living, and the magnitude of the dangers to life and property to be
encountered on shore. Melbourne, we were told, was swarming
with rogues and cut-throats, ready to seize every opportunity of
plundering “ new chums,” broad daylight being the same to them
as the darkness of midnight. This made us button our pockets and
pull down our wide-awakes. The canal-like Yarra-Yarra, by
which the capital of Victoria is approached by water, gave me but
a poor opinion of the river department of this go-a-head part of
the world—an opinion which was not improved after I had seen
more specimens of the sort. On one side of the river there was
nothing visible but a continual thicket of dense scrub, and on the
other, a flat bare country wearying to the eye. What it may pre-
sent fifty years after this, I will not even venture a conjecture, much
less a prophecy. If the mineral wealth of the colony, and gold is
said to be all-powerful, could remodel its rivers and keep up th%
supply of water all the year round, then might I prophesy its
future greatness —but I am anticipating, and forget that I have
not been on shore yet, and so cannot be supposed to have formed
an opinion on such a vast subject as the future of Victoria, nor, let
me add, have I any intention to set myself up as “ a Daniel come
to judgment,” in these pages, but what I record shall be my veritable
experiences, such as they are.
Our little steamer took some time to get alongside of the wharf,
as there were frequent calls upon her engineers “to ease her, stop
her.” A goodly amount of shipping of small tonnage lined the
river opposite Melbourne, and we had to take it easy to avoid a
collision.
On shore all was bustle and activity. The wharves presented


an appearance of business—men and drays, merchants and clerks,
busy at work. At first, I looked suspiciously at every one, expect-
ing the fraternal welcome of a knock on the head according to
promise; but I was doomed to disappointment in this as in many
other sanguine expectations. Nobody heeded me, not even a porter
or cabman—such ready aids to the weary or heavy-laden traveller,
were, at that time, in the womb of time, and were not duly
developed till long after my first appearance on the colonial stage.
The well-laid-off streets of Melbourne were many of them made up
of buildings of motley character and appearance. Some good, sub-
stantial houses, with well-stored shops, mingled with wooden erec-
tions of a very temporary character, and canvas tents of various
shades of dirtiness. A wooden box of a place, not unlike a very
gigantic dog-house, would be the bureau of Messrs , com-
mission agents, general merchants, and dealers in confusion; and
next door to them, in the canvas tent, The Miner’s Emporium,
where gold was bought and “parties” fitted out for the gold fields
with everything, from a pannikin to a cradle. “The Digger’s
Larder” looked like a booth at a fair, inside of which one could be
regaled with a slice of ham or cold roast beef, and a couple of small
potatoes, with a small glass of very small beer, at the low charge of
four shillings, and considered cheap at the money. In Collins
Street the houses and shops were, many of them, excellent; and
everywhere the wooden fabrics were giving place to stone, or brick
and mortar. The land and building mania had set in, and every
available inch of ground in Melbourne and its neighbourhood was
being bought up at any figure. The sound of the mallet and chisel,
of the hammer and saw, was to be heard in every direction. There
was seemingly a race who should have his store or dwelling-house
up first, or as if a contract had been entered into to build a city in
a given time. It was no easy matter for families to find accommo-
dation at that time, and the rent of a single, miserable room, for a
week, was something awful to newly-arrived married couples with
large small families. Owing to this destitution, arose Canvas Town, a
city of tents, on the opposite side of the Yarra-Yarra, containing the
most unwashed, miserable-looking population it is possible to con-
ceive. Some of our steerage passengers planted themselves there
on their arrival, one of whom, a respectable-looking married woman
with a family, told me, that she was so disgusted with everybody
and everything about her that she bitterly regretted ever having
left her “ ain fireside” in Scotland. Strong-minded women might
find such a situation well suited to their manly ideas of self-depen


dence; but alas! for the gentle, timid, and only lovable sort, what
can it be to them but degrading? An emigrant ship is no
school for good manners or morals, and, in too many instances,
female emigrants are pretty well prepared for the innumerable
indelicacies of a life in Canvas Town or at “ the Diggins.” Alas!
for the wisdom of posterity!
Venturing into a confectioner’s shop for the purpose of making a
modest investment in a bun, which, in that slow old country which
we fondly called “ home,” would be had for a penny, and innocently
helping myself to one from the counter on which they were tempt-
ingly displayed, with all the timidity of a new chum, I presented a
sixpence to the gentleman in charge of the baps, expecting, of
course, to get the usual change; but to my great discomfiture and
financial derangement, he bluntly announced, that whatever it
might be with myself, “ that there was no change in him." I
thought, at first, that he was joking, and was merely borrowing a
sentiment from a favourite song by way of showing off his colonial
humour; but no! he never condescended to look my way again, but
busied himself with other customers, who seemed to stand in the
same relation to him as I did, unchanged and unchanging. Well!
here is a specimen of colonial robbery in retail—-what will it be in
wholesale? If such things be done to the green leaves, how very
soon they must become dry! Such were my infant sentiments as
I walked off sheepishly, feeling as regularly done brown as if I had
been in the baker’s oven. But I learned soon the lamentable state
of the small change currency, and the loose ideas of the value of
money in the gold country. In a shop into which I entered for
the purpose of inquiring the price of an article of dress, I was
coolly told that I could not be attended. They had so much business
on hand that my little wants could not even be listened to. The
poet who writes “ Man wants but little here below, nor wants that
little long,” had ideas antipodal to mine on that subject as I walked
on to the next door like an unsuccessful beggar. Two years after-
wards I visited the same establishment, when my reception was so
different from what I had previously experienced, that I could not
but be struck with it as a proof of the dissolving views with which
many of the Melbournites had been of late amusing themselves and
the public. “ The tables are turned!” I thought to myself, as the
cringing shopman paid every attention to my wants with that
respect which he had been well accustomed to pay to customers in
the Old Country, before he ever thought of counter-acting here.
“ Quantum mutatus ab illo,” who had lately stood so magnificently,


and seemed to say, “ Our time flies on golden wings, our minutes
are nuggets; will you move on to the next door ? ”
Such little incidents in my early experience in the colony deprived
me of a good deal of the self-satisfaction which the voyage had
engendered in me. I was “ a new chum.” Everybody saw it, I
was convinced. I was not nuggety-looking, not enough of the
digger, bushman, or old leg about me to command the respect of
the public. Too new-looking, too soft, too green, too retiring, too
much out-of-plaoe-looking—l thought they laughed even at my
purse!
Wishing to indulge in a few grapes which were to be had at
something like a penny each berry, I ventured along with some
friends into a shop in Geelong, where we saw some exhibited for
sale. The vendor, whose appearance was in keeping with his
manners, acceded to our request by handing to us what he consi-
dered eighteenpenoe worth, and upon the intending purchaser
demurring a little at the smallness of the bunch for the money, he
was met with that spirit of growling independence which was the
disgusting characteristic of the colony at the time, the owner of
the grapes fiercely saluting him with, “ You can keep your lousy
eighteenpenoe; I don’t make my living by the patronage of bloody
squatters.” This unexpected discharge of grapeshot caused our
party to beat a retreat, with a threat from two “ gustus peas,” who
were of it, to have the fellow deprived of his licence, to which he
replied by telling them that he did’nt care a d—n for them or their
licence.
To induce a man having a horse and cart at his disposal, to so
far forget himself as to accept a bribe of fifteen shillings to have your
luggage conveyed from the wharf to the distance of five minutes’
walk, was considered a master stroke of diplomacy. To sit on a
trunk and expect a porter or drayman to appear and solicit the job
—you might as well have looked up to the skies and expected to see a
hurly descending by a golden rope with an angelic porter sitting be-
tween the shafts to cheer your ’lone ’lorn drooping spirits with the kind
inquiry, “ Your luggage, sir? yes, sir—where to, sir, if you please?
Yes, sir—my number, sir? No. 1 Moonshine, sir.” To be allowed
to put up at a respectable hotel, seemed to require a personal intro-
duction at the bar of the house, before his excellency the landlord,
or his lady, who would condescendingly allot to you a share of a
bedroom containing a stretcher and bedclothes for your own special
use. The waiter seemed anxious to show you that if you looked
upon him in the light of a mere serving domestic, you should soon


have your eyes opened as to whether you or he were really the waiter.
If you presented “ Thomas” with what you considered, in your old
country notions, an extravagantly liberal remembrance before de-
parture, “ Thomas” would, hesitating whether it were worth while,
take it with an air half pitiful, half contemptuous. “ Thomas” was
in receipt of a large annual income, of which your regium donum,
miserable new chum! formed an infinitesimal fraction. Your washer-
woman would do you and your “ things” at the same time as clean
as possible. She would only require you to pay for her labours on
your account, very often as much as, and in some cases more than
the real value of the articles consigned to her tub, and it was
sometimes a question for deep study whether it would be more
economical to buy a new stock or to have the old one washed. Socks
for instance, with a look-out in the toes or heels, were ruinous in a
double sense at tenpenoe a pair for washing, and with such small
articles the best policy was either to cut their connection altogether,
or give them a soaking in the hand-basin, and then hang them up to
dry, without having recourse to such costly scientific aid. To this
economical dodge I cannot plead guilty, and if I had tried it, I
have no doubt I should have had “Molly” down upon me in a
couple of hurries with the besom of destruction. Of such mollifying
influences new chums must beware.
Everybody was making money, it was said—one had only to
buy and sell, and the result was sure to be great gain. The
possessor of a small tumble-down-looking shop, with some pots of
blacking, lucifer matches, and tallow candles, in the small apolo-
getic window —-was on the high road to fortune. The great arcanum
had been discovered; whatever was touched in the way of business
turned into gold. The fortunate proprietor of land in Melbourne
or its vicinity, found a mine of wealth in his possession, in what
had long appeared in his eyes only so much barren and useless soil,
for which he would gladly have taken a very trifling sum of money
a few months ago, but which every day was now increasing in value.
No price could be asked that would be deemed too high. A barber
who had shaved the colony for a livelihood in the good old easy-going
times before the gold discoveries, and who had been accustomed
to think that in his colonial experience there was “ nothing like
lather,” and to look upon himself as the unhappy proprietor of an
ungrateful soil in his adopted country, found himself suddenly
transported from lather and bristles into four thousand a-year. A
butcher whose daily customers in former years had but slowly con-
sumed his carcasses of beef and mutton, and whose fat-enclosed soul


had sickened, not at the sight of his own bloody deeds, but at the
thoughts of boiling down establishments and the desecrating uses
to which needy squatters were obliged to put their stock, in order to
keep up the circulation at their dreary stations, found himself with
a soul above tallow and tripe, and that although cattle were beef,
and sheep were mutton once more, and his line of business one of
the best paying in the newly awakened colony, yet with his lands
and hereditaments, he had become great in power and in purse, as
he had formerly been poor in soul and in prospects.
Such were some of my first experiences of the state of affairs in
Melbourne. The furor of money-getting was then daily increasing,
and rapidly working up to the inevitably approaching crisis. The
multitude were intoxicated with the great game that was playing.
“Make a bold stroke; you are sure to win,” was the general cry,
and instances of great good luck were not wanting to stimulate
one to make the venture. “ So-and-so has cleared so much by his
land sales.” “I am going to purchase so many allotments at the
sale at St Kilda to-morrow, and expect to make a fine thing of it.”
“ I have sent home an extensive order for bottled stout and bitter
beer, bricks, cheese, hoots and shoes, iron bedsteads, sulphuric
acid, and brandy; and if these arrive safe and sound, my fortune’s
made.” “I have let my large store on lease for a thousand a-year,
and if the tenant pay me the rent, my investment shan’t he a bad
one.” Such were the sounds that most commonly startled the ear
of the bewildered new chum, who fancied, as he sat and listened,
every day diminishing in size , that he had arrived among a locust
crowd of Croesuses —men who had but to wag their little fingers or
their tongues, and the jade Fortune would smile on them and
caress them as she is wont to do her pet poodles. I must, confess
that I felt rather disgusted at first at such seemingly universal
prosperity, a feeling somewhat akin to what a would-be-legatee
would experience if he were excluded from participating in a
general division among the nearest in kin of the property of a rich
deceased relative. I could not drink in the prevailing enthusiasm
in sufficient quantity to enable me to keep anything like pace with
the hastening-to-be-rich community of Melbourne. The harvest
was golden, it was said, hut the reaping machine was of colonial
construction, which made timid my old sickle-cutting notions, and
made me feel quite behind the age. The race is not always to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, and I comforted myself with
the reflection. When I returned, after an absence of two years,
Melbourne had been bled, blistered, and had had its head shaved.


The Croesus with the store had been obliged, in self-defence,
to find fault with his tenant for drinking too many “ nobblers,”
and not paying his rent, and at length to resign himself to his
tenant’s resignation of his lease of the lumbering premises. The
speculator in beer, boots, and cetera, had found, not a watery
grave, but a glutted market for his goods, and was obliged to sell
at a sacrifice. The land speculator was in a most uninteresting fix.
He was still the possessor of so many feet of frontage above ground,
but alas! for the profits. The game had been unlimited 100, the
bank issuing I O U’s, payable at Crisis day.
On the first day I was in Melbourne, I met several speci-
mens of the lucky digger, in what they doubtless considered a high
state of enjoyment. One claimed me for an old acquaintance,
and insisted upon my accepting a bottle of champagne, and taking
out of his pocket a goodly mixture of nuggets and coin, assured
me that his stock of riches was not yet exhausted, and that as
soon as that was done he would be off to the diggings for more.
My soi-disant friend was new to me, both in character and
person, and not admiring his company so much as he expected,
I did not yield myself to his fond embrace, but slunk off amidst
a volley of curses. Some days after this I came into close contact
with additional specimens of this important class of the colonial
community, on my passage in the steamer to Geelong. In the
saloon were three of the fraternity as drunk as lords, and, of
course, making more noise than the engine, and all the rest of the
passengers put together. No complaint was made against them,
and it seemed to be considered quite in the usual style of proceed-
ings that they should be there, and should get drunk as a matter
of course —all in the way of business for the steward. They were
dressed in the usual digger costume, blue flannel shirts, without
coats. When dinner made its appearance, the gentlemen from the
diggings were of course to be partakers. One of them had become
gradually overpowered by his frequent potations of “spiders,”
and had lain down upon one of the sofa seats, from which he had
expelled every one else by using his great iron-shod feet as sledge-
hammers. His companions, in rousing him up to dinner, with
brotherly attention to his interests, made the blood come from his
nose pretty freely by their gently awakening movements, and by
dint of shouting, and shaking, and propping him up, got him
seated at table right opposite to where I was. The sight of this
jolly digger, looking like one of the murderers of the good King
Duncan, his face and hands smeared with gore, gave a zest to the


meal which might have been very agreeably dispensed with. With
bloody hands he dug his fork into the dishes within his utmost
reach, offering to stick a potato for me on the point of his übiqui-
tous two-pronged instrument, and when I declined his assistance,
shaking his gory locks, he looked at me as if he were very much
inclined to dig his fork into me. After dinner, pipes and cigars,
brandy and water, cards and backgammon, were the order of the
company. “ Tempora mutantur;" since my first excursion in a
Geelong steamer, the digger ceases from troubling, and the fare is
much reduced.
At the hotel at which I put up in Melbourne, and which was
considered one of the best, we had a general table d’hote twice
a-day. The house was frequented mostly by the fraternity of
squatters, or the bush aristocracy, who came to town “to see
about ” something or other, enjoy the pleasures of town life for a
season, and get rid of some of their muttonous or monotonous
ideas in the great mercantile capital of Victoria. They seemed a
set of very jolly fellows, intent on enjoying themselves when away
from their sheep, the sight, sound, and smell of which were the
only disturbers of their solitary reign over their wide territories.
I soon found out that Melbourne was a tiresome place for an
idle man. Attractions to the mere holiday traveller it can have
none; and for amusements, he will search in vain. The same re-
mark is still more applicable to Geelong, where I spent my first
week in the colony. In the large, bare, desert room of the hotel,
I passed the most solitary week of my existence. What could one
see in the dull dusty streets of Geelong to interest him? and when
day was over, I would find myself the sole occupant of a room
that seemed as spacious and as dreary to me as Sahara. I would
attempt to sing, but my croaking voice horrified me, until the room
became more dreadful than ever. Ordering the idle waiter to bring
me “ a nightcap ,” I would sit down and soliloquise upon the vanity
of this life a and of large empty rooms, and of colonial humbug.
Then getting up under the inspiring influence of the “ nightcap,”
I would, bed-room candlestick in hand, —
“Feel like one
Who treads alone,
Some banquet hall deserted,
Whose lights are fled,
Whose garland’s dead,
And all but he departed "
to bed, whither I would immediately betake myself, to get up


next morning, and go through the same performance with similar
success.
The streets of Melbourne, in dry weather, were frequently enve-
loped in clouds of dust; and if rain fell in any quantity, the dust
composed itself into greasy mud—a change scarcely for the better,
but variety is pleasing. On Batman’s Hill, a military band played
for an hour once or twice a-week to a very common-place looking
lot of people—a few carriages full of Melbourne ladies, two or three
swell squatters on nags which would not stand music, and seemed
inclined to buck-jump; and an inner circle of admirers, male and
female, would encompass the brazen band of warriors, who dis-
coursed to them from operas, new polkas, or waltzes.
The reported dangers to he apprehended from mauvais sujets ,
were very much exaggerated, and with due precaution, little was to
hedreadedon thatscore. Cases of “sticking up” occasionally took
place, but these generally hefel stragglers after a certain time of
night, when the prey was considered “ fair game” from the late-
ness of the hour and their helpless state. When the composition of
the omnium gatherum population of Melbourne is taken into con-
sideration, the wonder is that person and property should have
been so safe as it was. The police force was then very efficient,
and a great improvement had been made in the quiet and safety of
the streets. To step into one of the drinking-houses of an even-
ing, where the rowdy digger-looking company was smoking and
imbibing “nobblers,” “ spiders,” and other potent colonial drinks,
one could not feel altogether comfortable, at least I pity him if he
could. On a platform or small stage at one end of the room, with
a screen on the back-ground for entrance and exit, would appear at
intervals a male or female performer, who would delight the audi-
ence with a sentimental melody or comic song, which would be
encored with most boisterous enthusiasm. At any time I visited
such scenes of nocturnal revelry, I never met with incivility; yet,
there were few of the company I would have trusted in an out of
the way place. Appearances were not in their favour. In a cir-
cular building with a canvas roof, concerts a la Julien were held.
The orchestra was frequently in nubibns from pipes and cigars;
the free and easy style being at that time so much in vogue, that
the privilege of smoking was not denied the audience, who seemed
to vie with each other who should emit most stupefaction. Mel-
bourne swells (undeveloped animals then) mingled with diggers,
squatters, old legs, shopmen, draymen, et hoc genus omne , in one
large tobacco cloud of “ liberty, equality, and fraternity.” The


fair sex were at that time in a great minority in Melbourne, and
a few might be seen in the gallery which surrounded the con-
cert-room, seemingly quite in their element. Since the time of
which I write, the colony has had a strong reinforcement in the
female line. Thanks to Mrs Chisholm among others for supplying
the community with some ship-loads of needlewomen, whose London
accomplishments have already had their humanising influences on
the men of Melbourne.
It was with no feeling of regret that I found myself, towards the
end of April, seated in a dog-cart, on my way into the Bush. I
had got a complete sickener of Melbourne life, and looked forward
to the change to bush life with considerable pleasure. My health
being but indifferent, made the prospect of a quiet life most agree-
able. Our road lay in the thoroughfare between Melbourne, and
Forest Creek and Bendigo diggings, to a sheep-station on theKiver
Loddou. The weather at this season is generally good. The
mornings are bright, cold, and frosty, and at mid-day the
atmosphere becomes both hot and dusty. I had not much com-
fort in the vehicle in which I was seated, which swung back
and forwards on the uneven roads like a ship in a cross sea. I was
compelled to be constantly on the look-out, for if unprepared, a
sudden lurch of the machine would have sent me spinning into the
middle of the road, an incident in travelling which it is generally
desirable to avoid. Before I got to my journey’s end I had had
enough of it. Every bone in my body ached, and my hands,
from holding on to the back of the dog-cart, were as blistered
and sore as if I had been a fortnight at the diggings sinking a hole.
I soon found, with many sighs, that comforts in a new country are
few and far between. The man who cannot dispense with them
should wait a bit before putting his foot in Victoria. If he be a
valetudinarian, let him not put his foot in it all. By the time I got to
my destination I had had more than enough of bush travelling on the
back seat of a dog-cart, which, on a macadamised road, would have
been nothingremarkable, but wasquite unadapted for the undulating
roads of the bush. What a relief it was to get off for an hour at
the different stages! If I had been put upon that dog-cart as a
punishment for crime, my conscience would have been easy on the
score of expiation at the end of the journey. A good pair of horses
composed the tandem, and my friend, who held the reins, was a
good whip. So far fortunate, as steady horses and good driving
are particularly essential to safety on such roads. Some of our
crossing places were ugly enough to look at. The steep banks of


a creek, rising on each side “like lofty wa's," frequently pre-
sented themselves, and to one unaccustomed to this style of road,
appeared almost insurmountable. They looked like sloughs of
despond in the way of our progress. Some portion of the high
road to Bendigo was then in a state of forwardness. Government
labourers, at ten shillings a-day, were breaking stones with what
is called “ the government stroke,” which is a slow-going, anti-
sweating kind of motion: or amusing themselves with a wheel-
barrow and a spade, enjoying their pipes, and looking forward to sun-
down, when the fatigues of the day would be over. We frequently
came to parts of the road where drays had either broken down or the
horses or bullocks had knocked up from the difficulties to be encoun-
tered. The whip was, in many instances, unmercifully applied, and
the poor brutes were rendered perfectly wild from their oft-renewed
but ineffectual efforts, and the curses and severities of these inferior
animals, their drivers. Innumerable decaying carcasses of horses and
bullocks, in the neighbourhood of the roads, saluted our nostrils as
we passed, sometimes invisible to the eye, but to be smelt afar off
like the battle by the war-horse. The road to the diggings was
thronged with travellers. Some were going up with drays, others
with their wives and families, in light carts, and many more trudging
thither on foot with their “swags” on their backs, dusty, weary,
foot-sore new chums, on their first trip to the diggings, to realise
their golden dreams or to join in the too general disappointment of
their predecessors.
Our resting-places for the night were at the wayside inns, at the
most convenient distances for a day’s journey, and at these the
accommodation for man and beast was what I can only characterise
as wretched. If the traveller awoke in the morning after a good
night’s rest, he might congratulate himself; but a slight inspection
of the couch or stretcher allotted for his repose -would require all
his philosophy, unless his notions of cleanliness or undisturbed
rest were by no means particular. Quiet during the night was
not to be looked for, as the bar was open at all hours to all cus-
tomers, and every now and again a drunken shout would startle
the half-asleep traveller and set him a-scratchingand a-kicking again.
Horses were not considered very secure in the stables, as it not
unfrequently happened that the stables were broken into at night,
and “ the steeds stown.” That a perplexity, such as this would have
been to our onward movements, did not happen to us, I now
regret, as it would have been something to record of a journey
which was entirely without anything like adventure. Our fare, at


these villanous specimens of the hotel tribe, was usually mutton-
chops and bread, and, according to the choice of each individual of
our party, tea or something more potent, for which we had to pay
most extravagantly. Our Melbourne charges were considered
wonderfully moderate in comparison. The rooms in these greedy,
filthy, mannerless establishments, had quite a stuck-up appearance,
the public-rooms having a dirty bandbox look, with a tawdry, staring
paper on the walls, of so unsubstantial an appearance, that it was
a strong temptation to knock one’s fist through the greasy parti-
tions, on which were suspended one or two convict-looking pictures,
which looked at you sneakingly, as if they thought that you knew
that they had been sent across the seas on account of their ugly,
thievish, murdering looks. Service, at these places, is one of those
things that the traveller must dispense with as much as possible,
and, indeed, the less he requires, so much the better for himself.
If he get his boots brushed, and be particular in that part of his
dress, he may consider himself as having received every attention.
At a place called Aiken’s Gap, where we rested the first night after
leaving Melbourne, our sitting-room was our bed-room. A little,
old waiter, who, “though banished, yet atrue-born Englishman,’’was
the most remarkable specimen of domestic politeness and attention
I ever met with in the colony. He frisked about amazingly, as if
it had been the delight of his old heart to attend to our wants.
When our party, which numbered eight or nine altogether, felt
generally disposed to turn-in for the night, the small waiter brought
in to the room stretcher after stretcher, rolls of mattresses and piles
of blankets, and with wonderful arrangement disposed of us all for
the night on the floor of the grand salon , or very small parlour,
whichever term may be considered most appropriate. The little
waiter was up when we. got up, which was with the sun, and made
ready some coffee for us before we started in the clear, cold morning
air.
At Carlsruhe, where we stopped for luncheon, (which consisted
of some greasy chops and ale, costing us somewhere about ten
shillings a-head, the ale charged at eight shillings per bottle,) two
of the mounted police arrived while we were there. They had
been out in search of a bush-ranger who had been reported at the
police-station as prowling in the neighbourhood. Some miles from
Carlsruhe they came upon a man on horseback, whose appearance
excited their suspicions that he was the game they were in search
of. He was at some little distance when they first got eyes upon
him, and upon their making towards him, he set off at full speed


in another direction. The police gave chase, and, after an exciting
run of some miles, came up with the bush-ranger, whom they
brought to bay. But policemen are but short-sighted mortals
everywhere. To their amazement the notorious bush-ranger whom
they had so gallantly captured, turned out to be a terrified squatter,
who seeing two disagreeable-looking characters (the policemen
happened to be in plain clothes) coming towards him, took alarm,
and put his horse to its speed to escape from their clutches.
Captors and captive, alike deceiving and deceived, enjoyed a hearty
laugh at the whole affair, the former returning to their quarters
disappointed of their prey, while the latter was glad to get off with
a whole skin, his horse, and wearing apparel.
The Australian bush-ranger is the lowest in the scale of ruffianism
of all who have followed the profession of highway robbery. He
bears no affinity to those heroes of romance, that outlawed race,
who, mounted on gallant steeds, at one time, (the good old time, as
it is still called by some who know better,) made the highway the
scene of their daring adventures, and whose courteous demeanour
toward the trembling victims of pre-railway travelling who fell
into their gentleman-like hands, invested their lawless deeds with
the halo of ancient chivalry, over which the imagination de-
lights to linger, making them at once the objects of dread and
of admiration to those who were then timidly given to slow-
coach locomotion as well as to homestayers, who travelled and
met with visionary adventures at the chimney corner only. Almost
invariably a member of that fraternity of outcasts from society,
who have been transported to the penal settlements for the
good of their native country, and known in the colony by the
aristocratic cognomen of Old Legs, (which they boastfully com-
pare with the modern contemptible one of New Chum,) he
may perhaps have worked out his term of servitude, or have made
his escape from the chains and slavery of his degrading sentence.
Like an untamed savage animal, he betakes himself instinctively
to a career of crime, and looks out for his prey, as the tiger in the
Indian jungle does. A coward at heart, he rarely makes an
attack but when the odds are in his favour, and the unarmed
pedestrian, who may be a digger on his way to town with his
hoard of nuggets, finds himself suddenly # pullad up by a figure
starting from behind a gum tree, who levels a gun at his
head, and bids him give up his gold. Resistance is in vain, the
contents of the barrel not having far to travel to his skull. He
E


may consider himself fortunate if the ruffian allows him to escape
with no worse treatment than being stripped of all his property,
even to his clothes. Too often the victim has been the object
of the most brutal treatment —bound hand and foot and tied to a
tree, in a state of complete nudity, perhaps with his nose slit up or
his eyes gouged out, he has been left to perish by the fiendish
villain. Most harrowing accounts are given of these atrocities,
which one would gladly disbelieve, if only too well-authenticated
facts would permit him. One story is told, where the victim,
after being stripped stark naked, and maltreated, was pinned hard
and fast to the ground, where a colony of large black ants had
taken possession of the soil, and there left to become the prey of
these insects, a lingering torture too dreadful to conceive, and
from which the mind revolts with horror. Bush-rangers were
still talked of when I travelled up the country, but as they rarely
attack squatters, who they suppose have little money about them,
we were not in a funk about them. The activity of the police,
who are now stationed in various localities in the most frequented
parts of the bush, has been the means of hunting down these vaga-
bonds, and cases of sticking up were then becoming comparatively
of rare occurrence. We met with no unpleasant commands “to
stand and unfold” ourselves. Our party was strong, and not
unprovided with fire-arms, so that if we had been called upon, we
could have had some plea to show cause why we should decline
any proposal “ to come out of the cart.”
We passed through Forest Creek on a Sunday. At Castlemaine we
pulled up for half an hour. Here, in a wooden church, the Bishop of
Melbourne was preaching, and the place had all the quiet usual
to the day in England. Of his lordship I got a glimpse and a
sound, through the weather boards, and after a short chat with
some of the camp officials, we drove on. In passing through the
diggings, we were saluted by a pack of curs, the diggers’ guardians,
and the annoyance of every body else. Here were to be seen small
flocks gathered around their particular pastors, who were generally
of that class of preachers called, in the colony, Beardies, from the
patriarchal length of that facial adornment. In Melbourne on a
Sunday, leaders of this fraternity were frequently to be found at the
street comers and at the end of the bridge across the Yarra-Yarra,
thumping their doctrines into the ears of the bystanders with
apostolic eloquence and fanatical vehemence. A cunning eye,
which the hairy covering of the lower part of the face served to
make more apparent, was, with quiet survey, taking a measure of


the audience. A heterodox champion similar in garb and appearance
would suddenly spring into the arena, and confronting his beard
to that of the first speaker, commence a loud and furious confutation
of his doctrines—an intrusive proceeding which would give great
offence to the faithful brethren, who would cluster round their
beloved Beardie for bis encouragement; while the other, backed by
his own adherents, would exhibit a firm determination to fight for
every hair’s-breadth of his doctrine. Ido not think lam unchari-
table when I say, that, in my humble opinion, they did not value
their doctrines so much as they did their cakes and ale.
There was apparently no work going on on the diggings on
Sunday, and the population, which was then considerable, were
enjoying their day of rest, chacun a son gout , so far as circumstances
would permit. Some were in the stores or refreshment tents,
which had flags hoisted in front of them to denote their purposes—
others lay stretched at full length outside of their Eechabite dwell-
ings, taking out their weekly otium cum dignitate , while a few might
be seen wandering through deserted claims like troubled spirits
lingering in a graveyard after a resurrection of the dead. The
Digger is something like the mole. He does not iinprove the
appearance of the country he passes through.
At this season of the year the bush appears to its greatest disad-
vantage. The scorching droughts of summer have burnt up the
whole country, and there is nothing to relieve the eye in the general
landscape, but the dull verdure of the gum tree, or the heoak,
which in Australian vegetation is monotony itself. My first im-
pressions of Australian bush scenery were by no means exciting. I
could not well have imagined a drive of 170 miles producing less
call for admiration of the country through which we passed, or
fewer incidents worth recording. Our journey occupied the better
part of five days, and on the last of these rain came down copiously,
giving us additional cause for satisfaction at finding ourselves at
our destination.
It would be no labour of love nor of pleasure either, were I to
attempt to give a detail of my daily life' in the bush. Such a
record would be one of feelings rather than of events, and would
furnish, even to the most inquisitive, but little matter to interest or
amuse. Events are of rare occurrence, and when anything out of
the usual slow course of things does take place, however interesting,
nay, even exciting, to the solitary inhabitant of the wilds it may
have been at the time, it might fail even to secure one reader whose
good nature would permit him to peruse an account thereof, without


yawning from beginning to end. Many a mighty yawn did my
residence in the bush exact from me, an enumeration of which
might have the painful effect of inducing a sympathetic reader to
indulge in two years’ osoitation at one “ go off.”
At my friend’s station on the Loddon I remained for a month. A
log hut, roofed with bark in the olden style of bush architecture,
formed the dwelling-house. In a small room with a thundering
big chimney, which might have served as a drawing-room as far as
proportion went, a large party messed and slept day and night;
and to those who can put up with small comforts, the narrow accom-
modation and plain fare of the establishment were matters of little
moment. Cordial wishes for our enjoyment were not awanting
on the part of the laird; and every one knows, or at least has heard of
the comforts of the bush. We packed round the table, seated on
chairs—not squatted a la turquesque, as squatters might naturally be
supposed to do—and vigorously attacked the mutton and bread,
and the bottle of green and red pickles. The cook was a China-
man, and so was the serving-man, both good specimens of the
Celestial Empire, with tails reaching from their crowns to their
heels, and breeches of such ample width that two pecks of meal
might have been disposed of with ease in their seats. The day-
light was got over somehow or other, and the evenings were de-
voted to the time-honoured amusements of cards, songs, grog, red
herrings, and jollity. The bed-making preparations were usually
the source of considerable mirth. All hands got to work to clear
the floor for mattresses, opossum rugs, blankets, or whatever was
to constitute bed or bedding for those who were to coil there for the
night, each in the way of the other, thumping and bumping heads
over heels, like clowns in a circus. Adjustments being made satis-
factorily, a general turn-in took place, the lamp was doused , and
we lay down in rows. Some restless spirit would for a time give
way to the roar that was in him, until exhausted nature called in
the aid of sleep, and universal silence reigned, undisturbed by a
snore, airs from heaven, or blasts from any other quarter.
By and by our party broke up, and I betook myself fifty miles
farther to the westward, to visit some friends on the Richardson.
On my way thither I stopped a night at a station on the Avooa.
I cannot say that I slept there. The night was frosty and cold,
and starry lights were shiveringly visible through the badly
shingled roof of the compartment of the weather-board house in
which I lay. I never spent a colder night anywhere. I lay awake
the whole night, trying to feel warm and sleepy, but it wouldn’t


do, and when morning broke, and the sky overhead became a cold
bright blue, the countless noises of feathered bipeds outside put all
hopes of sleep out of the question. I was but too glad to get up,
and endeavour, after a freezing lavation of hands and face, to raise
some animal heat in me by exercising my remaining powers of
locomotion. The Avoca (shade of Tom Moore, forgive the pro-
fanation !) is one of the overgrown ditches, called rivers in the maps
of the colony, and creeks by the happy settlers, and which are in
most situations the sole means of supplying the thirsty colonists
with the essential article of water. Who gave it the classical
name, I cannot tell. Most probably it was some Peep-o’-day boy,
whose expatriation from that valley, which we are told has not its
equal for sweetness in the wide world, became necessary for his health
and the good of the community at large, and who sat down on the
banks of the newly-discovered creek, and added to his crimes
against his country by calling the new scene of his adoption after
the paradise from which he had been righteously driven —on the
principle of the great arch-rascal, who having made a hell of
heaven, thought he could as easily make a heaven of hell, but
which on trial he found was more difficult than he had imagined.
At the time that I first saw its scanty waters, it was in great want
of a fresh supply from the fountain-head in nubibus. There was
no continued body of water in the bed of the creek—only a pool
here and there. Along its banks were rows of the everlasting
gum trees. The morning air was too piercing to allow my admi-
ration to get warmed by the first glance at the Avoca, a river
which would not run except upon very pressing occasions. One
requires to be resident in Australia for a time sufficient to wean him
from the recollections of other more favoured lands to be able to
distinguish the beauties of its landscapes; and a cold morning before
breakfast, after a shivering, sleepless night, is not the most favourable
time for seeing anything to advantage, unless it be a roaring fire
of wood in the chimney, and symptons of preparation for heating
the inner man. With such like sage reflections I returned to the
house, but, alas! there is no rest for the wicked. I found my
companion sitting in the chimney trying to get warmed, but the
heat seemed to have commenced with him at the tip of his nose,
and blushingly to say, Thus far and no farther. The fire was only
so much smoke, and the green boughs gave forth a hissing sound
as if in contempt of our blowing so much, as if we meant to set the
house on fire in the absence of the proprietors, who had gone to
the yard to draft sheep. All our efforts ended in smoke, which
E 2


made our eyes to ache, and our breath to come short, and, in this
instance, (and it is no extraordinary exception to matters opacous
producing nictation, which, being interpreted, means, that a nod
is as good as a wink to a blind horse,) light would not arise out of
darkness by any exercise of our ingenuity. The arrival of coffee
or tea—it was a qucestio vexata which between my friend and me—
probably “it was something more exquisite still,” concocted ex-
pressly for the Avoca—gladdened our smoked-out eyes, bringing
tears unto them, and infusing some warmth into our systems from
the extreme point of the great toe even unto the nasal promontory.
Our hosts had welcomed us heartily—a kind welcome is to me the
best part of entertainment—and as heartily invited our return to
spend another pleasant evening. To enjoy the full variety is the
most satisfactory pleasure. A night in the hot season, the ther-
mometer at 110°, the mutton lively, and the water slightly warm,
would, I could imagine, be the best time for testing the remaining
pleasures of the Avoca. My companion and I took our departure
for the Richardson about mid-day, and, after a very quiet drive
through a melancholy-looking country, got Itome about sundown
The horse, which was nothing but bone and hide, and had kept
roaring all the way, as an accompaniment to his slow jog move-
ments, trotted away briskly when he was let out of the shafts and
unharnessed, and after a roll in the dust, went to tell his mates
that he had got that job over, but that he had made it fearfully
slow, so much so that he thought master would never drive him
again. Foolish beast! He improved amazingly in condition
afterwards, and, forgetful of his poorer days, seemed proud of his
place in the harness of a neighbour, to whom he was sold.


CHAPTER THE FOURTH.
MONOTONY OF BUSH LIFE—THE IMAGINATION AT A LOSS—THE DESERTED
HUT —THE BLACKS’ MIMAS —THE ENTHUSIAST AND GENIUS THE
SQUATTER —HIS ADVANTAGES—UNLOCKING THE LANDS—HIS DIFFI-
CULTIES—HIS JOB-LIKE CALAMITIES — COMFORTS OF THE BUSH —
SQUATTERS’ HOSPITALITY —WORKING-MEN —MARRIED COUPLES.
I was now about two hundred miles from Melbourne, in a
northerly direction, the ultima thule of civilised occupation in
these parts. Here I tasted both of the sweets and the bitters
of solitude. The pleasures of the pathless woods and non-intrusion
society are all very well occasionally, and may be very good medicine
for the mind, but when “ the mixture as before” is repeated and
re-repeated ad nauseam , the evil effects begin to counteract the
good, and woe be to him whose system gets deranged from the
overdose! I was most favourably situated amidst kind and hospi-
table friends, with whom I shared many enjoyments, and the fault
was all my own if I passed, during my residence in the bush, many
an irksome hour. A voluntary exile, inasmuch that I always
knew “ the way out,” I could not sit down by the muddy rivers
of Victoria, and croak,
“ Sad is my fate 1 said the heart-broken stranger;
The wild deer and wolf to a covert can flee,
But I have no refuge from famine and danger;
A home and a country remain not to me.”
But, in truth, the first months of my bush residence were, after
the novelty of the thing had worn itself and me out, unmistakably
dull, and sometimes bordering pretty closely upon melancholy, and
it was not till I had got fairly antipodised in my ideas as to what
constitutes the enjoyment of life, and had in some measure ceased
to dream of old country absurdities, that I began to see beauty
where formerly all had been barrenness—to find pleasure in what
had before produced nothing but disappointment, and to feel an
interest in matters from which I had at first turned away with
something like disgust. The mind has so much influence in the
colouring of the landscape, in bringing out the lights and shadows,
and making either a pleasing picture of it or one quite the reverse,


that it is well for a bush resident, particularly if he be an idle man,
to determine to be content. Without this, if he is possessed of a
restless imagination, or a craving for excitement, he will feel all
the more miserable; and it would be better for him if he could be
transformed, for the term of his bush existence, into an opossum or
a laughing jackass, so that he might either betake himself to the
hollow of a gum tree, and sleep away the daylight, or get upon the
topmost branches, and make himself jolly after the manner of that
rare bird. But even in these circumstances, if he escaped the
clutches of hungry blaokfellows, he would find that in his attempts
to kill time he would come off second best. In spite of his utmost
endeavours to be jolly at all times and under every circumstance,
the hours will drag on in monotony, and the mind sicken at the
dreary prospect of succeeding days of unchangeableness.
The imagination of man, like nature, abhors a vacuum. But in
vain will the bush resident search for ideas in surrounding objects;
in vain will he appeal to the crown to aid him in his exhaustion.
He will plunge from “depth to depth, a vast profound,” and,
floundering on, at last give it up in despair. In the wild solitary
bush, where the foot of man has seldom trod, and the sounds of
human industry are never heard, Nature’s voice alone is audible in
“ the song of birds, the rustling of the leaves of the forest, and in
the thousand murmurs of solitude.” The fall of a branch, the shrill
chirp of a cricket, the sudden dart of a snake, the gliding of a
lizard through the rustling grass, the hum of insects, and the flight
of birds, break upon the surrounding quiet. But the imagina-
tion, ever restless, seeks for something to cling to whereon to
weave its airy fancies. In a country rich in history, it finds abun-
dant material in the surrounding landscape whereon it may thrive
and flourish with wondrous vigour, but in the bush the dull, unvary-
ing, soulless character of the scene presents no such attraction.
No ancient landmarks speak of the existence of an intellectual race,
and chronicle centuries of past events. The tall gum tree, whose
huge trunk and wide-spreading branches tell of centuries of
vegetation, reveals nothing more than its own existence, the mute
historian of long years of changeless monotony. If it had a human
voice it might tell of its early struggles for existence, its feeble
efforts to vegetate, the scorching droughts of its summers, the
reviving floods of its winters, the thunderstorms and hurricanes
that it had withstood, the lightnings that had struck down its com-
panions, or the wild winds that had torn them up by the roots; it
might also tell of animal existence, of the first bird that lighted on
56
EECOLLECTIONS OF A


its yet slender stems, of the herds of kangaroo that sported in its
neighbourhood, how it slowly and drearily became the resort of
winged animals of various hue and voice, and of night-larking
opossums that coiled themselves during daylight in its hollows, and of
swarthy man, the lord of these wilds, who had stood under its
shadows, armed with his rude weapons of war and of the chase.
In traversing some of the wide dreary plains, which are so
characteristic of the country, where the eye finds nothing to attract
its attention, or the quickest ear can catch no sound to break in
upon the death-like stillness that prevails, the imagination in
vain seeks for something to cling to —it wanders in vain over a land
sterile in subjects to which it can look for aid. Like the dove of
the ark o’er the waste of waters, seeking for rest but finding none,
the mind reverts to its inward resources, wearied with its fruitless
wanderings, “ from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking
up and down in it.” In some of my solitary rides I have come
suddenly on a deserted hut. There the imagination would busy
itself with the little history attached to the spot. The shepherd
who had dwelt there, where was he now ? Perhaps dead!
Imagination would set eagerly to work, and bring vividly before
the mind’s eye the shifting, scenes of its little story, such as, the
visit of the settler when he fixed on its site, the felling of the
timber, the building of the hut, the first day that it was tenanted,
the daily movements of Jhe solitary shepherd, with no companion
but his dog, the gathering of his flock at sundown in the adjoining
brush-yard, now strewed with skulls and bones. Entering the hut,
the half-consumed firewood remained black amidst the ashes in the
wide chimney in which the solitary’s fire had sparkled and crackled,
and with the rude bench which had served the double purpose of
bed and board, a cracked kettle, the head of a tobacco pipe, and
the remains of an old shirt, was all that remained to trace his
household movements by. Many a silent hour he had spent there—
no human voice familiar to his ear but his own, which startled him
in dreary soliloquies. Perhaps the participator in some foul crime,
for which he had been expelled from his native land, without a
father’s farewell blessing, or a mother’s affectionate embrace,
memory would haunt him by night and by day, in the quiet glare
of noontide, and in the still dark hours when all was silent as the
grave. Left in utter solitude, the prey of his own gloomy reflec-
tions, how he must have longed, as he sat in the evenings over his
solitary suppers of mutton and damper, for the expiry of his term
of service, cursing inwardly “ the cove” and his sheep, and looking


forward impatiently to a deep debauch at the nearest public-
house.
Sometimes, in rambles by the creek-side and waterholes, the
forsaken mimas of the blacks would induce me to linger in medita-
tion over the deserted village, the temporary resting-place of a
race fast dying out. The sole representatives of mankind in these
vast solitudes before the European had set a foot on the soil, they
had lived their savage lives in utter unconsciousness of the exis-
tence of their fair-skinned fellow-creatures, whose homes were far
away in the uttermost parts of the earth, but before whom they
were destined to disappear like water in the drought of their own
summer. In these rude huts of bark and boughs, the miserable
remnant of the uncared-for, heaven-forsaken race, had chattered
and grinned, scratched and painted their unfragrant bodies, made
rude love, danced with uncouth gestures to barbarous sounds, ate
their scant meals, and, surrounded by mangy dogs and wrapped
in blankets or opossum skins, lolled, yawned, and slept the hours
away without reflection and without anxiety, further than what
the cravings of hunger or the hopelessness of disease could excite.
No one to mourn over their ruthless destiny, the solitary mimas
seemed to say, Their name and generation gone, what can we do
to serve as a memorial of their existence? A feeling of melancholy
would come over me as I thought of the complete annihilation
which awaited the history of the poor wretches.
Suppose some poetic dreamer standing upon the above-mentioned
classic ground, and exerting all his powers of imagination to infuse
a ray of light into the foregoing dark and cheerless picture. Work-
ing the steam of his enthusiasm up to high-pressure point, he
bursts into the following apostrophe to the “mighty dead:”
“ Shades of Australasian Csesars, hear me! Ye dark-skinned,
bridgeless-nosed, opossum-eating warriors, arise from your ashes,
and tell me of the past! ”
A mournful sound issues from the tottering mimas, and the dead
branches and withered leaves give signs of animation.
“ Visions of glory! spare my aching sight.”
“ Caw-w-w-w, Aw-w-w-w, Aw-w-w, Bosh,” cries the genius loci,
in the shape of an ugly bare-throated, carrion-eating crow, seated
above the enthusiast’s head upon the lofty branch of a venerable
gum-tree. On looking up to the ill-omened disturber of his
reverie, something falls squash into the enthusiast’s eye. “ Aching
sight, sure enough, you unmannerly beast!” shouts the enthusiast,
shying a rotten stick at him with what aim his remaining eye will


admit of, but without effect. The genius looks down upon the
enthusiast with a shiny eye, on either side of his dirty beak, and
seems to say to him, “There ye go with your eye out.” The
enthusiast sits down upon a fallen tree, and wipes his eye. That
injured and much-insulted organ of vision convinces the enthusiast
that defunct Australian glory is all in his eye.
By a simultaneous movement, suggested by a concurrence of
ideas, the genius and enthusiast tacitly say to each other, “ revenons
a nos moutons .” The genius flies to the creek-side, and digs his
beak into the eyes of a sheep that has just died. “Ah ! it’s there
that he gets his ideas,” remarks the enthusiast, as he returns home-
ward to dine on boiled sheep’s-head, plain without sauce. Seated
at table, he musingly thumps the sheep’s organs of ideality with
the back of his knife, and, fetching a deep sigh, murmurs, “ And
it’s here I must look for mine. Pass the pickles, please.”
To find occupation in the bush is the grand desideratum, but to hit
upon something congenial to the taste is not always an easy matter.
On a sheep and cattle station there are periods of more than usual
activity, but on ordinary occasions wool grows, sheep and cattle
propagate and fatten without much assistance from the lords of the
creation. Possessed of an active overseer, the squatter’s hours of
ease are many, his hours of labour few. The times have gone by
that called for the active exertions of all hands. The abundant
supply of the labour market has fortunately accompanied the great
increase of flocks and herds, and the squatter, who formerly, from
sheer necessity, had to shepherd his own sheep, and assist in all
the drudgery of the station, may now either superintend, with
aristocratic dignity, the general management of his affairs, or, if he
prefer it, may leave all to his subordinates, and, feigning disgust at
the sight and smell of his flocks and herds, betake himself to a
life of indolence or absenteeism. An active personal superinten-
dence is undoubtedly the means of securing the prosperity of the
station; and considering the many advantages which the squatter
now possesses of turning his large tract of country to good account,
it is astonishing how imperfectly in many instances he avails him-
self of these. Like the farmer in England, he is ever grumbling,
though with far less cause, at the hard times. Possessing thou-
sands of acres of tolerable pasture land, for which he pays
a mere nominal rent, yet to hear him in conversation with
a Mlow-sufferer, one would be led to conclude that they, the
squatters, were the most unfairly dealt with and worst remune-
rated men in the whole Australian community. And yet the


grass that covers their countless plains, over which their sheep and
cattle feed in undisturbed possession, costs them next to nothing, and
the unfortunate owners are alone making themselves unhappy by
the cries of “ the wolf, the wolf!” Stations which were formerly
of little value, are now, since the opening up of the long-hidden
mineral riches of the colony, worth more, by a long chalk, than
ever they were at any period of the history of Port-Phillip. A
more favourable position for ample profits can scarcely be conceived,
and yet the squatter despondingly looks back to the good old hum-
drum times when he and his iellow-sufferers had all the country
to themselves, and could eat their mutton and damper under their
bark-covered huts, without being bothered with a rise in the mar-
kets. Something akin to his opossum-eating, skin-clad aboriginal
neighbours in his ideas of conservation, he loathes the innovations
which gold has made in the colony. All his old ideas of pre-
eminence are overturned, and he finds that he must yield with the
pressure of the times, which call on all loiterers like himself to
keep moving. No feeble efforts of his can stem the current
which has set in, and a new order of things demands the set-
ting aside of the quiet, easy-going regime of pastoral supre-
macy.
Without entering upon the question which had arisen, and was
much agitated during my residence in the colony, between the
squatters and the general community, regarding “ the unlocking
of the lands,” I shall only remark that a due regard to the rights
of every one should be the aim of the Government. The squatter
should have his run secured to him by lease, but the right of
purchase should be free to all who have the wish to settle in the
colony, and to turn the land to some account. This, however,
must be left to the Legislative Council, I suppose, which, it is to
be hoped, is wise in its generation.
That the squatter has his difficulties, must be admitted, and a
strange exception to the general order of things would his case be
if he W'ere free from the cares and crosses to which humanity, not
to speak of stock , is everywhere heir. Disease among his flocks is
one of the greatest misfortunes to which he is exposed, and a great
one it undoubtedly is, but its suppression can only be managed by
active measures, and a more strict surveillance of the boundary
lines which mark his possessions with those of his neighbours.
With gold digging, the price of labour and of station stores in-
creased considerably, but a ready market and high prices are a good
set-off against these charges, and when both sides of the sheet are


added up, the balance ought to be considerably in favour of the
squatter. He may, it is true, be a sulferer from other causes, over
which he has for the time little control.
Like Job, the patriarchal squatter, who, we are told, had a goodly
run in the land Uz, well stocked with sheep and camels, oxen and
asses, and at whose home-station there must have been a consider-
able weekly consumption of rations, not to speak of greens when
in season, and pickles, the Australian squatter may become the prey
of sudden and grievous calamities. On some hot afternoon in
January, when the wind breathes as if issuing from a heated fur-
nace, and the thermometer is at 120° Fah. in the shade, when
seated in his easy-chair in shirt and trousers, with no companions
but a host of tormenting flies which use all manner of liberties with
his person—playing at leap-frog on the crown of his head, descend-
ing into the caverns of his ears, exploring the tunnels of his nose,
drinking from the wells of his eyes, penetrating into the forests
of whisker and moustache, and riding steeple chase over the
open country of his face—he may be suddenly startled from
a state of dreamy perspiration by the voice of a shepherd
whom he hears complaining that a fire is raging on the south
part of the run, and that his sheep are in danger of being
consumed unless a stop is immediately put to the ravages of the
devouring element. Ere the nerveless squatter has time to give
the thirsty messenger of destruction a fiery “ nobbier,” and bid him
do his speedy utmost to save his mutton, in stalks a black-fellow,
like an emissary of Satan, who, with native composure, tells him
how that “ two big-fellow bushrangers pull away along o’ creek,
and look out yarramen (horses) belonging to station, and no
gammon.” The overcome squatter falls into his easy-chair, weak
with heat and exertion, and giving Black Tommy a bit of baccy,
bids him not come between the hot wind and his nobility. “ The
shadow’d liveryman of the burnished sun,” the swarthy “ abori-
gine,” has just effected an improvement on the fragrance of the
heated atmosphere of the squatter’s salle-k-manger, by noiselessly
withdrawing his blanket-draped form, when in walks, erect and
lord-like, an indignant neighbour, with spurs on heels and whip in
hand, whose salutation is in chilling contrast with the heat of the day.
He growls as he looks with an eye like Mars on his prostrate brother
in the easy-chair, who feebly asks him “how he feels?” “Feels!”
He feels very much inclined to jump down his neighbour’s throat,
if he would only give him the chance, and he looks as if he meant
it. The neighbourly mouth is wisely shut up, “no thoroughfare


this way,” seems written on the closed lips. “A large mob of
cattle, of Prostration’s cattle,” Indignation tells him, “ is across the
boundary line on the north of the run, and had it not been for his
stock-keepers, as sure as little apples form a part of creation, there
would have been a join with his own cattle, and then there would
have been the devil to pay. He should just feel obliged to people
who have got runs, to stick to them, and not make free with what
don’t belong to them. If it happens again, the stray cattle will be
sent to the nearest pound.” The prostrate squatter feels like a
print of butter before a rousing fire—a sensation as if he were
gradually giving way and becoming all liquid, and that there is no
escape from complete liquefaction. The indignant squatter leaves
him to his fate, in unrelenting, unforgiving mood. His departure
has the effect of relieving his melting neighbour, by the conscious-
ness that no fierce eye now glares upon him, and he feels slightly
happy at the thought that he is once more alone with the flies. By
and by the door abruptly opens, and the overseer presents himself
with a face glowing like a furnace, and exhibiting sundry wounds
where the bark has but lately been peeled off, who tells him “as
how he and Jim the cook have been having a few rounds with their
fists, ’cause he had been a deal too cheeky, and he thought as how he
would be the better of a damned good ’iding and be sent about his
business, as that sort o’ ways of going on wasn’t a-going to do on
this station.” The now pancake-like squatter feels that he is
approaching the climax, and gurgles out, “ that he has but one
idea left, and that is, that the station is going to the devil.”
The day closes with mutton and maggots, peat-dry bread, and
green and red pickles, and the horrors of the night set in; but we
shall not draw them from their dread abode. In the heated gloom of
yonder bed-room, from whence issues the demon buzz of a thousand
blue bottle flies, there he lies in purls naturalibus, not a kick, not
a squeak in him, the victim of despair! No friends come to mourn
with him, and to comfort him, to weep, tear their shirts, and
sprinkle their heads with tobacco ashes! He may lie on that iron
stretcher for seven days and seven nights, none to say “how are
you getting on ?” or to witness the length of his prostration!
Such are some of the evils that may beset a squatter, and by
which he may easily make a Job of himself.
Little has been done in the bush for the comfort of its human
inhabitants. On some stations will be found very comfortable
houses built of stone or weather-board; and if the proprietor is mar-
ried, a tidy interior and a well-supplied table; but, in general, the


reverse is the case. As if sick of magnificence, and sighing for
nature, the squatter seems determined to deny himself “home”
comforts, if he ever knew what these are, and to rest satisfied with
the meanest accommodation, and the most miserable fare. He
doubtless acts upon the non-improvement system in some measure.
His tenure is uncertain, he is a mere tenant-at-will of the Govern-
ment, and he does not know at what hour he may be called upon
to give up his possession. So far his position is discouraging, but
as he has it in his option to buy up his home-station at so much per
acre, he may, by so doing, secure to himself any improvements he
may have made thereon, without molestation from any quarter. If,
for various reasons, he should think it advisable to do this, then he
must take his chance of obtaining from Government a definite
acknowledgment of his right of possession of his adjoining run, or
if he sells, he will not find a comfortable home-station detract from
the value of the whole in the eyes of a purchaser.
It is true, that in these respects matters have improved, and are
improving; but it is with great caution that the squatters set to
work in their domestic reformations. It is comparatively an easy
matter to attain some degree of comfort now-a-days, to what it
was in the days of the primitive settlers. Labour, though high, is
abundant, roads much improved, and Melbourne glutted with all
sorts of things.
Approach a settler’s home-station at sundown (the usual time
for travellers to make their appearance), pull up at the portal of
his log hut, or weather-board tenement, and request the favour of
a night’s quarters, you are not likely to meet with a refusal, though
instances have occurred when the would-be guests were pro-
hibited from crossing the thresholds of the miserable-looking
dwellings of the lords of the wilds, but were kindly permitted
to have the privilege of associating for the night with the work-
ing-men in their hut. Their society might quite possibly be as
improving, and doubtless more entertaining for a time, than that
of the stingy proprietor; but such uncourteous concessions of the
rites of hospitality, a man of spirit would of course indignantly
decline to accept, giving infinite preference to the shelter of a gum-
tree for the night. It is, I believe, unusual for ths respectable
traveller in the bush to he denied bed and board for the night at
the manor-house of the squatter. You are permitted to turn your
horse loose into the paddock, where the poor brute must take his
chance of what pickings he may find there. These will in all proba-
bility depend on the season of the year, and if it should so happen


that the paddock is bare, and that your host has no haystack, or is
a niggard of his bounties, your unfortunate charger must have a
miserable time of it. As for yourself, you are requested to walk
inside, have the use of a little water, and perhaps a towel, and an
invitation to sit down at the table to be regaled with that standard
article of bush diet—mutton; and deem yourself in good luck, if
you have any other more tempting accompaniments than bread and
pickles. In the rainy season, some foliage or green stuff, which is
facetiously called cabbage, and by some exceedingly well-meaning
people vegetables, may probably be set before you. Chew the mut-
ton, bolt the greens, and cram down the bread, grateful traveller,
there is nothing more coming, your dinner is before you. May “good
digestion wait on appetite.” Anon,you’ll “drink a measure the table
roundbut don’t drink too much tea, it is bad for the nerves. You
may make up your mind to a very taciturn tete-a-tete for the even-
ing, unless you are posted up in all the mysteries of sheep-farming.
The meal finished, if you are a smoker, you will of course take out
your pipe and tobacco, and under the influence of the narcotic,
begin to fancy you are tolerably comfortable. Never mind the
tallow candle made on the station. Don’t attempt to snuff it, the
snuffers are of a very primitive fashion, and you cannot use them
without either .soiling or burning your fingers; and moreover,'if you
once begin to pay the candle any attention, it will keep glooming at
you every minute till you go to bed. Besides, you will feel that dim
smoky light soothing after a hearty dinner, and the strong muttony
smell, when you get used to it, is fattening, at least so it is said by
those who ought to know. Of course, you will talk as much as you
can by way of getting the hours to slide greasily on till bed-time;
for do not expect that having discussed mutton to surfeit at dinner,
that you have done with the subject, as it is the staple article of
conversation, as well as of consumption. Sheep will form the en-
grossing topic, the state of the markets, the latest cure for scab, the
most improved method of scarifying the affected parts of the diseased
animal, how many pounds of tobacco, arsenic, and sulphur to the
gallon of water should be used in dipping, and the latest discoveries
which the inspector of scab and other scientific men have made as
to the character, mode of propagation, domestic habits, and tastes
of the animalcula which take possession of the skin, and destroy
the wool of the sheep, communicating uneasiness, and sometimes
baldness premature, to the heads of the squatting community. You
will then discuss con amove the topic of the season. If breeding
time, when the ewes and the rams were brought together, and


how many she-lambs of a twelvemonth have been wedded to the
“crooked-pated, old rams, out of all reasonable match;” if
lambing season, if the lambs are numerous; if shearing time, if
the clip is good, and what the fleeces weigh on an average, etc.
etc. In this intellectual communion you will be proceeding in a
drowsy manner, varied occasionally by your lighting your pipe,
which will keep going out, when—your host having exhausted
you, and himself of all his ready stock of conversation—a dead
silence will ensue, and you will begin to nod in your seat near the
fire. On your making a half-apologetic remark about feeling baked,
your host will ask you, if you would like to turn in. You feel very
much inclined for the movement, and suppressing a yawn which you
were about to make in his face, you will be conducted to your cham-
bre a coucher, and, after a “ good-night,” be left to make the most of
the stretcher opposite you, against the wall. You need’nt turn your
boots outside; there’s nobody going to black them, so let them gape
there at the bedside. If you are so fortunate as to luxuriate in a
sheet, remember you may chance to find it on the breakfast table
next morning, but don’t let that interfere with the enjoyment of it.
So, sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you. After you have been
in bed for a time—during which you come to the conclusion that the
census of your couch has not been taken lately, and that the popu-
lation has become pretty numerous and hungry—you fancy you have
attained the happy moment of reverie betwixt sleeping and wak-
ing, when sleep begins to wake and life sinks gently into sleep.
Suddenly a diabolical noise, proceeding from under your bed, recalls
you from the borders of oblivion, and gives rise to a feeling of all-
overishness, somewhat difficult to describe. Your room has become
the sporting ground of some native cats, ■which skip, leap, and
hirple all about, accompanying their movements with a conversation
of a cough-and-grunt-mixture, most enlivening to listen to. This
change entertains you for the most part of the night, as your com-
panions “ won’t go home till morning,” and, when daylight doth
appear, you manage to get a few winks of sleep, that
“ Balm of hurt minds, great Nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.”
On getting up, about breakfast-time, you are proceeding to dress
yourself, but you search in vain for your socks; the playful creatures
have carried them off during the night to make them add to the
comfort of their dormitories under the floor, and are now probably
y


snoozing luxuriously on the top of them. You rub your eyes, sit
down on the bedside, and scratch your foot, in musing wonder at
their impudence. Concluding that your socks have gone from your
gaze for ever, you clothe yourself in what the facetious creatures
have left to you of your garments, and get all ready for a start.
Mutton chops, done in the grease, await you on the breakfast table
when you come in from having a look after your horse. Never
mind the table-cloth, it is somewhat crumpled and funny-looking;
take what Providence sends you, and remember that ceremony is a
sauce unknown in the bush. Breakfast over, you have your horse
to catch in the paddock, and your success depends upon the character
of the animal. This feat accomplished, you get him saddled, your
swag strapped on, and bidding your host adieu, you set off on your
journey, cheerily congratulating yourself that you are a stage nearer
the last.
There are, however, various specimens of squatting hospitality.
You may be fortunate to find superior accommodation and more
enticing fare, and what is of equal importance to your comfort, an
intelligent host, ready with a kindly welcome. Better still, if he
be a married man; for then you are sure not only of a good table
and a comfortable bed, but also of that heartfelt enjoyment which
the presence of a gentle hostess generally imparts to her
guests. Mayhap a piano may add to the cheerfulness of the
evening, if the instrument does not happen to be labouring under
some malady and in great want of a tonic—a condition by no
means rare in the piano-forte world in the bush. I can truly aver
that the bush is not altogether destitute of such social attractions.
In matrimonial establishments, you will almost invariably find the
creature comforts well attended to. There you will have the
luxuries of the dairy and the vegetable garden, and the benefits aris-
ing from a stock of barn-door game; fresb eggs, and fat fowls—all
of which, by a little attention and management, are easily attained,
but nevertheless are by no means common in the bush. On cattle
stations, I have found milk a rarity in the proprietor’s bill of fare,
and butter might be dreamt of, but never seen in the body. Fowls
are easily got, and, of course, will lay eggs out of pure spite,
and incubate and increase if protected from that seemingly most
cherished game about a squatter’s homestead—viz., native cats and
carrion crows. Step into the verandah of the matrimonial estab-
lishment, you will see some taste displayed in the cultivation of
flowers, shrubs, and vines; and in some places fruit trees thrive,
and, if it is the season, you may pluck and eat. It is the more to


be wondered at, that these things should be rarities in the bush,
and not to be had at most home-stations. The squatter cannot
plead want of time nor want of opportunity. He may have cli-
mate, and, in some situations, soil to contend with, but with a little
effort and attention these difficulties may, in a great measure, be
overcome. He cannot expect to reap where he has not sown, nor to
gather where he has not strewed. But little taste is displayed at
most of the home-stations, and, in the arrangement of the unpic-
turesque domestic buildings, those are generally most prominent
which the dictates of good taste would place in the background, and
some which are of a very retiring character are almost invariably
to be found standing sentry in front of all, as if the proprietor, with
misplaced propriety, had reversed his habiliments in his haste to get
dressed, and was saluting his visitors in that state. But the traveller
must not forget that he is on the other side of the world, and
must naturally look for a reversed order of things, which may at
first appear offensive to his upsetting ideas.
Ladies are not always in such comfortable situations as regards
their household economy. Let me give one instance in my know-
ledge, by way of illustration. During some very hot weather in the
month of January, I accompanied a friend for some distance on his
way to town. On my return, I called at a home-station at mid-
day, when an early breakfast, and a ride, rendered doubly tiresome
by my efforts to drag another horse along with me, which would not
lead, made shelter from the hot winds and glare of sunshine most
welcome. A smiling, blooming, servant girl answered my inquiry
if the master was at homp. “He was not,” she said, “ but missus
wasand having given my name, she returned with an invitation
from the lady, “to alight and come in.” There was evidence of a
process of cleaning going on, as a feather-bed and some pieces of
furniture lay outside; and having expressed a delicacy of feeling
at intruding myself on such an occasion, I was assured that it was
a proceeding which might give me no cause of alarm, as they had
merely turned some of the furniture out of doors that they might
have more room inside. I was told to turn my t horses into the
garden, a proposition at which I at first gave an incredulous stare,
uncertain whether it were really meant, or only made in jest. I
attempted to remonstrate at such seeming desecration of a place
generally sacred to the lighter footsteps of men, and of those
best gifts of Heaven, women; not to mention these unexclusive
creatures, cats; but I was told, in the most unsophisticated manner,
that there was nothing in the garden that a horse could injure.


Thus assured, I availed myself of the privilege of turning the
animals’ attention to the study of flowers and vegetables, with the
satisfactory but selfish reflection, that the fence would at least
prevent them from wandering farther in pursuit of botanical or
horticultural science. And, truly, the fence was the best thing
about it. If the garden had been used as a cattle yard, it would
have received no damage in consequence, unless the brutes had
pushed the fence over. Flower, vegetable, or green weed, there
was none. All was neglect, “things rank and gross in nature
possessed it merely.” Small room for actions of damages, said Ito
the horses, as I left them to their un-llervey-like meditations. I
then entered the hut, and seating myself on a sofa covered with
chintz, at one end of which lay a shawl, as if carelessly thrown
down, awaited the entry of the hostess. Feeling slightly fatigued,
1 took the liberty of reclining; my elbow resting upon the shawl,
which I fancied served admirably for a cushion. The apart-
ment was by no means spacious, and with the connubial bedroom
on the opposite side of the little passage, occupied the whole of the
roof. In the centre of the room, which was lighted by a very
small window, was a table, alongside of which were the sofa,
on one side, and a couple of chairs, on the other. In a corner,
stood a kind of cupboard or chiffonier, on which were some hooks;
and in another, a small table devoted to needle-work and ladies’
working gear. The fire-place was ornamented, or rather screened,
by a piece of chintz, and although the contents of the room were
of the most unpretending description, yet there was a certain
degree of tidiness about the tout ensemble, which told plainly,
without the aid of further circumstantial evidence, that there
was a lady in the case. What a melancholy case to he in!
I thought to myself, as I reclined on the shawl listening to the
mournful sighing of the withering hot wind, as its enervating
breath, coming in heated puffs, shook the canvas-lined walls of
the hut, making the little blind of the window, which looked
out on the garden, shiver as if in an ague: That lady must be
a sister of Mark Tapley, who can be happy here. By and by
she appeared, and with grateful smiles, added greatly to the em-
bellishment of the little space devoted to general conversation
and repast, and, when a guest remained over night, to repose.
I remembered the words of a song which I picked up in my
early country theatre-going experience, and felt the truth of
them:—


“ What’s a house without a woman ?
An empty space, a dismal place;
What’s a house without a woman,
Without a woman’s smiling face ?”
“ What sort of case would this hut be without a woman’s smiling
face? A pistol-case, no doubt. The proprietor must be a sort of
Bush Byron, who, having chosen the desert for his dwelling-place,
baa got a fair spirit of good substantial flesh and blood to be his
minister.” The lady, during our introductory conversation, kept
her eyes very religiously towards the end of the sofa where lay the
shawl. A little girl came into the room, who, mamma said, was
her eldest; and, to my horror and confusion, announced to me the
appalling fact that the shawl by my side contained a little boy, the
youngest. I started, as if she had presented a Colt’s revolver at
my head. I felt conscience-stricken when I reflected on the liber-
ties I had taken with the slumbering innocent, the son and heir of
all I surveyed. I had some misgivings as to the existence of the
contents of the shawl, as it had given no signs of animation, obser-
vable'by eye or ear of mine, and I inwardly shuddered as I
said to myself—“ Well, what if I have squashed it!” I tried to
look at ease. Symptoms of lunch, or dinner, appearing, I went
outside to see if the horses were all right, and, on my return to the
sofa# found to my great relief that the shawl was gone, and had
the extreme satisfaction of seeing baby, quite happy, in the arms of
its mother. The comforting assurance, that I was not an infanti-
cide, cooled the atmosphere some degrees, and, at request of the
blooming mother, I sat down to dinner, with a clear conscience.
“ Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upwards!” Before me
were placed roasted ribs of mutton, and, on commencing to cut up
the same, the table was seized with such a fit of the shakers, that
I verily thought that, instead of disjointing the mutton, my exer-
tions were more likely to result in a complete disseveration of the
legs of the table from the top, and the consequent dispersion of
mutton, pickled salmon, and bread, to the four corners of the hut,
not to mention the contents of the teapot, water-jug, and sugar-
basin, and one eternal smash of crockery-ware. I didn’t know
whether to laugh or to weep,—there is a time for both, we are
told, —but it is sometimes difficult to hit upon the right thing in
the right place. My inclination was to burst out a-laughing, but
good breeding forbade it, and I bottled up my mirth till the tears
started down my face, bursting at every pore. I grasped a leg of
the table, viciously, between my knees, and entered upon a desperate


struggle with the ribs. I made up my mind for the worst, as the
table swayed and creaked in an excited state. Providence is kind!
By good luck the knife got through the joint somehow, and I
helped my hostess to mutton with a hesitating air of triumph;
but dreading the result of a repeated attack on the same dish, I
expressed my great liking for fish, and, in particular, for preserved
salmon. In an unguarded moment I accepted a cup of hot tea, and
my whole system reached hoiling-point. During this most exciting
conference with the ribs of mutton and the paralytic table, the lady
preserved the most extraordinary equanimity. When wreck and
ruin were staring me in the face, she looked as composed and
unconcerned as if she had been born and nurtured, moved,
breathed, and bad her being in a perpetual convulsion of nature,
such as when
“ Oft the teeming earth
Is, with a kind of colick, pinch’d and vex’d,
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb; which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldame earth, and topples down
Steeples, and moss-grown towers.”
I would have proposed some remedy for strengthening the consti-
tution of the table, but I couldn’t take the liberty, and the kind
lady seemed so used to it that it may have become necessary for
her existence, and so any proposal about knocking a nail in might
have been impertinent. I found my hostess so kind, unaffected,
and agreeable, that I could not but feel at my departure, notwith-
standing the heat of the entertainment, that our tete-d-tete had been
to me a most grateful one. After a short siesta, I got the horses
out of the garden, where they had had a long fast and serious
meditation on the vanity of things in general, and of squatters’
gardens in particular, and set off on my journey homewards in a
dull, lurid, suffocating afternoon, such as is common at the com-
mencement of a new year in these parts.
If the lords of the wilds are thus housed and fed, it may he asked,
Low do the serving-men find themselves provided with the neces-
saries of life? The home-station of a squatter’s run may he regarded
as the town or village of his wide domain. Here, beside the lord’s
own castle, are the dwellings of his retainers. These consist of log-
huts, roofed with hark, of the usual rough construction and appear-
ance, One large hut, called “the men’s hut,” is usually set apart
for the working-men engaged in various jobs on the station, and
who are without the encumbrances of wives or families. One of


the men acts as cook for the others, and remains in the hut to
superintend the culinary affairs of the establishment. That he is
not a disciple of Soyer, but knows how to butcher a sheep, to cook
a chop or roast a joint, to bake a damper and brew a kettle full of
dark-coloured full-bodied tea, is all the better for him. A more
extended knowledge of the science of cookery would only lead to
endless repinings and disappointments. How many ways a sheep
may be served up, consort not with his limited ideas, and primitive
roast and primitive boil, chop or stew done in the grease, are the
sole triumphs of his rough cuisine. Hunger is the best sauce.
Good appetites await his exertions, and Jim the cook has little to
apprehend from the epicurean criticisms of his able-bodied family.
A rude bench serves as a table, on which are placed the viands;
and every man, armed with trencher and knife, helps himself to
mutton and damper and a panikin of tea, and seats himself on
one of the surrounding benches, which serve for beds when night
comes on. I will not attempt to give a further picture of the life,
nor a sample of the conversation which enlivens the leisure hours
of the too questionable characters which generally fill the men’s
hut on a station. The conversation of Old Legs may well be
imagined to be generally taken up in the relation of—
“ YiUanies
Ruthful to hear, yet piteously performed.”
That their comforts, rough-and-ready as they are, consort well with
their ideas, may easily be imagined, and any other provision would
be disregarded by a class of men, whose sole object in engaging in
labour, is, that it may enable them to dissipate their earnings in a
deep and brutal debauch, which, by a life of the lowest depravity,
has become the summum bonum of their existence. The employer
is inclined to look upon them as so many vicious animals, whose
services he cannot dispense with; and it would be like casting
pearls before swine if he were to attempt any amelioration of their
condition. If satisfied with their allowance of rations, their rude
shelter and accommodation are but in keeping with their history,
character, and feelings. When the sums at their credit in their
employer’s hands show bulk enough for a good drink, they take
up their “swags” and trudge to the nearest public-house, where
a week or two of beastly drunkenness gratifies their vitiated
inclinations, and brings out all the worst features in their charac-
ters. The keeper of the public-house—most probably an unprin-
cipled blackguard, as is too often the case—furnishes his devilish


compounds with no sparing hand, and when he thinks his cus-
tomers have had enough for the amount of money contained in the
cheques, which they have placed in his keeping; though perhaps
they have not received more than one-half of what would he the
value in drink, if they knew what they were about; he tells them to
be off, as they are over the score. Of course, rioting, lighting, etc.
etc., are all included in the landlord's charges; and one could give
him some credit for putting a check on the proceedings, were it
done from any other than the most dishonest motives. Very few
of this class of bush labourers are what can be called sober men.
There are exceptions, however; and some save their money and
buy land, or a team of bullocks and dray, and so become men of
property, returning no more to their former wicked courses, “ like
the dog to his vomit, or the sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire.”
That new immigrants should be compelled to associate so closely
with such characters, is to be regretted. The blighting influence
of their society is but too apparent, as it is a common practice
with them to chaff and banter the new hands out of all their old
country notions of propriety; a matter which it is sometimes easy
to accomplish.
In cases where there are married couples acting as servants in the
bush, there is, of course, a hut allotted to each family, -where they
may pig together as in Ireland, or the Highlands of Scotland. In
a small wooden hut, not much larger than a bathing machine, I
have known a man and his wife, two children, and an “oldleg”
(who, at least, was two legs too many for the establishment),
huddled together. In this box of a place, they all slept at night.
One end of it was occupied by a bed for the married couple and
their “bairns,” while the “old leg” stretched himself at night, in
the most convenient posture he could find, with his two feet in the
chimney, and the remainder of his “six feet” on the space between
the matrimonial couch and the fireplace. Of course there could
not he much furniture in a place of such dimensions. A sea-chest
served for a table, or whatever necessity dictated or fancy sug-
gested, and an empty soap-box, turned upon its side, was promoted
to the rank of a stool, on which the mother would sit when nursing
the bobby. A few pieces of delf, a volume or two, and some odds
and ends, lay on a shelf. An old watch hanging near the
bed, a kettle simmering in the chimney; the frying-pan and pot
being turned outside; completed the visible plenishing of “the
moveable hut,” as it was called. The gudewife, who was generally


very trig and cleanly in her person, made th& remark, that “ the
hut was mair fit for a hox for a penny show 'at a fair, than for
Christian folk to leeve in, and it was’na dacent their being so near
auld Boh, wha’ could’na hut ken every thing that was going -on.’!
Her eldest daughter was a pretty, interesting girl, about eight years
of age. On being interrogated by one who took an interest in her
religious knowledge, or who at least wished to do so, as to whether
she remembered her Creator in the days of her youth or not, she
readily replied to the questions: but her answers showed that she
was ignorant of any other parent but her earthly ones. Her religious
education had been neglected; and yet her mother, like many of
her countrywomen, was fond of talking on religious topics, and
had taught her daughter the horn-book, and how to nse a
needle. In most parts of the bush, children are left to the tuition
of their parents, and their instruction in secular or religious
knowledge is entirely at the mercy of the parental inclinations
or attainments.
There is some room for improvement in the state of the working
men in the bush. Their employers do nothing for them, more than
their mutual agreements exact. The squatter bothers himself little
whether his labourers, or their wives and families, be living in
decency or comfort or not. They get their allowance of rations, be-
sides their wages, and with these equivalents for their services, he
considers that his part of the contract is fulfilled. By a system such
as this, the women get corrupted, and the children grow up in hea-
thenism and ignorance. Left to depend more upon their instinctive
than their reasoning faculties, the children become, at an early age,
adepts with their hands, while their hearts are unimproved and
their minds uncultured. Bush reared children are generally very
precocious animals, physically soon developed; while morally, they
are little removed from the swarthy aborigines. Matrimonial
squabblings, arising out of jealousies, are but too common, and the
crown, which a virtuous woman is said to be unto her husband, is
an ornament little worn in the bush. What the schoolmaster and
clergyman, who are, at present, few and far between, could do by
way of improvement, it is needless to say. The remedy is too old
to require any comment, which must necessarily be common-place
and trite.


CHAPTER THE FIFTH.
BUSH-SERVANTS —THE WINTER — ANGELS’ VISITS — THE MEDICAL—THE
MANAGER—THE POLICEMEN —THE PARSON—SQUATTERS — BILL THE
NATIVE—THE STEAMER—THE LITTLE DOCTOR—ENNUI.
Good servants are rare in the bush, a complaint common enough
everywhere, but the want of them is nowhere more felt than there.
In a bachelor’s establishment, where household matters are gene-
rally thrown, in a helpless manner, on the shoulders of servants,
the comfortable management of these depends, in a great measure,
on the temper and capabilities of the domestic in-management.
During my residence with my friend, these ministering spirits
changed several times, and the variety of character among them
was so great, that I think they may furnish a pretty correct idea of
what bush servants are in general. A married couple occupied
the kitchen, which adjoined the dwelling-house. The man was
expected to look after the garden, and to make himself generally
useful about the place, while the woman took charge of the internal
arrangements of the house and the preparation of meals, Etc.
The first couple which served in the above capacities, during
my time, was from Scotland, and had but lately arrived in the
colony. The man was a most active and willing servant; and
it would be, by no means, overpraising him to say, that he was the
most useful man on the station. A sort of Mark Tapley, he
was good-natured and persevering under all difficulties. Knocked
over in the yard by an unruly cow, Mark would rise, his mouth
bleeding profusely, with a most good-natured grin on his counte-
nance, and an exclamation, that “she was a sorrow of a beast!”
but his energies would not slacken until he had “the sorrow”
bailed up and the milk taken from her udder. Soused head-over-
heels in the creek, while engaged in a job there, he would rise to
the surface with the usual happy grin, and remark with a gasp,
that “the water was wonnerfu’ cauld;” and latterly, when he took
to being a stock-keeper, he had an old horse that threw him once
or twice every week, but Tapley always mounted again with the
74
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


indomitable grin on his healthy face, saying that “he had suspeckit
the auld rascal.” Always civil and obliging, a better specimen of
an efficient bush-servant there could not be than this Ayrshire
Mark Tapley. His wife was quite a different character. She
was a quick-tempered, much-ado-about-nothing-making woman.
Cleanly in her person, and faithful to the besom and scrubbing-
brush, she was noisily active in all her movements, and opened and
shut doors, dashed things on the table, and did most of her services
with an air which seemed to say, “ take them and be hanged to
you.” She would say that “she never had been accustomed to
serve gentle folks, and she was’na up to their ways.” Though
always active and bustling, she was quick in temper, never
contented, and her household arrangements savoured of what is
called, in Scotland, “ kail through the reek.” Consequently,
the room was always full of smoke, the bread would’nt rise, or
the milk would’nt churn, do what she could. Butter-making
forsook her entirely, and she attributed her failure to the in-
fluence of “an evil e’e.” Some one, who had no friendly feeling
to her, had cast his malicious eye on her churn, and all her efforts
could not regain the lost art so wickedly spell-bound. This did nob
improve her temper, and she and “the gudeman” quitted the
kitchen for another engagement on the station.
The couple that succeeded them were very different specimens of
the class. The man had been a paper-hanger, a soi-disant up-
holsterer, and a generally useless servant he proved himself to be.
He did as little work as he could contrive about the station, and as
for the garden, he never ventured to interfere with the growth of
so much as a weed. His most memorable achievement was papering
the sitting-room, of which he seemed very proud, and was inclined
to give himself airs after his work was pronounced “ very good.”
The helpmeet of this mate was as useless in her department as her
husband was in his, but her tawdry arrangements were more felt
than his out-of-door deficiencies. The rooms lost their soap-and-
water cleanliness, and the nocturnal couches became fully alive to
the want of a careful and keen-eyed inspector. Dawdling about in
half-decayed unwashed finery, she attempted innovations on the
former unpretending garniture of the house, which gave the rooms
the appearance of trying to be something—a stuck-up look very
much in keeping with her own personal appearance. Her cookery
was also a departure from the ordinary plain fare of the bush table,
but a deviation of such a sloppy, suspicious-looking sort, that made
the change anything but an agreeable one; to add to which, the
75
VISIT TO PORT-PHIIXIP.


wretched woman had a finger enveloped in a dirty rag, the con-
nection of ideas with which would have made the least fastidious
stomach feel queer at the sight of her culinary triumphs.
The next pair was as different from the two former as these
were from the Scotch couple. The man was one of the fraternity
of “ old legs,” and like all of them, took good care not to overwork
himself. He would milk the cows in the morning, and thereafter
amuse himself in the garden for the greater part of the day. He
seemed to take a great interest in the growth of plants and vege-
tables, as he was generally to be seen in a contemplative attitude,
quietly watching them as they shot up before his eyes in the warm
sunshine. “ I see you, and master sees me, so it’s all right,” he
would tell the young cabbages, for their encouragement and his
own comfort. Every now and again he would feel inclined for a
smoke, and would travel to the kitchen for a light, which, of
course, involved an argument with the “ old woman,” as he
would uxoriously term his better-half. By and by it would be
time for him to put the calves in the pen for the night, and
this done, the heavy task of the day was over. Before leaving
the station—from an expressed desire of leaving an impression
behind him when he should be ready to go —he had a pitched
battle with the overseer, whom he attacked most savagely, without
just provocation, and both came off with most hideous faces, each
claiming the victory. This led to his immediate dismissal, and
when I heard of him last, he had been tried and acquitted on a
charge of burglary. His wife; always the most important half of
the couple to the master; was a thorough specimen of Irish blarney
—a squat, stout, plain-looking “daughter of the sod.” On her
first arrival, she had somehow got influenced by the cratur, and
made a great row because “her Tom” had called her “the sorry
cook,” an injury to her character and feelings which touched her
to the quick. “Bad luck to him for a man, what would he be
without meseljf' With arms a-kimbo, smoking her doodeen, she
would sit and hold high argument with her daughter, a girl of nine
years of age, the issue of a former marriage with a property-
man, called “Bob the Sweep.” The young sweep was quite a
match for “ the parient” in the colonial supply of chaff, and would
tell her mother “that the devil would make a fine roasting of
her as soon as he had a chance.” The indignant mother, snatching
the poker, would exclaim, “Bad luck to ye, ye young divil, I’ll
knock tin pots out of ye!” but the heiress of Bob the Sweep was
not to be caught by that sort of chaff, and Tom had to be called in


to uphold the parental authority. When bringing in dinner, she
was always ready with an apt observation, such as “Here comes
the owld sheep again”—■“ Bad luck to the mustard pot, it’s tim,”
etc. No frown could suppress the familiar loquacity, and it was
no use attempting to “ put out her pipe”—she would have her say.
There was not much scrubbing or dusting done during her reign,
but she would sometimes relate, with an air of triumph, how suc-
cessful she had been in flea-hunting, and what a boomer she had
caught that morning. Some mornings when she thought I was
late in getting up, she would come to the bedroom window, and
looking in, say, “Hoch! and ye’re taking it out this morning!”
The excellent woman was very fond of taking “a slant” at the
spirit-bottle when she had a favourable opportunity, and the chink
of the glass-stopper would tell to the practised ear that another
“nobbier” had gone the way of its spirited predecessors.
After this interesting couple left, the kitchen was occupied, pro
tem., by a Devonshire couple, who were engaged on the station
in other services. The drays from town were daily expected, and
with them a new couple for the house. The woman from sweet
Devon spoke in an unknown tongue, not more than a word in a
sentence being intelligible, and we had to take it for granted that
wlrat she said was all right. I sometimes found myself addressing
her in the jargon in use with the black fellows, with whom I could
converse much more fluently than with this white lubra. On the
day that the drays arrived I had been out in the bush when they
made their appearance at the home station, and, on returning, I
perceived some one in the verandah as I approached the house. A
tall, dark, martial-looking woman confronted me, whose stern,
masculine look, together with her upright figure, clad in rusty
black, made me pull up suddenly, as if the Majesty of buried
Denmark had appeared before me. I could not conceive where
she had dropt from, and expected every moment that she would
give a wave with her hand, and order my straw-hat to be doffed
in her queenly presence. I had almost made up my mind to ask
her permission to pass into the house, when, by a bold stroke, I
addressed some words to the dog that accompanied me, and bolted
past the awful figure. I found that the drays had arrived, and,
that the tall, dark lady was the new domestic for the house.
Being the only inmate of the house at the time of her introduction,
I entertained, in spite of myself, an amusing dread of the woman.
It appeared that she and her husband had seen better days, and
had never been accustomed to bow to the yoke of servitude. She


soon took an early opportunity of letting this be known. Those sort
of characters make the worst servants any where, and it so hap-
pened that “ the Major,” as I called her, was much more inclined
to dictate, than to act upon suggestion, even from “ the master.”
Request her to boil some greens, and she would bestow upon you
a glance enough “ to cabbage your very existence,” and seemed to
say, with a dagger accompaniment, “ out upon thy recreant gizzard.”
It became a daring adventure to make a sally into the kitchen
on a hot-water mission. “ One glance of her eye, shun danger
and fly.” Het husband was next door to nobody. He was broken
down in constitution apparently, and found himself gradually get-
ting worse; owing, as he said, to his being so long habituated to
the use of spirits, which he now had to do without. He was fit for
no work but little jobs about the kitchen, and, besides being very
surly and ill-tempered, he went about with his hand on his side,
grunting sympathetically, and fancying himself and the Major very
like £BO a-year.
So far my experience of bush house domestics goes. The colo-
nists are supplied from the Government Emigration Depot. There,
married couples, or single men or women, are “ trotted out” before
you, and if, upon inspection and interrogation, the applicant, is
satisfied with any of those presented, he makes his agreement ac-
cording to circumstances. Very few of them are provided with
written characters. Ho one thinks of carrying such a thing, and,
if he or she attempted it, would be sure to lose it. In most cases
it would be necessary for those servants depending upon such tes-
timony to follow the example of the country-woman who, in cross-
ing a stream in company with a friendly male companion, had the
misfortune to let her character drop into the water, and, by way of
making up for the loss, got him to testify the event in the follow-
ing style:—“l, Jamie So-and-so, hereby declare that Jeanie
What’s-her-name lost her character when in my company.” As
there are insurmountable objections to this mode of re-instating a
lost character, such recommendation of servants is not looked for,
and the employer must take them as he finds them, and rely upon
his ’cuteness as a master.
Ho sooner do the rains of winter set in than a marked improve-
ment takes place in the appearance of the country. The thirsty
soil drinking in the out-pourings from the clouds with unmitigated
delight, gives renewed life to the scorched and jaundiced pastures
of the bush, and soon the landscape becomes of a bright, fresh
green, most grateful to the eye. Yet the progress of vegetation is


checked by cold winds and frosts, which chill the atmosphere, and
keep shrubs and plants in strict abeyance till the season becomes
more advanced. How glad one is to resort to warm clothing and
blazing fires of wood! I never enjoyed a fire in the cold winters of
my native land more than I did during my first winter in Australia.
If the rains are heavy and continuous, down comes the creek, roar-
ing and rollicking as if on “ a spree,” carrying the accumulated
rubbish of the dry season along with it. The improvement, which
the rushing waters make upon the aspect of its banks, may well be
imagined. They give life and joyousness to the landscape, and the
music of their murmur is gladdening to the heart. The muddy,
stagnant pools, or “ water-holes,” are no longer separated from each
other by the dry channels, which so lately afforded so many cross-
ing places, but are united in one common living stream, which,
rushing along round bends and between high banks, takes it more
quietly in wider and flatter parts of its course. Man and beast,
bipeds with and without feathers, animal and vegetable, all rejoice
at the meeting of the waters. Now travellers find the roads bad,
creeks dangerous, and salute each other with “ Heavy weather,
Master Noah!” drays get bogged, and bullocks get drowned, and
the arrival of the weekly post becomes a matter of great uncertainty.
We had but few visitors during winter; being on the outskirts of
the settled districts in these parts, such visitations were rare events
at any time; few and far between, like the visits of angels. As
my friend was always careful to entertain the strangers who pre-
sented themselves at his gates, it is quite, probable he entertained
angels unawares. Let me give a few specimens of the angels who
visited us in our loneliness.
A little angel, (fallen, of course,) dressed very nattily for our
part of this dirty planet, with long shiny boots, and unexception-
able coat and hat, dropped in one evening at sundown, “without
more train accompanied than with his own complete perfections.”
In himself and horse “ was all his state.” He was a medical angel,
and had newly arrived in the colony. It was his intention to settle
in the country, and prey upon the health of the settlers, so he in-
formed us, as “ awhile discourse we held, no fear lest dinner cool,”
the mutton being still at the fire; the pickles, only, on the table.
During the evening, the angel was uncommonly loquacious, and as
full of information as an egg is full of meat. But some eggs are not
to be trusted. No man, even on the brink of starvation, would eat
a nest egg, blindfolded, without some degree of diffidence. The
doctor, however, could give us—poor outcasts from the pale of


civilisation —the most correct information on every subject. A
perambulating treasury of knowledge, he would put us right,
maunder as we pleased, and largely allayed our hunger, by vouchsaf-
ing to relate things that we had hitherto found unsearchable, or had
formed erroneous ideas of. It was quite refreshing to have such
a guest in these wilds. Like dew upon the tender herb, we
felt greener and greener as he went on with his copious supplies
of knowledge, while we modestly sat and sucked our tongues.
In literary topics, the treasury of knowledge was quite complete,
and informed us, amidst a press of other matters, that Goldsmith
was the author of Johnson, and that he wrote not only the Vicar
of Wakefield, but also Kasselas. I thought I heard an invisible
angel say with a gruff voice, “ Sir, you know as much about me as
a Bandicoot.” In professional skill he was, in my opinion, per se.
“ He would have cut off my little finger,” he said, “ had he been
consulted at the time of an accident which I met with; it would
have made a much neater hand, more like a lady’s.” I could not
but feel that his departure was a loss to our part of the country,
and wondered why he had been allowed to leave his own sweet
home. Prophet-like, had he found no honour there ? and did he
expect to find either profit or honour in the bush ? False profit!
This little angel was amusing, and meant no harm, except when he
bled his patients, which he avowed was done from the best of
motives.
Another angel visited us some weeks after the little medical
one. He was manager of a small station not very far from
us, and nearer the terra incognita than we were. He was
disabled in one of his wings, unattractive in appearance, and
defective in discourse. He peered through his eyes all night
as if the candle-light had been that of the sun, and he were
soaring on one wing in the immediate vicinity of that dazzling
luminary. He was on his way to the nearest police-station, he
said, to ask for protection. A black fellow, called Bob, had
threatened violence to his person, nay, had even gone the length of
giving him a blow with his aboriginal fist upon his, the angel’s chest,
within the precincts of his own hut, and in great mental alarm, he
had fled immediately for refuge to my friend’s home-station, as he
was convinced the black fellow meant to take his life. He admired
the spirits, I recollect, and pronounced them good. He had not seen
any spirits for a long time, and we gave credence to this, as he
looked so very much out of spirits when he arrived. Poor little
angel! he rubbed his lame wing, and went early to his angelic


couch, and vanished in the morning; not at cock-crow, (we had
no cock-crow; ours were all hens,) hut after early dejeuner.
This brought to us, some days after, two police angels, a cadet
and a trooper, who stayed a night with us on their way to the
little lame angel’s abode. He had been successful in his mission,
and had persuaded the authorities to let him have the protection of
the two police angels for a time. They took up their abode with
him for a week, and reassured the little lame angel that Ms other
wing was quite safe. The trooper was tall and well-looking, the
cadet not remarkable for Ms appearance; but the trooper informed
me that Ms (the cadet’s) orthography was remarkable, and showed
unmistakeable evidence of the want of a schoolmaster. He was
an Irish angel; was the cadet, and entertained us with bulls; not
that lie meant to cow us but just because he couldn’t dis-
guise the nature of the animal, and from whence he came.
He was very well bred with all Ms bulls, and being Irish,
we could not find fault with Mm if his tales were not always
well adjusted. The trooper-angel had been a settler in Hew
Zealand at first, but the purchase of some unavailable land in
that colony bad so far settled his prospects that he had become
unsettled in his mind, and had come to the gold colony, expecting
to settle it at the diggings, but finding that wouldn’t do, he had
taken it to the police-office, as a dernier ressort. He told me
that he had called at a squatter’s residence on one occasion, when
he was entertained by the lady, in the absence of her lord, and was
seated at dinner, when his lordship came in, and asked him if he
were a cadet-angel. He said “No.” “Then,” said Ms lordship,
“ your proper place is the kitchen.” That since then he had been
very careful to intimate, on his arrival at a squatter’s residence,
that he was only a trooper, as he did not care about a bloody
parlour. Not being a murderer or butcher of any kind, I quite
coincided' with Mm, that a parlour was not to be coveted in
that state, and that he should always show his own feathers, and
not borrow those of a cadet, to the danger of being plucked and
exposed, wMch would make any angel feel particularly awkward
and fallen very low.
There was a parson-angel, who visited us but rarely, like all
good angels, who make themselves scarce. He lived more than a
score of miles from us, on that sweet river called the Avoca where
he had bis parsonage, or vicarage, Ms wife and family, a horse,
some cows, and a pig with a broken leg, of which last-mentioned
Cr
81
VISIT TO PORT- PHILLIP.


possession he seemed very fond, and showed it to me with pride
and affection, because it wasn’t a tithe-pig, I suppose. He at-
tempted to establish at his place a Hotheboy’s Hall for educational
purposes, where young Australia might be taken in and done for
on the most scientific principles. His wife, from her superior
accomplishments, was made Principal of the New College, whether
from want of principle on his part I don’t exactly know, but he
took a fatherly interest in the concern, which added considerably
to his credit on the Ayoca. This alma mater had got two aspiring
youths under petticoat government when I visited her abodes of
learning. They wandered about her academic groves, ate her
mutton, and drank of her classic pools, to the tune of £9O
a-year.
As I said before, this parson-angel rarely visited us. He said
ours was a God-forsaken country, and did not agree with his
ministering functions, except upon occasions of baptism or marriage,
which latter ceremony he naively called “putting together.”
When he said this he would put his hand upon his pocket in a blunt
manner, expressive of his feelings. He was a queer angel, this
parson. He was dressed quite k la mode when he favoured our
benighted land with his luminous presence. His black clothes and
white neckcloth were the most clerical-looking part of him, and gave
rise to a profane remark from the Irish-woman in the kitchen,
that give her these garments, she could putt people together
as well as his riverence could. This showed a want of piety
on her part, which is remarkable, as she came out strong in
pies as a cook. He was an Independent, he said, which he
looked every inch, except when he wanted something, such as a
christening fee, or his dinner. His face, which was of a studious
yellow colour, was surmounted by a short crop of black hair,
slightly grey, and brushed up erect off his clerical brow into little
tufts. He would look at you with his little eyes, in a peeping
way, as if there were a door or some other obstruction between you
and him, and he were trying to see you through a crack or a chink;
and he did look very like an angel who would look through a key
hole upon occasion. Small in stature, and rather angular in figure,
he fitted a corner admirably, and he seemed to know it, which was
clever. He would sit for hours in the most orthodox position iri
quiet commune with his thoughts, for which I never knew any one
rashly offer him so much as a penny. I wondered why he thought
so much when he must have found thinking so unprofitable, but,
probably, his studies did not reach farther than his wide-awake.
82
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


I came to this conclusion by observing a knowing weasel-like
twinkle of the eye which quickly said, “I’m all there,” as he looked
into the crown of his black wide-awake. In conversation his
countenance was very animated. If you made an observation to
him, he would give his head a knowing cock, open his eyes wide,
turn up his eyebrows, and exclaim, “Indeed! ha! hear! hear!”
He seldom entered deeper into colloquy than that, but that was
sufficiently expressive, and very lively for the bush. If you asked
him to drink wine during dinner, he would say, with his favourite
expression of countenance, “ No, I thank you, not at present,” and
shortly after help himself to himself. No doubt he thought it
heathenish to drink wine with another, at all events papistical,
prelatical, erastian—anything but like an independent who does
things in the plainest way, except when he has a double end in
view, and then he may dodge a little, but still it is the independent
dodge. He smoked, too, a little, but rather spasmodically, like an
old chimney which had lost the draught. He visited us twice
while I was in that part of the country, and on both occasions on
Sundays. They were professional visits, when he did a stroke of
business at “puttings together,” and baptisms. He intimated his
intentions of preaching on both occasions, but he could not
persuade any one to come near enough to hear him. Some
undiscerning people who had once had that privilege, gave it out
that his sermons were more trying to the risible, than improving
to the mental faculties, and that it was a duty not to encourage
him. This was cutting it very unkindly, but, true to his indepen-
dence, he did not let the vulgar neglect prey on his damask cheek,
but meekly composed himself for dinner. He was fond, passionate-
ly fond of music, and after dinner called upon me to favour him on
the accordion. In consideration of his white neckcloth and other
independent clerical claims upon the regulation of the programme
for a Sunday evening, I asked him what he would like to have.
He hummed, squeakingly, what he called a little hymn tune,
which I accompanied with ready ear, and a vain attempt at
gravity. He was delighted, it was angelic, as unlike a cathedral
chant as possible, quite independent in its style. This finished to
his entire satisfaction, he called upon me for “any sort of tune.”
I then gave him, by way of variety, “We won’t go home till
morning,” “ Uncle Ned,” and some others, with all of which he
expressed himself pleased. “Indeed! ha! no harm in a tune, no!
hear! hear!” Some malicious people said that he turned up his
angelic little finger too often, but he always kept his thumb upon
83
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


that when I saw it, so I gave him the benefit of a doubt.
No doubt, it was just another of his independent ways of going
on. I enjoyed this angel’s visits very much.
There were squatting angels who sometimes favoured ns with
visits, and these, though few in number, were very unlike each
other, except in their ideas, which were almost unexceptionably
“ sheepish,” as was but natural, considering that they all came from
distant fleecy regions. But it was melancholy to learn from them
that they were all more or less scabby, and had been dipping in
arsenic and sulphur, which gave them a lucifer-spunky smell, and
made one feel infernally restless beside them. There were some who
talked a great deal about making new rivers, a proposal which
appeared to me to smack of impiety, and to carry with it a cutting
reflection on the original plan of that part of the world, and a sort
of daring attempt at wholesale improvement, which I thought very
unbecoming the position of squatting angels, and that it savoured
of a withered, dried-up, well-less interior. There was one who
had an enlarged mind, which led him to take more extended
views of his own run than exactly suited his neighbour’s confined
ideas on the subject. Setting aside these engrossing peculiarities,
these angels were well enough in private, with the exception of
one who was said to be a bit of a nipper , from which I think he
must have been an arch- angel.
A squatting-angel alighted among us for a few hours, who told
us that he had been accosted two days before by a notorious bush-
ranger, called Bill the Native, who had met the angel in a plain
not very far from us. The bushranger ordered him to dismount,
and take off his boots, coat, and trousers, all of which he politely
complied with. The angel said he was more annoyed at the pro-
spect of losing his horse, which he valued much, than at being left
to wander about the bush bare naked. He would not admit that
he was afraid of his life, but remonstrated calmly with the bush-
ranger about the impropriety of his conduct, without effect at
first. But it so happened, luckily for him, that the bushranger
had been in search of another squatter, on whom “he said he had
a down,” and on finding out that the angel was not he that he
was in search of, told him that he might put on his clothes again,
and go on his way rejoicing. Some days after this we learned that
Bill the Native had been taken by a party who were in pursuit of
him. He was found concealed under a bed, and surrendered him-
self without showing any pluck. He had been the alarm of the
neighbouring country for some time, making ladies and timid
84
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


people feel very queer, one individual in particular being very
much alarmed lest he should
“ With a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his wezand with a knife.”
There was a tall dark angel alighted at our gates one evening,
who told us that he had but lately arrived in the colony, and was
on his way to a station some miles beyond us, or, in fact, at the back
of beyond. He breathed very hard, and in doing so, emitted a
sound very much resembling a steamer in a gale of wind, so much
so that he was referred to by the name of “ the Steamer” ever
after. He looked like an angel who had seen better days, like
some other angels of whom we read.
These were some of the angelic visitors who enlightened our dark-
ness during my residence in the hush. They came at long intervals,
rested for a night, and soared away next morning, leaving no trace
of their visits behind them, with the exception of what might be
found in our memories and in our noses, which would retain a
smell of sulphur for some time. They broke in upon our solitude;
and the evenings on which we were so favoured, furnished us with
a few extra ideas for a time.
I must make room for the doctor of the district before closing
this part of my subject. He was our most frequent visitor, and
though his errands were generally those of mercy, yet he got paid
for them, which fact clearly disentitles him to be characterised
as an angel, of whom I never knew it to be recorded that they
made any charge for a visit. The doctor was of German parentage,
but had first seen the light of day in Labrador, where the intense
cold had untimely checked his growth, as with his boots on, and his
little figure erect, he could not attain more at a stretch than four
feet and a-half of longitude. His latitude was a little more in
proportion, and his short legs, when seated on a common chair,
would not permit him to rest them on the ground, but would keep
him, like a good little boy, raised high above the lower world.
His trousers were always turned up at the foot about half way up
his leg. On his nose he wore a pair of spectacles, or glasses, as he
called them, through which he looked like a daddy owl. Long
straight black hair fell down upon the cuff of his coat, and some-
times shaded one-half of his bird-like features —not ambrosial
looks, nor such as would adorn a Samson, or excite the itching
fingers of a Delilah, but such as were more likely to excite his
own fingers to take a quiet scratch now and again when no Delilah
85
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


■was looking. And Delilahs were rare in the bush. The doctor’s
general appearance suggested to the observing mind a want of
soap. He contrived to shave his face, cheeks and all, at times, but
as he did not make this a regular part of his toilet, the returning
crop of black bristles did not add to the cleanliness of a person
which naturally required more than ordinary attention to make it
look respectable. As a set-off to this, the little man’s shirt appeared
as changeful as the skin of snake, only to be doffed when the old
one is ready to be superseded by a fresh one. These too, too
prominent defects in his person gained for him the name of “ the
dirty little doctor,” and made him by no means the most agreeable
companion, fireside or professional. Against such a visitor certain
precautions were necessary for preserving the sanctity of tooth or
hair brushes, combs or towels. Setting aside these personal pecu-
liarities—and it was no pleasure to be set beside them—the little
doctor was unobtrusive in his manner, and did not want ideas in
his repulsive-looking head. As to his medical skill, I cannot say
more than that if he did not do much good, he did but little harm,
which cannot be always said of members of his profession. Some
of his patients, who got better somehow or other, thought him a
rare little doctor, while others who wouldn't get better, looked upon
him as a regular little humbug, who would give them nothing but
powders, composed of sugar and cinnamon, and look at them
through his glasses, and talk broken English like any parrot. At
meals he would dig away at his food, the back of his fork turned
towards him, in no very elegant manner, and was particularly
desirous of making himself useful in cutting you a junk of bread if
you should happen to express a wish for that article when in his
neighbourhood. The doctor was well posted up in historical
matters, among which the fader-land, of course, held the first place,
and there the little man was companionable, but his broken
English and German gutturals made bis conversation resemble an
attempt at an agreeable promenade on an unfinished pathway,
its frequent deficiencies obliging you to leave the pavement and
get among the gutters, where there was nothing but “durty
vasser.” He used to come and go very quietly, so much so, that
you might suddenly come upon him when in the act of using your
hair-brush in face of the looking-glass, before you had received
other notice of his arrival, or see his grey mare’s tail disappearing
among the distant timber before you were otherwise warned of his
departure. He was a great smoker, and was sometimes very much
perplexed to get a glimpse of his tobacco pipe when it happened
86
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


to be placed out of his reach or beyond his gaze on the chimney-
piece. The assistance of a stool would have been necessary for an
accurate survey of the premises; and I have often seen him, in this
predicament, stretching himself to his utmost height, and trying to
make out whether the object of his search was on the table-land,
which was just level with his eyes. “ Das is coorius,” he would
say. “What are you looking for, doctor?” “Awh! mein pipe,
but I tink das is not hare.” “ Das ” would be lying in the back-
ground of the level plain, alongside of a fig of tobacco, amidst a
confusion of all sorts of things; and no very inviting object to look
at, much less to touch, taste, or handle, was the doctorial pipe.
With such and such like guests did Providence or chance furnish
us in the wilderness to break in upon our evenings of almost un-
varying monotony. It was in vain at times to attempt among
ourselves what could be called a conversation. Our galvanic
attempts would startle for the moment to be succeeded by a death-
like stillness. All our worn-out subjects would produce yawn upon
yawn, “ tedious as a twice-told tale, vexing the dull ear of a drowsy
man.” The utter prostration of mind which we experienced, made
us at times the subject of laughter to ourselves. Books we had,
but these oft read, failed at times to regain the necessary current
of attention, and after renewed attacks, would be relinquished
in despair. I repeatedly found myself seated for an hour over a
book without ever having turned the page during that time. Oh
Zimmerman! what would you have recommended? No wonder
solitaries and hermits resort to flagellations to fill up their vacant
hours, and drive them on with the lash. If one could bring him-
self to bear it, it might be as good a way as any for backing out
against time—a little lively excitement to look forward to, during
the dull days of the bush.
87
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLTP.


CHAPTER THE SIXTH.
SPRING —ITS NIGHTS AND MORNINGS —NIGHT IN THE RAINT SEASON —
BLACK BELLOWS—DR SYNTAX—DR CCOBHAM—SIR ASTLET COOPER
PRINCE JAMIE —DUCK SHOOTING—BLACK SWANS — SHEEP SHEARING
SHEPHERDS —A PASTORAL.
During the spring months, the bush is very pleasant. A change
so great comes over the scene, that it almost seems a different
creation from that which you have been looking upon for so
many months with weary eyes and sickening heart. The rains
have made nature fresh and fair everywhere, and the warm
rays of the sun temper the atmosphere to a state something very
akin to perfection, invigorating to the body, and exhilarating to
the spirits. The dreariest plain puts on a gay and smiling face,
presenting to the eye a verdant carpet, variegated with yellow and
white flowers, intermixed with blue and purple. The forests resound
with the merry voices of birds. The golden blossom of the wattle,
midst the stately gum, sombre he-oak, and feathery pine, gives a gay
holiday aspect to the stern primeval wilds, and greets the passing
traveller with a grateful fragrance, while innumerable little flower-
ing shrubs and plants, which at other seasons of the year shrink
from the gaze, put forth all their energies to add their quota of
bloom, in honour of nature’s renaissance. The agricultural and
horticultural labours of man reap their reward. Cultivation
paddocks assume a rich green—the most brilliant emerald in all
the surrounding landscape. The garden seeds sown in the dry
and unquickening soil, spring up with amazing rapidity, and
quickly maturing, furnish a most welcome addition to the domestic
meal. Well-kept gardens now reward their tasteful possessors
with all their variety of leaf and flower. Delicate creepers, no
longer under the influences of drought or frost, decorate verandahs
in luxuriant wreaths, intertwined with roses and other climbing
plants; while the neat parterres present a variety of hues, and
forms of gaiety and beauty. Let me not forget the budding
vines, yielding promise to the cultivator of refreshment to the


thirsty soul when vegetation begins to shrivel up under the wither-
ing hot winds of summer. Universal nature is in holiday attire.
Pity that the holiday should be so brief!
At this season of the year, the nights in Australia are most
beautiful. There is a delightful freshness in the air, and “ the fair
moon, and these the gems of heaven, her starry train,” shine with
a glorious brilliancy. In the silent night when
“Reigns
Full orb’d the moon, and -with more pleasing light,
Shadowy sets off the face of things,”
the landscape partakes more of a graceful character than in the full
glare of sunlight. The moonlight sleeps on the open plain, and the
flood of silvery light throws an air of enchantment on surround-
ing objects. How distinctly the trunk of each tree is shadowed out
among the wide-spreading timber, and how softly the light falls
down among the huge branches of the old warrior gum-trees,
making their white bark gleam like silver mail, while “the sweet
wind doth gently kiss them,” and they tell no tales! The opossum
comes out of his sleeping quarters in the hollow trunk, and keeps
larking about till morning. Occasionally the cry of some water-
fowl is heard, as it gives its voice to “the stilly night,” while
winging its flight down the course of the creek. A flock of black
swans, high overhead, is sailing majestically in the moonbeams, with
outstretched necks, silently intent on forming a supper party down
at the swamp —the supper to consist of frogs which are making a
tremendous row, as if there were no one in the world but themselves,
altogether regardless of the feathered gentlemen on the spree, who
are making all sail to gobble them up List! some little bird
awakes out of sleep, and thinking it is day, tunes its notes for a
time, until finding out its mistake, it feels abashed, and quickly
hides its head under wing again. So nature dreams and wakes,
and dreams again in these solitudes until morning dawns.
In the rainy season, “ when night’s pitchy mantle over-veils the
earth,” the screaming curlew sends his wild cry on the dreary blast,
and all around is mist and blackness. Amidst the surrounding
gloom the camp fires of the blacks are visible, making the darkness
still more palpable; and the wild melancholy song which the natives
indulge in during the earlier part of the night, and which they
accompany by beating sticks together in time to their wailing music,
gives a strange unearthly effect to the scene, as if the voices of
the dead were mourning over the extinction of their race. By and
by all is silent, save the dripping rain and the howling wind, as it


rayes around the house, and drives on amidst the neighbouring
timber.
The early mornings in spring-time are very delightful. Nature,
wet with dew, sparkles joyously in the morning sun. There is a
grand chorus of birds, some of them having beautiful clear notes,
though in general not much variety of song. The magpie, one of
the most common birds in the country, has a very peculiar falsetto
note, and in the early morning carries on an extensive conversation
with its better-half, which it is extremely difficult to listen to in bed,
and makes one feel that it is time to be up; and the bright
sunshine glancing through the green creepers on the verandah,
invites you “to rise up and come away, for, lo! the winter is past,
the rain is over and gone, and the time of the singing of birds is
come.” But what is the good of getting up? it only makes the day
longer, and, consequently, more difficult to get over. So I would
reason with the magpie, and try to shut my eyes upon the clear
bright morning light; but it was no use —sleep was over, and I
would lie until I could lie no longer. So up at last and down
to the creek for a dip. How glorious is the morning, the air fresh
and inspiriting! Up get a covey of teal as I approach the fallen
tree where I usually bathe. “Once more in to the hreech,
dear friends, once more.” Ugh! how cold the water is. Look
out for leeches! Faugh! there’s a monster sticking to me, in
size like an eel, and as ugly as sin. The water is so muddy there
is no seeing what is in it, and doubtless hundreds of leeches and
cray-fish surround me, ready to feed fat the precious grudge they
bear me for private reasons of their own. No very pleasant idea;
so out I get again in double quick time, quite satisfied with my
plunge. The muddy hue of the water does most decidedly detract
from the pleasures of a bath in the Richardson, not to speak of the
leeches. The cray-fish is the only fish known to exist in its waters,
if I may except a small specimen of the finny tribe which was found
on one occasion, resembling somewhat the perch, and was new
to the oldest inhabitant, including the blackest. The cray-fish are
good eating, and can be got in any quantity.
In the garden I contrived to find occupation for some of my
superabundant hours, and, with the assistance of a couple of black
fellows, attempted some improvement upon its general appearance.
The black fellows had to be coaxed into working humour. One of
them, called Doctor Syntax, was my head-man; and it was only by
means of donations of tobacco and old clothes, andthe promise of “big
one money,” that I could get him on with the work. He was particu-
90
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


larly fond of stopping to have a “yabber” about his pecuniary-
prospects, or the magnitude of the undertaking which the extent of
the yet unweeded ground presented to his aboriginal gaze, and would
mark off with his spade in the morning what he meant to do during
the day in the way of weeding, but sometimes “picaninny sun”
came long before Syntax had completed his self-allotted daily task.
“The ground was hig one hard, and his back was hig one tired,”
he would tell me; but, take him all in all, Syntax was as conscien-
tious a worker as most of the white men on the station. His spade
broke down with him one day, and he came to tell me, with a
sparkle in his eye, that “ the hades was no good.” He expected that
with this event his labours would terminate, but I found him
another spade, to his disappointment. He would philosophise on
the utility of the work in which he was engaged, and, with all my
reasoning, I could scarcely bring him to admit that “ white fellow
was not big one stoopid to plenty work like it that along o’ garden.”
The prospect of money was the Doctor’s most convincing argument
for digging up the weeds. “He must have all done by a certain big
one Sunday,” he would tel] me, “as Wimmerablack fellow would
come barley then, and then black fellow all pull away along Avoca,
and then big one corrobary.” I admitted the propriety of this,
and urged him to go a-head. He would sometimes suggest a little
grog as a great stimulus to active exertion, and would suck over
any quantity, with sparkling eyes and the most profound relish,
making the spade move in double quick time while the exhilaration
lasted. While Dr Syntax was engaged in his horticultural labours
he was visited by numbers of his sable friends, who came to help
him to do nothing, for whenever they appeared the Doctor dropped
his spade like a hot potatoe. Among others came Dr Cooper, or,
as I used to call him, Sir Astley Cooper. His only piece of dress,
with the exception of a blue cloth cap on his head, was a shooting-
coat, which with difficulty enclosed his round figure, and gave him
quite a professional air. One of his legs was a good deal thicker
than the other, owing, I suppose, to some disease which his medical
science could not master. His salutation to me was always, “Well,
maboy!” which he accompanied with a laugh that opened his
mouth from ear to ear, and showed a good set of grinders. To a
question to which he was not ready with an answer, he would
reply, with an air of easy indifference, “ I din know,” and upon
receipt of a bit of baccy he would express his complete satisfaction
by the flattering compliment meant for my brother and myself,
that “ there was no gammon alon ’ two fellow Dobie.” Poor
91
VISIT TO POET-PHILLIP.


Sir Astley died before I left the station, but as the blacks were
always averse to speak of the dead, I could not learn any particulars
of his end. Doctor Cobham was another of my most intimate
aboriginal acquaintances. He had lost an eye, which gave him a
very comical expression, and added somewhat to the effect which
his appearance generally produced upon my risible faculties. He was
particularly fond of devouring cabbages, which he preferred raw, and
ate them up where they grew, with great gusto. Some people like
gooseberries and strawberries just as they are pulled, and Dr Cob-
bam’s relish for cabbage was “ off the bush.” He would crunch
away at the green stuff with the relish of a cow or pig, and exclaim
every now and then, with a twinkle of the remaining orb,
“ Merrijig old man cabbage! ” He paid me daily visits for a time,
and on his first appearance for the day would start back, place
himself in a theatrical attitude, with his hands over his face, and
then burst out with “ Old man cabbage! ” and a loud laugh.
There was something so irresistibly comical about Dr Cobham that
he became my most esteemed friend among the aborigines. He
seemed more susceptible of humour than most of his tribe. I
consulted him professionally one day, showing him a wounded
finger. He looked at it very seriously, put it close to his ear, then
looked with his one eye at the sun, and told me that I would
“ quamby ” dead in three months. I expressed my disbelief, and said
that he was “only gammon.” He shook his head very seriously,
and intimated that he “ knew white fellow shepherd who had
finger like it mine, and he quamby dead in three months.”
But he added, and this was my saving clause, “me come barley
piccaninny time, and suck ’im blood and water, then all gone sick.”
He disappeared for a short time, and when he came back he took
my hand, and sucked it on the palm and on the back, and spat out
a mouthful of blood. This he did two or three times, with the
same wonderful result, accompanying his mysterious movements
with a most sagacious look at the sun now and again, as if he were
taking that luminary’s idea of the matter. After a time he let go
my hand, and pronounced, with great emphasis, that the cure was
effected. “ Borak, you quamby dead, me suck ’im blood and water,
and all pull away.” From my countenance he seemed to guess
that I was up to his dodge, but he tried a grave face all through
the performance. It is their common practice, when any of their
tribe is unwell, for one of their gifted men to pretend to suck blood
from the invalid, and in this way their doctors have power to cure
diseases and sickness of all kinds. Of course it is necessary for the


doctor quietly to cut his gums before commencing operations, so as
to furnish a sufficient quantity of blood for his purpqse, and this
he spits out, as if he had really sucked it through the skin of the
patient. On my sounding Dr Syntax about Dr Cohham’s cure, he
gravely assured me that it was “merrijig” (very good), and that
“black fellow doctor was far better than white fellow doctor.” In
proof of which he would say, “ Borak you ever see black fellow with
waddie (wooden) leg. Bungalallee white fellow doctor cut him leg,
borak black fellow stupid like it that.” I asked him how it was that
he and Cobham were doctors, and if it were the other black fellows
who made them doctors, by which I meant to inquire if they had
passed any examinations, or obtained a diploma at Bungalallee
(stupid) college. He said that some black fellows were doctors
naturally, and that they were known as such by certain marks
about them, which he either would not or could not explain. So
a black doctor, according to Syntax, is like a white poet, nascitur,
non fit.
The black fellows now-a-days are a very harmless set, whatever
they may have been when the whites were first introduced to them,
and they furnished me amusement when amusement was a scarce
luxury. They were but rarely guilty of a misdemeanor, and so
far as honesty and trustworthiness go, were seemingly equal at all
events to their white brothers. They live together in tribes,
which belong to different parts of the country, and congregate
as one large family. Fast dying out from various causes, a few
years will make a considerable change in their numbers. They
were by no means fond of what we would call work, but would
have no objections, if it suited their inclinations, to take a gun
and some powder and shot, and go in search of wild turkey or
duck, and they were generally successful in bringing home some-
thing. I have, however, known instances where powder and shot
were furnished to the black sportsmen, which brought no return at
all, neither in the shape of game nor hunter. There was one
big strong fellow, called Bob, who more than once played this
trick, and who was generally considered to be “no good,” as he
himself would have expressed it. This Bob did not bear the best
of characters. He was said to have aided and abetted the murder
of a white man who had been killed by the blacks, and was at
times, when opportunity favoured him, inclined to enforce exactions
of flour or tobacco upon solitary shepherds. On one occasion, during
my residence there, the home station was thrown into some little
excitement by the rather threatening manifestations of a black-
93
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


fellow, called Tommy, who frightened the overseer’s wife one night
when she was alone in the hut, with her young children. Her
husband was absent on a cattle hunting expedition, and was not
expected home for a day or two. Tommy had always home the
character of being a very quiet, inoffensive black fellow, and on
that account was frequently employed in trifling jobs about the
station. His lubra was generally about the overseer’s hut, dur-
ing the day, assisting his wife to wash, etc. Tommy had
been absent for some days, but returning on the night in
question, he suddenly presented himself at the window of the over-
seer’s hut, and alarmed the inmates by his wild looks and threaten-
ing gestures, shaking his spear at the overseer’s wife in a somewhat
wicked manner. She demanded of him what he wanted, but
he only replied by a repetition of fierce and savage movements,
breaking several panes of glass in the window with the point of
his spear. There were two black lubras in the hut at the time;
one of them the lubra of Tommy, who concealed herself in a back
apartment, in terror of her wild lord. The overseer’s wife got
very much alarmed, and contrived to get out of the hut and to
reach another hut which was a few hundred yards distant, where
she roused out the inhabitants to come to the rescue —a movement
which was the means of calling out the whole effective force of the
station, which at the time, being then sheep-shearing, was pretty
considerable. A hawker was also there who made himself con-
spicuous by valorous words, and the superior wisdom of his
tactics. He told us that he had been in some great encounter with
blacks, where deeds of unprecedented prowess had been performed
by him, to the great discomfiture of the hostile aborigines. A
large party mustered at the overseer’s hut, and guns and ammunition
were brought out and prepared for immediate action. By this timo
black Tommy had taken himself off, but it was resolved that for
the sake of intimidating, and mayhap capturing the enemy, that a
hostile demonstration should be made on our part, and a brave and
gallant party, headed by the redoubtable hawker, volunteered as a
forlorn hope to march musket in hand upon the camp of the enemy,
and there demand as prisoner the recreant Tommy. The hawker
looked pale and serious, and another youth of the forlorn party, a
new arrival, solemnly besought his oompanions-in-arms that there
should be “no unnecessary bloodshed.” Meanwhile a party
remained to secure the overseer’s hut and family in case of attack.
About an hour elapsed from the time the forlorn hope set out until
its return. They reported that they had visited the camp, but had
94
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


had no need for the use of their weapons of warfare, as all there
seemed peaceably inclined. Of black Tommy they neither saw nor
could learn anything. The night was pitch dark, and doubtless
he was dodging about the bush in the neighbourhood of the camp;
but they might have as well attempted to look for a needle in a
hay stack, and as for his black comrades; honour bright! they
would say nothing about him. Some of our party volunteered to
garrison the hut till morning dawned, and daylight should assure
its inhabitants that Tommy would not dare to show himself again.
On the third day after this adventure the overseer returned home,
and on learning the story from his wife, he took a double-barrelled
gun and rode to the blacks’ camp—there he found Tommy, who at
once gave himself up as a prisoner, and preceded the overseer on
foot to his hut, where he was chained and padlocked like a con-
demned felon. Tommy looked lugubrious enough as a captive,
and would give no other explanation of his improper conduct, than
that he had returned from an unsuccessful foray in the bush, so
“ big one hungry,” that he had appeared before the window of the
hut and asked for food. He said “he was big one sore along o’
belly for want of food.” The truth was, that Tommy wanted his
lubra out of the hut where she had taken refuge from conjugal wrath
—Desdemona-like, the victim of the green-eyed monster jealousy.
Tommy was liberated after a couple of days’ confinement and
threats of hanging. Some of the lubras got hold of the key of the
padlock, and the chains fell from Tommy’s legs, and off he set like
a liberated deer. I never saw him again, but I have no doubt that his
Desdemona regained his affections, and as the story-book ends, that
“ they are both now living together in naked peace and happiness.”
I never knew an instance of the natives of a tribe quarrelling
among themselves, if I except one or two occasions when the excite-
ment produced by grog was the cause. They then made a great
noise, but that was the worst of it. They are very careful of their
sick, and when the parents get old and unable to look out food for
themselves, their children invariably supply their wants. They
have a great terror of hostile tribes, and are careful when night
comes on to join their camp for mutual protection. But hostile
meetings are rare now, and, in fact, never take place. I have
Often heard them express their hostility to neighbouring tribes,
but it never went farther. Their days of warfare are o’er, and
their greatest enemies are themselves—the miserable remnant of
a people who must be placed low in the scale of intellectual
creation. Their favourite dress is a blanket, which they wear
95
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


round their persons in not an ungraceful manner. When not
supplied by the white settlers they are but ill fed, their chief food
being the opossum, and wild roots and herbs. The supply of these
is very precarious, and for some days together the poor devils have
to exist without a bellyful. When hard pressed by hunger, they
are very anxious to get a job from the white fellows, such as cutting
firewood, or stripping bark, but they soon tire of the least approach
to thraldom, and prefer their wild independence to regular employ-
ment, and comparatively good living. The wild human animal
will not be induced to part with his native birthright for a mess of
pottage, and although he may serve you for a time, yet it always
proves in the end that the influences of nature are stronger than
the, temptations of accident. Like almost all other savage races,
they are particularly fond of “ grog,” and will give it a preference
to any other thing, if offered to them. The consequences of such
an attachment are very decidedly evil, as many have become the
victims of “fire-water;” and the opening up of diggings in so
many localities furnishes so many traps of this kind to the wretched
natives, that both male and female of them are but too frequent
visitors at the public-houses. Disease fastens on both sexes, and
will ultimately be the means of completely exterminating the
whole race. I recollect questioning a black fellow, called Mickey,
as to what had become of his gun. He told' me, with a laugh,
that he had got grog for it at the public-house. Another, called
Prince Albert, who had a young lubra, not bad-looking for her
race, had become the happy possessor of a gun, through means of
favours bestowed by his wife at the Diggings, and which his Royal
Highness seemed to think was a highly proper mode of obtaining
the weapon. One black fellow, called Prince Jamie, was the most
cunning-looking of his race I ever saw; and Jamie had frequently
shown himself in a way that did not make him altogether an object
of trust to white men. Jamie was not insensible to humour, and
would mimic, in a very ludicrous manner, some of the proceedings
at the aboriginal protection establishment. He would commence
with an imitation of the chanting of the service, in a reverent
attitude, and with an attempt at grave looks. He would then
wind up in solemn accents with these words, “As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever s’all be, world without end, amen.
Xo give it grog, no give it flour, cabbage baccy, b the
money!” Who had taught Jamie this, I don’t know; but he
would give it con amove, and his performance was Repeatedly
encored—a tribute to his accomplishments to which he seemed well
96
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


accustomed. He would sometimes come in upon us and find us all
deep in books. Jamie would look very grave, and say, “Big one
Sunday this—plenty read ’im book or big one Massa (looking up
to the sky as he spoke), big one sulky.” Jamie was a knowing
dodger, and knew very well how to play his black cards.
In the bush there are no unfailing sources of occupation. You
cannot always be among cabbages and cauliflowers, and they will
go to pot and to seed, the inevitable fate of all maturity; but you
may take your gun and go up the creek side or down to the swamps
and “look out duck”—you may not have great sport, but, at all
events, you will have a walk, which at this season is agreeable,
and a look at the water, which, although it be not possessed of
many beauties, yet has its pretty bends and picturesque nooks.
Along its banks, old gum-trees never tire of looking at themselves
in its muddy mirror. In some places the bank is high above the bed
of the creek, in others, nearly on a level with the water. Look out!
a large flock of wood duck, with their peculiar wild cry, flies above
your head, and is coming down the course of the creek towards
you. Bang! bang! the devil’s in the birds'—they won’t come
down. What a row the white parrots are making on these tall
gum-trees along the water’s edge, every one talking and no one
listening except yourself, and you can hear nothing but their hulli-
baloo! You are thirsting for blood after the uncourteousness of the
wood duck, and you are resolved to have your revenge on the
chattering mob. You empty both barrels at them, and bring down
with a thump as many as will furnish soup for the establishment
for dinner. “Just like hare soup,” the Major’s man says, who has
learned the art of making it to perfection on Sydney side, and not
bad soup, mind you, though, as to resembling hare soup, Caesar and
Pompey very much alike, specially Pompey. What a chattering
the poor wounded devils make as “Fiddle” jumps about them with
wicked joy, and gets bit on the nose occasionally by an exasperated
parrot! The noise above head is redoubled,, and away they go in
hundreds with their short heavy flutter, making the clear air ring
with their sharp cry. You leave the noise, or the noise leaves you
rather, and you proceed farther up the creek. At that sudden bend
there is a whole lot of black duck and teal sunning themselves on
the bank. Down on your marrow hones! If they get the smallest
inkling of your presence, it’s all up. You approach cautiously,
under cover of the timber or scrub, and, when you reach within
shot, quietly make your observations. See! a couple of teal is in
H
97
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


the water, now, between these dead branches, and is swimming to
and from the sleepy group on shore. By and by they waddle ont
and join the rest. You take your aim. What a stretching of
necks, quacking, and fluttering, as your shot astonishes their weak
nerves! Off go the survivors up the creek as swift as arrows. You
approach to learn your success. A couple of black duck lies dead,
one bird on the bank, the other in the water, which Fiddle gallantly,
or rather gracefully brings out to you, and lays at your feet with
infinite satisfaction, looking up into your face for approval. You
proceed farther up the creek, and pass the ruins of an old wool
shed, but the game seems to have taken the alarm, as you get not
another chance until you are past the dipping tanks, when you
come upon some teal taking their afternoon’s cruise in loving couples.
‘ ‘ Down Fid.!” The bank, where you are, is pretty high, but thickly
covered with scrub, among which you conceal yourself and await
your chance. You look down upon the game, which is cruising
about in the bright declining sunshine. Bang! there they are over
your head! Bang! A wounded bird is in the water, and, as soon as
Fiddle makes towards it, it dives out of sight. But Fid. is not to be
done, but swims about till the bird appears again in another part
of the pool, when off she makes for it again. It dives, but soon re-
appears. It is showing symptoms of giving in, and after sundry
little goes at hide-and-seek, Fid. grabs the little bird and brings it
on shore. By this time you will have had enough of walking, and,
it is to be hoped, satisfied with your sport, as, rest assured, you
are in more than ordinary luck, as you may walk over the same
ground again without seeing any thing. However, as there is
“piccaninny sun” yet, you can return by the water’s edge and take
what chance may offer. How quiet the banks are in the golden
light of declining day, and how fresh and cool the air is! There is
a long-legged, flesh-coloured crane just by that old hurdle on the
opposite bank. There he is rising up before you, but don’t trouble
him, he is all legs and feathers, and it’s no use wasting powder and
shot on him. Stop! there is a whole lot of wood duck along the
water’s edge, get alongside as quietly as possible, under cover of
that fallen tree. There you have them, my word! What a mob,
and how they are chaffing each other! There! you have settled a
brace of them. They are not so good eating as the black duck or
teal, but make a good change from the everlasting greasy mutton.
You get home about sundown, in good time for dinner. How
beautifully the level rays of* the sun are gilding the old he-oaks
and gum-trees, making their old rusty foliage look quite regal!


They look on the great luminary as he sets with adoration as they
have done for many long years. There is a party of long-legged
white spoonbills at supper in the shallow water, just a little above
where the working bullocks are taking their evening drink, down
by that old gum-tree on the other side. Down goes the sun. It
is like gradually screwing out the lights—a solemn tinge comes
over the landscape. There is no length of twilight, and im-
mediately the stars come out in great haste. Fiddle, you must be
tied up, or you will be sheep hunting in the morning when day-
light re-appears. What’s for dinner? Mutton, by Jove! What a
delightful variety! Let’s have a fresh bottle of pickles. Ko, you
forget there are turnips and cauliflower to-day. What a tightener
awaits you, Oh waistcoat! Light the candles—sit down—“ gape,
sinner, and swallow.”
There was an extensive swamp, or lake, as it was more fre-
quently called in our neighbourhood, which had been formed from
previous winters’ floods. It covered some miles of ground, and
formed a most agreeable feature in the landscape, besides furnish-
ing a supply of water, and additional sport from the numbers of
wild fowl which frequented its waters. All along its edges, and for a
considerable way in the water, were box and gum-trees, which were
fast losing vitality, from the decaying action of the water. These
dead and dying trees detracted considerably from the appearance
of what would, otherwise, have been a fine sheet of water. It was
of no great depth in any part of its eight mile stretch, and was
fast drying up in the droughts of summer, a succession of dry
winters not making up for the evaporation. There I used to
ramble with the gun, but, from the exposed nature of the ground,
was never very successful. The smallest signal of danger is suffi-
cient to startle the wild game, and to spoil the sport. Outside of
the trees there was usually a fleet of black swans, which as soon as
I approached, would immediately give their trumpet-like warn-
ing, and all within hearing would be on the alert. One day
I got very savage at these graceful disturbers of ray sport,
and rushed into the water with the determination of being
avenged of mine adversary. I had to wade among long weeds,
thicker than Scotch kail, for some hundreds of yards, before I got
within hail of the nearest of the handsome birds, when I fired, but
might as well have let him alone. He shook his head, and looked
at me, as much as to say, “ It’s true what they say of me, that I’m
somewhat a rare bird.” By this time my thirst for revenge had
somewhat abated with my struggles among the kail. I fired the


other barrel at the invulnerable trumpeter, and he fluttered heavily
along the water for a little bit, and alighting alongside of a brother
swan, told him all about it. I turned and left him, but I had
a job in getting out again, and nearly got soused overhead from the
unevenness of the bottom, and from tripping over dead wood,
concealed among the weeds. I let the black swans blow their
trumpets after that without molestation from me.
The blacks brought me some young swans, which I had con-
fined between hurdles along the creek-side, one-half of the en-
closed space being in the water, where they throve amazingly.
After keeping them in close confinement for some weeks, I took
away the hurdles, and let them have access to the creek, where
they swam about for a fortnight. One morning I missed one,
the smallest member of the family, but as the remainder seemed
disposed to stick to the scenes of their education, I did not
bother myself about its disappearance. In two mornings more,
on going down after breakfast, my usual time for feeding them,
only one solitary swan saluted me with the usual greeting, and
he, poor bird, seemed desirous to tell me that he was quite miser-
able, now that he was alone. “At one fell swoop” I had lost
three “of my pretty ones,” and I felt like a bereaved parent,
more alone in the world than ever. I sought them that night, and
next day, but nowhere on the creek were they to be seen. I
interrogated white, and endeavoured to pump black men on the
subject of their fate, but with no satisfaction. They had been seen
here, some said, others said, there, but opinion was as divided on
the matter as was the identity of the moon to the three jovial
Welshmen. The remaining bird looked so melancholy as he swam
about with Ms arched neck in graceful movements that I enter-
tained a sympathy for him, and visited him very often, which
attention he seemed to appreciate very much, as the moment he
got his eye upon me he would come towards me, bowing his head,
and uttering a plaintive cry, as if to tell me how very lonely he was.
He would follow me along the water’s edge, through the paddock,
and up to the garden fence, where I would regale him, to his great
delight, with the freshest sprouts I could find among the dried-np
stocks of cabbages. One morn I missed him at his accustomed
place. I searched for him up and down, and discovered him
at last, sitting alone in melancholy mood, about balf-a-mile dis-
tant from home, on the opposite bank of the creek. I called
to him, and he knew my voice at once, and came swimming
towards me, following me down the creek to his old place. But


home had lost its attractions. It was no longer what it used to be
when his companions were there. He left me again next day, and
I never saw him more. There was nothing for me but to sit down
on the hard-baked bank of the muddy creek, and bewail the fickle-
ness of friendship—
-14 Blow, blow, thou sultry wind;
Thou art not so unkind
As swan’s ingratitude
and complain—
I never nursed a dear black swan,
To glad me with his clear bright eye,
But when he came to know me well,
The bla'guard, he was sure to fly! ”
Snakes were numerous about the swamp and along the banks of
the creek, some of them of a venomous kind, and I had the satis-
faction of killing several of them. One hot day, at the commence-
ment of summer, I was down at the swamp looking out duck. By
this time the water was beginning to disappear very fast, and
taking off my shoes and stockings, I got into the water to get a
chance at the birds as they flew from one part of the lake to
another. I came to a fallen tree in the water, and was just
on the point of resting my naked foot upon it when a large
snake darted like lightning into a hollow part of the trunk. I
did not feel very comfortable just then, but could not but feel
grateful to the vile animal for taking itself off so suddenly,
and so preventing me from making its acquaintance. Repeated
excursions, with but little success, soon diminished my sport-
ing ardour in that locality. There was no end of wild duck,
teal, swans, and plovers, not to mention cranes, “et hoc genus
omne;” hut it was only a distant recognition that my presence
would get from them, and if I made any advances towards them,
they would greet me with loud quackery, and deposit themselves
far beyond reach of my double barrel. Wild turkeys were almost
fabulous with us. Sometimes we would take the gun, and ride out
on purpose to shoot one. But as sure as we had the gun with us,
so sure were we to see no turkey. When without that sporting
implement, we might chance sometimes to see a small flock of these
large birds, but then we had to content ourselves with a look. The
only way to approach them is on horseback, as they will unsus-
pectingly allow you, when mounted, to get within shot. Once or
twice the blacks furnished our table with a turkey, which proved,
in my estimation, “ a very lino bird.” Of course, I only speak of
my own experience in that part of the bush where I was located, when
h 2


I say that the sport was indifferent. In other parts it may be
better. Quail and snipe are abundant in some places, but taking
the country as a whole, I think it will generally be acknowledged,
that it furnishes little excitement for the sportsman. Away from the
vicinity of water, one might wander many a weary mile in search
of animal life. The kangaroo is becoming very scarce, and it was
but rarely that I chanced to come upon a mob of these gracefully
mis-shapen animals. The emu was also rare, but sometimes we
were fortunate enough to fall in with a family of them, when
we would have a gallop after them for a mile or two. One can
have little idea, without experience, what it is to meet with
kangaroo or emu in the bush after a long ride “ from morning’s sun
till dine,” without seeing a living animal of any kind. It is like
the appearance of a strange object at sea. You alter your course,
and make all sail to catch at least a nearer glimpse of the observed
of all observers, and feel for the time quite an agreeable excitement
come over the monotony of your dream. Sometimes we ventured
to observe that to fall in with a lion or a tiger would have been
a pleasant variety, but there was no danger in expressing such a
wish. One might as well have looked among the surrounding scrub
for a glass of iced champagne.
Sheep-shearing usually takes place during the spring months,
and then there is always more stir than usual, though of a kind
which to the mere spectator presents but few attractions. The
flocks are brought in by the shepherds from their several feeding
stations, one by one, to the home-station, to undergo the processes of
washing and shearing. The wash-pool is usually on some suitable
part of the creek, selected for its convenient vicinity and appro-
priate position. There all hands are employed at the commence-
ment of operations, in yarding, throwing in, catching, and ducking
the stupid animals, whose wool is for our use, and not their own.
These several occupations are plentifully accompanied by shouting,
barking, kicking, tumbling, swearing, knocking off horns, breaking
legs, drowning, and sweating. While some are busy bringing the
sheep gradually up to the scratch, no easy job, and requiring a
Job-like temper, others are engaged in seizing the innocents by the
cuff of the neck, and plunging them headlong into the pool beneath.
Sometimes a struggle takes place between a fat wether and its
unceremonious handler, which ends in the prostration of the latter
on the broad of his back amidst the muck of the yards, to his great
wrath, and the enjoyment of the spectators. It is of no use fret-
ting, and he explodes with a damnatory ejaculation, which acoom-
102
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


panies the offending animal as it is again grabbed and hurled with
all its imperfections on its head into the purgatory which is yawning
for it beneath, where it is consigned to the tender mercies of
black tormentors, who, with long crutch-like poles, poke it up and
down, backwards and forwards, forcing it under the water, until
the poor sinner and its fellows have been sufficiently punished
for the crime of wool-bearing. They are then allowed to swim
on to the landing-place, where they arrive in a melancholy plight,
half suffocated, and looking as grave and stupid as any bewigged
judge. Some give up the ghost in the struggle with the penetra-
ting element, others, less fortunate, get out with a broken leg, to
meet with a bloodier death from a black fellow’s knife on shore,
while others are dragged out of the water with barely enough of
breath left in them to give them credit for being in life. Those of
hardier constitution, or that have come off unscathed from the watery
ordeal, set off at a canter from the scene of their purgation, and
join those which have been in advance in the strife. According to
the state of the flock, or the wish of the proprietor, the sheep are
put through the wash twice or thrice. The cleaner the wool, the
higher price it obtains in the market. The washing goes on as the
demand at the wool-shed requires supply.
After the washed flocks have had a sufficient time allowed them,
so that the wool may be in a proper state for shearing, they are
brought to the wool shed, and there undergo the process of shear-
ing, which includes shaving, skinning, clipping, and carving,
accompanied with kicks, tar, and starvation. Each shearer has
his own stand in the shed, and if it be well arranged, should also
have a separate pen for his sheep. There the operation of shearing
as above characterised, is carried on from day to day, until all the
wool is disengaged, and each particular ram, ewe, wether, or lamb,
is completely fleeced of every available tuft of its natural covering.
I see them stand, “ a grisly band,” as they escape from the rough
hands of the shearers. As it is a principal object with the shearers
to turn off as many sheep as they can in a day, they take little care,
unless checked, how they use their shears, and the consequence is, that
the unfortunate animals frequently receive hideous wounds carved
by clumsy or careless operators. In well-regulated sheds, such
cutthroat performers are dismissed. Tar is applied to the wounds,
and the insulted, disfigured, and injured animal receives a kick on
the rump, and is sent houseless on the world. A man is engaged in
picking up the fleeces, which he carries to a table, where the wool
sorter arranges them according to quality, while other hands are
103
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


busily at work pressing the wool into bales for transmission to town.
In this way the work is soon got over, and by the time the last
fleece is shorn, the whole clip is all but ready for sending off the
station. In the good old times; am} every country has had its good
old times which the discontented ever refer to with a sigh of regret;
it was no easy matter to keep rule in a wool-shed at shearing time,
and the conduct of the old hands, who had then a monopoly of the
labour market, was disgusting in the extreme. But now, owing
to the abundant supply of labour, a proprietor is not so dependent
upon the chance ruffians who may offer their services at shearing
time, but may pick and choose such men as he finds to be quiet and
good workmen.
During shearing there is more life on the station than at any
other period of the year. The shepherds who bring in their flocks
to the home-station to be shorn, experience the delights of a town
life during the time their flocks are in hands, and doubtless return
to their solitary avocations with pleasing reminiscences of the in-
tellectual society which they enjoyed at the home station—what a
first-rate yarn that was of Jim’s, and how Bill’s song was so good!
Of the occupations in the bush, there is none which present fewer
attractions than that of a shepherd. Virgil and others have sung
loud and long in praise of the pastoral life. If that knowing youth,
“ every schoolboy,” has a warm side to the Latin poet, it is neither
his right nor his left one, but that other important side, which,
from the earliest ages, and by the recommendation of the wisest
of men, has been honoured by the parents,’ teachers, and guardians
of youth in the matter of their education, and which is frequently
made to tingle at the strains in which Tityrus, Meliboeus, and others,
will have their say about sheep. If Virgil had been an Aus-
tralian, his pipe would have been a tobacco one, and the youth of
merry England been saved many bottles of tears, which have been
extracted by the rump and dozen. Left alone for weeks and weeks
without seeing a single soul with whom he can exercise the gift of speech,
the shepherd’s business is to qualify his flock for good fat mutton,
and he passes the time of its probation in the most frightful silence,
amidst a wilderness of gum-trees and scrub, or in some dreary plain
of the most unenlivening description. His dog and his own thoughts,
if he have any, are his only companions. As for his flock, no
Australian shepherd loves his sheep, but curses them at intervals from
early morn till dewless eve, affording him, almost the only satisfac-
tion which his vain power of speech can yield him. Few men stick
long to shepherding, and it is generally the last occupation which a
104
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


man makes choice of. One of our shepherds, a little red-faced
old man, who had at home been “a snapper-up of unconsidered
trifles,” according to his own confession, was a frequent applicant
for books from our small library, and would, on such occasions,
discourse learnedly on history, “as how Skypio what destroyed
Cartage was a most upsetting sort o’ chap,” etc. His knowledge,
though not so “ ill-inhabited as Jove in a thatched house,” was an
exception to the general run of his class, whose philosophy is not
more extensive than that of Corin, however superior their sins may
be to that shepherd, “ in a parlous state,” who was damned “ like
an ill-roasted egg, all on one side,” for never having been in
court. All our shepherds had been in court, and got promoted
to the colonies for their many and varied accomplishments.
AN AUSTRALIAN PASTORAL.
AFTER THE MANNER OF VIRGIL AND DRYDEN.
The scene is supposed to be on a sbeep station, up the country.
At the edge of some timber, before an open plain on which a flock
of sheep is feeding, Old Billy and Harry, arcades amba, meet
together. Old Billy, an ancient piece of expatriation, thinks that
it is pleasant desipere in loco. Harry, who is much his junior, has
but lately arrived on the station from “ the diggings,” and is in-
clined to be cheeky. The arrival of Mary Ann or Marian, a lubra
belonging to one of the aboriginal tribes of the Australian Arcadia,
gives rise to a contest between the two shepherds for her favour.
The dark-eyed Phyllis, after hearing both swains, decides in favour
of Harry.
HARRY,
Ho Mate ! what shepherd owns those scabby sheep ?
OLD BILLY.
The Cove’s they he’s, he gave them me to keep.
HARRY.
Unlucky sheep of an unhappy Cove !
While ho the town frequents in hopeless love,
And fears that I unfaithful servant prove,
Thou, Convict, dost thy master’s mutton spoil—
Thou starv’st his ewes, defraud’st them of their coil—
Keep’st them from water in this burning sun.
And from the wild dogs-thou dost cut and run.
105
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


OLD BILLY.
Shut up, young green Mate! don’t be cheeky so;
With us old hands, you’ll find it is no go.
Go! get your rations where you can them find:
Here comes my Mary Ann, a lubra kind.
With her I’ll dawdle. Harry, what’s your mind ?
HARRY.
No doubt, the sheep are starving on this feed,
Whilst thou, but Mary Ann, dost nothing heed,
OLD BILLY.
An honest man may surely take his own—
The lubra’s mine, the prize I’ve fairly won;
Down at the camp, a reg’lar marriage made;
Ask Bungalallee if’ts not true I’ve said;
I baccy gave him, and he me the maid.
HARRY.
Thou married with her? old boy, never fear,
The lubra’s mine by all that I hold dear!
Me Marian loves; her blanket cover’d form—
Her bruised nose, black eyes, and bosom warm—
Her raven locks bound with a ribbon red—
Her glossy skin, with oily fragrance spread—
To me are charms, which in this desert bush
I will not yield—so, Billy, keep a hush !
OLD BILLY.
Cow-hearted chum! a hiding do you want ?
Deprive me of my lubra—no you shan’t,
Marian was mine, is mine, and shall be still;
And that she love’s me, you shall know right well.
HARRY.
Thou vile Old Leg ! thou’rt worse than any Jew —
This very day did Marian plight me true —-
As gentle winds among a she-oak tree,
So Marian’s words were musical to me—
As golden wattles do the woods adorn,
So Marian’s smiles were to this heart forlorn.
Ye winds! to Araby her odours bear,
To meet the spices that do come from there.
106
RECOLLECTIONS OF A


MARIAN.
What make you yabber like it cockatoo ?
Me tink it, white fellow, no good you two.
Come give it baccy for me plenty ’moke.
No give it? then me pull along o’ creek.
You tink me stoopid ? borak 3 do you see
Any ting green ? No gammon long o’ me.
HARRY.
Let Marian say whose lubra she is then,
And we will bide by her decision.
MARIAN.
Me plenty like him all about for prog,
Me like him baccy, -and me plenty grog 3
No give it flour ? oh then me pull away.
And make a light you on an oder day.
HARRY.
Me, Marian, plenty give it grog and flour,
And baccy, pipe, and old man cauliflower.
MARIAN.
Me like you, white fellow, you good one, you!
Him too much sulky, him no good for do 3
OLD BILLY.
No flies about it! You have won the day.
HARRY.
And you’re shut up; got nothing more to say I
OLD BILLY.
Come, sit us down beneath this shady gum,
I wish, my chummie, that we had some rum,
The Cove has plenty, but he keeps it tight.
Come, Harry, leave it'off and give’s a light.
HARRY.
My Marian lights my pipe into a sun.
Here, Mate, ’s a fire-stick, pull away like fun.
107
VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


OLD BILLY.
These scabby sheep are heading for the creek—
Go, Jacky, round ’em, there’s a good dog, seek!
Them crawlers there, -now what’s the good of them ?
That darn’d old crow is feeding on the lamb,
I wish my time was up—l’d have a drink.
I’m tired of tea; this hot wind makes me blink.
My eyes, them both bung’d up with blight will be.
By gum! but here’s a boomer of a flea!
HAEBY.
These winds are hurtful both to man and beast.
A fire is raging, Billy, in the east;
Mark you the smoke, just right beyond the timber,
How black,it rises! is’ut this December?
OLD BILLY.
Not being lam’d in months, I did’nt book it.
The sun gets low, I think we’d better hook it.
HAEEY.
The ev’ning comes to ease the shepherd’s toil,
And I must home and make the kettle boil:
To fold, O Billy! gently bring your sheep,
And from the wild dogs, them defend and keep.
OLD BILLY.
Give over croaking there like some old crow,
And tell us summut that we do not know.
HARRY.
Come, Marian, lubra, let us pull away.
Good-bye, Old Billy, till another day.
GLASGOWS FEINTED BY THOMAS MURRAY AND SON.
108
RECOLLECTIONS OP A VISIT TO PORT-PHILLIP.


