

RECOLLECTIONS
OF
Sir Henry Parkes
BY
WILLIAM WALKER, M.L.O.
WINDSOR.
1896.




THE LATE SIR HENRY PARKES :
SOME PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS
BY W. WALKER, WINDSOR .
Thom my long acquaintance and, for a considerable period, political associa-
tion, with the late lamented statesman, I have been solicited by a number of
my fiionds to give the public some reminiscences, with passing comments,
of and upon his remarkable career, coming within my own knowledge and
observation. With much diffidence I have consented to comply with this
request, so I now proceed : I knew Henry Parkes for about 40 years, dur-
ing ten of which I sat with him in the Legislative Assembly. I first became
-acquainted with him when he was editing the long since defunct “ Empire ”
newspaper, a publication which in its day exercised much political influence.
Jn. Ins editorial sanctum I had an interview with him about a .matter which
.1 wished to be fully reported in his paper. He courteously aoceded to my
wisnes. Put I did not come closely into contact with him until he contested
the Central Cumberland bye election (on the resignation of the .seat by Mr.
-John Pay ley lJarvall) against Mr. Thomas Whistler Smith in the year 1857.
I supported Mr. Smith on the recommendation of my friend Darvall, and
■canvassed the Windsor portion of the electorate in his behalf. The result
was that Mr. Smith was returned by a large majority. Mr. Parkes never
-forgot the circumstances and used often in my presence to .mention them to
mutual acquaintances in a good humoured manner, adding that I followed at
Ins lieels wherever lie went and succeeded in upsetting liis plans, Mr.
Parkes always took considerable interest in the Windsor district. The pre-
cursor of the Windsor School of Arts was the old -Debating Society and
Literary Institute, the first anniversary of which was celebrated by a dinner
-and ball at the barracks 10th Feb, 1858, at which Mr. Parkes and Air W
B. Dailey were both present. The entertainments were largely attended’
and at the dinner the two distinguished guests delivered eloquent and
interesting speeches. Air. Parkes, I may also say here, took part in -the pro-
ceedings at the inauguration of the .Richmond School of Arts, -27th August
1866, when he delivered a most instructive address on the subject of Educa-
tion and the use and value of Schools of Art. Everyone knows how much
he was identified with the question of Public Education, and that he was
the author of the existing system and the present Public Instruction Act.
lie was se.ected to lay the foundation stone of the Windsor Public School
winch he did m Ins usual pleasing manner, Sept, 7., 1869. In those days
the Government only gave two thirds of -the cost of erecting school build-
mgs, the other third having to be provided by private subscriptions.
t hair man of the local committee and on their behalf, I had the privilege of
piesenting him with an address on the occasion, together with a silver
trowel and a myall mallet. He made a nice reply and delivered a long and
eloquent speech on the subject of public schools and education generally, a
full report of which appeared in the Sydney papers next morning. After-
wards a luncheon took place at the old Rbyal Hotel, to which about 70 per


fcoiis sat down. I had the honor of presiding on the occasion, having on mv
light Mr. Parkes and on my left the late Professor Smith of the Sydney
niversity. A number of the leading Windsor townsmen were present and
some interesting speeches were made in proposing the various toasts. A;
the conclusion, Mr. I aikes, in hig'hly complimentary terms, proposed nr 7
health as chairman. I was then member for Windsor. He said, as is re
ported in the “ Herald,” “he had the highest regard for Mr. Walker, no
only for his honesty of purpose but for his independent public spirit.”
hope I will be pardoned for the seeming vanity of reproducing these words
b'lt I thought as the 1 eminiscences are personal I ought not to omit them
Ihe badding hav.ng afterwards been completed, the formal opening took
pla.,e -2nd hebruaiy, 1870, when Mr. Parkes was again called into requisi
tion and delivered another of his grand speeches. I became more intimately
acquainted with him after my election as Member of the Legislative
Assembly in March, 1860, in succession to that bright particular political star
\V llliam Bede Dailey. The Forster ministry was then in power. Mr
1 aikes was wait ng and watching for his opportunity. Forster being de-
feated, the Cowper-Robertson ministry came into office, but resigned in 1863.
Those were the days of frequent ministerial crises. The Martin ministry
succeeded. 1 hey in turn were defeated in 1864. The Mouse was dissolved
and Martin came back with only 14 followers, of whom I was one, in
Jauua.y, 1866. Ike Low per-Robertson ministry then returned to power,
Mr. Parkes moved a vote of censure upon them for their appointment of Mr.
Marshall Bui dekin as Colonial Treasurer. The motion was carried, the
ministiy resigned, and Mi. Martin was again sent for. This was the time
when Mr. Parkes and myself became fast political friends. A caucus rneet-
m ’ was held at Martin s office respecting the formation of the new 7 ministry,
and the first question was whether Martin should select his colleagues from
his own immediate supporters or should coalesce with Mr. Parkes. I and
all others but one advocated the latter course which was adopted. And then
was formed one of the ablest and strongest ministries that ever held office in
Rew 7 feouth Wales. Mr. Dan Lgan, the objector to the taking of Mr. Parkes
into the ministry, joined the Opposition, and in October he moved an amend-
ment upon Martin s new Land ildi. The amendment was carried by 32 to
oO but the m.nisuy would not resign as was expected, and Robertson therefore
moved a vote of want of confidence, which was rejected by 31 to 21. In
January, 1868, the Duke of Edinburgh arrived and shortly afterwards occurred
the lamentable episode of his being shot by O’Farrell. This caused intense
excitement, in the naMst of winch Mr. Parkes took a prominent part in con-
demnation of the dastardly deed. Mr. Martin was knighted afterwards, and
in September Mr. Parkes withdrew from the Government, taking offence at
the action of Mr. Eagar, the Colonial 1 reasurer, in removing Mr. Duncan from
the collectorship of customs. Mr. Docker, a member of the Legislative
Council, was appointed to succeed Mr. Parkes as Colonial Secretary, which
greatly displeased Mi'. Windeyer and others, and in October an amendment
wts moved on the address, woich w 7 as negatived only by the casting vote of
the opralcer. . Six James asked the Governor for a dissolution, but being re-
alised, he resigned and the Robertson-Forster Government followed. Mr.
Parkes moved a vote of want of confidence in them, but it w 7 as negatived bv
29 to 25. In 1869 Mr. William Macleay brought up a report over the O’Fai-
i ell aifaii, in which vire passages condemnatory of certain acts of Mr.
i aikes, the Colonial Secretary. Mr. Parkes moved an amendment upon the
motion for adoption, which was carried by 32 to 22 against Macleay Sir
James, voting for Parkes, offended Macleay and a separation between them


thereafter took place, which was never healed. In the divisions I generally
voted with Martin and Parkes. The House was dissolved in November, and
in the melee I lost my re-election, Mr. A. Dight defeating me by only eight
votes, procured as was generally believed by a lavish expenditure of money.
With reference to this defeat, occurring so unexpectedly as it did, after I had
successfully contested three previous elections, and sat in Parliament for
about 10 years, I received a number of letters of sympathy from friends, but
amongst them all there was none I valued more than the one I received from
Mr. Parkes, of which the following is a copy.
Sydney, December 28, 1869.
My dear Walker,
I am very sorry that you have been defeated at
Windsor. So far as I can form an opinion, the contest was mainly decided
on local and personal grounds. This is to be regretted for its own sake.
But so far as we are concerned we shall feel your absence as a heavy loss, for
few men have acted in any cause with more firmness and fidelity than you.
With kindest regards, I remain
Yours faithfully,
Plenry Parkes. .
William Walker, Esq.
In December, 1870, a coalition ministry was formed by Martin and Robertson
which offended Mr. Parkes and his friends, and in January, 1872, a motion by
Mr. Pidclingten against the Government having been passed by 88 to 19, the
House was dissolved. At the elections the ministry was defeated and then
Mr. Parkes came into power as Premier for the first time, with Mr. Piddmg-
tun as Treasurer and Mr. Butler as Attorney-General. In November, 1874,
Sir James Martin was leading the Opposition, when a vacancy occunirg in
the Chief Justiceship by the retirement of Sir Alfred Stephen, a question
arose as to who should succeed him. I happened to be in Sydney when a
uiscussion was going on on the subject, and whilst sitting behind the speaker’s
chair as a listener, Mr. Parkes observing me kindly asked me to join him in
a glass of wine in the refreshment room. He called, as was his wont, for a
bottle of champagne, when amongst other topics the matter of the vacant
Chief Justiceship was mentioned. I had the boldness to say that I hoped it
would be given to Sir James Martin, whom I considered was the ablest and
best man for the position. Mr. Parkes said nothing, when suddenly, before
we had got half through the champagne, the bell rang and he had to hurry
away to take part in some important division. Judge of my agreeable sur-
prise on opening next morning’s newspaper to find that the Chief Justiceship
had been offered to and accepted by Sir James. Of course I was delighted
and wrote a note of congratulation to His Honor who sent me a graceful reply,
which I published in my reminiscences of Sir James Martin which appeared
in the “ Daily Telegraph ” shortly after his lamented death. Mr. Parkes’
career as minister after this is well-known. The appointment gave general
satisfaction, though in some quarters quite the reverse, but the sequel proved
its judiciousness. Mr. Parkes now had everything his own way in the
House. Sir James had been almost the only man he feared; now he was
removed to a calmer sphere of usefulness and to a position which he adorned
by his learning and eloquence. In 1877, during his second administration,
Mr. Parkes was knighted, being made a K.C.M.G. I will not attempt even a
slight sketch of him as a statesman or a politician; that has already been
done by other and more competent pens than mine. Suffice it to say that he
was Premier of no less than five ministries and a parliamentarian of upwards
of 40 years. He possessed naturally literary gifts of no mean order, as is


scon by his and in his magnum opus “ Fifty Years in the Making ef
Australian History,” on the subject of which he wrote me a very interesting
letter. On one of his visits to Windsor in connection with the public school,
he spent part of an evening at my house. We sat together in the library
and had a long talk on books and politicians. He was much pleased with
the contents of my shelves, but what interested him most was a collection of
newspaper cuttings on colonial subjects which I had in a stout volume, to the
authorship of some of which he confessed ; there were two satirical poems
in itj one headed “ The Collective Wisdom,” published in the “ S. M. Herald”
29th November, 1859, contained twelve stanzas, the first commencing thus :
The House meets to-day, and if you, Sir, as there,
In your own proper person, by leave of the chair,
You’ll see—let me see—the clerks in their gowns,
And the party that smiles, and the party that frowns,
And the spirit of faction that loftily chides
Its own darling sin, and hear, Sir, besides,
The Sergeant at Arms—and you, ne’er heard a weaker,
In wildest of accents, announce Mr. Speaker.
The last stanza is as follows :
Hhiough of the great ones, since Cowper’s not there,
Besides you and I have no time now to spare,
There are Piddington, few on those benches so plucky,
Invincible Rotton, McArthur the lucky,
And canny-eyed Wilson, and great hearted Flood,
We'd wait for the speeches of all if we could,
But the legs of old Time never statesman could fetter,
And the more we keep up with his march the better,
So leave we the scene of their strife and their glory,
The papers to-morrow will finish the storv.
Crow.
And the other poem was headed *• The Statesman’s Forecast,” which appeared
in the “ Empire” 28tli December, 1864. It also consisted of 12 verses. I
subjoin the two first and the last :
James Martin sat in his chair of state,
And he looked quite hale and hearty,
And he told his friends he could calculate
On a powerful governing party.
And Piddington sat at James Martin’s feet,
And cried : “ It is bravely spoken,
A minister’s smiles to new men are sweet
And promises early broken.”
When the House assembles, remember they
Will have to provide (great laughter)
For the Government crew, whose rations and pay
Will be due a few days after.
This will give us a chance as Ministers still,
And if we don’t use it then blame us,
And little Will Walker cried : “It will ”!
And Piddington cried : “ ’Tis famous.”
He told me he wrote both of these long pieces, and he pencilled his initials
H.P. at the foot of each of them. Alas ! most of the names mentioned in
them are of men now no more. Sir Henry, I believe, boasted of his never


having bfiongel to a dab or any society. At the same time he could un-
bend and be very gmial when in the humour. On one occasion whilst I
was member of the Assembly and during a ministerial crisis, he invited a
number of his political friends, including myself, to lunei with him, and
spend the day at his then residence, Werrington, near Penrith. The first
Mrs. Parkes and two of his daughters were present. We were most kindly
treated and sumptuously entertained, and were also much amused by an
inspection of hi t collection of native wild animals. He had quite a small
menagerie in which it seemed in his spare moments lie. took great interest.
He also showed us liis valuable collection of autographs from learned and
distinguished person . But the one lie set most store upon was a long letter
from Thomas Carlyle. I tried to read it, but found it very difficult, the
crabbed hand of the great Scottish philosopher and writer being a puzzle.
He had great faith in the virtue of gastronomy as a political force. Like
all Englishmen he believed in a good dinner where the feast of reason and
the How of soul with friends could bo blended with good viands. The minis-
terial dinners before the meeting of Parliament at which he presided were
most enjoyable. Picnics he did not much care fo-. I only remember one
which lie attended down the harbour, at which Martin was present, ft was
thought that whilst holding it measures might be concerted for
making an attack upon the hen newly-formed ministry; but instead of it
b ling a gathering wh re matters could be seriously considered, it was found
that so much rambling and rapid talking took place that nothing definite
could be determined upon. He was generally very temperate so far as 1
could observe in his habits, but when he did indulge champagne was always
his favorite beverage. He was generous and humane to a degree. In tliis
he followed the huma libarianism of his great English political idol, the Right
Honorable W. E. Gladstone. I believe his generosity and encouragement to
artists helped greatly to keep him a poor man. His humanity was shown
in the great interest and support he always took in and gave to the charit-
able and philanthropic institutions of the colony, particularly the asylums
for the Destitute and the Insane. To mention a local matter, he was the
means of a grant being given in response to a deputation, of which I was
a unit, to the Hawkesbury Benevolent Society and Hospital, which was ex-
pended in making needed additions and improvements to the building. That
he was somewhat vain and ambitious will not be denied, but this arose from
the pride of intellect which possessed him. He loved popular applause, yet
his desire for power was I believe that he might use it for the benefit of his
fellow men. To attain power he sometimes sacrificed his real opinions or
forebore pressing them. In this respect he was unlike his friend Sir James
Martin, who would never yield to anything that he thought was wrono-
mere ly for expediency. It was chiefly through his advocacy, at first through
the columns of the “Empire” newspaper, that manhood suffrage was ob-
tained, and forced for adoption upon Charles Cowper, the Premier—Martin
refusing to accede to it, and leaving the Ministry. He never believed in pay-
ment of members, nor, as I am told, in one man one vote, or the single tax,
yet he assented to the two former, and refrained from openly opposing
Henry George and his disciples, because he thought it would at the time be
impolitic to clo so. He bowed to the vox populi as the vox djsi, differing
thus from his great apostle Carlyle, who said that of the many millions of
people of whom England was composed the most of them were fools. Sir
Henry was a man of tender sentimentality, as is evidenced by some of his
poetical effusions. His quondam opponent Arnold, in the House, used to
speak of him as being incomprehensible and always in the clouds. In per-


son lie was moie robust, like his intellect, and imposing than handsome, yet
he was accused of seeking much the admiration of the fairer portion of the
creation. Hence his advocacy of womanhood suffrage and his wish always to
have ladies present at his meetings.. In fine, he was a born politician, his
motto being aut Caesar aut nullus, at the same time desiring to be considered
a tribune of the people. It was against his nature to play second fiddle to
any one; hence his objection to submit to the present or any other Premier.
These reminiscences being, to so large an extent personal, would, I think,
be incomplete if I did not gratefully mention in them that it was through
the good offices of Sir Henry that 1 was honoured with a seat in the Legis-
lative Council in December, 1887. In conclusion, I must aver my agree-
ment with those who have said that Sir Henry was the most striking politi-
cal figure which has appeared in Australia during the last half century. He
was the last of those intellectual giants who laid the foundations of the
political institutions and secured the liberties and benefactions we now enjoy.
The mistakes in his career in the later portion of his life must be attributed
to the effects of his extreme age, and should be overlooked in consideration
of the many good services he rendered to his adopted country. He is now
at peace, and all that is mortal of him rests in the romantic shades of
Palconbridge on the Western mountains. Of him it may be said finally, in
the words, slightly altered, of the exquisite little poem which he wrote on the
death of his once distinguished colleague, Sir James Martin, “ The Buried
Chief.”
With speechless life and solemn tread,
They brought the aged statesman home ;
They laid him with the gathered dead,
Where rich and poor like brothers eome|
He scaled the summit while the sun
Yet shone upon his conquered track,
Nor faltered till the goal was won,
Nor struggling upwards once looked bac v .
But what avails “ the pride of place ”
Or winged chariot rolling past ?
He heeds not now who wins the race,
Alike to him the first or last.
25th May, 1896.




