

RECOLLECTIONS
OF SOME
AUSTRALIAN BLACKS.
BATHURST DISTRICT, 1835-40:
PORT MACQUARIE, 1844- - -
HUNTER’S RIVER, 1850.
WRITTEN IN iSpo.


/hjmstA~ i> •
SANDGATE HOUSE
AYR
J' t'tp aXch.
y 7 /
as -
*
X*s > ~t K t b-4n*p £*~y~&*~ry A^c4
44
y %us~*~c. tL. £4# b*Crfa*£r% o
&K*, /b*J*k~t%~*** % kO'+'R 4 ? J
- *'*J-
A- rj rtbtA A**6*4t*~*4-*~c*ro ily-
-6c
(j'A**'* 4*4 fa-*^


Recollections
of some . .
Australian
Blacks. .




RECOLLECTIONS OF SOME AUSTRALIAN BLACKS*
Bathurst District, 1835-40. Port Macquarie, 1844.
Hunter’s River, 1850.
WRITTEN IN 189 0.
1 was talking lately to some friends about the native Blacks of
Australia, and we became so much interested in the subject that I
determined to write down some of my early recollections of our old
friends of the Capita Tribe, which is now, I fancy, quite extinct, as
in 1835 to ’4O, when we saw a good deal of them, there were only
seven left. These were old Jacky and his Gin Mary, their two sons,
Jimmie and Charlie, and their wives, Mary and Nannie. Nannie was
Charlie’s Gin, and they had one little girl, Maria, really a pretty, in-
telligent child, with whom we often played. She taught us to run
along a narrow plank and to cross the creek on it, even when the
water was in full flood, but we never could equal her nimbleness and
fleetness of foot.
Once when Marie was about seven years old, her mother left her
with us for a few days. The first day she was very happy and de-
lighted with all the attention we paid her; the night was not so
succeseful, as she had to sleep alone in an empty room. The next
day she was very restless, and towards night began to cry, always de-
claring her foot was sore, but as she described it as “ stockyard in
mundowie ”we could not make out what was wrong. So early the
next morning we sent off for her mother, who was only about three
miles away, and really their meeting was quite affecting, Nannie
hugging her and saying, with a smile and a frown “ Foolish piccaninnie
you,” and poor little Maria sobbing with joy. Then the foot was
examined again, and we found a small splinter in it. The natives


call any piece of split wood “ stockyard” from the stockyards being
made always of splint wood, so “ stockyard in mundowie” was found
to mean that she had a splinter of wood in her foot.
The Blacks, as we called them, were an unsettled wandering race,
but the small tribe I am writing about kept always together, some
times they were accompanied by a neighbouring tribe and occasionally
by strangers, the latter generally from the Coal river, or Hunter s
river, as we now call it. Their language is difficult to learn. I never
knew any one who could speak it perfectly, but we could make our-
selves understood in broken English, which, they spoke fluently. They
called anything that pleased them “ hudgerry, ’ and anything large or
great “cabawn, thus the lady of the house was “ the cabawn missis,”
the Queen “cabawn missis belonging to her.” We were very loyal
and told them about Her Majesty, whose reign had then but recently
begun. They liked to hear abom her, but her chief greatness to them
was that she possessed an unlimited supply of blankets, as each one of
them who applied at the nearest Government store got one on the
Queen’s birthday, a very sensible and seasonable gift, as May there is
the beginning of winter.
When they visited us they usually encamped about half-a-
mile from the house on a grassy flat near the creek, and we
took the earliest opportunity of paying them a visit. In fine
weather their camps were composed of a half circle of gi een
boughs interlaced so as to form a sheltering wall about three
or four feet high. In wet or stormy weather they stripped oft sheets
of bark from the tall gum trees or stringy bark trees, and sticking
two forked posts into the earth about eight feet apart, put a ridge
pole across between them. Against this rested the bark slanting,
and under this poor shelter they slept contentedly, always keeping
up a good fire in front. The men stripped off the bark and formed
the “ Gunyah;” the women lit the fire and prepared the food, but when
the opossum was sufficiently roasted the lord and master took posses-
sion of it, giving to his Gin only such pieces as he chose to tear off
and throw to her. We used to watch all their proceedings with the
liveliest interest, and they were always so good humoured and
pleasant that we always rejoiced when we heard they were coming.
I speak only of these old friends, for 1 know all the Australian
blacks are not like them. Each family had a separate camp, and


each single man had a camp to himself. I believe this was the
custom throughout the country.
Our first visit would, of course, be to Jacky and Mary,
who, 1 must own, were hideous in the extreme and frightfully
greedy, demanding tea, flour, sugar bag, ’bacca: but, poor creatures,
very little satisfied them, and, like children, they were delighted
with very trifling gifts. One evening when we went to see them
we found that old Jacky was ill. He had a bad cold, and all
were busy preparing a very pi’imitive sort of hot bath for him. They
dug a hole in the soft earth just lai‘ge enough for one to lie in doubled
up. This hole they lined with stones taken from the bed of the
creek. They made a good fire in it, and when the wood was all
consumed they swept it out with boughs, then threw in a
quantity of the young leaves of the guxxx tree (Eucalyptus) and poured
water over them; of course, a great steam rose from the hot stones.
I did not see the whole process, but we understood that Jacky was
laid in the hole on the gum leaves and covered with an opossum skin
rug, and that he was quite cured by the hot air and the gum leaves.
When first I remember these blacks Jimmie was a “ poor man,"
that is to say he had no Gin, but one day we saw a rather doleful
looking young woman seated in his camp, and were told he had just
carried her off from a distant tribe. She was always called Mulwary
Mary, and never seemed to be quite reconciled to her fate. She was
a great contrast to Nannie, who really was comely and cheery.
Both Jimmie and Charlie were very fond of shooting, and
brought us ducks and pigeon«, and occasionally a turkey, but they
never took to riding or breaking in horses, as so many of the natives
did, neither do I remember ever seeing thexxx at wox’k about the place,
though they were both strong, active men. There was a friend of
theirs, Pretty Boy by name, who was great at burning off trees. I
have seen him and his gin burning oxxt stuxxxps from a field for weeks
at a time, and receiving rations regularly for their woxdc and a small
sum of money, which they spent sensibly enough in buying clothes at
the nearest store. Of course they never required boots, and the
blankets given annually on the Queen’s birthday kept them comfox't-
ably supplied in addition to their own warm opossum skin rugs.
They made their rugs vei’y large and of the best skins, but they


were too idle to make more than they absolutely required, and it was
most difficult to get one from them, indeed one completed to their own
taste is more curious than desirable, as it is impossible to divest it of
a most offensive smell of combined grease and wood smoke. It was
interesting to watch their mode of preparing these skins for a cloak.
I do not think they ever caught the opossums for pleasure, and seldom
prepared the skin for profit, but they showed wonderful activity and
intelligence when they did set to work. The opossums generally were
very plentiful, and, as they sleep during the day, it was not very
difficult to secure them. A Blackfellow is tolerably sure of his prize
before he takes the trouble to climb a tree for it. The good tomahauks
supplied by the settlers no doubt helped them greatly both in chipping
out notches in the tree to climb by and in cutting holes in the hollow
branches where the opossums live. When they had secured as many as
they desired they selected the best and carefully skinned them, pulled
the fur off the others and used it for spinning. As for the remainder,
they singed off the fur and roasted the opossum in its skin, which, I
fancy, they considered far the best food, as the skinned ones v ere not
often cooked, but were given to the dogs. Each skin as it was taken off
was pegged out tightly and carefully, with the raw side out on a small
sheet of bark, which was then set up before the fire but not too near,
and rubbed from time to time with fine wood ashes, and the skin left
on the bark till it was quite dry. When they had collected a good
number of skins, they trimmed the edges, but did not make them all
exactly the same size, then commenced what I think the most curious
part of the work, marking the skins with patterns so as to make them
quite soft and pliable. These marks are ornamental and of various
designs, and form a pleasing whole. The skins, though by no means
uniform in size, are made to fit together. As these patterns are formed
by doubling the skins and scraping them with glass or flint, there can
be no great variety. When sufficiently marked they are rubbed with
grease and sewn together carefully by piercing holes with a finely-
pointed bone and immediately passing a thread of lint, or of opossum
wool. It was a painful process, painfully slow, till they learned to
use the large needles and whity-brown thread given by the white
men. It takes from thirty to forty skins to make a good sized cloak
or rug.
The process of spinning the fur is much like the old distaff and
spindle of other countries and it makes a good strong thread. With


this they net the belts or girdles worn by the men and sometimes
make nets for the hair and small bags, but the bags or nets in which
the women carry all their worldly goods are made of linen thread and
are immensely strong and durable.
When the Blacks are about to move their camp the women collect
all their possessions, stow away any small things in their bags, put on
all the blankets and cloaks they possess under the left arm and fastened
on the right shoulder with a wooden pin, being open down that side
and leaving both arms free, the bag goes round the neck and under
the left arm and helps to secure the cloak. Then they take a good
staff in their hand and sometimes a lighted stick and set off for a walk
of miles acx*oss the country without any track—they have a wonderful
instinct which prevents them ever losing the way. The men stalk
on quite independently, carrying only their spears and “ nulla nullas ”
a sort of rude club, their “ boomerangs ” usually thrust through
their belt, which is their only covering except the bunches of tags
which descend from it—these tags are a few narrow strips of opossum
skin.
They are not a selfish race or thieves, indeed their wants are so
f cav they would only be encumbered with anything not absolutely
necessary. The Blacks generally are very superstitious, having a
confused notion of a supreme being and a future state, and talk of
jumping up white men, that is rising after death to a higher state and
they speak with horror of an evil spirit, Avho they think makes them
ill or causes them misfortune, but they were not fond of talking on
these subjects.
When staying near Bathhurst in 1840, we went to visit the
graves of two Black fellows who had died some years before. One
Avas Jacky Ranken, an old friend of ours. These graves were situated
each on the brow of a separate hill. The nearest trees had been
curved to mark the spot, but one had fallen, another had withered
and Avas dying, while the tops on the graves raised originally some feet
above the ground had fallen in so that they had a neglected appear-
ance, and like the tribes to which the tenants of the graves belonged,
all traces of them will soon have disappeared.
We Avere present only once at a great Corrobcree or dance, pro-
bably about the year 1837. We supposed it to be the amicable con-


clusion of some religious ceremony or consultation, as there was a
great gathering of strangers from distant tribes. I remember the
Coal River (now Hunter) being mentioned, and also Goulburn and
Maneroo. The blacks encamped for several days on a grassy plain
not far from the house. We were for a time rather anxious as to
the outcome of their doings. Then we got a message from them to
say there was to be a grand Coroheree before they separated, and that
all the white people were invited to see it.
The night was fine but very dark, fires from the different camps
lighted up the scene. By these fires were seated the women, many
of them holding in their laps or between their knees opossum skin
cloaks gatheied up into large pads, which they beat upon with their
hands as an accompaniment to their singing, and which sounded much
like muffled drums. The men at first were not visible, but presently
they stole out of the darkness and ranged themselves in the light of
the fii’es. They were all marked with pipe-clay in lines which followed
their bones and made them look like skeletons, as in the gloom the
outline of their dusky bodies was not descernable. The women then
began to sing more loudly and to beat time on their cloaks. The men
at first danced slowly and then more quickly, if dancing it can be
called, spreading out their arms and legs which seemed to shake and
quiver, while they uttered the most unmusical grunts, more like a
horse sneezing than anything else. Finally they disappeared again
into the darkness. Then others came stealing out, two or three at a
time, with bodies bent and holding out one arm and hand to repre-
sent the head and neck of an Emu. In the other hand a bunch of
twigs was held behind so as to represent the tail. The head and neck
were moved about as if to see that all was safe before bending cloavu
to eat some grass. Then a few active men came bounding in vho
represented Kangaroos, their hands held up like paws and a long
branch for a tail. They soon jumped off’, and they or others appeared
again at different points. It Avas a curious and amusing scene at the
time but monotonous, and we did not remain very long. Next day
the camp broke up, and the strangers made their way back to their
OAvn haunts or districts for homes they had none. I Avas a child of some
eleven years at the time, but this wierd scene made a great impression
on me. Their singing has neither spirit nor music and their voices no
charm. We often tried to learn some of their little songs or chants,
the only one I remember having a rather monotonous refrain of only


three words or syllables, on only four notes pronounced, min ya row,
min ya row, min ya row, the last note loud and jerky.
Port Macquarie.
When we went to Lake Innes in 1841 there were still a good
many members of the native tribes of the Port Macquarie and neigh-
bouring districts, but we did not often see any of them, as they were
not encouraged to come about the house. These blacks cn the coast
side of the range were, if possible, an uglier race than those of the
Table land, not so well fed and pleasant looking, and of a dull black
colour instead of a rich brown black. The men wore their hair
differently, longer and drawn back and upwards over a tuft of coarse
dried grass, and bound round with long stripes from the cabbage
palm, with a tuft of hair and grass at the end about eight inches from
the head. Murrigat and his Gin Ellen were the only two we knew.
They used to bring fish to the house, and occasionally wild duck and
wood pigeons. Sometimes we saw the women and children digging
for cockles on the beach when the tide was low. They used pieces of
wood with a flat end, and easily got as many as they cared to take
away. Occasionally we came upon a party fishing at Cati Creek.
One evening we walked to the lake intending to go to the boathouse
on the bank. Quite near the pier we found a party of natives seated, to
whom we spoke. Murrigat was busy at work on a canoe, with which
he seemed highly delighted, while the others looked on with admiring
eyes, at the same time enjoying a smoke. As we had never seen a
canoe made we remained till this one was finished. It was made of a
long oblong sheet of bark, the ends of which were drawn together by
means of a piece of stick with a sharp point, which was thrust through
the bark and then fastened secure by a strong vine. The vine had
previously been put in hot ashes to make it tough. We saw the
canoe launched, and then the well satisfied owners, after telling us
not to touch that fellow, took their departure with many smiles and
bows.


Another friend I must mention was Midgee Brown, a black boy
from New England, who accompanied my uncle, Major Innes, in many
long and weary journeys in the far bush. My uncle was much at-
tached to him, and Midgee reciprocated for some years with devoted
fidelity. At last my uncle took his friend with him to Sydney. He
was so much noticed there by the gentlemen stopping at the Australian
Club that I am sorry to say his head was quite turned, and he became
rather pert and presuming. Many of those at the club were Squatters,
at whose far-away stations my uncle and his attendant had rested when
travelling together. There was also an English gentleman who had
come out to the colony for pleasure, as sometimes happened even in
those early days. He took a great fancy to this smart black boy, and
proposed that he should go to England with him. Midgee was much
flattered, and consented to gu “just for a bit you know.” But when
my uncle left town he would not remain with his new patron. A few
days after their return to Lake Innes, Midgee disappeared. He left
no message for any one, and took nothing with him. It was many
months before he was heard of, and then a stockman at an out station
told how he had recognised him at a black’s camp, where he was
seated by a fire devoid of any clothing but the netted girdle always
worn by the men. At first he pretended not to know the stockman,
but afterwards let him understand that civilised life was not good
enough for him, or, as he expressed it, “ too much no good.” Midgee
never returned to the home station, and we never heard of him again j
probably he died early.
St. Clair.
Some years afterwards, about 1850, I made the acquaintance of
another tribe of Australian Blacks in a different part of the country
Their habits were much the same as those of the Bathhurst district,
only that for a part of every year the men worked regularly, and got
rations and wages. This tribe consisted at the time I first saw them
of a sturdy amusing fellow calling himself King Dicky, a deaf and


dumb man who was wonderfully useful and intelligent, an old woman
known as Marmie, and her three sons, Jimmie, Davie, and Geoigc.
George was a fine looking lad, but he took a severe cold, and died
after a few weeks illness. Jimmie, the eldest, ivas a strong, active
man, a good worker, and a good rider, lie had a Gin and one Pic-
caninny, who, poor thing, was quite silly, but she used to spend houis
gathering mulberry leaves for our silkworms one summer when we
had a great many to feed. David lived in summer in a small hut in
the garden. One day we were surprised to find it tenanted by a
very comely young Gin, but she was shy and sulky, and did not take
kindly to her new surroundings, David having carried her off with a
high hand from a neighbouring tribe. She ran off more than once,
and finally disappeared for good.
These ptople are always associated in my mind with an exciting
cattle hunt that took place near the home station. We were all busy
one afternoon in the empty hut that for the time was devoted to our
silkworms, when we heard a great cracking of stockwhips and shout-
ing. On looking towards the stockyards we saw a great dust and a
herd of wild cattle coming in. There was a high strong fence between
us and them, but we could not help a feeling of alarm when we saw a
huge black bull rush out from among the rest and take a determined
stand between us and the stockyard. In vain the stockmen cracked
their whips and galloped round him, one man more daring than the
others half dismounted and picked up some stones to throw at him,
keeping one foot in tha stirrup and his hand on the saddle on to which
he vaulted in a moment as the bull charged at him. We were really
terrified, and when the boys who were with us climbed on to the fence
in their excitement and anxiety to get a better view, we expected
them to be attacked next. But now a nearer object had attracted the
furious animal, close to the stockmen’s huts, but on the opposite side
of the road from the stockyard, the blacks had made a camp, and
there on that eventful day lay poor old Marmie alone. Perhaps she
had been asleep, or it may have been that her fear overcame her dis-
cretion, for all at once she rushed out of her camp towards the huts,
of course the bull saw her, and after bellowing a moment and tearing
up the earth, he rushed at her. We expected to see her trampled on
or tossed into the air. Jimmie’s wife and Piccaninny, who were in the
garden and near us, howled piteously ; their cry was taken up by her
sons nearer the scene of action, and all shouted Marmie, Marmie I


But Marmie was equal to the occasion. She fell flat on the ground
with her opossum cloak over her. The bull started back from it and
its unpleasant odour, snorted, bellowed, and tore up the ground.
Jimmie now made a rush for the stockman’s hut to get a rifle. He
got in safely, but could not get within range except from the roof. At
last he made a bold rush out and got to the side of the chimney. The
bull naw him, and turning from poor prostrate Marmie, who had never
attempted to move, rushed madly at Jimmie and grazed his shoulder
with his short strong horn. We all thought he would be killed, but
in a moment heard the sharp report of the rifle. Then Jimmie was
seen safely on the roof taking deliberate aim at the great creature,
who apparently had been stupified by the smoke from the first shot.
At the next he fell, and then there was a triumphant shout of
Marmie, Marmie ! And up rose poor old Marmie, and staggered
more dead than alive back to her camp. We all marched through the
slip pannels to inspect the monster, the stockmen having meantime
secured the rest of the herd. He really was an enormous creature,
and looked terrible even when dead. A few hours after he was
dragged to a hollow a short distance off, and left for the crows and
native dogs to feast on. For a long time after this happened, we
were afraid to go far from the fences when out walking, dreading to
meet stray animals from some of the wild mountain herds.
One day we had a very pleasant expedition with King Dicky
and several others in search of honey. They came up to the house to
tell my aunt that they had found a beehive, and said if we would go
with them and take a dish we might have a share of the honey, so off
we set in great force, and, after we had walked about two miles, they
pointed triumphantly to something we could not see, but believed it
to be an English bee, for presently we came to a hollow tree where
there were a good many flying about. Our black friends commenced
at once to cut the tree down. By some accident it fell into the forked
branch of another tree, but, nothing daunted, they proceeded at once
to cut it off, though by this time the bees were flying about in angry
swarms. In a wonderfully short time the trees were both down, and
a square opening was then cut in the hollow trunk containing the
honey. We were beckoned to advance and help ourselves. My aunt
had a strong spoon and a tin dish, and helped herself liberally, and
we all took great pieces of the sweet comb, the blacks looking on com-
placently. When they thought we had taken enough they stepped


forward, and, dipping some stringy bark into the honey, sucked it and
dipped it in again. We then retired, and they ate as much as they
could and filled their calabauhes and pannikins. We all returned
home in great glee, delighted with our honey. Of course our friends
were substantially rewarded for their liberality, but they asked for
nothing nor attempted to make a bargain beforehand.
When staying at St Clair I became acquainted with tne most
intelligent native I ever met. He came from Port Stephens, and had
been taken in hand early by a good and judicious missionary, who
trained and educated him well, but made no attempt to show oft his
acquirements. On the contrary, he had been encouraged to work
and allowed to follow the occupation he was most fitted for, and for
which there was always a good opening. Dick was a most wonderful
rider, and handled horses with such care and firmness that he found
constant employment at good wages. When he came to St Clair
he was at once engaged to remain and to break in some valuable
young horses for the Indian market, and finally he sailed to Calcutta
in charge of them. I was not at St Clair when he came back, but
my aunt, who lived there, wrote to me that he was much improved
by the voyage and all that he had seen, and that her boys were never
tired of listening to his tales. It was rather a slack time at the
station, and he was often with them and in full favour with every one.
Then came a letter in which she expressed some annoyance at Dick’s
evident admiration for her pretty young nurse Eliza, but hoped that
the horses just brought in would give him occupation for some time
and keep him away from the house. Alas ! poor Dick. He met his
death from one of these untamed horses. He had just mounted for
the first time a spirited young chestnut, and appeared, as usual, to
have her in perfect control, when suddenly the brute plunged and
buck-jumped madly. The saddle girths gave way, and the
unfortunate rider was thrown violently on his head on the hard
ground. For some time he lay stunned and insensible ; when at last
he showed signs of life it Avas only too evident that his spine was
seriously injured. As soon as he was able to speak he asked for my
aunt; she went to him at once. He whispered Eliza, so Eliza was
sent for, and a happy smile'crossed over his face when she came to
his side. She was a good, kind girl, and took his cold hand in hers
and held it tenderly while he murmured, “ Don’t forget poor Dick ; I
am glad to go—glad, glad, it is far better.” A messenger had been


sent df in haste for the nearest doctor, some eighteen miles distant
Before lie could arrive poor Dick’s spirit had fled, had gladly quitted
his dusky body, and winged its way to realms of light, where all aie
the children of one merciful and loving Father.
In conclusion, it has often been said that the native Blacks of
Australia are incapable of receiving any education. I must own that
in all my experiences I have not met with or heard of any who had
attained to a high degree of civilisation, though I have known some
who could read and write, and several who conformed for a time to
the habits of white people. It is against all experience that any liv-
ing thing should at once, and completely, change its habits,
therefore, should these people be despised because they could not do
sol They have died out so quickly on the approach of the white
population that there has been no opportunity of gradually educating
them, and developing the race. And now that they are gone, I do
not lament over their extinction, but I wish to preserve all kindly re-
membrance of some of those individuals that I knew best, and who
were most deserving of our friendship, and such words of praise as I
can give them.
- w




