

(7%y>
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY
COMMISSION
RECOMMENDATIONS
ROYAL COMMISSION
WATER SUPPLY
1937
<ri
&
*s>
r 1
Qjo


STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY
COMMISSION
RECOMMENDATIONS
ROYAL COMMISSION
WATER SUPPLY
1937


STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Memorandum for The Hon. the Minister of Water Supply,
Melbourne..
Following inquiries spread over a period of fourteen months, the Royal Commission
on Water Supply presented to the- Government four Reports containing some 187 pages of
printed matter, and 106 summarized recommendations dealing with the various matters
referred to it in its terms of reference. There are, in addition, a large number of other
recommendations included in the text of the Reports.
The Reports of the Royal Commission have been transmitted to me by you for a
statement of this Commission’s views in regard to the recommendations made by the
Roval Commission.
Summarizing the subject matter of the four Reports very briefly, the more
important recommendations of the Royal Commission are :
1. That financial relief should be given water users in respect to arrears of rates
and charges accumulated prior to and during the depression.
2. That the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission should be reconstituted
on the lines of the State Electricity Commission with a view to
disassociating it from political control.
3. That in order to remove rating from the political to the business or economic
sphere, the necessity for authentication of rating by-laws by the Governor
in Council should be removed, subject to revision of capital liabilities
on lines indicated in the Royal Commission’s Report, and that the
Commission should make rates and charges of such amounts as may be
required to meet necessary annual expenditure in accordance with the
Water Acts.
4. That a substantial proportion of the capital liabilities at present debited
against water users in Irrigation and Waterworks Districts, but upon which
up to the present they have not paid interest charges, should be accepted
as a State liability and transferred to a Special Account designated
“ Capital borne by the State,” the interest upon which would be met
out of Consolidated Revenue.
In effect, practically all the Main Supply Works would be made
“ Free Head works,” and a large proportion of local capital would be
“ written off,”
5. That the remaining capital liability should be carried by water users, and
that, except in a few cases, such as in the North-west Mallee, total
payments made by water users in respect of domestic and stock supply
rural districts should remain substantially at the level applying prior
to the recent temporary reduction of 10 per cent, in general rates.
6. That certain recurring yearly losses, such as would be inevitable if the
North-west Mallee water supply is to be continued, should be met by a
special annual vote as formerly in the case of “ non-paying railway
lines.”
7. That the Commission should then be given complete control of its finances,
which should be separated entirely from the Budget, and that it should
then meet all its operating costs and interest charges from revenue
collected each year.
8. That in Irrigation Districts the established Water Right system should be
superseded by a voluntary “ Contract ” system in which water users
would be free to determine to what extent they were prepared to irrigate.
This would mean the complete abandonment of the fundamental
principle that the State, having provided water supply facilities at great
cost, had the right to ensure rural development by insisting that such
facilities should be used.


9. That revenue in Irrigation Districts, other than the Red Cliffs, Merbein, and
Nyah dried fruit areas, should be raised by a genera] “ Service ” rate
(as in metropolitan “ Two-part ” electricity tariffs) for which no water
would be supplied, and irrigation charges for “ contracted ” and “ excess ’’
water.
The “ Service ” rate was, except in a few specified districts, to be
somewhat higher than the present “ General ” rate, but the irrigation
charge was to be lower than the present irrigation charge, with the
exception that the charge for “ excess ” water was to be 50 per cent, above
the charge for “ contract ” water.
In the Red Cliffs, Merbein, and Nyah Districts the Royal
Commission proposes that the general rate for domestic and stock
purposes should be abolished, and the irrigation charge increased to
offset loss in revenue.
The total amount payable by irrigators in most districts was to
remain approximately unaltered.
10. That landholders in the Koo-wee-rup, Cardinia, and Carrum Districts could
not meet the cost of dealing with flood waters brought down on their
reclaimed lands from surrounding high lands, and that the English system
of rating the entire contributing catchment area should be instituted
to provide for the maintenance of main arterial watercourses carrying
“ upland ” waters through reclaimed areas. The financial position of these
districts was shown to be such that without extension of rating on lines
suggested they could not possibly provide for the adequate maintenance
of the works upon which they depend for protection. •
11. That the capital cost of drainage works in irrigation districts should be borne
by the State, but that land owners should be required to pay the annual
cost of maintenance.
12. That the Accounting System of the Commission should be re-organized and
that a complete system of Cost Accounts should be introduced involving
the installation of mechanized equipment. Also, that an officer with
Treasury experience might be appointed to the Commission’s staff.
With many of the Royal Commission’s recommendations, my Commission is in entire
agreement. Others, including those affecting the constitution of the Commission itself,
are matters for Government Policy, and no comment is offered. I desire to say, however,
that effect has already been given to important recommendations in regard to the
re-organization of accounts, the introduction of a costing system, the installation of
mechanized equipment and the appointment of a Treasury officer.
The proposal, however, that the Water Right system be abandoned is, in the opinion
of the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission, a very retrograde step, and one on which,
it might be mentioned, little evidence was tendered to the Royal Commission, and I cannot
too strongly recommend that this proposal be not adopted.
The few anomalies that arise as a result of the too rigid observance of the Water Right
system can, without difficulty, be rectified by administrative means —and are in fact being
remedied by the Commission from time to time —whereas the adoption of the cumbersome
and costly contract system would not only retard development, but would leave water supply
finances in a chaotic and uncertain condition, particularly while the system was being
introduced. To deal with the clerical and legal work of negotiating and finalizing the many
thousands of individual contracts involved throughout Victoria would also make unavoidable
a considerable immediate increase in the Commission’s staff with consequent increased
overhead cost.
To facilitate consideration of the various recommendations of the Royal Commission,
I attach a complete schedule of these recommendations, together with an indication of my
Commission’s views in regard to each item.
Also, for your information, I attach copies in booklet form of preliminary evidence
submitted by me to the Royal Commission, giving a comprehensive review of Water Supply
Development in Victoria with particular reference to the financial position.
(Sgd.)
L. R. EAST,
Chairman, State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.
30th June, 1937.


■ns.
| References.
■ Report. Page. Paragraph.
Page 1
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
FIRST PROGRESS REPORT.
The First Progress Report dealt with the
question of arrears of water rates and charges and
interest thereon, and the Royal Commission
recommended ;
Arrears Owing by Water Users other than Civilian
and Soldier Settlers.
That, in every instance where, at Ist July, 1936,
the account of a water user is in arrears, the
account shall be recast as from Ist July, 1929.
All interest charged during the period from that
date to 30th June, 1936, shall be credited to the
account. All payments made by or on behalf of
the water user since Ist July, 1929, shall be applied
in reduction of water rates and charges (other
than interest) which have been debited to the
account
The Commission considers that the writing off of
interest charged on arrears over this period is
justified, as arrears accumulated in years 1929-36
may be considered as due to incidence of
depression on prices of primary products, and
hence interest, which is imposed as a penal
provision to ensure prompt payment of accounts,
might well be waived in respect of these accounts,
which obviously could not be paid
That, from the balance of the account after
recasting as provided in Recommendation 1,
there shall lie deducted the greater of the following
amounts :
Although this policy is followed by this Commission
in regard to " Farmers Debts Adjustment ”
cases, the Commission considers that it should
not be of general application, as any debt
adjustment in cases of water users not under
" Farmers Debts Adjustment ” should take
into account their ability to pay. It is pointed
out that the Farmers Debts Adjustment Board
investigates thoroughly the ability to pay of all
debtors who apply for relief under its Act
The Commission concurs in this proposal, as under
Section 324 of Water Act, water rates over the
(i) An amount equal to 20 per cent, of the
balance of the account
(ii) An amount necessary to reduce the balance
of the account to the equivalent of the
total amount of water rates and charges
for the period of five years ended
30th June, 1936
period in question, are a charge on the land for
a period of only five years. A subsequent
Amending Water Act 1937 has made such rates
in the future a charge for all time
In no instance shall the account be placed in credit
as at 30th June, 1936, as a result of these
adjustments
XVI.
If accounts of water users in arrears were placed
in credit as result of adjustment, the great
majority of water users, who have paid all
amounts owing, would undoubtedly feel aggrieved
At the request of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, the Government gave
consideration to this recommendation in
September, 1936, immediately upon issue of
the Royal Commission’s First Progress Report.
The Government, by Cabinet decision dated
Bth September, 1936, directed that ratepayers
should be advised that their accounts would be
adjusted in accordance with the policy that
might be adopted by the Government after
consideration of the whole of the recom-
mendations of the Royal Commission
Every water user shall, however, he given credit in
full for any payments made subsequent to that
date
XVI.
That the debt as reduced in accordance with
Recommendations I and 2 shall be payable
without interest by instalments. The amount
and time of payment of each instalment, and the
length of the period over which the total debt is
to be spread, shall be determined in the fiVst
instance by the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission, but such period shall not exceed ten
years unless an extension of the time shall be
granted by the appeal Board to be set up in
accordance with Recommendation 5 hereafter
XII (b)
The proposal to spread payment of adjusted
arrears over ten years appears to be reasonable,
as in many cases payment over any lesser
period, together with current charges, might be
be unduly burdensome


1 References.
i
Report. | Page. Paragraph.
1st 11 XVI
i
1st 11 XYI. Concur
Page 2.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
First Progress Report— continued
Concur with the principle, but consider that in
order that each case might be dealt with on its
merits, specific grounds ” upon which appeal
is based should include a verified statement of
That, on the completion of the adjustments made
in accordance with Recommendations 1, 2, and 3
hereof, notice shall be sent by the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission to the water user,
setting out the amount of the debt as reduced,
the period of time over which the debt is to be
discharged by instalments, and the amount of
each instalment
assets and liabilities. See comment re Appeal
Board below
Such notice shall inform the water user that
he may apply, within 60 days of the date of such
notice, to the Appeal Board to be set up in
accordance with Recommendation 5 hereafter,
for special relief in addition to that given by the
adjustments made in accordance with Recom-
mendations 1, 2, and 3
The water user shall be entitled to apply to
the Appeal Board, within the specified period of
60 days, for consideration of his case on the
ground of special circumstances, and, in making
such application, he shall set out the specific
grounds upon which his application is based
That, in order to deal with special and exceptional
circumstances in which the relief given by the
adjustments made in accordance with Recom-
mendations 1, 2, ' and 3 may be deemed
insufficient, an Appeal Board shall be constituted
consisting of one Treasury official and one other
member appointed from outside the Public
Service - To help the Appeal Board in its
deliberations, it should be assisted, in each
district dealt with, by an officer of the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission having an
intimate knowledge of the district conditions and
acting in an advisory capacity only
XVI
Owing to the very large number of different
districts in which appeals might be made, this
proposal would probably unduly delay hearing
of appeals, and it is suggested that advantage
might be taken of the machinery and organiza-
tion of the Farmers Debts Adjustment Board
The functions of the Board shall be as follow :
(a) To consider, on the application of a water
user in accordance with Recommendation
4 hereof, whether an inquiry should be
made by the Board into the applicant’s
claim for further relief.
(h) In the event of the Board deciding that an
inquiry is justified in view of the reasons
given by the applicant, to conduct such
inquiry, and, in its discretion, to write
off such further amounts as it may deem
justifiable or desirable and/or to vary
the amounts and times of payment of the
instalments set out in the notice to the
water user referred to in Recommendation
4, and, without limitation, to extend the
period over which the liability is to be
discharged
Concur, but such decision should be subject to
confirmation by Treasury
XVI.
The decision of the Appeal Board, in every
instance, shall be final and binding on both the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission and
the water user.


I *
Report. Page. Paragraph.
i
1st 11 XVI. This is a- necessary safeguard
i
I
i
i
i
Page 3,
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Corrtmssion’s
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
First Progress Report — continued.
That, should the instalments determined in
accordance with Recommendations 3 or 5 hereof,
together with current rates and charges, not be
paid regularly and promptly, the arrangements
regarding extension of time for payment shall
lapse, and the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission shall be free to take the Usual steps
for the recovery of the debt as reduced in
accordance with Recommendations 1 and 2
Arrears owiny by Civilian and Soldier Settlers
That, in the cases of civilian and soldier settlers, in
every instance where the affairs of a settler are to
be adjusted by the Closer Settlement Commission,
his liability for arrears of water rates and charges
shall be taken into account by the Closer Settle-
ment Commission in making the adjustment and
shall form part of the total debt to be so
adjusted
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
Concur. This is, however, a matter for reference to
the Closer Settlement Commission
That the total amount of the reduction in a settler’s
liabilities to the Crown as the result of the adjust-
ment, shall be borne by the Closer Settlement
Commission and the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission in proportion to the amounts
due to those respective authorities at the date of
the adjustment
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
Concur. This means that if the Settler’s liabilities
to the Closer Settlement Commission are written
down, then his arrears of water rates and
charges should be reduced in same proportions
That, in every instance, the minimum relief given
to a settler in respect of arrears of water rates
and charges shall be not less than would be
received by him by the making of the adjustments
in accordance with Recommendations 1, 2, and 3
hereof
XVI.
Concur, subject to previous comments in regard
to 1, 2, and 3
That, in every instance where the liability of a
settler is not to be adjusted by the Closer
Settlement Commission, his liability for arrears
of water rates and charges shall be dealt with
in the manner set out in Recommendations 1 to 6
hereof
XVI.
Concur, subject to above
In the event of the adoption of Recommendations 7
to 10 hereof, the question of making the Closer
Settlement Commission the sole collecting
authority for instalments of the reduced debt
should be discussed between the tw r o authorities
concerned with a view to economy and efficiency
of collection. This, of course, would leave
unaltered the powers of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission in regard to collection
of future rates and charges
XVII.
This would facilitate collecting and is already in
force in Irrigation Districts in regard to current
charges in respect to settlers under lien to the
Closer Settlement Commission
SECOND PROGRESS REPORT.
The Second Progress Report dealt with the adminis-
trative and executive control by the-State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission, and the Royal j
Commission recommended (paragraph 128) : I
That the State Rivers and Water Supply Commis- |
sion shall consist of one full-time Commissioner, |
who shall be Chairman, and three part-time j
This is a matter for Government policy. The form
proposed is that of the State Electricity Commis-
Commissioners


O..o.
I
References. j
Report. | Page. Paragraph, j
2nd 7 IS 1 °r Act 19z.
five years orn^
\t for further sn.
2nd 7 18 Matter for Government policy
4tli 45 Sec. 21
2nd 28 128 Matter for Government policy
2nd 7 20 Dependent upon form of Commission
2nd 6 8 to 15
Page 4.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Second Progress Report — continued.
No person shall be appointed a Commissioner for a
term exceeding seven years, but any Commissioner
may from time to time be re-appointed for any
further term not exceeding seven years
Water Act 1928, Section 21, provides for terms
of five years only, with provision for reappoint-
ment for further similar periods
That it shall be the usual practice to appoint the
Chairman of the Commission for the maximum
period of seven years
That the Chairman of the Commission shall be
selected for his business, financial and admin-
istrative experience and qualifications, and that
a salary be paid commensurate with those qualifi-
cations
Matter for Government policy. Water Act 1928
provides for salary of £2,000 which was amount
paid to former Chairmen, Elwood Mead and
William Cattanach. Mr. Cattanach’s successor,
Mr. Horsfield, was appointed in 1933 during
depression at £1,250 per annum, which salary
has been continued. (See also Serial Reference
No. 121 giving Royal Commission’s Recom-
mendations in regard to payment to other
Commissioners in event of its proposal for “ part
time ” Commission not being adopted)
That, in the selection of the part-time Commissioners,
regard shall be had to the necessity for qualifica-
tions for, and experience in, dealing with the
engineering, irrigation, economic, and financial
problems involved in the administration of the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.
One of the Commissioners shall be a practical
irrigator
That the chief officers of the staff of the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission shall be
a chief engineer and a financial manager, who
shall receive salaries commensurate with the
responsibilities of these important posts and
sufficiently high to attract and retain men of the
highest qualifications and experience
That the remainder of the senior staff of the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission shall be
organized on the lines of the plan set out in
Fig. 2 of the Second Progress Report
This is the present form of organization of the
Commission’s staff, having been in operation
now for several years with complete satisfaction.
The Royal Commission states “ The plan is a
comparatively recent innovation which reflects
credit on the present Commissioners who were
responsible for its introduction ”
That the Commissioners shall be given the maximum
scope for the recruitment of officers possessing
the necessary qualifications for the higher posts
in both the engineering and financial divisions
21 to 25
127 ( h )
The Commission’s policy is to advertise all vacancies.
Applicants for Professional positions are required
to have Technical School or higher Certificates
or University Degrees in Engineering. For
Clerical positions applicants must have at least
School Leaving Certificate. Qualified applicants
are interviewed by the Commission’s Appoint-
ments Board, which recommends selected appli-
cants for final interview by the Commission.
All appointments over £250 per annum, and all
promotions are subject to confirmation by the
Minister of Water Supply
That it is desirable that the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission shall adopt the
practice of sending its senior officers abroad
from time to time, as need arises, for the purpose
of studying engineering and irrigation practice
This is most desirable and is at present receiving
consideration. Owing to limited finances, the
Commission has never been in a position to send
any engineering officer abroad for overseas
experience
in other countries


Page 5
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph
Second Progress Report— continued.
That it is desirable that funds shall be made
available for experimental work on the lines
suggested in paragraph 30 of the Second Progress
Report
8, 27
30, 127 {d)
This refers to model experiments to facilitate
design of major structures. Effect is being
given to this recommendation
That it shall be mandatory that every proposal
involving the expenditure by the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission of loan moneys
exceeding £lO,OOO shall be investigated by a
Parliamentary Committee, such as the Public
Works Committee. The report of such Com-
mittee shall be submitted to Parliament before
the proposal is considered by the legislature
38 (i)
This was a recommendation of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission. It is believed
that it would be of considerable value to
Parliament in dealing with Loan Applications if
such reports on major works were printed for
circulation
That, for the purpose of advising the Parliamentary
Committee upon such proposals, there shall be
set up an expert inter-departmental investigating
staff. This body shall include some member or
members (drawn from outside the Public Service
if necessary) qualified to carry out complete
economic surveys
38 (ii) (in)
Matter of Government policy. In Queensland
there is an Economic Bureau to which such
matters are usually referred
That the services of the expert investigating staff,
referred to in Recommendation (xi) hereof, shall
be utilized from time to time in investigating
and advising upon reconstruction of existing
settlements, particularly in relation to necessary
changes in types of products, having regard to
changing marketing conditions
10-11
35-38
Matter of Government policy. See also above
That, in carrying out its work, the special investi-
gating staff make the fullest possible use of such
information as to marketing conditions and
prospects as is available from departments either
of the State or Commonwealth Public Services
such as the Department of Commerce
A Joint Committee of officers of the Commission
54-55
and the Department of Agriculture is at present
investigating the Murray Valley proposals
That the accounting system of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission be re-organized.
For the purpose of this re-organization the
services of an independent accountant, and, if
possible, of an accountancy officer of the Depart-
ment of Engineering and Water Supply, South
Australia, or of the Department of Lands (Irriga-
tion Branch), South Australia, be sought to assist
the accountant of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission
57-58
Effect has already been given to this recommendation
after careful investigation of South Australian
system
This has now been done, and effect will be given as
from Ist July, 1937
That, in the re-organization of the accountancy
system, a complete and efficient system of cost
accounts for both construction and operating
costs be installed, to be operated by the account-
ancy staff of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission
16-] 7
60-64
That, as part of the plan of re-organization of the
accountancy system, arrangements be made for
the accounts relating to operating results in the
various districts, to be placed upon a revenue
basis in substitution foi- the present cash basis
90-93
Effect will be given to this for financial year
1937-38. It cannot, however, be introduced for
1936-37 and will therefore not appear in the next
Annual Report


Page 6
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report.
Page. Paragraph
Second Progress Report— continued.
84-92
See above re (xvi)
That the annual reports of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission shall include a balance-
sheet and a revenue account, showing for each
irrigation and water supply district and each
waterworks district the financial position and
detailed operating results of the district
That the capital expenditure in each district be shown
in the published balance-sheets in such detail as
may be found possible after investigation of past
records, and that details be given in the balance-
sheets from time to time of the nature of the
additional capital expenditure in each year on the
lines of the accounts published by the Department
of Engineering and Water Supply, South Australia
Records, i.e., pay-sheets and vouchers, which would
enable this to be done in detail in respect to past
expenditure are no longer available. Following
the introduction of the costing system referred to
above, effect will, however, be given in the future
That, in the accounts of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission, adequate depreciation
be provided for on perishable assets (for this
purpose the accounts should be kept on lines
similar to the South Australian accounts illus-
trated in Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the Second
Progress Report) ; that all provision made for
depreciation be credited to the district asset
accounts concerned ; and that, on the replace-
ment of any asset, any balance of the original
cost still standing in the asset account be trans-
ferred to a capital expenditure written-off
account
24 102, 103
This is most important, but in addition to deprecia-
tion being shown in accounts, an actual interest
hearing fund should be established, into which
depreciation payments should be made annually
in respect to all assets having an estimated life
shorter than the term of the National Debt
Sinking Fund, i.e., 53 years. The amount
involved would be approximately £50,000 per
annum on present assets
This was shown in the Commission’s last Annual
Report, the amount credited to Water Supply
being £988,478 to 30th June, 1936, in respect
to a total original capital expenditure of
£26,791,817
That the equity of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission in the National Debt Sinking
Fund be brought to account in the balance-sheet
of the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission in the manner shown in Figure 6
The State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission considers that sUch credits should be
allocated to liquidate outstanding liabilities in
respect to :
(a) Loan Flotation Expenses and other
operations in respect of which there
are no tangible assets
( b) “ Capital Written Off ”
(c) “ Free Headworks ”
(d) " River Murray Works ’’—The Common-
wealth’s share of which has been met
from its revenue as construction pro-
ceeded
( e) Other works
That, in order to avoid a continuance of the long-
standing unsatisfactory methods employed in
the accounts of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, as described in paragraphs
67 to 111 of the Second Progress Report, the
Accountant of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission —recently appointed to that
position —should confer at frequent intervals
with the Treasury officials
25 114, 115
These difficulties have now been completely
overcome, and relations between the Treasury
and the Commission are entirely satisfactory
And that, in any future appointment of the
Accountant, consideration be given to the
desirability of appointing an officer who has
had experience in the Treasury
At the request of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, the Treasury has made
available one of its experienced qualified officers
who has now been appointed by the Commission
to the position of Assistant Accountant


Page 7
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission's
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report. Page.
Paragraph.
THIRD PROGRESS REPORT.
The Third Progress Report dealt with the Flood
Protection Districts and the Carrum Waterworks
Trust, and the Royal Commission recommended
‘ (paragraph 158) —
That the Lower Koo-wee-rup and Cardinia
Flood Protection Districts be amalgamated
77-83
This is desirable, but is contingent upon adoption of
the Royal Commission’s rating proposals—see
below. At present Flood Protection Charges in
Cardinia are 50 per cent, higher than in Koo-
wee-rup, but in neither district is the revenue
sufficient to meet maintenance costs
105-108
That the Carrum Waterworks Trust be abolished
and the present Trust area, with the addition of
such other lands as are directly benefited by the
existing and/or proposed works be constituted
a flood protection district
Recommended. The present financial position of
the Trust is particularly unsatisfactory and
frequent attention has been drawn to it by the
Auditor-General, who in his latest report, dated
21st June, 1937, states :—-
“ I am of the opinion that the serious
financial position of this Trust should be
submitted to the Treasurer. The position is
becoming more serious and calls for a definite
decision.”
Actually the Commission in December last had
already advised the Treasury of the desperate
position of the Trust, with an intimation that
nothing could be done pending a decision by the
Government on the Recommendations of the
Royal Commission
That the whole of the catchment area of the
present flood protection districts of Lower Koo-
wee-rup and Cardinia (including those districts
and the township of Koo-wee-rup) be constituted
a catchment area
32-35
This refers to the introduction of the English system
of rating “ uplands ” i.e., all lands within catch-
ment contributing to the flood problem in the
lower areas. The principle of rating “ contri-
butors ” as well as “ beneficiaries ” is already
established in Victoria in the Metropolitan
Drainage Rate which applies over the whole of
the Metropolitan Area. The system was intro-
duced in England upon the recommendation of a
Royal Commission which reported that the cost
of dealing with “ through ” waters could not be
met without rating the whole of the contributing
lands. The State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission is in accord with these recom-
mendations
That the whole of the catchment area of the
proposed Carrum Flood Protection District
(including that district and those portions of towns
within the catchment) be constituted a catchment
area
That the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission be given power to levy rates on all
landholders within a catchment area for the
purpose of meeting the cost of drainage and flood
protection works and the maintenance and manage-
ment thereof within that catchment area
That, in levying such rates, regard shall be had to
the direct and indirect benefits obtained from
such drainage and flood protection works and the
measure of responsibility for the volume and
intensity of flood waters contributing to the
necessity for such works
That rates in any catchment area shall be levied
on a valuation basis and not on an acreage basis
10 34 (85)
14-15 61
The Commission’s experience is that charges on
acreage basis are unsatisfactory in that they do
not take into account relative benefits received
by valuable properties as against those of low
value, nor does the acreage charge reflect
differential enhancement resulting from works
A flat charge does not take into account
fluctuations in wages and in value of money,
whereas these are generally reflected ultimately
in valuations


.Oils.
References.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
I
i
I
3rd 12 45
Page 8,
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Recommendations.
Royal Commission’s
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Third Progress Report— continued.
This was a recommendation of the State Rivers
That the proposed expenditure of £145,500 on
additional works in the present Lower Koo-wee-rup
Flood Protection District shall be referred to a
board of engineering experts for inquiry before
the work is proceeded with
and Water Supply Commission and effect has
been given to it by the Government, which is
notv awaiting a report on this matter
85 to 87
Contingent upon Government decision in regard
to works, and necessary legislation providing
for Catchment Areas as recommended above
That, in the event of the proposed additional work
in the present Lower Koo-wee-rup Flood
Protection District or any modification thereof
being approved by the proposed Board, and
proceeded with, the total rates levied on land-
holders in the various sections of the Koo-wee-rup-
Cardinia catchment area shall be as under —
(iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
(a) From the combined Lower Koo-
wee-rup and Cardinia Flood
Protection Districts .. .. 8,850
(6) From the township of Koo-wee-rup 800
(c) From the external catchment area 2,500
£12,150
Total
Concur—total rating should be in accordance with
maintenance requirements
That, in the event of the proposed additional capital
expenditure in the present Lower Koo-wee-rup
Flood Protection District not being incurred, the
amounts provided to be raised under ( h ) and (c)
in Recommendation (ix) hereof shall stand, but
the amount to be raised Under (a) shall be reduced
to the extent necessary to ensure that no increase
shall be made in the total rates now payable by
landholders in the existing Lower Koo-wee-rup
Flood Protection District exclusive of the township
of Koo-wee-rup
That, in the accounts of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, all capital expenditure to
date in the Lower Koo-wee-rup and Cardinia
Flood Protection Distriqts shall be transferred to
an account entitled !£ Capital expenditure borne
by the State ”
This is equivalent to “ writing off” and there is no
alternative other than a substantial increase in
the present Flood Protection Charges
That the lands in the proposed Carrum Flood Pro-
tection District be reclassified in three divisions
for rating purposes in accordance with the relative
benefits from the works and maintenance thereof
Concur
That the annual revenue required to meet main-
tenance, management, depreciation, and interest
and sinking fund on the works in the Carrum
catchment area be raised in the following pro-
portions :
(a) From the proposed flood protection £
district .. .. .. 1,566
Contingent upon decision re Catchment Areas and
necessary legislation
(/>) From the external catchment area 4,600
Total
£6,166


References.
Report. 1 Page. 1 Paragraph.
3rd 23 109
3rd 22 107
24 116
I
3rd 24-25 123
28 133
Page 9,
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Third Progress Report— continued.
That, in the accounts of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, all capital expenditure in
the Carrnm catchment area in excess of £82,586
shall be transferred to the “ Capital expenditure
borne by the State ” account
i.e., Written off ”
That, in the event of the proposed additional capital
expenditure of £19,000 in the Carrnm catchment
area, referred to in paragraph 107 of the Third
Progress Report, not being incurred, a proportion-
ate reduction shall be made in the assessments (as
set out in Recommendation (xiii) hereof), so that
the total revenue shall be sufficient to meet main-
tenance, management, and depreciation, and to
provide interest and redemption at 44 per cent,
per annum on £63,586. In that event all ex-
penditure in excess of £63,586 shall be transferred
to the “ Capital expenditure borne by the State ”
account
Some of this additional capital has already been
provided from Unemployment Relief Funds
That, in regard to the Loch Garry Flood Protection
District, the following procedure shall be fol-
' lowed :
The Agreement was :
In consideration of the Government of Vic-
toria bearing half the cost of carrying out, main-
taining and managing the Loch Garry Minor
Flood Protection Scheme described above, which
is estimated to cost Sixteen thousand pounds
(£16,000), and pursuant to the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission carrying out such
scheme, we, the undersigned landowners, hereby
agree that our lands as set out opposite our
signatures in the schedule hereunder shall be
formed into a Flood Protection District, and
that in respect of such lands there shall be made
and levied a flood protection rate or flood pro-
tection charge of such amount in either case as
shall be sufficient (after making allowance for
the above-mentioned contributions by the
Government) to meet the annual charges in
connexion with the scheme whether the actual
cost of constructing the works thereof shall be
more or less than the hereinbefore mentioned
amount of Sixteen thousand pounds (£16,000).
And we hereby further agree and undertake
to make no claim against the Government of
Victoria, or .against the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, the Board of Land and
Works, or any other Authority for compensation
in respect of any injury, loss, or damage to our
properties caused by the carrying out of the
works of the scheme or by any breaking away,
failure, or collapse of any of the levee banks
forming part of such works ”
{a) That there should be no variation of the
terms of the agreement between the
Government and landowners in this district
( b ) That the amount of the present rate be
reduced to sd. an acre until 30th June, 1955
Rates are made annually. The Commission pro-
poses to make this reduction for 1937-38
(c) That the district accounts be recast in the
books of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission to reflect the correct financial
position as set out in paragraphs 126 to 128
of the Third Progress Report
126-128
This will be done
(d) That, as from Ist July, 1955, the rate shall
be reduced to such an amount as is then
necessary to meet half the annual main-
tenance and management costs
Contingent upon actual collections. No decision
required at present


3rd 29 153 This will be done
30 155
3rd 30 156
157
3rd 30 156
157 !
I
I
3rd 30 156
157
References.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
3rd 28 137
3rd 28 134
Royal Commission's Recommendations.
Text.
Third Progress Report — continued.
( e) That, in the accounts of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission, the half-
share of capital liability to be borne by the
State in accordance with the agreement,
namely, £12,291, be transferred to the
“ Capital expenditure borne by the State ”
account
(/) That the State’s share of annual maintenance
and management costs (one-half) be dealt
with in the accounts of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission by charging it
to an account entitled “ Revenue expendi-
ture chargeable to the State ”
That in regard to the Echuca (High-street) Flood
Protection District, the following procedure be
adopted :
(a) That the district accounts be recast in the
books of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission to reflect the correct Financial
position as set out in paragraphs 153 to 155
of the Third Progress Report
(h) That ratepayers within the district be given
the option of extinguishing their shares of
the remaining capital liability by immediate
cash payments
(a) That, as an alternative to ( h ), the present
rates shall be maintained until such time
as the remaining capital liability is ex-
tinguished by the application to redemption
cf the excess of receipts over expenditure
( d ) That, on the extinction of the capital liability
as a result of either ( b) or (o), the Echuca
Borough Council be invited to assume the
responsibility for maintenance and manage-
ment of the works
(e) That as an alternative to (d), the rates
shall then be reduced to such an amount as
is necessary to meet the estimated cost of
maintenance and management
FOURTH AND FINAL REPORT.
In this Fourth and Final Report, which deals
with the remaining matters of the terms of
reference, the Royal Commission recommended :
That, in irrigation and water supply districts
Supplied by gravitation —
(a) the present general rate for the supply of
water for domestic and stock purposes
shall be replaced by a general service
rate for which no allowance shall be
made as a deduction from the charges
for water supplied
Page 10.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
No alternative
Recommended. There is at present no provision
in ” Estimates ” for an item of this nature
-Recommended alternatives be placed before
Borough Council to determine views of rate-
payers and of Council in regard to proposals.
Legislation may be required to give effect to
decision
From the point of view of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission there would be no
particular objection to this proposal, which is
analogous to the “ Service Charge ” of electricity
supply tariffs. The water users, however, may
feel when they receive such assessments that a
charge was being made in respect of which ’they
were receiving no return
Government Decision


Pago 11. •
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Recommendations
Royal Commission’s
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision,
Number.
Text.
Report.
Page. Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report— continued.
(6) the general service rate shall be of such
It is pointed out that the amounts in the £1
amount as to provide annually, as nearly
as practicable, the inescapable minimum
amount required for the maintenance
(labour and materials only) of the works
in each district and, as far as possible,
the rates shall be uniform throughout
proposed for the General Service Rates are, for
all the Goulburn and most other districts, 25
per cent, to 50 per cent, higher than the present
“ General Rates.” Exceptions are Cohuna,
Kerang, Leitchville, Third Lake, and Koondrook
districts where the proposed General Service
Rates are lower than present rates
districts supplied from the same source
(c) the present compulsory water rights and
sales systems shall be replaced by a
system of voluntary contracts for the
sale of water, based on the principles
enumerated in paragraph 138 of their
Report as set out below :
120 to
137
The Commission considers that this recommendation
should not be adopted. In Victoria, since the
passing of the epoch making Wafer Act 1905,
administration and control of country water
supplies' by the State has been a fundamental
principle in public policy
As far as irrigation is concerned, water rights
have been regulated by statute to ensure
equitable distribution of the State’s limited
water resources, and adequate development of
the lands for which works have been con-
structed at the cost of the State.
The Water Act provides that all lands in
irrigation districts shall be classified in accord-
ance with their suitability for irrigation, and
that the available water supply shall be allotted
as “ Water Rights ” to holdings in proportion
to the areas of land commanded by channels
and fit for irrigation
The benefits conferred are the provision of
drinking water for domestic and stock purposes
to the whole of each holding, and the assurance
of irrigation supplies to suitable lands up to
the extent of the water rights
Payment for these benefits has been by a
General Rate on the net annual value of the
holding in respect to the domestic and stock
supply, and an irrigation charge for the quantity
of the water right in respect to the irrigation
suppy
Excess water has in general been supplied at
the same rate as the water right
The system has been extraordinarily success-
ful, and since its introduction the Victorian
Water Act has been used as a model in all
subsequent legislation throughout the world
The Victorian system presented a marked
contrast with, and a substantial advance on the
systems which up to that time regulated the
subject of water and water rights in other
countries
Water rights attach to the land and provide
a perpetual assurance of essential water supplies
to the irrigator, as well as an assurance of
revenue to the State
The abandonment of the system in favour of
a contract system would mean a reversion to a
practice long since tried out in America and of"
which there was ample experience prior to the
passing of the Victorian Wafer Act 1905. Under
the contract system the allotment of water
would be subject to violent fluctuation at every
period of review depending upon intervening
seasonal conditions, with corresponding serious
effect upon revenue


Royal Commission's Recommendations.
Serial
Reference References.
Number. Number . Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report — continued.
4th 23-24 120-137
Proposed Basic Principles of Contract
•69 4th 23-24 120-137
Page 12.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision,
The Royal Commission’s recommendations are
that the contract prices should be fixed from
time to time to raise the revenue required in
each district
The contract system would therefore necessi-
tate marked variations in the price of water to
offset variations in quantities contracted for,
e.g., if the water contracted for were reduced
by one-half, the charge would have to be
doubled. Such a drastic change change might
well have serious political re-percussions.
It might be mentioned that at no time since
its introduction has there been any request or
suggestion by irrigators or their representatives
that the water right system should be abolished
The Royal Commission states that it set out to
devise a system by which “ the merits of the
Water Right system will be preserved, but by
which its defects may be avoided.” The prin-
cipal defect alleged was that “ some irrigators
are compelled to pay for more water than can
be effectively used on their land, whereas other
irrigators have no assurance that they will be
able to obtain the full volume they require.”
Paragraph 137.
The particular points raised by the Royal Commis-
sion are dealt with hereunder :
System.
(i) That the existing rights of each
irrigator shall be recognized, if
Under the existing system, irrigators may and
do apply for “ Extra Water Rights ” or addi-
tional water by way of “ Sales.” Any addition
must be at the discretion of the Commission as
he so chooses, as permanent
rights, that is to say, that he
shall be entitled to contract for a
quantity of water to be supplied
annually equal to the quantity
at present assigned to him by
way of water right or the maxi-
mum quantity used by him in
any year during the period of
seven years ended on 30th June,
1936, whichever quantity be the
greater
the total water “ commitments ” either as water
rights or contracts should not exceed capacity
of storages and channels. See Serial Reference
No. 73 below
(ii) That the system should be such as
to encourage the further develop-
ment of intense culture in exist-
ing irrigation areas. To that
end, the system should permit of
an increase in the quantity of
water contracted for in those
instances where an increase is
desired by the irrigator for the
purpose of more fully developing
his property
This is fully provided for under the Water Right
system, and the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission encourages application for 1 ‘ Extra
Water Rights ” where water is available and
can be used to advantage
(iii) That, in order to avoid the prin-
cipal defect of the water rights
system (namely, that irrigators
have no voice in the deter-
mination of the minimum quan-
tity of water for which they are
bound to pay), each irrigator
should be given the right at the
outset to nominate his own
requirements
There is already machinery in the existing Water
Act to allow of appeals against the Commission’s
apportionment of water rights. These appeals
may be made at the time of compilation of a
Register on the constitution of a District or at
any time when such Register is revised, and
such revisions must be at intervals of not more
than fifteen years. Actually it has been the
Commission’s practice for many years to make
an annual revision of the Register, and conse-
quently it has been competent for irrigators to
.appeal against their allotment of water right
every twelve months. It might be mentioned
that from the many thousands of irrigators, there
has been only one appeal to law over the past
30 years, whereas there have been hundreds of
variations of water rights by arrangement. The
rinminiseii n tins iu>Vf»r rwFiispfl fn rorblPP thn


Report. Page. Paragraph.
__— »- —
Fourth and Final Report— continued.
'
rights
Page 13.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations,
Serial
Reference
Number,
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment,
Government Decision,
Number,
Text.
water rights when it has been established that the
lands to which the water rights were allotted
were unsuitable for irrigated culture
The proposal of the Royal Commission would
simply enable the land owner who was unwilling
to irrigate to evade his responsibilities and transfer
his obligations to the efficient irrigator whose
charges would be correspondingly raised to
meet the deficiency
Should there be any cases where agreement as to
allotment of water right cannot be realized, the
Commission would have no objection whatever
to such cases being referred to an Appeal Board
which might include an officer of the Department
of Agriculture and a representative of the
i rrigators
As a deterrent to the under-
statement of requirements in the
original contracts, water supplied
in excess of the contracted quan-
tities in any year should be
charged for at a higher rate than
the contracted rate
139 (vi)
The higher rate for excess water is essential to the
“Contract” system, to prevent gross under-
statement of requirements, but the Commission
feels that in Victoria, where the total available
supply of water.varies considerably from year to
year, this proposal would operate very harshly.
Under either “ Water Right ” or “ Contract ”
system the Commission must limit its total
commitments. In years when excess water is
available, present practice is to supply it at the
same price as for water rights. Under the pro-
posed system all such excess water over “ con-
tract limitation ’ ’ would be at the higher price
(50 per cent, increase)
The proposal would also specially penalize land
owners irrigating pastures and other fodder
crops whose water requirements fluctuate with
seasonal conditions much more than those of
orchardists
(iv) That the State Rivers and Water
This is obvious and fundamental, and applies with
equal force to both “ Water Right ” and “ Con-
297, 298
Supply Commission should be
given the right to restrict the
tract ” systems
total quantity of water con-
tracted for in any district to a
maximum figure governed by the
capacity of the existing storage
and distributary works
(v) That contracts should be made for
In view of what has been said above no further
a term of years sufficiently long
to prevent irrigators from
attempting to speculate on pros-
pective seasonal conditions in
fixing the quantity of water
contracted for. At the same
time, it is not desirable, at least
comment is offered. In America where all
forms of contracts have been tried out over
the past 50 years, the most satisfactory are
“perpetual contracts” which are in effect
’ £ water-rights.” As the Royal Commission
itself pointed out witnesses in Irrigation Districts
attached considerable value to their water
in the initial stage of the system,
that the term of the contracts
should be so long as to prevent
variations suggested by ex-
perience. Contracts should be
renewable from time to time at
the option of the irrigator for
reasonably lengthy periods. The
first contracts should be for a
term of say, three years, so that
minor details of the system may
be varied on the expiration of
that term in the light of the
experience gained. Renewals of
contracts from time to time
should be for longer periods, say
seven vears


Page 14.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
Serial
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment
Government Decision
Reference
Number.
Number.
Text.
Report. Page.
Paragraph
Fourth and Final Report — continued.
{d) the conditions governing the voluntary
contracts provided for in (c) hereof shall
be as set out in paragraph 139 of their
Report as under
It will be noted from the comments below that
practically all of the desired conditions already
apply, or can be mad: to apply, to the existing
Water Right System
(i) The contracts shall be made
between the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission and
individual occupiers in irrigation
and water supply districts for
the supply of a specified quantity
of water annually for a term of
three years in the first instance.
Contracts shall be renewable, at
the opinion of the irrigator for
periods of seven years
Already dealt with —see Serial Reference No. 74
above
(ii) Contracts shall be made in respect
of the supply of water for
irrigation purposes to specified
holdings of land
This applies to the present Water Right
(iii) The quantity of water contracted
for shall be determined by the
irrigator, subject to the following
conditions :
This is contrary to “ Basic Principle” No. (iv) of
Royal Commission. See Serial Reference No. 73.
Proposal that irrigator should be entitled to
maximum he may have received in a good year
is impracticable. When water is available, the
Commission would have no objection to allotting
“ Extra Water Right ” under existing system
(a) The irrigator shall be
entitled, as a right, to
contract for a quantity
equal to the present water
right allocated to the
holding or to the maxi-
mum quantity supplied to
the holding in any years
during the period of seven
years ended on 30th June,
1936, whichever quantity
be the greater
(b) On the application of an
irrigator the quantity
contracted for may be
greater than the quantity
determined in accordance
with (a), and such appli-
cation shall be granted
unless, in the opinion of
the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commis-
sion, the existing storages
and distributary works
are incapable of supplying
the full quantity applied
for by irrigators in the
district
This could apply to Water Right System
(c) In the event of any irrigator
desiring to contract for a
quantity smaller than the
quantity determined in
accordance with {a), the
contracted quantity shall
be such a quantity as the
irrigator is prepared to
contract for and no more.
Any voluntary reduction
in the amount contracted
for below the present
water right shall, however,
be deemed to constitute a
surrender of that water
right to the extent of
The Commission cannot too strongly recommend
against the acceptance of this principle which
would benefit only the unprogressive land
holders and would indefinitely retard rural
development
It would have a particularly serious effect in
the case of new irrigation projects, such as the
Murray Valley proposals, where a one in four
water right is absolutely essential to financial
success. These conditions were accepted by
the land holders —the price of water to be 10s.
per acre foot—but the Commission has no
hesitation in saying that under the contract
system land holders would prefer a much
smaller allocation of water and the scheme
would prove hopelessly unfinancial from the
such reduction
outset


Page 15.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision,
Number.
Text.
Report. Page.
Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report— continued.
(d) No contract, variation, or
renewal thereof, between
the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission
and any occupier other
than the owner of the
holding, by which the
quantity of water con-
tracted for is less than the
present water right of the
holding, shall be entered
into or accepted by the
State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission except
with the consent in
writing of the owner of
that holding
Alterations, to either Water Rights or Contracts,
should be only with consent of owner, whether
variation is either to increase or decrease
allocation of water
During the currency of any con-
tract or renewal thereof, the
State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission may vary the
quantity of water contracted for
in the following circumstances
(a) On the application of the
irrigator, the quantity
may be increased, and if
so increased, shall remain
This applies to Water Right system
at the higher figure during
the remainder of the
currency of the contract.
The State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission
shall agree to the varia-
tion in all instances where,
in its opinion, such
increased quantity can
safely be contracted for,
having regard to the
capacity of the existing
storages and distributary
works in the district. The
increase shall take effect
as from the commence-
ment of the irrigation
season immediately suc-
ceeding the receipt of the
irrigator’s application, but
applications received after
the thirtieth day of June
in any year shall not be
considered until after the
close of the succeeding
irrigation season
(6) On the application of the
This applies to Water Right system
tion is due to soil conditions
where
altera-
irrigator, the quantity may
be reduced, and if so
reduced, shall remain at
the lower figure during
the remainder of the
currency of the contract.
The State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission
shall agree to the variation
only in instances where it
is shown to the satisfaction
of that Commission that,
owing to special circum-
stances arising since the
contract was entered into,
the application should be
granted


Page 16.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations,
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment
Government Decision,
Number,
Text.
Report.
Page. Paragraph
Fourth and Final Report — continued.
(v) The irrigator shall be bound to pay
in each year for all water con-
tracted for under the contract, as
entered into or varied, at the
unit charge prescribed for that
year in the irrigation and water
supply district in which the hold-
ing is located, whether the
quantity contracted for is
actually used or not
This applies to Water Right. This Commission is
in accord with principle that charge should not be
made where, owing to unusual drought or other
unforeseen contingency the Commission is unable
to supply the full water right. A proportion of
Irrigation Charge would, under such circum-
stances, be written off
In the event of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission
being unable to supply the
quantity contracted for in full in
any year, the irrigator shall be
bound to pay, at the prescribed
unit charge, only for that
quantity actually supplied
(vi) Water supplied in any year in
excess of the quantity con-
tracted for shall be charged for
at a rate exceeding the rate for
water supplied under the con-
This does not, and, in the opinion of the Commission,
should not apply to the Water Right System,
although provision is made in the Water Act for
the Commission to dispose of surplus water at
such charges as it may determine. The Com-
mission’s practice is to charge for excess water
the same price as for water right
tract
(vii) The State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission shall have power to
insert in the contracts such terms
This applies equally to “Water Right” or
“Contract” system
as it deems fit in respect to :
{a) Conditions and times of
delivery of water ;
(b) Point or points of delivery
of water to the holding ;
(c) Terms and time of payment;
(d) Limitation of liability for
breach of contract in the
event of failure of supply
arising from unusual
drought or other unavoid-
able cause or accident
(e) The right to withhold sup-
plies of water in , any
instance where the irri-
Sec. 345
The Royal Commission emphasizes that this con-
dition is essential to the Contract System as its
proposed contract charges would not be a charge
on the land
gator has refused or
neglected to pay for
water already supplied
(viii) Payments to be made by the
irrigator under the contract shall
not be made a charge on the
land, nor shall interest be
chargeable on arrears of such
payments; it being the inten-
tion that the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission shall
enforce its right to payment
through the exercise of its
powers to withhold further sup-
plies of water
Sec. 345
The Royal Commission elsewhere in its Report
endorses the principle of interest on arrears of
rates, and considers that 6 per cent, is not ex-
cessive, see paragraphs 100 and 154 of Fourth
Progress Report. Unless Irrigation Charge re-
main a charge on the land, the Commission would
be forced to withhold water even when tins
would entail serious hardship


Page 17
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission's
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report —con finned.
(ix) Each contracting irrigator shall be
at liberty, with the consent of
the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission, to assign
his rights under the contract,
in respect of any holding, to any
subsequent occupier of that
holding. The State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission shall
have the right to withhold its
consent to the assignment only
in those instances where the
proposing assignor has refused
or neglected to pay for water
already supplied to that holding,
and then, only until such time
as arrangements for payment
acceptable to the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission
have been made
The existing water rights are attached to the laud,
and this difficulty does not arise
That, in the irrigation and water
supply districts
The Royal Commission stated —page 27, para. 141,
Fourth Report —that “ the proportion of the
total cost which is at present paid by irrigators
generally is so small that no reduction in the
present general level of charges should be con-
templated ”. The scale submitted by the Royal
Commission however,while maintaining generally
the level of total charges—i.e. rate plus irrigation
charge—in most districts, does recommend a
substantial reduction in Cohuna, and a few
adjacent districts supplied from the Torrumbarry
System which actually have the special advantage
of the River Murray Works. The construction
of these works a few years ago enabled these
districts to dispense with costly pumping plants
without being debited with any additional capital
liability in respect to the River Murray Works.
This Commission, however, considers that in any
revision of charges, which must of course be based
on relief of capital liability, all districts should
receive uniform consideration. The adoption of
the proposed' charges or any variation of them is
not necessarily dependent upon the acceptance
of the Contract System, as any scale of charges
might apply equally to the Water Right System
provided equivalent relief is given in respect of
Capital Liabilities
served by
gravitation the rates
is and charges in
rate and contract
respect of the general service
system provided for in
Recommendation I.
hereof shall be as under :■ —
Charge an
Acre-foot
for Water
Supplied
in Excess
Con era I
Service
liate in
tl on
Improved
Annual
Valuation.
C'liar.'c an
Acre-foot
for Water
Supplied
under
Contract.
Reference
in
District.
Fourth
Report
Appendix
D.
Contracted
Quantity.
S. d.
S. d.
s. d.
Para.
South
Shcpparton
Shepparton
North
5 0
5 0
7 6
7 6
15 |
Shepparton
Katandra
5 0
5 0
Rodney
Tongala
Stanhope
Rochester
5 0
5 0
5 0
5 0
Echuca North
Dingee
5 0
5 0
Calivil
5 0
Tragowcl Plains
Boort
5 0
2 0
9 0
Leitchville
Cohuna
5 0
5 0
Koondrook
Kerang
5 0
4 0
6 0
Third Lake
Mystic Park
Fish Point
Swan Hill
5 0
5 0
5 0
5 0
Bacchus Marsh
Werribee
17 0
25 6
10 0
15 0
Maflfra-Sale
13 6
There are no vital objections to this proposal
other than that it would create an anomaly
That, in the Merbein, Red C
Irrigation and Water Supply Di
(a) the general rate for the
Cliffs, and Nyah
Districts—
supply of water
in comparison with other districts. The matter
is not of any real importance as the Royal
Commission recommends that the loss in revenue
for domestic and stock
purposes shall
be abandoned
should be offset by an increase in the irrigation
charge


Page 18.
SUPPLY.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations,
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph
Fourth and Final Report — continued.
This appears desirable. There are difficulties
in connexion with the operation of the present
system owing to requirements for dried fruit
production fluctuating with seasonal conditions.
The installation of meters to measure actual
deliveries would involve an expenditure of some
£20,000, and in the opinion of the Commission
this expenditure is not warranted. At present
five waterings are given under “ water rights ”
and any additional waterings required under
“ sales.” It is recognized that present practice
in dried fruit production requires six waterings
in a normal year
( b ) there shall be instituted a system of
charges based entirely on acreage, and
the unit charge under this system shall
be an inclusive annual charge an acre
covering six waterings a season (whether
such waterings are full or alternate row
, 4th
162-163
waterings)
Recommended, but there should, of course, be
(c) the unit charge referred to in (6) hereof
shall be £3 ss. an acre in the Merbein
District, £3 12s. 6d. an acre in the Red
Cliffs District, and £2 13s. 4d. an acre
Appendix
D,
156, 165,
and 170
provision for fluctuation with fluctuations in
costs, wages, &c.
in the Nyah District
{d) each watering in excess of six a season
shall be charged for on the basis of a
full watering at ten shillings an acre
Appendix
D,
156, 165,
and 170
Charge should depend upon actual cost of supply,
and fixed charge should not be quoted, as
variations in cost of fuel, wages, &c., from
time to time will affect such cost. The present
cost averages about ten shillings
with proportionate reductions for
alternate row waterings
This was tried as an experiment last year and gave
satisfaction neither to the Commission nor
the irrigators. Actual measurements showed
that although the district as a whole used less
water for alternate rows than for full watering,
some lands took more water when irrigating
alternate rows than others watering whole area.
It meant also a large amount of additional work
with complication of accounts and is not
recommended
(e) the concession in regard to supplementary
(“ run through ”) waterings shall be con-
tinued
This has been the practice of the Commission for
many years
That, in the Tresco Irrigation and Water Supply
District, the general rate for the supply of water
for domestic and stock purposes shall be abandoned,
the concessions in regard to water supplied to
replanted holdings shall be continued, and the
charge for water shall be a single charge of ten
shillings an acre a watering
Conditions should be as in other similar districts.
98-99
173-177
Alteration should, therefore, be contingent
upon decisions in other cases, i.e., Red Cliffs,
Merbein, and Nyah
That all lands in irrigation and water supply dis-
tricts shall be placed in the first division, and
that the State Rivers and Water Supply Commis-
sion shall be given the legal power to write off all
rates in respect of lands which do not derive any
benefit from the service, until such time as they
28-29
150-153
Recommended
do derive a benefit


Page 19.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report — continued.
That the Harcourt and Axe Creek Waterworks Dis-
tricts l)e re-constituted as irrigation and water
supply districts ; that the rates and charges in
those districts be based on the principle of a
general service rate and contracts system as
provided for in Recommendation I. hereof ; and
that the rates and charges in each district shall
be as under :
No objection to constitution of Irrigation Districts,
other than that, owing to fact that domestic
water supplies for Bendigo, Castlemaine, and
other centres have to take precedence in Coliban
District, the Commission could neither enter
in contracts nor allot water rights for more than
a very limited area. See also comment re
“ Contract ” system and charges for excess
water (Serial Reference No. 68)
177-180
General service rate ~ Is. in £1 on annual
valuation
Charge for water sup-
plied under contract Id. a thousand gallons
Charge for water sup-
plied in excess of the
contracted quantity l id. a thousand gallons
That the Compaspe and Deakin Irrigation and
Water Supply Districts shall be re-constituted as
waterworks districts ;
71, 72
Appendix
Recommended. Water rights cannot be given in
these Districts, owing to intermittent or inade-
quate supply, or to unsuitability of soil or other
reasons as indicated in Royal Commission’s
3, 9, 12,
13
Report
that, in each district the general rate for the
supply of water for domestic and stock purposes
shall be that in force prior to the temporary
reduction of 10 per cent;
Appendix
Recommended
9, 13
and that the present charges for water supplied
for irrigation shall stand
Appendix
Decision might be held over pending determination
of charges in other districts. Present charges
in Campaspe District are an anomaly and are a
continuance of old Trust charges
That, with a view to the re-constitution of the
Loddon United Waterworks Trust as a waterworks
district, a detailed plan of re-arrangement of the
Trust’s district (involving possible inclusion of
portions of the area in neighbouring districts) shall
be prepared by the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission and submitted to the ratepayers of
the Loddon United Waterworks Trust for their
consideration
72, 73
Appendix
The decision should be one for Government rather
than for ratepayers, as there will be conflicting
interests in various sections of the area in
21-23
question. When proposed plan of re-arrange-
ment has been prepared by the Commission —■
which will take some time—it could then be
submitted to the Government
That the general rate for the supply of water in the
Hindmarsh Waterworks District shall be reduced
to 2s. Bd., Is. 4d., and Bd. in the £1 in the First,
Second, and Third Divisions respectively, with
a minimum charge of £lO 13s. 4d. a square mile
on First Division lands
Appendix
Recommended by the Commission and already
approved by Government. No legislation
required and effect will be given, 1937-38
32-32
That, in each of the Waterworks districts of Coreena,
Millewa, Millewa Central, Carwarp, Carwarp
Central, and Yelta, the rates shall be levied on
the basis of a flat rate a square mile as under
First Division .. £lO 13s. id. a square
91, 92
Comprehensive report already submitted by the
Commission to the Government which has
Appendix
approved of Royal Commission’s recommen-
dations
43-46
Second Division .. £5 6s. Bd. a square
Third Division .. £2 13s. Id. a square
{a) That, in the portion of the Walpeup West Water-
works District approximately east of Cowangie,
all public bores shall be kept in operation, the
classification of lands shall remain as at present,
and the rates shall bo those in force prior to the
temporary reduction of 10 per cent.
Appendix
Recommended
38-42


their total contribution of £81,000
4th 44 260 See below for details
4th 44 260 Recommended
i
i
Page 20.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page.
Paragraph.
Fourth and Final Report —continued.
Recommended. There is already special legislation
providing for the sale of certain bores no longer
required for public purposes
{h) That, in the portion of the Walpeup West Water-
works District approximately west of Cowangie,
all public bores, except those adjacent to railway
stations or defined areas, shall be abandoned
unless adjoining landholders are prepared to take
them over and assume liability for their main-
tenance, and the whole of this area shall be reduced
in classification to Third Division, and rated at
2|d. in the £ in order to produce sufficient revenue
to maintain the remaining public bores
4 th
Appendix
38-42
This could be done, but district should be debited
That, in future, all moneys received from sales of
water in the Kerang North-West Lakes Water-
works District, shall be credited to the accounts
of that district
Appendix
for water supplied in bulk to the lakes from the
Torrumbarry System Main Supply Works
56-57
Surveys have been in progress for several years
and are being continued
That a complete survey of the drainage requirements
of each irrigation and water supply district be
commenced forthwith ;
that, as soon as those surveys are completed,
plans for comprehensive district drainage schemes
be designed and estimates of cost prepared ;
For the majority of districts, complete plans with
estimates have been prepared
that these plans and estimates be placed before
Parliament with a view to provision being made
at the earliest possible moment for the capital
required to construct the main drains and outfalls ;
These plans and estimates have been referred by
the Government to the Employment Council for
consideration, and recommendation
and that, in each instance, the capital expenditure
and interest thereon shall be borne by the State ;
Upon the recommendation of the Employment
Council, grants totalling some £853,000 have
been made for these works from Unemployment
Relief Funds to 30th June, 1937, and work in
most districts is well advanced. In Red Cliffs
the work has been completed
proposals for the constitution of Drainage
Districts, with a view to levying maintenance
and that the landowners shall be required to pay
the annual cost of maintenance of the drainage
system
rates, have been placed before the Government
That the existing financial arrangements in regard
to the capital expenditure of the drainage systems
in the districts of Merbein and Red Cliffs shall be
adhered to
In these districts, settlers are contributing in in-
stalments towards cost of drainage works amounts
totalling £5 per irrigable acre of their holdings,
and have already paid some £26,000 towards
That the Water Act 1928 shall be amended in accord-
ance with the specific recommendations contained
in paragraph 260 of this Report, as under :
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS.
Section 6.—That the word " use ” be inserted in the
third line between the words “ divert ” and “ or
appropriate any water ”
Purpose —To ensure that all cases of diversion
of water as, for example, for water power by
machinery located in a weir or dam constructed
across a stream, are subject to authority from
the Commission
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment,
and recommend its adoption subject to the
preservation of the existing rights of the State
Electricity Commission of Victoria


Page 21.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision,
Number.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph.
Proposed Amendments —continued.
Section B.—That the words “ Corporation or ” be
inserted between the words “ any ” and “ person ”
in the fifth line. That there be added to the
section the words “ any authority other than the
Commission and the Mines Department shall have
no right to control diversions of water from any
river, creek, stream, or watercourse, or from any
lake, lagoon, swamp, or marsh other than public
rivers, creeks, and watercourses within the metro-
polis as defined in section 3 of the Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of TPorAvf Act 1928 ”
Recommended
Purpose. —To provide for the control of diver-
sions from natural sources of supply outside of the
metropolitan area by a water supply authority
being reserved to the Commission, and hence
that such control may not be independently
exercised by another body (or corporation) such
as a Waterworks Trust, also constituted under
the Water Act
Conclusion and Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve, of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Section 10. —That the words “ dead stock ” be
Recommended
inserted (after “ filth ”) and “ or deleterious ”
(after “filthy ”) in the second and third lines, and
that there be added to the section the words “ but
no Water Right Licence shall be granted by the
Mines Department without the consent of the
Commission ”
Purpose. —To enable the Commission to give
early consideration to the possibility of pollution
Conclusion and Reco'nmendation.~Yonv
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Section 12. —That a clause be added to indicate that
Recommended
the responsibility for damage resulting from works
carried out under this section shall rest on the
persons carrying out the works and not on the
Commission
Purpose. —The Crown Solicitor is of opinion
that the granting of permission under this
section may involve responsibility to the Com-
mission
Conch sion and Recommendation. —-Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption ,
Section 14.—That the word “ solely ” be inserted
in the last line between the words “ and ” and
Recommended
“ used in connexion with a dwelling ”
Purpose —To ensure that the purpose of the
proposed diversion will be for domestic require-
ments, and not for commercial use, for which
latter a diversion permit must be obtained
Conclusion and Recommendation ■ —Your Com-
missioners apj>rove of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption


Authority. Chairman. Commissioners.
Victorian Railways £3,500 £1,750
(Act provides for
£5,000)
State Rivers and £1,250 £1,000
Water Supply (Act provides for
Commission £2,000)
State Electricity £2,100 Part time
Commission (Act provides for
£3,000)
Country Roads £1,550 £1,200
Board (Act provides for
£1,550)
} Government Policy
Page 22
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Co mmissiou’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
Proposed Amendments — continued.
Section 20.—That, in the second paragraph (third
line), the words ; ‘ One thousand five hundred ”
be substituted for the words “ One thousand ”.
That the last paragraph be repealed
Purpose —The present remuneration is not
commensurate with the responsibility of the
Commissioners and the last paragraph is not
now applicable
Conclusion and Recommendation —In the
Second Progress Report, your Commissioners
recommended that the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission should consist of one full-
time Commissioner and three part-time Com-
missioners
The suggested amendment to the second
paragraph of section 20 of the Act would
increase the maximum salary of each Commis-
sioner, other than the Chairman, to £1,500 a
year instead of £l,OOO as at present. *ln the
event of the recommendation for part-time
Commissioners being adopted, this amendment
would be unnecessary. In the event of the
principle of full-time Commissioners being
continued, your Commissioners are of opinion
that a maximum salary of £1,500 a year would
not be unreasonable, and they recommend that,
in that event, the suggested amendment be
adopted
As to the proposed repeal of the last para-
graph of the section, this relates to the adminis-
tration of the Closer Settlement Act 1928 by the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.
As that Act is no longer administered by the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
the paragraph is not now applicable, and your
Commissioners recommend that it be repealed
Section-21. —That the section be amended to provide
for continuity of tenure by the Commissioners
Purpose. —Continuity of tenure of office is
considered essential for independent control and
efficient administration
Conclusion and Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners agree that continuity of tenure
is desirable, and in the Second Progress Report
it was recommended that it shall be the usual
practice to appoint the chairman of the Com-
mission for the period of seven years, and the
part-time Commissioners for terms not exceeding
seven years
Government policy. The Royal Commission
states —Second Progress Report, page 27, para.
127 (c) that ” the salaries paid to the Commis-
sioners and Senior Officers have been inadequate
in relation to their responsibilities ’’. It might
be mentioned that salaries paid to major Boards
and Commissions are :
Government Decision


omission in earlier
Page 23.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
•Government Decision,
Number.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph,
Proposed Amendments— continued.
Section 30. —That provision be included for trans-
ferring to the Commission works constructed and
completed between 12th December, 1905, and
45-46
Recommended—To remedy an
Water Acts
4th January, 1910, the dates of commencement
of the Water Act 1905 and the Water Act 1909
respectively
Purpose. —By the Water Act 1905, the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission took over
the works completed by prior authorities to
12th December, 1905. By the Water Act 1909,
the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
assumed control of all works constructed after
4th January, 1910. The works constructed by
the Board of Land and Works between 12th
December, 1905, and 4th January, 1910, have
never been formally transferred to the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission. It was
intended to effect this transfer by a provision
in the next Statute Law Revision Act. It is
now considered that it would be preferable to
provide for the transfer in the Water Act itself
Conclusion ami Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Section 33 (7). —That this section be amended to
Recommended
provide that all moneys arising from the sale of
any lands pursuant to the Act shall be paid to the
credit of the State Loans Repayment Fund
instead of to the credit of a Trust Fund to be
kept in the Treasury and called the “ Waterworks
Construction Fund,” as at present provided
Purpose. —To bring the provisions of the Act
into line with present practice. All moneys
received from the sale of assets originally pur-
chased from loan money are now paid to the
credit of the State Loans Repayment Fund
Conclusion and. Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Section 42. —That this section—which provides that
appointments, promotion, and increases in salary
and allowances or additions to the salary of
officers shall be subject to the sanction of the
Government Policy
Minister- —be repealed
Purpose —To give the Commission power to
appoint such officers as it considers necessary
and to pay such salaries as it considers adequate.
(Compare State Electricity Commission Act,
section 30)
Conclusion —This question was considered in
paragraphs 21 to 25 and recommendations (v),
(vi), and (vii) of the Second Progress Report
Section 69 (1). —That the maximum rate of depre-
ciation to be provided for on machinery, plant,
or perishable structures shall be increased from
71 per cent, per annum to 121 per cent, per annum
Purpose —To provide adequate depreciation
Recommended
on boilers
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption


Page 24.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph
Proposed Amendments —contim cd.
Section 69 (2). —That this paragraph be amended
to provide that the Water Supply Works Depre-
ciation Fund to be established by the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission and kept in the
Treasury, shall be invested and the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission credited with
interest thereon at the end of each financial year
Recommended—See also serial Refefence No. 36
of this schedule
Purpose —To provide adequate depreciation
Conclusion and Recommendation —The pro-
posed amendment would not of itself ensure
adequate provision for depreciation. In the
Second Progress Report (paragraphs 94 to 105),
your Commissioners dealt with the question of
the inadequacy of the amounts hitherto allocated
to depreciation, and made specific recommend-
ations in that Report (Recommendations (xix)
and (xx)). The amendment to this section
suggested by the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission is approved in principle by your
Commissioners and they recommend its adoption
in addition to the measures recommended in
the Second Progress Report
Subdivision 5, Sections 87-100. —That subdivision
s—dealing with Murray Settlements be repealed,
and that a section be substituted making the
irrigation districts’ provisions of the Act apply to
irrigation areas (Merbein and Nyah) and to the
waterworks districts within which such irrigation
areas were constituted
Recommended
Purpose. —To bring Merbein and Nyah Water-
works Districts and Irrigation areas under the
irrigation districts’ provisions of the Act
Conclusion and, Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Section 188. —That the word “ use ” be inserted in
lines 11 and 19 between the words " to” and
“ take or divert water ” ; that the words “ con-
struct a weir or dam or to use” be inserted
between the words “ authorizing persons to ” and
“ take or pump water ” in the second paragraph,
line 3 ; and that the words “ weir or dam may be
constructed and used as such ” be inserted between
the words “ under which such ” and “ water may
be ” and the word “ used ” be inserted between
the words “ water may bo ” and “ taken or
pumped ” in the third paragraph, line 2
Recommended
Purpose. —To ensure that all cases of diversion
of water, as for water power by machinery
located in a weir or dam constructed across a
stream, are subject to authority from the Com-
mission
Conclusion and Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption subject
to the preservation of the existing rights of the
State Electricity Commission of Victoria


Page 25.
WATER
SUPPLY,
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page.
Paragraph.
Proposed Amendments —contin tied.
Section 304. —That the section be amended to
remote the necessity for approval by the Governor-
in-Council of by-laws made by the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission, and to provide
that in lieu of publishing by-laws in full in the
Government Gazette , a notification be published in
the Government Gazette that certain by-laws have
been made
Matter of Government policy. The suggested
simplification of publication on lines of Local
Government Act is desirable
Purpose. —To remove all rates and charges
from political control. A minor advantage
sought by the suggestion that by-laws be not
published in full in the Government Gazette is a
considerable reduction in the cost of advertising
Conclusion and Recommendation. —For the
reasons given in paragraphs 268 to 283 of this
Report, your Commissioners are of opinion that
it is desirable that the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission should be given a measure
of financial independence
They regard the provision that by-laws shall
be published in full in the Government Gazette as
unnecessarily expensive. They the reforerecom-
mend the adoption of the suggested amendments
to this section
Section 309. —That a new section be added in terms
of section 250, Local Government Act 1928, to
include power to rate Crown lands occupied under
grazing licence
Recommended
Purpose —To enable the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission to sue for such rates.
At present, pending such an amendment, it is
believed that the legal position is that the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission cannot
sue
Conclusion and Recommendation—- Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption
Section 334.—That provision be made for a cer-
tificate showing rates and charges due and payable
to any authority or that [no rates and charges are
due and payable to such authority, to be issued by
the secretary of the authority in lieu of under
seal of the authority
Recommended
Purpose —To facilitate the giving of such
certificates. A similar provision appears in the
Jjocal Government Act 1928, section 385
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption
Section 343. —That the words “ other than an
irrigation charge” should be deleted
There appears to be no reason why irrigation charges
were excluded from those that could be re-
covered by issue of a warrant which can be used
in. connexion with all other rates and charges
Purpose —To compel payment of rates and
charges
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption


Page 26.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
Proposed Amendments — continued.
Section 344. —That the words “ other than an
irrigation charge ” be deleted
Purpose —To assist in collections by em-
powering an occupier who pays or is distrained
for a greater sum than the irrigation charge due
by him for the period of his occupancy, to
deduct such sum from the rent or to recover
it from the owner in court of competent juris-
diction
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption
Section 345. —That the words “ other than an
irrigation charge ” be omitted and that, after the
word “ cessation,” there should be added the
words “ any person requiring restoration of
service may be liable to a payment of Ten
shillings ”
Purpose. —To give power to the Commission
to cut-off water in irrigation districts for non-
payment of irrigation charges, and to recoup
expenses involved in disconnecting and restoring
service
Conclusion and Recommendation. — In the
event of the adoption of the recommendations
made by your Commissioners for a contracts
system for the supply of water in irrigation
districts supplied by gravitation, the words in
question should be deleted. In the event of
the present system of a compulsory irrigation
charge being continued, they should be retained
for the reason that it would be inequitable to
levy a compulsory irrigation charge on lands
from which a supply of water is withheld. In
the case of the irrigation districts supplied by
pumping, the charge at present is a compulsory
charge based on acreage, and no alteration in
this basis is proposed by your Commissioners.
That being so, the words in question should be
retained in respect of these districts. Your
Commissioners recommend that, in the event
of the adoption of the recommendations for a
contracts system for the supply of water in
irrigation districts supplied by gravitation, the
section should be amended to provide that the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
shall have power to withhold supplies of water
for non-payment of any rate or irrigation
charge, other than an irrigation charge in
irrigation districts supplied by pumping. The
proposed charge for restoration of service after
water has been cut-off, appears to be un-
necessary, since no expense is involved in
cutting-off a rural supply, and your Com-
missioners do not recommend the adoption of
this proposal in irrigation or waterworks
districts
Section 348. —That provision be included for a fine
in lieu of imprisonment as penalty for destruction
of works
Conclusion and Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed
amendment and recommend its adoption
Again there appears to be no reason why irrigation
charges are specially excluded from the provisions
of the section
The alternative to cutting-off water as proposed
to compel payment of rates and charges is for
the Commission to take the legal action provided
by the Water Acts, and in difficult cases to
realize upon the properties concerned
Recommended. Provision should be made for
fine or imprisonment at discretion of the Court


4th 48-49 260 Matter of Government Policy
Page 27.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
Serial
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision,
Reference
Number.
References.
Number.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph.
Proposed Amendments — continued.
Recommended
Section 349. — (a) That the section be extended to
include irrigation and drainage channels and all
measuring appliances thereon, and that provisions
be included for interference with channel banks
without authority, on the lines of section 397 of
the Water Act 1890. That the second paragraph
be amended by increasing the penalty for illegally
taking or diverting water from £5 to £2O a day.
Purpose —To strengthen the Commission’s
position in proceedings for interference with
wheel meters, &c. Crown Solicitor’s suggestion
to enable prosecution to be launched in such
cases
(b) That the penalty prescribed at the end of the
first paragraph be increased to £5O a day
Purpose —To make the fine commensurate
with the extent of the possible damage and cost
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of these proposed amend-
ments and recommend their adoption .
PROPOSED NEW PROVISIONS.
(i) That the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission be given power to issue its own summonses
and to sue in courts of Petty Sessions for amounts
Recommended
exceeding £5O
Purpose —To give greater freedom in effective
collection of rates and charges
Conclusion and Recommendation —Your Com-
missioners approve of the proposed amendment
and recommend its adoption
(ii) That the Lands Department and the Closer
Settlement Commission be made responsible for
payment of rates and charges on lands under
their control
Purpose —To avoid the difficulty of collection
in instances where the settler in occupation has
no equity in the land
Conclusion —Your Commissioners have recom-
mended (in Appendix B) that all collections
from closer settlers be apportioned between
the various Departments concerned, by agree-
ment. Apart from that, your Commissioners
do not consider that the Closer Settlement
Commission should be called upon to make
payments which it is itself unable to collect


4th 52 284 See below
i
Page 28.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Recommendations
Royal Commission’s
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Page.
Paragraph.
Report.
Proposed New Provisions — continued.
(iii) That provision be made for a limited rate to
be levied by a newly-constituted authority
prior to water being supplied to enable
liabilities incurred to be liquidated
Recommended
Purpose. —To avoid circumstances arising in
future similar to what occurred when Bruthen
Waterworks Trust was constituted. An over-
draft was granted in good faith by a bank for
preliminary work and then the ratepayers
decided not tc proceed with the scheme, with
the result that the bank had to bear the loss,
there being no legal means of recovery as a
rate cannot be made until a district is supplied
with water. The Crown Solicitor was of opinion
that, while Tambo Shire Council initiated the
scheme and made the application for the
constitution of a waterworks trust, it could
not be held responsible for the liability of the
overdraft and the State could not be held
responsible for a debt incurred by the Trust,
which is a responsible body under the Act
Conclusion and Recommendation. —Your
Commissioners approve of the proposed amend-
ment and recommend its adoption
That, in order ro improve the administrative and
executive control by the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission and to place its finances on
a sound footing, the alterations enumerated in
paragraph 284 of this Report shall be made to
the existing financial system- —(see below)
284. (i) The capital allotted to the various irrigation
and water supply districts, waterworks
districts, and flood protection districts
in the books of the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission should be adjusted in
each instance to a figure which represents
the estimated surplus of revenue over
expenditure on maintenance, water dis-
tribution depreciation, and management
chargeable to the district, capitalized at
the rate of 4 per cent, per annum
Recommended
(ii) All capital expenditure relating to irrigation
and water supply districts and water-
works districts, to headworks serving
such districts, or to flood protection
districts, in excess of the capital charge-
able to the districts as adjusted in
accordance with (i) hereof should be
transferred in the books of the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission to
a “ Capital expenditure borne by the
Recommended —This is in effect equivalent to
“Writing Off” or creation of further “Free
Eb'adworks.” See, however, paragraph 214 for
reasons why these terms were not used
State ” Account
Government Decision


98 177
4th 50 266 Recommended
4th 50 266 Recommended
]
j
i
i
I
Pago 29.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Cortiraission’s Reeomme
■ndations
Serial
Reference
Number.
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Government Decision.
Niimber.
Text.
Report.
Page.
Paragraph
(iii) All future capital expenditure in connexion
with irrigation and water supply districts,
waterworks districts, and flood protection
districts in excess of the amount which
may reasonably be charged to the various
districts, as representing the expected
saving in operating costs or the increase in
revenue resulting from the expenditure,
capitalized at the rate of 4 per cent, per
annum, should be charged to the “ Capital
expenditure borne by the State ” account.
Upon any future proposal for capital
expenditure in connexion with irrigation
and water supply districts, waterworks
districts, and flood protection districts, a
statement should be prepared and included
Recommended
in the Loans Application Bill showing the
allocation of the proposed expenditure as
between “ Capital chargeable to districts ”
and “ Capital expenditure borne by the
State ”
(iv) In those districts where, owing to special
circumstances, it is not practicable for the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commis-
sion to raise sufficient revenue to meet
maintenance, water distribution, depre-
ciation, and management costs, the whole
of the capital expenditure relating to the
district shall be transferred to the
“ Capital expenditure borne by the State ”
account, and the annual deficiency of
revenue to meet the operating costs shall
be transferred to a Revenue expen-
diture chargeable to the State ” account
Recommended. This would apply particularly
to North-west Mallee Districts where operating
charges will exceed maximum revenue, and also
Appendix
D
to Koo-wee-rup, Cardinia, and Carrum Districts
if the recommendations of the Royal Commission
in regard to rating of catchments are not adopted
(v) All interest on capital expenditure in respect
of irrigation and water supply districts
and waterworks districts, of headworks
serving such districts, and of flood pro-
tection districts, should be brought to
account in the books of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission by charging
it to the “ Revenue Expenditure charge-
able to the State ” account. Interest on
the capital expenditure chargeable to
irrigation and water supply, waterworks,
and flood protection districts, as adjusted
in accordance with these recommendations
and those contained in the Third Progress
Report, should be credited to the “ Re-
venue expenditure chargeable to the
State ” account
(vi) Any capital expenditure of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission which is not
productive of revenue to that Commission
should be charged to the “ Capital expen-
diture borne by the State ” account, and
net operating expenditure in connexion
with reservoirs and storages used as
headworks or relating to activities which
are not productive of revenue to the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commis-
sion should be charged to the “ Revenue
expenditure chargeable to the State ”
account


Page 30
ROYAL COMMISSION ON WATER SUPPLY.
Royal Coirtnlission’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
(vii) The funds necessary to meet the net
balance of the “ Revenue expenditure
chargeable to the State ” account should
be provided from Consolidated Revenue
(viii) In addition to the alterations in the form
of the annual accounts of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission recom-
mended in the Second Progress Report,
Recommendations XVII. to XX., the
accounts should be so arranged as to
distinguish between the results of
operations of —
{a) Irrigation and water supply districts
( b ) Waterworks districts
(c) Flood protection districts
( d ) All other activities administered by
the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission
(ix) The State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission should be given power to fix
rates and charges in irrigation and water
supply districts, waterworks districts, and
flood protection districts by resolution,
subject to the adoption as a basis of the
scales of rates and charges in the various
districts recommended in this Report
(Appendices B, C, D, E, and F) and the
Third Progress Report (paragraph 158)
(x) The State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission should be given control of its
revenue from irrigation and water supply
districts, waterworks districts, and flood
protection districts, to meet the necessary
expenditure on maintenance, water
distribution and management thereout,
and to provide for adequate depreciation
of wasting assets
That a system of continuous comparison and
analysis of water distribution costs in the various
irrigation and water supply districts shall be
installed
That a small staff of permanent maintenance men
shall be employed in each district to replace
casual labour
That provision shall be made for the allotment to
each centre (in the irrigation areas) of a suitable
mechanical excavator and facilities for transport-
ing it from place to place
That a further trial shall be given to the system of
local advisory Boards : that the Boards shall
be reconstituted in those districts where they
have ceased to function ; that the chairman of
each Board shall be elected by the members
thereof; that the district engineer shall attend
all meetings of the Board ; and that a copy of
every resolution carried by a Board shall be
forwarded forthwith by the chairman to the
head office of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission for consideration
Recommended
This is already done in the Commission’s Annual
Report, and further improvements along these
lines will be effected in future statements. See
also Appendices and Diagrams in L. R. East’s
Booklets of Evidence attached
Matter of Government Policy—See Serial Reference
No. 130
The purpose of this recommendation is to ensure
adequate provision for maintenance
This is being done
This is desirable, but depends on adequate Vote
provision
Recommended. This has already been done in
several districts, and has given great satisfaction
to the Commission and to water users in these
districts
As Advisory Boards are at present constituted, the
Commission’s District Engineer acts as chairman
and in practically all districts this has given
satisfaction and Boards perform very useful
function. The proposed alteration is considered
unnecessary, and would in effect result in Boards
overlapping the province of Local Irrigators’
Leagues


Page 31.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
References.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
Text,
Report.
Page.
Paragraph
That, where anomalies in the classification of lands
into divisions in waterworks districts are com-
plained of, they shall be investigated by the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
whose final decision shall be based on considera-
tions of equity rather than on considerations of
the possible loss of revenue which adjustments
might entail
This is present practice of the Commission
That, as a means of reducing the financial losses
incurred in the supply of water to waterworks
districts served by pumping from the River
Murray, consideration shall be given to the
possibility of replacing the channel system in
certain isolated areas by a system of ironclad
catchments and to the possibility of making the
supply available in alternate years only, the land-
owners being required to construct storages
sufficient to hold a two years’ supply
305-
307
This refers particularly to North-West Mallee
Districts, and consideration could be given to
proposal when settlement in those districts
reaches a more stable condition. Very large
areas have already been vacated and portions
are being re-allocated by the Closer Settlement
Commission, the balance reverting to the Lands
Department and being licensed for grazing in
large holdings
That, with a view to economy in operating costs,
consideration shall be given to the substitution
of pipes for the worst sections of the channels in
the areas subject to sand drift
Appendix
B,
This is being done. The Royal Commission does
not suggest any extensive piping of the Mallee
channels which would be quite impracticable
60-61
That repairs to the Campaspe Weir shall be put
in hand immediately, or alternatively that con-
sideration be given to the question of the instal-
lation of pumping plants to serve the Campaspe
District
Appendix
Temporary repairs have now been effected to this
structure
That, to safeguard as far as possible the interests
of the established irrigators in the Bacchus
Marsh and Werribee Irrigation and Water Supply
Districts, no extensions of irrigation in those
districts shall be contemplated
Appendix
D,
The Commission concurs in this recommendation.
Many strong representations have been made
for extensions, but have been refused by the
Commission.
133-135
That, with a view to the elimination of the objec-
tionable features associated with the present
method of distributing water through natural
watercourses and lakes in portion of the
Torrumbarry system, a thorough investigation of
alternative methods of distribution shall be
made by the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission
Recommended. Cost of surveys would be in
vicinity of £l,OOO
225-228
303
That, in regard to future capital expenditure, the
policy of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission shall be directed towards the pre-
vention of losses of water in transit, and that
such works should be regarded as being of more
importance and urgency than proposals to open
tip new irrigation areas
Concur. Owing to inadequate maintenance many
channels have been reduced in capacity by
siltation and weed growth with result that
distribution efficiency is low. The present
tendency in irrigation districts is towards
development of sown pastures with resulting
increasing demand for water. This can be met
only by improving efficiency of distribution
That all proposals for the opening up of new
irrigation areas shall be subjected to the closest
scrutiny, in the light of suitability of soil,
potential production, markets, capital expendi-
ture required, possible rates and charges, and
the limitations of the water resources of the
State
This is, of course, most important, and proposal
to refer such question to Parliamentary Com-
mittee would ensure the close scrutiny desired.
See serial Reference No. 37. A joint Committee
of officers of the Department of Agriculture and
the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
is at present carrying out investigations on
these lines in regard to Murray Valley Irrigation
proposals


Page 32.
WATER
SUPPLY.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
Royal Commission’s
Recommendations
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
References.
Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph
That, with a view to ensuring the optimum use of
the limited water resources of the State, the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
shall be given power to refuse to supply water
for irrigation to any area not at present supplied
if, after investigation, it be found that it is
undesirable to do so in the light of any of the
factors mentioned in Recommendation XXVIII.
hereof
The Commission is already in a position to
recommend against proposals of this nature.
No further safeguard appears necessary
That the proposals made by Mr. Commissioner W. A.
Robertson for improvement in the system of
water distribution from the Goulburn storages,
as set out in paragraph 298 of this Report, be
adopted
These recommendations have been submitted by
Mr. Commissioner Robertson to Public Works
Committee in connexion with its inquiry into the
“ Enlargement and Extension of the Waranga
Western Main Channel ”
Recommended. The Commission, although author-
ized under the Water Act, is unable to provide
for any expenditure on these lines. It would
be more desirable if provision could be made to
extend greatly the excellent and valuable work
of the Department of Agriculture in this direction
and undoubtedly the State would be repaid many
times in increased production from irrigation
areas
That financial provision be made for the establish-
ment of a staff of trained irrigation officers
sufficiently large to make a complete study of
irrigation practice as affecting productivity in
different districts, and to demonstrate, by means
of experimental plots in each district, and by
individual instruction to irrigators, the most
improved methods of irrigated culture
198-201
That consideration shall be given to the proposal
of the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
for the establishment of a State Valuation Board
whose valuations would be used by all rating and
taxing authorities
Matter of Government Policy. A separate memo-
randum making this proposal was submitted to
the Government by the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission on 11th January, 1937
Recommended
That the specified due date for the payment of
rates and charges in any given district shall
remain unchanged from year to year, and that,
in certain districts, such due date shall be not
earlier than the time at which the proceeds of the
sale of the staple product of the district are
usually available
That the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
shall accept the responsibility of destroying
noxious weeds and vermin in its reservoir
Although the Commission is not required by the
Vermin and Noxious Weeds Act to destroy
vermin and noxious weeds on reservoir lands
which are not situate in an irrigation and water
supply district, the Commission does, in fact,
undertake this as far as its finances permit.
Where such lands are leased, however, tenants
are required to comply with the provisions of the
Vermin and Noxious Weeds Act
reserves
That the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
shall be given power —similar to that given to
the Water Conservation Commission in New South
Wales—to licence all works for flood protection
on the rivers and streams of the State
Many levee banks have been erected in Victoria by
landowners in such a manner as to cause damage
to adjacent lands or to public works by blocking
or diverting flood flow or stormwater. Where, as
usually, these levees are on private land they,
cannot at present be controlled, and difficulties
can be settled only by litigation between parties
concerned
In New South Wales, the Water Act 1912-36
(sections 10 to 18e) provides that the occupier of
any land in that State must obtain a licence from
the Water Conservation and Irrigation Com-
mission for any work for “ the prevention of
inundation of land and overflow of water
thereon,” and penalties are provided for con-
struction of unlicensed works. The Act makes


Serial _ ,
Reference References.
Number. Number. Text.
Report. Page. Paragraph.
Page 33.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
WATER
SUPPLY.
Royal Commission’s Recommendations.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission Comment.
provision that, on receipt of an application for a
licence, the Commission shall give public notice
of it by advertisement. If objections are raised,
the Commission causes a public enquiry to be
held by the local Land Board or a police magis-
trate. Should the decision on the enquiry be
favourable, the Commission then issues a licence
for the work
To avoid the damage and friction arising out of the
present position in Victoria, it is recommended
that legislation on similar lines be introduced in
this State
That consideration shall be given to the suggestion
of Mr. Clive McPherson, chairman of the Closer
Settlement Commission, that the total annual
commitments of closer settlers in all districts,
based on their capacity to pay, shall be appor-
tioned between the various Departments
concerned, by agreement
Appendix
B,
The Royal Commission has elsewhere given con-
sideration to “ ability to pay ” and in certain
difficult areas such as North-west Mallee has
recommended very substantial reductions in
water rates below actual cost of supply. This
further recommendation, although apparently
reasonable, may actually mean “ double
banking ” in regard to reductions
That all collections of the arrears of rates and
charges remaining after the application of the
adjustments recommended in the First Progress
Report (paragraph XVI.) shall be earmarked for
use in making good delayed maintenance of the
works and structures
292, 293
This proposal would be workable only if the
Commission were given complete control of its
revenue as. recommended elsewhere by Royal
Commission (Serial Reference No. 151). Under
present system all revenues must be paid into
Consolidated Revenue
That a Sand Drift Removal Fund shall be established
to which an amount equivalent to the estimated
average annual expenditure on sand drift removal
shall be specially appropriated each year, and
from which all such expenditure shall be met
87-90
Strongly recommended. The present position is
most unsatisfactory as sandstorms resulting
from strong winds have filled hundreds of
miles of channels in a few days, and have
necessitated applications at short notice for
very large sums from Supplementary Estimates
or Relief Funds
That the necessary amendments be made to the
Water Act 1928, to give effect to these recom-
mendations
A large number of the Royal Commission’s
proposals would require legislative authority
(Sgd.) L. R. EAST,
Chairman,
(Sgd.) W. A. ROBERTSON,
Commissioner,
(Sgd.) P. J. O’MALLEY,
Commissioner,
30th June, 1937.
Authority: H, J, Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
47
174 XXXIX
173 XXXVIII
172 XXXVII
171 XXX VI


■Vn) irrigation charges
DISTRICTS SHOWN _ 4/- PER AC.FT.
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION \ y ||||| (/Cf' n , R
GOULBURN IRRIGATION SYSTEM >»" rite' \
RESERVOIRS, HAW CHANNELS, AND PRINCIPAL DISTRIBUTARY CHANNELS. J j I S
PRC6MLE


Str ®
3
V
01112755


I
\
I
\
57 0
