

RECOMMENDATIONS
Ihiioit of l||dl|oi(ist
AGREED ON AT A MEETING OF THE
APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE VARIOUS BRANCHES OF THE
Methodist CDpttjrgpi
VICTORIA AND TASMANIA,
HELD AT THE
CONFERENCE HALL, WESLEY CHURCH, MELBOURNE,
July iqth (and subsequent days), 1892.
Mclbourne :
RICHARDSON BROS., GENERAL PRINTERS,
181 Little Collins Street East.
MDCCCXCII.




UNION OF METHODIST
CHURCHES.
The Wesleyan Methodist Conference, at its last Session,
having passed resolutions upon the subject of Methodist
Union (see Min. Con. 1892, p. 52) and appointed a Com-
mittee to confer with similar Committees of other
Methodist Churches, upon the desirability and practica-
bility of organic union, negotiations were entered into
by Dr. Watkin, the appointed convener, and arrangements
made for holding a meeting of such Committees.
There were present appointed by the various
Churches: —
Wesleyan Methodist. —Revs. F. Neale (President), S.
T. Withington (Secretary), J. C. Symons, G. Daniel, W.
P. Wells, W. L. Blamires, H. Bath, S. Knight, E. I.
Watkin, D.D., H. Greenwood, W. Williams, P.L.S., T.
Adamson, and W.H. Fitchett, B. A., and Messrs. E. John,
S. G. King, G. M. Hitchcock, E. Whitehead, and S.
Giblett.
Primitive Methodist. —Revs. S. Bracewell, T. Cope-
land and J. T. Kearns, and Messrs. W. Taylor, G. Sweet,
S. Barnes, and W. Canning.
United Methodist. —Revs. H. Wallace, J. Barton,
W. H. Chapman, J. L. Green and F. Clemens, and
Messrs. W. Ellingworth, J. Page, J. Roberts, J. Walker,
W. Williams and W. Woollard.
Bible Christian. —Rev. S. P. Webber, R. Warren, J.
Teague, W. H. Hosken, G. Netherway, A. Uglow, R.
Yeo, and R. E, Craddock, and Messrs. T. Allin, G. Bean,
and E. Lyon.
The Rev. F. Neale, President of the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Conference, was unanimously voted to the chair.
The Revs. G. Daniel and T. Copeland were appointed
to act as secretaries.
After devotional exercises the Chairman briefly ad-
dressed the meeting in reference to the business for which
it was convened.
Dr. Watkin moved the adoption by the meeting of the
Resolutions of the Wesleyan Conference, viz :


“ That considering (1) the doctrinal unity and the
“ substantial resemblance of the various Methodist
“ Churches in Victoria and Tasmania ; (2) the un-
“ necessary waste of labour and money caused by
“ our separate church operations; and (3) that a
“ united Church could much more effectively provide
“ the country districts with religious ordinances and
“ perform evangelistic work in our city populations :
“ This Conference is of opinion that the glory of God
“ and the extension of Christ’s Kingdom would be
“promoted by the oi’ganic union of the Methodist
“ Churches in Victoria and Tasmania.”
This meeting therefore affirms that such union is
desirable. Seconded by W. P. Wells, and carried.
The constitution of the United Church of Canada was
next considered, and points of difference between that
and the plan published by our united committees in 1883
discussed. It was resolved to adopt the latter as the
basis upon which our recommendations of union shall be
founded.
1. That the United Church shall be called the
Australasian Methodist Church.
2. That the Church shall be governed by General
and Annual Conferences.
GENERAL CONFERENCE.
I.— Constitution.
The General Conference shall consist of—
1. The Pi’esidents and Secretaries of the Annual Con-
ferences for the time being.
2. One General Secretary of the Australasian Methodist
Missionary Society.
3. One General Clerical Treasurer of each of the Con-
nexional Funds.
4. One General Lay Treasurer of the Australasian
Methodist Missionary Society.
5. One General Lay Treasurer of each Connexional
Fund. All the above shall be members ex officio.
6. Ministerial representatives from each Annual Con-
ference in the proportion for the present of one minister
to every ten ministerial members of such Conference,
provided that no Conference shall have less than two


ministerial representatives in addition to its President
and Secretary.
7. Lay representatives from each Annual Conference,
equal to the number of ministerial representatives, includ-
ing the President and Secretary.
Representatives, whether ministers or laymen, shall
be elected by ballot by and from among the members of
each Annual Conference respectively.
ll. —The General Conference shall have no power—
1. To revoke, alter, or change any of the doctrines as
contained in Mr. Whsley’s first four volumes of Sei’mons,
and Notes on the New Testament, nor to establish any
new doctrine contrary thereto.
2. To revoke the “ Rules of the Societies of the people
called Methodists. ”
3. To make such change in the discipline as to do away
with the itinerancy of the ministry.
4. To abolish the privilege of trial and appeal of mem-
bers or ministers.
5. To abolish the right of the ministers to admit or ex-
pel members, subject to such guards and regulations as
the rules of the Church shall provide.
6. To abolish the right of the minsters to receive and
ordain ministers in the Church.
111. —Powers of the General Conference
The General Conference shall have power —
1. To elect by ballot on its assembling, from its mem-
bers, a minister of not less than fifteen years standing
to preside over its proceedings, and in the intervals of
the sessions of the General Conference to perform such
duties as the General Conference may direct.
2. To divide the Annual Conferences, or alter their
boundaries.
3. To create new Conferences.
4. To alter the proportion in which the Annual Con-
ferences shall from time to time elect representatives to
the General Conference.
5. To make, or direct the Annual Conferences to make,
all necessary changes and interchanges of ministers be-
tween the several Annual Conferences.


6. To control the Australasian Methodist Missionary
Society, the several Connexional funds, and to appoint
their committees and officers.
7. To review the proceedings of such committees, and
sanction or disallow the same.
8. To arrange the order in which the several Annual
Conferences shall make provision for returned Mission-
aries.
9. To direct any Annual Conference to re-appoint to
the full work any minister who may have been made a
supernumerary since the last General Conference.
10. To disallow any of the regulations of the Annual
Conferences which in its judgement infringe constitu-
tional principles.
11. And generally to legislate for the Australasian
Methodist Church.
IY. —What number share form a quorum.
The General Conference, on the first day of its session,
shall determine the number that shall constitute a
quorum.
Y. —When and where the General Conference shall
Assemble.
The General Conference shall meet once in three years,
or at such other intervals more or less as it may deem
expedient, and shall have power to fix the date, place,
and duration of its sessions.
ANNUAL CONFERENCES.
I. —Constitution.
1. The Annual Conferences shall comprise all the
ministers within their respective boundaries who have
been admitted into full connexion with the said Con-
ference.
2. The Quarterly Meeting of each circuit shall be en-
titled to elect one lay representative, who shall be elected
by ballot at the Quarterly Meeting next preceding the
session of the Conference to which such circuit pertains.
3. The Committee of each Institution of the Connexion,
to which a minister is or may be set apart by an Annual


Conference, shall have the right to elect from among the
members of such Committee, by ballot, one lay repre-
sentative.
4 Should the number of laymen thus provided for, he
less than the number of ministers pexdaining to any An-
nual Conference, additional laymen shall be elected by
the Quarterly Meeting of the circuit or circuits which,
according to the returns published by such Conference
at its last session, contained the largest number of mem-
bers. The Presidents of the several Annual Conferences
shall give notice to the circuit or circuits which may be
entitled to elect more than one lay representative.
5. The laymen eligible for election as representatives
must be church members of four years’ continuous stand-
ing, and at the time of their election must be members in
the circuit by which they are or may be elected.
ll.—Powers of the Annual Conference.
1. Each Annual Conference shall have the usual
powers in regard to —
(1.) The election of its own President and Sec-
retary.
(2.) The division of circuits and districts, or alter-
ation of their boundaries.
(3.) The appointment of Chairmen of Districts.
(4) The exercise of discipline upon its ministerial
members and preachers on trial.
(5.) The making of any of its ministerial members
supernumeraries.
(6.) The reception of candidates for the ministry.
(7.) The appointment of ministers and preachers
on trial to the several circuits and churches.
(8.) The carrying out of all directions of the Ge-
neral Conference relative to the changes and inter-
changes of ministers. In the intervals of the Gene-
ral Conferences, the Annual Conference shall effect
changes and interchanges by negotiation.
(9.) The receiving and finally deciding upon ap-
peals from the subordinate courts of the Conference.
(10.) The direction and control of those funds
which have been known as District or Conference
Funds.


(11.) And all other powers necessary for the ad-
ministration of the affairs of the Methodist Church,
except the powers of general legislation, set forth as
pertaining to the General Conference.
2. Each Annual Conference shall also have the power
to recommend to the General Conference any measure
which may be deemed conducive to the welfare of the
Connexion.
3. In the exercise of the aforesaid powers by the An-
nual Conferences, the ministers alone shall: —
(1.) Dispose of all matters comprised in the sub-
joined questions :
Question I.—Who are now admitted as ministers
into full connexion with the Conference ?
Question II. —What preachers remain on trial ?
Question lll.—What preachers are now received
on trial ?
Question IY.—What students are to continue to
have theological training P
Question V. —What candidates are now received
for theological training ?
Question YI. —Who are now admitted as native
ministers ?
Question Vll,—Who remain as native preachers
on trial ?
Question YIII. —Who are received as native
preachers on trial ?
Question IX. —What ministers become supernum-
eraries ?
Question X.—What supernumeraries return to
the regular work ?
Question XT.—What ministers have died since the
last Conference ?
Question Xll.—Are there any objections to any of
our ministers or preachers on trial ?
Question XIII. —What persons who were in full
connexion with the Conference have now ceased to
he recognised as ministers among us ?
Question XlY.—How are the ministers and preach-
ers on trial stationed for the ensuing year P
(2.) Elect Chairmen of Districts.


(3.) Determine all appeals affecting the status of min-
isters and members.
4. For the purposes enumerated in the foregoing sec-
tion the ministerial members of each Annual Conference
shall meet alone at such times as the Conference shall
determine.
5. In the election of ministers and laymen as represen-
tatives to the General Conference, all the members of
each Annual Conference who may he present in their
respective Annual Conferences, shall be entitled to vote.
The voting shall he by ballot.
6. Who may attend, and what number shall form a
quorum. —The Chairmen of Districts, ex officio, a represen-
tative elected by ballot at the Annual District Meeting,
and such other ministers as may be appointed by, or obtain
the permission of, their Annual District Meetings to at-
tend the Conference ; together with the laymen elected as
provided for in the foregoing section headed Constitution.
The number of ministers and lay representatives who may
actually attend the Conference shall be deemed competent
for the transaction of business; but the Conference shall
have power, whenever it may deem it expedient, to de-
termine how many of its number shall constitute a
quorum.
7. When and where the Conference shall Assemble.
—Each Conference shall assemble annually, and shall
have power to fix the time and place, and to limit the
duration of its sessions.
8. President and Secretary, and who may vote in their
Election. —The President shall be a minister of not less
than fifteen years’ standing, and the Secretary shall be a
minister of not less than ten years’ standing. All minis-
ters in full connexion who may be present at their
respective Annual Conferences, and lay representatives,
shall be entitled to vote in the election of the President
and Secretary. The voting shall be by ballot.
9. Re-election to Presidency. —Each Annual Con-
ference shall determine for itself the time which shall
elapse before a minister shall be eligible for re-election
to the office of President, provided that no minister shall
be eligible for election two successive years.
10. Stationing Ministers. —(1.) The Stationing Com-
mittee shall consist of the President and Secretary of
the Conference, the General Secretary or Secretaries of
missions, the Chairmen of Districts, and one ministei foi


each District, elected by the united votes of the minis-
ters and laymen who are members of the Financial
District Meeting. (2.) This Committee shall prepare a
list of stations to be presented to the Ministerial Con-
ference for consideration. Such station sheet shall also
be laid before the United Conference for information.
(3.) The United Conference shall' have the power, at its
first session, to add, by ballot, to the Stationing Com-
mittee a number of its lay representatives, not exceeding
one-half the number of those already constituting the
said Committee. The ex-President and ex-Secretary
shall continue members of the Committee. (4.) Minis-
ters and Circuit Stewards, or authorised representatives
from Quai'terly Meetings, shall have the right of
communicating either personally or by letter with the
enlarged Stationing Committee in reference to Circuit
appointments. (5.) The enlarged Committee shall revise
the Station Sheet as often as may be necessary, and sub-
mit it to the Ministerial Conference for final consideration
and adoption.
11. Funds of the Australasian Methodist Church. —
The funds hitherto known as District or Conference fu*is
shall be under the management of the Annnal Confer-
ences. The funds known as the Connexional Funds shall
be under the direction of the General Conference, and
the Presidents of the Annual Conferences shall see that
all the regulations relating to these funds are faithfully
carried out by and within the bounds of their respective
Conferences.
District Meeting.
The District Meeting is a committee of the Conference,
composed of all the Ministers, including Supernumeraries
and Probationers, who are appointed to circuits within the
boundaries of the Districts.
At this meeting the character of the ministers are in-
quired into ; candidates for the ministry and probationers
are examined, and, if approved, recommended to the Con-
ference ; and numerous other matters pertaining to the
pastoral office are considered.
Financial District Meeting.
This meeting is composed of the Ministers, Supernume-
raries, and Circuit Stewards of the various circuits in the
District, who deal with all the financial and temporal af-
fairs of the District.


N.B.—ln this meeting Probationers in charge of cir-
cuits have the right to speak and vote.
Quarterly Meeting of Circuits.
The Quarterly Meeting is to consist of
1. All the Ministers and Preachers on trial in the cir-
cuit, and the Supernumeraries whose names appear in the
printed minutes of the Conference.
2. The Circuit Stewards, the Society Stewards, and the
Poor Stewards.
3. All the Class Leaders in the circuit.
4. All the Local Preachers in full standing, they being
resident members of society in the circuit.
4. All the Trustees of chapels situate in places named
on the circuit plan, such trustees being resident members
of society in the circuit.
6. A Superintendent of each Sunday-school which is
conducted under the Conference rules, such superinten-
dent being a member of the Church in the circuit. Where
there are two or more superintendents in one school, the
senior superintendent shall be the member of the Quar-
terly Meeting.
Membership of the Church.
It was agreed that no mode of facilitating and promo-
ting fellowship among Christians approaches so nearly to
the requirements of the New Testament as the class-
meeting, which under God has so greatly contributed to
the spiritual vitality and success of Methodism, and we
resolve to adhere to it as a test of membership in the
United Church.
The term “ member” shall be understood to include all
whose names are entered upon a class book and who at-
tend the monthly fellowship meeting, according to the
recent regulation of the General Conferenee of the Wes-
leyan Methodist Church.
N.B. —No persons can be removed from membership
without the privilege of a trial by the leaders’ meeting,
and of appeal to the higher courts of the Church, should
such be demanded.
Status of Ministers.
Resolved —That all ministers in full connexion with
their own Churches shall be I’egarded as entitled to the
same status in the United Church.


Superannuation Fund.
The Committee haying carefully considered the posi-
tion of each Church as to a Superannuation Fund
Resolves—l. That there are no insuperable diffi-
culties in the way of such equitable arrangements
being made as will secure to the ministers of the
Minor Methodist Churches —including supernumer-
aries and widows—advantages, equal at least, to
those which they at present possess in their own
Churches.
2. That a supplementary scale, which shall be
equitable to the present members of the Wesleyan
Supernumerary Fund, as well as those who may
join from the other Churches, be prepared, and
submitted, for approval, to the various denomina-
tions ; such scale to be prepared by the Treasurers
of the S. M. and W. Fund.
3. That all ministers, joining the United Church,
shall become members of the fund now known as
the Wesleyan Supernumerary Ministers’ and Widows’
Fund, and shall purchase into the said fund that
which will secure an amount, for each, equal to that
which he would receive from any Annuitant Fund,
with which he may be at present connected ; unless
he can show that he has made equivalent provision
in some other way.
Church Properties.
The available statistics from the various Churches
were examined. These were fairly complete concerning
the properties of the Primitive Methodist, Bible Chris-
tian, and United Methodist Churches, but were only
general, giving totals of Districts, and in some cases
Circuits, concerning those held by the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church; but .the Committee finds that the tabula-
ted statements fairly represent the state of the church
properties.
2. There are about ten cases in which the position of
the Trusts may be regarded as really difficult, and
heavily burdened ; some of these belong to each of the
Churches.
N.B.—Colleges were not included in the list.
3. The methods of valuing property differ, in some
degree, in the various Churches, and this may affect the
proportion of debt to the estimated value.


4. There are Loan Funds in operation to assist Trusts
in three of the Churches, viz. :
Wesleyan Methodist —
Original Fund £38,938
Jubilee ditto 12,442 Total £51,382
Primitive Methodist ... 1416
Bible Christian ... 600
5. The information received concerning titles was
considered satisfactory; all important properties being
found to be secured to the Connexions.
6. The Committee recommends that after union shall
have been effected, no property shall be sold without the
most careful consideration being given to the case, and
after such sale has been approved of by the Trustees
the sanction of the Building and Loan Fund Committee
of the United Church, or its Executive, must be obtained
prior to the consent of Conference being sought.
Any surplus arising from sales of property to be
appropriated as the Conference, with the consent of the
Trustees, may from time to time determine.
7. That with a view to prevent the erection of addi-
tional churches which will not be required when union
is consummated, the Conferences of the uniting Churches
be requested to appoint members of a Representative
Committee, which shall have power to deal with the case
of any proposed new building, that, in the judgment of
the Trustees of any Methodist church existing in the
locality, is not needed. The Committee to be constitu-
ted in the following proportions, viz.: 12 members of
the Wesleyan Methodist Church, and 6 ditto from each
of the other Churches.
Provision for Children.
The Committee finds that 174 additional children would
have to be provided for ; that the ministers of the Primi-
tive Methodist and Bible Christian Churches receive
about £8 per annum for each child, but those of the
United Methodist Free Church receive no children’s al-
lowances ; that no educational allowances are paid in
either of the three Churches. The Committee recom-
mends that for the children born prior to the Union no
educational allowance be paid; but for all other chil-
dren, all ministers to receive children’s allowances alike, at
the rates that shall be paid from time to time by the
funds of the United Church.


Thanksgiving Fund.
1. The Committee finds that the aggregate of Circuit
income in the three Minor Churches would not do much
more than meet what will he necessary for stipends,
house rent, and other Circuit expenses; it therefore
recommends that a Thanksgiving Fund be formed, the
objects of which shall be —
(1.) To aid, where necessary, in placing the Minis-
ters and Ministers’ Widows of the Minor Methodist
Churches on equitable terms upon the S.M. and W.
Fund now belonging to the Wesleyan Methodist
Church ; and to aid, when necessary, in meeting the
annual Circuit payments to the said fund.
(2.) The securing for the children of the Minis-
ters of the Minor Methodist Churches allowances on
the same scale as those received by the Ministers of
the Wesleyan Methodist Church.
(3) To aid Home Mission Funds.
(4) To aid Trusts which may be affected by the
Union.
(5). Queen’s College.
(6.) Any other objects specified by donors.
N.B. —Unspecified donations to he divided in such
proportions as the Conference may determine be-
tween the first five objects named.
2. That such Fund be formed (1) from subscriptions
and donations, (2) from such portion of the surplus on
the sales of church properties (rendered unnecessary
by the union) as may he agreed on, according to provi-
sion made in recommendation 5 under heading “ Church
Properties; (3) money saved by reducing the number
of ministers employed within certain areas; (4) any
other sources.
3. That the first Conference of the United Church ap-
point a Sabbath to be observed as Thanksgiving Sunday,
when Collections be made in all our churches in aid of
the Fund; and that Deputations be appointed to visit all
the Circuits, advocating the claims of the Fund, and pro-
moting the spirit of thanksgiving and consecration.
4. The Committee recommends that wherever —after
the union has taken place —there shall be areas in which
the number of ministers is reduced, and consequently a
certain amount of income saved; the Circuits in those


areas respectively, shall pay into the Fund an equitable
amount, to he agreed on between the said Circuits
and the Conference.
5. The Committee is of opinion that such a Fund as
that named should provide about £2OOO per year for a few
years, after union takes effect ; and believes that after-
ward the financial arrangements of the United Church will
be so far adjusted as not to need any further special pro-
vision.
6. That when the union is effected, some surplus
churches in the centres of populations, may be utilised for
special evangelistic services.
Income of Circuits and Number op Ministers.
1. The Committee occupied a considerable time in in-
vestigating the income of circuits in the four Churches,
and in enquiring into the number of ministers employed
in the various circuits of Victoria and Tasmania. It was
believed that about thirty (30) ministers and preachers
on trial would be found in excess of Circuit requirements
if the union were immediately effected; but that if the
several Conferences take out no more ministers than are
absolutely necessary during the next four years, then by
the time the union is consummated the whole number, or
nearly so, will be needed.
2. As a considerable portion of the income of the
Minor Methodist Churches is raised by what are called
Missionary Efforts, it is understood that upon the union
being effected, such efforts may continue to be made for
three years, but shall be denominated “ Special Efforts
for Circuit Sustentation Funds.” Nevertheless, annual
efforts on behalf of the Home and Foreign Mission Funds
shall be made in all the Circuits of the United Church.
3. Should financial exigencies demand it, the various
Circuits of the four Churches may be worked much as
at present, for a few years after 1895 or 1896, which is
the earliest date at which the union can be legally con-
summated.
Examination of Candidates.
1. That a Central Examination Committee be formed,
the constitution of which shall be determined when the
Conferences shall have decided in favor of the union,
after which no candidate for the Ministry shall be


received by any of the uniting Churches who shall not
have been examined and approved by such committee.
N.B. —This resolution not to apply to the case of any
candidate who may have been accepted for training by
either of the Conferences.
2. That we recommend to tho Wesleyan Conference
that any candidate -for the ministry, from either of the
Minor Methodist Churches, who shall have passed the
Representative Central Examination Committee, be re-
ceived as a Theological Student at Queen’s College upon
the same terms as those upon which students from the
Wesleyan Methodist Church are received ; it being under-
stood that should Methodist union not take place such
student belongs to the Church which sent him.
Miscellaneous.
1. That in order to promote organic union there shall
be quarterly interchanges of pulpits, wherever practic-
able, between the ministers and local preachers of the
various Methodist Churches, and united meetings of
church members for prayer and fellowship.
2. That the Conferences of the various Methodist
Churches be requested to appoint some of their members
to act on a joint committee to represent the Methodist
Church on Sabbath Observance, the Bible in State
Schools, Temperance Legislation, Gambling, and other
questions connected with the moral welfare of the com-
munity, or which may affect the political rights and
privileges of the members and adherents of the Metho-
dist Church.
FRANCIS NEALE, Chairman.
GEORGE DANIEL, ) Secretaries
THOMAS COPELAND,) feECRLJA
