

Geneva. November 17th, 1924 - February 19th, 1925
, ? ;? * ' 7 .* S
?VOU-.U?ItlE II
C. 760. AS. 260. 1924.
Vol, 11.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
RECORDS
OF THE
SECOND OPIUM CONFERENCE
MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEES
AND SUB COMMITTEES
>
IlSiiiii


OPIUM DOCUMENTS
issued by the
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium :
Minutes of the First Session, held at Geneva, May 2nd - stb, 1921
(C.77.M.39.1921.X1) 4/- $l.OO
Minutes of the Second Session (out of print)
Minutes of the Third (Emergency) Session, held at Geneva on
September Ist, 1922 (C.72.M.27.1923.X1) 1/- $0.20
Minutes of the Fourth Session, held at Geneva, January Bth - 14th,
1923 (0.155.M.75.1923.X1) 6/- $1.40
Minutes of the Fifth Session, held at Geneva, May 24th-June 7th,
1923 (C.418.M.184.1923.X1) ................ 7/6 $2.00
Minutes of the Sixth Session, held at Geneva, Aug. 4th - 14th, 1924
(C.397.M.146.1924.X1) 5/- $l.lO
Beports to the Council on the Work op the Advisory Committee
on Traffic in Opium :
First Session, Geneva, May 2nd - sth, 1921 (A.38.1921.X1) . , . 1/3 $0.30
Second Session, Geneva, April 19th - 29th, 1922 (A.15.1922.X1) . 1/3 $0.30
Third (Emergency) Session, Geneva, September Ist, 1922 (A. 15 (a),
1922.XT) . 2d. $0.05
Fourth Session, Geneva, January Bth - 14th, 1923 (C.37.M.91.1923.X1) 6d. $O.lO
Fifth Session, Geneva, May 241h - June 7th, 1923 (A.13.1923.X1). , 6d. $0.15
Sixth Session, Geneva, Aug. 4th - 14th, 1924 (A.32.1924.X1) . . . 9d. *0.20
Second Opium Conference :
Part T. - Summary of the Information received from the Govern-
ments with regard to the Production and Manufacture of Eaw
Opium and Coca-leaves, Opium Derivatives and Cocaine, with
Statistical Tables (Years 1920, 1921, 1922 and 1923).
Part IT. Estimated Annual Requirements of Opium and its
Derivatives reduced to their Morphine Contents, together with
Estimated Requirements of Cocaine and Other Narcotics
(O.D.C.l(I)) (C.656.M.234.1924.X1) 2/6 . $0.60
Second Opium Conference :
Convention, Protocol and Final Act, signed at Geneva on February
19th, 1925 (C.85.M.44.1925.X1) (0.D.C.106(3) ; 0.D.C.7(2) ;
0.D.C.130 (I)) (English and French texts) .......... 2/6 $0.60


I m/ Ho
ujn/n
[Distributed to the Council
and the Members of the League .]
C. 760. M. 260. 1924. XI.
Geneva, August 1925.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
RECORDS
OF THE
SECOND OPIUM CONFERENCE
Geneva. November 17th, 1924- - February 19th, 1925
VOLUME II
MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEES
AND SUB COMMITTEES




CONTENTS.
Page
1. Verbatim Report of the Meetings of the First and Second General Committees and
of the Joint Meeting of the Two Committees 5
2. Verbatim Report of the Meetings of the Committee of Sixteen 41
3. Minutes of the Meeting of the Co-ordination Committee 79
4. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee A 87
5. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee B 141
6. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee C 225
7. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee D 233
8. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee E 249
9. Minutes of the Meetings of Sub-Committee F 281




VERBATIM REPORT
of the MEETINGS of the
FIRST AND SECOND GENERAL COMMITTEES
AND OF THE
JOINT MEETING OF THE TWO COMMITTEES
Geneva, November 24th - December 3rd, 1924.
CONTENTS.
First General Committee : Page
First Meeting, Monday, November 24th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m 6
Second Meeting, Tuesday, November 25th, 1924, at 4 p.m 11
Third Meeting, Thursday, November 27th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m 12
Fourth Meeting, Wednesday, December 3rd, 1924, at 10 a.m 18
Annexes 22
Second General Committee ;
First Meeting, Tuesday, November 25th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m 24
Second Meeting, Tuesday, November 25th, 1924, at 5.30 p.m 25
Third Meeting, Thursday, November 27th, 1924, at 5.45 p.m 26
Fourth Meeting, Wednesday, December 3rd, 1924, at 11.30 a.m 28
Annex 34
First and Second General Committees :
Joint Meeting, Tuesday, November 25th, 1924, at 5.40 p.m 35


FIRST GENERAL COMMITTEE
VERBATIM REPORT OF THE FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, November 24 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
CONTENTS ;
1. Rules of Procedure of the Committee.
2. Publicity of the Meetings of the Com-
mittee and its Sub-Committees ; Ques-
tions of Procedure.
3. Appointment of Members of the Sub-
committees.
President: M. Herluf Zahle.
1. RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COM-
MITTEE.
The President :
Translation : The agenda now before you
includes three items, the first of which concerns
the Committee?s procedure.
Article 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the
Assembly of the League lays down that: ?These
Rules of Procedure shall apply to the proceedings
of Committees of the Assembly??.
There is no article to this effect in the Rules
of Procedure of our Conference, but I think we
might follow the example of the Assembly and
decide at once to apply the Rules of Procedure
of our Conference to our First Committee.
Has anyone any objection to my proposal ?
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : I beg to support the President?s
proposal.
The President :
Translation : Does anyone wish to speak
on this point ?
M. Sze, delegate of China, will speak.
M. Sze (China) :
It has not been my good fortune to be a
member of any Assembly of the League of
Nations, and therefore, before I am qualified
to give any opinion on the President?s proposal,
I should like, if possible, to be furnished with
the Rules which have just been mentioned.
The President :
Translation : There is apparently a slight
misunderstanding on the part of the Chinese
delegate. I am not proposing that the Rules
of Procedure of the Assembly should be applied
to our Committee. I merely said that, under
the terms of Article 27, the Rules of Procedure
of the Assembly were applicable to its Commit-
tees. I took this as a basis for my proposal
that our Committee should adopt the same
Rules of Procedure as our Conference. You are
already familiar with these Rules.
M. Sze (China) :
Thank you, Mr. President.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) ;
I have never had the privilege of attending
a meeting of the Assembly, and therefore I
am entirely unfamiliar with these Rules. But,
as I understand the statement of the President,
it is that he desires this Committee to adopt
as its Rules those which have been adopted by
the Conference.
The President :
Translation : I understand that the members
of the Committee agree to my proposal. We
shall decide, therefore, that the Rules of Proce-
dure of our Conference are applicable to this
Committee. {Assent.)
2. PUBLICITY OF THE MEETINGS OF THE
COMMITTEE AND ITS SUB-COMMIT-
TEES : QUESTIONS OF PROCEDURE.
The President :
Translation : I venture to draw the atten-
tion of the delegates to the fact that Article 6
of our Rules of Procedure lays down that :
?All meetings of the Conference shall be public,
unless a decision is taken to the contrary?.
This means that, if we apply this rule, all
the meetings of the First Committee will be
public, unless it is decided otherwise. This
first meeting is therefore public. I would ask
the members of the Committee, in the event
of their considering that any meeting should
not be public, to inform me the day before,
in order that the journalists and members of
the public who wish to be present at our dis-
cussions may have sufficient warning.
W'e have not yet received from the delegations
the names of the members of our Committee,
but these names may still be sent in. In this
connection, I would repeat what I have already
said, namely, that our procedure admits of a
certain degree of elasticity, and that any mem-
ber who has not been formally appointed to our
Committee can nevertheless be present at
our meetings. I feel that one point should be
emphasised the delegates on this Committee
are not, officially, plenipotentiaries, but they
represent their Governments ; they will speak


in the name of their Governments. Thus, there
will be no risk later on of the first delegate of
any delegation refusing to agree to a decision
which has been accepted by another member
of that same delegation!
Has anyone anything further to say on the
question of publicity ?
M. von Eckardt (Germany) ;
Translation : I agree with the President
as regards the publicity of our meetings. I
would add, however, that we may be dealing
with questions at the discussion of which it
would be better for the public not to be present.
In such cases, the Press and public should be
asked to withdraw.
The President
Translation : I quite understand what the
first German delegate says, and I agree with
him. It seems to me, however, that it would
be better, if we have to discuss questions
which should be dealt with in private, to give
the public and the Press due notice the day
before.
We have decided that our meetings shall be
public unless a decision is taken to the contrary.
{Assent.)
As regards the meetings of the Sub-Commit-
tees, it seems to me that they should be held in
private, except in very special cases.
ML von Eckardt (Germany) :
Translation : If I had known that, I should
not have raised my point.
The President
Translation : The Sub-Committees of the
First Committee will each be known by a
letter of the alphabet : Sub-Committees A,
B, C, D, F, while Sub-Committee E is the one
Sub-Committee of the Second Committee.
I now wish to raise the question of procedure
as regards the work of the Committee and its
Sub-Committees. Are formal proposals to be
discussed first at plenary meetings of the Com-
mittee, or are they to be dealt with in one of
the Sub-Committees without having been sub-
mitted to the full Committee ? I should like
to know the opinion of my colleagues on this
point.
Ml. von Eckardt (Germany)
Translation : I think that any question of
principle ought first to be discussed in the
Sub-Committees. If subsequently the members
of any Sub-Committee wish a question to be dis-
cussed in the First or Second Committee, that
might be done ; but 1 think that as a general
rule proposals should first be dealt with in the
Sub-Committees.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America)
I am not clear as to what has been said with
regard to the publicity of meetings of the Sub-
Committees. Have I understood you aright,
Mr. President, that the meetings of the Sub-
Committees are to be private ? As a matter
of fact, all the important work of this Confe-
rence (at least, most of it) will be done in the
Sub-Committees, and there may come a time
when any delegate here may want to move in
a Sub-Committee that the public should be
allowed to hear the discussion. Do you not
think it would be wise for us to put ourselves
in the position whereby such action could be
taken ? I am not saying that I intend to
make such a suggestion, but I merely want to
be in a position to do so without violating
any of the rules of this Committee.
M. Sze (China)
Mr. President, Ladies and gentlemen, I am
in favour of full publicity. I should suggest
that the Sub-Committees, like this Committee,
should meet in public, unless some members
of the Sub-Committee move that a particular
meeting be held in secret.
Another point I wish to make is this : if the
Sub-Committee desired to hold a secret meeting,
I suppose it would do so because it did not,
for the moment, want to take the public into
its confidence. I would suggest, however, that
the delegations which are not represented on
the Sub-Committee should nevertheless be
allowed to attend the meeting, because, even
when relegated to the position of holding a
watching brief, we cannot protect our interests
unless we know what is going on.
Ml. Buero (Uruguay);
Translation: I most heartily and definitely
support the views of M. Sze and Mr. Porter.
I feel that we cannot make it a rule that our
proceedings shall be private. The President
made this proposal in view of the denomina-
tion of the Sub-Committees. It is quite true
that the meetings of the Sub-Committees of
the League are generally private.
But in the present case 1 do not think that
the term ?Sub-Committee? is correct. In
actual fact the two Committees represent the
Conference, since all the delegations are repre-
sented on them, and the Sub-Committees re-
present the Committees. The League Com-
mittees are always public, and I see no reason
why we should make any exception to the rule
in this case, especially as the questions with
which we have to deal are economic and tech-
nical rather than political in character. I
therefore support the proposal of the Chinese
delegate that all the proceedings shall be public,
even those of the Sub-Committees. Excep-
tions can obviously be made to this rule should
any delegation so request.
As regards the second point raised by the
President, the question to which body formal
proposals should be submitted, I wish to give
my personal opinion. I think, consistently
with what I have just said in regard to publicity,
that formal proposals should be laid before the
First Committee, which would then refer them
to the proper Sub-Committee.
Ml. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : I think that, in the case of
the Sub-Committees, we might follow the rule
adopted for the First and Second General
Committees. It was understood that the meet-
ings of the Sub-Committees should be public,
unless any member of a Sub-Committee asked
that a meeting should be private.
The President
Translation : Would a vote be taken on
this point in the Sub-Committee itself ?


M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : It would be subject to the
approval of the Sub-Committee, because no
one member could decide the point. If,
for example, I thought at any time that it w'as
inadvisable to discuss a certain question in
public, I could ask that the discussion might
be continued in private. Of course, if the
majority of the Sub-Committee did not agree
with my proposal, the meeting would be continued
in public. Otherwise, the discussion would be
continued in private.
My opinion is based upon the fact that the
meetings of the general Committees are to be
public, and that the questions with wdiich we
have to deal are of general concern. We must
not lose sight of the fact that the whole world
is following our work with the closest attention.
A certain scepticism has already crept into the
minds of the public, who have been disappointed
by the failure of previous conferences. There
is even a certain amount of antagonism, because
it is felt that material and humanitarian inte-
rests are in conflict. We must show the world
that w T e have met here in all sincerity and with
the most earnest desire to save humanity from
the scourge of opium. Members of the'public
who are present at our discussions can see this
for themselves.
As regards the handing in of formal proposals,
I think it would be better if they submitted
to the First General Committee, which would
decide which Sub-Committee w r as competent to
deal with them. Otherwise, if a proposal were
submitted direct, for example, to Sub-Committee
A without first having been examined by the
General Committee, the other Sub-Committees
would know nothing about it. All proposals
should first be examined by the General Com-
mittee ; in this way we should save time and
our work would be more satisfactory.
Mr. Campbell (India) :
As regards the question of publicity, the
Indian delegation considers that all the meetings
of the Sub-Committees should be held in private.
I w r ant to make it perfectly clear, however, that
the only reason which actuates us in this matter
is the desire to expedite the business of the
Conference. The Indian delegation has no
objection whatever in principle to the meetings
of the Sub-Committees being held in public.
I am quite prepared to give an undertaking
now that the Indian delegation will in no case
vote against a proposal to hold any meeting of
the Conference or of its Committees or Sub-
Committees in private.
There is the further question where a funda-
mental principle should be discussed in the
first instance. I agree with wdiat many of the
delegates have said that questions of prin-
ciple should, in the first instance, come before
the plenary Committee ; but I would go
further, for the reasons which have just been
expressed by the delegate of Cuba, and add
that every delegation should have the right, if
he considers it necessary, to demand at any time
that a question of fundamental importance
should be referred to and discussed in the
full Conference.
The President :
translation : Various opinions have been
expressed by the members of the Committee
on the questions now before us. The majority
of the speakers consider that the meetings of
the Sub-Committees should be public unless the
Sub-Committees themselves decide to the con-
trary. Only one delegate is of the opposite
opinion. Although as President it is for me
to fall in with the desires of the various dele-
gates, I venture, in view of my long experience
in the matter, to suggest that to make the
meetings of the Sub-Committees public would
be, in my opinion, a dangerous procedure, not
because we have to deal with questions which
should be kept from the Press, or the public,
but because these Sub-Committees have to deal
with the preparatory work which is the most
important of all and because it is impossible
to do such work properly if the public is pre-
sent. I therefore support the opinion expressed
by the delegate for India.
In order to settle the matter, I venture to
propose that the members of the Conference
vote as to whether or not the meetings of the
Sub-Committees shall be public. We have
therefore to deal with two points : How far
are the meetings of the Committees to be public,
and how far is publicity to be extended to the
Sub-Committees ?
Before taking a vote, I will call upon two
delegates who are still down to speak, the first
being Sir Malcolm Delevingne.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
On behalf of Great Britain, I have no objec-
tion at all to offer to the principle of publicity,
and if the matter had been put to the vote at
once I should have voted for publicity ; but
the advice you have just given us, Sir, out of
your long experience makes me hesitate, and I
certainly should not like to vote in a sense
contrary to that advice. Would it not be
possible to postpone taking a vote and for
you to consult those wdio have expressed a
strong view in favour of publicity or against
publicity, and talk over the matter with a
view, if possible, to arriving at what is the best
procedure for accomplishing our work success-
fully ?
M. Buero (Uruguay) :
Translation : After the very just remarks
of the President, I have been trying to arrive
at some compromise which should reconcile
his views, those of the delegate for India,
and also the opinions expressed by the majority
of the members of the Committee. I have
arrived at practically the same result as the
first British delegate.
I therefore beg to propose the following pro-
cedure : That the Sub-Committees, at the
opening of the meetings, should decide whether
their proceedings are to be public or not ; in
this way the Conference would not have to
decide either for or against publicity, as it
leave this point to be settled by the Sub-Com-
mittees.
In this respect my proposal differs from that
of the British delegate. I think, however, that
my suggestion is perhaps the less drastic
of the two.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire):
May I just point out that the delegate of
Uruguay appears to have misunderstood me ?
I made no proposal at all as to a formula. I


only suggested that, before the Commission
comes to a decision takes the vote we
should ask the President to consult with those
members who have expressed themselves either
strongly for or against publicity, with a view
to arriving at a solution.
IV!. Sze (China) :
I am much gratified that I suggested a pro-
position which is receiving almost unanimous
?approval. Even the remarks made by the
delegates for India and Great Britian show that
the principle meets with their approval. So
far so good. Of course, I always bow to expe-
rience and wisdom, and there is a great deal
of truth in what you say, Sir ; but my recent
experience is that Sub-Committees of a secret
nature do not realise the expectations of those
who support those secret meetings.
In fact, it has been found that the number
of secret meetings of a Sub-Committee is
ioo per cent more than the parent Committee
of which that Sub-Committee was its offspring.
I do not pretend to know what happened in the
secret Committee, but undoubtedly certain
of the points which were raised afterwards at
the plenary meeting were more or less touched
upon in the Sub-Committee. In view of the
above circumstances, I request that the very
simple proposition I have made should receive
your immediate attention and favourable consi-
deration, in order that this discussion may not
unnecessarily be prolonged and that there
should be more time for our other work.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
It seems to me that there is a very simple
solution of this matter, namely, to extend the
application of Article 6 of our Rules of Pro-
cedure to the Sub-Committees. Article 6 says :
?All meetings of the Conference shall be public,
unless a decision is taken to the contrary?.
That leaves the matter entirely to the good,
sound judgment of the members of the Sub-
Committees.
There may be occasions where it is to the
advantage of all to go into what we call execu-
tive meetings, but my experience (and it has
been rather a lengthy one) has convinced me
that executive meetings usually arouse distrust
on the part of the public, as the delegate of
Cuba has suggested. On the other hand, if
the meetings are thrown open, the public is
satisfied, and it is probable that you will have
few 7 er people present than if you tried to close
the meetings.
I should like to tell the Conference that there
have been hundreds of meetings of the Foreign
Affairs Committee of the House of Represen-
tatives during the last six years, and I doubt if
the doors have been closed twenty times. When
they are closed, it is because of something which
has come up wdiich no one could anticipate.
I feel that this is a safe rule for us to follow.
No one here can anticipate what is going to
arise in the Sub-Committees, and, if something
does arise which makes the majority of the
Sub-Committee feel that the doors should be
closed, that Sub-Committee, having the facts
of that particular situation before it, should
have the right to determine the question.
I may add that, after all (at least, this is my
viewpoint), we are agents for the Governments
we represent. The people of the United States
are. represented by this delegation. We are
only agents, and there is no reason why our
principals, the people of the United States,
should not know everything we do here. I
am very anxious for them to know, and I
am sure that every member of this Conference
feels the same about it that every delegate
wants his Government to know exactly what
is taking place at this Conference. The appli-
cation of Article 6 of our Rules of Procedure to
Sub-Committees will solve the problem and
leave the matter, as I have said, to the good,
sound judgment of the Sub-Committees, when
the occasion arises for a closure.
IVI. Sze (China) ;
the honourable delegates for Cuba and United
States of America have just said exactly what
I proposed in the formula which I have sub-
mitted. May I therefore request the President
to have the two formulae I handed in read to
the Conference, to enable the members to see
that what I proposed has been heartily endorsed
by my friend from Cuba and mv friend from
the United States.
The President
Translation : The proposals will be read at
the close of the discussion.
As there is no one else down to speak, I
will sum up the position. We have before us
only one resolution, that submitted by the Chinese
delegation, which reads as follows :
"Except in cases in which such Sub-
Committees shall decide otherwise, all
meetings of Sub-Committees shall be public.
?Representatives of delegations not repre-
sented on a Sub-Committee may attend the
private meetings of such Sub-Committee.?
I have no more to say, except that I wish to
thank the British and ETuguayan delegates for
their courtesy. I will not accept Sir Malcolm
Delevingne?s offer or prolong a discussion which
it seems to me has now been brought to a satis-
factory conclusion.
I would therefore simply ask you, when the
text of the Chinese delegate?s resolution has
been read in French and English, to vote on
the motion.
We will vote first of all on the first part of
the Chinese proposal, concerning the application
to the Sub-Committees of Article 6 of the Rules
of Procedure.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I ask for a vote by roll-call.
IV!. Buero (Uruguay) :
Translation : Will my compromise pro-
posal be put to the vote ?
The President
Translation : Do you think that it is neces-
sary to take a special vote on your proposal ?
It seems to me that the one upon which we are
just going to vote is practically the same as
yours. I would point out, moreover, that the
reason I did not put your proposal to the vote
was that you did not submit it in writing.
TVS. Buero (Uruguay) ;
Translation : In that case I reserve the
right to submit my proposal wdien I see the
result of the vote about to be taken.


The President :
Translation : I would ask you then to sub-
mit it in writing.
{A vote by roll-call was taken on the first part
of the Chinese proposal.)
In favour.
Australia ; Belgium ; Bolivia ; Brazil ; Canada ;
China ; Cuba ; Czechoslovakia; Danzig; Domini-
can Republic ; Egypt ; Germany ; Greece ;
Irish Free State ; Japan ; Luxemburg ; Persia ;
Poland ; Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes ; Siam ; Spain ; Sweden ; Turkey ;
United States of America ; Uruguay ; Vene-
zuela.
Total: 26.
A gainst.
A bstentions
British Empire ; France ; Hungary ; India ;
Italv ; Netherlands ; Portugal ; Switzerland.
Total ; 8.
The proposal was adopted by a majority of
26 votes, with 8 abstentions.
The President
Translation : According to the ordinary
rules of procedure, this proposal has been una-
nimously adopted, as abstentions do not count.
The latter will, however, be noted in the record
of the meeting.
We will now vote on the second part of the
Chinese delegate?s proposal, which reads as
follows :
?Representatives of delegations not repre-
sented on Sub-Committees may attend
the private meetings of such Sub-Commit-
tees.?
Before taking a vote, I have one remark to
make. The Sub-Committees will be obliged to
hold meetings simultaneously. I wish to direct
my colleagues? attention to this point. This
does not mean that 1 am opposed to the Chinese
delegate?s motion ; but the point should be
noted. As a rule, three Sub-Committees will
be sitting at the same time ; I suggest that
meetings of Sub-Committees A, B and F and
of Sub-Committees C, D and E respectively
should be simultaneous. This means that
certain delegates will not always be able to be
present at the discussions of all the Sub-
Committees.
(.A vote by roll-call was taken on the second part
of the Chinese proposal.)
In favour :
Australia ; United States of America ; Belgium;
Bolivia ; Brazil ; Canada ; China ; Cuba ;
Czechoslovakia ; Danzig ; Dominican Republic ;
Egypt ; France ; Germany ; Greece ; Hungary ;
Irish Free State ; Italy ; Japan ; Luxemburg ;
Persia ; Poland ; Portugal ; Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes ; Siam ; Spam ,
Sweden ; Switzerland ; Turkey ; Uruguay ;
Venezuela.
Total : 31.
A gainst
A bstentions.
British Empire; India; Netherlands.
Total : 3.
The proposal was adopted by 31 votes in favour,
with 3 abstentions.
The President
Translation : Does the Uruguayan delegate
still wish a vote to be taken on his verbal
proposal ?
M. Buero (Uruguay) ;
Translation : No, thank you ; but the first
point raised by you still has to be decided.
The President
Translation : I presume that the first
Uruguayan delegate is referring to the question
whether matters of principle are to be discussed
in the first place at plenary meetings of the
Committee.
M. Buero (Uruguay) :
Translation : I made a proposal covering
this point in the course of my first speech.
The President
Translation : I put the question to the
Committee, and three speakers gave their views
on the matter. The first German delegate
stated that, in his opinion, it was inadvisable
that matters of principle should be discussed
in the Sub-Committees before being laid before
the Committee. Two delegates have expressed
the opposite view.
Does anyone still wish to speak, on this
subject ? It is perhaps difficult to vote on
the question, as no formal proposals have been
submitted.
I think that, in order to avoid a lengthy
discussion, we might adopt the following pro-
cedure : questions of principle should first
be submitted to the Committee, which would
then refer them, discussing them or not, as the
case might be, to the various Sub-Committees.
This seems to me the simplest procedure.
Unless we adopt it, there is a danger of doubt
arising in the Sub-Committees as to whether
questions are to be referred to the Committee.
I venture, therefore, to put this proposal
to the members of the Committee.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) ;
Translation : I beg to support the Presi-
dent?s proposal. Apart from the reasons which
he has advanced, this procedure is the one
generally adopted by the different Parliaments.
Any question of principle would be submitted
to the First General Committee, which would
then decide to which of the Sub-Committees
it should be referred.
M. Sze (China) ;
I am not in a position to discuss the matter
just now, but in the event of a decision being
taken by a Sub-Committee, would that decision
come before the plenary Committee or before
the full Conference ?
The President
Translation : The Sub-Committee would
first submit its report to the General Committee ;
a formal discussion might then take place in the
full Conference.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America)
I rise to make a parliamentary enquiry.
Am I correct in the assumption that any pro-
posals which a delegate desires to make to the
Conference will be presented to one of these
plenary Committees, and that, if any question


of principle is raised, it will be decided or
referred to the appropriate Sub-Committee ?
The President :
Translation : I agree with the view of the
United States delegate.
I think that this closes the discussion on
the first item of our agenda.
The Committee adopted the proposal of the
United States delegate.
Mr. Campbell (India):
Before the discussion on this point is closed,
1 would again like to draw attention to the
suggestion which I made when addressing the
Conference a short time ago. As I understand
it, the proposal is that if a question of principle
arises it should be discussed first of all by the
Plenary Committee of the Conference. But
with the object of avoiding the practical diffi-
culties to which you, Sir, I think drew attention,
I suggested that it was perhaps necessary to
go further and that, if it appeared during the
discussion in the full Committee that there
was divergence of opinion on a fundamental
point, any delegation should have the right
to demand that that question should be refer-
red for discussion to the plenary Conference.
The President :
Translation : I think that any delegation
would have the right to make a proposal in
the sense indicated by the delegate of India.
It would be for the General Committee to decide
this point.
3. APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE
SUB -COMM ITT E ES.
The President :
Translation : We now have to deal with
the second item on the agenda, which refers
to the appointment of the members of the Sub-
Committees.
According to Article 5 of our Rules of Proce-
dure, the Business Committee has the right to
nominate members, but the Business Committee
has not met to discuss this point, and I did
not wish to call a meeting for this purpose
before hearing the opinion of the General
Committee.
Does the General Committee wish itself to
nominate the members of the Sub-Committees
or does it wish the Business Committee to sub-
mit a proposal ? I put this question to you,
as it is a difficult point ; in nominal ing
members, several considerations have to be taken
into account, and, among others, as I have just
pointed out, the lines upon which the Sub-
Committees are to proceed. It would be better
if delegates who are members of Sub-Committees
A, B, and F were not at the same time members
of Sub-Committees C, D, and E. The members
of the delegations should be allocated between
the Sub-Committees in a practical manner so
that the work may be expedited.
Does the General Committee wish the Business
Committee to submit a proposal or does it
prefer at once to elect, by roll-call, members
other than those already referred to in the Busi-
ness Committee?s report which has been adopted
by the plenary Conference ?
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : It is clear that we could pro-
ceed at once to elect the members of the Sub-
Committees, but we must not lose sight of the
fact that these Sub-Committees consist of at
least 14, 16, or 18 members, that there are six
Sub-Committees, and that, in consequence, we
shall have great difficulty in deciding whom
to appoint. We must remember that it was
decided, after we had heard Sir Malcolm
Delevingne?s report, that the States which he
referred to should be represented in equitable
proportions. We must therefore proceed with
the greatest care in choosing the other members.
I propose that this Committee ask the Busi-
ness Committee to submit a provisional list
and that we adjourn the election of the members
of the Sub-Committees in order that we may
decide whom it is best to appoint.
The President :
Translation : I have to inform you that no
definite proposal has been made by members
of the Committee.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt has suggested
two proposals. If you would allow me to sum
up the views of the meeting, I would suggest
the following procedure : that the Business
Committee be asked to prepare lists, which
would not, however, be binding. You may
be sure, moreover, that any lists submitted
to you would take all necessary considerations
into account ; I am simply making the
suggestion. In this way, you could vote
with all the facts before you. There would be
no need for a secret ballot, as the vote would
be not on ?names? but on ?countries?. I
propose, therefore, that a vote by roll-call
be taken, and I would ask the Business Committee
to draw up the lists which I have just sug-
gested. Do the members of the Committee
agree to this proposal ? (Agreed).
The Committee rose at 12.40 p.m.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, November 25 th, 1924, at 4 p.m.
President : M. Herluf Zahlf.
CONTENTS:
4. APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE
SUB-COMMITTEES.
4. Appointment of Members of the Sub
Committees.
The President :
Translation : The meeting of the First
Committee is now open.
5. Election of the Chairmen of Sub
Committees A, B, C, D an d F.


I think that all the members are in possession
of the proposals of the Business Committee
(Document O.D.C. I/i, Annex i), concerning
the appointment of the five Sub-Committees
to be set up by the First Committee. I may
inform you that this list has been drafted with
the most scrupulous care, all the delegations
present and the particular qualities of the
members best adapted to sit on the various
Sub-Committees being alike taken into consi-
deration. I would ask the delegates to note
what I have said, although I do not wish in
any way to influence their decision.
i would venture, however, to direct your
attention to the fact that any great divergence
in the views expressed regarding the consti-
tution of the Sub-Committees would make
it practically impossible for them to be set up
at all.
I now propose to take a vote in accordance
with the following procedure ;
One representative of each delegation will
put in the ballot-box five voting papers marked
A, B, C, D and F, following, so far as is possible,
the order of the scheme proposed by the Busi-
ness Committee.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : Would it not save time if,
instead of using voting papers, we used the
lists submitted to us, giving the names for the
five Sub-Committees ? {Applause.)
The President :
Translation : I am quite ready to accept
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt?s proposal. I
would go even further. As the vote which
is about to be taken does not refer to indivi-
duals, there is no need for a secret ballot,
which, moreover, is not even laid down in our
Rules of Procedure. We can vote for Sub-
Committees A, B, C and D by acclamation
or by a show of hands.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : I accept the President's pro-
posal, but I still suggest that, in the case of
Sub-Committees A, B, C and D, we should use
the lists now before us. The appointment of
Sub-Committee F would be by secret ballot.
The President :
Translation : lam quite ready to agree to
the suggestion ; I think it is an excellent one.
Has anyone any objection to offer ?
As there is no objection, we will vote as pro-
posed by M. de Aguero.
I have the honour to ask M. Sugimura,
Japanese delegate, M. Dendramis, Greek dele-
gate, M. Gotuzzo, Brazilian delegate, M. Toivola,
Finnish delegate, and M. Chodzko, Polish
delegate, to take their places on the platform
and act as tellers.
A vote was then taken by roll-call and secret ballot.
The President :
Translation : The result of the ballot is
highly satisfactory for the Business Committee.
34 delegations voted and 31 adopted the lists
without any modification. It may be said,
therefore, that these lists have been almost
unanimously adopted. I do not think it
necessary to point out the slight alterations
made in them by the three other delegations.
I therefore declare the proposals of the Busi-
ness Committee for the composition of the Sub-
Committees of the First Committee adopted.
[Adopted.)
5. ELECTION OF THE CHAIRMEN OF
SUB-COMMITTEES A, B, C, D AND F.
The President :
Translation : I now call upon the members
of Sub-Committees A and B to meet in order
that they may proceed to nominate their
Chairmen. The representative of the country
whose name, in French, begins with the first
letter of the alphabet will be good enough to
preside until the appointment of the Chairman.
In the case of Sub-Committee A, this duty
devolves upon the German representative, and
in that of Sub-Committee B, upon the Australian
representative.
The President;
Translation : Sub-Committee A has finished
its discussion. I do not yet know the result.
I call upon Sub-Committee C to meet under
the temporary chairmanship of the Bolivian
delegate for the purpose of electing its permanent
Chairman.
I would also ask Sub-Committee Dto meet
under the temporary chairmanship of the
Cuban delegate, in the absence of the Albanian
delegate, in order to elect its permanent
Chairman.
Sub-Committees A, B, C and D are now
constituted and have elected their Chairmen
as follows :
Sub-Committee A : The Hon. H. S.
Beland, first Canadian delegate ;
Sub-Committee B : M. Chodzko, first
Polish delegate ;
Sub-Committee C : M. von Eckardt,
first German delegate ;
Sub-Committee D : M. Veverka, first
Czechoslovak delegate.
Sub-Committee F has not been able to meet,
as all the experts are not present. I would ask
Mr. Amyot, the Canadian delegate on this
Sub-Committee, to call a meeting for the
purpose of electing the Chairman and to inform
me afterwards who has been elected.
The Committee rose at 5.25 p.m.
THIRD
MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday,
November
27th, 1934, at 3.30 p.m.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
6. ALLOCATION OF WORK BETWEEN
THE SUB-COMM ITT EES.
CONTENTS:
The President :
6. Allocation of Work between the Sub
Committees.
Translation : I declare the meeting of the
First Committee open. We have to deal with


the allocation of the various questions referred
to this Committee by the plenary Conference
at its meeting this morning. We shall have
to take a decision assigning these questions to
the various Sub-Committees. I think you
will agree with me that it will aid you in your
decision if I ask the Rapporteur, the first
Swiss delegate, to submit suggestions. When
M. Dinichert prepared his report on the general
division of the work, he certainly took into
consideration the further allocation of this
work as between the various Sub-Committees.
I leave M. Dinichert entirely free to submit his
proposals in the way he thinks most practical
and suitable.
IVI. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur :
Translation : Mr. President, ladies and
gentlemen I am quite ready to undertake the
task which I have been called upon to perform.
I wish to make it clear, however, that any views
which I may submit to you are not formal
proposals, but merely personal expressions of
opinion. Your President will ask you from
time to time if you approve of the division
of work among the different Sub-Committees,
as I forecast it.
Our work is greatly simplified by the fact
that you took the necessary decisions this
morning concerning the reference of the various
questions to the First and Second Committees.
As we are dealing only with the First Committee,
my proposals will relate simply to the division
of work between Sub-Committees A, B, C,
D and possibly F. I may say at once that,
so far as I am able to judge at present, there
are very few questions to be referred to Sub-
Committees B and C. It remains to be seen
if lam right ; I hope not.
I propose, with your permission, to deal
first with Part I of the Advisory Committee?s
plan, 1 which was referred en bloc to the First
Committee. Articles i, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, that
is to say the whole of Part I, come within the
competence of Sub-Committee A ; these ar-
ticles refer to questions relating to the limita-
tion of the manufacture of narcotic drugs or,
if necessary, to the limitation of imports of
raw materials for purposes of manufacture,
a question which is also within the com-
petence of this Sub-Committee. Consequently,
Sub-Committee A alone can deal satisfactorily
with Part I, for I cannot see that Sub-
Committees B and C, which have to deal
with the limitation of the actual production
of raw materials for export, can have much
to say on this matter.
To sum up, I suggest that the whole of Part 1
of the Advisory Committee?s programme be
referred to Sub-Committee A. I should add
that Sub-Committee D, which has to deal
with all proposals which come before any one
of the other three Sub-Committees, will natu-
rally also have to discuss it. 1 do not wish,
however, to encroach upon the powers of Sub-
Committee D by suggesting that it should deal
with these questions at once, for it may pos-
sibly judge it necessary to wait for some inti-
mation from one or other of the Sub-Com-
mittees. I propose, therefore, that the whole
of Part I be now referred to Sub-Committee A,
and that Sub-Committee D be left to decide
when it will deal with the matters in question.
1 See Record of the Plenary Meetings, Annex 2.
This is the first proposal which I have to
submit to the Committee for approval.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I agree with the Rapporteur that the whole
of Part I of the Advisory Committee?s plan,
in so far as it bears on the limitation of the
manufacture of the drugs, should be referred
to Sub-Committee A for examination and con-
sideration. I do not quite agree, however,
that there is nothing for Sub-Committees B,
C and D to do at the present moment.
Let me take Sub-Committee D first. Sub-
Committee D was appointed to consider the
suggestions for the limitation of the manufac-
ture of the drugs and the production of the
raw material for export from the point of view
of the consuming countries. Under Part I,
the consuming countries would undertake cer-
tain duties ; the duty, for example, of fur-
nishing annually an estimate of their require-
ments of the drugs or of the raw material.
It seems to me very important that Sub-
committee D, which specially represents the
consuming countries, should get to work at
once in regard to the suggestions in Part I of the
scheme of the Advisory Committee in so far
as they specially affect the consuming countries
as such. I would therefore suggest that there
is something for Sub-Committee D to do at
once. Their criticisms and suggestions will be
of very great assistance to Sub-Committee A
in the consideration of the scheme in Part I,
from the point of view of the manufacturing
countries.
As regards Sub-Committees B and C, there
are provisions in Part I which affect the coun-
tries producing the raw material. For instance,
there is the provision that each Government
undertakes not to export consignments of the
raw material in excess of the estimated quan-
tities. There is also a special provision in
paragraph 6 of Part I in relation to the question
of the limitation of exports. It seems to me
desirable that the two groups of countries
which produce the raw material the raw-
opium and the coca leaves should consider
those suggestions from their point of view and
let Sub-Committee A (and Sub-Committee D,
if necessary) have their observations and criti-
cisms with regard to those suggestions.
It seems to me, also, that there is something
else which Sub-Committees B and C could do
with advantage. The Conference is not, of
course, limited nor are the Committees limi-
ted to the proposals which have actually been
put forward either in the Advisory Committee?s
scheme or in the various proposals already
handed h. by the different delegations. There
are here the delegations of almost all the coun-
tries which produce the raw material, and they
have been divided into two groups, which are
represented respectively on Sub-Committee B
and Sub-Committee C. It seems to me very
desirable that they themselves should investi-
gate the possibility of limiting the production
of the raw material for export. They have
the knowledge ; they know the conditions of
their own countries, which are the producing
countries.
If they can either produce a scheme of their
own (which the Preparatory Committee failed
to do) or, failing that, if they can let the Confe-
rence know why it is impossible to produce a
scheme, one very important factor will have


been established in the. decisions at which this referred to by Sir Malcolm Delevingne, Ido not
Conference will eventually arrive. There are,
for instance, the proposals in the schemes
which were submitted by the British and Nether-
lands representatives on the Preparatory Com-
mittee. Those schemes are in abeyance for
the time, but they are not dead, and I see no
reason why, if Sub-Committees B and C choose
to examine them, they should not do so.
Such are my suggestions in regard to the
work of Sub-Committees B, C and D, and I
would respectfully suggest to the Conference
that those Sub-Committees might be asked to
get to work at once.
The President
Translation : If no other member of the
Committee wishes to speak, I will ask M.
Dinichert to reply to the British delegate?s
suggestions.
IVt. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : My reply to Sir Malcolm
Delevingne will simply be a statement showing
that, in the main, our views are much the same.
We are in agreement as regards Sub-Com-
mittees A and D. I said just now that all
these questions will have to be referred to
Sub-Committee D, but that I felt that it
might be regarded as interference on my part
if I proposed that Sub-Committee D should
examine them now, at the same time as Sub-
Committee A. I simply made this reservation :
I wanted to leave Sub-Committee D free to
decide when it was best to begin its work, for,
as Sir Malcolm Delevingne has just pointed out,
the question which most concerns it is the limi-
tation of the exportation of raw materials and
manufactured drugs, from the consumers? point
of view. This question should also be examined
by Sub-Committee A in the presence of the half
of its members who belong to the consuming
countries. I think, therefore, that it would
be better for Sub-Committee D to wait for
information from Sub-Committee A.
I might mention in this connection that we
even thought of having what one might call
liaison agents between the various Sub-Com-
mittees, who could supply, in particular, from
Sub-Committee A information which might be
of special use to Sub-Committee D during its
discussions. We are in agreement, then, as
regards Sub-Committee D.
As regards Sub-Committees B and C, I also
am of the opinion that they might, with some
difficulty, glean something from Part I of the
Advisory Committee?s scheme.
Part I also mentions certain statistics rela-
ting to the exportation of raw materials from
producing countries which might serve as a
starting point, but it is Sub-Committee A
which ought to deal with the question of limi-
tation in principle and to consider at the same
time the working of the international organi-
sation which it is desired to set up.
On this point, I have no objection to raise,
for I am in favour of employing the quickest
methods of getting through our work.
As regards the other point raised by Sir
Malcolm Delevingne, I agree with him in prin-
ciple. I would merely point out that this
morning we divided up the work covered by
the Advisory Committee?s project and a number
of other schemes, more especially that of the
United States. As regards the projects
propose that they should be similarly included
in our scheme of work as I see it at present.
As regards the proposals made by the Prepa-
ratory Committee, the programme of the Advi-
sory Committee has in fact been substituted
for them.
The proposal submitted to us should, in my
opinion, come from the delegations represented
here. The British project, unless I am mis-
taken, was not submitted to the Conference.
It is obvious, however, that if the plenary
Conference accepts schemes such as those of
the British and Netherlands Governments, which
emanated from the Preparatory Committee,
it can refer them to its Committees and Sub-
Committees. I did not wish to pursue this
matter further, because I did not know whether
the proposals had been actually laid before the
Conference. In any case, the Business Com-
mittee did not deal with them yesterday.
I am simply giving you the ideas which have
been suggested to me by Sir Malcolm Dele-
vingne?s remarks. As he said just now, though
there appears to be some divergence between
our views, in the main, we are really of the
same opinion.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I am not quite sure that that part of my
speech which related to Sub-Committees B and C
was quite understood. What I said was that,
apart from the particular matters in Part I
of the Advisory Committee?s scheme, there was
the general question of the limitation of the
production of the raw material to be considered.
There are present at this Conference represen-
tatives of all the producing countries except one,
and I suggest that it would be highly desirable
that, as those producing countries are meeting
together in Sub-Committees B and C, they should
themselves examine the possibility of effecting
a limitation of the production of the raw mate-
rial for export, and should consider whether
they could come to any agreement in regard
to such limitation. I only mentioned the
schemes which have been put forward in the
Preparatory Committee by the Netherlands
and British representatives as instances of
schemes or suggestions which the producing
countries might take into account.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : I understand then that, apart
from the questions which the plenary Conference
decided this morning to refer to the two Com-
mittees, the British delegate is making a fresh
proposal, namely, that the general question of
the limitation of the production of raw mate-
rials for export should be referred to Sub-
Committees B and C.
May I say that, so far as I am concerned in
the question, I personally see no reason why
the First Committee, if it thinks fit, should not
accept Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s proposal and
recommend that the Chairmen of Sub-Commit-
tees B and C should suggest that the members
of these Sub-Committees, who, in the case of
Sub-Committee B, include representatives of
opium-producing countries, and, in that of
Sub-Committee C, representatives of coca-
producing countries, should deal with the
question.
I readily admit that Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s
proposal is in conformity with the Assembly


resolution of September 1923, but Sir Malcolm
knows, even better than I do, that, in drawing
up the subsequent programme, it was not
found possible to retain the ideas contained
in that resolution ; we shall, however, be
keeping within the general purpose of the Confe-
rence, if the latter decides to deal with this
general question, and I think I shall not be
misinterpreting Sir Malcolm?s views if I say that
the First Committee appears to be competent
to ask Sub-Committees B and C to examine it
also.
M. Chodzko (Poland) :
Translation : On behalf of the Polish and
Danzig delegations, I beg to support Sir Mal-
colm Delevingne?s proposal concerning Sub-
Committees B and C.
The President
Translation : Has M. Dinichert anything
further to say ?
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : As I said just now, I think,
if I may be allowed to express an opinion, that
the Committee should instruct Sub-Committees
B and C to proceed to a general examination
of the questions raised by the British delegate.
The Committee would have to take a decision
authorising the Chairmen to bring the questions
before their Sub-Committees.
The President
Translation : If the Committee is of opi-
nion that a formal resolution is necessary before
Sub-Committees B and C can deal with the
questions raised by Sir Malcolm Delevingne,
then we must have a definite proposal before us,
but if the Committee agrees to an extension
of the question under discussion, without any
formal resolution, I think that it might also
pass a resolution referring Sir Malcolm Dele-
vingne?s proposal to the Sub-Committees.
Sir IVlalcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I respectfully suggest that no formal autho-
risation is necessary, nor do the suggestions
which I have made, in my opinion, involve any
extension of the terms of reference of those
Sub-Committees. .When the Conference adop-
ted the first report of the Business Committee,
it decided that Sub-Committee B should be
appointed to consider the suggestions for
the limitation of the production of opium for
export, and that Sub-Committee C should be
appointed to consider the suggestions for the
limitation of the production of the coca leaf
for export. My suggestions fall entirely within
those terms of reference.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I merely rise to ask for some information.
Do I understand that the motion of the dele-
gate of the British Empire places no limitation
upon the duties of these two Sub-Committees ?
If it does, I shall have to raise an objection ;
if it does not, I have nothing further to say on
the point.
Sir IVlalcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I have suggested no limitation of the terms
of reference adopted for these two Sub-Com-
mittees by the Conference itself.
IYI. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : From what Sir Malcolm
Delevingne has just said we appear now to be
discussing mere words, so that we have practi-
cally reached an agreement.
Two Sub-Committees have been set up :
Sub-Committee B, to consider suggestions for
the limitation of the production of opium for
export ; Sub-Committee C, to consider sug-
gestions for the limitation of the production of
the coca leaf for export. Hitherto, however,
no proposal has been submitted for referring
these questions to the competent Sub-Com-
mittees.
This morning the Conference referred certain
definite questions to the Committee, so that
I will go back to what I said just now : there
is no objection to any member for instance,
the British delegate suggesting to the Com-
mittee that this or that proposal be referred to
the two Sub-Committees ; but we must have
a formal proposal.
Does the Committee agree that the proposal
formulated this afternoon should be referred
to the two Sub-Committees ?
The President
Translation : Does anyone wish to speak
on this point ?
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) :
Translation : I agree with Sir Malcolm
Delevingne ; we can call a meeting of Sub-
Committee B to discuss the matter.
The President
Translation : Will you allow me to make
a suggestion, in order to curtail the discussion ?
I propose that you refer the record of to-day?s
meeting to both the Sub-Committees.
Does the Committee agree to this somewhat
unusual proposal ?
IVI. Sugimura (Japan) :
Translation : The Japanese delegation agrees
to the proposal.
The proposal was adopted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : To continue : by a decision
of the Conference this morning, paragraph XIII,
the last paragraph of Part II of the Advisory
Committee?s programme, was referred to the
First Committee. In view of the discussion
which has just taken place, that paragraph
should now be referred to Sub-Committees A,
B, C and D, each of which will deal with the
points which specially concern it.
We will now go on, with your permission,
to the suggestions of the United States. This
proposal contains very few articles which
come, for the present, within the competence
of the First Committee. Chapter I deals
with the definition of raw opium. According
to the proposals of the Business Committee,
these suggestions fall within the competence
of the First Committee, the idea being, I
think, that the latter will probably find it
desirable to submit them to Sub-Committee F,
which consists of specialists. That is all that
there is to be said about Chapter I, and Chapter
II does not concern us now. The definitions
laid down in Chapter 111 should also be re-
ferred, under the same conditions, to the First
Committee.


We now come to Articles 20-A, 20-B, 20-C,
20-D and 20-E relating to the constitution of
a Central Board. These articles fall within
the competence of Sub-Committee A, which
also has to deal with the part of the Advisory
Committee?s suggestions referring to this ques-
tion. There remains only Article 20-L, which
was excepted this morning from the series of
articles to be referred to the Second Committee,
this article should also be referred to Sub-
Committee A, which has to deal with the Central
Board. So much for the suggestions of the
United States.
We still have to deal with the proposals
submitted by certain Governments. We have
first to consider the part of the Austrian proposal
which relates to statistics, limitation, etc., and
which falls within the competence of Sub-
Committee A ; the same applies to that part
of the Austrian proposal relating to the Central
Board. The second part of this proposal has
been reserved for the Second Committee;
we shall not discuss it for the present.
There is also the brief proposal submitted
by the Cuban delegation, which should be
referred to Sub-Committee A and which might
also be discussed by Sub-Committees B and C,
We might refer this proposal to three of the
Sub-Committees, which would deal with what-
ever points specially concern them.
The first part of the Norwegian proposals
concerning statistics should go to Sub-Com-
mittee A; the second part falls within the
competence of the Second Committee.
I have left out the Australian proposal, with
which the First Committee is competent to deal
and which should be referred to Sub-Committees
B and C, as it relates to the restriction and
limitation of the production of raw materials.
I think I have exhausted all the proposals
which have been submitted and which we allo-
cated thi morning.
Mr. Campbell (India) ;
I think a verbal slip was made in dealing
with this matter. I think that reference should
have been made to the definition of coca
leaves and not to the definition of raw opium.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) ;
I would like to move that Article 14 of the
United States Suggestions be referred to Sub-
Committee F, It is a medical matter, and
Sub-Committee F is the competent one to
deal with it. It relates to a number of officinal
and non-officinal preparations of opium, heroin
and cocaine. Apparently the item has been
overlooked in the report. The proposals which
have been made are rather hard to follow, but
I assume that the report includes all the other
items suggested by the delegate of the United
States excepting that relating to Article 14
which I move should be referred to Sub-Com-
mittee F.
The President :
Translation : Does M. Dinichert wish to
reply to the question raised by Mr. Campbell ?
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : I quite agree with Mr. Camp-
bell. It was merely a slip, for we are discuss-
ing the report adopted this morning which
states that the definition of coca leaves was
referred to the First Committee.
As regards Mr. Porter?s remarks, I left out
Article 14 of the United States suggestions
because we agreed to refer this proposal to the
Second Committee, which will, no doubt, decide
to send it on to Sub-Committee F. If I did
not deal very fully with this point, it was because
the general opinion yesterday seemed to be
that questions should not go automatically to
Sub-Committee F unless they came within
the competence of the First Committee, and
that, if they came within that of the Second
Committee, the latter would use its own dis-
cretion.
IV!. Chodzko (Poland)
Translation : I should like to raise another
point I think that the Rapporteur has omitted
something, for, according to the decisions
which we adopted in conformity with the Busi-
ness Committee?s first report, we should also
refer to Sub-Committee D paragraphs 20, 20-A,
20-B, 20-C, 20-D, 20-E and 20-F of the American
suggestions, as well as the Austrian, Cuban and
Norwegian proposals, since all questions which
come within the competence of .Sub-Committees A,
B and C also fall within that of Sub-Committee D.
IV!. Bourgois (France) :
Translation : I beg to support the Rappor-
teur?s proposal; I have no objection to Article
14 of the United States suggestions being exa-
mined by Sub-Committee F, but I wish it to
be examined also by Sub-Committee E.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
I wish only to say one word about the pro-
posal to refer certain matters to Sub-Committee
F. Sub-Committee F has been appointed by
the Conference for a specific purpose, which
is set out in the first report of the Business
Committee. That purpose is to consider the
report of the Health Committee of the League
of Nations on the medical requirements of the
drugs and the material collected by the Pre-
paratory Committee, and any other material
that may be available with reference to the
same question.
I do not wish to offer any objection to the
proposal to refer these additional matters to
Sub-Committee F, but I wish to make this
reservation. The proposals of the United States
in regard to the definitions of the coca leaf and
cocaine are new proposals which the British
authorities have not had an opportunity of
considering. The British delegation is not
provided with any medical or scientific experts
to advise it on these matters. Therefore I
shall have to refer these proposals to my Govern-
ment for advice, and I shall have to be guided
by the advice which I receive. Subject to
that reservation, I desire to offer no objection
to the above proposal. As regards Article 14 of
the United States draft, I agree with what
M Bourgois has said.
The President
Translation : Before calling again upon
M. Dinichert, I should like to point out that
there may have been some misunderstanding
owing to the omission in the French version of
the Business Committee?s first report, at the
end of the paragraph referring to the Sixth
Sub-Committee, of the words : ?with refe-
rence to the same question?. I merely direct
your attention to this point.


The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I assume that the report of the Chairman
of the Committee refers all the items in the
American programme to appropriate Sub-Com-
mittees which were agreed upon yesterday
afternoon in the Business Committee. In the
hurry of this debate it is difficult for me to
follow and check carefully in order to see if they
are all included. I assume they are. If not,
I shall hereafter ask leave to amend the scheme
by inserting any which are omitted.
The President
Translation : The Business Committee?s
decision, which was submitted to you, has been
put into effect by the allocation of the work as
just arranged.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : The President has just replied
to Mr. Porter; his remarks are perfectly
correct. The articles which have been held
over are mentioned in the Business Committee?s
report.
As regards the British delegate?s remark
concerning the duties of Sub-Committee F,
I am unable, as Rapporteur, to make any
observation on the subject, since the matter
was not discussed yesterday. I think it was
understood that the First Committee would
automatically refer certain questions to Sub-
Committee F. The idea was that questions
referred to the First Committee as was
mentioned in the course of our discussion this
afternoon on the definition of cocaine and
coca leaves would be sent on by the First
Committee to Sub-Committee F. If I remember
rightly, it was in this roundabout way that we
decided to refer these questions to the First
Committee.
As regards the question whether matters
submitted to the Second Committee could be
referred by the latter to Sub-Committee F,
I have already stated that I displayed a certain
caution on the subject as I think that the
Second Committee might prefer itself to decide
whether it should call upon Sub-Committee F.
I do not remember that any formal decision
was taken regarding the duties of that Sub-
Committee.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
Allocation has been made, except of those
items held in abeyance. The items held in
abeyance are Article i, Chapter 11, and Article
g-A of our scheme. If that is correct, then we
agree with the report.
The President :
Translation : Then you will vote in favour
of the project if the questions referred to in
Article i, Chapter 11, and Article g-A are held
over ?
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
Yes.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : It is Article i, Chapter 11,
and Article g-A of the United States suggestions
that are held over. All the other articles are
referred to one or other of the Committees.
I still have to reply to the Polish delegate.
We are agreed that a complete series of questions
which we referred to Sub-Committees A, B and C
are ipso facfo also within the competence of
Sub-Committee D, should the latter consider
that it is called upon, in the consumers? interest,
to deal with them, for it follows from our plan
for the allocation of the work that Sub-Com-
mittee D is competent to deal with all questions
referred to Sub-Committees A, B and C, pro-
vided they are questions relating to the con-
sumer.
The President
Translation : I think we may now regard
the scheme as adopted. {Assent.)
It will be communicated as soon as possible
to the members of the Conference, together
with the record of this meeting.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States of
America) :
On behalf of the delegation of the United
States of America, I hereby present for the
consideration of the Conference Article q-A
of the suggestions of the United States of
America, which reads as follows :
?The Contracting Parties shall enact
effective laws or regulations prohibiting
the manufacture and distribution of heroin ?,
and move that a plenary meeting of the Con-
ference be called to consider the proposal.
I have a companion resolution, which per-
haps might as well be offered at the same time.
On behalf of the delegation of the United States
of America, I hereby present for the considera-
tion of the Conference Article i of the sugges-
tions of the United States of America, which
reads as follows :
?The Contracting Parties shall enact
effective laws or regulations for the control
of the production and distribution of raw
opium and coca leaves so that there will
be no surplus available for purposes not
strictly medical or scientific.
?The foregoing provision shall not ope-
rate to prevent the production for expor-
tation or exportation of raw opium for the
purpose of making prepared opium, into
those territories where the use of prepared
opium is still temporarily permitted under
Chapter II of this Convention, so long as
such exportation is in conformity with the
provisions of this Convention.?
I make the same motion in this case as I
did in the other ; I move that a plenary meeting
of the Conference be' called to consider this
proposal.
The President
Translation : The first delegate of the
United States has submitted his proposals in
the form of set motions. I think that this
question can easily be settled.
The two proposals involve a question of
competence, with which the plenary Conference
must deal.
I propose, therefore, that a plenary meeting
be held to-morrow at 3.30 p.m. Have members
of the Committee any objection ? {Agreed.)
I will lay the same proposal before members
of the Second Committee when they meet
presently.
The Committee adjourned at 5.40 p.m.


FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 3rd, 1924, at 10 a.m.
CONTENTS :
y. Enactment of Effective Laws and Regu-
lations for the Control of the
Production and Distribution of Raw
Opium and Coca Leaves ; Article
i of the Suggestions of the United
States of America.
8. Examination of the Third Report of the
Business Committee,
q. Work of Sub-Committee F : Communi-
cation by the Chairman of Sub-
committee F.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
7. ENACTMENT OF EFFECTIVE LAWS
AND REGULATIONS FOR THE CON-
TROL OF THE PRODUCTION AND DIS-
TRIBUTION OF RAW OPIUM AND COCA
LEAVES : ARTICLE 1 OF THE SUGGES-
TIONS OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
The President :
Translation : We have now to decide whether
or not to refer Article I of the suggestions of
the United States of America to a Sub-Committee
of the First Committee, or possibly to two
Sub-Committees if it should be found that two
are competent to discuss the question.
Do any members of the Committee wish to
express an opinion on this subject ?
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : It seems to me that if the
First Committee wishes to decide now to refer
this article to the Sub-Committees, the natural
thing would be to refer it to Sub-Committees B
and C, which, as you know, are both dealing
with raw materials. Unless the First Commit-
tee wishes to deal with the question itself,
which would hardly be desirable, we cannot do
otherwise than refer it to those Sub-Committees.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I am entirely in agreement with the suggestion
that this matter should be referred to Sub-
Committees B and C.
The President :
Translation : The members of the Committee
have to pronounce upon M. Dinichert?s pro-
posal, supported by Mr. Porter, to refer Article i
to Sub-Committees B and C. Has anyone
any objection ?
As there is no objection to M. Dinichert?s
suggestion, I consider it agreed that Article I
is to be referred to Sub-Committees B and C.
(.A greed.)
Before calling upon the Rapporteur, I would
like to ask the Chairmen of Sub-Committees B
and C to note the fact that Article I of the
suggestions of the United States of America
has been referred to their Sub-Committees,
and to take into consideration also the desire
expressed by Mr. Campbell, the delegate of
India, that the discussion in the Sub-Committees
should not be unduly hastened, for the reasons
which he has already given.
8. EXAMINATION OFTHETKIRD REPORT
OF THE BUSINESS COMMITTEE.
The President :
Translation : The Business Committee
came to a decision yesterday as to what ques-
tions should be referred to the First and Second
Committees. M. Dinichert, who was so kind
as to draw up the second report of the Business
Committee, has also drawn up the report which
is now submitted to you and which contains
various suggestions for referring questions to
the First and Second Committees.
We have felt justified in referring the
questions concerned direct to the First and Second
Committees without obtaining a decision to
that effect at a plenary meeting of the Confe-
rence. As the two Committees are more or
less independent of the Conference, we thought
it would be a waste of time to adopt the ordi-
nary procedure.
If, therefore, the members of the Committee
have no objection, the Business Committee will
continue to adopt this course in the future.
I will now ask the Rapporteur of the Business
Committee to be so good as to give us his views
with regard to the different points in his report.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) ;
Translation : The document which, as Rap-
porteur of the Business Committee, I am now
submitting to you is scarcely a report. It is
little more than a summary. This is explained
by the fact that the few proposals submitted
to the Business Committee yesterday for exa-
mination were of such a character that there
was not much hesitation about referring them
to the First and Second Committees.
On the other hand, as our President has just
said, we have for the first time simplified the
procedure to some extent. The third report
of the Business Committee is addressed not to
the plenary Conference, as the two previous
reports have been, but to the First and Second
Committees in succession direct. If you have no
objection, I could take advantage of the oppor-
tunity thus afforded to make at the same time
some informal suggestions with regard to the
referring of certain proposals by the First and
Second Committees to their Sub-Committees.
We should thus simplify our work. I think
that you could, for the time being, agree to this
arrangement and, if it were found to save time,
we could adopt it in future.
1 now pass to the proposals submitted to the
Business Committee which I am laying before


you. We first have the memorandum from
the Persian delegation, which we shall all
have found to be of great interest, since it
describes the situation in one of the countries
particularly favourable to the cultivation of the
poppy. I mention this in order to draw your
attention and that of the Sub-Committee to
this document.
The First Committee has to deal with this
memorandum and I suggest that we refer it
to Sub-Committee B, which is considering ques-
tions relating to the production of opium and
consequently the cultivation of the poppy.
We will now pass to a proposal formulated
by the German delegation with regard to amend-
ments to be introduced into the new' Convention.
I will merely point out that the reference to
Chapter 111 of the Convention is accurate as
regards the new definition to be given to cocaine,
but it would be more exact to say that the refe-
rence is to Chapter I of the Hague Convention as
regards coca leaves. It is simply a question of
correcting the title of the proposal. I suggest
that you refer it to Sub-Committee F, as was
done in the case of the definitions contained in
the American suggestions.
I must now make a communication with
regard to an interesting letter, dated November
19th, which has been received by the President
from the International Pharmaceutical Federa-
tion relating to a discussion which took place
at a meeting of that Federation held at Paris
on November 18th.
The report explains that, in the opinion of
the Business Committee, this letter can simply
be distributed to the members of the Conference.
When you read it, you will see that it deals
more particularly with individual opinions as
regards the internal laws to be applied in the
matter of the control of pharmacies. These
ideas are very interesting, but they do not
directly concern our work. At the same time,
it would be well that they should be brought
to the notice of Governments by the different
delegations with a view to the judicious settle-
ment of certain details of domestic legislation.
There is one point in this letter, however, to
which I think your attention ought to be spe-
cially directed. The Pharmaceutical Federa-
tion recommends the drawing-up of interna-
tional lists of all pharmaceutical preparations
showing the proportion of narcotics contained
in them.
It is possible that, when all the members of
the Conference are acquainted with this letter,
one or other of the delegations may make a
proposal to refer this point to Sub-Committee F.
This is no more than a possibility. 1
Let us now turn to the last document,
which is referred to in the report of the Busi-
ness Committee, namely : three proposals by
the Egyptian delegation, of which two, which
have for the moment been retained, are within
the competence of the Second Committee.
As regards the First Committee, I have now
completed my task.
The President
Translation : You have heard the proposals
made by the Rapporteur of the Business Com-
mittee.
I will begin by the first proposal regarding
the note on Persian opium submitted by the
1 See Minutes of Sub-Committee F, Annex 11
Persian delegation. The Rapporteur proposes ?
and I agree with him to refer this question
to Sub-Committee B. If nobody washes to
speak, I will regard this proposal as adopted.
{Adopted.)
I would beg the Chairman of Sub-Committee
B to take note of this decision.
The second proposal concerns the amendments
to be made to the Hague Convention in confor-
mity with the proposals contained in Chapter 111
of the Convention. The Rapporteur proposes
to refer this question to Sub-Committee F.
If no one wishes to speak, I will consider this
proposal as adopted. {Adopted.)
I would request the Chairman of Sub-Com-
mittee F to take note of this decision.
In the third place, the Business Committee
has taken cognisance of a letter from the Inter-
national Pharmaceutical Federation. In accor-
dance with the proposal of that Committee, I
will acknowledge the receipt of this letter and
will inform the Federation that the document
will be distributed to the members of the
Conference. The Business Committee has made
no proposal for referring this communication
to a Sub-Committee. It is understood that
all the members of the Conference may acquaint
themselves with this letter, and if, later, any
proposal is made to refer this question to a Sub-
Committee, it will be examined. I presume
that you are willing to adopt this procedure ?
{Adopted.)
Lastly, the Business Committee has exa-
mined the proposals submitted by the Egyptian
delegation. Two of these proposals have been
referred to the Second Committee, and we are
not called upon to deal with them for the
moment. The third proposal has been reserved.
We have now exhausted our agenda, but
before closing the meeting I will call upon
the Chairman of Sub-Committee F to address us
with regard to the course of the Sub-Committee?s
work and the results so far obtained.
9. WORK OF SUB-COMMITTEE F : COM-
MUNICATION BY THE CHAIRMAN OF
SUB-COMMITTEE F.
M. Cam ere (Switzerland), Chairman of Sub-
Committee F :
Translation : Sub-Committee F, which is
a scientific committee, has dealt at three suc-
cessive meetings with the questions submitted
to it with reference to the programme drawn
up by the Health Committee of the League
of Nations relating to the fixing of the so-
called legitimate requirements of opium and
narcotics. Sub-Committee F has studied this
report, and 1 have prepared a short summary of
the deliberations which took place in the Sub-
Committee. I had thought that our Sub-
Committee might adopt that summary, and
only this morning I called a meeting for this pur-
pose. Unfortunately, we did not have time to
conclude our discussion, but we shall deal with
it at our meeting to-morrow. Accordingly, I
hope that to-morrow Sub-Committee F will
definitely adopt the report which I have pre-
pared. As this deals with the production and
control of the raw material and the manufactured
products, I think it necessary that it should be
transmitted for information to Sub-Committees
A and B, and perhaps even to Sub-Committees
C and IX


The President
Translation : You have heard the proposals
made by the Chairman of Sub-Committee F.
It is suggested that M. Carriere?s report should
be transmitted to the different Sub-Committees.
If we were to follow the formal rules of pro-
cedure, we should have to convene our Committee
afresh to take a decision on this point. But
M. Carriere's proposal is clearly an excellent
one, and, if no objection is raised, I propose that
you agree forthwith that this report should be
transmitted to the different Sub-Committees.
I also propose that, as soon as it has been ac-
cepted by Sub-Committee F, it should be distri-
buted to the members of the First Committee.
IVEr. Campbeli (India)
I am not quite certain that I have understood
the proposal correctly. So far as I recollect,
the suggestion was that the report of Sub-
committee F should be sent to Sub-Committee
B for information and guidance. If that is the
proposal, I should like to point out that, in
accordance with the decision of the Committee,
Sub-Committee B is now charged with the
consideration of Article 1 of the United States
suggestions. This question, therefore, becomes
one of cardinal importance to Sub-Committee B,
and I suggest that the work of that Sub-Com-
mittee, as regards the report of Sub-Committee
F, should be upon exactly the same basis as
that of the other Sub-Committees, that is to say,
the report should not be sent to Sub-Committee
B for information and guidance only but should
be discussed by that Sub-Committee.
The President
Translation : Does the Chairman of Sub-
Committee F wish to say anything in reply to
the observations of the first delegate for India ?
M. Carri ere (Switzerland), Chairman of Sub-
Committee F :
Translation : I thought that Sub-Committee
F was responsible for its report to the First
Committee and eventually to the Plenary
Conference. I do not quite see what would
happen if the report of Sub-Committee F
were altered by Sub-Committee B. Who will
then be responsible ? I thought, and I still
think, that our report should serve as a guide
to the Sub-Committees which have to deal
with the problem, but Sub-Committee F remains
responsible to the Conference for the conclusions
in its report. Confusion will arise if one Sub-
Committee discusses the reports of other Sub-
Committees.
lV!r. Campbell (India) :
May I explain my point ? It is rather diffi-
cult to deal with these matters without written
proposals before us. I understood the sugges-
tion to be that the report of Sub-Committee F
should be referred to four Sub-Committees, that
it should be sent to two of these for discussion
and to the other two for information and
guidance.
My point was that Sub-Committee B is very
deeply interested in this matter and should have
the right to discuss the report of Sub-Committee
F. There was, of course, no suggestion that
the report of Sub-Committee F should be modi-
fied by Sub-Committee B. That is clearly
impossible. M. Carriere has very clearly said
that Sub-Committee F is responsible for its
own report, and there can be no question of
any other Sub-Committee modifying it or
attempting to modify it. If, however, the
report is to be discussed in any Sub-Committee,
I think it must be discussed in Sub-Committee
B, which is one of the Sub-Committees prima-
rily interested in the matter. The only object
of my intervention is to secure that the report
of Sub-Committee F shall be seen and discussed
by Sub-Committee B before it is discussed in
full Committee or in full Conference.
M. Carri ere (Switzerland), Chairman of
Sub-Committee F :
Translation : In view of the explanation
just given by Mr. Campbell, I do not think that
Sub-Committee F will have any objection to
its report being studied on the lines indicated
by Mr. Campbell. It is understood that the
report of Sub-Committee F will not be modified
by the other Sub-Committees but will be sub-
mitted to the plenary Conference, and those
members who do not agree with the conclusions
of the report may then formulate such reser-
vations as they think fit. *
IVI. Sze (China)
I want to ask a question for information.
If I understood correctly, the Chairman of
Sub-Committee F used the word ?etudie? i
Mr. Campbell says ?discussed?. Are ?discussed?
and ? etudie ? the same thing or are they a
little different ?
The President
Translation : If that question is put to the
Chair, I will answer it. Ido not see how Sub-
Committee B can study the report in detail
without a discussion. Otherwise it seems to
me that the proceedings in Sub-Committee B
will be purely formal.
IVi. Sze (China) :
I must confess that my Oriental mentality
is not able to follow your explanation. As
I understand the matter, Sub-Committee F
may have studied the amount of opium and
other derivatives required for the annual con-
sumption for each person and may have decided
upon a certain figure. If that figure is studied
and discussed in Sub-Committee B, might that
not lead to a change of the figure ?
The President
Translation : It is understood that the
report of the Sub-Committee cannot be altered
by another Sub-Committee. But if the Sub-
Committees to which the report of Sub-Com-
mittee F is submitted desire to make observa-
tions in their own reports with regard to Sub-
Committee F?s report, they are free to do so,
and their observations will be examined by the
plenary Conference.
I take it that the proposal of the Chairman
of Sub-Committee F, as amended by the remarks
of the first delegate of India, means that the
report will be sent for information to Sub-
Committees A, D and C, and for study to Sub-
Committee B.
IV!. Carri ere (Switzerland), Chairman of
Sub-Committee F :
Translation : That is the meaning of my
proposal.


M. Sugimura (Japan) :
Translation : I should like, for the sake of
clearness and precision, to express my point
of view on this subject.
All the delegations are agreed, first that the
First Committee is supreme in this question,
and, secondly, that Sub-Committee F is res-
ponsible for its report. This Sub-Committee
is primarily a technical one, and it is from that
point of view that its report is of value.
The report is now submitted, for information,
to Sub-Committee B, which has to discuss the
same question as that dealt with in the report.
I am anxious that no confusion should arise
in the future, for we shall have six Sub-Com-
mittees, and if these Sub-Committees are all
to submit to each other their reports and discuss
them, I do not think that it will be a good
method of work.
At the same time, Sub-Committee B is per-
fectly free to discuss the question dealt with
in the report of which we are speaking, and it
can put forward its point of view at a plenary
meeting. Each Sub-Committee, as regards its
competence, is in direct relation with the
general Committee and not with the other Sub-
Committees.
The President :
Translation : 1 entirely share the opinion
of M. Sugimura, and I do not think it is neces-
sary to prolong this discussion. We can send
the report to the four Sub-Committees for
examination. We understand that to mean
that it is for the information of Sub-Committee
B and for its guidance in the discussion of subjects
coming within its competence. There is no
reason to make any distinction between the
four Sub-Committees. The report of Sub-
committee F will be referred to these Sub-
Committees for examination.
Does M. Carriere wish to say anything else
on this question ?
IV! = Carriere (Switzerland), Chairman of Sub-
committee F :
Translation : I entirely agree with M-
Sugimura, the delegate of Japan. I simply
wished to avoid the discussion by Sub-Com-
mittees of reports which are not within their
competence. Of course, the plenary Confe-
rence may adopt a different point of view and
we shall then be able to defend our own stand-
point.
IVI. Chodzko (Poland)
Translation : As Chairman of Sub-Com-
mittee B, I may be allowed to add a few words.
I think that the Chairman of Sub-Committee
F proposed to submit the first report of that
Sub-Committee to the plenary meeting of the
First Committee for adoption. lam not sure,
however, that it is quite expedient to transmit
this report to the First Committee, since, if it
is rejected by that Committee, it will naturally
be useless to refer it to the Sub-Committees.
I therefore propose that the report should first
be sent to the Sub-Committees, then to the
First Committee, and then be dealt with
according to the directions given by that Com-
mittee.
The President
Translation : I will endeavour to sum up
the discussion. If I have understood aright,
the Chairman of Sub-Committee F has proposed
to refer the report of Sub-Committee F to the
four Sub-Committees direct, without first sub-
mitting it to the First Committee, although
the report has not yet been adopted by Sub-
Committee F. This is a report prepared by
experts, and, therefore, its discussion by the
First Committee would not be of very much
value if the Sub-Committees concerned have
not taken cognisance of it.
If I have misunderstood M. Carriere, I
hope he will correct me.
I may add that, unless I am misinformed,
all the experts on this Committee are also
members of the Sub-Committee in question.
This being so, it is for the experts to express
an opinion.
IV!, Carriere (Switzerland), Chairman of Sub-
Committee F ;
Translation : It seems to me clear that, as
our report is a technical report we were
asked to supply figures which could serve as
a basis in considering the question of reducing
the production of raw materials and manufac-
tured products it should first be referred
to the Sub-Committees, whose work must to
some extent be based upon the conclusions of
the experts? report. I did think, but I have
changed my mind, that our report should first
be adopted by a plenary meeting of the First
Committee. I now think that it should first
be submitted to the Sub-Committees, whose
work must be based upon the conclusions that
we submit.
IVIr. Campbell (India)
I only intervened in the debate when there
was a suggestion that a differentiation should
be made between the Sub-Committees. The
moment that suggestion is withdrawn, India
has no objection to offer. If the report goes
on the same basis to all four Sub-Committees,
that is perfectly acceptable to India.
The President
Translation : Are there any other objec-
tions ?
As there are no other objections, I will
consider the question of the referring? of the
experts? report to have been settled on the
lines indicated in the discussion which has just
taken place. {Assent.)
I have just received from the Egyptian
delegation a memorandum on the use of drugs
of different kinds in Egypt, together with very
interesting statistics. 1
I propose to communicate this document
to you and then to refer it to the Business
Committee, which will deal with it at its next
meeting.
The Committee rose at 11.25 a.m
1 See Minutes of Sub-Committee B, Annex 10.


ANNEXES.
Page
i. Composition of the Sub-Committees of the First Commission 22
2. Third Report by the Business Committee 23
Annex 1.
0.D.C.1/I (1).
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEES OF THE FIRST COMMISSION
AS ADOPTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE.
Sub-Committee A.
Chairman : Dr. Henri Beland (Canada).
Germany, Netherlands,
United States of America, Switzerland,
British Empire, Brazil,
Brazil,
France, Canada,
Japan, Spain,
Sub-Committee
Chairman : Dr. W. Chodzko (Poland).
Egypt,
Greece,
India,
Persia,
Sub-Committee C.
Siam,
Sweden,
Czechoslovakia,
Uruguay.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, China,
Turkey, Dominican Republic,
United States of America, Poland,
Australia, Switzerland.
Chairman : His Excellency M. H. von Eckakdt (Germany).
/Bolivia, Peru, Japan,
Netherlands, Germany, British Empire (in the event of the arrival
of the Peruvian delegate).
Sub-Committee D.
Chairman : His Excellency M. F. Veverka (Czechoslovakia).
Albania,
Australia
Belgium,
Bulgaria,
Cuba,
Finland, Roumania,
Hungary, Siam,
Irish Free State, Czechoslovakia
Luxemburg, Uruguay,
Portugal, Venezuela.
Sub-Committee
Chairman ; Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
Doctor J. A. Amyot, Canada.
Vice-Minister of Health.
Doctor W. Chodzko, Poland.
Former Minister of Health, Delegate of the Polish Govern-
ment to the ?Office international d?hygiene?.
Doctor Anselmino, Germany.
Senior Government Counseller at the Health Department
of the Reich.
Assistant Surgeon-General Rupert Blue,
United States of America.
Brazil.
Doctor Humberto Goxuzzo,
Medical Director of the Rio de Janeiro Mental Flospital


Dominican Republic.
Doctor L. N. Betances,
Doctor of Medicine and Science, Biologist at the Embryology
Laboratory of the College de France.
Doctor A. H. Mahfooz Bey,
Egypt.
Assistant Director of the Government General Hospitals,
Public Health Department, Cairo.
Spain.
Doctor Francisco Bustamante Romero,
Head of the Pharmaceutical Service of the Ministry of
Interior.
Greece.
Professor Em. J. Emmanuel,
Professor of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the University
of Athens, Member of the Supreme Council of Public
Health.
Professor Comm. Pietro Spica,
Italy.
Director of the Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at
the University of Padua.
Switzerland.
Doctor CarrieE,
Head of the Public Health Service.
Doctor COEBERGH,
Netherlands.
Chief Inspector, Public Health Service.
M. de Myttenmaere,
Belgium.
Chief Inspector of Pharmacies.
M. J. D. Kurwan,
Doctor Mikinoske Miyajima,
Great Britain.
Japan.
Annex 2.
O.D.C. 44
THIRD REPORT BY THE BUSINESS COMMITTEE.
Rapporteur : M. Dinichert.
The Business Committee met in the afternoon of December 2nd in order to consider
which of the two Committees should examine certain proposals which had been laid before
the Conference.
These proposals are as follows :
(i) Note on Persian opium, submitted by the Persian delegation, with four annexes
(Doc. O.D.C. 24).
The Business Committee proposes that the questions contained in this important docu-
ment should be referred to the First Committee.
(2) Proposal by the German delegation with regard to the definitive clauses in Chapter 111
of the Hague Convention and with regard to certain suggested amendments to that Convention.
It is proposed to refer this proposal to the First Committee.
(A The Business Committee has taken note of a letter from the International Pharmaceu-
tical Federation to the President of the Conference dated Ihe Hague, November iqt 1
(Doc. O.D.C/C.T/3.). . , , ?
The Committee considers that, for the moment, this letter need only be circulated to all
the members of the Conference.
(4) Three proposals put forward by the Egyptian delegation. (Doc. O.D.C. 44).
The Business Committee will deal later with the first of these proposals which refers to
the addition of hashish to the list of narcotics in the Convention which is to be concluded.
The second proposal, which refers to the system of penalties to be laid down by the Con-
vention, and the third proposal, referring to import and export licences, are, in accordance
with previous decisions, referred to the Second Committee. .
These are all the matters upon which the Business Committee has been asked to gi\t
an opinion to-day.


SECOND GENERAL COMMITTEE
VERBATIM REPORT OF THE FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, November 2sth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
CONTENTS :
1. Composition of the Committee and its
Sub-Committee : Communication by
the President.
2. Rules of Procedure of the Committee.
3. Publicity of the Meetings of the Com-
mittee and its Sub-Committee.
4. Procedure as regards the Work of the
Committee and its Sub-Committee.
5. Appointment of the Members of the Sub-
Committee.
6. Adjournment of the General Discussion.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE AND
ITS SUB-COMMITTEE : COMMUNICA-
TION BY THE PRESIDENT.
The President
Translation : Ladies and gentlemen, I de-
clare the first meeting of the Second Committee
open.
Before opening the discussion, I should like
to repeat to the Second Committee what I said
to the members of the First Committee.
The various delegations have not yet sub-
mitted the names of the members whom they
have appointed as their representatives on the
Second Committee. I do not attach any great
importance to this matter, but I should, however,
like to point out that it is essential that the
representatives chosen to attend the proceedings
of the Second Committee and its Sub-Committee
should be in a position to take all the necessary
decisions on behalf of their Governments, so
that there will be no risk of such decisions being
subsequently repudiated by the first delegate
of their Government.
In this I am only stating my own opinion.
2. RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COM-
MITTEE.
The President
Translation : The first item on our agenda
relates to the procedure of the Committee.
At its preliminary meeting yesterday, the
First Committee adopted, without any lengthy
discussion, the Rules of Procedure of the Con-
ference for its own use. I suggest that this
Committee should do the same, If you raise
no objection, I shall take it that the Rules
of Procedure of the Conference are adopted by
the Second Committee.
The Rules of Procedure were adopted.
3. PUBLICITY OF THE MEETINGS OF THE
COMMITTEE AND ITS SUB-COMMITTEE.
The President
Translation : We also discussed in the First
Committee yesterday the question whether its
meetings should be public or private. I would
propose that you follow the example of the
First Committee in this matter also and resolve
that the meetings of this Committee be public,
unless otherwise decided.
The President?s proposal was adopted.
I would suggest that we also adopt the same
rule, which was approved yesterday by the
First Committee, as to the admittance of the
public to the meetings of the Sub-Committee.
The President?s proposal was adopted.
On the proposal of the Chinese delegate, the
First Committee yesterday adopted the following-
resolution :
?Representatives of delegations not repre-
sented on a sub-committee may attend the
private meetings of such sub-committees.?
I propose that you adopt, this resolution as
regards the Second Committee.
The resolution was adopted.
4. PROCEDURE AS REGARDS THE WORK
OF THE COMMITTEE AND ITS SUB-
COMMITTEE.
The President
Translation: We have now to decide whether
proposals relating to questions of principle
should be submitted and discussed at a full
meeting before being referred to the various
Sub-Committees.
The First Committee yesterday decided that,
as a general rule, proposals relating to matters
of principle should be discussed at a full meeting
before being sent to the Sub-Committees.
I believe that you also approve of this method
of procedure. {Agreed.)
5. APPOINTMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF
THE SUB COMMITTEE.
The President
Translation : There was a protracted dis-
cussion in the First Committee yesterday on
the appointment of members of Sub-Committees.
A resolution was finally adopted instructing
the Business Committee to draw up a provi-
sional list of the members who were to sit on
the various Sub-Committees. This list will
not in any way bind members of the Committee.


I venture to suggest that you should adopt
the same arrangement and ask the Business
Committee to submit to you a list of delegates
for your Sub-Committee.
The work imposed on the Business Committee
in preparing this list of delegates is somewhat
difficult, as it may well happen that meetings
of Sub-Committees take place simultaneously.
7he preparation of a provisional list of the
? members of the Sub-Committee was entrusted to
the Business Committee.
6. ADJOURNMENT OF THE GENERAL DIS-
CUSSION.
The President
Translation : Yesterday, the First Committee
did not take up the third point on its agenda
relating to the general discussion. I think it
would be prudent if we followed the example
of the hirst Committee and did not venture
on a general discussion until the Business Com-
mittee has submitted a plan of work to us.
I propose that we now rise and meet again this
afternoon at 5.30.
IV!. Bourgois (France) :
Translation : I should like to state the
French Government?s attitude to the draft
programme prepared by the Advisory Com-
mittee. I am, however, prepared to do so
later if the President considers that this ques-
tion does not come within the scope of the
general discussion and ought not to be taken
up now.
The President
Translation : I venture to ask M. Bourgois
whether the observations he intends to make
relate to the work of the First or the Second
Committee.
M. Bourgois (France) :
Translation : Any solution which we may
adopt for the problems submitted to the First
Committee is intimately dependent on the
solution adopted for the problems which will
be raised in the Second Committee. The
result is that I shall be obliged to refer to the
whole programme of questions submitted to
the First and Second Committees.
The President
Translation : As the delegate of France
has asked for my opinion on the question, I
would say that he ought to postpone his state-
ment. I suggest that he should make this
statement either in the First or the Second
Committee, or, if he prefers it, at a full meeting
of the Conference.
I am asking the French delegate to take this
course, because I think it important to complete
the formalities regarding the constitution of
the various Sub-Committees first of all. Tire
Sub-Committees cannot begin their work until
they are constituted, and it is important that
they should be in a position to transact business
without delay.
The Committee rose at 11.15 a.m.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, November J2sth, 1924, at 5.30 p.m.
CONTENTS :
7. Appointment of the Members of Sub-
Committee E and of its Chairman.
President: M. Herluf Zahle.
7. APPOINTMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF
SUB-COMMITTEE E AND OF ITS
CHAIRMAN.
The President
Translation : The meeting of the Second
Committee is now open.
1 propose that we vote in the way suggested
by M. de Aguero y Bethancourt in the First
Committee, namely, by using the list now before
you as a voting paper.
I call upon the first Chinese delegate and the
first Italian delegate to act as scrutineers.
A vote was taken by roll-call and secret ballot.
The President
Translation : The result of the vote is as
follows
Thirty-one votes have been given, all of
which are in favour of the list of names pro-
posed by the Business Committee. The list
is as follows ;
Representatives of : United States of Ame-
rica, Brazil, British Empire, China, Denmark,
Danzig, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Persia, Portugal, Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Switzerland.
I therefore declare this list unanimously
adopted. [Adopted.)
I would ask the members of Sub-Committee
E of the Second Committee to elect their
Chairman at once. Will the United States
delegate be good enough to act as temporary
Chairman ?
The members of Sub-Committee E met in
order to elect their Chairman.
The President
Translation : Has Sub-Committee E elected
its Chairman ? May I know the result of the
election ?
M. Sugimura (Japan)
Translation : M. Bourgois has been elected
Chairman of Sub-Committee E.
The President
Translation : I declare M. Bourgois duly
elected Chairman of Sub-Committee E.
The Committee rose at 5.40 p.m.


THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, November 27 tk, 1924, at 5-45 p- m -
CONTENTS :
8. Allocation of the Work of Sub-Com-
mittee E.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
8. ALLOCATION OF THE WORK OF SUB-
COMMITTEE E.
The President
Translation : The first task of the Second
Committee is to decide on the work to be
assigned to Sub-Committee E.
I would suggest that we should employ the
same method of procedure as was successfully
adopted in this matter by the First Com-
mittee.
I will ask M. Dinichert to give us his views
with regard to the allocation of the work.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : The allocation of the work
for which the Second Committee is responsible
does not, in my opinion, give rise to the same
difficulties as the allocation of work between
the various Sub-Committees of the First Com-
mittee, for, as you are aware, there is only
one Sub-Committee, namely, Sub-Committee E,
belonging directly to the Second Committee.
For the moment, the Second Committee
merely has to decide whether any particular
question ought first to be examined by Sub-
Committee E or by the plenary Committee.
It therefore seems to me to be a matter of
secondary importance at the moment whether
a question is referred to Sub-Committee E
for a preliminary examination or is considered
by the plenary Committee itself. I will, how-
ever, state what procedure I consider could be
followed as regards the reference of problems
to Sub-Committee E, my opinion being based
upon the fact that this Sub-Committee has
been formed chiefly to examine proposals
concerning international traffic, exportation,
importation, transit and transhipment. Ques-
tions relating mainly to these subjects might
therefore be referred immediately to Sub-
Committee E.
I now come to Part II of the Advisory Com-
mittee?s programme, which has been referred
en bloc, with the exception of the last paragraph,
No. XIII, to the Second Committee.
I would propose to refer forthwith para-
graphs 11, 111, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII
to Sub-Committee E, and to retain the others
provisionally for consideration by the plenary
Committee. Paragraph II of Part 111 of the
Advisory Committee?s programme should also
be referred to Sub-Committee E, but not para-
graph I of Part 111, which deals with the
question of the penalties to be imposed.
This is the general proposal which I would
put forward with regard to the Advisory Com-
mittee?s programme.
I would like at this point to say a few words
with regard to paragraph V of Part IT, which
deals with the definition of cocaine, to be inserted
in Chapter 111 of the Convention.
The question might be dealt with at once if
the Second Committee desires to refer this
item to Sub-Committee F. I do not know
whether there is any objection to this proposal.
With your permission, we will now consider
Ihe suggestions of the United States. Among
the articles within the competence of the Second
Committee, we might refer Articles 2, 2-A,
3 and 4 to Sub-Committee E. Articles 10
and 11, on the other hand, should not be refer-
red to. that Sub-Committee, at any rate for the
moment. We might perhaps consider the pos-
sibility of appointing a new Sub-Committee
to deal with measures of internal control,
regulations concerning manufacture, internal
circulation, penalties, etc. Articles 10 and
11 of the suggestions of the United States,
which deal with these questions, ought not,
therefore, to be referred to Sub-Committee E,
while Articles 12 and 13 are clearly within the
competence of that body.
The question of Article 14 has already been
briefly discussed. I think that the Second
Committee would wish to see this article refer-
red to Sub-Committee F, as well as to Sub-
Committee E, as was proposed by M. Bourgois.
It would perhaps be as well for the Committee
to express its opinion with regard to the sugges-
tion which I have just made, in order that there
should be no confusion.
I now come to Articles 20 and 20-F of the
United States suggestions, which, in my opin-
ion, ought to be considered by the Second
Committee itself, as they are articles relating
to measures of internal legislation. On the
other hand, Articles 20-G, 20-H, 20-1, 20-J
and 20-K should be referred to Sub-Committee E.
We have now covered all the suggestions
made by the United States.
There remain a few special proposals emana-
ting from various States. Among those which
have to be dealt with by the Second Committee
is the Belgian proposal with regard to Article 14
of the Convention. Perhaps the Second Com-
mittee will consider that the opinion of Sub-
committee F would be useful in dealing with
this question. If so, we could decide at once
to refer the proposal to Sub-Committee F.
Then, among the Austrian proposals, there
are two which will be referred to Sub-Com-
mittee E.
Among the Norwegian proposals is one which
ought to be considered by the whole Committee
without being referred to Sub-Committee E,
as it deals with the principles which should
govern the control of harmful products within
the various countries.
Lastly I hope my friend M. Sze will
excuse my using that sequence the pro-
posal of the Chinese delegation has been refer-
red to the Second Committee and might be
left on its agenda until further notice.


I have now been through all the questions
with which the Second Committee is concerned.
M. Sze (China)
Mr. President, I appeal to you for a decision,
because I am not satisfied that my proposal
should remain before the Second Committee.
The President
7 ranslation : I do not clearly understand
what is in M. Sze?s mind. Such of the proposals
or parts of proposals on the agenda of the
Second Committee as fall within the competence
of Sub-Committee E have been referred to that
Sub-Committee. The Chinese proposal, which
does not fall within the competence of Sub-
Committee E, remains for the moment before
the Second C ommittee. The Second Committee
naturally reserves the right to discuss any pro-
posal in full itself or to appoint a new Sub-
Committee to deal with it ; or it can be refer-
red to Sub-Committee E if the Second Com-
mittee should deem it a good idea. I think
M. Dinichert will agree with me on this point.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) :
Translation : Certainly, Mr President. I
also find it difficult to grasp M. Sze's meaning.
The Chinese proposal has been referred to the
Second Committee ; it does not appear to me,
at any rate at first sight, and so far as I can
judge, to concern especially Sub-Committee E,
which deals with general questions of transport
and traffic. It seems to me to be much more
general in character, and I admit that I should
have expected the Chinese delegate to be
satisfied for the moment that it should remain
before the plenary Committee, which is the
more important organ.
IVI. Sze (China) :
I object in principle to proposals made by
the Chinese delegation not being put on an
equal footing with the proposals of other
delegations. We are now present at a full
meeting of the Second Committee, so why
cannot action be taken at once ?
The President
Translation : I can assure M. Sze that 1
would not allow a proposal emanating from the
Chinese or any other delegation to be placed
in a position of inferiority in relation to other
proposals. But it must not be forgotten that
the Second Committee has so far only appoin-
ted one Sub-Committee, and that that Sub-
Committee, in the opinion of the Rapporteur,
is not competent to discuss the very important
memorandum submitted by the Chinese dele-
gation. Consequently, the Rapporteur thought
that this question ought to be considered in
the first instance by the Second Committee,
which will discuss it in plenary meeting and
will perhaps refer it to a new Sub-Committee
established for the purpose, unless it takes a
decision in the matter itself. It seems to me,
therefore, that the Chinese proposal is not
being placed in a position of inferiority, but,
on the contrary, is receiving specially favour-
able treatment.
IVS. Sze (China)
Mr. President, I rise to thank you for your
explanation, because it has put a different light
on the matter. I did not like the idea that a
proposal which I had made should be left in
the Second Committee. Sometimes things like
that are meant in a bad sense ; it is sometimes
meant that they are to lie there and end there.
That is why I wanted the position to be per-
fectly clear. Our proposal must be discussed
according to its merits, because it is a matter
of great importance to China.
As people here know, we are dealing with the
smuggling which has been going on, and all
the members of the Conference will bear me
out that it is disagreeable for me to have to
mention such things. But we all know that
they are going on, and I want to avoid them
and so take a step forward. I prefer to go
forward rather than backward, and I think
that China should, for the sake of humanity,
be able to count upon the co-operation and
sympathy of other Powers.
I hope I have made the position quite clear.
My point was that my suggestion should receive
the consideration which it merits from this
Conference. If the Second Committee does
not itself feel inclined to take it up, then I
shall move that a plenary meeting of the Confe
rence be held to discuss it.
The President
Translation : Any delegation has, of course,
the right to do that, but I do not think that
it will be necessary as regards the question which
we are discussing, as it will certainly be exa-
mined by the Second Committee with all the
care it deserves. lam sure that the Committee
will agree with me on this point, and that the
question will receive the utmost attention.
If it is considered necessary to appoint a new
Sub-Committee, that will certainly be done.
The Chinese proposal will, I repeat, be treated
on the same footing as all the other proposals.
I would again point out, and I venture to
emphasise the fact, that other proposals sub-
mitted to the Second Committee have also
been reserved for consideration in plenary
meeting and have not been referred to Sub-
Committee E.
IV!. Sze (China)
In order to avoid any misunderstanding, as
we are now going into the work of the Sub-Com-
mittees, may I ask if I have an assurance from
you, Mr. President, that the next full meeting
of the Second Committee will take place before
the end of the work of the Sub-Committees ?
I wish to be assured that there will be a meeting
of the Second Committee soon, that is, before,
the Sub-Committees have finished their work.
The President
Translation : I think I can give such an
assurance to the first delegate of China. Even
before he raised the question, 1 had asked the
Secretariat to draw up a special list of all the
questions which have been reserved for discus-
sion by the Committees in plenary meeting,
particularly as regards the First Committee,
and to make the necessary arrangements for
plenary meetings of the First and Second Com-
mittees to be held, without disorganising the
work of the Sub-Committees, in order to con-
sider the matters within their competence
which have so far not been referred to Sub-
Committees.


M. Sze (China)
I am quite satisfied, Mr. President.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I wish to make the same reservation with
regard to the proposal to refer the Belgian
amendment to Snb-Committee F as I made
with regard to the proposal to refer to that
Sub-Committee the question of the definition
of cocaine and the coca leaf.
The President
Translation : The reservations of the British
delegation will be entered in the record of the
meeting.
SVI. Bourgois (France)
Translation : I understand that the reser-
vation is to the effect that the Belgian proposal
should be referred to Sub-Committee E as
well as to Sub-Committee F.
Is it a reservation with regard to the com-
petence of the Sub-Committees ?
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
No. I explained the reason for my reser-
vation when the proposal was made to refer
the definition of cocaine and coca leaf to Sub-
committee F. M. Bourgois will find it in
the verbatim record of the meeting.
The President
Translation : I think we can now regard
the plan of work of the Second Committee
as adopted. {Agreed.)
I feel sure I am voicing the sentiments of all
my colleagues on this Committee in thanking
the first delegate of Switzerland very warmly
for the laborious work which he has so
successfully accomplished. {Applause.)
The Committee rose at 6.20 p.m.
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 3rd, 1924, at n.30 a.m.
CONTENTS :
9. Situation in China ; Proposals by the
Chinese Delegation.
10. Consideration of the Third Report of
the Business Committee.
President ; M. Herluf Zahle.
9. SITUATION IN CHINA : PROPOSALS BY
THE CHINESE DELEGATION.
The President
Translation: The first item on your agenda
is the discussion of the proposals by the Chinese
delegation 1 . You will remember that the discus-
sion of these proposals was held back by the
Conference and was not referred to the only
Sub-Committee constituted by the Second
Committee.
Does anyone wish to speak on these proposals ?
SVI. Sze (China)
I do not propose to detain you for more
than a minute or two, but 1 wish to offer a
word of explanation. I have heard it whis-
pered that there has been some misapprehen-
sion regarding the few simple proposals I have
laid before you. I have been told I was going to
raise the question of extra-territoriality. Let me
say at once that there is no such intention in my
mind, although I have always felt, and still feel,
that the extra-territoriality imposed on China is
unjust and unfair and should be removed as
soon as possible. I do not, however, propose
to raise that question here.
The second proposal which I have made
only asks the Powers signatories of the Hague
Convention of 1912 and having extra-territorial
rights in China to carry out their side of the
1 See Record of the Plenary Meetings, Annex 18 c.
pledge given faithfully in 1912. In the other
proposals I do not raise the question of extra-
territoriality at all. I simply ask you and
everyone knows that something must be done
to tighten up the regime for the prevention ol
smuggling, not only in the interests of China
but in your own interests and in the interests
of humanity ; for smuggling must be checked,
and stopped if possible. I ask you, therefore,
either to adopt the Chinese laws on these ques-
tions or, if you find that inconvenient, to streng-
then your own laws.
I do not insist that you adopt the Chinese
suggestion that is to say: that the Powers
having extra-territorial rights should do so.
Ladies and gentlemen, I beg you to examine
very carefully the proposals I have put before
you and in which I have not raised the ques-
tion of extra-territoriality.
As some of you know from the pamphlets
which have been circulated by the United States
of America, there are treaties in existence be-
tween China and the United States of America,
and you will have seen that the United States,
as far back as 1844, conceded to China rights
much fuller than anything in the proposals
which I have put before you. So I am not
asking you to make any sacrifice at all. But
I do ask you, for your own protection and for
the protection of humanity, apart from carrying
out the Hague Convention, that something
should be done, and done on those lines. I
hope I have made it clear and I will emphasise
that fact once more before I sit down that
I do not raise the question of extra-terri-
toriality, bad as that question is, but I simply
ask you to do something which you pledged
yourselves to do as long ago as 1912.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
Mr. President, the question of competence
may be raised on the Chinese proposal, but I


do not intend to raise it, at any rate at the
present stage, partly because I want to avoid
a long discussion, which will still further delay
the work of the Conference, and partly because
I think it possible to give satisfaction to the
Chinese delegation in a manner which I will
indicate presently and which, I hope, may
avoid a question of competence.
It is obvious that the Chinese memorandum
and the Chinese proposals raise some delicate
questions as between China and the Powers
which have extra-territorial rights in China.
1 can speak more impartially on this matter
because M. Sze has been good enough, I believe,
to express his approval of what has been done
by the British Government to control the trade
in opium and dangerous drugs by their nationals
in China. Various regulations have been made
and put into force by the British Government
for that purpose.
M. Sze says that he does not wish to raise
the question of extra-territoriality, and there-
fore I will leave that aside. But in the memo-
randum there are complaints as regards certain
Powers, unnamed ; there are also proposals
as to the nature of the penalties which have
been imposed by the Powers on their nationals ;
there is a new proposal in regard to ships, which
would certainly require to be considered very
carefully by the Governments concerned ; and
there is, lastly, a proposal as to the manner
in whicfi the Powers having extra-territorial
rights should conduct the trials of their natio-
nals. All those, as I say, are questions of some
delicacy.
Now 1 am not sure whether the view of
the Chinese delegation is that the present pro-
visions of Chapter IV of the Hague Convention
are insufficient and inefficacious, but 1 infer
from what M. Sze has just said that that is
not his point. What he desires is, it seems,
that the Powers concerned shall carry out
effectively the obligations which they have
already undertaken in Chapter IV of the Hague
Convention.
That matter has already been raised and dis-
cussed at the last session of the Opium Advisory
Committee in 1924, and I might just quote,
for the information of the Conference, what Sir
John Jordan said about it. On page 20 of the
Minutes (Document C. 397. M. 146. 1924.
XI) Sir John Jordan said that he did not think
the question fell ?within the competence of
the Committee, but within that of the
Diplomatic Body at Peking and the Chinese
Government?. The Commission had no powers
to enforce rules. He accordingly suggested
that the document should be referred back
to the Chinese Government for negotiation
with the Diplomatic Body at Peking.
The Committee eventually adopted a resolu-
tion, which is on page 22 of the aforementioned
document, in the following terms ;
?The Advisory Committee recommends
that the Powers having extra-territorial
rights in China should, if they have not
already done so, make regulations, the
breach of which shall be punishable by
adequate penalties, to control the carrying-
on by their nationals in China of any trade
in the drugs to which Chapter 111 of the
Hague Convention applies.?
1 may say that the British Government is
heartily in favour of the effective application
to the nationals of the Powers having extra-
territorial rights of the provisions of Chapter IV
of the Hague Convention, and 1 imagine - in
fact, lam sure? that that is the general desire
of all the representatives of the Powers here
represented which have such rights.
My suggestion will be this: that the Chinese
delegation and the delegates of the interested
Powers should confer on this question with a
view to seeing whether an understanding can
be reached. There are a good many Powers
which have extra-territorial rights in China
I think, about sixteen altogether but, in
practice, the number immediately concerned is
very much smaller than sixteen I fancy
about seven or eight, but I am not sure of the
exact number. 1 gather that this suggestion
which I have made may not be unacceptable,
and it has this advantage : that China and
the countries concerned will be able to discuss
this matter quite frankly among themselves
in a way which they could not do in public.
If, as the result of such a Conference, it
appears that there are any definite recommenda-
tions which can usefully be made, then those
recommendations can be presented for the infor-
mation and guidance of the Conference. I
venture to think that this suggestion should
give satisfaction to the Chinese delegation.
If it is a practical one, I think that quite a
great improvement can be secured, and it does
not give rise to the disadvantages or raise the
question of competence which would arise,
I think, if the matter were dealt with in another
way.
IV?. Bourgois (France)
Translation : The French delegation sup-
ports Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s proposal for a
consultation between all the countries directly
interested.
SVC Ferreira (Portugal)
Translation: The Portuguese delegation wel-
comes the suggestions of Sir Malcolm Delevingne,
the honourable delegate of the British Empire.
The Hon, Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
If I understood aright the statement of the
distinguished delegate from China, he is satisfied
with the terms and conditions of the Treaty
between China and the United States. If, on
the other hand, 1 misunderstood him, it is only
necessary to say that we are anxious? and I
believe it is the same with all the Powers to do
everything we can to aid China in eradicating
her great national affliction. If this suggestion
of the distinguished delegate of the British
Empire will bring about the results that China
desires I shall be glad to support it.
IV!. Sze (China)
While I appreciate the statement made by the
distinguished delegate of the British Empire,
he will perhaps allow me to point out that he
has so far only approached my proposal
from one end. There are certain things to
which Great Britain is also a party and regard-
ing which she has not acted promptly. I
have in mind particularly the pharmacy laws
my second proposal which, under the Hague
Convention, China had to submit to those


Powers having extra-territorial J 'rights and
which they were to agree upon and adopt.
The Chinese Government communicated those
pharmacy laws to the Diplomatic Body on
March ist, 1923, and, at the end of one year and
five months, had no answer. So it asked the
Diplomatic Body repeatedly how long it would
take to examine those laws, and on August
Bth, 1924, it had not yet received an answer,
From March ist, 1923, till August Bth, 1924.
is a long time, even making full allowance for
the distance from China to Europe or to America.
While appreciating Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s
statement of the readiness of Great Britain to
meet China, I must be permitted to point out
that, so far, Great Britain has only met us
from certain angles and not from all angles.
As to the interesting proposal made by
Sir Malcolm Delevingne, 1 have no objection
to make if you appoint a special Sub-Committee
to discuss the matter or if you refer it to any
particular Sub-Committee t or to this Com-
mittee ; but, as I said in the First Conference,
I am a practical man, and I want to see results,
and to see results quickly. If, however, it
is the wish of this Conference to appoint a
Sub-Committee, may I request that that Sub-
Committee should not be limited to the seven
or eight Powers which are specially interested in
regard to extra-territorial rights. Others are
equally interested, because whatever is decided
on the question of the suppression of smuggling
in China will react on other countries. There-
fore I would request, in the event of this
Conference deciding to appoint a Sub-Com-
mittee, that that Sub-Committee should be
fortified by having the advantage of neutral
opinions, so that the interests of those most
nearly concerned should not dominate. We
want to have impartial opinions.
Now, Mr. President and members of the Con-
ference, there is nothing extraordinary in this
request, because, as we have seen, we have in
Sub-Committee A, for instance, members repre-
senting manufacturing countries and we have
also the benefit of the presence of members
representing the consuming countries, so that,
whatever decision may be reached, it will not
be too much influenced by the views of those
who are interested in the matter but the opin-
ion of those who are neutral will also be avail-
able.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
I can clear Great Britain, at any rate, of the
charge of delay which has been brought against
it by M. Sze. The British Government dealt
with this matter months ago I believe last
year and sent the necessary instructions to
our Minister in China. Great Britain is only
one of a number of Powers, and the matter
to which M. Sze referred is dealt with by the
Diplomatic Body as a whole. M. Sze?s charge,
therefore, against Great Britain falls to the
ground.
As regards his suggestion to enlarge the
Sub-Committee by the inclusion of a number
of Powers not interested in the matter, I can
only say such a procedure would entirely des-
troy, in my view, the value of such a Sub-
Committee. I made the suggestion with the
sincere desire to help the. Chinese delegation in
this matter. The whole purport, the whole
object of the suggestion, was that there might
be a frank and full discussion between China
and the Powers in question on this matter.
China has complaints to make, and such com-
plaints cannot be satisfactorily or effectively
discussed in the kind of Sub-Committee which
he suggests. I would therefore ask him whether
it would not be wise to accept the suggestion
in the form in which I made it, because, if he
were to press his suggestion, the only result
would be, 1 am afraid, that the whole thing
would fall to the ground.
IV!. Sze (China):
1 am very much obliged ?to Sir Malcolm
Delevingne for his information regarding the
British Government?s action with reference
to China?s pharmacy laws. I wish the British
Government had seen fit to notify the Chinese
Government to that effect in due time. But the
point I raised was the inaction on the part of
the Powers. Notwithstanding Sir Malcolm
Delevingne?s reply, nobody can deny the fact
that there has been inaction on the part of
the Powers towards China.
Now as to the reference of my proposals to
a Sub-Committee, or to this Committee, I
leave that question entirely in the hands of
the President and of the Conference. All
I want is that something should be done. I
must say that I do not propose to go out of
my way to attack any people in the Sub-Com-
mittee or this Committee with regard to the
wrongs they have done China, because it is
disagreeable to me, and they are too well
known. I have purposely avoided doing so ?-
though everybody knows that China has been very
badly treated by some Powers at least -?? because
it is disagreeable to me.
I can state China?s policy in two or three
words. China?s policy is friendship to all and
enmity towards none. My sole idea is to show
the Powers that it is not only in the interests
of China but in their own interests and in the
interests of the world that they should honour
their word, the promises they have given to
China. I am not proposing to throw mud at
anybody, because that does not do any good.
I propose to look forward and not backward.
With this assurance I have no doubt the mem-
bers of this Conference will see the justice of
my cause and will try to meet me. lam not
asking any of the delegations to make any
sacrifice for the sake of China ; I am asking
them to do an act of justice. I ask them to
fulfil something that they are pledged to do.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America)
There seems to be somewhat of a misunder-
standing about this matter of the delay, and
it may not be out of place to refer to the Hague
Convention of 1912, which provides that ?the
Chinese Government shall promulgate phar-
macy laws for their subjects regulating the
sale and distribution of morphine, cocaine,
and their respective salts??, and so forth.
As I understand the matter, China did not
promulgate those laws, and in 1915 the Con-
gress of the United States acted in the matter
by passing the Public Bill 262, which will be
found on page 133 of the Grey Book submitted
by the United States.
My information is that this demand on the
part of the Chinese Government reached the
Government of the United States some time


last summer with a request that we should adopt
the Chinese pharmacy laws. The Department
replied that it would be glad to consider the
matter, but that, of course, it would require
an Act of Congress, and that Congress was not
in session.
I again desire to say to the Chinese delegate
that we shall be only too happy to take up
this matter and try to comply with the wishes
of China in every particular. The period of
a year and five months to which the Chinese
delegate referred does not, however, seem to
be quite accurate, because my information is
and I have beside me the gentleman who
handled the matter that it only reached us
last summer. We have not acted because
Congress was not in session.
The President
Translation : Before calling upon M. Sze,
the Chinese delegate, I will ask the Committee
whether it considers that the question which
has been raised should be discussed in the Com-
mittee and whether we are not losing sight of
our agenda. If the Committee considers itself
competent and that the discussion of this
question at this moment is opportune, I
will accede to its wishes. But I ought to tell
you that, in my opinion, we are becoming in-
volved in details.
M. Sze (China)
As I always desire to do, I bow to your good
judgment and opinion. I do not propose to
discuss the matter any longer. I should like
to refer, however, to the point raised by Mr.
Porter. The dispatch addressed by the Foreign
Office of Peking to the Diplomatic Body in
Peking was dated March ist, 1923. I do not
know why the transmission of the note from
Peking to Washington was delayed. The
point I made a little while ago substantially
subsists there has been inaction on the part
of the Powers or their representatives in Peking.
I will say no more.
The President
Translation : We have before us a proposal
by the British Government. If I rightly
understand the suggestion made by Sir Malcolm
Delevingne, he desires to create a kind of
Committee apart from the present Committee
and its Sub-Committee. This new Committee
would consist of the distinguished represen-
tative of China and certain of the members of
the Conference representing countries with extra-
territorial rights in China.
The establishment of this Committee seems
to me rather a difficult matter, because the
countries possessing these rights have not been
named. This would no doubt be an easy
question to settle, but it would be more difficult
to determine the countries to be represented on
this Committee, I am not sure that the present
Committee is qualified to settle a question of
this kind.
I propose that the delegates of China and
Great Britain and, let us say, the delegates of
France, Portugal and the United States, who
have expressed an opinion on this question,
should meet and decide among themselves
regarding the countries which they consider
sufficiently concerned in this question to form
part of the Committee,
M. Sze (China)
May I suggest that, instead of speaking of
a private conversation, we should refer to
Sub-Committee G. I dislike the word ?pri-
vate?.
In addition to the countries which have just
been mentioned by the President, I would suggest
the inclusion of Spain and Italy. For the mo-
ment, I cannot think of any others, but if,
after mature consideration, I consider that others
should be added, I hope you will give me permis-
sion to suggest them.
Sir Malcolm DeSevingne (British Empire)
I think your suggestion, Sir, was that the
five delegates you named should act as a con-
vening body to ascertain which of the Powers
here are specially interested and to make arrange-
ments with them for convening the Committee
which I suggested.
I have a list here of the States which have
extra-territorial rights in China, and that
list includes both Spain and Italy, so there
will be no question of their not being repre-
sented on the Committee. I think your
suggestion is a practical one, and the arrange-
ments can be made as soon as the five members
which you have mentioned can meet.
The President
Translation : Sir Malcolm Delevingne has
accurately interpreted my meaning. I am of
the opinion that the five members I have men-
tioned should first meet I gladly avoid the
use of the word ?private? in order to convene
the delegates specially concerned in this ques-
tion.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
My suggestion would have been that those
five members should address invitations to all
the delegates representing States which have
extra-territorial rights in China, and it will
rest with those States to decide whether they
have a sufficient interest in the matter to be
represented or not.
M. Sugimura (Japan)
Translation : Up to the present, Mr. Pre-
sident, with that modesty which characterises
the Japanese delegation, I have not ventured
to ask you to add to the five members under
consideration a member of the Japanese dele-
gation. 1 prepared a few notes on the question,
but as I thought that everyone here was tired
by this time. I decided not to speak. Never-
theless, as there is a prospect of a decision being
taken, it seems to me essential to point out that
the question which so nearly interests our wes-
tern neighbour necessarily affects us also. I
therefore venture, in spite of our modesty, to
request you to add Japan?s name to that of the
countries appointed.
The President
Translation : 1 quite appreciate the obser-
vations of our colleague from Japan, and
I should like the name of the Japanese dele-
gation to be added to the five already proposed.
M. Sze (China) :
I thougnt Japan was included in the list.
That is why I did not mention her. I did say
that if, after careful consideration, I thought
other names should be added, I should
request you to include them.


Ihere is one question on which I should like be set up Committee or Commission o
rArm o f i rvn on T i "U  J' i i , ?< i ? 
information, as I want to be sure of my ground.
Whatever name we call this new body, I
hope we are not going to refer to its proceedings
as a "private conversation??. I suggest that
it should be called Sub-Committee G, and I
hope the Committee will see its way to accept
that name.
Do I understand correctly that this Sub-
Committee is to be part of the Conference ?
Is that quite clearly understood ?
SVi. van Wettum (Netherlands) :
If this Sub-Committee is to be an official
body, I have to point out, on behalf of my
Government, that we have no instructions to
deal witn this proposal referring to Chapter IV
of the Convention.
The President
Translation : Note will be taken of the
declaration by the delegate of the Netherlands.
Mr. Campbell (India) :
If this matter is to be referred to an official
body, it is necessary for me to state that the
Government of India does not recognise the
competence of the Conference in this matter.
The question is not one which concerns India
in the remotest degree, and I only take up this
position because I have been forced into it
in view of the remarks made in the general
discussion.
The President
Translation : The statement of the delegate
for India will be included in the record of the
meeting.
In reality, we have two different proposals
before us :
(1) That of the delegate of the British
Empire, which suggests a meeting of six
members, representing the United States, China,
England, hiance, Portugal and Japan, these
members to be instructed to invite the Powers
concerned co discuss the question raised bv
China at a limited conference ;
(2) The proposals of the Chinese delegation.
The Chinese delegation has in principle accep-
ted the idea of the convening of this body, but
would lixe it to be known as Sub-Committee G
in order to be certain that its proceedings will
form a real part of the work of the full Conference
or of the work of the present Committee.
As the question has been put to me directly,
I think, personally, it would be preferable
that the delegate for China should withdraw
his proposals and accept the suggestion of the
first delegate of the British Empire, which
is supported by the other delegations. Other-
wise, we run the risk of launching into an inter-
minable and, I may add, a pointless discus-
sion.
I therefore venture to recommend the Chinese
delegation not to insist upon the questions it
has put forward, nor upon its proposals regarding
the appointment of a Sub-Committee G.
M. Sze (China)
In order to confirm what I said a little while
ago, I again bow to the wise judgment of the
President.
What I wish to see attained is practical results.
It seems to me from the discussion that it is
quite clear that whatever we call the body to
whatever it may be it is going to form ai
official part of the Conference. In that case
I do not press for it being called Sub-Committee
G or any other name.
M. Bourgois (France)
Translation : The question that has beer
raised is particularly important. The memo-
randum prepared by M. Sugimura might per-
haps serve to show the complexity of this
question. It would allow the delegates to take
a decision with a full knowledge of the facts.
I do not propose that this document should be
read forthwith. I leave it to the President and
my colleagues to decide, but I draw the atten-
tion of the members of this Conference to
the expediency of hearing this memorandum.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) ?
I cannot understand why M. Sze will insist
on raising difficulties in the way of getting
something done.
My suggestion referred clearly to something
quite outside the scope of the Conference.
I suggested that there should be a meeting
between the representatives of China and
the interested Powers. The President has
made that quite clear, but M. Sze still
attempts to hold on to his idea that this
meeting is going to form an official part of the
proceedings of the Conference. Surely he can
be content to waive his point for the moment
and let these people meet and see what they can
do.
If he insists on pressing his point that this
meeting must be regarded as an official part
of the Opium Conference, he is raising difficul
ties with other Powers which may lead to nothing
being done at all. I therefore second the appeal
made by the President that be should leave
these difficulties aside and let this meeting,
which I have suggested, take place.
IVI. Sze (China)
I must be permitted to say that I object to
the statement made by Sir Malcolm Delevingne
that I have been putting up one obstacle after
another. I have not. I have bowed to the
President?s decision twice within the last few
minutes in order to facilitate matters. I was
not the first to say that this Sub-Committee
was going to be an official part of the Conference.
The point was raised by another member of the
Committee when he said he made a reservation.
I only repeated the remark, and I cannot
therefore be made responsible for the statement.
IV!. de Palacios (Spain)
Translation : I must make a personal reser-
vation. If I understand rightly, an unofficial
Sub-Committee is to be appointed. We are
part of an official conference, and I do not
understand how we can create a body which
is not official. I his, I repeat, is a purely per-
sonal observation. In my opinion it is naturel
that certain members of this Committee should
discuss matters quite freely, but it seems to
me to be creating a precedent if, in an official
conference, we create a body which is not
official.
M. Bourgois (France)
Translation : lam greatly flattered by the
opinion expressed about me by our colleague
M. Sze, who thinks that I am able to discuss


?de omni re scibili et quibusdam aliis? . Unfor-
tunately, my Government does not share this
view. That is why I supported the suggestion
of Sir Malcolm Delevingne to discuss this ques-
tion at a private meeting. Furthermore, I
acknowledge the force of the objection raised
by the Spanish delegate.
The President
Translation : I, too, realise the justice of the
observations of the honourable delegate for
Spain. The object of submitting a proposal
to discuss this question in a private meeting
was to avoid raising difficulties.
After what I have just said, I think it is
impossible to proceed to vote on this question.
I leave it, therefore, to the members concerned
to arrange for a meeting. The delegates in
question, in the first place, are those of the
United States, China, Japan, the British Empire,
Portugal and France. These delegates should
invite the other interested parties to attend their
meeting. The question before us is that of a
meeting which it is desired to hold in view of
the fact that this Conference affords the
opportunity for those particularly concerned
in this question to discuss it between themselves.
IVI. de Palacios (Spain)
Translation : As everybody shares the Pre-
sident?s point of view, I have nothing to say
against it.
10. CONSIDERATION OF THE THIRD RE-
PORT OF THE BUSINESS COMMITTEE.
The President
Translation : We will now pass to the
consideration of the third report of the Business
Committee, which deals with the division of
the work among the various Sub-Committees. 1
I will ask M. Dinichert to speak on his report
regarding the referring of this question to the
Sub-Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur :
Translation : Only the second part of the
Business Committeq?s report affects the Second
Committee. Of the three proposals by the
Egyptian delegation contained in Document
O.D.C. 44, 2 this Committee is only concerned
with points 2 and 3. The Business Committee
will make a statement later concerning point 1.
Point 2, which relates to the system of penal-
ties, in so far as such a system can be provided
for in an international convention, is to be dealt
with by the Second Committee, as well as point 1
of Part 111 of the Advisory Committee?s pro-
gramme. Point 3, which'relates to the question
of import and export licences, comes, without
any doubt, within the province of the Second
Committee. I will add a further proposal to
refer this question, together with similar ques-
tions, to Sub-Committee E, which deals with
traffic.
1 See the Record of the First General Committee,
Annex 2.
2 Annex
The President
Translation : The Rapporteur has spoken
about the two Egyptian proposals and has
suggested, as regards the proposal dealing
with import and export permits, that it should
be referred by our Committee to Sub-Committee
E. This proposal is included in paragraph 3
of Document O.D.C. 44.
As no objection is made by any member of
the Conference, the question is referred to Sub-
Committee E. {Assent.)
With regard to the second proposal, which is
also dealt with in Document O.D.C. 44 and
which refers to penalties, the Rapporteur is of the
opinion that it should remain for the present
for consideration by the Second Committee.
IVI. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : Yes, in accordance with the
previous decision, which left the question in the
hands of the Committee. This question, like
paragraph 1 of Part 111 of the programme of
the Advisory Committee, which deals with
exactly the same subject, is a legal question.
It seemed necessary and obvious that legal
questions should be examined by a special
Sub-Committee, which is indispensable for
questions of international traffic. This was
the purpose of Sub-Committee E, and if the
Second Committee wishes to refer the question
to a special sub-committee which might be
known as the ?Legal Sub-Committee? and which
does not yet exist at our Conference this
might be useful.
1 believe that the Second Committee has
already considered the expediency of establishing
a Drafting Committee. It might therefore be
possible for this question to be referred to that
Committee.
If, however, I am to discharge my duties as
Rapporteur consistently and logically, I can-
not make any other proposal concerning point
2 of the Egyptian recommendations than that
adopted in the case of the same question in the
programme of the Advisory Committee.
Mr. Campbell (India)
Mr. President, for the reasons already ex-
plained, I desire to say that the Government of
India does not admit the competence of this
Conference as regards the question of penalties.
The President
Translation : The statement by first
delegate for India will be noted.
We have accordingly referred the third pro-
posal to Sub-Committee E. There still remain
on our agenda, therefore, item 2 Articles
10, 11, 20 and 20-F of the proposals by the United
States delegation and item 3 the proposals
by the Egyptian Government. To this we
may add the second proposal by the Egyptian
delegation regarding penalties, upon which the
Rapporteur of the Business Committee has
just spoken.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.


There is one question on which I should like
information, as I want to be sure of my ground.
Whatever name we call this new body, I
hope we are not going to refer to its proceedings
as a ?private conversation?. I suggest that
it should be called Sub-Committee G, and I
hope the Committee will see its way to accept
that name.
Do I understand correctly that this Sub-
committee is to be part of the Conference ?
Is that quite clearly understood ?
!VS. van Wettum (Netherlands) :
If this Sub-Committee is to be an official
body, I have to point out, on behalf of my
Government, that we have no instructions to
deal witn this proposal referring to Chapter IV
of the Convention.
The President
Translation : Note will be taken of the
declaration by the delegate of the Netherlands.
Mr. Campbell (India) :
If this matter is to be referred to an official
body, it is necessary for me to state that the
Government of India does not recognise the
competence of the Conference in this matter.
The question is not one which concerns India
in the remotest degree, and I only take up this
position because 1 have been forced into it
in view of the remarks made in the general
discussion.
The President
Translation : The statement of the delegate
for India will be included in the record of the
meeting.
In reality, we have two different proposals
before us :
(i) That of the delegate of the British
Empire, which suggests a meeting of six
members, representing the United States, China,
England, France, Portugal and Japan, these
members to be instructed to invite the Powers
concerned to discuss the question raised by
China at a limited conference ;
(2) The proposals of the Chinese delegation.
The Chinese delegation has in principle accep-
ted the idea of the convening of this body, but
would like it to be known as Sub-Committee G,
in order to be certain that its proceedings will
form a real part of the work of the full Conference
or of the work of the present Committee.
As the question has been put to me directly,
I think, personally, it would be preferable
that the delegate for China should withdraw
his proposals and accept the suggestion of the
first delegate of the Britisli Empire, which
is supported by the other delegations. Other-
wise, we run the risk of launching into an inter-
minable? and, I may add, a pointless discus-
sion.
I therefore venture to recommend the Chinese
delegation not to insist upon the questions it
has put forward, nor upon its proposals regarding
the appointment of a Sub-Committee G.
M. Sze (China)
In order to confirm what I said a little while
ago, I again bow to the wise judgment of the
President.
What I wish to see attained is practical results.
It seems to me from the discussion that it is
quite clear that whatever we call the body to
be set up - Committee or Commission or
whatever it may be it is going to form an
official part of the Conference. In that case
I do not press for it being called Sub-Committee
G or any other name.
fs. Bourgois (France)
Translation : The question that has been
raised is particularly important. The memo-
randum prepared by M. Sugimura might per-
haps serve to show the complexity of this
question. It would allow the delegates to take
a decision with a full knowledge of the facts.
I do not propose that this document should be
read forthwith. I leave it to the President and
my colleagues to decide, but I draw the atten-
tion of the members of this Conference to
the expediency of hearing this memorandum.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
I cannot understand why M. Sze will insist
on raising difficulties in the way of getting
something done.
My suggestion referred clearly to something
quite outside the scope of the Conference.
1 suggested that there should be a meeting
between the representatives of China and
the interested Powers. The President has
made that quite clear, but M. Sze still
attempts to hold on to his idea that this
meeting is going to form an official part of the
proceedings of the Conference. Surely he can
be content to waive his point for the moment
and let these people meet and see what they can
do.
If he insists on pressing his point that this
meeting must be regarded as an official part
of the Opium Conference, he is raising difficul
ties with other Powers which may lead to nothing
being done at all. I therefore second the appeal
made by the President that tie should leave
these difficulties aside and let this meeting,
which I have suggested, take place.
IV!. Sze (China)
I must be permitted to say that I object to
the statement made by Sir Malcolm Delevingne
that I have been putting up one obstacle after
another. I have not. I have bowed to the
President?s decision twice within the last few
minutes in order to facilitate matters. I was
not the first to say that this Sub-Committee
was going to be an official part of the Conference.
The point was raised by another member of the
Committee when he said he made a reservation.
I only repeated the remark, and I cannot
therefore be made responsible for the statement.
IV!. de Palacios (Spain)
Translation : I must make a personal reser-
vation. If I understand rightly, an unofficial
Sub-Committee is to be appointed. We are
part of an official conference, and I do not
understand how we can create a body which
is not official. This, I repeat, is a purely per-
sonal observation. In my opinion it is natural
that certain members of this Committee should
discuss matters quite freely, but it seems to
me to be creating a precedent if, in an official
conference, we create a body which is not
official.
IV!. Bourgois (France)
Translation : I am greatly flattered by the
opinion expressed about me by our colleague
M. Sze, who thinks that I am able to discuss


?de omni re scibili et quibusdam aliis?. Unfor-
tunately, my Government does not share this
view. That is why I supported the suggestion
of Sir Malcolm Delevingne to discuss this ques-
tion at a private meeting. Furthermore, I
acknowledge the force of the objection raised
by the Spanish delegate.
The President
Translation : I, too, realise the justice of the
observations of the honourable delegate for
Spain. The object of submitting a proposal
to discuss this question in a private meeting
was to avoid raising difficulties.
After what I have just said, I think it is
impossible to proceed to vote on this question.
I leave it, therefore, to the members concerned
to arrange for a meeting. The delegates in
question, in the first place, are those of the
United States, China, Japan, the British Empire,
Portugal and France. These delegates should
invite the other interested parties to attend their
meeting. The question before us is that of a
meeting which it is desired to hold in view of
the fact that this Conference affords the
opportunity for those particularly concerned
in this question to discuss it between themselves.
M. de Palacios (Spain)
Translation : As everybody shares the Pre-
sident?s point of view, I have nothing to say
against it.
10. CONS ID ER AT lON OF THE THIRD RE-
PORT OF THE BUSINESS COIVIIVI ITT EE.
The President
Translation : We will now pass to the
consideration of the third report of the Business
Committee, which deals with the division of
the work among the various Sub-Committees. 1
I will ask M. Dinichert to speak on his report
regarding the referring of this question to the
Sub-Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur :
Translation : Only the second part of the
Business Committee/s report affects the Second
Committee. Of the three proposals by the
Egyptian delegation contained in Document
O.D.C. 44, 2 this Committee is only concerned
with points 2 and 3. The Business Committee
will make a statement later concerning point 1.
Point 2, which relates to the system of penal-
ties, in so far as such a system can be provided
for in an international convention, is to be dealt
with by the Second Committee, as well as point 1
of Part 111 of the Advisory Committee?s pro-
gramme. Point 3, whichYelates to the question
of import and export licences, comes, without
any doubt, within the province of the Second
Committee. I will add a further proposal to
refer this question, together with similar ques-
tions, to Sub-Committee E, which deals with
traffic.
1 See the Record of the First General Committee,
Annex 2.
2 Annex.
The President
Translation : The Rapporteur has spoken
about the two Egyptian proposals and has
suggested, as regards the proposal dealing
with import and export permits, that it should
be referred by our Committee to Sub-Committee
E. This proposal is included in paragraph 3
of Document O.D.C. 44.
As no objection is made by any member of
the Conference, the question is referred to Sub-
Committee E. {Assent.)
With regard to the second proposal, which is
also dealt with in Document O.D.C. 44 and
which refers to penalties, the Rapporteur is of the
opinion that it should remain for the present
for consideration by the Second Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : Yes, in accordance with the
previous decision, which left the question in the
hands of the Committee. This question, like
paragraph 1 of Part 111 of the programme of
the Advisory Committee, which deals with
exactly the same subject, is a legal question.
It seemed necessary and obvious that legal
questions should be examined by a special
Sub-Committee, which is indispensable for
questions of international traffic. This was
the purpose of Sub-Committee E, and if the
Second Committee wishes to refer the question
to a special sub-committee which might be
known as the ?Legal Sub-Committee? and which
does not yet exist at our Conference this
might be useful.
1 believe that the Second Committee has
already considered the expediency of establishing
a Drafting Committee. It might therefore be
possible for this question to be referred to that
Committee.
If, however, I am to discharge my duties as
Rapporteur consistently and logically, I can-
not make any other proposal concerning point
2 of the Egyptian recommendations than that
adopted in the case of the same question in the
programme of the Advisory Committee.
IVlr. Campbell (India)
Mr. President, for the reasons already ex-
plained, I desire to say that the Government of
India does not admit the competence of this
Conference as regards the question of penalties.
The President
Translation : The statement by the^first
delegate for India will be noted.
We have accordingly referred the third pro-
posal to Sub-Committee E. There still remain
on our agenda, therefore, item 2 Articles
10, 11, 20 and 20-F of the proposals by the United
States delegation and item 3 the proposals
by the Egyptian Government. To this we
may add the second proposal by the Egyptian
delegation regarding penalties, upon which the
Rapporteur of the Business Committee has
just spoken.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.


O.D.C. 44.
PROPOSAL BY THE EGYPTIAN DELEGATION.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen: I have the honour to communicate to the Second
Opium Conference the three recommendations which the Egyptian Government desires to see
embodied in the Convention which we are to draw up. They are as follows .
(1) That hashish be included in the list of dangerous drugs with which we are to
deal ;
(2) That the Powers signatories of the Convention impose uniform penalties for
offences against the provisions of the Convention to be concluded by this Conference,
or at least that they should mention in the Convention that the penalty will not be less
than that provided for misdemeanours ;
(3) That it is desirable that the import and export permits referred to in the
Convention should be alike in all countries and that they should be drawn up in such a
way as to make it difficult for contraband dealers to forge them.
Dr. Md. Abdel Salam El Guindy,
Egyptian Delegate.


VERBATIM RECORD OF THE JOINT MEETING OF THE FIRST
AND SECOND GENERAL COMMITTEES
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, November 25 th, 1924, at 5.40 p.m.
CONTENTS :
1. Allocation of Work Between the Com-
mittees and Sub-Committees.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
1. ALLOCATION OF WORK BETWEEN THE
COMMITTEES AND SUB-COMMITTEES.
The President
Translation : I have proposed that we
should hold a joint meeting of the First and
Second Committees, not for the purpose of
discussion, but simply to enable me to make
a communication which can, of course, be
discussed if necessary.
The moment has come to deal with the sub-
stance of the questions before us.
It may, perhaps, be thought that this Con-
ference has taken a long time to settle down to
business. I do not believe, however, that the
time we have spent in determining the bases
upon which we are to work was time wasted.
I think, on the contrary, that the scrupulous
care which we devoted to every point will
enable us now to proceed all the more rapidly.
We must, as soon as possible, allocate the
work of the Conference to the various Com-
mittees and Sub-Committees. I propose that
the Business Committee should meet to-morrow
at 10.30 a.m., and I would ask the chairmen
of the Sub-Committees who have now been
elected (with the exception of the Chairman
of Sub-Committee F) to discuss with the Com-
mittee the lines upon which the work should be
divided.
The questions before us for consideration
come under three main heads, namely.
(1) The Business Committee?s proposal, with
which you are all acquainted and which was
annexed to my introductory speech (Document
1.A.320.C.216) :
(2) The suggestions submitted by the United
States delegation ;
(3) The various proposals submitted by the
Governments invited.
I think we should keep to this sub-division ;
it is, however, for the Business Committee to
decide. Ido not think that this will present
any difficulty.
I would add that the Sub-Committees can
draw up provisional reports whenever they
think discussion at a plenary meeting advisable.
We shall, of course, hold plenary meetings from
time to time, in order to hear the Sub-Com-
mittees? reports and to discuss any formal pro-
posals submitted by the Committees.
I should like to know the views of my collea-
gues on this point.
M. Sze (China)
Mr. President, members of the Conference,
I had the honour to submit to-day through
the Secretariat a short memorandum contain-
ing proposals made in the name of my dele-
gation. This memorandum I have requested
the Secretariat to distribute to the different
delegations. It contains a short statement and
three or four proposals of a very simple nature.
They raise no question of principle, and I
request the President, upon its receipt, to
assign it to the appropriate Committee or Sub-
Committee for consideration, and, if necessary,
that a special Sub-Committee should be
appointed.
M. Bourgois (France)
Translation : I think that certain delega-
tions and in any case the French delegation
will wish to state the views of their Governments
in regard to any convention to be concluded.
Their statements might aid the Business
Committee in deciding on the programme of
work of the Conference and Committees and
might be of value in subsequent discussions. I
should like to know if a plenary meeting will
be devoted to this purpose ; I am prepared,
for my part, to make a statement now, at this
joint meeting of the two Committees.
M. Dendramis (Greece)
Translation ?: I should like to remind the
Conference that a proposal has been submitted
by the Egyptian delegation regarding the inclu-
sion of hashish and other narcotics in the term
?harmful drugs?.
Will this proposal be referred to a Sub-Com-
mittee for examination, or will it be discussed
by the General Committee ?
The President
Translation : In my opinion, this proposal,
which was submitted in writing, should be
referred by the Business Committee to the
Second Committee. It is connected with the
revision of the Hague Convention.
Does the Greek delegate approve ?
M. Dendramis (Greece) :
Translation : I simply asked for informa-
tion.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) :
Translation : I reserve the right to submit
this proposal at a plenary meeting.
The President
Translation : The reservation made by the
Egyptian delegate will be noted.
We have before us the proposal of the French
delegate. As the statement which M. Bourgois
wished to make has not yet been submitted to
a plenary meeting, and as I think that it would
facilitate our work, I will call upon the French
delegate, if the two Committees agree, to make
this statement now.


M. Bourgois (France)
Translation : The French delegation feels
that it is necessary and advisable to make
known, at this juncture, the views of the French
Government concerning the programme sub-
mitted to us by the Advisory Committee, namely,
the whole series of measures which, in the words
of the Assembly, may furnish a satisfactory
basis for the work of the Conference, and pre-
pare the way for a final agreement. I will be
as brief as possible.
These measures are divided into three parts.
The first part constitutes a scheme for the gene-
ral control of the exports and imports of these
drugs by a Central Board ; the second part
contains provisions intended to define and
strengthen the provisions of the Hague Con-
vention, particularly as regards international
trade. We will only examine these two parts.
Part I.? This part of the scheme is founded
on the idea that each country shall estimate,
at the beginning of the year, its import require-
ments in raw materials and manufactured
drugs, and that each country shall undertake
not to import quantities in excess of these
figures. In the opinion of the French Govern-
ment, it is quite impossible to make the whole
operation of one part of the future convention
dependent on so weak a sub-structure, for
official statistics show that the quantity manu-
factured by the manufacturing States varies
to an appreciable extent from year to year.
Thus, in the last two years, 1921 and 1922,
it was doubled and even trebled in certain
countries, whereas in others it decreased by over
one-half, and varied between 20 and 80 per
cent of the world manufacture in certain other
States. These variations, which are so great
as to render this part of the scheme quite
impossible, are not by any means fortuitous ;
they obey a permanent law which we are unable
to control, as its origin is to be found in the
very nature of the problem, namely, the extreme
variations in the poppy crop each year which
cause an enormous fluctuation of prices and a
constant change of markets.
As a result of these circumstances, the whole-
sale trade in narcotics has inevitably become
a speculative trade with all the usual charac-
teristics advance purchasing and the consti-
tution of large stocks. No wholesale trader
in narcotics can, I think, foresee on January Ist
what his purchases will be. Still less would
it be possible for Governments to do so. The
estimate which the Government of the United
States might, for instance, have fixed in 1923
would have been entirely arbitrary, because in
that year the quantity of these drugs manufac-
tured was twice as great as in the preceding
year. And it should be noted, moreover, that
I have selected a country which neither exports
nor imports, and in which therefore the margin
is not increased to any considerable extent by
the influence of the foreign market.
The author of the proposal has foreseen this
objection and has attempted to discover a
remedy by saying, on the one hand, not "medi-
cal and scientific needs? but the needs of "the
trade?, which implies the possibility of consti-
tuting stocks, and, on the other hand, by pro-
viding ?that it will be open to the Government
in the course of the year to furnish, revised
estimates?. But that is a condemnation of
his principle. The opening of this double
breach the constitution of stocks and the
revision of estimates deprives the Y measure
of all its utility and leaves nothing'fbut the
drawbacks. Importers will be tempted to
submit exaggerated estimates, a course which
will offer serious disadvantages. An unscru-
pulous trader might, by importing a stock
practically equal to the maximum stock, entirely
block the import market and place manu-
facturers, other traders and the public at his
mercy. This observation alone should serve to
show the impossibility of a system which would
constitute a most immoral and dangerous incen-
tive to speculation and illegitimate traffic.
The author states, moreover, that "it is not
expected that in the early years it will be pos-
sible to give exact estimates?. That is quite
true. But 1 cannot share his optimism when
he adds, "As experience is gained, the estimates
will become more and more precise?. No, the
causes of the uncertainty of these estimates are
profound. They are due to factors which will
always exist and which we cannot control,
namely, the variation of crops and the variation
of prices. "The experience gained? to which
he refers may convince us that these causes
exist, but it will be unable to remove them.
Qn this unstable basis of arbitrary estimates,
Part I erects machinery of a fantastically com-
plicated nature. The second measure sugges-
ted is that Governments shall periodically
send their statistics to a Central Board, in order
that the Board may be in a position to notify
them at any time that the exports or imports
for a given country have exceeded the amounts
specified in the estimate furnished by that
country. No Customs or statistical expert
would ever admit that the quarterly or half-
yearly collection of statistics concerning the
"imports, exports, re-exports, manufacture,
stocks and consumption? of over fifty countries
which would, incidentally, involve setting up
an excessively complicated organisation
could ever furnish results sufficiently precise
to enable a consecutive idea to be formed of
the figures for world trade, accurate enough to
justify the Central Board making representa-
tions to the various Governments.
Moreover, this detailed keeping of accounts
for the whole world would be practically
useless ; the complicated machinery would
produce but little result. Consignments uncon-
trolled by the Central Board would have plenty
of time to take place in the five or six months
between the beginning of a quarter and the date
on which the collected statistics were sent to
the various Governments.
Finally, it is provided that the Central Board
shall "fix the amounts reasonably required?
by countries which have not furnished an
estimate, and that the other countries shall
refuse to authorise exports in excess of the figures
fixed by the Board.
I could not possibly agree to this proposal,
which would, I think, create a very dangerous
precedent. Any Government has the right
to refuse to adhere to a Convention without
being subjected to suspicion, pressure or menaces
of this kind, and every Government must remain
the sole judge of its own imports. The French
Government desires as careful and rigorous
a control as possible, but it should be national
control, exercised by the Government itself
on its own responsibility. Control by an inter-
national power, on the contrary, must be reduced


to a minimum : it should only be exercised
in the very special case in which a country
constitutes a danger to other countries by
becoming a centre of contraband.
It is on these lines that a text might be drawn
up instead of the six paragraphs of Part I.
For instance :
Countries shall furnish detailed statistics at
the end of each year concerning their importation
and exportation of the substances referred to
in the Hague Convention, as supplemented by
the new Convention. These statistics, when
collated, shall be made public.
Were a definite centre of international contra-
band to come into being, this centralisation of
information concerning the world trade would
be bound to demonstrate the fact, and the
Government concerned would have its attention
drawn to the danger.
The object of Part I would thus be entirely
attained. The main movements of the world
trade in narcotics would be noted and, as far
as possible, the international danger caused
by the appearance of a centre of contraband
and revealed by the centralisation of statistics
would be publicly denounced. We feel
that the moral effect of this publicity would be
sufficient to prevent the perpetuation of the
danger.
Therefore, in order that the objections raised
to the text of Part I may be eliminated, there
must be no question of impossible forecasts,
which would lead to exaggerated estimates ;
no obstacle must be placed in the way of legi-
timate trade and no incentive must be offered
to unscrupulous traders ; there must be no
complicated and Utopian machinery ; no more
interference on the part of an international
power, unless such interference is justified by
danger to a neighbour, and no more boycott.
This text might easily be accepted by all,
because it respects the principles which must
form the basis of the Convention :
Respect for the national sovereignty of all
countries.
Action must be taken against illegitimate
traffic and not against legitimate trade.
The Contracting Parties should be asked to
make sacrifices for an ideal and not on behalf
of a rival or of smugglers.
The text should be prepared not only with
a view to signature, but also with a view to
application.
Part 11. Part II consists of a number of
provisions intended to strangthen and define
the articles of the Hague Convention concerning
the control of national and international trade
in narcotics.
The French Government accepts practically all
these provisions and, in particular, those concern-
ing ; Coca leaves ; synthetic cocaine; the compul-
sory measures proposed in place of the optional
measures of the Hague Convention ; measures
concerning zones, free ports and warehouses ;
measures concerning transhipment.
The only essential measure in Part II which
it would appear to be difficult and even dange-
rous to accept is that concerning import cer-
tificates. The French Government is of opinion
that this measure should be replaced by a series
of three measures (official notification of export,
transire, and Government authorisation), which
serve the same purpose, are quite as effective and
would probably be more readily accepted by all.
In principle, we approve most of the other
provisions, but we think that it would be advi-
sable to propose a more precise text. Thus
we think it would be necessary to ?prohibit?
warehousing, even in zones and free ports, unless
such warehousing is authorised. A study of
the history of large-scale smuggling shows
that illicit traffic almost always begins with
the passing of drugs into the zones, free ports
or warehouses. We cannot over-multiply our
precautions in this direction.
The declaration of transit provided for in
Part II does not seem to be very effective or
indeed necessary, as the goods are already
subject to a double control on departure and
on arrival. This control might be strengthened
by the adoption of the three following measures ;
Persons engaged in the trade in narcotics must
not only make a declaration but must obtain
permission from the Government (and not the
local) authorities.
Bills of lading and way-bills may only be
made out to ?persons mentioned?.
Coverings and receptacles must bear special
marks.
The above constitutes a treble and we
think a sufficiently effective guarantee both
for the consignee and the consignor.
Finally, we may add to the measures sugges-
ted in Part 11, in addition to the three measures
just proposed, certain very definite provisions
concerning the compulsory payment, within
a certain time-limit, of transires or import
licence, the keeping of books, the increase of
penalties and the exchange of information by
the authorities, who should be authorised to
correspond direct with similar services abroad.
To sum up, the French Government will give
its general support to the provisions of Part II
intended to strengthen the clauses of the Hague
Convention concerning the national and inter-
national trade in narcotics. It proposes to
substitute for the system of import certificates
a system of official notification of consignments
(with certain supplementary measures) which
would serve exactly the same purpose, but
would be more effective, because it would be
more readily acceptable by all. On other points
we think it would be desirable to have more
detailed provisions or simply a more careful
drafting of the text.
In Part I, one principle should be borne in
mind the publicity of the centralised certi-
ficates and immediate notification of the appear-
ance of a definite centre of international con-
traband.
It would be possible, we think, to obtain that
efficacy which we are entitled to expect by
provisions more elastic, than those suggested
in Part I.
We think that the other proposals in Part I
should be rejected as being incapable of
realisation or dangerous or vexatious : namely,
the arbitrary estimate, constituting a tempta-
tion to submit exaggerated figures ; the
hindrance of legitimate trade and incentives to
unscrupulous traders ; complicated and inopera-
tive machinery ; interference in other people?s
affairs not justified by danger to oneself ;
liability to offend Governments and infringe
their rights ; threat of boycott, etc.
It is infinitely preferable to be stricter as
regards the provisions of Part II and to organise
with the greatest care the control to be exercised,
individually and on its own responsibility, by


each State. In this way, so close a network
can be constructed against illicit trade that
only a minimum of contraband will be able to
slip through its meshes. It will be better to
carry national control of foreign trade to its
extreme limits and to confine international con-
trol to the strict minimum compatible with
effectiveness.
Moreover, the possibility of effectively orga-
nising the national control of inland trade has
been demonstrated by experience. Great Bri-
tain, the Netherlands and France, to take
no more than three examples, consider that the
efficacy of their control is absolute. There
is reason to believe that, by applying to foreign
trade measures similar to those which have
succeeded in inland trade, equally satisfac-
tory results can be attained.
We must obviate the possibility of a large
number of Governments refusing, for various
reasons, not only of an economic and commer-
cial but also of a political nature, to accept
measures which they may consider arbitrary
or vexatious. The principle which must guide
the preparation of the new convention is that
it should be easy for all countries to accept,
since the refusal of three or four countries to
adhere would be enough completely to destroy
its effectiveness. The cultivation and indus-
tries concerned would at once be transferred
to these countries, and thus escape international
control.
A convention of excessive severity which
hampered legitimate trade and threatened
Governments with interference on the part of
an international authority would be a danger.
It would encourage Governments to hold back
in order to escape all pressure or boycotting and
to cultivate and manufacture for themselves.
In this way new sources of production, and indi-
rectly of contraband, would be created. One
must be careful not to take measures which
would result in the parallel development of
cultivation and manufacture in two opposing
groups thus constituted, each of which would
be led to endeavour to supply its own require-
ments.
The French Government does not propose
to confine itself to criticism, but wishes to
submit definite texts to replace the provisions
which it criticises.
The amendments and texts which it has pre-
pared may perhaps be of some assistance to the
work of the Conference. {Applause.)
IVI. Chodzko (Poland) :
Translation : As the general discussion is
not yet closed, I would ask permission to
speak.
Since the ultimate aim of the Second Inter-
national Conference is the conclusion of a
new international Convention on narcotic drugs,
or the framing of important amendments to
the existing international Convention, the Polish
Government begs to state that, in drafting
fresh provisions, it will take as a basis the pro-
posals put forward in the United States note.
Any criticisms of the programme laid down
in Nos. i and 2 of Annex I will also be based
on this note.
In subsequent discussions the Polish dele-
gation will lay special stress on the necessity
for a precise definition of lawful requirements
as regards narcotic drugs, the question of the
reduction and control of the production of
these drugs, and the question of the total sup-
pression of heroin.
I do not propose to go fully into the subject
here ; I shall discuss the details in the Sub-
Committees.
As representative of the Senate of the Free
City of Danzig I declare that the Free City
is of the same opinion.
M. Pinto-Escaiier (Bolivia) :
iVB. rmiu-fcDuaNCi \l<X) .
Translation : I should like to know if a
plenary meeting of the Conference will soon
be held at which delegations may have an
opportunity of stating the views of their
Governments. In any case, I reserve the right
to speak.
The President
Translation : I understand that the Boli-
vian delegate wishes to speak on the programme
of work.
IVI. Pinto-Escaiier (Bolivia)
Translation : I wish to make a few remarks
concerning the programme of work submitted
by the Advisory Committee.
The President
Translation : Does anyone else wish to
speak ?
IV!. Dinichert (Switzerland)
Translation : I do not think it is the wish
either of the Conference or of the President that
we should carry the general discussion anv
further ; I certainly do not wish to prolong
this discussion. I must not fail, however,
to thank at once the French delegate for the
interesting and clear statements which he has
just made at what appears to me a particularly
opportune moment, the moment when, in accor-
dance with the wishes of the Conference, the
Sub-Committees are about to begin their real
work. I am sure that, as we listened to M.
Bourgois? speech, each one of us felt that the
ideas which he put forward deserve the most
serious consideration in the course of our future
deliberations.
I must thank M. Bourgois then for taking this
opportunity of encouraging us in the work
upon which we are about to embark, and I
would at the same time express my gratitude
to him for having again emphasised the fact
that the programme of work which we have
outlined is the right one. We have, on the
one hand, to deal with the revision of the Hague
Convention itself and to bring it into line with
the requirements of national and, above all,
of international control. We shall be able,
moreover, to deal concurrently with the varied
and complex questions raised by the problem
of limitation. I would add that, whatever we
do as regards limitation, I am more than ever
convinced that we must also deal exhaustively
with the question of control, and that, if there
is to be limitation, control is more necessary
than ever.
You have been reminded that the preparation
of statistics upon which any scheme of limi-
tation must be based, whether that limitation
affects the raw materials or the manufactured
products, presents great difficulties. Should
those limits be fixed at a high level or a low ?
If our figure is too low, we run the risk, in the
first place, of not having sufficient quantities


to meet legitimate requirements. Moreover, if
this amount is only barely sufficient for legi-
timate requirements, there is nevertheless the
danger that these drugs will still be obtained
by illicit traders, unless control is very strict.
We must not forget that the illicit traffic has
plenty of money at the back of it ; indeed,
more money than the lawful traffic.
If, on the contrary, the limit fixed is high,
large stocks will inevitably be created. How
is this fresh danger to be averted ? Here,
again, increased supervision is what is wanted.
Hence, from whatever aspect we view the pro-
blem of limitation, we are bound to come to the
conclusion that control must be strengthened.
This is encouraging for the Second Committee,
which will deal more especially with that ques-
tion, since control is shown, from every point
of view, to be necessary.
M. Bourgois? speech gave me the opportunity
of making these observations, which I thought
might be useful. [Applause.)
The President
Translation : As there is no one else down
to speak, I will reply to the first Bolivian dele-
gate and then adjourn the meeting for to-day.
I had proposed to call a plenary meeting of
the Conference for to-morrow afternoon. Accord-
ing to our Rules of Procedure, the Business
Committee is obliged to submit its plan of work
to the Conference. This meeting will therefore
be held to-morrow afternoon at 4 o?clock, and
delegates will then have an opportunity of
submitting statements or making observations.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.




MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS
OF THE
COMMITTEE OF SIXTEEN
Geneva, January 26th lo February 6th, ig2 5
CONTENTS
First Meeting, Monday, January 26th, 1925, at 10.30 a.m 42
Second Meeting, Saturday, January 31st, 1925, at 3.30 p.m 47
Third Meeting, Tuesday, February 3rd, 1925, at 10.30 a.m 52
Fourth Meeting, Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 11 a.m 63
Annexes 71


COMMITTEE OF SIXTEEN
VERBATIM REPORT OF THE FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, January 26 th, 1925, at 10.30 a.m:
CONTENTS:
1. Constitution of the Committee of Six-
teen : Opening Speech by the Secre-
tary-General of the League.
2. Election of the President of the Com-
mittee.
3. Election of the Acting President of the
Committee.
4. Rules of Procedure of the Committee
and Publicity of its Meetings.
5. Agenda of the Committee of Sixteen.
Acting President : Sir Eric Drummond.
1. CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE
OF SIXTEEN : OPENING SPEECH BY
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE
LEAGUE.
The Secretary-General (Sir Eric Drummond) ;
As a result of the resolutions passed by the
First and the Second Conferences on Saturday
last, of which you are aware, the First Con-
ference met on Saturday afternoon and chose
the following eight States to be the members
of this Committee of Sixteen which now meets
for the first time. These States are :
British Empire, China, France, India, Japan,
Netherlands, Portugal, Siam.
The Second Conference also met and chose
eight States, namely ;
United States of America, Brazil, Cuba,
Egypt, Finland, Italy, Persia, Poland.
The Committee of Sixteen is therefore consti-
tuted, and I presume that the first item on
its agenda will be the election of a President,
either from amongst the members of the Com-
mittee itself or an invitation could, I presume,
be extended, if the Committee thinks fit, to
someone outside its own membership. That,
of course, is entirely for the Committee itself
to decide.
Has any member of the Committee a proposal
to make on this subject ?
2. ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
COMMITTEE.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America)
I desire to place before the Committee a
nomination for the President. I beg to pro-
pose the distinguished delegate of Cuba, M. de
Aguero y Bethancourt. He is Vice-President
of the Conference and has served it faithfully
and long. He is well known to all of us, and
it seems to me that he would make an ideal
President of this Committee.
IVI. Sze (China)
I have great pleasure in seconding the
nomination made by the delegate of the United
States of America that M. de Aguero y Bethan-
court, of Cuba, be elected President of this
joint Committee.
IV!. van Wet turn (Netherlands)
My view is that we ought not to elect as our
President a member of the First or of the
Second Conference. We must try to get
someone who is outside this joint Committee.
Such a procedure is quite usual. I propose,
therefore, as President M. Zahle, President of
the Second Conference.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I am in entire agreement with what M. van
Wettum has said. This is, in effect, a Confe-
rence between two delegations a delegation
from the First Conference and a delegation
from the Second Conference to examine
certain proposals which have been made in
the Second Conference with reference to the
work of the First Conference. It seems to me
that the correct procedure would be for the
two delegations to agree upon some President
from outside. In my view, and I think this is
also the view of other members of the delega-
tion from the First Conference, the President
of this Committee should be chosen neither
from one side nor the other.
An obvious selection is that suggested by the
President of the First Conference namely,
M. Zahle, who has presided so long over the
work of the Second Conference. We hope that
this proposal will be acceptable to the delega-
tion from the Second Conference. It appears
to be essential for the success of our work that
the President, and the Vice-President also,
if there is to be one, should be selected by
agreement between the two delegations from
outside their numbers.
M. Kircher (France)
Translation : The French delegation en-
tirely agrees with the opinions expressed by
M. van Wettum and Sir Malcolm Delevingne.
I think that the best means of reconciling the
two groups representing the First and Second
Conferences would be to choose an independent
President. I therefore support M. van Wet-
tum?s proposal.


IV!. Rodrigues (Portugal) :
On behalf of the Portuguese delegation,
I concur in the proposal made by the Nether-
lands delegate and supported by the British
and French delegates.
M. Sze (China) ;
This Committee is meeting in order to work
out some kind of solution of the problem referred
to it which will be acceptable to all, and 1 am
somewhat surprised that the word neutrality
should be used in this connection. I think
it is most deplorable that it should have been
used. We do not want to cast any reflection
upon anybody, and I have the greatest respect
for both the gentlemen w ; ho have been proposed
as President of the Committee. In view of the
fact that M. de Aguero y Bethancourt has been
nominated by the Fnited States delegate
a nomination which 1 had the honour of second-
ing I hope that he will be acceptable. The
presiding officer is only expected to preside
and to be impartial. I think it would be very
unfortunate if, at the very beginning of these
sittings, the word neutrality should be imported
into the proceedings.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I tender my cordial thanks
to the Hon. Mr. Porter and to M. Sze for having
been good enough to propose me as President
of this Committee, but T would ask them to
withdraw my name, since, as there are a number
of members on this Committee who feel that the
President should, with a view- to his being
absolutely neutral, be selected outside this
Committee, I cannot agree to the proposal
made by Mr. Porter and M. Sze.
I am of the opinion that the position of Pre-
sident under the present circumstances should
only be given to a person whose appointment
would meet with universal approval, and
therefore, while again tendering my thanks to
my friends, I desire once more to inform them
that 1 cannot agree to stand as a candidate.
I therefore beg them to withdraw my name.
The Secretary-Genera!
Two proposals have been made in regard
to the election of the President. The first is
the proposal made by the delegate of the United
States of America, seconded by the delegate
of China, that M. de Aguero y Bethancourt
should be nominated as President. M. de
Aguero y Bethancourt has now, however,
informed the Committee that he has withdrawn
his candidature. I do not know whether the
delegate of the United States wishes to proceed
with his motion or not. Since the candidate
proposed has said that he does not wish to be
nominated for the position of President, I
am not clear if the proposal is still before us.
If it is, it will have to be put to the vote.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I regret exceedingly the withdrawal of M. de
Aguero y Bethancourt, but 1 feel bound to
submit to his wishes in the matter.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I should like to say one word in reference to
what has been said by the delegates of China
and Cuba. There is, of course, no personal
question in a matter of this kind, and I rather
regret that the personal aspect has been intro-
duced. We have raised the question on our
side purely as a question of principle and of
what in our view is the ordinary, well-established
procedure in the somewhat exceptional cir-
cumstances in which we are met. I therefore
venture on our behalf, certainly on my own
behalf, to deprecate those personal questions
and to say most emphatically that, as far as
I am concerned, they have not entered into
the matter at all.
It seems to me that this is a matter which
ought to be settled by agreement between the
two delegations, and personally I should be
quite content to leave it to be settled between
Mr. Porter, w r ho may perhaps be regarded as the
leading member oil the delegation from the
Second Conference, and the President of the
First Conference, who may be regarded as the
leading member of that First Conference. I
do not know whether that is a suggestion which
would command the assent of the tw r o delega-
tions.
M. Falcioni (Italy)
Translation : I had asked leave to address
the Committee before the delegate of the
British Empire in order to beg the Committee
carefully to consider how serious a matter it
would be if it did not unanimously decide on
the choice of its President. As the question
of impartiality has been raised, it is quite
possible that the President we may nominate
will not accept our nomination, unless we are
quite unanimous. I entirely concur in the
British delegate?s proposal. The choice of a
President is the first question which we have
to decide, for, wffien once we have a really
impartial President, there is some hope of our
attaining a satisfactory result.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I should like first of all to
thank the British delegate for stating that his
remarks should not be taken as in any way
referring to any particular person. I quite
understood that from the outset. I never
imagined that there could be any personal
animosity between members of our dele-
gations and I am sure that each one of us
is actuated by the best intentions. If I requested
Mr. Porter and M. Sze not to insist upon
my candidature, it was because I did not wish
to become the object of a discussion or a dis-
pute. Besides, I must admit that it is not
always very agreeable that it is, in fact, some-
times rather painful to preside over a Com-
mittee of this kind.
M. Kircher (France) :
Translation : On behalf of the French dele-
gation, I should like to assure the delegate of
Cuba that we have never for a moment doubted
his perfect impartiality we hold him in the
very highest esteem. This, however, is a ques-
tion of principle, and it is in the interest of the
Committee of Sixteen, and of the Cuban dele-
gation itself, that our President should be
elected unanimously. I therefore concur in
the British proposal, supported by the delegate
of Italy.
IV!. van Wettum (Netherlands) :
I also wish to express my regret in the same
w r ay as Sir Malcolm Delevingne has done.


I have great respect for the personality of ments of this Committee in wishing him a
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt. I quite agree
with the proposal which has just been made by
Sir Malcolm Delevingne that we choose a Pre-
sident by mutual consent with Mr. Porter.
The Secretary-General :
A proposal has been put forward, which
seems to meet with general approval, that the
President shall be chosen by agreement between
Mr. Porter, on the one side, and the President
of the First Conference, M. van Wettum, on the
other.
If that proposal meets with 3/our approval,
as I think it does, I would suggest that the
Committee might perhaps adjourn for twenty
minutes or half-an-hour in order that that
exchange of views should take place. I hope
very much that the Committee will then be
able to decide unanimously on a President,
as this is one of the most important factors in
the success of the work. If no one has any
objection to make to that proposal, I suggest
that the Committee should adjourn for half-
an-hour.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) ;
I feel that there is no necessity to go to all
that trouble, w r hich would only delay our w'ork.
Many of us thought that M. de Aguero y
Bethancourt had earned whatever honour is
attached to the Presidency, and yesterday
afternoon I said that I would take" pleasure
in suggesting his name. But, inasmuch as he
has withdrawn, I think that it is only proper for
me to accept his withdrawal so that the- elec-
tion of M. Zahle may be made unanimous.
The Secretary-General
In the circumstances, an adjournment does
not seem necessary. The delegate of the Nether-
lands having proposed M. Zahle and the dele-
gate of the United States having now agreed
to that nomination, I think that it would be
the unanimous wish of the Conference that
M. Zahle should be invited to act as your
President. If that is so, I presume that the
first thing to do will be to convey that invita-
tion to M. Zahle, and I shall undertake to do so
immediately.
IVI. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
The Cuban delegation supports this proposal.
The nomination of M. Zahle as President of
the Committee of Sixteen was accepted unani-
mously.
The Secretary-General
I am sorry to tell you that M. Zahle is not
well this morning and is confined to his room.
Although I hope that he will be available this
afternoon, he will not be able to take up his
duties this morning. Ido not know' if in those
circumstances the Committee is prepared to
elect a Vice-President to carry on temporarily.
That is for the Committee to decide.
3. ELECTION OF THE ACTING PRESIDENT
OF THE COMMITTEE.
M. Sze (China) :
I am very sorry to hear that M. Zahle is indis-
posed and I am sure I am voicing the senti-
speedy recovery. In the meantime, may I
have the honour to propose that Sir Eric
Drummond be elected unanimously as Vice-
President of this Committee ?
May I add one word ? I did not mean to
say that Sir Eric Drummond should be elected
to serve only during the absence of M. Zahle.
I meant that we would like to impose upon his
kindness to continue to preside. I have the
honour, therefore, to propose that Sir Eric
Drummond be elected permanent Vice-Pre-
sident. He wall thus continue to preside this
morning, and in case M. Zahle cannot come this
afternoon, or at any other time.
IVI. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I support that proposal.
The Hon. Stephen G, Porter (United States
of America) :
The delegation of the United States supports
the proposal.
Sir IVSalcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
The British delegation warmly supports the
proposal.
The Secretary-General
I am much flattered and much honoured, and
also very much troubled. But, naturally, in
order to help things forward, I am entirely
willing to put myself at the disposal of the
Committee.
I am very grateful to the delegate of China,
but I would ask, if I may, that he w r ould not
insist on my appointment being a permanent one,
because in that case I should have to attend all
the meetings, and honestly I do not know
that I can. But I would be most willing to act
as President in the absence of M. Zahle!
IVI. Sugimura (Japan)
7 ranslation : I have no kind of personal
objection to the appointment of the Secretary-
General, but from the point of view of the Statutes,
and from a juridical point of view', I do not
think that we can appoint the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations as Vice-President of
a Conference or a Commission. To do so
would be to create a dangerous precedent.
I nevertheless accept the proposal that the
Secretary-General should be appointed provi-
sional President of this Committee, but not
its permanent Vice-President.
The Secretary-General
The delegate of Japan has expressed entirely
my view. Perhaps I might therefore be looked
upon merely as the substitute of M. Zahle
until he is strong enough to take up his duties.
That, I think, would meet all the difficulties.
(A dopted.)
4. RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE
COMMITTEE AND PUBLICITY OF THE
IVI E ETINGS.
The Acting President
dhere are two items which the Committee
ought to consider. First, wdiether the Rules
of Procedure which were adopted for the Second
Conference should be followed by this Com-
mittee. I presume that those rules are based
on what has taken place in Conferences generally,


and, if so, I take it that this Committee would
think that they are proper rules for its guidance.
If there is no objection to the adoption of those
rules, I shall declare them adopted.
The second question is more difficult, and
rests with the Committee to decide. The
question is whether its proceedings should be
public or not. I should be grateful for any
proposal that any member of the Committee
may desire to make on that subject.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
Mr. President, I see no reason why we should
depart from the policy which we have followed
all through this Conference. There is nothing
of a confidential nature to be discussed here.
We always have the right at any time to declare
an executive session and to meet in private if
we feel that the necessities of the situation
demand it.
I think that we should follow the rule that
has been followed before, as it might create some
unfavourable comment if the meetings of this
Committee were not held in public. As I
have said before, if the doors are shut, a lot
of people will clamour to get in. No doubt
you have all observed that since the doors
have been left open w r e have had very small
audiences, especially at the Conference.
M. Sze (China);
Mr. President and gentlemen, I have looked
up the Rules of Procedure adopted by the Second
Conference and I see that in Article 6 provision
has been made in regard to this question.
With your permission, I propose to read that
Article. It says ; ?All meetings of tne Con-
ference shall be public, unless a decision is taken
to the contrary. Decisions taken by private
meetings shall be announced at a public meet-
ing?. Therefore, I think, Mr. President, that
since we have adopted the Rules of Procedure,
we should follow Article 6.
M. Falcioni (Italy) :
Translation : In my opinion our discussions
ought not to be too public. However, M.
Zahle, the President of the Second Conference,
was careful to point out on Saturday that our
nominations would not refer to persons but
rather to countries. I therefore propose that
all who possess full powers should take part
in the discussions of this Committee. A dele-
gate might not always be able to be present
at the meetings and he should be able to send
some other member of the delegation to take
his place.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) ;
I am entirely in favour of publicity and I
think, so far as possible, the proceedings should
be in public.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : 1 support Mr. Porter?s pro-
posal. Article 6 of our Rules of Procedure
lays down that meetings should be public
unless otherwise decided. Moreover, we are
not proposing to consider any secret question.
All the proposals, statements and suggestions
have been made public. Our duty here is to
seek some formula of conciliation which will
enable us to emerge from the deadlock with
which we were faced. There is no reason why
we should not discover this formula in public.
If we were to discuss the matter in private,
the public might entertain some doubt as to
our sincerity, our real desire to reach a com-
promise. It might perhaps think that we
were going to have a fight and that we had
transferred the field of battle from the two
Conferences to our joint Committee. We must
inspire confidence and our meetings should be
open to the public.
The Acting President :
Nobody has proposed that the meetings
shall not be public, and various delegates have
proposed that they shall be and that Article 6
of the Rules of Procedure already adopted by
the Conference shall govern also the proceedings
of this Committee as regards publicity. I
therefore assume that this proposal can be
considered as adopted.
With regard to the point raised by the repre-
sentative of Italy, I think there can be no
doubt that, as a choice has been made of States,
any representative of those States having plains
ponvoirs would be most certainly entitled to
sit on the Committee if a delegation so decides.
IVI. van Wettum (Netherlands) :
May I ask if we are to apply the Rules of
Procedure of the Second Conference to this
Committee ? I have not the Rules of Procedure
before me, but I think that we cannot take a
decision by voting. If we have to take a
decision, the members of the First Conference
will have to decide on any particular questions
for themselves and the members of the Second
Conference will also have to decide for therm
selves, so that I doubt whether we can apply
the rules of the Second Conference and put
anything to the vote.
M. Toivola (Finland)
Mr. President, may I just say a few words on
the composition of our Committee ? There
have been several mentions made of two dele-
gations. Now if I read aright the resolution, or
the amendment, which was adopted on Satur-
day, it reads like this : ?The Second Opium
Conference decides to name eight delegates,
representative of Governments which have not
participated in the First Conference, to form
a committee with eight members designated
by the latter?. The words are ; "to form a
committee? ; it is not ?a mixed committee?.
I cannot see how we can work here if we adopt
the view put forward by the Dutch delegate
that the two delegations should meet together
and then decide separately what view they
take and eventually meet together again. We
have to work here, in my opinion, as a Committee,
every member as representative of his Govern-
ment and not as part of a delegation, which
ought to take a vote on every subject sepa-
rately and then come here and say : ?We are
of this opinion ; what is yours ? ?
I am quite sure that on such lines we should
never come to an agreement or reach the end
of our work. I ask, therefore, that we do not
refer to two delegations, but, from the very
beginning, accept the fact that we form here a
committee and nothing else.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands)
I should like to ask whether the delegate of


Finland is of opinion that there is no difference
between a committee and a delegation. The
first delegate of-the Netherlands asked, the day
before yesterday, that the word employed should
be ?delegation? and not ?commission?, because
it seemed to him that there was a difference
between the two. In the French text, there-
fore, we have the word ?delegation? and not
?commission?.
M. Toivoia (Finland)
The delegate of the Netherlands proposed
on Saturday that this body should be called
a delegation, but not even in his proposal did
he suggest it should be a joint delegation. If
we accept the view that there are two delegations,
both will meet separately, and there may be
differences of opinion amongst the delegates of
both.
I cannot accept the position that I am here
as a representative of a delegation ; I am here
to represent Finland and not any delegation.
The eight members who were elected by the
Second Conference do not form a delegation,
and I do not say a word in the name of any
such delegation ; I am speaking in the name
of my Government. I cannot see my way to
agree that there are two delegations.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire)
I suggest that we do not go into this matter
any further, at any rate at the present time. I
think the delegate of Finland is quite right
in saying that we are all of us here as repre-
sentatives of our countries. On the other hand,
we are in fact also a meeting, by delegation, of
the two Conferences.
The reason why I suggest we should not go
any further into the matter now is that the
whole purpose of this meeting is to arrive at
an agreement ; in order to arrive at an agree-
ment, both sides have to be satisfied. It
seems to me quite evident that both delega-
tions (for, after all, there are two delegations
here, even if we call the whole one delegation)
must not only agree between themselves but
amongst themselves. If, for example, we arrive
at an agreement which involves some addition
to the Convention drawn up by the First Con-
ference, that addition can only be made if the
members of the First Conference are agreed
amongst themselves that it should be made.
In the case of the Second Conference, if anything
is done which involves inserting some article
in the Convention to be drawn up by the Second
Conference, the members of the Second Confe-
rence must also agree amongst themselves.
If we are to arrive at a successful result
(and I am sure we all hope we shall) the two
delegations (I use the term without prejudice)
must agree between themselves and indivi-
dually.
M, Toivoia (Finland)
I agree with what Sir Malcolm Delevingne
has said, but there is just one word that I
should like to add. I hope that the explanation
he has given will not exclude the possibility
of taking a vote on some questions here in this
Committee. It may happen that some small
question may arise on which we shall have to
take a decision. If a vote is taken, it is pos-
sible that we shall not all agree at once, but it
may very well happen that if the two delega-
tions as you call them separate and dis-
cuss the matter, they may, after a while, reach
unanimity in regard to it. It would certainly
be a pity, however, if we could not take a vote
on any small divergence of opinion which
might arise here in this Committee. We must
work as a committee, and in all committees
votes are taken ; so we must, on some occa-
sions, take a vote, should the necessity arise.
I hope, nevertheless, that we shall reach
unanimity in regard to every important
question.
The Acting President
It seems to me that the suggestion which
has been made that the question should not
be discussed further has a great deal, if not
everything, in its favour, particularly as I hope
that the question of voting may never arise,
because I trust that the decisions of the Com-
mittee will really be unanimous. I think that
this is almost essential if the Committee is
to arrive at those practical results for which
we all hope. Perhaps the question of voting,
therefore, might be left on one side, at any
rate for the moment. {Agreed.)
5. AG EM DA OF THE COMMITTEE OF
SIXTEEN
The Acting President
There are three proposals, suggestions or
declarations before this Committee. The first
is the proposal submitted by the delegation
of the United States of America regarding
Chapter II of the Hague Opium Convention.
The second is the British declaration made at
the plenary meeting of the Second Confe-
rence held on January 19th last, and the
third the French declaration made at the twenty-
second plenary meeting of the Second Confe-
rence on January 21st.
If the Committee agree, it seems to me the
right procedure would be that we should start
by considering these proposals and declarations
in the order in which they were received,
namely, that the first proposal to be considered
(though naturally the other two will have to be
considered in conjunction with it) would be
that submitted by the delegation of the United
States of America.
I do not think it is possible to co-ordinate
these various proposals in such a way as to
make it possible to take them article by article.
I think the only method to be adopted, there-
fore, is to consider first the suggestion that was
proposed first.
If that is agreed, I would propose that the
consideration of the proposals of the United
States be begun, article by article, unless it is
the wish that there should be a general state-
ment on the whole question. It may be the
desire of certain of the delegations that a
general statement should be made on the subject
of prepared opium, or of the proposals made by
the United States delegation in regard to it. I
therefore open that general discussion now.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
May I make a suggestion ? I have gone
very carefully over all the proposals. It is
always of great advantage to reduce the matters
in dispute to the smallest possible compass.
There does not seem to be any material dispute
here as to the period of time, namely, fifteen


years. There does not seem to be any dispute
as to the care of the confirmed addicts at the
end of that period. The question seems to us
to have narrowed down to a very simple one
so far as our procedure is concerned, but to a
very perplexing one so far as the result is
concerned that is, When shall the period
of fifteen years begin to run? I was wondering
whether it would not be better to discuss the
point in dispute rather than to go into a general
analysis of all the various suggestions.
May I repeat that there is really only one
question before this Committee, that is, the
date when this period of fifteen years shall
begin to run. Inasmuch as that is a matter in
controversy between all the suggestions or
declarations or programmes, it would be better
perhaps for us to discuss them from that stand-
point.
I would like to add that perhaps it would be
wise for us this morning to have matters in
readiness for M. Zahle when he is able to pre-
side over the Committee. I really would not
like to go on without his consent. It seems to
me that it might embarrass him somewhat to
take up the matter where we have left off.
I was going to suggest that we should adjourn
and be called together by the Chair as soon as
M. Zahle?s condition can be ascertained. I
hope you understand, Mr. President, why
I make the suggestion. If I were in M. Zahlc?s
position, I should want to be here when the
actual debate began.
The Acting President
The suggestion made by the representative
of the United States meets entirely, if I may
say so, with the full agreement of M. Zahle?s
temporary representative, and I hope very
much that the Conference will accept it. Matters
have now reached the stage at real
work of the Committee must begin and it
would be very difficult for the President to
assume the Chair after the discussion had begun.
I therefore hope that the Committee will agree
to adjourn until half-past three this afternoon.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
Anything will suit me ; but I suggested that
we should be re-convened on your call after you
have ascertained when it will be possible for
M. Zahle to preside. I think that is the safer
plan.
The Acting President
Certainly. Supposing M. Zahle is able to
preside this afternoon, the Committee would be
able to meet, I suppose, at 4 o?clock. It may
be wise, on the other hand, to postpone the
meeting until to-morrow morning in order to
put M. Zahle in full possession of all that has
passed. 1 should prefer to do that if the Com-
mittee agreed.
IV!. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I think that as M. Zahle is
indisposed, it would be better, instead of hold-
ing a meeting this afternoon at four o?clock,
to hold it to-morrow morning. In order that
M. Zahle should be able to carry out his duties
as President, it is important that he should be
quite fit.
The Acting President :
Then 1 propose to the Committee that its
next meeting shall be at 10.30 to-morrow
morning. (/I greedy
The Committee rose at 11.55 a.m.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday, January 31 st, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
CONTENTS:
6. Examination of Proposals and Sugges-
tions SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS STATES
CONCERNING CHAPTER II OF THE UNITED
States? Suggestions.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
6. EXAMINATION OF PROPOSALS AND
SUGGESTIONS SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS
STATES CONCERNING CHAPTER II OF
THE UNITED STATES SUGGESTIONS.
The President :
Translation : When the Committee of Six-
teen met for the first time I was not present, as
1 had no duties in connection with that meeting.
You have done me the honour to elect me
President. I thank you most heartily for
this fresh mark of confidence, and hope to
prove worthy of it.
I did not have the official agenda distributed,
as it consists simply of the resolution passed
last Saturday by the two Opium Conferences.
Under the terms of that resolution, it is the
duty of the Committee of Sixteen to examine
the proposals submitted by the United States
delegation and the various suggestions and decla-
rations put forward during the recent discussions
in the Second Conference. The Committee of
Sixteen must submit a report to the two Con-
ferences as soon as possible on the results of
its work.
Yesterday and this morning fresh drafts of
the proposals already put forward were sub-
mitted by several delegations now present. I
think that the latter may perhaps desire to
give some additional information concerning
them. I call upon M. Kircher, the French
delegate, to speak.
M. Kircher (France)
Translation : Mr. President. There are
now three proposals before the Committee of
Sixteen : the American, French and British
proposals. I refer to them in the order in
which they were distributed.


Before dealing with the actual matter under
discussion, I think it is desirable to say a few
words on a preliminary question, a formal
question, which is not without importance and
in regard to which I do not wish any delegation
to be under a misapprehension.
It must have been noticed that the British
and French proposals, which recommend the
adoption of measures absolutely identical
except for a few details, have been submitted
to you in very different forms. The French
suggestions, as they now stand, are to be
found in one single act, which includes both
the fresh obligations entered into by countries
consuming prepared opium and those accepted
by countries producing raw opium. This act
can be discussed and adopted as a resolution
emanating from the Committee of Sixteen and
can then be submitted at a plenary meeting
for ratification by the Powers represented at
the Second Conference and consequently for
signature by all these Powers.
If formulated and adopted in this form, our
proposal would not give rise to the juridical
question, of the competence of the two Confe-
rences, which has been the subject of most
interesting discussions, but has not yet been
satisfactorily solved. I hasten to add that the
French delegation, in adopting a formula which
would include the obligations to be entered into
by all countries represented at the First Confe-
rence, and also the obligations to be assumed
by certain countries which are only represented
at the Second Conference, had no intention of
abandoning the position which it had taken
up as regards the question of competence. It
simply wished to get on as quickly as possible
and to condense within the compass of a few
simple articles, short and clearly drafted, the
measures which appeared to it calculated to
attain the supreme object which we all have
before us namely, the suppression of the
scourges afflicting humanity but it reserved
the right to revert, when and as it might think
fit, to the proposals accepted in principle by
the Assembly, in order to meet the views of
a number of Powers which have legitimate
doubts in regard to the question of competence.
We thought that, with this object in view,
any measures which it was decided to put into
force might be embodied in two distinct acts :
In the first place, the conditional undertakings
relating to the suppression of the consumption
of prepared opium in countries which authorise
its use would be embodied in a first report, a
first convention, an addendum call it what
you wall consisting of resolutions adopted at
a meeting of members of the First Conference
only convened ad hoc ; this would be signed
only by the members of that Conference.
In the second place, the correlative under-
takings concerning the suppression or limita-
tion of the production of raw opium, or, more
correctly, the suppression or limitation of
poppy-growing, would be embodied in a second
agreement, or convention, or addendum, con-
sisting of resolutions adopted by the Second
Conference, which would take note beforehand
of the conditional undertakings entered into
by the Powers represented at the First Confe-
rence.
This formula, which is absolutely correct
from the juridical point of view' would, we think,
satisfactorily solve the question of competence,
which nearly proved a stumbling-block in the
work of the Powers which have sent represen-
tatives to Geneva from all quarters of the globe.
The French delegation is delighted to find
that the British delegation has taken the initia-
tive and drafted its proposals at the very
beginning of our discussions in accordance with
the definitive formula which we had in mind.
I beg to state that the French delegation is
in agreement with the British delegation in
recommending to the Committee of Sixteen the
adoption of two distinct acts as a practical
and juridical formula for the resolutions to be
adopted by us.
Having made the position clear as regards
this preliminary question, I shall now deal
with the actual matter under discussion and
here again I propose to be very brief, because
I do not wish to impose upon your good-will
and because you know as well as I do the many
considerations by which we must be governed
in our opinions and decisions.
We are all agreed as regards a certain number
of points, a very large number of points, I am
glad to say. At bottom, there is only one single
question about which we do not agree.
Our opinion is unanimous as regards the
following points ;
(i) States which adhered to the Hague
Convention are bound as soon as possible
to suppress the use of prepared opium in
the territories under their authority ;
(2) Most, if not all, of the countries
consuming prepared opium have encoun-
tered serious difficulties in carrying out the
task which they have undertaken and are
still courageously pursuing owing to inten-
sive smuggling against which they have
virtually no defence.
(3) Smuggling, far from being on the
decline, is increasing to an alarming degree
despite international action and measures
taken by the police and Customs authorities
in each State;
(4) If smuggling is to be suppressed,
the onty practical and efficacious means
of doing so is to strike at the root of the
evil, to limit the production of raw opium
and hence the cultivation of the poppy to
the amounts required for lawful consump-
tion, for it is obvious that it must disappear
and cease to be the terror of the world
if smugglers can no longer find the mate-
rial for their nefarious traffic.
So far we are all in agreement. The only
point in regard to which we are not agreed is the
procedure, the method to be adopted in order
to achieve this object. It is felt in certain
quarters that the countries consuming pre-
pared opium can and should continue to set
an example, can and should go even further
along the lines which they have already adopted,
can and should enter into an undertaking here
and now to reduce by a fixed percentage the
annual quantities of opium allowed their sub-
jects, so that within a fixed period the use of
prepared opium may be entirely abolished.
Others consider, on the contrary, that
the countries consuming prepared opium have
reached the limit of the reductions to which
they can reasonably consent and declare
that fresh measures of suppression would be


ineffective and would even run counter to the
object in view.
I note that the States which are of this
opinion are the very ones most competent to
speak on the matter, as it is the inhabitants of
their territories that use opium.
I wonder how it is that the reservations put
forward by the British Empire, Japan, the
Netherlands, Portugal, Siam and France, which
cannot be accused of anti-humanitarian senti-
ments, have not received more attention from
the other Powers. I wonder how it is that,
when we all solemnly proclaim to the world
that we can do no more, we are not heard and
our word is not accepted.
We demand that, before entering into any
engagements to make further reductions in the
quantities now allowed, to our ?regies? or our
monopolies, the States concerned in this ques-
tion should give us guarantees that any mea-
sures which we may take will not prove inef-
fective or even dangerous.
I do not wish to try the patience of members
of the Committee of Sixteen too much, but I
must inform you that smuggling is rampant
on the frontiers of nearly all the States which
still consume prepared opium. The consump-
tion in Indo-China with which I am especially
well acquainted, having been at the head of
the opium ?regie" for the last ten years
is not high ; it is practically negligible as
compared witn the consumption in other coun-
tries ; but on our borders all along the land
frontiers and the sea-coast, smuggling is inten-
sively carried on.
Smugglers can introduce thousands of kilo-
grams into the country for the use of the people
under my authority. If by chance I reduce
by one kilogram the quantity which the "regie"
official allows smokers in any given village, at
the high rate of 200 piastres per kilogram, what
happens ? Smugglers come right up to the
door and offer for that sum not 1 kilogram
but 7or 8 kilograms. Under the present regu-
lations, smokers have to come specially to the
"regie" office, and, as I have just said, they
have to pay heavily for what they want. If
I refuse to give them all the opium they want
the smuggler will give it to them and for
20 piastres instead of 200.
Imagine the results of this state of affairs,
against which we are powerless. It is obvious
that smokers who have to come and fetch the
opium they want will apply to smugglers if
the sale of the drug is entirely suppressed, and
as you know, there is a freemasonry among
opium-smokers, who are always trying to
make fresh converts. Thus, the absolute sup-
pression of opium would automatically involve
an increase in the number of consumers. Is
this the result at which you are aiming ? Are
your measures designed to increase the number
of smokers ?
I do not think so.
We have decided, therefore, after a profound
consideration of this grave problem, that we
cannot go any further along the lines already
adopted until we receive guarantees that the
peoples which are concerned in the question
of opium, and which it is my duty to defend
against that scourge, will not suffer from the
possible consequences to which I have just
referred. Ours is a very serious responsibility,
for our decision means a step forwards or a step
backwards in human progress. It was with
a feeling of awe, therefore, that we asked
ourselves : "Can we accede to the plea so
eloquently put forward by the great American
people. Can we here and now grant their re-
quest ?? ? The voice of conscience answered
"No".
We have a duty towards humanity, but we
also have a duty towards the nationals of our
own country. We cannot expose them to the
risk of being poisoned by the thousands of
kilograms of the drug which are being offered
all along our frontiers ; that would be a crime.
We will not be guilty of it.
We call upon the producing countries to
make an effort in their turn. We ask them
to make a reasonable reduction in the quanti-
ties of opium which they produce, to reduce
the cultivation of the poppy within their
territories. Many States, it is true, would be
obliged to make heavy sacrifices from the
political, economic and financial points of
view. We are well aware that thousands of
peasants make their living by cultivating the
poppy, but it is the duty of these producing
countries towards humanity which must deter-
mine their condfict. They, too, must join the
march of human progress. They, too, must
make an effort, must agree to restrictions and
aim at the total suppression of raw opium for
the manufacture of prepared opium or dange-
rous drugs. They, too, must aim at producing
opium only for the legitimate requirements
of the world.
Contrary to what has been said, the proposals
which we now submit constitute, in our opinion,
a very marked advance on the present state of
affairs.
Let us compare the juridical position imposed
by Article 6 of the Hague Convention on
countries consuming prepared opium and the
juridical position to which we consuming
countries shall be voluntarily consenting when
we sign the 1925 Convention.
Three fresh juridical points, all of primary
importance, have been introduced into the
statute for countries consuming prepared opium.
Article 6 of the Hague Convention reads as
follows :
"The Contracting Powers shall take
measures for the gradual and effective
suppression of the manufacture of, internal
trade in, and use of prepared opium, with
due regard to the varying circumstances
of each country concerned, unless regu-
lations on the subject are already in exis-
tence."
If we examine the juridical position of coun-
tries consuming raw opium, we find, on compar-
ing Article 6 of the Hague Convention with
the fresh measures which we propose to intro-
duce :
1. That, in place of the indefinite period
provided for in Article 6, we now have a fixed,
unvarying, constant period of 15 years. We
undertake in 15 years entirely to suppress the
consumption of prepared opium.- That is a
fresh factor instead of laying down an inde-
finite period of perhaps 20, 50 or 100 years or
more, we countries consuming prepared opium
undertake to suppress consumption entirely
within 15 years. This is an important point.
2. Who is to judge what measures are to
be taken under Article 6 of the Hague


3- One other important point. Under Article 6
of the Hague Convention, we ourselves must
be judges of, and decide, the circumstances
which shall govern our decision. Let me read
the passage again : ? with due regard
Convention ? We ourselves. It is we who are to represent and must endeavour to find a
to judge what we shall ; it is we who have
power to say : ?We will do this ; we will
not do that?. Under the new Convention, this
will no longer be the case. Under the new 1925
Convention I hope that I am not making
a mistake in calling it the 1925 Convention ?it
will no longer be for us to judge, we shall no
longer be entitled to take what decisions we
please. We shall be subject to an independent
organisation, and shall have to bow before the
decision of the Council of the League, or a
Committee, or some other organisation
that point will be settled later. Is not this a
fresh juridical factor, and a most important
one ? I need not dwell on the enormous
advantages to be derived by humanity from
this voluntary resignation of our rights.
to the varying circumstances of each country
concerned, unless regulations on the subject
are already in existence?.
I do not propose now to enter into a juridical
discussion or to make any lengthy statement,
but when the Convention says ? with due
regard to the varying circumstances,? etc.,
that means that the right of each country to
fix the conditions which shall determine its
decision is juridically established ; each country
has a perfect right and I do not think that
the question has ever been brought before any
Court to select from among political, eco-
nomic and financial considerations those which
shall determine its decision. True, it has
entered into an undertaking before all the world,
but it has reserved the right to determine,
according to circumstances, the extent and the
nature of the measures which it shall take.
In the 1925 Convention all this is done away
with. Only one condition is to govern any
decision which we may have to take, and our
decision is to be determined not by ourselves
but by an external authority. That is the
guarantee which I demanded that producing
countries should not be allowed to place the
poison within reach of the people subject to
my authority. Is not this a fresh juridical
factor ?
I cannot over-emphasise this point how
essentially these three juridical factors modify
the international statute of countries consuming
prepared opium. I think that I have made it
sufficiently clear that it would be the height
of injustice to allege that the British and French
proposals do not constitute a step forward in
the anti-opium campaign.
I would call upon the United States delegate,
who has it in his power to further the success of
our deliberations, and would urge him to form
a just estimate of the sacrifices which we con-
suming countries are prepared to make in the
interests of his ideal. Let Mr. Porter say
?Yes?, and this very night the question of
opium will be solved. In a few years, in a
very few years, this curse will be unknown to
humanity. [Applause.)
M. Rodrigues (Portugal)
Translation: We have come to the point when
each of us must make a statement as to the
position of the country which he has the honour
formula for the compromise at which we are
all anxious to arrive. I had prepared a state-
ment on behalf of the Portuguese delegation,
but I have in the meantine received the second
detailed British proposal, and I beg to state that
I fully support this proposal. 1 think, there-
fore, that I need not submit my statement, but
I would ask the President to have it translated
and distributed. (Annex i, p. 71.)
The President
Translation : The Portuguese delegate has
given me a copy of his statement, which will
be translated and distributed to the members of
the Conference.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) :
I do not intend this afternoon to discuss the
proposals which the British delegation has put
forward after consultation with the delega-
tions of other Powers represented on the First
Conference or to go in any detail into the
facts and the arguments on which those
proposals are based. The Committee has only
just received those proposals, and I think it
would be a convenience to it and would pro-
bably facilitate the course of our deliberations
if we had time to examine those proposals at
leisure before embarking on a general and
detailed discussion. It might, however, help
those members of the Committee who have not
taken part in the discussions in the First Con-
ference it I were to say something, very briefly,
on the course which the consideration of
this question by the Governments of the various
Powers concerned, and in particular by the
Government of Great Britain, has taken during
the last few years.
When the Hague Convention came into force
after the end of the war, the Government of
Great Britain and the Governments of the other
States concerned had to consider the position
in their Far Eastern colonies in regard to the
enforcement of the obligations which they had
undertaken in virtue of Article 6 of Chapter II
of that Convention. As a result of the exami-
nation which was undertaken to that end
by the British Government and of the reports
received from its Far Eastern colonies, my
Government came to the conclusion that the
position was not satisfactory. It made, through
its representative on the Opium Advisory Com-
mittee of the League, a proposal that a Confer
ence of the Powers concerned should be held
for the purpose of examining the question and
considering whether more effective measures
for the application of that article were possible.
At the same time, it put forward for examina-
tion by the Powers concerned and for conside-
ration by the proposed Conference a number of
suggestions, which will be found in the report
of the session of the Opium Advisory Committee
held in 1923, as to the measures which might
possibly be taken. Those suggestions included
proposals for a scheme of rationing and regis-
tration of smokers, with a view to a progressive
reduction of the amount of prepared opium
consumed. The proposal was favourably
received by the other Powers concerned and, as
the outcome of it, the First Opium Conference
was opened in November last.
It seems to me, if I may say so and I
think the Committee will be prepared to agree
that this action, by itself, on the part of the


Governments of the Powers concerned is a
proof of their sincere, indeed of their anxious,
desire to do everything possible to carry out
the obligation into which they had entered.
The suggestions which had been put forward
by the British representative on the Opium Advi-
sory Committee were accepted as the basis for
the deliberations of the Conference, and, in the
interval of a year and a-half which elapsed
between the submission of the proposals and the
holding of the Conference, a very close study
of those suggestions was made by the British
Government and, I believe, by the Governments
of the other Powers concerned. Many of the
members of the Committee will have seen,
or at any rate will be aware of, the reports
which were made by representative Committees
in the British colonies, especially in the colo-
nies of Hong-Kong and Malaya. I may say
that, in particular, the report of the represen-
tative Committee which was appointed by the
Government of Malaya is a perfect store-house
of information with regard to the treatment of
these questions, and I believe has been gene-
rally acknowledged to be an extremely fair and
impartial statement of the problem.
The examination by the British Colonial
Authorities of those suggestions which had been
put forward by the British Government unfor-
tunately did not give the results for which the
British Government had hoped, and, in parti-
cular, it was forced to the conclusion that the
scheme of rationing and registration was imprac-
ticable in the circumstances of the present
time. That conclusion was a very serious check
to the policy which it had hoped to put into
effect.
I believe it is generally admitted that the
only method, or at any rate much the most
effective method, by which the progressive
reduction in the consumption of prepared opium
can be carried out is by such a system of regis-
tration and rationing. The above conclusion
was a check which the British Government
could not and still cannot see any way of
escaping. The reasons for the conclusion to
which it was forced have been explained both
by myself in the First Conference and by
Viscount Cecil in the Second Conference, and
have been re-stated again this afternoon by
the delegate of France.
A new situation had arisen in the Far East
during the last two or three years. The con-
ditions in regard to the production and smug-
gling of opium had been growing progressively
worse, and in the course of the years 1923 and
1924 the Colonial Authorities, especially the
Colonial Authorities of Hong-Kong and Malaya,
found that the prevalence of smuggling into
their territories was far greater than they had
realised. Particulars of the extent to which
it prevails in those two colonies have been
given to both Conferences, and I think there
can be no question as to the facts. It seems
obvious, in fact the conclusion is inevitable,
that, with large quantities of smuggled opium
available on the spot, the introduction of the
system of rationing of smokers would to a large
extent, if not wholly, be a reform on paper
only.
In these circumstances, we felt that there
was only one course which could be taken and
that was to make known to the First Conference
all the facts (and that we did by laying our
reports upon the table of the Conference and by
the explanations which were given during the
proceedings of the Conference) and to declare
the determination of the Government to take
all practicable measures to restrict and dis-
courage the practice of opium-smoking and its
readiness to take the further measures which
are necessary to bring about a complete sup-
pression immediately a change in the situation
in the Far East makes them practicable.
The First Conference and the result of its
work have come in for a good many hard words.
The proposals now put forward, which have
the support not only of the British Government
but I believe it is correct to say of all or almost
all the Governments of the other Powers repre-
sented at the First Conference, are the result
and the evidence of their desire to put their
intentions into the most categorical form, and
so to give the fullest satisfaction that is possible
in the circumstances to the general desire which
exists not only in the Conference but also in the
world outside that this evil should be grappled
with effectively and suppressed.
I wish just to say two words only about the
proposals themselves, to remove any possible
misunderstanding. The Committee will note
that the proposals fall into two parts, two sepa-
rate Protocols. I wish to make it quite clear
that it is not the intention of the British dele-
gation that the first Protocol should be consi-
dered as in any way dependent on the adoption
of the second Protocol. The second Protocol
has been put forward as a suggestion to the
Governments of the producing countries with
a view to giving greater precision to, and
making more binding, if it is possible to make
it more binding, the undertaking into which
we propose to enter in the first Protocol. We
hope that the Governments of the producing
countries will see their way to accept the sugges-
tion in the second draft Protocol.
T do not think it is necessary to enlarge at
any length on the close connection which in
any circumstances must exist between the pro-
duction of the raw material and its consumption.
It is by this time a truism that, if there is
over-production either of the manufactured
drugs or of the raw material, there will be abuse,
there will be illicit trade, and no measures,
however stringent, accompanied by however
heavy penalites, can effectively suppress the
illicit use. But if the producing countries should
not see their way I hope that will not be the
case to adopt the second Protocol, it is the
intention of the British delegation, and I
believe it is the intention of all the Powers
represented at the First Conference, to carry
through the first Protocol, which gives effect
to the intentions of the Governments concerned.
There is only one other point, and a small one,
to which I would draw attention. A suggestion
has been made that the effect of the Agreement
concluded at the First Conference, and of the
declarations which have been made by the
British and French and other Governments, is
a weakening of the obligations in the Hague
Convention and a step backwards. In order
to meet that point, to make it quite clear that
that is not our intention, and that nothing
is further from our minds, we have inserted
in the first Protocol an article which places on
record in the clearest terms that that will not
be the case.


?VI. van Wettum (Netherlands) ;
As I have so often stated the aim, methods
and results of the opium policy in the Nether-
lands Indies, I do not think it necessary to take
up the time of the delegations assembled here
to explain again the situation which I trust is
now fully known to all of you. I feel convinced
that every unbiassed student of these state-
ments, corroborated by the figures published
annually by the Netherlands Indies Govern-
ment, figures which are open to everybody,
must agree with the conclusion of Jonkheer
Loudon, that the Netherlands Government
has fulfilled its duties under the Hague
Convention and that it has done everything
in its power to accomplish as soon as possible
the effective suppression of the use of prepared
opium.
As we have stated time and again, the only
reason which has prevented us from achieving
more than we have done is that measures still
more restrictive than we have already taken
will be of no effect, and will be even detrimental,
to the cause for which we are fighting if the
illicit trade is lying in ambush waiting for its
opportunity to reconquer and increase its
market. This fact was again brought home to
us when we started in recent years taking the
most restrictive measure possible apart from
prohibition namely, the introduction of the
licensing and rationing system in big centres
of the Netherlands Indies. As you know,
since that time a reduction of more than 50 per
cent has taken place.
As we find, however, that the decrease of the
legal use does not correspond with the decrease
of the actual use, and as we have many reasons
to doubt whether the use is not merely shifting
from legal to illegal channels, we are not satis-
fied that our severe measures have been effec-
tive ; possibly they have bad effects on the
situation, not only in our own territories but also
as regards the producings countries, as a not
legally satisfied demand must necessarily react
on the clandestine production or expoitation
of opium in those countries.
We have considered it, therefore, to be our
duty to take no more restrictive measures
before we are reasonably certain that illicit
opium is not increasingly finding its way into
our territories. This has been the position
taken up by our delegation throughout the
discussions in the First Conference, and, with
this firm conviction in mind, we heartily endorsed
the view that the terms of the Agreement of
the First Conference should be strengthened by
future Conferences as soon as the situation in
the Far East as regards contraband traffic should
have been ameliorated. This is the root idea
of Article 12 of the said Convention. The
sooner the producing countries attack the pro-
blem on their side the sooner the desire under-
lying that article may be fulfilled. Happily,
we may, if the said promise is given, enter on
our part at once on a review of the situation and
take a definite obligation to abolish the con-
sumption within a fixed number of years after
the contraband traffic will have diminished to
such an extent as not to give serious obstacles
to the execution of our measures. The expres-
sion of this firm will, as has been done by the
British delegation, meets therefore with our
full approval.
We are convinced that these Protocols show
the right way out of our difficulties, and I hope
that all of you will co-operate to ensure that
the next step of our anti-opium movement wall
be taken along this road, the only one which, in
my opinion, leads to the goal we desire to reach.
{Applause.)
The President
Translation : There is no other speaker
on the list. Does anyone wish to speak ?
As no one wishes to speak, I venture to inter-
pret your wishes as follows :
I suggest that the proposals submitted and the
important statements we have just heard should
be examined more fully by the members of this
Committee.
If you have no objection, I propose that we
adjourn the meeting and meet again on Tuesday
morning at 10.30 a.m.
The Committee rose at 5 p.m.
THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, February 3rd, 1925 at 10.30 a.m.
CONTENTS:
7. Examination of Proposals and Sugges-
tions SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS STATES
CONCERNING CHAPTER II OF THE UNITED
States Suggestions.
President : M. Herluf Zahle.
7. EXAMINATION OF PROPOSALS AND
SUGGESTIONS SUBMITTED BY VARI-
OUS STATES CONCERNING CHAPTER
II OF THE UNITED STATES SUGGES-
TIONS.
The President
Translation : We adjourned last Saturday
because some delegations had submitted very
interesting observations in regard to the pro-
posals which had already been made. These
observations were not previously known to
the other delegations. Moreover, the Portu-
guese delegation had presented a long memo-
randum which could only be distributed last
Saturday. For these reasons, we were obliged
to adjourn the discussion.
I now declare open the discussion on the
question for the consideration of which the
Committee of Sixteen was originally created.
I call upon Mr. Porter, first delegate of the
United States of America, to speak.


The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) ;
Mr. President and gentlemen of the Com-
mittee, I have discussed the United States
suggestions in the plenary meetings on numer-
ous occasions ; in fact, I have said almost
everything I care to say in their support.
I shall therefore be quite brief this morning and
will re-state in the form of a resume the posi-
tion of the United States in regard to Chapter II
of those suggestions.
In my remarks at the plenary meeting of the
Conference, held on January 20th, 1925, I
indicated that the delegation of the United
States was willing to increase the period con-
tained in Chapter IT of our suggestions, after
the termination of which the use of opium
for smoking shall not be permitted from ten to
fifteen years; the various Governments con-
cerned will determine the internal measures to be
adopted by them in carrying out the obligation
undertaken.
Article 8 of our suggestions, therefore, should
be amended to read as follows :
?The Contracting Parties in whose ter-
ritories the use of prepared opium is now
temporarily permitted under the Hague
Convention agree that within fifteen years
from the ratificetion of this Convention
the importation, exportation,' sale, manu-
facture, distribution, and use of prepared
opium in all territories subject to their
jurisdiction shall not be permitted.?
I further stated that we not unwilling
that the Convention should recognise, and if
necessary make adequate provision for, with
appropriate safeguards, persons in wdiose case
it was certified by the competent medical
authorities of the States concerned that they
could not be deprived of the drug without
serious danger to health or to life.
I therefore request the Committee to con-
sider our proposal in the amended form as
indicated.
The distinguished delegate of the British
Empire and other delegates have assured the
Conference, if indeed any assurance were neces-
sary, that the Governments they represent not
only recognise the obligations undertaken under
the Hague Convention but are determined to
carry them out to the fullest extent. The various
proposals and declarations which have been
referred to this Committee for examination
indicate that it is the intention of the Govern-
ments in whose territories the use of prepared
opium is still permitted effectively to suppress
this traffic. All apparently are agreed that
the traffic shall be terminated after the expira-
tion of a period of fifteen years.
The only point at issue, therefore, would
appear to be the question as to the time when
the fifteen-year period shall begin to run. In
the proposal wffiich w r e have offered, it has been
suggested that the fifteen-year period shall
begin to run immediately. In other proposals
or declarations, the suggestion has been made
that the commencement of the period shall
be conditional upon an event or contingency,
the occurrence of which cannot, at the moment,
be foretold with certainty.
While recognising the difficulties confronting
a number of the nations in their endeavour to
suppress effectively the traffic in prepared opium,
we consider that it would be most unfortunate
should this Committee fail to recommend that
the traffic in prepared opium shall be brought
to an end within a definite period. At the
present stage of our deliberations, it. cannot be
definitely foretold just what is to become of the
Hague Convention. We accordingly took occa-
sion to state to the Second Conference that
the United States was not prepared to forego
any right which under the Hague Convention
it was entitled to enjoy. The United States
is seriously suffering from ill-effects due to
the leakage in the distribution of enormous
quantities of raw and prepared opium in the
Far Eastern territory, and the only remedy we
have is the right to insist that the nations
signatory to the Hague Convention effectively
and progressively suppress this traffic.
At this stage of our deliberations, when the
final effect upon the Hague Convention of the
agreement concluded by the Second Conference
cannot definitely be ascertained, w r e would be
most reluctant, in fact we could not willingly
consent to this, that the clear and explicit obliga-
tion undertaken under the Hague Convention
should be exchanged for or transformed into a
conditional or contingent obligation. In thus
making known our position, we do not mean to
imply that any nation represented here is seeking
or intends to secure the avoidance of an obli-
gation which, under the Hague Convention, it
solemnly undertook to fulfil. It is unnecessary
to point out that an interpretation or construc-
tion of an instrument wath which we all may
now be in accord may not, years later, under
different conditions and circumstances, be so
generally accepted.
We believe that, if international obligations
are to be performed, they should, so far as
possible, be clearly defined. The introduc-
tion of contingencies or conditions into inter-
national agreements often gives rise to doubts and
misgivings; and this, I am sure all the delegates
will agree, should be avoided if it is at all pos-
sible so to do. I conceive it therefore to be the
duty of this Committee, after considering the
question when the traffic in prepared opium
shall be terminated, to forward, if it is humanly
possible, a recommendation setting forth a
definite and certain period after which the traffic
in prepared opium shall no longer be permitted.
M. Sugimura (Japan)
Translation : Mr. President and gentle-
men, we have now entered on the decisive week
of our work and it is absolutely imperative that,
we should reach a definite conclusion after
our long and laborious discussions. In these
circumstances, there is a moral obligation on
us all to do our best to reconcile our differences,
to clear up this complex situation so far as
may be possible, and to bring forward any
suggestion which may lead to the just and equit-
able solution we all desire. It is in this spirit
that I venture to address you once more.
Last Saturday M. Kircher, the distinguished
delegate of France, pointed out quite rightly
that" his proposal, although it had not given
entire satisfaction to some delegations, none
the less marked an important advance on the
provisions at present in force under the Hague
Convention. I recognise the truth of his
remark, and I am anxious that we should not
lose the fruits of our prolonged discussions,
even if the result is not. yet as satisfactory as
it might be. For that reason, I feel compelled


to persevere in my efforts to reconcile our
differences, because, when all is said and done,
this C onference cannot disperse without having
reached an agreement. In spite of all difficulties,
and fortified by my profound faith in our ulti-
mate success, I appeal to you to make yet
further efforts and further sacrifices in order
that we may find a common ground upon which
all the delegations can agree. I am fully
convinced that this question is less complicated
than it appears, and that, as the saying goes,
?Where there?s a will there?s a way?.
In my opinion it would be best? as a first
step, to find a solution for the question of sub-
stance. We should then have little difficulty
in finding solutions for the secondary questions
of competence and of form.
The best method to arrive at a wise and equit-
able compromise would perhaps be to recon-
cile, as a first step, the French and British
proposals, which are already in agreement so
far as principles are We could
then go on to discuss the joint scheme which
would result, and amend it as desirable.
The one point to be settled is the initial
date of the period of fifteen years, by the end
of which time the suppression of opium-
smoking must be accomplished. I need hardly
say that this initial date must be the same for
all the Contracting Powers, whether they are
producing countries or consuming countries
or both. The question upon which opinions
are divided concerns the existence of contra-
band on an immense scale, which renders all
progress difficult. We all agree that this con-
traband trade exists, but opinions differ as to
its extent. I have no intention of reopening
this interminable discussion, but I would
like to state quite frankly that many effective
and necessary measures still remain to be taken
by producing and consuming countries alike.
In order to put an effective stop to the con-
traband trade which so greatly hampers us
in accomplishing our humanitarian task, it will
be necessary to devise and apply a system of
close and frank co-operation between producing
and consuming countries. The former must
take all possible steps not only to reduce the
cultivation of the poppy but also to exercise
strict control over exports. It will also be
the duty of consuming countries, and such as
may be termed centres of the traffic, to arrange
between themselves for concerted police super-
vision, as the headquarters of the smugglers
are very often situated outside the producing
countries.
As regards the abolition of opium-smoking,
the producing countries must not continually
throw the onus of taking the first step on the
consuming countries and vice versa, each party
waiting for the other to take the initiative
before applying effective measures itself. The
result is a vicious circle, from which we shall
never be able to escape. All the measures must
be applied simultaneously, although they need
not be on rigidly parallel lines. If we begin by
introducing the easiest methods, the work we
have in hand will go forward with methodical
certainty, like the steady spreading of a patch
of oil on -water.
I would like to add that, in carrying through
this great task of social purification, we must
look primarily to the measures taken by each
Contracting Party in its own territory. ' It is,
above all, on our own efforts that we must rely!
When we have thus given evidence of our
good-will, we shall be in a stronger position
to appeal for active co-operation on the part
of other Powers. Such co-operation will effec-
tively supplement our own efforts, but that
is all. Thus, in the case of the island of Formosa,
it was by our own efforts that we succeeded in
obtaining such excellent results, whereas in
the case of Kwantung we were obliged to seek
the valuable and friendly co-operation of China.
But we took the initiative, as we firmly
believe that in this matter each country
must rely primarily on its own efforts if T is to
secure really effective results. If we keep
waiting for the other Governments to begin
in the struggle _ against the opium habit, we
are likely wait for a very long time, each of
us taxing his neighbour with not taking the
first step. Noblesse oblige and a great Power
can go further along the road of reform than
one which does not command the same resources.
It is for the great Powers to lead the way and
to prove by their zeal in the cause of humanity
that their greatness rests mainly on a moral
foundation. Let us not forget that nothing great
can be accomplished in this world without a
readiness to make sacrifices. Let us not all
wait for our neighbours to make sacrifices before
doing so ourselves. There is little glory in
flying to the aid of victory, but there is much
in compelling victory in spite of all obstacles.
In my opinion, if any country, after ratifying
the agreement, finds itself unable for any reason
to carry out its international obligations respect-
ing the opium traffic, it should be entitled
to appeal either to the Council of the League of
Nations or to the Committee set up by the
Council ; or alternatively it should be entitled
to demand the convening of a conference of the
Contracting Powers which signed the First
Opium Convention and of any other countries
concerned.
1 hope I am not being indiscreet in stating
that, in a private conversation which I had with
Mr. Porter, he agreed to the principle that any
Contracting Power might appeal to the Council
of the League of Nations if faced with such
internal or external difficulties that it was
unable to carry out the obligations it had under-
taken. I am convinced that everyone will
fully appreciate the value of so far-reaching a
concession, made by a great country which is
not represented on the Council of the League
of Nations.
If I remain optimistic in regard to the success-
ful issue of our work, it is because. I know
and appreciate the keen desire for an agreement
which prevails among all the delegations here
present. During a discussion which took place
last Saturday morning, I was very much grati-
fied to observe the readiness to abstain "from
adopting any rigid or dogmatic attitude which
was displayed by both the British and American
delegations. Lord Cecil asked whether the
producing countries could not make the effort
required of them within five years, and the
distinguished representative of the United States,
Mr. Porter, replied that to his desire
for conciliation he was prepared to make a
further concession, by extending to three years
the period of grace which is to precede the period
of fifteen years. Now ? that these two stand-
points have been brought so close together,
it seems to me that our discussions have entered
a new phase and I feel certain that the


distinguished delegates in this Committee will
prove that my hopes are justified.
IVEr. Clayton (India) :
The difference of opinion which has manifested
itself among certain delegations here may
perhaps be described as one between those
who think the Chapters of the Hague Con-
vention should be dealt with independently
and can be realised independently and those
who think that independent action under each
Chapter is difficult and that real progress can
only be achieved by an advance under all the
Chapters together.
I should like to point out that, when the
Hague Convention was originally drawn up,
this point was very much before the Conference.
It was originally proposal to deal with opium.
It was represented very strongly on behalf of
Great Britain that to deal with opium alone
would not be satisfactory, and that there was
a real danger that the reduction of opium might
simply be attended by an increase in the con-
sumption of drugs. It was said then, by repre-
sentatives who were present at that Conference,
that :
?The necessity for the British proposals
had become obvious to all the Governments
interested in the Far East ; for, beginning
with the suppression of the opium vice in
China and other Far Eastern countries, a
determined, and one might almost say a
calculated, effort was made by the manu-
facturers of morphine and cocaine to
introduce these drugs in replacement of
opium. Such efforts had largely succeeded,
and to the world was presented the spec-
tacle of many great Governments willingly
sacrificing or providing for the sacrifice
of an opium revenue of great magnitude,
only to see the subjects of some of them
pressing two other deadly drugs into the
hands of those Far Eastern peoples who
had heroically determined and were bent
upon the abandonment of the opium vice.?
As a consequence, all the representatives
present at The Hague agreed to include in that
Convention provisions in regard to drugs.
The words that I have just read are almost the
words that have been used in this Conference
by certain delegations as indicating the diffi-
culty which they encounter in reducing pre-
pared opium because of the way in which
smuggling is increasing in their countries.
The connection between Chapter II and
Chapter 111 of the Hague Convention was there-
fore very strongly emphasised at the original
Conference. The connection between Chapter
II and Chapter I is being very strongly empha-
sised by the Powers at this Conference which
are concerned with Chapter IT.
I venture to suggest that these considerations
point to the fact that the only way of carrying
out effectively the provisions of the Hague
Convention is for an advance to be made all
along the line. If these considerations are
borne in mind, therefore, it will be seen how
extremely difficult it must necessarily be for
any country to guarantee to carry out measures
of suppression (that is to say, where the question
of control goes beyond mere control and reaches
the actual point of suppression) under Chapter I,
unless it is assured of equal progress all along
the line.
I suggest that if these considerations are
borne in mind it is possible that they will help
forward the realisation of an agreement. If
an advance all along the line is to be secured,
it is obviously desirable that there should be
some outside authority, and that outside autho-
rity is at present to be found in the League of
Nations. Therefore, from the point of view of
the considerations which I have advanced, it
seems to me that the proposals of the British
delegation (in which the moment at which
suppression can be definitely foretold depends
upon the advance made under other Chapters)
are particularly desirable. Unless means can
be taken for advancing all along the line in the
application of the Hague Convention, great
difficulties, and possibly a great set-back,
may occur.
I would only say, with regard to the suggestion
of the honourable delegate of Japan, that it
seems to me that it would be a very serious set-
back if any country, after having put its signa-
ture to an agreement, were obliged to go to the
League and say that, whatever the circumstances,
it was unable to carry it out.
M. Sugimura (Japan) :
Translation : I wish to say just one word
in explanation. The .idea underlying my pro-
posal is not one which emanates exclusively
from the Japanese delegation ; it is shared
by many others, for example, by the Italian,
French, and United States delegations. I
should like to ask the delegate of India whether
he means that, once this period of fifteen years
has commenced to run, we are to go through with
our undertakings no matter what obstacles or
difficulties may arise. I am well aware that
certain conventions concluded before the war
remained in force during the war and are still
in force. But these were political and commer-
cial conventions, and what we are now drafting
is a social and moral convention and, as such, it
requires both social stability and effective admi-
nistration. It is a very fragile and delicate
instrument. Such an obstacle as contraband
trade is a very grave hindrance. Let me repeat
that this Convention is of a special nature and
must be distinguished from other classes of
conventions.
I would therefore like to know whether
Mr. Clayton really means that, once the hfteen-
year period has begun to run, we must go
through with our undertakings until the end
of these fifteen years, no matter what obstacles
such as contraband trade, etc. may arise
or whether we may appeal to an international
organisation every time we encounter an
obstacle.
IVIr. Clayton (India) ;
May I reply to M. Sugimura that, as his case
is put now, I am fully in agreement with him
and that really the point between us is an
extremely small one.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire)
I can only speak by permission of the Com-
mittee because I am not, strictly speaking,
a delegate to this body ; but Sir Malcolm Dele-
vingne, who is the delegate, has been good enough
to ask me to say a few words on this occasion.
I think that the speeches to which we have
listened, particularly those of the United States
and Japanese delegates, have been of great inte-


rest, and all of us, I suppose, will feel ourselves
in hearty agreement with the remarks of the
Japanese delegate as to the immense desirability
of reaching a settlement of this question if it
is possible to do so. Indeed, I have very little
criticism, beyond, of course, what has already
passed, to make regarding either speech.
But there was one phrase in the speech of
my distinguished friend, Mr. Porter, which I
admit I did not quite follow, but no doubt that
was because I did not appreciate exactly what
he meant. He spoke of the leakage of opium
being a great danger to the United States.
I should, of course, agree with that most
thoroughly ; it is a great danger to all of us.
But I cannot myself see how his motion, if
passed, would affect that danger in the least.
The danger arises from the over-production
of opium in certain countries and the search,
in consequence, of those wffio own the opium
for markets in which to sell it. As long as that
over-production continues, the question of
whether part of it is consumed in smoking or not
does not appear to affect the position so far
as the danger to the United States is concerned.
I do not in the least say that this is a reason why
the delegate of the United States should not
take an interest in the subject ; but it is
really that difficulty which I venture to present
to him as one which is worth cnosidering. In
other words, as long as there is over-production
of opium, there will always be a grave danger
of its causing evil in the world.
1 hat is the reason, no doubt, why those
who have been considering this matter during
recent years have always come to the conclu-
sion that, if it is desired to put a stop to the
opium evil, the morphine evil, or the cocaine
evil, it is necessary to go to the very source of
it production as being the only way in
which it will be possible ultimately to control
the distribution of these dangerous substances.
On one point I most heartily agree with
Mr. Porter. He said that he thought it of
great importance ldo not agree' with the
application of the observation, but I agree with
the general principle most heartily that
international obligations should be clear and
definite. Ido not believe there is any better
principle to adopt in international relations.
I believe that four-fifths of the misunderstand-
ings between peoples arise from the want of
courage or want of clearness with which their
respective positions have been stated at
critical . moments, and that unless you state
accurately wiiat you really mean (the real
function of diplomacy is to state, no doubt
persuasively and in a conciliatory manner, but
perfectly clearly and accurately, what is your
position and what you feel about it) and convey
it to other parties concerned, there is always
a danger of misunderstanding, and from misun-
derstandings half the disputes and difficulties
in international relations arise.
I admit, if Mr. Porter will allow me to say-
so, that I feel a little disappointed that the argu-
ments which I endeavoured to adduce to the
Conference the other day I am afraid I
spoke twice and at considerable length he
did not regard as of sufficient value to deal
with at all. I am very sorry, but I am not
going to repeat those arguments. I will merely
remind the Committee, broadly speaking, of
what our objections were to the American scheme.
Let me assure Mr. Porter and everybody else
that there is not any difference of opinion, and
I was very glad to hear that he recognised it,
as to the object in view. We are all desirous
of putting a stop to opium-smoking at the
earliest possible moment. There is no difference
of opinion between us on that point. I am
here to say that in the most explicit and defi-
nite way on behalf of the British Government.
The whole question is, What is the best
method, what is the effective method, of pur-
suing that object ? I ventured on the last occa-
sion to point out that in my view there were
very grave difficulties in the way of adopting
the American proposals difficulties of a
purely practical character ; I am not going
to recite them, I merely refer to them. I
pointed out that as long as there is an alter-
native source of opium, a contraband source
of opium in these consuming countries, the
,countries where smoking was continued, it was
not of any use ; it was not likely to be effec-
tive on a priori grounds to cut off the supply
from a section, and that the smallest section,
of the population in many of the countries.
All the supply must be cut off if any good is
to be done. The mere prohibition of opium
by a Government, therefore, would not be
likely to be of use.
I pointed out, secondly, and I am not going
into details now, that we had behind us a vast
mass I think I may put it as strongly as that
-- of authoritative opinion. We had the
views of all the experts,in these districts who
have considered the matter and have advised
us very strongly in that sense after making a
very special investigation of the most elaborate
character into the problem, the results of which
have been published in large official publica-
tions.
I was able to say, too, that that was not only
the opinion of those who were on the spot but
the opinion also of such a man as Sir John
Jordan, whose general competence and imp?r-
tiality are admitted on all hands. I even went
so far as to say that, as I read and understood
the published utterances of Bishop Brent, he
also took the same view. I may be wrong in
that, but I have not been contradicted.
Finally, I pointed out that the experience
of this method of prohibition had not been
satisfactory. I pointed out the experience of
Japan in Kwantung. I pointed out the expe-
rience of India in Burmah. I ventured even
to cite the experience of the United States
Government in the Philippines. I regret that
it has been impossible for the United States
Government to furnish us with the full details
of the latest results, which might modify our
opinion, of this experiment. As far as our
information goes, though it had been in opera-
tion for a great many years, more than the
fifteen years suggested, it had not so far
succeeded in its object.
Such was the view of the British Government,
namely, that this plan would be ineffective.
I want very strongly to impress on the whole
Conference the views of the British Government
about adopting or pledging itself to an ineffec-
tive of reform, a method of reform
which wall not accomplish the object in view,
because it will not be carried out by the popu-
lation to whom it is directed. If we were to say
to-morrow," We abolish all opium-smoking?, and
the result of it were, as we believe it would be,
that opium-smoking would continue to flourish


and would in all probability increase in our
Dominions, we should be faced not only with
a disastrous failure in this particular object,
but we should have done infinite harm in other
ways. We should have struck a great blow
at our national reputation. Everyone natu-
rally thinks very highly of his own country.
I may think too highly of my country, but we
believe (it may be an unfounded belief) that
we have a reputation for carrying out literally
our international obligations when we have
undertaken them ; and we would regard our-
selves as false to all our traditions and to our
whole trust if we consciously and intentionally
undertook an international obligation which we
believed it was impossible for us to fulfil.
We have a very strong view that nothing is
more disastrous than for a Government to
enact a law which is generally disobeyed.
The result is not only the failure to carry out
what it is desired to do ; there is bred in the
people a disregard and a disrespect for law
which may inflict infinite damage on the
population of the country. We will not
assent, therefore, under any circumstances,
to undertake an international obligation or
to enact laws which we do not think will
in fact be carried out, because we believe
that we shall not only do no good in that
way but shah actually do very great harm
both internationally and nationally.
I am quite sure that those considerations were
fully present in the mind of my friend the dele-
gate of Japan ; I am sure that he would
assent to everything that I have said on that
point. But there w r ere phrases in his speech
which seemed to indicate - I do not know
whether I misunderstood them, I daresay I
did that we were to undertake some obliga-
tion and then go to the League of Nations to
allow us to say that we were unable to fulfil
that obligation. I am very glad now to see
that he rejects that view, because I am quite
sure that it would be an altogether disastrous
suggestion.
In these circumstances, what is it that we
can do? I want to remove as far as ever I
can by words it is very difficult, of course
the impression that we are content to do
nothing. That is not at all the position of the
British Government. It is most anxious to
proceed as rapidly as it can in the cause of this
reform, and I agree with what Mr. Clayton said
just now?That our proposal is strictly founded
on what we conceive to be the policy of the
Hague Convention. So far from regarding that
proposal for an instant as weakening the Hague
Convention or substituting a new obligation for
the Hague Convention, we utterly repudiate
such a view, and I think I shall be able to show
in a minute that we have made it perfectly
clear that the operation of our proposal can-
not possibly have such a result. We take the
Hague Convention ; we take it as a whole ;
we say we are anxious to see the whole of its
policy carried out. We recognise that it
binds us as much as ever and all those others
who are parties to it, but we suggest certain
things which can be done which in our view
will make it much more effective than it has
ever been.
I must remind the Committee that the Hague
Convention does not consist only of the obliga-
tions placed on the consuming Powers by Article
6 ; equally precise, perhaps more, even much
more, precise obligations are placed on the
producing Powers by Articles i and 3.
Article 1 reads as follows :
"The Contracting Powers shall enact
effective laws or regulations for the control
of the production and distribution of raw
opium, unless laws or regulations on the
subject are already in existence."
Article 3 is even more precise in connection
with this subject :
?The Contracting Powers shall take
measures :
?{a) To prevent the export of raw
opium to countries which shall have pro-
hibited its entry, and
?(6) To control the export of raw
opium to countries which restrict its im-
port, unless regulations on the subject
are already in existence."
The Convention imposes, therefore, a perfectly
definite obligation, as I read it, on all the pro-
ducing countries to prevent smuggling, illicit
import, into other countries. Though I am
far from saying that the ineffectiveness of the
operation of those articles removes our obliga-
tion under Articles 6 and 7, yet it is right to say,
and to say very definitely, that it is in fact the
failure to carry out those obligations I am
not saying conscious or intentional or wicked
or blamable failure, but the actual failure
to carry out those obligations - which really
has brought us into all this trouble. If it had
been possible for them to have been carried out,
I have no doubt that by this time the evil of
opium-smoking would have been well under
control, if not altogether abolished.
What can we do now ? In the first place,
we re-assert in the strongest language in the
proposal which we suggest that the First
Conference should adopt, our continuing
obligation under the Hague Convention. Let
me just read two passages from the Preamble.
This is what we ask the First Conference to
say :
?Recognising that the signature of the
said Convention does not in any way mini-
mise the obligation, already assumed by
them under Article 6 of the Hague Con-
vention of 1912, in regard to the gradual
and effective suppression of the manu-
facture of, internal trade in, and use of
prepared opium ;
Anxious to take all practicable steps
to ensure the complete and final execution
of the said obligations" ;
There we recite our obligation under the Hague
Convention in the most precise terms, and when
we come to the operative part of the Con-
vention we put as the very first and foremost
provision :
?The States signatories of the present
Protocol recognise that the provisions of
the Convention signed this day are supple-
mentary to, and designed to facilitate,
the execution of the obligation assumed by
the signatory States under Article 6 of the
Hague Convention of 1912, which obli-
gation remains in full force and effect."
I venture to say that it is quite impossible
to make it clearer by any international document
that whatever is put into this document is
supplementary, in addition to, and not in


substitution for, the Hague Convention. That
is the first thing we do. So much for Article 6.
We then turn, as it were, to the obligations
assumed by the producing countries under
Articles i and 3 of the Hague Convention, and
we say that these obligations have never been
carried out. They are the real difficulty which
hinders the effectiveness of our operations in
pursuance of Article 6, and we ask the producing
countries to take a more definite and precise obli-
gation with reference to the suppression of smug-
gling ; we say that, as soon as that has been done,
we will take a much more definite and precise
obligation than that imposed upon us by Article
6 of the Hague Convention in order to stop
opium-smoking altogether. Such is the effect
of Article II of our Protocol :
?The States signatories of the present
Protocol undertake that the use of prepared
opium shall be effectively prohibited in
their Far Eastern territories in which such
use is temporarily authorised? effectively,
mind ?within a period of not more than
fifteen years from the date on which the
effective execution of the measures taken by
the producing countries to limit and control
the production and distribution of raw-
opium has reached such a stage? I call
attention to the drafting here ?that
opium smuggling into the said territories
no longer constitutes a serious obstacle
to tne carrying out of the measures neces-
sary to that end.?
I remember that on a previous occasion the
distinguished delegate from the United States
criticised the wording which we had adopted
in what has been called the British declara-
tion. In that we said that our obligation should
arise as soon as the danger of smuggling was at
an end. He said, ?There is always danger of
smuggling, and therefore that is really a per-
fectly indefinite obligation?. We do not quite
agree. We think his reading of what we put
into the British declaration is not correct, but
in order to remove any possible misapprehen-
sion on that point we have altered the drafting
of it, so that we say now that our obligation to
put an absolute end to the whole thing within
fifteen years is to begin as soon as smuggling
ceases to constitute a serious obstacle to our
proceedings. That seems to me to be a very
definite obligation.
You may say, ?Ah ! yes, but who is to be
the judge of when this condition of affairs has
arisen ? Who is to say when smuggling has ceased
to be a serious obstacle ?? That is a very
proper question, and we answer that we will
put the matter into the hands of an abso-
lutely impartial international body. We suggest
that we shall not be the judges, that the matter
shall be left to be determined by an Interna-
tional Commission appointed by the Council
of the League of Nations. We do not say that
it shall be determined by the Council of the
League, and I will tell you why. If we had
said that, a unanimous decision of the Council
would have been necessary, and therefore any
single Member of the Council could hold up that
decision, and consequently hold up the obli-
gation to put an end to opium-smoking within
fifteen years. We say a Commission appointed
by the Council, because under the terms of the
Covenant a Commission is appointed by a
majority of the Council and it is one of the
few things wnicn can be done by a majority.
Without prejudice to what the Council will
do in future years, I can say that, as far as the
British Government is concerned, it would
welcome the appointment of an American
citizen as a member of that Commission.
My Government is perfectly satisfied that the
Commission should be absolutely and entirely
impartial. The Commission would meet and
act in a judicial or semi-judicial capacity. It
would determine, like other judicial bodies, the
issues submittted to it, I suppose in the way
that all other judicial bodies determine them,
namely, by a majority of the judges if there is
a difference of opinion. Therefore, there would
be an absolute certainty, as far as human pro-
visions can provide for absolute certainty, that
when smuggling had ceased to be an obstacle
to the prohibition of opium-smoking the obli-
gation would arise, by the decision of this
impartial body, to put a stop to that smoking
within a definite period. We have said fifteen
years, but I do not attach a very great deal of
importance to the number of years ; it might
be a shorter time than that, if necessary. We
are content that the obligation should be abso-
lutely definite and precise.
Now I venture very respectfully to ask Mr.
Porter to consider those two obligations
the obligation under Article 6 of the Hague
Convention and the obligation that we are
prepared to assume under this Protocol.
What is the obligation under Article 6 of the
Hague Convention? lam sorry to repeat what
was so very admirably said by my friend
M. Kircher on behalf of the French delegation
on the last occasion, but I think he will forgive
me if I do repeat it, as it is necessary in order
to make my meaning clear. Article 6 of the
Hague Convention reads as follows :
?The Contracting Powers shall take
measures for the gradual and effective
suppression of the manufacture of, inter-
nal trade in, and use of prepared opium
There is no definite period at all. All that
is said is that suppression is to be effected ; it
is not to be immediate, it is to be gradual. The
Parties to the Hague Convention are absolutely
left free as to the period of time in which they
are to carry out their obligations. Then the
article goes on :
?with due regard to the varying circum-
stances of each country concerned.?
That seems to be one of the vaguest obligations
that have ever been put into an international
document. It merely means that each country
acknowledges the principle that opium-smoking
ought to come to an end, and that, subject to
what it may regard as the varying circumstances
of its own country, it is gradually to put a stop
to it. If a country says, however, ?There is
this financial or social or this political difficulty-
in our way ; we cannot do anything?, it is
absolutely free, strictly speaking, under the
terms of the Hague Convention.
Now just compare with that the clearness of
the obligation which we are ready to assume
under this Protocol. We say that, as soon as
one condition is_ fulfilled, which we regard as
practically essential and without which we cannot
do anything, as soon as that condition is


fulfilled and as to when it is fulfilled we leave
to the decision of an absolutely impartial
international body we will enter into an
absolute obligation to put a stop altogether to
opium-smoking a clean sweep within a defi-
nite period of fifteen years. I cannot conceive
that the obligation we are ready to assume under
this Protocol is not far clearer, far more defi-
nite, far more precise, and far more effective
than that which existed and still exists under
the Hague Convention.
My friend, M. Sugimura, very properly points
out that possibly we are going too far that
is really what his observations amount to.
He says ; ?You are taking an absolute obli-
gation in fifteen years, subject only to the sup-
pression of smuggling ; all sorts of other con-
siderations may arise.?
We are content, so far as our Protocol is
concerned, to take the risk. We believe that,
so far as human foresight can go, the only
thing that need be considered as a possible
obstacle is the introduction of contraband
opium. That eventuality may arise as a result
of disturbances in a neighbouring country or
other circumstances, but it is the introduction
of contraband opium that makes it impossible
for us to suppress opium-smoking. As soon
as that obstacle is removed we are prepared to
assume our obligation.
The only thing we do say in Article VII of our
Protocol is that, if, after smuggling has been
stopped for a certain period, it breaks out again
owing to disturbances or any other cause, then
this obligation may be denounced in this
we agree with M. Sugimura and a conference
may be called of all the parties in order to con-
sider what is the best thing to be done in the
circumstances. I think myself that such a
procedure would naturally result from the
general principles of international law, but
in any case, in order to make it clear, we
do not propose that such a position should be
left without a remedy. We propose that there
should be a fresh conference to consider what
should be done.
I have now pointed out the obligation we
assume. We have put forward another Pro-
tocol which we suggest a second Conference
might adopt and in which we ask that the pro-
ducing countries should undertake within five
years the period is only suggestive to take
sufficient measures to put a stop to smuggling.
That is a matter on which we must, of course,
take the views of the producing countries. If
they tell us that they cannot undertake such
an obligation, we, at any rate, are not going to
say or suggest that a majority of this Conference
can impose upon them any obligation which
they are unwilling or unable to undertake.
We wait for their views on that proposal. We
have taken the suggestion not from our own but
from the French proposal, and we think it
would be a desirable thing to fix a period of five
years, or any other period, within which they
would say that they would do it, or do their best
to do it, leaving it again to an impartial interna-
tional commission appointed by the League of
Nations to say whether or not they had been
successful in carrying out their obligation.
We are content to leave it in that way if
they will accept it. If they will not, then our
obligation remains. We do not wish to diminish
it, and we say that, as soon as smuggling is
stopped and we are prepared to co-operate
to the utmost of our power in stopping smug-
gling then our absolute obligation shall
remain whatever may be the decision of the
producing countries as regards our proposed
second Protocol.
We do not leave it there. We think it
necessary, in order to avoid any possible misun-
derstanding, to put another provision into our
Protocol. We say, in the fourth article of the
Protocol, that, pending this stoppage of smug-
gling, we will none the less proceed with every
measure in our power to put a stop to opium-
smoking. We recite in broad general lines
what we regard as the way in which we can
proceed. We will, by any other measures that
are practicable, make every effort to reduce
the consumption of prepared opium, to encourage
the abandonment of the practice by existing
smokers and to combat the illicit traffic. We
undertake that obligation absolutely. We shall
continue our efforts whatever the decision of
this Conference may be and whatever the result
of our meetings. We regard ourselves as abso-
lutely bound by the obligation in Article 6 of
the Hague Convention, and we shall carry it
out to the full.
Of course, during the period of five years, the
more smuggling is reduced, even if it is not
absolutely stopped, the more effective will be our
measures to reduce smoking, and we are prepared,
if there is any doubt about that point, to
make it quite clear in our draft. It is obvious
but we are quite prepared to make it clear, and
I agree most fully with what M. Sugimura said
that our efforts must be simultaneous ;
we must not sit still and wait until the other
people have stopped smuggling ; we must go
on. All we are doing is to make our position
clear so that we cannot be reproached for any
want of international good faith if, after the
period of five years, we are still unable to stop
opium-smoking because opium smuggling still
continues.
I need not trouble the Committee with Article V
of our draft, which is of minor importance.
It merely indicates the kind of measures we
think may be adopted. The moment the obsta-
cle of smuggling is removed there are certain
obvious things we can do and we bind ourselves
to do them. This article is not of much impor-
tance, neither is Article VI, which provides for
the continuance of supplies to those addicts
who cannot be deprived of their opium without
danger to their health, a point on which there
is no difference of opinion between America
and ourselves.
Finally, there is Article VII, to which I have
already alluded and which is a provision in
case there should be a recrudescence of smug-
gling after it has been put down.
I am most sincere, as I said at the beginning,
in my very earnest desire for an agreement in
this matter. I was sent out here by the British
Government to try to obtain an agreement, and
1 am still most anxious to co-operate in every
possible way in doing so. The one thing I
think we can possibly do, and I hope we shall
do it without loss of time, is to complete the
drug Convention, which is very near completion
now and which can be put in an absolutely
concrete and definite form in a few days. I
hope that, whatever happens to this Committee,
or to any other, we shall all agree to sign and
to make effective that extremely valuable step


in dealing with the great evils arising from opium
and cocaine.
I am sorry to have occupied the attention of
the Committee for so long, but I was anxious
to do two things - to show that we were not
taking up an obstructive attitude, but, on the
contrary, that our attitude was merely dictated
by what we sincerely and genuinely believe
to be practicable, and, secondly, to point out
that it is an entire mistake to suggest that what
we have put in this Protocol is nothing of real
value ; it does represent a very distinct and
very large advance on our obligations under Ar-
ticle 6of the Hague Convention. [Applause.)
IV!. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I believe we have all carefully
read the various proposals submitted by the
delegations and that we have all given careful
thought to the brilliant speeches which have
been delivered by each delegate in support of
his own standpoint. I think the time has now
come to bring this discussion to an end. For
some time past the same arguments have been
brought forward over and over again and nothing
new has been adduced. We must now try
and reach some practical result.
I do not wish to reopen the debate but merely
to make a proposal. I hope that the President
will accept this proposal and allow it to be
discussed although it is not submitted in writing,
as required by the Rules of Procedure. It is
that the Committee of Sixteen should appoint
a Sub-Committee of four or five of its members,
three of whom should be the authors of the
proposals which we have before us, the remain-
ing two being members who have not sub-
mitted any proposal at all and who are, so to
speak, ?neutral?. This Sub-Committee could go
into the matter thoroughly and would probably
be able to find some basis of agreement which
would enable a solution to be reached. As you
will doubtless have noticed, the various pro-
posals have many points of resemblance and
really differ on one point only the date from
which the period of fifteen years is to be
reckoned.
Various opinions have been expressed on that
point, and that is my principal reason for pro-
posing the appointment of a Sub-Committee
including, among others, three members chosen
from the British, American and French delega-
tions respectively. [Applause.)
The President
Translation : Although it has not been sub-
mitted in writing, the Cuban delegate?s proposal
can be discussed by this Committee, provided
the Committee unanimously agrees. Before
it is discussed, however, I wish to advance
another proposal.
As you are aware, the representatives of the
Powers most nearly concerned in this question
have met during the last few days and have
endeavoured, though without success, to reach
an agreement. If a Sub-Committee is now
appointed on the same lines, I doubt whether
it will have any greater prospect of success. I
therefore venture to make another proposal
which may perhaps prove equally satisfactory
to M. de Aguero y Bethancourt. It is that
two Rapporteurs should be appointed, one to
report to the First Conference and one to report
to the Second Conference. To these two Rappor-
teurs might be added a third member, appoin-
ted by the Committee of Sixteen. In this way,
the work which the Cuban delegate proposed
to entrust to a Sub-Committee would be done
by these Rapporteurs.
IV!. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I much regret that I cannot
agree with the proposal made by the President.
I suggested that the Committee of Sixteen should
appoint a Sub-Committee consisting of four
or five members, including representatives of
Great Britain, France and the United States
of America, and two States which have not
submitted any proposals. I believe that it
will be possible to reconcile our differences. The
situation is not what it was a few days ago, and
the speeches to which we have listened to-day
give us every ground for being optimistic. We
may therefore hope to secure agreement, but
such agreement can more easily be reached by
four or five persons in private than by a debate
in full Committee. There is a great difference
between making speeches and simply discuss-
ing matters informally. I therefore wish to
maintain my own proposal and would ask the
President to open the discussion on it.
The President
Translation : The Cuban delegate?s proposal
is now open for discussion.
IVF. Toivola (Finland) :
Translation : I think that it should be
possible to reconcile the proposals advanced
by M. de Aguero and our President. In regard
to the two Rapporteurs, they would, in any
case, have to be appointed later. I suggest,
therefore, that we appoint a Sub-Committee,
including two ?neutral? members. The Com-
mittee might also instruct the latter to act as
Rapporteurs to the two Conferences.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) :
I shall be very glad, first of all, to know what
the United States delegation thinks of this
proposal, and if it thinks there is a possibility
of agreement and conciliation. I need not say
that the British delegation will be only too
happy to join in any proposal, even if it offers
only a faint hope of resulting in an agreement.
There is only one thing that I want to say,
and to say with such emphasis as it is possible
for me to command. This must not be merely
a dilatory proposal. We must get on. I hope
I do not put it too crudely or too emphatically,
but I feel very strongly that we have now
arrived at a stage in our deliberations when it
is quite clear that we can adopt a Convention
concerning drugs which will be of the greatest
value to the world ; at least, that is the
opinion of all the experts on the subject.
I think there is only one Sub-Committee
which has not yet reported to the Conference.
That Sub-Committee meets this afternoon,
and will then, I hope, be ready to make a
report, for, if I may say so with all respect
to that Sub-Committee, it has, I understand,
been discussing the same point for at least
two months, and should probably therefore
have exhausted all that can be said on the
subject.
Ihe Co-ordination Committee can then meet
to-morrow. I will inform myself as soon as
I can of the points that will come up before
that Committee, but I see no reason why its


work should not be completed with great
rapidity. Its work should not occupy it for
more than a day, or, indeed, for more than one
morning ; because, if it does not reach agree-
ment, I have no doubt at all it ought to refer
the matter, not back to a Sub-Committee, but
to the Conference itself, which is the only
body which can determine finally any diffe-
rences of opinion. I hope there will not be
any. I believe there are only two serious diffe-
rences in the reports of the Sub-Committees, and
I cannot help thinking the those will be adjusted
without difficulty. We may confidently hope,
therefore, that the Co-ordination Committee
will finish its work to-morrow.
I hope it may be possible to ask the Drafting
Committee to proceed with its work immediately
and produce a draft Convention, which could
then be laid before the Conference by Friday
at the latest for its final consideration and deci-
sion. In this way real progress would have
been made, and we should justify the Opium,
Conference, which has not escaped criticism
outside these walls. We should show that we
have really accomplished a definite and impor-
tant work for the good of mankind. So much
would be safe, whatever happened to the dis-
putes and differences of opinion which still divide
us on the question of opium-smoking.
If that is the kind of plan wnich M. de Aguero
has in mind, I shall be in hearty agreement with
it. Let us try every means of smoothing
out this one last difference of opinion, the only
important one which still divides the Confe-
rence. I could not assent to the plan unless
we are really going on with and completing
the rest of our work, whatever may be the conse-
quences to this dispute.
I hope I have not expressed myself too empha-
tically, but I do feel that we must justify our
proceedings in the eyes of the rest of the world.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I am in hearty accord with the statement of the
distinguished delegate of the British Empire
that we must hurry on with our work. In fact,
I am reminded of his remark the other day
that he was fearful of violating the hospitality
of Geneva. I have been here so much longer
than he has that I know I have violated it !
I see no objection to the appointment of the
Sub-Committee proposed by the Cuban dele-
gate. It has been our uniform policy to meet
with anyone who cared to discuss the matter.
I cannot, however, answer his other question
as to the result, because 1 am not a prophet.
We have built up structures so many times only
to see them dashed to pieces, but perhaps
it will be a good thing to appoint the Sub-
Committee and see what will be the result.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : When I proposed the forma-
tion of a Sub-Committee of five, I certainly
had no intention of retarding the procedure.
On the contrary, I was taking the English
saying ?Go ahead? as my motto, and it was
my belief that such a Committee would be a
means of expediting matters. If we pursue
our discussions here, we shall waste time, and
I feel that an agreement is more likely to be
reached in a Sub-Committee. That Sub-Com-
mittee will not in any way interfere with the
work of the Sub-Committees of the Plenary
Conference or with that of the Conference itself.
Our sole aim in setting up this Sub-Committee
is to save time, and to avoid long debates which
often serve no useful purpose, and I made my
proposal in the belief that I was meeting the
wishes of several of the Powers here represented.
As regards the question of the Rapporteur,
this does not concern us at the moment. The
Rapporteur can be appointed whenever we
reach an agreement, but an agreement must
be reached first. That is essential, if anything
of value is to be accomplished.
SYI. Kircher (France)
Translation : The French delegation feels
that no possibility of reaching an agreement
should be neglected, and it therefore supports
the motion of the Cuban delegate, who has
on several occasions been the author of judi-
cious proposals which have advanced the work
of the Conference.
The French delegation is also in entire agree-
ment with the British delegation as to the need
for expediting the work of the Conference and
with regard to the other questions considered.
The President
Translation : The proposal made by the
honourable delegate for Cuba was not very
explicit. He spoke of three or four members.
Before putting the matter to the vote, I should
be glad if his proposal could be stated in more
definite terms. According to the author of
the proposal, this small Sub-Committee would
include representatives of France, the United
States of America, the British Empire and two
?neutral? States. Does M. de Aguero wish
to make any supplementary proposal before
these two ?neutral? countries are designated ?
iVI . de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : I suggest that the Committee
be composed of the representatives of the Bri-
tish Empire, France, the United States of
America and Japan, who has shown so admirable
a spirit of conciliation. A membership of four
should, I think, suffice. The President would,
of course, also be a member of the Sub-Com-
mittee.
The President
Translation : I wish to suggest an amend-
ment to M. de Aguero?s proposal, which I
trust he will accept, and that is that I should
not personally be included. If membership
of the Sub-Committee is limited to the four
very important countries which he has named,
the Conference over which I preside will not
be represented. I therefore suggest that the
name of the delegate for Finland be added.
Will M. de Aguero accept this amendment ?
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I am all the more ready to
accept this proposal as it relates to one of the
members of the Committee of Sixteen whom
we hold in nigh esteem, and whose ability and
energy we have had many opportunities of
appreciating at the General Assemblies of the
League of Nations.
The President
Translation : The proposal is that this
Committee should appoint a Sub-Committee
consisting of representatives of the United


States of America, the British Empire, France,
Japan and Finland.
The proposal is put to the vote. Does anyone
oppose the motion ?
There being no opposition, the proposal is
unanimously adopted. {Adopted.)
As regards M. de Aguero?s proposal that I
myself should form part of this Sub-Committee,
I shall be very glad to attend as an observer,
but will not participate in the discussion.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) :
Shall we have to adjourn sine die ?
The President
Translation : I think so.
We might fix the first meeting of the Sub
Committee at once. Sub-Committee Bis meet
ing this afternoon.
IV!. Sze (China) :
I have always been in favour of speed, and
I was glad to see this morning that two dele-
gations were of the same mind. The distin-
guished delegate of the British Empire men-
tioned, in fact, a programme for the whole Con-
ference. In that case, it would be difficult if
the deliberations of the Sub-Committee were
to continue indefinitely. I think it should
be instructed to proceed with its work speedily
and that some date should be settled on which
the Sub-Committee should report to this Com-
mittee.
The President
Translation: I think it would be very diffi-
cult to lay down an exact time-limit within
which the Sub-Committee should complete
its work. I think the delegate of China should
be content with the spirit in which the proposal
was made, and the emphasis which was laid
on the necessity for speed by the British and
French delegates.
We are all agreed that the Committee must
complete its work as soon as possible. If,
however, M. Sze wishes to fix an absolute time-
limit for the Sub-Committee, I would ask him
to frame a definite proposal, but I reiterate
my opinion that it would be extremely difficult
to give effect to such a proposal.
As regards the Sub-Committee meeting this
afternoon, I would ask the delegate of the United
States of America whether he will be able to
send a representative. I believe the United
States has already to supply a delegate to
Sub-Committee B, which is also sitting this
afternoon.
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
Mr. President, I would like very much to
comply with your request, but our representa-
tive on Sub-Committee B is ill, and I feel under
an imperative obligation to attend that Sub-
Committee. As we all know, the limitation
of production is the heart of the whole matter,
and I should not feel that I was doing right in
staying away. I should be glad to meet
the new Sub-Committee to-night or to-morrow
morning, or at any other time after the meeting
of Sub-Committee B, but obviously I cannot
be in two places at once.
M. Sze (China)
I quite agree that it is impossible to give this
Sub-Committee a mandate as to the date on
which it has to report. What I had in mind
was this : we do not want to have a repetition
of the experience of this Committee of Sixteen.
This Committee was appointed and did work
at its first meeting, when the President was
elected, but after that, in spite of all the desire
for conciliation, we heard nothing more for a
week. That is what I want to avoid. I want
the work to proceed at once so that we may
be able to comply with the programme suggested
by Lord Cecil.
The President
Translation : In reply to the Chinese dele-
gate?s observation, I wish to point out that the
Committee of Sixteen has not met more frequently
because conversations have been proceeding
between the various delegations. I agreed to
this procedure in deference to the requests
made by several delegations.
As regards the hour at which the newly
appointed Sub-Committee is to meet, a meeting
will clearly not be possible to-day as the United
States representative cannot attend. I do
not think it will be possible to hold night
sittings. I am quite prepared to make the
suggestion, but I doubt whether it will be
acceptable.
It was suggested that the first meeting of the
Co-ordination Committee should take place to-
morrow. At the moment I am unable to say
whether this will be possible. Unless I am
mistaken, some members of this Committee
are members both of the Co-ordination Com-
mittee and of the newly appointed Sub-Com-
mittee.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire)
I feel very keenly the difficulty in which we
are, but it is quite evident that it will not
be possible for this Sub-Committee to meet at
all unless we take some step in that direction.
I do not know whether M. Sugimura can help
us at all and whether he regards it as absolutely
essential that he should be present at the Co-
ordination Committee. If he could find
somebody else to represent his country on that
Committee, it might be possible for us to meet
to-morrow morning. I have received a commu-
nication from my French colleague to the effect
that it will suit that delegation to meet to-
morrow morning, and I wonder whether one
might venture to make an appeal to M.
Sugimura in this connection.
M. Sugimura (Japan):
Translation : I am in favour of holding
night sittings. Despite my optimism, I am
convinced that the situation can be saved only
by strenuous efforts. It is only on this under-
standing that I accepted membership of the
Sub-Committee.
It is essential, I repeat, that we should apply
ourselves with renewed energy to finding a
prompt solution. I therefore propose night
sittings.
IVI. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : There is a proverb which says,
?Strike while the iron is hot?, and I think we
ought to take advantage of the favourable
atmosphere now prevailing and not lose time.
I therefore support the Japanese delegate?s
proposal. How many times have we not held


small committee meetings during Assemblies to
discuss matters and prepare the ground ? There
is therefore no lack of precedents.
The President
Translation : I will ask the Chairman of
Sub-Committee B what time he thinks that
Sub-Committee will finish its work this after-
noon.
M. Chodzko (Poland) (Chairman of Sub-
Committee B) :
Translation : It is difficult to state a defi-
nite time, but I hope that we shall finish towards
6 o?clock.
The President
Translation : Will the United States dele-
gation, which is represented on Sub-Committee
B, be able to take part in a sitting of the newly
appointed Sub-Committee at 6 o?clock this
evening ?
The Hon. Stephen G. Porter (United States
of America) :
I should prefer to have the meeting at
9 o?clock so as to give us a little breathing
space.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire)
I should be quite content to meet at any time
this afternoon, even at 2.30. lam not desirous
of delay, but I am afraid that I do not agree
with M. de Aguero as to the favourable results
of after-dinner meetings during the Assembly.
I have attended several of them. They are
exhausting and they are apt to result in
exceedingly foolish decisions which usually
have to be reviewed by somebody else. I
should be very glad to hear the views of the
French delegation on this point.
M. Kircher (France)
Translation : The French delegation agrees
with Lord Cecil. Moreover, we have also had
a proposal put forward to-day by the United
States delegation and heard speeches by the
British and Japanese members, and we therefore
need time to think matters over. I therefore
propose that the new Sub-Committee should
meet at 10.30 to-morrow morning.
IVI. Sugimura (Japan)
Translation : I have heard privately that
the French delegation has an excellent reason
for postponing the meeting, and I may say
that we regard this reason as a very important
one. I therefore withdraw my motion as far
as to-day is concerned, but for the future I
reserve the right to revert to it.
The President
Translation : I would like to ask M. Sugi-
mura whether the meeting of the Co-ordination
Committee to-morrow will not make it impos-
sible for him to attend a meeting of the Sub-
Committee.
M. Sugimura (Japan)
Translation : It is impossible for me to be
in two places at once, and I would therefore
prefer to remain free to go to either Committee.
It is a right which I am entitled to claim.
The President
Translation : This is an impossible state
of affairs, and it is clear that I must pronounce a
decision and that you must accept it. With a
view to expediting our discussions, I therefore
decide that the Sub-Committee shall meet at
10.30 to-morrow morning and that the Co-
ordination Committee will perhaps meet to-
morrow afternoon.
The Committee rose at 1.25 p.m.
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 11 a.m.
CONTENTS:
8. Examination of Proposals and Sugges-
tions SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS STATES
CONCERNING CHAPTER II OF THE UNITED
States Suggestions: Report of the
Sub-Committee of Five of the Com-
mittee of Sixteen.
9. Withdrawal of the United States Dele-
gation from the Conference.
President ; M. Herluf Zahle.
8. EXAMINATION OF PROPOSALS AND
SUGGESTIONS SUBMITTED BY VARI-
OUS STATES CONCERNING CHAPTER
II OF THE UNITED STATES SUGGES-
TIONS : REPORT OF THE SUB-COM-
MITTEE OF FIVE OF THE COMMITTEE
OF SIXTEEN.
The President
Translation : I call upon M. Toivola, Rap-
porteur of the Sub-Committee, to speak.
M. Toivola (Finland) (Rapporteur) :
Translation : All that remains for me to
do as Rapporteur is to read you my report
(Annex 2. p. 74).
The President
Translation : The discussion on M. Toivola?s
report is now open. I call upon M. Sugimura,
delegate of Japan, to speak.
IVI. Sugimura (Japan) :
Translation : Mr. President, ladies and gen-
tlemen, I feel it my duty to speak, for the last
time, on the United States suggestion concerning
the abolition of the use of opium for smoking.


For the last six weeks we have had inform?!
discussions and private meetings and conver-
sations in an endeavour to bring the reality as near
as possible to the ideal. Despite all our efforts,
we still differ in our views both as to facts and
as to methods. The single-heartedness and
sincerity of all parties have, however, created
a feeling of mutual confidence and understand-
ing which have served to unite us all. We have
avoided superficial and fallacious compromises
and have set our hopes on a better and fuller
understanding in the future.
Despite all the difficulties of these last few
weeks, we have realised and appreciated the high
motives which have inspired every delegation.
Great Britain has remained faithful to her
traditional policy of democracy and practical
liberalism. France has shown herself through-
out the child of the great Revolution which
proclaimed the charter of the rights of man,
without distinction of race, creed or nationality.
Holland stands before us as the land of Grotius
and the sanctuary of law. As for the United
States of America, posterity will read in the
annals of the League of Nations that that great
Republic was the guiding star of this humani-
tarian Conference. Great as is our admiration
for the immense resources of that great nation,
we admire still more the power of her fervent
idealism. We rejoice in America?s strength, for
by that strength idealism may become a living
force, and her weakness might mean the decay
of idealism. That is why we pray that her
power may never decline.
The United States suggestion has not as yet
been unanimously adopted, but everyone is
agreed as to its great moral significance, which
no civilised nation worthy of the name will
dare to deny. Japan, for her part, will always
remain faithful to the noble principles advocated
by America and will ever be ready to co-ope-
rate, in a spirit of confidence and practical good-
will, towards the realisation of that common
ideal, which will confer incalculable benefits
on the human race. [Applause.)
SVI. Sze (China)
It is with great regret that I hear from the
report made by the Rapporteur of the Sub-
committee of Five that no agreement has been
reached by that Sub-Committee in the course
of the last two or three days. Although the
hour may be late, although it is nearing twelve,
I am inclined to think that the clock has not
yet struck, and I hope that my fellow-delegates
will pardon me for my insistence in making
another appeal that something may be done
for humanity, because it is agreed by all of us
that the practice of opium-smoking is dele-
terious to health and degrading, socially and
morally. If that is the fact, why should we
not make another effort ?
I have referred recently to the effects upon
the world of what we do or fail to do here,
and I dwelt at some length upon the effects in
the Far East and, in particular, upon my people.
For this reason, I hope the members of the
Conference will permit me to make another
appeal to those delegations which cannot accept
the United States suggestions, and particularly
I make my appeal to the distinguished member
of the British delegation, Lord Cecil.
His Lordship has stated on a previous occa-
sion that it is the practice of the British Govern-
ment to attach very great weight to the opinions
of its colonial authorities as to the policies
to be adopted in the colonies or possessions
where such officials are stationed. He took
occasion to laud not only their practical wisdom
but their disinterestedness. As to this, I
must qualify my assent. By this Ido not mean
to assert that these officials are disposed delibe-
rately, and from selfish motives, to give advice
other than that which their judgment and
conscience approve ; but Ido say that expe-
rience has again and again shown that officials
are, as a rule, disposed to oppose changes in
the systems of control and in the policies to
which they have been accustomed, or, what
amounts to the same thing, to defend the
status quo.
As a single but striking evidence of this,
I would draw the attention of Lord Cecil and of
his advisers to the fact that, at the time when
the abolition of human slavery in the British
West Indies was being urged, it was practically
the unanimous opinion of the British officials
in those islands that slavery was justifiable and
that it would be a mistake to attempt to do away
with it.
It may be of interest to the British delegation,
as well as to the other delegations which, upon
the advice of their colonial officials, deem it
impracticable to take immediate steps to sup-
press that form of slavery which is due to
addiction to the use of prepared opium, to
recall what Gladstone upon one occasion said
in the House of Commons :
?I do not think?, he declared, "that in
this matter we ought to be guided exclu-
sively, perhaps even principally, by those
who may consider themselves great experts.
It is a very sad thing to say, but unques-
tionably it happens not infrequently in
human affairs that those who ought from
their situation to know the most and the
best, yet from prejudice and prepossessions
know the least ?nd the .worst. Eminently,
it was the case in the great question of the
West Indian slavery, when this House and
the country for a long time were discouraged
and abashed by the assurance that those
who were in favour of that great and
radical change were in favour of it only
because they did not understand the negro
character. I certainly, for my part, do not
propose to abide finally and decisively by
official opinion.?
In the First Opium Conference, the Chinese
delegation made every possible effort to have
the participating Powers agree to adopt mea-
sures which would, by their necessary operation,
if strictly administered, lead to an early and
legalised use of prepared opium within their
several jurisdictions. These obligations the
Powers refused to assume. In this Second
Conference, there is given to these Powers an
opportunity to reconsider their refusal.
That great official, Sir Robert Hart, dealing
with another matter, once used words which
apply to the problem with which we have
to deal. As to the treatment to be accor-
ded to the Chinese, he said : "Respect and
not. contempt ; conciliation and not dic-
tation ; appreciation and not differential treat-
ment try this prescription, and you will have
a healthy body politic. And until this is
done, it will be the reverse.?
I beg the Powers under whose jurisdiction
large numbers of Chinese dwell to bear these


words in mind. These Powers now stand at
the parting of the ways. It is for them to deter-
mine whether they will show a due regard for
the interest of these people, upon whose labour,
as they themselves confess, their economic and
commercial prosperity so largely depends, and
thus gain the gratitude of the millions of Chinese
living in China ; or whether they will show
themselves regardless of the moral and phy-
sical welfare of these, their wards, and thus
render themselves liable to the charge that they
have not that respect for the welfare of the
Chinese which they have for their own people
that they have one law of ethical obligation for
the West and another for the East.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) :
It is quite clearly right that the British
member should be permitted to respond to
any appeal made to him by any member of this
Conference. We are here to consult with all
the other members of the Conference to see
what is the best possible solution of some very
difficult problems, and we are ready to go, even
at the very last moment, up to the very limit
of our power in our efforts to find a satisfac-
tory solution.
Tne delegate from China has criticised some
observations I made with reference to British
officials. I see nothing to modify or withdraw
in what I said about those gentlemen. 1 have
had some experience of them and I know many
of them personally ; I repeat here, and I
defy anyone with any knowledge of the subject
to contradict me, that there is no body of men
who have , more devotedly, successfully and
disinterestedly discharged their duties in any
part of the world, whether in China or elsewhere.
I do not, of course, contend that they are
infallible ; no one has ever maintained that
and no one but an idiot would maintain it.
They are human beings and they make mis-
takes, and, if they make mistakes, they must be
overruled. That, of course, has been the policy
of the British Government, and the instance
that M. Sze quoted shows that the British
Government on a proper occasion is ready to
overrule all its officials, or anyone else, when it
is quite confident that they are wrong. In the
case of slavery, no doubt it did. It set an
example to the world, which the world subse-
quently followed, although in some cases not
until after a considerable lapse of time. It
abolished slavery and took upon itself what, at
that time, was a very large financial burden in
order to do so. I hope that the British Govern-
ment will always be ready to lead the way, if
it be its duty, in any work for humanity, and
that it will never be deterred, as it was not
deterred on that occasion, by any economic or
financial considerations.
I must remind M. Sze, however, that, in the
present case, the course which the British Govern-
ment has recommended does not depend upon
the advice of officials only, even if you take
merely the question of advice. I have pointed
out to the Conference on two previous occasions
that the greatest living authority on China, at
any rate outside the Chinese nation, Sir John
Jordan, has expressed his strong approval of
the course that tne British Empire is recom-
mending. That is the more remarkable because
he was the author, as the United States dele-
gation has pointed out on previous occasions, of
what are now called the American proposals,
and it was after considering them in juxta-
position with the present British proposals that he
stated in the clearest possible language that
he was confident that the present British pro-
posals were the best way of dealing with the
subject that could be devised.
Relying on the passage from Bishop Brent?s
last communication to this Conference, I think,
and it has never been contradicted, that the
British proposals are in accordance with the
recommendation made by Bishop Brent. We
have put them forward and I have myseli
made three speeches on the subject. I have
given all the reasons why we think that this is
the practical, honourable and sincere way of
dealing with the question. I have given a
very large number of arguments and those
arguments have been greatly reinforced by the
speeches of the French and Netherlands
delegations. Not one single word of those
arguments has been ever alluded to, either
by Dr. Sze or anyone else. No attempt has
ever been made to deal with any one of
them. That is the literal truth and it is time
that it should be stated in the clearest and
plainest language.
In these circumstances, although I respect
and admire the appeal made to us, and although
I am most anxious to meet it in every possible
way, I do not think it is reasonable to make
such an appeal without pointing out grounds
or reasons why the proposal of the British
Government is not the best way of dealing with
the problem and without meeting the very
serious criticisms that have been made in
connection with the American method of dealing
with this question.
I do not want to say anything that can pos-
sibly savour of heat, but I am bound to say
that I think it is rather hard to suggest, even
in a peroration, that there is any question in
the British mind as to its great desire to deal
with this question fully. If there is any conceivable
ground for suggesting that we are making,
in regard to this question, a distinction as
regards the races which form part of or reside
in the British Empire, I am most anxious to
deal with it.
The British objection is solely a practical
one, made solely on the ground that one
proposal would not succeed, whereas it is
thought that the other would succeed. These
considerations have nothing whatever to do
with any desire to extirpate opium-smoking.
We are bound to do that by international obli-
gations. We have repeatedly asserted, here and
elsewhere, that we are bound by those obli-
gations and that we are doing our very utmost
to carry them into effect.
We believe that, if the Conference here assem-
bled, adopts our proposals a very large and im-
portant step will have been taken towards
extirpating opium-smoking and, in particular,
if we are so fortunate to obtain from the pro-
ducing countries their assent to the second and
shorter Protocol. I should like to ask M. Sze
plainly whether he is prepared, on behalf of
the Chinese Government, to assent to that
second Protocol. He makes an appeal to me ;
may I not make an appeal to him ?
Here is a Protocol which has the authority
of the French and British delegations, who,
after all, know something about the situation.
They appeal to the Chinese delegation and to
the delegations of the other producing countries


to rim an underlain ng that nber remv wtI
can Republic oi which tbe Japanese delegate
m and 5-* m the t Lmr-tcmdutnitui m r u~?
acL ij 1 ? * ? luifz ??  tfel HH>,
I do* nm lew a. moHKHi question -be abscihite
It is because I snare ms afpr&dattn that I
smoeritv c*f 3L ?k. I 7." sere ae 25 mosl
sbpuid have seen glad to tun that ickgatk*
atsrxioBis, *'tat bit if'lmr-rnnntrvnwn w*<r Tread?
still with us, in order that I might supnrt a
outside dm2 should be pre:edtei I recognise
m.st appeal for mtemati ona - unity an a 11?ope-
thaf br 25 far Ft entitled to blend thrir caBSS but
ratitu ? the out real meatii 'i -uccessfully
m.av I reunmu ~ mat there are sisall I 3c
combating the scourge which is de'.'astatin?
rw sewur v*m>? five tu*' ? '?- hinese who
the human racer.
live prtsklc CMna. Tuene Ere sonaelhreg -ike
J. Ti~ ? OE-ZZ-T- b/i ? A Ii ?-2"IT It.
fov ?^z 5 Ti ?=< irrr wbs who bv~ T3!*a<ne 1 mna
1 -bX-'I'Tbi . ?, jutr - sen rr-rsii
who are al_ devasfcatec I wit act set a* nut
efforts *? ere being mate, they should be ten-
Q.C3n5Cl ~ B- i Z Z/JPj bJ.- -idr
for Q3c -~? s joker nssdr C e?e mete
prinopie or c practice width we pane put
are omt hummed inside China. Bt e_ rear;
for ward here. But we must net despair;
let us real with trose outside, bet do sot let
m the ccntrarv cur dui. sow is to red tuble
rs ferret tie others. I sav this to M. Sze
cur etfttns to rind the net-essart' ct-mpromise
V?T1T _'V most V itll0 V-rTT
he tween, the trieari;m whath we revere and the
wise dicta c-f Sir Robert H rt wiocb re read
?re ncrete reahttes t h::h are ecuariv imporlaat
tTIT tfiftTfe" IS TO feiK tO ClMrtS?r tO
and ecuariv desmtiu of respect-
r ?*" E- " ??-" <? w ?-* ?
? ? - -
with the ether ceferatt t-ns.
tipciior to them in any w ev nut e ? E>e t' ;
s' >ni?. htwevem be f.a:~~ug im ?r ~utv if
Et tea. to tren mme i> a? ??? rt?.? _* it ?
i _tu not, in ttni-usun. repcv tc oercam words
which you car before tre woiid. adept a
,~V- ?- ? j
definite attitrde towards tre ovenwodtse-
to tnem new it is net. te-oeve me in. anv con-
tier of tre poppy ard advance. if you
tro it it itctt to nit ti ti iidib-
car carrv out that pc rev to certair success.
sentativr of that c ittntrv w~ ~ ~~ one dav
a ctnrararvelv brie: period to tre
? 2.4"? Si. ? - "p
?" -*e :???-? mrt .1 ., "?m-e-i .rr. -'at
*- a ;y T r ea r apnea- to address tt a area: retc.e
ard I hope it will rot be trade in vain.
unmerited.
I can cniv ear that M. Sze rest wboilv ms-
L u [ir - - - losnal it *. _i tTt tit iijm ind
fudge the spirit the desire. tre rolitv tt mv
broadminded as : ? ze~e~- "ri p how ran
fellow-co art rvmen arc, most of an. of my
you explain the unexampled tain that a nation
Go venire rt if be thinks it is at al possible
emplovs an a: ?v i* less --an -?a.ccc ?en to
nrde-T B-r- rtre trat trere -1.cuid ever re
a distinction in 'ustice between one race arf
ant to keep order imznn mere than so million
another living rrder trat rrie
inhabitants cc me ~~ ~r? ~ -verv race ? in. other
words that in ovr col tries there is not one
V Dalauer France
French soliier ner theusand inhabitants ? De-
Trmnslatzcn : I desire,, on be bait of tre
spite this tact order is maintained and real
Jp c. LiOIi. lU* _njLdT m sZtiM-t. - CcLdtr?KrlLLl-
progress achievec because France nas reached
f mrst first express my gratitude to tre
t-'r cc me mhxnetaats arc mane them
Japanese delegate for mat be has said cf my
realise that her only care, her only dm. is to
ipi J-: t . ; 1 1 * , . ! Ll J-i. ?CLE -- ?* tHid- ? ? *?
to proclaim to all the rations represented here
gUKTC *_iT*riAau. in ljja. 0-1 * to
the in to profit bv tier eisq?erteiice^
that France remans faitntr to the tradttiirs
Lord Cecil asked whether we were m think
of idealism to which the Japanese delegate
:n_v of me ~ve madieu I'anese hvrass outside
referred. I wish to tell yon all that, returning:
China and to forget the ncv nb ms bviag in
here after mv short absence. I am still as anxious
China i I shook! kte the British
as I was a few days ago to make every effort
ir-voi: ?. ; .teg .tram: an a ?e;:m r -ai::nc for
to help this Conference to arrive at a practical
?t msmss m. it me oucsr ,m, *: submit
result, hill of promise for the future and worthy ,
a tew tacts cn w tier . Item Cm ft;;nest dele-
of the Liar moral interests for which we stand. -
- i:v ' - 't t-' C. lima ? ; p v ' infor-
{Applause.)
matfon at some future nice: n,<
I have no desire to incur any suspicion or
The Chinese Costoaaas in the
inordinate national pride, but I trust this assem-
Island of Hainan which 1 tel t o s um outside
blv will permit me to say that here at Geneva,
Chinese territory, reports that the local autho-
quite recently, when we were entering into
nties are ipnji'ninir o** the
formal undertakinas for the protection of the
is-ana mi aummmis a: hooch tv, id; insist
smaller States ? which have as much right
upon poppy-growing and fix the nr nimum area
to existence as the big States ? and when we
which must be placed under cultivation.
w ere drawing up that great charter of humanity.
The opium traffic in ?xvvanos: is continually
the Protocol, France was the first to affix her
increasing, hverv week we tear or large ouan-
signature, and has always been and will always
hlics of drugs being sent from Kvndow and
be prepared to honour it. (Applause.)
further inland to the Chinese ports of Tonkin
It is a sad disappointment to me to-day that.
and Packoi.
in making: a fresh appeal for unity and concilia-
W e are in possession of a considera - ' e tuber
tion to the representatives of all the countries
of reports and documents, including ; ; t o nal
assembled here, I can no longer number among
of a proclamation of December 13th, tqgg. with
my hearers the delegation of that great Amen-
the official seal of the Prefecture of Lien-Kiang


Sien a province of Chekiang ordering the said a few minutes ago to Lord 'Cecil and,
cultivation of the poppy after the rice crop has
been got in and prescribing penalties if these
orders are not carried out.
I might quote other official proclamations
and documents in proof of the fact that the
goal is still far distant, and that it is easier to
lay down the law at a Conference, and to enter
into solemn undertakings, than to be responsible
for the actual execution of those undertakings.
[Loud applause.)
I hope that the silence observed at earlier
meetings when facts such as these, and even
more important facts, were submitted will not
be maintained till the end of the Second Con-
ference.
I felt it necessary to quote these few facts,
in reply to certain allegations courteously, nay
cordially, worded though they were which
have been brought against my country. I
beg to state to day as I did yesterday
that we are prepared to do our utmost
now as always, and that it is my inten-
tion to submit to the Conference fresh proposals
concerning both producing and consuming
countries, with a view to effective action being
taken to prevent the use of prepared opium and
all drugs, because I fully realise and I would
thank all the previous speakers for having
emphasised this point that we must make
every effort to win the respect and friendship
of all the Powers, to enhance the prestige of the
League of Nations and to increase its moral
authority and effective power. ( Loud applause.)
Prince Arfa-ed-Dowleh (Persia) :
Translation : Mr. President, ladies and gentle-
men, we have had the honour of working
for the last six weeks with the distinguished
delegates of the United States, and have wit-
nessed their zeal in dealing with questions
concerning the reduction of poppy-growing and
the suppression of the illicit use of opium.
They were animated by a profound desire to
save humanity from the scourge of opium.
Whilst paying tribute to the United States
delegation, I have no wish to depreciate the
work of the other distinguished delegations
present at our Conference. All our colleagues
desire to co-operate in suppressing this scourge.
Our thanks are due to our distinguished Pre-
sident for the manner in which he has conducted,
and is still conducting, the difficult work of the
Conference, and we also greatly appreciate
the work of the Secretariat and of all the
members of the Conference.
I cannot but express profound regret at the
absence of the United States delegation, and
I hope most sincerely that, despite the absence
of the United States delegates, the League
of Nations will make fresh efforts to find a
compromise between their views and those of
Great Britain and France. {Applause.)
M. Loudon (Netherlands)
Translation : Mr. President, ladies and gen-
tlemen, I desire, in my turn, to thank the first
delegate of Japan most sincerely for the appre-
ciative terms in which he spoke of my country.
He spoke of it as the land of Grotius and recog-
nised that justice is still our guiding principle.
This is the point which I wish to emphasise
justice has always been and still is our guiding
principle in colonial policy, and it is from this
standpoint that I wish to reply to what M. Sze
indirectly, to us also.
If the first delegate of China knew our East
Indian colonies, and the policy we have pursued
there for years past, he would recognise that
we are still applying this same principle, and
that our legislation is directed towards this end
equality of rights for East and West. M. Sze
would also realise that, owing to the large
numbers of Chinese among the population, it
is towards them that our efforts are largely direc-
ted in the matter of opium ; it is the hundreds
of thousands of Chinese living in our colonies
who are the first to benefit by any restrictive
measures which are taken.
I have already described, and M. van Wettum
has also repeatedly described, our opium policy
in the East Indies ; I understand that the
Conference is unanimous in regarding our
system as a most excellent one giving every
satisfaction.
If M. Sze realises the import of what I have
just said, he will know that we are prepared to
continue our efforts to carry out restrictive
measures. The only reason which militates
against such action for the moment is over-
production in the countries producing opium,
and first and foremost in China;"
Lord Cecil and M. Daladier have given an
eloquent description of the position in their
territories, and have shown why they also are
unable to change their policy.
I should like to support what has been said
by the speakers before me. We have heard
several proposals, and last of all the very impor-
tant proposal which has been submitted by the
British delegation and of which the French
proposal is simply a variant. No real argument
has been advanced against these proposals.
I wish to state most emphatically that we
are prepared to co-operate cordially in arriving
at an understanding. We still cherish the hope
that, despite what has happened, we may be
able, if we work together, to make this Con-
ference a success, and to arrive at some con-
crete result reflecting our ideal aims. If we
set our hearts on it. we can doubtless reach an
agreement on the question of alkaloids. The
world must know that we have done our best
and that, whatever happens, effective measures
on this question will be taken at the earliest
possible date.
I will not detain you any longer ; I think
that we shall have further opportunities of
hearing one another?s views at future meetings.
The President
Translation : There are no more speakers
on my list. If no other delegate wishes to
speak, I will ask the Committee of Sixteen to
state whether it desires to close the discussion
or whether, in view of certain suggestions which
have been made regarding further work, it
prefers to hold another meeting.
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : We may be guided at the
present juncture by the resolution adopted
by the Second Opium Conference on January
24th. The last paragraph of this resolution
reads as follows :
"That Committee (Committee of Sixteen)
shall be entrusted with examining the
proposals of the delegation of the United


States of America, together with the various
suggestions and declarations presented
during the recent discussions of the Second
Conference. The Committee shall present
a report to the two Conferences on the
result of its work with the least possible
delay.?
In view of the failure of the Committee of
Sixteen to reach an agreement, I proposed a
few days?ago the appointment of a Sub-Com-
mittee of five as a more likely means of finding
a formula reconciling the various suggestions
submitted to the Committee. The Rappor-
teur of this Sub-Committee, M. Toivola, dele-
gate of Finland, informs us that the Sub-Com-
mittee also failed to come to an agreement.
I therefore think that our task, as defined by the
resolution of January 24th, is now concluded.
Since the Sub-Committee of Five has failed,
the Committee of Sixteen cannot hope for
success either.
Our only course would seem to be to appoint
two Rapporteurs, one for the First Conference
and one for the Second, to report on the failure of
our efforts, and the Conferences will then pass
whatever resolutions they may think fit.
Before conducing, I should like to pay a tri-
bute to the conciliatory words of the Japanese
delegate. We warmly second the tribute which
he has paid to the United States, and we do
so not because the United States are a great
Power, but because we have always regarded
that great American republic as a Power that
upholds the ideals of humanity and because
we were among the first to benefit by its
idealism.
I very much regret that the United States
delegation has been absent from our recent dis-
cussions. America has already, on many occa-
sions, been prepared to co-operate witn tne
League 6f Nations. Whenever an appeal has
been made in connection with work conducive
to the happiness of mankind, the United States
have always responded by offering their resources,
their good-will and their active co-operation.
For all these reasons I particularly desired
to express my frank regret ; but, having-
expressed it, I would add that our work should
not be interrupted on account of the absence
of the United States delegation.
Since we have not been able to agree as regards
the question of prepared opium and the re-
strictions on raw opium, let us, at any rate,
take up the question of the restrictions on
manufactured drugs. If we were to succeed
in this, if we could restrict the manufacture
of harmful drugs, we should at any rate have
advanced a step further. We could then leave
it to the League of Nations to settle the ques-
tion of prepared and raw opium. I know that
on this subject one of our colleagues wishes
to submit a resolution which merits the atten-
tion of the Conference.
In conclusion, therefore, I propose that two
Rapporteurs should be appointed for the First
and Second Conferences, and when they have
submitted their reports we will declare our
work concluded. [Applause.)
The President
Translation : Does anyone else wish to
speak ? If not, I will venture to make one or
two observations in regard to the suggestion
made by the delegate ; of Cuba. I have on
intention of making a counter-proposal,
because the suggestion before you is excellent ;
but I should like to point out that, although
it is easy to appoint two Rapporteurs, it will
be much more difficult for them to draw up
a report. It would, I think, be preferable
simply to forward to the two Conferences the
record of the meetings held by the Committee
of Sixteen, with M. Toivola?s report as an
annex. This record could then be used as a
basis for the further discussions of the two
Conferences.
I am aware that my suggestion is not exactly
in conformity with the resolution of the Confe-
rence, which states : ?The Committee shall
present a report?, and for that reason I do
not make this suggestion as a counter-proposal ;
I make it simply in order to avoid the drafting
and possibly the discussion of two reports.
I had thought of proposing that a plenary
meeting of the Second Conference should be
held to-morrow, and perhaps a meeting of the
First Conference also.
Should my suggestion not meet with your
approval, I am prepared to comply with the
resolution of the Conference and to appoint
two Rapporteurs, as the Cuban delegate pro-
poses.
!Vl. Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba) :
Translation : Mr. President, ladies and
gentlemen, with all respect for the opinions
of our President, I regret that I cannot share
his view on this occasion.
As he has just stated, the last sentence of
the resolution is worded as follows ; ?The
Committee shall present a report to the two
Conferences on the result of its work with the
least possible delay?. We are a Committee
of the two Conferences, and the resolution
in questions was passed by the plenary Confe-
rence. We have, therefore, no authority to
depart from its terms, and we must, I think,
keep to the legal principle embodied in those
terms to which we are always justified in
referring. Ido not think it will be difficult to
come to an agreement with regard to the
report. M. Toivola, submitted a report this
morning to which no objection was raised, and
ours will be drafted on practically the same
lines. We cannot find a compromise; that
much is certain. We must now submit our
report and our task will then be completed.
The President
Translation : I entirely agree as regards the
legal point. I merely wished to proceed as
quickly as possible.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) :
Translation : We came here to-day in the hope
of finding an agreement drawn up, but we only
hear expressions of regret, and we see that the
United States delegation is no longer present.
It is implied that this delegation is no longer
co-operating with us. Is this really the case ?
Has the United States delegation withdrawn
only from the Committee of Sixteen or from
the Conference ?
The President
Translation : I propose to make a com-
munication on this subject after the present
discussion ; but the discussion must be con-
cluded first.


IVI. Ei Guindy
Translation : Could not the President make
this statement before the end of the discussion ?
The President
Translation : I regret very much that I
cannot do so ; I think the discussion should
be finished first. Moreover, the communi-
cation would only be in the form of information
for the Committee of Sixteen, and could not
give rise to any discussion.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) :
I feel always that any appeal made by M. de
Aguero y Bethancourt is worthy of the utmost
consideration, particularly when he asks us
to be careful to proceed on legal grounds. That,
naturally, touches a cord in my heart. I think
it would be right to have a report ; but I
will make a suggestion to M. de Aguero which, I
think, is of a strictly legal character. Why should
we not do as we constantly do in the League
of Nations simply forward to the Conference
the report of our Sub-Committee which we
appointed really to deal with the matter with
which we were called upon to deal ? I suggest
that all we need do as a Committee is to report
as follows : ?The Committee of Sixteen has
held four meetings. At the third meeting it
appointed a Sub-Committee of Five, which made
the following report, to which the Committee
of Sixteen has nothing to add.? Then we could
send the two reports together.
I may remind M. de Aguero y Bethancourt
that this report of M. Toivola has had the assent
not only of M. Daladier and myself but of
M. Sugimura, the distinguished delegate of
Japan, whose admirable spirit of conciliation
we all recognise, and for which I desire to thank
him as others have done. {Applause.)
M. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : I accept Lord Cecil s sugges-
tion.
The President
Translation : I think Lord Cecil s proposal
and that of M. de Aguero do not quite coincide,
because Lord Cecil did not propose to appoint
a Rapporteur. Moreover, M. Toivola is not
a member of the First Conference.
IV!. de Aguero y Bethancourt (Cuba)
Translation : Since we agree that the report
of the Sub-Committee of Five should be adopted,
it is unnecessary for M. Toivola himself to pre-
sent the report to the First Conference. There
is, therefore, no difference between Lord Cecil?s
proposal and mine.
The President
Translation : We have before us a proposal
by M. de Aguero and Lord Cecil, by which
M. Toivola?s report would be forwarded to the
Presidents of the two Conferences with the
following preamble : ? Ihe Committee of Sixteen
held four meetings. It appointed a Sub-
Committee of Five, which made the following
report, to which the Committee of Sixteen
has nothing to add.?
May I consider this proposal adopted ? {Agreed.)
I will take the necessary steps to put this
decision of the Committee into effect.
9. WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED STATES
DELEGATION FROIVi THE CONFER-
ENCE :
The President
Translation : Before closing this meeting,
I have a communication to make to you. I
have just received a letter from the Chairman
of the delegation of the United States of
America, which reads as follows:
? Geneva, February 6th, 1925.
?I have the honour to inform you that, in
pursuance of authorisation of the President
of the United States, this delegation, to its
deep regret, finds itself unable longer to
participate in the deliberations of the Opium
Conference. The reasons for this action
are more fully set forth in the enclosed
memorandum.
?In taking leave, permit me, on behalf
of the delegation, to say that we are deeply
sensible of the consideration and kindness
of our colleagues in the Conference, and
to express to you and to the officers and
Secretariat our appreciation of the uni-
form courtesy and the cheerful, untiring
and efficient service which have been
shown to the delegation.
{Sgd.) Stephen G. Porter,
Chairman.?
I am sure that the members of the Committee
of Sixteen note this communication with the
deepest regret.
I am also prepared to read to you a somewhat
lengthy memorandum 1 which accompanies this
letter and explains it fully from the legal
point of view. The letter and memorandum
have already been translated, and could be dis-
tributed to the members of the Second Confe-
rence very shortly. Accordingly, I need not,
I think, read the memorandum, as the distri-
bution of the document will be sufficient.
{Agreed.)
I must acknowledge receipt of the letter and
its enclosure, but for this purpose I do not
need the authorisation either of the Committee
of Sixteen or of the plenary Conference.
The Committee rose at 1.20 p.m.
1 The text of this memorandum will be found in
ex.'enso in the record of the twenty-sixth meeting of
-the plenary Conference, held on February 7th, iq2s


Annexes.
i. Statement by the Portuguese Delegation
2. Report of the Sub-Committee of the Committee of Sixteen 74
3. Proposals of the French Delegation. . .
.e TD i _.. i n.- 1 ! .1 ... , /O
4-5. Two Draft Protocols, submitted by the British Delegation 75-75
Annex 1
Opium, C.S./8.
STATEMENT BY THE PORTUGUESE DELEGATION.
Like other delegations, the Portuguese Delegation clearly defined its point of view at
the meeting of the Second Conference on December 12th last.
It stated that, in its opinion, the Conference was not competent to take a decision
on the United States proposals regarding Chapter II of the Hague Convention.
After defining its attitude, the Portuguese Delegation refrained from making any further
a y, us .* on P ro P osa l i n question. It is now, however, glad to have this opportunity of
offering its sincere co-operation in the work which we all desire to accomplish, in an atmosphere
of calm ; namely, to discover some method of putting our programme into effect without
sacrificing any of the fundamental principles on which it is based.
From the outset, the Portuguese Delegation has repeatedly proclaimed that it was Por-
tugal s most ardent desire to devote all her energies to the conclusion of an international
agreement, based on humanitarian considerations, which would definitely put an end to the
terrible effects of the drug habit. We have seldom alluded to our national interests, because
we consider that the interests of individual countries should be subordinated to those of
mankind as a whole.
But as I oitugal is called upon to give her opinion on a question closely affecting the admi-
nistration of one of her colonies, she feels it to be incumbent upon her, at this new meeting,
to make a brief but definite statement concerning her attitude at the First Conference.
The truth is as follows : Portugal, as everyone knows, was the first country to open the
gates of the Far East to shipping and commerce. At this very moment the Great Powers,
through theii representatives at Lisbon, are paying a tribute to the memory of the great
Portuguese navigator, Vasco de Gama.
Our action as a civilising Power has brought us certain advantages ; but we have suffered
the grievous and inevitable consequences of the services we have rendered humanity.
The opium evil is one of these consequences.
Our colony in the Far East Macao ?is the only part of all the Portuguese possessions
to which the provisions of Chapter II of the Opium Convention apply, as it is in Macao alone
that the habit of smoking prepared opium is permitted. For three centuries Macao was
the only port on the Chinese coast open to the trade of the whole world. Consequently,
until 1845, the entire trade in opium destined for China (a trade in which, be it noted, countries
other than our own took part) passed through the port of Macao. The result of this was that
the trade took the name of the port through which it passed and that is why the word ?Macao?
las become indissolubly linked with that of the drug whose terrible effects we are now endeav-
ouring to combat.
Before other Chinese ports were opened to general trade, the trade in opium for China
passing through Macao, amounted to tens of thousands of cases (approximately 33 000)
After the opening of other ports, the trade through Macao fell to the average figure of 1 838
cases - as is shown by the statistics previous to the Hague Convention of 1012. After the
conclusion of this Convention, to which Portugal was a party, and, as a consequence of an
agreement between our country and the British Empire, the opium trade in our colony
gradually decreased, until only 500 cases were handled in iqig and 330 in 1924.
It should be noted, too, that this diminution occurred simultaneously with a considerable
increase in the population of our colony. Indeed its population is now estimated to be nearly
double that of a few years ago, apart from the fact that the floating population is certainly nine
times as great as the fixed population. These figures show how large must be the volume
ot trade between our colony and the neighbouring territories. Notwithstanding these facts
which are a striking testimony to our efforts to reduce consumption, the name of our colony
continues, and is hkely to continue, to be applied to practically all the contraband opium
which floods the Far East in quantities often greater than those of legally prepared opium
I have felt it my duty to draw attention to these facts, as many persons in perfectly good
faith attribute to us a responsibility which is not ours. For instance, Bishop Brent the dis-
tinguished representative of the United States, in a speech on Opium in the Philippines
which is reproduced m a pamphlet circulated to us at the beginning of the Second Opium
Conference, said ; The Moros bring a good deal of the drug in their vintas from 80rne0....
We also know that a good deal comes in from Macao. Macao, I think, is the worst source


The fact is that every smuggler uses the renowned Macao trade-mark in order to stimu-
late his illicit sales. In so doing he greatly harms the reputation of the Portuguese authorities,
who are powerless to combat the abuse. This brings me to the statement, Gentlemen, that,
while the opium problem concerns us financially, as it does othei countries, the material
interests involved are as nothing compared with the moral interest we have in the effective
suppression of the opium traffic, since a victorv over this evil would bring to us, more than
to any other country, the moral reparation which is our due. We therefore give our whole-
hearted support to the measures which aim at totally suppressing such opium traffic as is still
considered to be legitimate. But we cannot extend this support to any measure which, while
having the appearance of restricting legitimate trade, would only tend to increase illicit traffic.
To support such a proposal would be doing a disservice to the humanitarian cause foi which
the Opium Conference is working. . . ,
We have thought it our duty on this occasion to offer these observations, tor it is natural
that certain delegates should not be familiar with all the details of the opium question which
do not directly concern them. This preliminary explanation is therefore necessary to an
understanding of what follows. What is the task of the delegations heie assemble . icy
intend to examine the proposals and suggestions submitted to the Second Conference with
regard to Chapter II of the Hague Convention and then to present a report to each of the two
Conferences. The independence of the two Conferences having thus been reaffirmed the
question of competence no longer exists, for if, as there is reason to hope, we arrive at any
solution at all that could be included in the Convention drawn up by the two Conferences
respectively the formula laid down would ipso facto hold good for *dl nations taking pai t in
the Second Conference. The question of competence being thus disposed of, we find ourselves
faced with (i) a Japanese suggestion for organising the work of co-ordination, a suggestion
which, as a matter of fact, it is for us to apply, since it is we who are dealing with the co-oidi-
nation of the work ; (2) the United States proposal concerning the Chapter in the Hague Co
vention ; and (3) the opinions of the British and French Governments on the same question.
What is the object of all these proposals, and how do they differ one fiom anothei .
Their object is to fix a period within which the habit of smoking opium may be regaide
as suppressed in the Far East. The American proposal fixed a period of ten years from the
signing of the Convention, irrespective of the situation in each of the countries concerned and
particularly in China, the country most intimately affected. This period has been increased
and extended to 15 years by the United States Delegate. The British
the same period, but makes the date on which this period shall commence dependent upon
the situation in China, in order that the measures taken by the nations collaborating w t
China may be effective. At the same time, the British Government proposes creatio
a Commission consisting of representatives of countries not concerned m the questio m l of pre-
pared opium, to study the situation on the spot and decide, with a full knowledge of the fs ~
on what date the period of 15 years should commence. , e rWlv
The French Government, considering that the situation in Indo-Chma depends clos }
upon production in the neighbouring countries, undertakes to abolish the use of opium wit 1
15 years, provided that, in the third year following the signature of the Convention, the League
of Nations finds that China has, during the first two years following this signature put
force the measures necessary to suppress the opium traffic, the period of 15 years to commenc
from the date of this finding. j - -u a pj P
Such is the gist of the suggestion on which we have to pronounce. In order to be a Die
to give a reasoned opinion, let us rapidly survey the drug problem as it has been presented
to the First and Second-Conferences. . , , 11
Apart from the question of hashish, which has recently been raised, the whole object
of our work according to our fundamental statute the Hague Convention is to combat
{a) the effects of opium and its alkaloid salts and ( b) the effects of the coca leaf
That distinguished statesman, Viscount Cecil, when he addressed the Second Conference
on the subject in great detail, divided the influence of these drugs into four categories accordi g
to the nature and gravity of their effects. This classification, by reason of lts cle^ r ness has
the advantage of indicating the measures to be adopted in order to arrive at a practical
To place opium-smoking and the abuse of alkaloid derivatives of opium m the sa
gory would be to jeopardise the prospects of success of the campaign which has been u _
taken. We should be equally wrong if we attached the identical importance to thn
of chewing coca leaves and the the use of cocaine. There is also anot er po 1 countries
bear in mind: we must distinguish between matters which concern individual countnc
only, matters which are of limited international importance, and matters wnc 1 aie o wor
? d This classification does not take the gravity of the intoxication into account but it has
an important bearing upon the steps which must be taken. Some persons find that chewmg
opium is more harmful than smoking it, but we are not for the moment concerned wit sue
differences of opinion. For the Conference, the real importance of the problem is the da g
that certain forms of the abuse of these drugs may spread and be propagated. For example
the Indian habit of chewing opium and the mastication of coca leaves in South America have
existed for ages and are purely local practices which are not likely to spread elsewhere, whatever
their physical effects may be. The League is therefore not concerned with these questions
which can only be solved by legislative and administrative action on the part of the countnes
concerned. We class them as national problems. , , , 1
Apart from all international action, individual countries are bound to take steps to deal
with these questions in order to protect the health of the community and their own sovereignty.


fhe case of opium for smoking is quite different. It must be classed among the questions of
limited international importance. Although opium for smoking is at present used almost
exclusively by Chinese, it must be remembered that the Chinese are to be found in a number
of countries other than China ; and that China has appealed to other countiies for help and
suppoit in her effoits to abolish the evil from which her people are suffering not only in her
own tenitory but in other countries as well. This, therefore, is a truly international problem,
one for which all are collectively responsible, a responsibility which increases proportionately
as countries are more directly concerned in the solution of the problem.
The problem of alkaloids, too, is worldwide, both on account of its prevalence and the
nature of the problem itself.
Day by day it is spreading and contaminating every nation and every race. Certain
nations have for generations been able to smoke opium and to chew coca leaves ; but woe
betide any nation which does not stoutly defend itself against the alkaloids of these products
which demoralise and rapidly kill off their victims.
Let us for the time being confine our attention to the problem of limited international
impoitance with which we are dealing and with which the First Conference was particularly
concerned, namely, the habit of opium-smoking.
The first essemial measure and the only radical one - would be strictly to limit the
production of opium to medical and scientific requirements. To such a radical measure,
however, there are insurmountable obstacles. The cultivation of the poppy is an extremely
simple mattei and, consequently, it is difficult to prevent \ moreover, it is carried on in vast
districts where the organisation of effective supervision is almost impossible. Certain coun-
tries represented at this Conference exercise or desire to exercise the necessary supervision ;
namely, China, India, Persia, Turkey, Egypt, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
and Greece. But there are other countries of equal importance, such as Russia, Afghanistan
and Turkestan, whose intentions we do not know and on whose help we cannot rely.
Theoretically, then, the restriction of cultivation is the only effective remedy but in
practice we must frankly admit that this is not the case. Therefore, the only measures left
to us are, on the one hand, the reduction of the opium trade and, on the other, the reduction
of consumption. Trade includes transit, importation, preparation and exportation. Con-
sumption, on the other hand, can only be dealt with through the smokers themselves The
First Conference recognised the impossibility of attacking the problem at its source by res-
tricting cultivation, and it endeavoured to utilise the other two methods of restriction. Accord-
ingly* if decided that Governments should have a monopoly of the trade in prepared opium,
f, in addition to this step, we could find some ready means of combating the illegitimate trade
in opium we could without difficulty attain the ideal of the Hague Convention we could
gradually suppress the use of opium for smoking.
But such means do not exist. The regions in which the traffic is carried on are too vast
ana too difficult to supervise, and they are, in addition, experiencing serious political distur-
bances which prevent the Governments from exercising control. We may say and the
fact is borne out by irrefutable figures which have often been submitted to Conferences
that smuggling increases in direct proportion to the restrictive measures taken. If our
S( ? . 11 concern * s f? abolish this evil, we must agree that the only method of preventing the spread
of illicit traffic, is to create a State monopoly. Such a monopoly would be justified on the
ground of the protection of social welfare and not on account of the revenue which would
accrue to the countries forced to adopt this method of solving the problem. If a country
attempted to reduce the consumption under its control, without taking energetic and
organised steps to reduce the cultivation of, and illicit traffic in, opium, it would
simply bring about an increase in illicit trade (even though the official figures showed
a reduction), since the consumption of smuggled opium would increase proportionately.
Production, trade and consumption are therefore complementary operations, and their
counterpart is contraband. This fact was recognised by the First Conference after a com-
prehensive and thorough study of the question with a view to finding some system of control
winch would suppress smuggling. But the effectiveness of the measures of suppression is
of less importance than the situation in the great country which forms the predominant factor
of the opium trade.
In these circumstances, it is not surprising that the measures proposed by the Conference
depend on the measures taken by China herself, which must be at least as strict and effective
as those which the other countries have decided to adopt.
No less inoperative than the measures relating to cultivation and trade are the measures
applying to consumers. The rationing and registration of smokers and the measures designed
to prevent the spread of the habit to other persons were carefully considered by the First
Conference.
A scrutiny of the Minutes of the First Conference will show the care with which this
subject was studied and will render it possible to appreciate the full value of the reasons which
led the Conference to recognise that the proposals for rationing and registration were ineffec-
tive and inopportune. It will also show that the Conference thereupon endeavoured to give
W i d f u C( S e t0 measures of another kind, such as those designed to prevent the spread
of the habit to other persons. Due recognition should be given to the intentions of the
hirst Conference, whose members were not only inspired by the lofty idealism which
animates the League of Nations but possessed great experience in the matter acquired on
the spot. M
Turning now to the suggestions submitted to this Delegation, we find that they relate
aVg! fiXmg  f t l he m \ ximi ; m time-limit for the suppression of the opium-smoking habit.
All these proposals are based on the fact that, apart from medical and scientific needs, the


continued use of prepared opium necessitates its cultivation over very wide areas, constituting
a fresh source of supply for the illicit traffic. The point at issue here is perhaps a debatable
one, but the proposal is dictated by a lofty humanitarian ideal with which we fully sympathise.
The Hague Convention, which pronounced in favour of gradual suppression had the?same end
in view.
The only fundamental difference between the American point of view on the one hand
and the British and French points of view on the other consists in the importance attributed
to the secondary factors of the problem. The United States Delegation desires to fix a period
immediately. The other delegations wish to make the beginning of this period depend upon
the moment when unity and co-ordination of effort have been attained. In our opinion, the
results of the two proposals will in practice be the same. One party desires to fix the date
of the journey in spite of prevailing bad weather and declares that it will nevertheless arrive
at its destination. The other party wishes to wait for fine weather before starting so as +o be
certain of arriving. The latter is no doubt actuated by prudence, but, in point of fact, who
shall say that to-day?s bad weather will not be followed by fine days or that to-morrow?s
calm will not be succeeded by a storm ? The period, on the duration of which everybody
is agreed, really constitutes a negligible factor in a social problem of this importance, and, if
it is expedient to fix a period, why should we not decide upon it immediately, leaving it to
the future to prove us right ? Let us admit that the Hague Convention was in this respect
more prudent, although at that time conditions were far more favourable. It restricted
itself to the use of the words ?progressive and gradual suppression?.
If, in spite of the disturbed conditions in the Far East, we succeed in suppressing the
habit of opium-smoking within 15 years, that is all tp the good. But, even so and even if
we succeed, bv adopting suitable measures, in preventing the formation of new smokers,
we shall not be able to eliminate the inveterate smoker. We shall be faced with a certain
number of opium addicts who have to-be medically supplied with the daily dose of opium
prescribed by scientific experience. Such is the case in Formosa, as the Japanese represen-
tative has told us.
Thus, at the end of 15 years, legitimate consumption will cease, but, in the case of regis-
tered and rationed addicts who, on a medical prescription, receive that amount of opium which
is medically essential for them, it will only have changed its name.
The First Conference recognised the impossibility of immediately registering and ration-
ing existing smokers. It also resolved to prevent by all means in its power the formation
of new smokers. For these reasons, it was unable to fix the period within which the habit
of opium-smoking could be entirely suppressed.
Having proceeded thus far in our statement, we may observe in the light of the foregoing
considerations that, in spite of the divergence of the ideas expressed, there is nothing, we
think, to prevent us from arriving at a formula of agreement. The divergence is only apparent
and we are all anxious to arrive at an understanding.
We might, then, agree upon the maximum period within which we all desire that the
habit of opium-smoking should be suppressed. As, however, we are forced to take into account
both the results of the present situation and unforeseen circumstances, we could leave the
subsequent ratification of the date of the period?s commencement for consideration later ;
we could proceed as if that date had been fixed as from the signing of the Convention and could
at once put into force the measures contemplated.
The formula of agreement might therefore be as follows :
?Having agreed upon a period of 15 years, we consider that [a) it would be expedient
for this period to commence as from the signing of the Convention, but it would be for
the Conference, which, according to Article 12 of the Agreement of the hirst Conference,
will take place in 1929, or by a Commission as proposed by the British Delegation, either
to ratify the date of the commencement of these 15 years or to determine upon another
date, should the circumstances which at present make it difficult to control smuggling
still exist, or be further accentuated ; [b) during the period of 15 years every country
in which the use of opium for smoking is still authorised should only reduce the quantity
of opium for consumption by a fraction at least corresponding to the co-efficient of the
adult death rate, so that, at the end of this period, the quantity of opium necessary for
the medical treatment of opium addicts in each country would then be less in all cases
than the quantity consumed to-day, being reduced by a figure equal to 15 times the co-
efficient of the annual adult death rate ; (c) all opium addicts surviving at the end of 15
years should be duly rationed and registered and might, after medical examination,
receive a quantity of opium supplied to them through the administration ; ( d) during
this period of 15 years, the different countries should undertake to proceed to register
smokers and to take all executive measures necessary to enforce this decision.?
The provisions which we have suggested above constitute, in our opinion, a corollary
to the ideas already expressed, as well as material for co-ordinating these opinions with one
another and with those of the Portuguese Delegation.
The Portuguese Delegation therefore has the honour to submit to this Assembly its pro-
posals as summarised in the above resolution.


British Empire :
Sir Malcolm Delevingne,
Viscount Cecil,
France :
M. Daladier.
Finland :
M. Toivola.
Japan :
M. SlJGIMURA.
Annex 2
Opium C.S. 9.
SUB-COMMITTEE OF THE COMMITTEE OF SIXTEEN.
Report by the Representative of Finland (Rapporteur) to the Committee of Sixteen.
The Sub-Committee of Five held a meeting on Wednesday, February 4th, 1925, under the
chairmanship of M. Zahle. The following Government representatives were present :
United States of America : The Hon. Stephen Porter
Ihe Sub-Committee met to consider the proposals of the United States of America con-
cerning the gradual suppression of prepared opium in territories where its use is temporarily
permitted under the terms of the Hague Convention of 1912.
In addition to the American proposals, the Sub-Committee had before it a proposal in
the form of two draft Protocols submitted by the British Delegation, with the principles of
which the French Delegation stated that it was in agreement.
It was explained that the first draft Protocol was to be signed by producing countries
though there was nothing to prevent other Powers from signing it if they so desired ; while
the second draft Protocol was in the nature of an addition to the draft Agreement prepared by
the First Conference.
The Sub-Committee proceeded to discuss the British proposals article by article, on the
understanding that the question of principle involved was in no way prejudiced by such dis-
cussion. It reached the conclusion that nothing in the draft Protocols submitted by the
British Delegation should be construed into diminishing the force of the provisions of the Hague
Convention, but that they might be regarded as agreements for the final execution of certain
of its provisions.
The question which was of chief concern to the Sub-Committee was the question of prin-
ciple. The Sub-Committee found itself faced with two proposals which differed essentially.
The first was to the effect that States with territories in which the use of prepared opium was
temporarily permitted should undertake effectively to prohibit that use within a period of
*5 years which should begin to run from a given date to be determined as the Conference
thought fit. The other proposal was to the effect that that period of 15 years should begin
to run only from the date on which the effective execution of the measures taken by the pro-
ducing countries to limit and control the production and distribution of raw opium had reached
such a stage that opium smuggling no longer constituted a serious obstacle to the carrying
out in the consuming States of any measures necessary to bring about the abolition of the use
of prepared opium.
In connection with this proposal, there were submitted to the Sub-Committee various
proposals in regard to the manner in which the date for the beginning of the period of 15 years
should be fixed. It was suggested that the producing States should be allowed five years
in which to control the production of opium and that the period of 15 years should begin
immediately at the end of that time, if at the end of these five years an impartial committee
should decide that such a control had been successfully achieved. None of the suggestions
brought forward met with unanimous approval.
The Sub-Committee consequently, after considerable discussion, reluctantly decided that
it was unable to find a compromise between the two opposing points of view, and accordingly
it is compelled to report that, on the question of principle, it has been unable to arrive at a
unanimous conclusion.
This negative result at which the Sub-Committee has arrived does not necessarily mean
a breakdown in the efforts to carry out in a comparatively short time the total suppression
of the use of prepared opium. On the contrary, the majority of the Sub-Committee is con-
fident that the Governments concerned will not remain inactive. They could, and the Sub-
committee hopes that they will, find it possible to embody in a Protocol a provision for a
period of 15 years, in the course of which the obligation to abolish the use of prepared opium,
assumed by the signatories of the Hague Convention, should be carried out. They will, the
Sub-Committee hopes, find a satisfactory method of deciding when this period of 15 years
will begin to run. If the duty of taking this important decision be left to the League of Nations,
of which the impartiality and authority cannot be doubted by anyone, the labours of the
Conferences have not been in vain. Even if members of the Conferences were to leave Geneva
without knowing exactly the date on which the final struggle against prepared opium will
begin, they should nevertheless know that the League of Nations is bound at some date to
declare to the general satisfaction of the world : ?The 15 years are to begin to run now ; there
must be no further delay."


Annex 3
Opium C.S. 5.
PROPOSALS OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION.
The Contracting Powers :
Being firmly resolved to combat and to suppress the use of prepared opium in the
territories under their authority,
But considering that the existence of smuggling on a vast scale hinders to a considerable
extent the application of the provision of Chapter II of the Hague Convention and that the
consumption of prepared opium in most of the territories concerned is closely dependent on
the production of raw opium in the countries adjacent to these territories :
Agree to the following provisions :
Article I. As soon as the present Convention has been ratified, the countries which
produce raw opium shall take all necessary steps to render the illicit exportation of raw opium
from the territories under their authority practically impossible.
Article 11. Within five years from the date of the ratification of this Convention, the
countries which produce raw opium shall prohibit the cultivation of the poppy in the terri-
tories under their authority or shall so reduce this cultivation as to make it impossible for any
quantity of raw opium to be offered illicitly for consumption.
Article 111. In the year following the period of five years provided for in Article 11,
the Council of the League of Nations shall take official note that poppy cultivation has been
abolished in the countries producing raw opium or has been reduced to the limits defined in
Article 11.
Article IV. Immediately upon notification of the decision regarding the abolition of
reduction of poppy cultivation in the countries which produce raw opium taken by the Council,
in accordance with Articles II and 111 of this Convention, the countries concerned shall gradu-
ally reduce the use of prepared opium in the territories under their authority in such a
way that the use of opium shall be completely abolished within 15 years at the most.
Article V. With a view to co-ordinating their efforts, the countries which produce raw
opium and the countries which consume prepared opium shall establish a system of close co-
operation.
Article VI. During the year immediately preceding the expiration of the period of
15 years provided for in Article IV, the Contracting Powers, in special conference, shall examine
the measures to be taken in connection with inveterate addicts, the pathological condition
of whom has been certified by the medical authorities.
Article VII. It is the intention of the Contracting Powers that these provisions shall
confirm and complete those contained in the Hague Convention of 1912 and those included
in the Final Protocol adopted by the First Opium Conference at Geneva on November 3rd,
1924.
Annexe 4
Opium C.S. 6
DRAFT PROTOCOL TO BE SIGNED, SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE SECOND
CONVENTION, BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OPIUM PRODUCING
COUNTRIES, AND TO FORM PART OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF
THE SECOND OPIUM CONFERENCE.
The undersigned, representatives of certain States signatory to the Convention relating
to dangerous drugs signed this day, duly authorised to that effect ;
Taking note of the Protocol signed this day by the representatives of the States signa-
tories of the Convention relating to the Use of Prepared Opium ;
Hereby agree as follows :
The States signatories of the present Protocol recognise that Chapter 1 of the Hague
Convention of 1912 involves an obligation so to limit and control within their territories
the production and distribution of raw opium as to prevent opium smuggling constituting a
serious obstacle to the effective prohibition of the use of prepared opium in those territories
where such use is temporarily authorised.


Each of the signatory States agrees to take the necessary measures, so far as this has
not already been done, to ensure the complete execution of its obligation under Article I of
the present Protocol within five years from the present date.
The question whether the obligation referred to in Article I has been completely executed
shall be decided, at the end of the said period of five years, by a Commission to be appointed
by the League of Nations, whose decision shall be final.
I he present Protocol shall come into force for each of the signatory States at the same
time as the Convention relating to Dangerous Drugs signed this day.
Annexe 5 1
Opium C.S. 7.
DRAFT PROTOCOL TO BE SIGNED SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE FIRST
CONVENTION AND TO FORM PART OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF *
THE FIRST OPIUM CONFERENCE.
The undersigned, representatives of the States signatory to the Convention relating to
the use of Prepared Opium signed this day, duly authorised to that effect ;
Recognising that the signature of the said Convention does not in any way minimise
the obligation, already assumed by them under Article VI of the Hague Convention of 1912,
in regard to the gradual and effective suppression of the manufacture of, internal trade in,
and use of, prepared opium ;
Anxious to take all practicable steps to ensure the complete and final execution of the
said obligation ;
Recognising that the effective prohibition of the use of prepared opium in their Far
Eastern territories is dependent on effective measures being taken by the producing countries
to restrict the production of opium and prevent its illicit export ;
Taking note of the Protocol signed this day by the representatives of certain States
signatories of the Convention relating to Dangerous Drugs ;
Hereby agree as follows ;
The States signatories of the present Protocol recognise that the provisions of the Con-
vention signed this day are supplementary to, and designed to facilitate the execution of, the
obligation assumed by the signatory States under Article VI of the Hague Convention of
1912, which obligation remains in full force and effect.
Hie States signatories of the present Protocol undertake that the use of prepared opium
shall be effectively prohibited in their Far Eastern territories in which such use is temporarily
authorised, within a period of not more than 15 years from the date on which the effective
execution of the measures taken by the producing countries to limit and control the pro-
duction ana distribution of raw opium has reached such a stage that opium smuggling into
the said territories no longer constitutes a serious obstacle to the carrying out of the measures
necessary to that end.
The question when the effective execution of the measures mentioned in Article II
above has reached the stage referred to in that Article shall be decided by a Commission to be
appointed by the Council of the League of Nations, whose decision shall be final.
During the period preceding the decision of the Commission that the stage referred to
in Article II has been reached, the States signatories of the present Protocol shall, both by
the measures mentioned in the Convention signed this day, and by any other measures that
are practicable, make every effort to reduce the consumption of prepared opium, to encourage
the abandonment of the practice by existing smokers, and to combat the illicit traffic.
1 Note by the Secretariat. The attached document, and Document Opium C S 6 which was distributed
to the Committee of Sixteen, are submitted by the British delegation and the? previously two docu-
ments should be read the one in conjunction with the other. J


As soon as the Commission provided for in Article 111 has decided that the stage referred
to in Article II has been reached, each of the signatory States shall initiate the necessary
measures to enable the use of prepared opium to be effectively prohibited in its territories
at the end of a period of not more than 15 years. The steps to be taken at once shall include
the necessary measures to prevent the use of prepared opium being adopted by persons not
already smokers, and to prevent the supply of opium to new immigrants, in so far as these
steps may not have already been taken at that date.
The signatory States shall consult together as to any measures which can usefully be
taken with this object by agreement among themselves.
It is understood that the effective prohibition of the use of prepared opium is not incon-
sistent with special and temporary provisions for the case of persons as to whom it is certi-
fied by the medical authorities of the State concerned that they cannot be completely deprived
of the drug without serious danger to life or health. Ihe signatory States will consult
together with a view to securing, so far as possible, uniformity in regard to the said precisions.
New Article VII.
If at any time after the decision of the Commission referred to in Ai title V, any of the
signatory States should find that a serious recrudescence of opium smuggling into its terri-
tories is taking place, such State shall have the right to request the Council of the League
to appoint a Commission to investigate the facts. If the Commission reports that, owing
to the measures taken by any of the producing countries to restrict the production of opium
and prevent its illicit export not proving sufficiently effective, the steps taken with a view
to the prohibition of the use of prepared opium are rendered ineffective, any of the signatoiy
States shall be entitled to denounce the present Protocol. In that case a Conference of
the States concerned shall at once be held to consider the action to be taktn.
VIII.
The present Protocol shall come into force for each of the signatory States at the same-
time as the Convention relating to the Use of Prepared Opium signed this day.


-
-


MINUTES OF THE MEETING
OF THE
CO-ORDINATION COMMITTEE
Geneva, February 4th ig2 5


(VIINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CO-ORDINATION COMM ITT EE
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, February yth, 1925, at 3 p.m.
M. Sjostrand in the Chair
Present
Sub-Committee A.
Dr. Erik Sjostrand (Chairman)
Sir Malcolm Delevingne.
Mr. Edwin Neville.
Sub-Committee B.
Dr. W. Chodzko (Chairman).
M. Dinichert.
Sureya Bey.
Sub-Committee C.
Herr von Eckardt (Chairman).
M. van Wettum.
Sub-Committee D.
M. F. Veverka (Chairman).
Mr. M. L. Shepherd.
M. Enrique Buero.
Sub-Committee E.
M. Bourgois (Chairman).
M. Sugimura.
Dr. Fabris.
Sub-Committee F.
Dr. Carriere (Chairman).
M. de Myttenaere.
Prof. Perrot.
M. Zahle, President of the Conference.
1 ? Election of Chairman.
M. Sjostrand was appointed Chairman of the Committee.
2. Co-ordination of the various Reports presented by the Sub-Committees.
called* tifAtW * h t. Confel ? n ?. said that the Co-ordination Committee had been
called together as a result of the resolution adopted by the Conference on December Bth
A slight variation was being made in the procedure described in the resolution It was laid
tufting Cornrnittee its work as soon as ft
. i ?i  f the vSllb ' ( ommittees had been approved by the Conference. It was now nrn-
P? cd , lat tle reports of the Sub-Committees should be sent to the Drafting Commhtee
before being submitted to the Conference. The present Committee woSdcfnsidS these
 ,lCe t0 the Drafting Comraittee ? which would, in
(i) Discussion of the Memorandum presented by the British Delegation.
Ihe C hairman said that Sir Malcolm Delevinjine had drafted o Uia + a
setting forth the divergencies between the
He suggested that tins memorandum should be taken as a basis for the present discussion.'


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that in preparing this memorandum he
had merely wished to facilitate the work of the Committee. The Committee was called to-
gether with the object of reconciling any divergencies which might be found between the reports
of the various Sub-Committees, and he had felt that their work would be simplified if attention
were drawn to these divergencies. The divergencies were extremely few. The two most
important differences related to (i) the constitution of the Central Board and (2) the period
within which the statistics of exports and imports were to be furnished by the Governments.
(The first part of the memorandum relating to the constitution of the Central Board was
read to the Committee.)
M. Chodzko (Poland) proposed that the article drafted by Sub-Committee A should
be taken as a basis of discussion, as it was more detailed in character than any other text
which was before the Committee..
This proposal was adopted, and Article 2 of the draft articles submitted by Sub-Committee
A was read.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that there was a difference of opinion
between Sub-Committee A and Sub-Committees B and D. Sub-Committee A recommended
that the Central Board should consist of individuals who were not representative of any
particular interests, whereas Sub-Committees B and D recommended that the Central Board
should be constituted in equal numbers of representatives of the manufacturing and producing
countries, on the one hand, and of the consuming countries, on the other hand. He would
point out that all powers of control had been taken from the Board, which now had only
powers of inquiry and recommendation. Moreover, the Board was to be appointed not by
the Council but by a new electoral body, on which the producing and consuming countries
were almost equally represented. The electoral body could accordingly be trusted to see that
the Board was fairly constituted. In these circumstances, which were different from those
which prevailed when the question had been discussed by Sub-Committees B and D, he did
not think there could be any serious objection to the adoption of the scheme submitted by
Sub-Committee A.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur of Sub-Committee B, said that the report of
his Sub-Committee did not refer to this question. Sub-Committee B had dealt with the matter
only incidentally, and had not thought it advisable to make specific proposals in regard to a
matter which was essentially being considered by Sub-Committee A. Certain members of
Sub-Committee B had presented some observations, but no formal proposals had been put
forward.
M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur of Sub-Committee D, said that his Committee
had put forward a recommendation to the effect that the Central Board should be constituted
in equal numbers of representatives of the manufacturing and producing countries and of the
consuming countries. He could, however, accept the scheme presented by Sub-Committee A,
in view of the facts to which Sir Malcolm Delevingne had alluded.
The Committee agreed to accept the proposals put forward by Sub-Committee A.
The Chairman said that the Committee would now take the second part of the memoran-
dum dealing with statistics. He pointed out that the points dealt with in this part of the
memorandum were covered by Article 4 of the draft articles submitted by Sub-Committee A.
Article 4 might, therefore, be taken as a basis of discussion.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) suggested that the Committee should first
consider statistics of exports and imports which were dealt with in paragraph (a) of his
memorandum.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that the divergency noted in the memorandum, which
related to the periods in respect of which statistics should be furnished by the Governments,
was one of the most important. The matter had been thoroughly discussed in Sub-Committee
B. The decision which had been reached by the Sub-Committee, after every endeavour
had been made to obtain the greatest possible concessions from the countries which produced
raw opium, was that it would be impossible for the Governments to do more than furnish
annual statistics of imports and exports. He noted that Sub-Committee A had come to the
conclusion that these statistics could be furnished quarterly. He did not quite see how it
was possible for the countries producing opium to do this, in view of the declarations which
had been made by their delegations, or how the two views could be reconciled. Sir Malcolm
Delevingne had explained in his memorandum how a solution of the difficulty might be
found in the licensing system. Licences were issued, but it was not known to the authorities
when or whether these imports and exports actually passed the frontier. Figures showing
the licences issued could not therefore take the place of actual statistics of imports and exports.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the system of quarterly returns
was the basis of the scheme of supervision submitted by Sub-Committee A. By the examination
of these returns the Board would be able to follow the course of the international traffic.
He did not think the difficulty described by M. Dinichert was vital. Licences would be
issued to cover every individual consignment. The issue of the licences was not proof that
the export which it covered had taken place, but it was quite easy for the Governments to
obtain under the system information as to the actual quantities passing the frontiers. When,


for example, the British Government issued a foace te an nfoidnd riapocter, the haporter
fnrrentoed the Berner to the Cogfaws authorities when the layer! mdfc. Thehceasig
authorities endorsed ft, than cwtifyig that the inoort had taken fhce, and the Berner
at once returned to the authorities :r. Loi&dk*r,. '? io v. v. visr-e av'* to tie exact
t. actually imported during a : .*r* period. L for *?x.y,*r. ?* Hrtfariv
endoned awi retorred to the Govermnesift. Trje .vritem ct r*&*Bsazjsssdz& hr Sob-
'^mmhtee E twjM therefore enable the GovgraiaKirt* to forr* the Vs&xc v thh the
data. It was admitted that, unless this system were adopted, qoarteriy retains nnid be
dUcalt. The Central Board would then he obliged to tdf mdf on the a?ai returns
made by the Customs authorities.
M, Vtm K A 'Czechoslovakia , Rapporteur of Sr. b-Gunjicf * tee D. tocsgt that
rcitbet D co*:M accept the proposal of So b- r r.trr. t tee A
M. Dixichert (Switzerland) agreed that the proposal of Sub-Committee A the
adoption of the system of licences. This was, in fact, the agreed pwr<t of departure, But that
did not mean that the Governments could be obhged to adopt a <pcdfic for the
delivery of licences and specific Customs arrangements such as those described bv Sir Malcolm
Delevingxie. Certain countries were unable to obtain Customs returns in throe or even in
12 months. The licensing system must he regarded as only part of the special cor.tr:l cpra-
tiors, and if a Covemmsnt stated that the organisation of its Custom- did not permit of such
returns within the required period, it would be useless to embody such an obligation in the
xmvention. He must accordingly make a formal reservation in this matter on behalf of Sub-
committee B.
Sir Malcolm Delevingse British Empire) said that the proposal of Sub-Ccmmirtee \
implied an effective administration and a co-ordination between the Customs authorities
and the authorities entrusted with the control of the traffic in dangerous drugs. There could
be no difficulty in countries with a developed admini tration. The Government would issue
its instructions and the necessary co-ordination would be arranged. Difficulties could onlv
an / d there were a division of control and if the Customs and the authorities controlling the
rug raffic failed to co-operate. It must, however, be assumed that the administration of
the Governments signing the Convention would be effectively organised. The proposal
p.h foiward by Sub-O.mrnittee A depended on the adoption of the licensing svstem proposed
by Sub-Committee L and on efficient administration by the countries adopting it. I**** 1
M. JhKiCHEKT (Switzerland) said that, as Rapporteur, he felt obliged to defend the
members of Sub-Committee B from any reflection upon their good-will in this matter There
wi;re certain countries which were resolved to accept only such engagements as they could fulfil.
. u >- ommillee B had not discussed the certificate system or the method of control to he
adopted by the Customs authorities. Reservations, however, had been made in regard to
tic period withm which statistics of exports and imports could be furnished to the Govern
merits. Ihe difficulty was purely material. He was ready to refer the martPr cJT
/Ommittee B, but he did not know whether much would be gained by asking hit SnC-Tn
to reconsider the matter, unless some new arguments or facts could be adduced. mmi ee
M. Chodzko (Poland), Chairman of Sub-Committee B doubts ?.i lo +r a ?. ~ .
possible to obtain any further concession in Sub-Committee B. ' th 2t would be
lions raised in Su^^lft^B^dSed^DU?'rte'diffii'lty the ^ ec ?
which was bulky and which was introduced in a
.espee, of drugs which were of small bulk and which L a few pTts'p
Turkish delegates in ( Suh-ComLittet BhVfoundTt difficSt ?J e^to y ?, d
(he other delegates were, if necessary, prepared?o sup? sitisis quarterly? 1 " Pe " d -
B, he had not
which were presented on bihalf of the Stoir^^^^t^Z^ ,?o^ y -i!, C ? pte l? d
unanimity even for a period of six months The bnh r ?, , beei ? to obtain
the possibility of Stated making
deal! with any distinction in regard to substances such as it vTu"' " orhad
referred. ces ' sucn as that to which Mr. Neville had
Sureya Bey (Turkey) said that Turkey was Dremmrl ,
recommended by Sub-Committee A. Y ? 1 p d to accept the three months 1 period
M. Sugimuka (Japan) said that the agreement at fn o ru
irwa ffifawau
- ?** ? -Wl3'


like to inquire what countries were against the proposal for a three months? period. Even
in countries with undeveloped administrations, it could hardly be impossible to furnish the
information required. Goods passed along definite trade routes, and the frontier stations
were few in number.
He would also like to inquire why it was suggested that the year in respect of which
the statistics were to be furnished should be the financial year.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said it was a matter of considerable gratifi-
cation that the Turkish delegate accepted the period of three months.
It did not seem likely that any final conclusion could be reached in the present Committee.
He therefore suggested that it should be noted that one or possibly more members of Sub-
Committee B had not accepted the period of three months recommended by Sub-Committee A.
The dissenting members of Sub-Committee B could take up the matter in the full Conference
and urge their objections.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that this was a question of procedure which should be
decided by the Chairman of Sub-Committee B. He had no objection to make either to the
matter being referred back to Sub-Committee B or to the course proposed by Sir Malcolm
Delevingne.
M. Chodzko (Poland), Chairman of Sub-Committee B, thought that, on the whole, it
would be well to call his Committee together, particularly as M. Sugimura had raised the other
questions, notably the question of the financial year.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), replying to the question of M. Sugimura as to the financial
year, said that this subject had been raised by two or three members of Sub-Committee B.
These members represented countries in which the Customs statistics were not made up at the
end of the calendar year, but at the end of their financial year. The question could be recon-
sidered if there were another meeting of Sub-Committee B.
The Chairman suggested that the reservations of the Rapporteur of Sub-Committee B
should be noted in the minutes. He would ask the Chairman and Rapporteur of Sub-Com-
mittee B to bring the matter before the Sub-Committee and report the results of their further
deliberations direct to the Drafting Committee.
M. Chodzko (Poland) agreed to this procedure.
The Committee then passed to a consideration of paragraphs (b) and (c) of Part II of the
memorandum of Sir Malcolm Delevingne.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that the divergence between Sub-
committee A and Sub-Committee B, to which attention was drawn in paragraph ( b ), was a
matter for the Drafting Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), referring to paragraph (c), said that the words ?if it is
possible? had been inserted in deference to the representations of certain delegates, since
they could not otherwise give the undertaking which was required. It had not, however,
been intended that the insertion of this phrase rendered the Governments free to act as they
pleased in the matter. Governments were bound to furnish the statistics in question if they
were able to do so.
In regard to the period within which it was proposed that statistics in regard to stocks
should be furnished to the Governments, he would ask whether Sub-Committee A could not
accept the period of three months already accepted by Sub-Committee B, instead of the period
of five months.
The Chairman said that the period within which figures in regard to stocks could be
furnished had been the subject of a very exhaustive discussion in Sub-Committee A and that
it would not be possible for the Sub-Committee to revise its decision.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) inquired as to the reason for the adoption of this period,
pointing out that his own Sub-Committee had already been called upon to explain its attitude
in regard to the period within which statistics of exports and imports should be furnished.
Sub-Committee A proposed a period of five months, which was longer than the period
accepted by Sub-Committee B.
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that the period of five months had been the result of very
careful consideration. He had always considered it doubtful whether statistics of stocks
could be furnished in three months, and he had accepted a period of five months in a spirit
of conciliation. The question of stocks was one of some complexity, and he welcomed the
suggestion of Sub-Committee B that it was desirable in this connection to define what was
meant by ?wholesale dealer?.
M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur of Sub-Committee D, said he was prepared
to accept the proposal put forward by Sub-Committee A.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) pointed out that the extension of the period
from three to five months was in favour of the interests of the producing country. He sub-
mitted that the questions dealt with in paragraph (c) of his memorandum were matters for
the Drafting Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said he was protesting against taking the question now under
discussion as a mere matter of drafting, whereas the previous question, which also closely
affected Sub-Committee B, had been discussed as a question of principle.


It was decided that the questions raised in paragraphs ( b) and (c) of the memorandum,
including the question of the definition of "wholesale dealers", should be referred to the
Drafting Committee.
(2) Report of Sub-Committee B.
The Chairman said he understood that Sub-Committee B had presented a minority
as well as a majority report.
M. Chodzko (Poland), Chairman of Sub-Committee B, said that a minute would shortly
be distributed to the members of the present Committee announcing that Sub-Committee B
had been unable to reach an agreement.
(3) Report of Suh-Committee C.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that there was no divergence to be noted
in respect of the report of Sub-Committee C. The system of import and export licences was
accepted by Sub-Committee C.
(4) Report of Suh-Committee D.
M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia), Chairman of Sub-Committee D, said that there was
nothing for the Co-ordination Committee to do in respect of the report of Sub-Committee D.
(5) Report of Suh-Committee E.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) made a similar statement with regard to the
report of Sub-Committee E.
(6) Report of Suh-Committee F.
M. Perrot (France) made a similar statement in regard to the report of Sub-Committee F.
1 le delegation of the United States of America was presenting minority observations on
this report.
3, Draft Article concerning Disputes arising under the Convention.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) inquired whether the Rapporteur of Sub-Committee E
was in a position to give him any information in regard to the article concerning disputes
arising under the Convention. r
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said he did not remember that this matter
was mentioned in the report of the Sub-Committee. The question, however, had been raised
and it had been suggested that the framing of a clause should be entrusted to the Drafting
Committee, which would consider the precedents already established by the Conventions
on Transit and Customs Formalities.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) hoped that the text would be circulated in time for careful
consideration by the delegates. He noted that the matter had been entrusted to the Drafting
Committee and thought this was an exceptional arrangement. It was the duty of the
Drafting Committee to put into form proposals which had been already adopted in substance
in the Sub-Committees.
M. Zahle, President of the Conference, said that the text of the articles would be
circulated in time for careful consideration by all the delegates.
4. Egyptian Proposal.
M. Zahle, President of the Conference, said that there had been a meeting of Sub-Committee
1 to discuss an Egyptian proposal which had not yet been brought before any Sub-Committee
He had on his own responsibility referred the proposal to Sub-Committee F, which had
already prepared a report which would be sent directly to the Drafting Committee
M. Perrot (France) said that the Egyptian proposal dealt with a question which had
already been settled during the discussions on Article 14. Article 14 gave entire satisfaction to
the Egyptian delegation, and it was only necessary that this fact should be recorded.
The Chairman inquired whether the Committee would appoint a Rapporteur or whether
sentmeethig 6 authorise him to forward to the Drafting Committee the minutes of the pre-
ZZ d that the


Position of the Rapporteurs of the Sub-Committees at the Plenary Conference
M. Zahle, President of the Conference, proposed that the Rapporteurs for the various
Sub-Committees should undertake to defend the proposals of their various Sub-Committees
when they came to be discussed at the plenary Conference.
The proposals was adopted.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) inquired when the various delegates would be
expected to make such reservations as appeared to them to be necessary-
M. Zahle, President of the Conference, proposed that there should be a first and
second reading of the reports and articles. Amendments might be submitted either ait e
first or the second meeting and the reservations and observations of the various delegations
might be made at the second reading.
The Committee agreed.
Annex.
COMMITTEE OF CO-ORDINATION.
Note by the British Delegation.
The adoption by Sub-Committee A of a scheme which differs in many important respects
from the scheme submitted in Part I of the proposals of the Advisory Committee wifi
many of the criticisms contained in the reports of the Sub-Committees B and D . and a com
parison of the reports of the different Sub-Committees appears to lndl
imoortant points of divergence in the recommendations submitted by them to the Contere
Tthch appear to require the consideration of the Co-ordination Committee relate (i) to
die constitution of the Central Board and (2) to the statistics to be furnished to the
Central Board.
1. Constitution of the Central Board.
Sub-Committee A recommends that the Central Board should be constituted by seven
persons who, by their technical qualifications, impartiality and disinterestedness are 1 e y
to command general confidence, and who are to be chosen from a list on which each ot the
signatory Powers shall be entitled to place one name, ~ , mnstitnted in
Sub-Committees B and D recommend that the Central Boar _ o c ,1
equal numbers of representatives of the manufacturing and producing countries, on tl e
hand, and of the consuming countries, on the other hand.
When Sub-Committees B and D made this recommendation they had J
the proposals in Part I of the Advisory Committee s scheme, which conferred iraportent p
of control on the Central Board. Under the new scheme submitted by Sub-Committee A,
those powers have disappeared and the powers of the Board are limited to * a ? ch '"g
national traffic, making inquiries and submitting recommendations to t .
No compulsory powers of limiting imports into any country are conferred upon the Boaro,
and full safeguards are inserted in the scheme against any mistaken action on thel part of the
Board. In these circumstances, it appeared to Sub-Committee A that special! r . ep , :f }?
of consuming countries or any other group of countries was not required, and that, if t
Board is? Command general confidence and to be successful, it must be absolutely impartial
and independent of particular interests.
2. Statistics.
(a) Exports and Imports.
c u r nmm ; t tp P a rprnmmends that these statistics should be furnished quarterly, to
enabffi out its duty of watching the course of the international
tra tb Committee B recommends that statistics should only be required to be furnished
r^ht"
the financial year. Sub-Committee D makes a similar recommendation.


In this connection, it should be borne in mind that Sub-Committee E has unanimously
recommended that a separate authorisation or permit should be required in respect of each
consignment exported or imported. If this recommendation is adopted by the Conference
it would seem that it should be possible, from the data which will be available under this
new system, to furnish the statistics of imports and exports at short intervals, as recommended
by Sub-Committee A.
( b) Production,
Sub-Committee A recommends that the Governments should be asked to give annual
statistics of production of raw opium and the coca leaf.
.S Co !fJ llt J t 5 B su gS ests that States should be asked to give ?as accurate statistics as
P bt ' 6 ' dl^erence between the two recommendations does not appear to be one of
(c) Stocks.
f Su k" Comn ji t tee A proposes that stocks of the substances covered by Chapters I and 111
of the Hague Convention in the hands of wholesale dealers or held by the Government for
m In 6 C( J u , i y tr y io J other than Government purposes should be furnished annually
within five months of the end of the year uy
for thfcternmlrn to SU g fv S e eS lhem at Sh  UW be r^uired **  Possible
"wholes^k?dSier" 0 B alS  SUggeStS tha ? ? W  U ? d be desirable t0 define what is meant by
Here, again, the difference does not appear to be one of substance.


MINUTES
SUB-COMMITTEE A.
Geneva, November 28th , February 6th,


CONTENTS
Page
List of Members g^
First Meeting, Friday, November 28th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
1. Opening Speech by the Chairman 89
2. Discussion of the Plan of Work 89
Second Meeting, Saturday, November 29th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m
3. Observations of the Dutch Delegation on the Series of Measures proposed
by the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium and other Dangerous
Drugs : General Discussion g 2
Third Meeting, Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
4. Election of Vice-Chairman of the Sub-Committee 94
5. Estimate of Quantities necessary for Medicinal and Scientific Purposes. ... 94
Fourth Meeting, Thursday, December 4th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
6. The Method of Work of the Sub-Committee 0 a
TEo Olioclinn T I? n + C'' ~ l 1 T> 1 _
7. The Question of Establishing a Central Board 95
Fifth Meeting, Wednesday, December 10th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
8. Results of the Work of the Committee of Five qg
9. Re-convening of the Committee of Five 99
Sixth Meeting, Wednesday, December 17th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
10. Work of the Committee of Five
Seventh Meeting, Wednesday, December 17th, 1924, at 4.30 p.m.
11. Discussion of the Articles adopted ad referendum by the Committee of Five. . 101
Eighth Meeting, Thursday, January 22nd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
12. Election of a Chairman to replace Mr. Beland (Canada) 102
13 . Election of a Vice-Chairman to replace M. Sjostrand (Sweden) i O2
14- Election of two Members to represent Sub-Committee Aon the Committee
of Co-ordination
Ninth Meeting, Wednesday, January 28th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
15 ? Amendments proposed to the Articles adopted by Sub-Committee A. . . 104
Tenth Meeting, Thursday, January 29th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
16. Amendments proposed to the Articles adopted by Sub-Committee A {Con-
tinuation) ? . v
? 109
Eleventh Meeting, Friday, January 30th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
17- Approval of the Draft Articles
18. Statement by M. Palacios (Spain) n g
19 ? Proposal by the American Delegation concerning the Central Board ? Xl g
Twelfth Meeting, Monday, February 2nd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
20. Amendments and Reservations to the Draft Articles TT o
ot TWoD- n ? HO
21. Draft Report of the Committee ? ? ? 1
O Anr> 4- /-N 4- D TV Si A i * 1 X^O
22. Reservations to the Draft Articles. ???...! i
Thirteenth Meeting, Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 3.30' p.m.
23. Reconsideration of Article 6
122
Annexes
125


SUB-COMMITTEE A.
LIST OF MEMBERS.
Chairman : Mr. Henri S. Beland (Canada).
Vice-Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
The following countries were represented on the Sub-Committee :
United States of America,
Brazil,
British Empire,
Canada,
Czechoslovakia,
France,
Germany,
Japan,
Netherlands,
Siam,
Spain,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Uruguay.
The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee
and adopted by the First Committee at its second meeting held on November 25th, 1924.
FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, November 28 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
1. Opening Speech by the Chairman.
The Chairman reminded the Sub-Committee that it had to deal with the important
question of the limitation of the manufacture of narcotic drugs. He hoped that it would
consider the question fully but that at the same time it would rapidly reach a solution. He
suggested that the members should submit proposals concerning the plan of work to be
followed. He assured them of his impartiality and zeal.
2. Discussion of the Plan of Work.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) pointed out that the Sub-Committee had to dea
with a number of plans, including the measures proposed by the Opium Advisory Committee
(Doc. A. 32 {a). 1924, XI), which had suggested the creation of a Central Board the submis-
sion of estimates to it. He suggested that the Sub-Committee should deal first with the pro-
posal to establish a Central Board and to submit to it estimates and statistics.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that the Sub-Committee might take the different
heads of the Advisory Committee?s scheme and deal at the same time with any points in the
other scheme connected with them.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that it should first consider the ques-
tion of each country furnishing estimates of the quantities of drugs required by it for medica
and scientific purposes. There would be a difficulty in the case of countries which required
the raw materials or the drugs, not only for consumption but also for purposes of manufacture
and trade. He was of opinion that this point should not be touched for the moment and that
the Sub-Committee should consider simply whether it was possible for each country to
estimate what were its legitimate requirements for purposes of internal consumption. The
question of the Central Board was mainly of an administrative character and could be bettei
dealt with later.


M. Sugimura (Japan) agreed with the British view, but advocated the use throughout
of the expression ?medical and scientific requirements? as being more accurate than ?legi-
timate requirements.?
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said that his country was prepared to give an
estimate of the drugs which it required for medical and scientific purposes. That was why
he had suggested going on at once to the question of the Central Board. He suggested asking
each delegation present whether its Government was prepared to furnish estimates.
M. Buero (Uruguay) supported Mr. Neville?s remarks. He had just communicated
the quantities of drugs required by his country for medical and scientific purposes.
The Chairman thought that it was not so much a question of seeing whether the different
countries could furnish this information as of finding out whether the different delegations
were prepared to recommend that their several Governments should supply these particulars
to the Central Board.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) proposed that a general discussion be opened on the first
part of the Advisory Committee?s scheme in order that the Sub-Committee might know the
attitude of the various Governments in regard to the compromise proposed by the Advisory
Committee and that it might learn what measures would be suggested by those Governments
which were not prepared to furnish the Central Board with estimates.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) supported M. van Wettum?s proposal. Before dealing
with particular questions, the Sub-Committee ought to discuss the problem as a whole.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden) supported the British proposal. He said it was time they got to
work and found out whether the Governments were prepared to supply the estimates in
question.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) also supported the British proposal.
M. Bourgois (France) said he wished to direct his colleagues? attention to the difficulty
* jbtammg accurate statistics. The reports of the Mixed Committee of the Health Committee
and the Opium Advisory Committee proved the extreme difficulty of establishing a satis-
factory basis for estimating the quantities necessary for medical and scientific purposes.
He quoted statements made by Sir John Jordan (pages 79 and 80 of the Minutes of the Fifth
Session of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium) and by Mr. Campbell (pages 78
and 79 of the same document). The Sub-Committee must be careful, however, to avoid
exaggeration. It could always give approximate figures, but it would be impossible to
supp y per ectly accurate estimates which could be used as a basis for an international con-
vention.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) wished to point out that there were two distinct
questions : the estimate of the quantities required for medical and scientific purposes and,
1 possible, the estimate of the quantities required by each manufacturing country for pur-
poses of manufacture. J 1
M van Wettum (Netherlands) assured his colleagues that his proposal in regard to a
general discussion was not intended to delay the work of the Sub-Committee but rather to
expedite it. If certain countries were not prepared to give the figures required, the first
part of the compromise suggested in the Advisory Committee?s project could not form the
subject of any convention.
i j he Chairman summarised the discussion. He pointed out that the Sub-Committee
t d T h l e uir SaS before L * he American (questions connected with the Central Board),
the British (the willingness of the Governments to furnish, or the possibility of their furnishing
(general^dis^cussion!)^ ema reqmrements for medical and scientific purposes) and the Dutch
w BUERO (U u U i thoUght that logically the Dutch proposal ought to be examined
first to discover whether it was possible for the Governments to supply the figures in question.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that that was what he had proposed.
m Eckardt (Germany) stated that his Government was prepared to supply an esti-
purposes the quantltl6s of narcotlcs which Germany required for medical and scientific
countJv N TW St A te A S 1 Am f ica) made the same declaration as regarded his
y ?f Th Y n ted | tates dld not P roduce P mm or coca and did not permit the impor-
enter the cTnfiy Ur6d narcotlcs - onl y the raw materials (opium and coca leaves) cSild
~ B y UI 4 G T IS (prance) said that, in view of the difficulty of drawing up statistics to which
attention had been drawn by French medical and scientific organisations, the French Govern-
ment was not in a position to supply estimates of this kind.
M. Sugimura (Japan) observed that his Government was prepared to supply such esti-
mates. Scientific precision could not, of course, be obtained, but they must try to do some-
LeTaken " r6C  mmended the Hea *h Committee would enlbTe TheTnitial step to


M. van Wettum (Netherlands) reminded the Sub-Committee that it had not yet decided
whether or not a general discussion ought to take place before the question raised by Sir
Malcolm Delevingne was examined.
The Chairman said that, in view of the opinions which had been expressed, he thought
that the British proposal ought to be examined first.
||M. Sugimura (Japan) thought that, in view of the importance, as regarded the question
under discussion, of the Swiss and Dutch points of view, it would be desirable to give M.
Hulftegger and M. van Wettum an opportunity of making statements of a general character.
His proposal was that members should speak, in turn, on Sir Malcolm?s proposal and that each
delegation, after answering the question, should be allowed to make a general statement.
M. Bourgois (France) thought that it was essential that certain delegations should be
able to make a general statement of their views in order to indicate what points were impor-
tant and what were secondary, what questions could be settled by agreement and what
questions could not be settled in this way, etc. He therefore supported the Japanese proposal
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) also supported the Japanese proposal.
With reference to the British proposal, he observed that his Government would be able
to supply the estimates in question, but it did not think it would be desirable to do so.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) agreed with M. Bourgois? views. The statistics of the
quantities necessary for medical and scientific requirements must be accurate and scientific,
otherwise they would be of little use. The Federal Government did not possess the legal
powers necessary for obtaining the required figures. Moreover, 40 per cent of the morphine
manufactured in Switzerland was employed in the manufacture of codein. The Hague
Convention did not, however, prohibit the manufacture of this alkaloid, and it was therefore
not under Government control.
M. Buero (Uruguay) said that they were not at the moment discussing the quantities
necessary for manufacture.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) replied that codein was largely used for purposes of inter-
nal consumption.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) observed that the Advisory Committee?s
draft did not ask Governments to supply exact figures but estimates. If it were the case
that the present quantities were greatly in excess of medical and scientific requirements, and
if an attempt were to be made to reduce these quantities so as to bring them as near as
possible to the figures representing these requirements, some basis must be established, even
if only an approximate one, and even if, in the first instance, it exceeded by as much as
50 per cent the quantities necessary for real needs. Most countries were consuming countries,
and they would have no difficulty in supplying the desired estimates, or at any rate in taking
steps for that purpose. The position was undoubtedly more difficult for manufacturing
or trading countries. Great Britain, which was such a country, had made an enquiry as to
the quantities necessary for medical and scientific needs. Three methods had been employed: (1)
figures had been obtained of the amounts required under the National Health Insurance System
and for hospitals ; (2) manufacturers and wholesale firms had been asked to supply figures
with regard to the sale of the drugs to retail dealers and to doctors and other persons autho-
rised to use drugs for professional purposes ; (3) the quantities imported into or manufac-
tured in Great Britain had been compared with the quantities exported. The authorities
thus obtained figures of the quantities available for consumption in the country ; but
this last method was less exact than the first. In these ways they got statistics which, if
not scientific, were approximate.
As regarded the manufacture and consumption of codein in Switzerland, the quantities
of opium acquired for the manufacture of codein were no doubt included in the opium
import figures, and figures of the amounts of opium alkaloids acquired had been supplied by
the Federal Government in the statistics which it had sent to the Secretariat (see Doc.
O.D.C. 1 (1)).
The Chairman said that the Canadian Government would be able to supply the estimates
required. He was in favour of the establishment of a central bureau for collecting these
estimates.
M. de Arenzana (Spain) said that, as Spain had only compiled statistics with regard
to dangerous drugs during the last two years, she would only be able to give exact figures
in two years? time ; in the meantime, provisional figures could be supplied, but 15 per cent
would have to be added to them.
Prince Damras (Siam) said that Siam would be able to supply the estimates in question.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden) declared, on behalf of his Government, that the figures could
be supplied by Sweden.
M. Buero (Uruguay) made a similar declaration and added that his Government had
recently forwarded statistics on this subject to the Secretariat.
M. Hulftegger (Schwitzerland) explained that, legally speaking, the Federal Government
could not obtain opium import figures. The figures to which Sir Malcolm Delevingne had
referred were not official and could not be used as such.


M. Bourgois (France) remarked that, by the very nature of the case, stocks constantly
varied, and likewise the amount manufactured. The opium trade was therefore a specula-
tive enterprise.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) read a declaration (Annex i).
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday , November 29 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
3. Observations of the Dutch Delegation on the Series of Measures proposed by the Advisory
Committee on the Traffic in Opium and other Dangerous Drugs : General Discussion.
The Chairman, after summarising the proceedings at the previous sitting, said that
M. van Wettum?s statement (Annex 1) would now be discussed.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) stated that, if he understood M. van Wettum?s
statement correctly, the latter was afraid that the system would mean rationing the retail
chemists and compelling them to buy exclusively from certain firms. At present, chemists
might purchase anywhere in the world.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) replied that in his country the law permitted chemists
and druggists to import, export and manufacture, although under strict control. He had
no information how many in practice availed themselves of this right.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed entirely with the Netherlands Government. In France
drugs might at present be imported by chemists, doctors and veterinary surgeons, if furnished
with the official authorisation, which was granted on application. According to a recent draft
law, the Government could henceforth grant or refuse this authorisation without giving
reasons. At the present time, thousands of persons could introduce drugs under a system
of control.
The distribution of morphine among these persons would be impossible. If the draft
became law, wholesale dealers, fearing to run short, would accumulate stocks which, if they
became large enough, would enable the dealers to control the market. The penalty provided
in the American draft, which was similar in this respect to the draft of the Advisory Committee,
consisted in drawing the attention of the country concerned to the facts, but these facts would
also be made known by the final statistics to be furnished at the end of the year. In reality,
therefore, there would be no fresh penalty.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) believed that the conditions were almost iden-
tical in France and the Netherlands. He considered that the system of a Central Board, in
the first place, enabled the opium trade to be centralised and its control thereby facilitated.
In the United States, importation was strictly limited, for the country provided its own require-
ments, and the system of estimates compelled manufacturers to apply to the Government
for the exact quantities they required and, consequently, to manufacture only quantities they
were certain of selling.
Importation, manufacture and distribution must be centralised in a few hands, which
was, indeed, the case in most countries at the present time. It would therefore be best to
entrust this centralisation to firms which had already specialised in this trade.
M. Bourgois (France) emphasised the fluctuations in the trade, which varied in the pro-
portion of from one to three in consequence of the uncertainties of the harvest. The drug
trade was therefore a speculative business. In some years, stocks accumulated in the hands
of the 70 or so wholesale dealers in France. The difficulty of rationing increased with the
variations in stocks and the fluctuations of foreign trade. Drugs went from France to Great
Britain, Switzerland and Germany, and returned to France, etc. Centralisation would
facilitate rationing for domestic consumption, but would make foreign trade more difficult,
there was no doubt that markets would be still further dislocated. This constituted for
Europe a very great difficulty, of which the United States knew nothing
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that centralisation would not solve the difficulties.
Kationmg must be general, or it would be harmful to the rest of the country.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) asked whether chemists in the Netherlands and
trance had a general import licence or had to obtain a licence for each importation.
x^'1 xai ? ET J UM (Netherlands) replied that there was no system of import certificates in
tlic i etherlands. Importation was free, although controlled, but the import certificate system
would be in force shortly. x


M. Bourgois (France) explained that chemists, etc., were able to import freely. For other
persons, the system of Customs permits was in force. Within ten days the importer was
required to produce a certificate showing that the goods had been delivered to a chemist,
druggist, etc.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) asked whether there were any particular objec-
tions to adopting a system of separate import permits for each importation, and to adopting
a system of concentration of imports in the hands of wholesale dealers, as in the United States
and Great Britain.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) asked what happened if the goods were not delivered to a
chemist within the period of ten days.
M. Bourgois (France) replied that penalties were inflicted and the drugs seized.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands), in reply to Sir Malcolm Delevingne, said that rationing
must be absolute if it was to be effective.
M. Bourgois (France), in reply to Sir Malcolm Delevingne, said that he shared M. van
Wettum?s objection to centralisation. As to import certificates, France had none, but he
intended to propose to the competent Sub-Committee a new system of consignment advices.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) observed that he had not spoken of centralisation
within a few hands, nor had he raised the question of import certificates ; he had only
been speaking of separate permits for each importation.
Mr Neville (United States of America) thought that the point to be first considered was
the control of the traffic and not the interests of trade. Trade variations should not be
considered as a factor. There was no danger of available supplies being bought up, for drug
manufacturers also produced other chemical substances. A rise in the price of diugs \\ou
displease these customers ; besides, the Government would prevent such a use. v,as ?
that the United States were not large exporters of drugs, but Canada depended for her dom -
tic requirements entirely upon the United States. He therefore hoped that the Chan man
would explain the conditions under which drugs were imported into Canada.
The Chairman stated that all imports into Canada had to be made under a licence from the
Ministry of Public Health. The licence might be granted for a certain period, but a report
had to be made upon each importation. The licence might be granted or refused, but it was
generally given only to wholesale dealers.
M. Sugimura (Japan), while recognising the difficulties of the Central Board system, thought
that they must go boldly forward on a path that was still untrodden. A year might be taken
as the basis for the figures provided for in Article I of the Advisory Committee s draft, but
for the figures referred to in Article 2, the basis taken should be two or three years.
In Japan, the importation, manufacture and distribution of medicinal opium were a State
The Government distributed the drug to the chief administrative magistrates
who, in their turn, distributed it to the doctors, chemists, etc., on There was stnc
control, and any offence against the regulations was very severely punished. Consequently
the public sought to obtain other drugs than medicinal opium. He was therefore inclined to
agree with M. van Wettum. Rationing must not be too strict.
He submitted a memorandum by the Japanese delegation on the question (Annex 2),
which he intended to supplement by certain concrete proposals.
M. Bourgois (France), in reply to Sir Malcolm Delevingne, said that in France the decrees
were being modified so as to make the importer?s authorisation for each importation a Govern-
ment and not a local permit, which would enable it to be withdrawn without any reaso
being given. Furthermore, the regulations were very strict and drugs might not be stored
in the but had to be kept in a cupboard, the key of which was in the hands of the
hld H Mn Neville; humanitarian considerations should be decisive in the ques-
tion but account had also to be taken of practical needs. The consumption of drugs in France
was'two tons, and exports were also two tons. France?s financial interest in the matter was
Sma The estimate provided for in Article 20-E of the suggestions (submitted by the United States)
would have very little effect - not more, in fact, than the moral pressure exercised by the
central organisation when it reported inevitable excess requirements of imports.
Mr. Neville (United States of America), in reply to M. Bou rgois said that the only sanctions
in case of the estimates being exceeded, was the pressure of public opinion. On the othc
hanThowever all Governments would be obliged to pay more attention to their requirements
and, generally speaking, to the campaign against drugs ; otherwise the only result would b
a -compiling of statistics. The system proposed would render it-possibleMto form a
idea of the good-will of the Governments and the effectiveness of their control.
M. Bustamante (Spain) submitted a statement on behalf of his Government (Annex 3).


THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada),
4. Election of Vice-Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
On the proposal of Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), M. Sjostrand (Sweden)
was elected Vice-Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
5. Estimate of Quantities necessary for SVledicinal and Scientific Purposes.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) said that his country was in a position to estimate its medical
and pharmaceutical needs for internal consumption but not for exportation.
M. Bourgois (France) said that his Government would examine once more the possibilitv
of making an estimate. J
M. Sugimura (Japan) was of opinion that the question of the quantities required for
medical and scientific purposes intended for exportation was quite -separate from that of
the quantities necessary for home consumption.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that, if the French Government was
icady to pass over the difficulties outlined by M. Bourgois at the last meeting, an appreciable
step forward had been made. 1
M Bourgois (France) explained that in certain years the production corresponding to
me ical and scientific requirements might be exceeded, as stocks might have been created,
t he basis to be taken was therefore the actual medical and scientific needs and not the annual
for the end h of e thTye e ar WOUM  n JanUary Ist > but would be based on the statistics
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that there was no reason why manufac-
turers should not avail themselves of a year in which raw materials were cheap to form stocks
provided that no exportation permit exceeding the annual estimate of exports were given.
cons!;it 8 . 0^ S . (^ anCe) dl r d * ot . think that the importing countries could be forbidden to
constitute stocks if the manufacturing countries were allowed to do so.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) replied that if every trader were allowed to
constitute large stocks the whole scheme would be stultified.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed, but did not think it possible to set up two different rules :
one for importing countries and one for manufacturing countries.
Mr- Neville (United States of America) considered that too much importance was being
TV* 1 and U ntific needs of theUarious countrfef
were very small. The right of keeping stocks was undoubted, and it would be for each Govern-
ment to estimate its requirements in this respect. Moreover, manufacturing countries already
it waf U?h U* 1* W3S U a p / ivilege  f the manufacturing countries ;
t was an established fact. The estimate given by the Central Board might also be made to
include the quantities necessary for the formation of stocks.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that M. Bourgois exaggerated the
danger which would be incurred by manufacturers. Competition would oblige them to charge
ow prices in years when the harvest was good. In such years the Governments of the produc-
colsTturn PO oTstUks UntrleS CoUld reVISe the,r est ? in as to permiJoTthe
explanation^ 0013 (Fran  e) declared himself satisfied with Sir Malcolm Delevingne's
(J a P an ) was not in favour of the constitution of excessive storks UTp
accepted Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s explanations, but be considered that the manufacturing
?^ySttS;., l ? thlS Way 6tOCkS be con f rut P ed Soul
that F h mCn^'S U*
considering estimates for exportation He that?V^
the estimates would have to be revised. g ? er ? that m t ha case of epidemics


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that, in principle, M. Bourgois,
M. Sugimura and himself were in agreement.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said that clearly three years would be required
in any case to ascertain the exact requirements of a country. This was the time which had
been required by his own Government for its estimates, in which it had taken into account
the quantities required for epidemics.
M. Sugimura (Japan) explained that the estimates would be provisional ; epidemics
were events of the past and constituted exceptional cases to be distinguished from the ordi-
nary estimates.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden), Vice-Chairman, considered that if a country wanted to revise
its estimates it should make an application to the Central Board, giving its reasons. A formal
procedure would have to be established for this purpose. He was also of the opinion that the
estimate ought to be made for three years.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) did not see any difference between estimates taken on
the basis of three years and estimates based on annual statistics.
M. Bourgois (France) observed that if factories were established or disappeared, require-
ments in raw materials or in manufactured goods might change.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) did not think that domestic requirements would
vary much from year to year. The question of exportation would in any case be considered
later.
M. Sugimura (Japan) explained that each year an estimate of medical and scientific
needs, which might increase or diminish, would be submitted, leaving epidemics out of account.
Consuming countries must be entitled to buy when conditions were good, so that manufac-
turing countries should not be able to reap excessive profits at the expense of the importing
countries. During the first year, supplies could be bought not only for twelve months but
also for the first two or three months of the second year. If the proposal raised difficulties
from the point of view of the consuming countries, he would not press the point. Elasticity
was essential. The specified period might be one of two years or four years, instead of three
years.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed with M. Sugimura as regarded the elasticity of the system.
But he feared that the estimate of, domestic requirements was being confused with that of
exportation in the discussion. The point he wished to emphasise was that imports could
not be based on medical and scientific needs. A distinction must be made between domestic
requirements and requirements for exportation.
M. Sugimura (Japan) agreed on the distinction to be made between the two points.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden) explained the difference between the system of an annual esti-
mate based on statistics and the estimate made for a period of three years. Ihe latter allowed
a certain margin, while inaccurate statistics could be corrected by the Governments when they
drew up their estimates.
M van Wettum (Netherlands) pointed out that the estimates could not be made on
any other basis than that of the statistics. He therefore did not see any difference between
estimate and statistics. Figures could not be taken as binding, otherwise a system of absolute
rationing would have to be introduced.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that it was true that statistics might serve
as a basis for the estimates, but the latter would have to be given in advance, since the whole
proposal of the Advisory Committee was based on this principle. Ihe Central Board must
be able to inform the countries that they had exceeded the prescribed quantity. It would
be moie in keeping with the dignity of the Governments if the Governments themselves,
rather than the Central Board, fixed the quantities necessary. Moreover, as the Central
Board based the quantities on statistics, it could not inform a Government that it was
exceeding the quantity required until it had already done so.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) said that, as long as drugs were an article of free trade and
not a State monopoly, his Government could not be bound by a figure of internal consumption ,
for in this case it would be necessary to introduce a system of general rationing of imports
which could only be done through the agency of a State monopoly. The Conference, however,
did not seem prepared to accept the idea of a State monopoly.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) did not see why certain Governments would
be unable to supply estimates. They need only take the statistics of the quantities of drugs
passing through the Customs. In the event of greater requirements, the Governments had
the option of revising their estimates. Moreover, the traders did not merely sell drugs, and,
in order to avoid displeasing their customers, they would not attempt to coiner the diugs.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed with M. van Wettum. In support of his view, he read the
importation statistics in Document O. C. D. I. (i), which varied by 100 per cent.
M. Sugimura (Japan) thought that, in a very large country like the United States?
an average figure might be calculated ; but this would be much more difficult in a small


country like the Netherlands. As regards Great Britain and France, it would seem to be
possible.
Since the war there had been great fluctuations in the drug market, and the statistics
varied widely from one year to another. It might, however, be anticipated that they would
become more regular in future.
There was competition between the manufacturing countries, and difficulties arose from
this fact. Since there was free competition, stocks were needed in the consuming countries
as well as in the manufacturing countries. The margin of three years provided a guarantee
for the consuming countries. The constitution of stocks in manufacturing countries depended
on the needs of the consuming countries. What must be avoided was the creation of large
stocks. This could only be prevented by means of the widest publicity.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) shared M. van WettunTs view. Manufacturers would
be obliged to give a maximum figure on account of their uncertainty as to the future. The
difficulties were greater for small countries like Switzerland, which were dependent on the
international market. He was of the opinion that the question of estimates could only
be dealt with in connection with that of limitation. In this connection he read a memorandum
setting forth his country?s views on the question (Annex 4).
M. von Eckardt (Germany) did not see why it was easier to make estimates for a large
country than for a small one. b
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that in a large country a falling-off in the requirements in
certain distiicts was compensated by an increase in other districts ; moreover, an epidemic
ravaged a small country more completely than a large one.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden) supported Sir Malcolm Delevingne?s views. In Sweden it was
perfectly possible to check the figures. There was a central medical board for this purpose.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) asked M. Bourgois to define his position clearly
After agreeing at the beginning of the meeting to ask his Government to accept the system
0 estimates (Article 1 of the Advisory Committee?s draft), he had appeared subsequently
ogo back on his decision. Moreover, he did not think that M. Bourgois was justified in basing
his objections on past statistics drawn up before the system of control had come into existence
and on the fact that no Government could know exactly its present requirements of drugs.
Despite fluctuations, normal annual requirements did not vary much from year to year.
Apart from epidemics and wars, there were no reasons to justify fluctuations. Assuming,
then, that fluctuations from year to year were not very great, and that a certain elasticity was
given to the proposal, the speaker did not see any reason against the adoption of the system.
M. Bourgois (France) said that the cause of variations in the statistics was permanent
and could not be eliminated ; it was the variation in the amount of opium produced which
led the constitution of stocks, etc.
As regarded his own position, he explained that the use to which the estimates should
be put was not in his opinion the same as that suggested by Sir Malcolm Delevingne. The
b !u Vei ? US6fU f  r tW  reaS  ns : (I) on account of the moral undertaking
hG Gov , ernment ? to revise their estimates; (2) the estimates could be
tr L an C fi  Vered a perlod of from three t0 five years ; they would render it possible
1 an average figure for consignments to any given country. The system of estimates
alth  Ugh 11 WOuld not have all the consequences attributed to it by Sir
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December yth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
6. The Method of Work of the Sub-Committee.
*v. T c e f r AIEM T. said . that ; he conversations which he had had with several members
connateJwithTw 6 ?/ T? the qUeSti  n  f establishin g a Central Board was closely
connected with that of estimating requirements, and it would therefore be desirable that the
two questions should be discussed at the same time.
A greed.
7. The Question of Establishing a Central Board.
establishment a (Vn+ral ofAmenca ) that no objection had been raised to the
establishment of a Central Board ; he proposed that this Board should be composed of inter-
national experts chosen for their competence and not dependent upon Governments.


M. Sugimura (Japan) and M. van Wettum (Netherlands) shared Mr. Neville?s opinion.
M. Buero (Uiuguay) thought it would be best in the first place to come to an agreement
as to the object aimed at by the Sub-Committee. He approved the object aimed at by the
United States delegation in advocating the establishment of a Central Board namely, the
centralisation of estimates. The French, Swiss and Netherlands delegations, however merely
wanted the Board to constitute an information bureau.
M. Bourgois (France) expressed agreement with his Uruguayan colleague?s views. He
admitted that an estimate could be given of the quantities necessary for medical and scienti-
fic purposes in each country, but he did not see how the quantities necessary for industrial
and commercial purposes could be estimated. The functions of the Board would therefore
be very modest, and the existing organs would perhaps suffice for centralising statistics. It
would therefore be well to settle the question of estimates before deciding on the establishment
of a Central Board.
M. Buero (Uruguay) asked whether the Committee was or was not in favour of the system
of estimating the quantities necessary for legitimate domestic needs (medical and scientific),
with a view to the restriction and supervision of imports.
By stating the question in this way, he was leaving on one side the question of manufacture
and the question of exportation, which had been dealt with by the Swiss representative in
his very interesting memorandum (Annex 4).
He also thought that his formula had the advantage of leaving no room for misunderstanding.
At a previous meeting, the French delegate had stated that he was not opposed to the system
of estimates, because he thought that an estimate might help to determine the legitimate
needs of a country in respect of narcotics. It would be difficult, estimating its requirements
at a particular figure, repeatedly to exceed the amount of the estimate and even double that
amount. Subject to that reserve, M. Bourgois had accepted the system of estimates.
Acceptance on such terms, however, would not satisfy those who believed in the American
system. In agreeing to begin by discussing the question of estimates, which form part of
the Advisory Committee?s programme, the Sub-Committee had intended that the estimates
should be made with a view to limiting the importation of narcotics, as otherwise the question
of limitation would have been raised in the first instance. Each delegation must know, when
voting on the question of estimates, what the position was. They must therefore ask the
opinion of the Sub-Committee as to this system of estimates, which was designed to limit
the importation of drugs to legitimate requirements (medical and scientific). In that way the
Sub-Committee would not lose its time by insisting upon questions upon which agreement was
impossible.
M. Bourgois (France) said that in principle he agreed with M. Buero, but that he would
like to examine his proposal in detail. Instead of the word ?limitation?, he would prefer the
word ?control.?
The Chairman, in summarising the discussion, said that certain members of the Sub-
Committee preferred to send in estimates at the beginning of the year, while others preferred
to send statistics at the end of the year.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) said that the question did not bear the same aspect in
all countries. Consuming countries could easily estimate their requirements, which were
exclusively medical and scientific, whereas manufacturing countries could not give those figures
as estimates. Switzerland, in particular, could only give statistics, and even that was not
certain.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) thought that all the members of the Sub-Com-
mittee agreed in wishing to restrict the consumption of the drugs (opium and coca and their
derivatives) to medical and scientific requirements. He asked M. van Wettum to explain
what use the Central Board could make of statistics.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that statistics formed a better basis than esti-
mates, for they gave the quantities actually consumed, whereas estimates might be modified
in the course of the year. He was willing to give the Central Board very wide powers : it
would have the right to correspond with Governments which had furnished statistics and to
publish all relevant documents and statistics, and also to let the whole world know that
such-and-such a country had exceeded its requirements in respect of drug consumption.
M. Bourgois (France) fully agreed with the view expressed by the Netherlands delegate.
He thought that there were three currents of opinion ; some persons were in favour of
statistics, others in favour of estimating medical and scientific requirements, while others
wanted both these requirements and also manufacturing requirements to be estimated.
M. Buero (Uruguay) proposed that a Drafting Committee of four or five should be
appointed to draw up a formula on which they could all agree.
M. Bourgois (France) and M. van Wettum (Netherlands) supported M. Buero?s proposal.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that to give up the requirement of esti-
mates would be equivalent to giving up limitation of manufacture. Statistics supplied after
the end of the year were not an adequate substitute. It was difficult even for Governments
to collect statistics within a fixed period, even when the law made delay in the despatch of


the statistics punishable ; and the Central Board would not have that power behind it.
Then, again, without estimates furnished by the responsible Government the Central Board
would have no standard to work by in considering whether the imports as shown by the
statistics were excessive. The Central Board could only work effectively if the system of esti-
mates was in force. Again, if the Central Board decided that a country had taken excessive
quantities, the only measure of control which could be taken would be for the Governments
of the other countries to come to an agreement not to export any further quantities to the
country in question. This would, however, be very difficult to apply, as the decision of the
Central Board would be taken long after the quantities had been consumed.
M. Sjostrand (Sweden) thought the Sub-Committee was agreed on two points : (i) the
establishment of a Central Board, and (2) the transmission to this Board of statistics
or estimates. It would perhaps be possible to use the statistics for the purpose of the esti-
mates, for they would already have as a basis the estimate supplied by Sub-Committee F.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) did not object to the idea of appointing a small
Committee.
M. Sugimura (Japan) declared, on behalf of his Government, that the question of limi-
tation was an essential one ; the question of commercial interests was secondary. As regards
methods, the position required to be cleared up. As regards the object to be aimed at, they
must insist on limitation. ~ fdl
He recognised that statistics constituted a very important factor, but the statistics of
one year could not serve as a basis for the following year. They must take into account
the statistics for three or four years. Countries should not be bound by their estimates.
The estimates ought to be limited : (1) to medical and scientific requirements within
a country, and (2) to the needs of commerce, provided that such needs corresponded to
medical and scientific requirements. The difficulty arose owing to the fact that stocks would
remain unused, but, even allowing a certain amount of latitude, they could arrive at an
estimate.
As regards the proposed organisation, it could not be invested with the power to make
estimates, for that would be contrary to the principle of sovereignty of States ; it could
only act by publicity and by appealing to public opinion.
M. Bourgois (France) was in entire sympathy with the views of the Japanese delegate,
except as regards the question of trade requirements. He thought that more confidence
ought to be shown in the statistics.
It was decided to appoint a small Committee to examine Part 1 of the measures proposed
by the Advisory Committee, and to draw up a text on this subject which would correspond to the
opinions expressed by the Members of the Sub-Committee.
It was decided that this Committee would he composed of the representatives of the following
five countries: the United States of America, the British Empire, France, Japan and the Nether-
lands, and that it would meet under the chairmanship of the Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
FIFTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 10 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
8. Results of the Work of the Committee of Five.
The Chairman stated that the small Committee composed of five members annmntpd
by the Subcommittee at its last meeting had held five Meetings under his chairmlnstnp d
after a friendly and informal discussion which threw light on the subjects under discussion'
the Committee was unfortunately unable to come to an agreement on the very important points
which had been referred to it. Each of the five members of the Commits wouWhave
an opportunity of stating his point of view in the Sub-Committee
The Committee of Five had discussed : (i) the creation of a Central Board and its
powers and duties ; (2) the advisability of the Governments submitting estimates of their
medical and scientific requirements for internal consumption and also estimates of their
needs for commerce and manufacture ; (3) the submission of reports and statistics
Jl. Buero (Uruguay) asked if it would be possible to have a brief summary of the argu-
ments put forward by the members of the Committee of Five. y 8


The Chairman said that from the outset there had been serious differences of opinion
in this Committee. Some members did not want to make it compulsory to furnish the
estimates but only to furnish statistical reports, while others wanted both estimates and
statistics , a proposal to the effect that estimates should only be supplied in respect of
medical and scientific needs did not meet with any better success.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) asked if the submission of estimates could not be made
optional.
M. de Palacios (Spain) considered that if the Sub-Committee were given a majority
and a minority report, it would be in a much better position to discuss the question and form
an opinion.
The Chairman replied that, in the matter of the estimates, there had been two extreme
proposals, and neither had been accepted by a majority. There had been a majority (3
against 2) against the full estimates, and in favour (3 against 2) of estimates of the quantities
required for medical and scientific purposes.
9. Re-convening of the Committee of Five.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed with M. de Palacios, but he believed in the possibility
of an agreement and asked that the discussion should be resumed in the Committee of Five
for this purpose. This Committee had given way to discouragement at the very moment
when an agreement would have been possible.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) supported M. Bourgois? proposal, adding the amendment
that the Committee of Five should not adjourn until it had reached a conclusion.
M. Bourgois (France) accepted this amendment.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) was not aware that any fresh possibility of
agreement had arisen.
M. Bourgois (France) said that his proposal implied that the French delegation was
prepared to make concessions.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said that the Sub-Committee had examined
the problem in all its aspects, except, perhaps, as regards the constitution of the Central
Board. Of course, there already existed an Advisory Committee. The Central Board should
have at least all the attributions of the Advisory Committee. If a new body was created,
it must be given the general control of all measures relating to the traffic in harmful drugs!
The executive powers of the Central Board must therefore be extended. In'short, it must
deal with everything relating to this traffic. The question of the estimates had raised great
difficulties ; their submission had seemed useless, if not impossible. The position of the
United States was favourable ; they had a large population, and no drugs were exported ;
the importation of raw materials was confined to the medical and pharmaceutical require-
ments of the country.
The Conference ought to decide on suppression of the traffic in drugs intended for other
than medical and scientific purposes.
Mr. Neville said that he took an extreme view, but he was prepared to make certain
concessions, although he was not ready to sacrifice everything in order to reach an agreement.
He could not consent to half-measures which would remain ineffective. He was ready to
co-operate wholeheartedly in the work of all the Committees, but, above all, he wished to
reach a tangible result.
M. Bourgois (France) considered that it was impossible to have two bodies an Advisory
Committee and a Central Board having similar powers.
The Chairman did not think they could withdraw from the Sub-Committee the right
to take a decision concerning the creation of the Central Board.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) agreed with Mr. Neville that, in order to combat the drug
scourge, recourse must be had to methods both technical and moral. The latter were of a
higher order, but not necessarily the more effective, and should only be brought into play
when the former had failed to yield all the results anticipated. Granted good-will, however,
the Governments had at their disposal a very wide choice of practical methods. The domestic
legislation of each country permitted a control of the home situation, especially in regard to
manufacture, and frontier control provided for the suppression of international contraband
traffic. Practically and technically, the system was complete.
At the same time, it was expedient to consider what could be done on moral lines and
what powers were to be conferred upon a new international organisation. The question was to
ascertain how far moral control could be extended. If every country informed the central
body of its own situation as regards the application of the Hague Convention, the result
would be satisfactory. There was, moreover, no reason to suppose that the Hague Convention,
supplemented by the present Convention, would be ineffective.
In conclusion, the Swiss delegation was able to agree with the principles contained in
Mr. Neville?s statements.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought, with M. Bourgois, that the small Committee
should resume its work, and he agreed with M. de Palacios that, whatever the results of this


work, it should report to the Sub-Committee. The question of the Central Board seemed
to him essential.
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that the Japanese delegation had received very wide instruc-
tions, and its role had been more or less that of mediator on the small Committee. Its
however, had not been successful, and if the Committee was reconstituted, Japan could not
be represented on it.
bir Malcolm Delevixgxe (British Empire) was prepared to make a new attempt with the
small Committee, but he would like to know first whether the opponents of the Advisory
Committee?s draft were ready to make concessions.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said, in reply to M. Dinichert, that if frontier
control were effectual, the situation would not be what it is to-day. The quantities of
drugs seized United States ports, which are situated very far from the manufacturing
countries, for the year ending June 1924 were approximately the following : 1 ton ol
opium, 156 lbs. of morphine, 47 lbs. of cocaine.
M. Dixichert (Switzerland) said that among the quantities seized there were probably
drugs of Swiss manufacture, but Switzerland was on the point of strictly applying the Hague
Convention and the system of import certificates, and this would put a stop to any illicit
traffic. Moreover, these seizures might form the subject of diplomatic negotiations between
States, independently of the Central Board.
The Chairman said he had some hesitation in convening the small Committee afresh.
He thought that it would in any case be well for members of the Sub-Committee not belonging
to the Committee of Five to make some general proposals.
M. Bourgois (France) supported the Chairman?s suggestion.
M. Blero (Uruguay) also gave his support to this suggestion and proposed that the
Swiss aelegate should be added to the small Committee.
deleglteXr Uruguay. *** BoUEGOIS < France ) supported the proposal of the
M - Sugimura (Japan) announced his retirement from the limited Committee and expressed
a desire to be replaced by the delegate for Uruguay. expressed
Commitfef RO F!UUCfl y, i tha \ k f d . \ Su g?ura. but he begged him to continue on the small
mad6 * '? rk  f f
... Sir / + l alC r lm D I LEVINGNE (British Empire) thought it would be expedient for the compo-
sition of the Committee to remain unchanged in order to facilitate discussion and agreement
M. Sjostraxd (Sweden) urgently requested the Japanese delegate to reconsider his
decision and to remain a member of the small Committee. " er Jus
ai I? 1 ) Sugi * iur a (Japan) stated that, before deciding, he would confer with the fir<t delegate
M. Kaku. He added that the Japanese delegation had given up all hope of
Mr. Neville (United States of America) paid a warm tribute to M Sngimura?s efforts
hi co-operation  P  m ? S V " W * a " d he " uld regret Uif the Committee ?3 re deprived ? f
the Committee, M. confelft "' lthclre ' V from
M. Dixichert (Switzerland) proposed that the limited a, u
itself call upon those members of the Sub-Committee whose presence U thought deshabir^
Eckaid^afid^M.^inicherf^was^dopted 60071^1^ **
It was decided that the small Committee should meet at once.
SIXTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December iyth, 1924, at 3.30 p m
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
10. Work of the Committee of Five.
-The Chairman stated that the small Committee of Five wHic'E r
consider the constitution of the Central Board, had made


question and had arrived at an agreement on a number of essential points. It had drafted
a scheme, which had been amended at its last meeting. He expressed his regret that M. Sugi-
mura had felt it his duty to withdraw from this small Committee, as his co-operation would
have been of great value in hastening the conclusion of the agreement.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) proposed that the project should be communicated to
the members for consideration and that the work of the Sub-Committee should be regarded
as concluded.
M. Bourgois (France) wished first to be allowed an opportunity of explaining the reasons
for the reservations which he had submitted.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) pointed out that the reservations would be
published by the Secretariat.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) stated that the scheme drafted by the Com-
mittee of Five was quite different from that of the Advisory Committee. He was obliged
to leave Geneva that evening and regretted that he could not be present at the discussion
or explain his point of view.
M de Palacios (Spain) suggested that the Sub-Committee should hold a meeting the
next day. The scheme was quite new, and some explanations were necessary if the delegates
were to be able to acquaint their Governments with the arguments for and against it.
M. Bourgois (France) urged the necessity of discussing the matter. He proposed that
a meeting should be held that same day in order that Sir Malcolm Delevingne might be pre-
sent.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) supported M. Bourgois? proposal.
M. de Palacios (Spain) asked that the text of the scheme might be communicated in
advance to the members of the Sub-Committee.
It was decided that this should he done.
SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 17 th, 1924, at 4.30 p.rn.
Chairman : Mr. H. Beland (Canada).
11. Discussion of the Articles adopted ad referendum by the Committee of Five (Annex 5).
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said he wished to make a very short and
PUreI T y |,Scheme pre"by the Committee of Five differed greatly both from the schemes
for the direct limitation of manufacture submitted to the preparatory Committee and also t t
compromise scheme submitted by the Advisory The scheme was a
for keeping a clear watch on the course of international traffic. It provided lor the estabiis .
raent of a Central Board, which would receive from Governments every two months in or-
mato as to the imports from, and exports to, each country. The Board would also be fur-
nished in advance by the Governments for its guidance with estimates of the requirements
individual countries in regard to narcotic drugs ; these estimates would not. however,
bind the Governments. Complete statistics as to production, manufacture, consumpt o ,
each of the articles and P-nted out that
rjssiscr
of controlling the amounts to be exported in certain cases had been dropped, and the sanction
behind the new scheme would be that of the moral pressure of public opinion.
M Bourgois (France) gave his reasons for holding that the statistics should be supplied
everv twelk minths and not every two months. Under the latter arrangement, manufac-
turing countries would be placed in a favoured position, for they would only supply t air
sialistics oncT a year, while non-manufacturing countries would furnish them every two
m  nt Statistics supplied every two months would be meaningless for purchases were spread
out over a number of months, and what was required was total quantity o the drugs.
Moreover, drugs frequently passed from one country to a number of othei countries bei
they reached their final destination. \
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said that the object of the Con ( e U"? e wates
check the illicit traffic in dangerous drugs to the fullest P^ s ? b ) e U, at p 1 even sulges-
had offered to supply the whole of the statistics at any time, and one delegate had even gg
ted that the Central Board might ask the Governments to give information at any i ~


The  e i e iS^i C^F U^ wea e i^^ed SeCUring a " a  reeme^t-
The unfairness referred
addUjon, fire quanta remaking 
be giTCn^<fn^y^v l ery^x n^ontffs ed The t CeSral^oan?TOuld 0 onlv > e OV that Sta ? istics Sh  uld
c?d traffiC ' U ? * matters *of only the^cou'ntry
was equivalent to three Th eB nar d r ful d? t for,! f 6 am . oUl ?f used da % by an addict
of the contraband traffic aV, could iT^^^t^ y d 3. the at Cen ?-
Bourgois woffid^ompletely^pnve^he 1 of'th m  difica ? ion proposed by M.
of the traffic. It would only  f - atcbin g the ?"se
regards the international traffic, it was the imports
M. Sjosteand (Sweden) read a statement (Annex 6).
rf G the U sc A heme Pan) h<s W ' Shed t0 express his appreciation of the work done by the
which d jd ?? v j h t0 d ? scu f ?he details of the scheme,
dut.es of the Central Board being enTrusfed to the Advf "r 116 SaW any ob i ec ? io " to the
Opium, which might perhaps be rfmodelled. d th Ad y Committee on the Traffic in
question. T The L LSrai e Bo S a ta d te wouldTav^lxecuHve no? 16 ?? ifficulty in answ ering that
be non-political and would be entrusted with l! ,1 d 1 advisor y powers. It would
Advisory Committee, in spite of its being an the traffic ' The
powers and was respons.ble for ensuring the ffitonadonaf treat?e?s ' ***
M. von Eckaedt (Germany) said that he would submit the scheme to his Government.
EIGHTH MEETING
HM at Geneva m Thursday, January 22nd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
12. Election of a Chairman to replace IVIr. Beland.
< Canada h had been Chairman of
therefore have to proceed to t h^eSonffiw ?mam Sub - Com ??tee would
should r b??d claffiman NE (Bri ? iSh Eml * e) pr  posed that M - Sjostrand (Sweden)
This proposal was unanimously adopted.
13. Election of a Vice-Chairman to replace M. Sjostrand
Sir Malcolm Delevingne Wettum (Netherlands)
14 ' E,e Co "ordlnaGom "^h 6 - 8 * ?s*" 4 8 *n the Committee o,
Conference, M. dr* pfkdof (SpainHSd o/thf Ct ple meetin  of ?he
the various delegations on the Committee of Co ordinadon
that one country might find itself with twn ? A ? 016 a t acios had pointed out
of Co-ordination 5 ; wfereas other*'Sn^ldTo FtolgSFZ'rt
would now become less acute in view of the fact that rP nt 1 L Thls P rob lem
to propose that the Conference should increase the mpmhprc- C  mmit t e e had decided
nation by the addition of representatives from Sub-CommitteS E and p 01111 ? 11^ 6  f Co'ordi-
sentatives, however, Sub-Committee A should not of dF m 1 e J ectm g rePre-
m view of the inclusion of Z CommSettf


Co-ordination, Switzerland found herself represented by two persons : Dr. Carnere, the Chair
man of Sub-Committee F, and himself, who had been elected by Sub-Committee B. At a
future meeting of Sub-Committee B, he would raise this point.
M. de Palacios (Spain) thanked M. Dinichert for the reference which he had made to
the point which M. de Palacios had raised at the plenary meeting of the Conference.
In reply to M. von Eckardt (Germany), M. Dinichert (Switzerland) pointed out that
the members of the Committee of Co-ordination would sit as representatives of then Su
Committees and not of their countries. Therefore the question of nationality would not seem
to be of the first importance.
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that the Committee of Co-ordination was perhaps the most
important Committee of the Conference. The discussions which had taken place in Sub-
committee A had revealed two distinct and opposed points of view, and for this t e
Sub-Committee should elect two representatives who should be able to express the two different
points of view existing in the Sub-Committee. Sir Malcolm Delevmgne and Mr. Neville had
been the principal members supporting one point of view, and M. Bourgois and M. van
Wettum the principal members who had supported the other.
M de Palacios (Spain) thought that it was most necessary for Sir Malcolm Delevmgne
and M. Bourgois to be members of the Committee of Co-ordination As, however M. Bourgois
would already be a member in his capacity as Chairman of Sub-Committee E, it would not
be necessary for Sub-Committee Ato elect him as its representative.
M Sugimura (Japan) pointed out that representatives of the Sub-Committees on the
Committee of Co-ordination would not be able to decide grave questions of dispute between
the views of the Sub-Committees without reference to the body which had elected them.
The work of the Committee of Co-ordination would therefore be rather of a technical nature.
What was required was that its members should be experts in harmonising points? of
which were similar and differed only in detail. Grave questions of issue would have to be
referred either to the plenary Conference or to the Sub-Committees.
M. Bourgois (France) said that as Chairman of Sub-Committee Ehe was also a member
of the Committee of Co-ordination, and that M. van Wettum was in a similar position,
asked whether they would have the right to speak and vote on matters of concern to Sub-
Committee A.
The Chairman replied in the affirmative.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) thought it essential that both M. van Wettum and M.
Bourgois should be able to speak and vote in matters concerning Sub-Committee A, in view
of their special competence.
M de Palacios (Spain) considered that it would be impossible for a point arising between
Sub-Committee A and Sub-Committee B to be discussed in the Committee of Co-ordination
onlv bv the representatives of those Sub-Committees. Such a procedure would entir y
nullify the object of the Committee of Co-ordination, which ought to regard its task as forming
a single whole.
M Sugimura (Japan) said that, as a result of the discussion, he withdrew his proposal
and moved that in view of the fact that M. Bourgois and M. van Wettum were already members
of the Committee of Co-ordination, Sir Malcolm Delevmgne and Mr. Neville should be
appointed as representatives of Sub-Committee A.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) pointed out that, if the Sub-Committee adopted this
proposal it should add that it appointed Sir Malcolm Delevmgne and Mr. Neville on the under-
standing? that M. Bourgois and himself would have the right to speak and vote on matter
affecting Sub-Committee A.
M Dinichert (Switzerland) maintained that all member on the Committee of Co-ordi-
nation were on the same footing and would have the right to discuss any point m the report
?f-t-cri in +}-,pm Faoh individual member of that Committee had the duty to watch
interests of the Sub-Committee which he represented and to furnish any explanations
which might prove necessary regarding the proposals made by that Sub-Committee.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed with the point of view put forward by M. de Palacios and
supported the proposal of M. van Wettum.
Mr Riddell (Canada) thought that, in order to prevent the same members representing
more than one Sub-Committee, Sub-Committee A could draw up a list of membeis w
it desired to represent it and that the names of those members who were elected by anot
Sub-Committee should then be struck off the list if necessary.
The Chairman asked the Sub-Committee whether it was ready to agree to the proposal
put forward by M. Sugimura that Mr. Neville and Sir Malcolm Delevmgne should represen
it on the Committee of Co-ordination.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) desired that it should be recorded in the minutes that Sir
Malrolm Delevinene and Mr. Neville were elected on the understanding that M. Bourgois
have the right to speak and vote in the Committee of Coordination
on all questions affecting Sub-Committee A.


should'b?"sse T d ? a proposed by M. von Eckardt
Mr Neville and Sir rf? ? 1 , The Sub-Committee should say that it electee!
mitteeota^dtaatitwo'Sd I 'rfSt to dS^n^ 8 *"?
To mention M. Bourgois and M van Weftr.m hv nf qU  S ? n . s a  ectln  Sub-Committee A.
did not consider that the o"her members ofX m>ght mipiy that Sub-Committee A
discuss its report members of the Committee of Co-ordination had the right to
electing Delevingne Nevi^'T' 11 ?* 166 sh n ld make U clear that . in
Sub-Committee, it did so on S ?e strictunderstandta ZtTb^T 0 ? 6 P  int  f ? w in *he
be represented by M. van Wettum and himQelf ? * Et t J? e ^ er point of view should
i irss:r ?? * tss sssss tzrs
fl - t W  Uld be imp  ssibk for Sub-
the Committee of Co-ordination might decide that all S represe^ tatlves - For instance,
and Sub-Committee B should onl v be discussed hi? P at ? s . ue between Sub-Committee A
The other members of the Committee of Col those Sub-Committees.
part in the discussion, and M.Bourgois^ an d Mvl wJ ? tha * ca ? not be able to take
In those circumstances it seemed bestfto him to return to + rl?? W  U J d theref o re be excluded.
to the effect that both points of view in SulcommX A Pr  P  Sa]  f M ' Su  imura
member. UD Uom mittee A should be represented each by one
sentatives should be conducted
be * 1^ that * should
sentatives by secret ballot. g ma protest a g ainst the election of the repre-
A secret ballot was held, as the result of which ;
M. Bourgois (France) ; 4
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) ? d ?
M._ Sugimura (Japan) '
suggested by from o voting (Japan) ? While not PP osin S the procedure
ninth meeting
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, January am, 1925,
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
15. Amendments proposed to the Articles adopted by Sub-Committee A (Annex 7)
Article 1.
- Article x
under Article 2 estimates of the quantities of substances n i 1!" 4 C v entral Board set up
imported for internal consumption during the following the Conve ntion to be
and scientific purposes. The amendment oresenterl m Y \r mt  U loll ' terntor y for medical
estimates should cover substances imported for medical sdentific
amendment introduceTfndirectly't he' Question ofTT  P ? osed the amendment. The
therefore be considered by the Gmmittee of Sixteen "S* prep " ed P iu ? a nd should
under the amendment were


forwarded to the Board. The Board would have statistics of the production of raw
material, statistics of manufacture and of consumption. Estimates made in advance by the
States of their internal consumption would not only be useless but positively misleading,
especially in view of the fact that in several territories there were large stocks of prepared opium.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) hoped that M. Bourgois would not persist in opposing
the amendment. The estimates were perhaps of no great value, but there were members of
the Committee who desired to have them included.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) thought that these estimates were of great impor-
tance. Less than 10 per cent of the opium imported was converted into alkaloids. If opium
imported ?for other purposes? were omitted, the Conference would be setting up a board
to control only 10 per cent of the raw material and would be ignoring the balance. States
importing raw opium in order to make prepared opium should give estimates of the amounts
which they required for this purpose.
M. Bourgois (France) said that Governments were already required to give figures of
their consumption of opium at the end of the year. Estimates of their forthcoming require-
ments were therefore unnecessary. He had for the past year opposed any suggestion that
trade or commercial statistics should be required. The trade in opium was highly speculative
owing to harvest variations, and the principle had already been accepted by experts that any
effort to obtain commercial estimates in advance should be avoided.
Mr. Riddell (Canada), referring to the last argument of M. Bourgois, represented that
the publication of commercial statistics was one of the best means of discouraging speculative
operations. He would refer in this connection to the statistics which were published by the
Agricultural Institute at Rome. He did not think too much stress should be laid on the argu-
ment submitted by M. Bourgois. An effort should be made to secure the largest measure
of control acceptable to the public, and the publication of as much information as possible
should be encouraged in order that public opinion might be well informed and strengthened
in favour of the restrictions which were undoubtedly necessary.
M. Bourgois (France) agreed as to the necessity of publicity, but pointed out that the
figures required were estimates and not statistics.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) supported M. Bourgois.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said the estimates required were a statement of
the imports needed for internal consumption. This was not a commercial estimate. It was
only right that the Board should know how much opium the States desired to import.
M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) thought that these estimates would not only be uselsss
but misleading. Each State would give figures in excess of its requirements, as the manufac-
turers would naturally put their requirements at a maximum. The Board of Control would
therefore be acting upon estimates which were too high. Switzerland would find it difficult
to produce such figures, as the manufacturers were unable to tell in advance what they might
require. The Board would obtain all the information it needed from the statistics which
would be forwarded to them.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that the Swiss delegate had misunder-
stood the object of Article i. Article i did not require estimates for manufacturing purposes
but estimates of the amount required for internal consumption only. Ihe proposal that these
estimates should include opium required for manufacturing purposes had been withdrawn as
the result of the opposition of certain delegations.
M. Bourgois said he thought that all the objections raised in the past to the submitting
of commercial estimates applied also to Government estimates. Governments would not
be able to produce these estimates, and they would be of no use to the Board.
The Chairman proposed that the amendments should be put to the vote.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) said that he had only seen these amendments just before
the meeting began. It was impossible for the Committee to take any final decision in regard
to them.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) proposed that the Committee should take a decision on
the amendments, subject to any objections which might be raised by individual delegates upon
a further examination.
The Chairman put the amendment to Article i to the vote.
The amendment was carried by six votes to four, the delegates of Germany, Switzerland,
France and the Netherlands voting against the amendment.


Article 2.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) explained the object of the amendments to Article 2.
Article 2 dealt with the composition of the Central Board. It proposed that a permanent
Central Board should be constituted by the Council of the League after consultation with
the Advisory Committee. The first amendment was for the deletion of the reference to the
Advisory Committee.
The second amendment was to the effect that the Board should be appointed by the States
represented on the Council of the League, together with the United States of America. He believed
that Mr. Porter desired to submit another version of this amendment to the effect that the
Central Board should be appointed by the States represented on the Council together with
a representative chosen by States who were not represented on the Council.
In a further amendment, it was proposed to raise the number of experts appointed to the
Board from five to seven and to prolong the period of office from three to five years. A
clause was also inserted to the effect that at meetings of the Board four should form a quorum.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said the object of the sub-amendment which he
desired to move was to secure an equal voice in the appointment of the Board for the non-
members of the League. Fifty-two members of the League would appoint ten persons, and
the four non-members of the League would appoint one person.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) said he wished to move yet another amendment, to the effect
that the non-members of the League should appoint two persons.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) thought it would be difficult to justify the appointment
of two persons to represent four non-members of the League.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) thought it was equally difficult to justify the appointment
of one person, and he must beg to insist on the amendment which he had moved. It was to
the vital interest of Germany to be represented on the Board, and Germany would be unable
to accept the principle of the Central Board unless such representation was secured. It was
certain that Germany would not be represented on the Board if the American amendment
were accepted.
M. Sugimura (Japan) pointed out that the presence of two States on the electoral
board would not give Germany a guarantee that she would be represented on the Board. The
American amendment gave Germany as strong a guarantee as could be secured in the
circumstances.
The Chairman put the amendment of M. von Eckardt to the vote.
The amendment was refected by four votes to one.
The Chairman then put the amendment of Mr. Porter to the vote.
The amendment was carried unanimously.
seven'experts RMAN PUt t0 V  t6 amendment to the effect that there should be
The amendment was carried unanimously
The Chairman put to the vote the amendment that the period of office should be five
years instead of three.
? , M - S T,-w EA (Japan) said he thought the original period of three years was more desirable.
He agreed that in order to secure men of the necessary standing and ability, there should
be some guarantee of a longer period of office, but it had always been the practice of the
League to re-appoint its representatives unless there was some reason to the contrary. If a
were unsuitable " 6re adopted ? there would be no opportunity to replace members who
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he did not press the amendment.
The amendment was withdrawn.
unanl e oudy n^pui t0 *** *** ** faim ? qmrUm at meetin S s the B  ard ?
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) then submitted the following amendment to Article 2 :
of .JS? , Boa "? s,ia . l * settle lts rules of procedure and may, subject to the approval
of the States referred to m paragraph 1 of this article, make regulations prescribing the
? forwarded/ 6 t0 * fUrnished to ? Under Artides 3 to 5 a?e to be dmwn
1 ? d the B  ard Was the P?P er
Mr. Porter (United States of America) presented the following sub-amendment :
?The Board shall settle its rules of procedure, and shall prescribe if necessarv the
regulations required for the discharge of its duties.? P ? necessaiy, the
by vfscountTecirVoffid tend  ?o r d > i f nde P endent and that the,amendment moved
oy viscount Cecil would tend to deprive it of any real power. The powers of the Board


were not, in his opinion, sufficiently wide, and the proposed amendment would still further
limit these powers, since the Board would only be able to make regulations subject to the appro-
val of the States which appointed it.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) proposed to delete from the amendment which he had
submitted the words ?subject to the approval of the States referred to in paragraph i of
this article?. He agreed that the regulations referred to in the articles should be drawn up
by the Board on their own responsibility and initiative. Other regulations would have to
be made, but these regulations should be framed in consultation with the Council.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) thanked Viscount Cecil for his proposal. He
pointed out, however, that the Board would still be limited to making regulations in regard
to the statistics. The Board would have to fulfil many other duties, and should not be
prohibited from making other regulations.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) agreed that it would probably be necessary to give
further powers to the Board. The amendment proposed by Mr. Porter, however, would
confer upon the Board authority to make any regulations it pleased. It was difficult at present
to foresee exactly what powers the Board would require. His own proposal did not exclude
the granting of further powers to the Board later on, but these further powers should be
entrusted to the Board after consultation with the Council.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) represented that no authority would have power
to enlarge the duties of the Board after the convention had been passed. The text proposed
by Viscount Cecil would limit its powers by defining their extent.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said that these powers might be extended in consultation
with the Council, in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 a. He enquired whether Mr.
Porter desired to press his amendment.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said the matter was of great importance. It was
absolutely necessary to secure an independent Board, and it must be assumed that the Board
must consist of men who would not exceed or abuse their authority. Under the amendment
proposed by Viscount Cecil their power would be limited to the drafting of regulations in
regard to statistics, and this was a very serious limitation. He would not, however, press
for a vote on the text which he had submitted.
M. Sugimura (Japan) presumed that the constitution of the Board under Article 2 implied
the ratification of the Convention by the majority of the States electing the Board. Was
it not necessary to insert a provision to the effect that a majority of the States represented
on the Council should ratify the Convention before the Board was appointed ?
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said the question of ratification would be dealt with
at a later stage. He did not think it would be impossible to appoint the Board, even though
a majority of the States on the Council had not ratified the Convention. States appointing
the Board would act as representatives of the 52 States Members of the League.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) enquired whether delegates might move further amend-
ments at a later meeting. He might himself desire to present certain observations and move
certain amendments to the text which was before the Committee. He had had no time to
study this text, which had only been circulated just before the Committee met.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) pointed out that the original draft of the articles under
consideration had been distributed in December and that every member had since been free
to propose amendments. It was true, however, that the amendments before the Committee
had only just been distributed, and if any member desired to raise points in connection with
these amendments, it would, of course, be possible for them to do so.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) said that the draft articles, though they had been distributed
in December, had never yet been referred by any Committee of the Conference. He thought it
would be necessary to read the draft article by article and to give an opportunity to the
delegates to present their observations.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said it was true that the present draft merely
represented the work of a small Sub-Committee and that the draft had never been formally
read. As, however, the amendments before the Committee were already being discussed,
it would perhaps be better to continue their consideration and to read the original draft
together with the amendments at a later stage.
This suggestion was adopted.
Article 2 (a).
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) then explained the meaning of the amendments under
Article 2 (a). These amendments were designed to replace the last paragraph of Article 2


and Article 8 of the original draft. He emphasised, in introducing the amendments the
necessity of providing for the control of the staff in administrative matters by the Secretary-
General, and the necessity of budgetary supervision by the League.
Articles 3, 4 and 5.
M van Wettum (Netherlands) said he had amendments to move to Articles 3, 4 and s
and asked that the consideration of these articles should be postponed.
1 he Committee agreed.
Article 6, paragraph 1.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he had no amendment to submit to paragraphs
1, 2 and 2*
+w r? f (France) submitted an amendment to paragraph 1. Paragraph 1 laid down
tha the Central Board should continuously watch the course of the international trade.
He would like to add that the Central Board should watch the course of the international trade
oZr g ih*\ e fmref a *y-General. Article 23 of the Covenant gave the League of Nations control
' 1 Baltic in opium in application of the Hague Convention, and it was not possible to
icate an organ completely independent of the League to exercise this control. The amend-
merit he proposed was in accordance with the spirit of the relationship already established
.etween the Board and the League. The Board would consist of private experts who could
not possibly maxe protests to the Governments. Their authority needed to be strengthened
and this could be effected by their acting through the Secretary-General. m
Chairman enquired whether the amendment moved by M. Bourgois was consistent
with the teims of Article 2 (a), in which it was laid down that the full technical independence
of the Board should be assured in carrying out their duties ?Tinder the direction of the Council?
< ? ir McColm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the phrase ?under the direction of
?lrndeTthe ComventioE^^heTV n * I t t e j ame^f men * b y mistake - The text should read
th Convention . The technical independence of the Board was dearly inconsistent
with a provision requiring them to carry out their duties under the direction of the Council.
M. von Eckardt (Germany) represented that the mistake to which Sir Malcolm
o! the 1 draft referred Strongly Confirmed his view that it was necessary to have a general raiding
It was agreed that the text of Article 2 (a) should be corrected to read "under the Convention".
Coundi URGOIS (FranCe) Sai<l * hat he WOUM P refer the readin S ? unde >- direction of the
relatiOTSh ?P f League
a c T , SI n ISIC f (J a P a n). referring to the amendment of M. Bourgois to oaraennh r nf
The amendment moved by M. Bourgois was adopted.
Article 6, paragraph 2.
Paragraph 2 laid dlwn that if a country gave no explanation or anuniat' f" t paragra P h 2 '
tion of excessdve quantities of drugs accumulating wUhin their territory thdeTr u
should have the right to call the attention of all the Governments and of .V ,loard
League to the matter and recommend that no further exports should be made Td  f C
m question. He did not think it was possible for the experts selvW In Y
grave a measure m their own name and on their own authoritv ti,a I th B dto take 50
amounted in effect to a commercial blockade and snrh h' -i measures contemplated
Without the approval of the Council. He would accordingly sieges??lhatThenaragra I 6 jfTn
be amended and that the right of the Central Board should bflimited to a rithf Tf* "
the Council to call the attention of all the Governments to the matter ?ud old re< l u , e , s , t
tion, Artide WOuld merel y ? nake a reclmmlmL


Viscount Cecil (British Empire) enquired whether the Council, under the proposed amend-
ment, would be required to act unanimously. In this case one Member of the Council would
be able to veto any action.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) represented that the amendment involved still
further limiting the power of the Board. The Council was unlikely to act if unanimity were
required.
M. Bourgois (France) contended that his proposal did not enfeeble the Board but,
on the contrary, reinforced it with the authority of the Council. If seven experts, on their
own authority, took the action described in paragraph 2, the Convention would inevitably
be denounced by the party concerned. He would also point out that the factor of most
importance was a moral factor. Moral pressure would be brought to bear on the Government
criticised, and this pressure would be all the stronger if it were exerted by the Council.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said it was extremely important to decide whether the
Council would act unanimously or by a majority vote. If the Council acted by a majority
vote, there was a good deal to be said for the amendment of M. Bourgois. If, on the other
hand, unanimity were required, the amendment was impossible. Each member of the Council
would have the right of veto upon any action under the Convention, and the offending State
would be represented at the discussion of the Council.
The Chairman said that the Committee was obviously not yet prepared to take a decision
on the question and proposed that the discussion should be adjourned.
TENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday , January 29 th, iq 2 s> a t 3-3 P-w*
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
16. Amendments proposed to the Articles adopted by Sub-Committee A ( Continuation ).
Article 6, paragraph 2.
The Chairman asked the Committee to resume the discussion of the previous day
on the amendment to paragraph 2, Article 6, which has been moved by M. Bourgois.
M. Bourgois (France), referring to the argument which he had advanced at the pievious
meeting, emphasised the impossibility of admitting that a blockade could be declaied as txie
result of a majority vote of the Central Board.
The Chairman reminded the Committee of the suggestion which had been put forwai
at the previous meeting, to the effect that action might be taken as the result of a majority
vote in the Council.
M. Bourgois (France) said he had already admitted that some derogation might be made
from the principle of unanimity in the Council. He was not, in fact, opposed to t c ounci
voting by a majority, in view of the fact that a majority vote would be necessary in e ei ic
Board as well as in the Council. He would suggest that this vote should be not y
the Council but by the Council together with a representative of the States non-members
of the League. He hoped that his amendment would be accepted, as there was a danger
that, if the article were adopted in its present form, many States would be unable to ratify
the Convention.
Viscount Cecil protested against the use of the word blockade as a description of.
action which would be taken as the result of a recommendation of the Central Board. This
action would merely consist in an agreement among the producing States not supply fuU er
quantities of drugs to the country whose supplies were known to be m excess of their legitimate
requirements.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) pointed out that the powers of the Board would be
confined to making a recommendation. It would have no authority to compel the G  v ?? e^ ts
to take any action. It was essential to set up a Board with sufficient power and author y
to attract men of ability and standing. If it were impossible for the Board to act without
first obtaining the authority of the Council, the Board would be reduced to the positio
a mere advisory committee of experts. He had no objection to the action of . c
as such but he was strongly opposed to any further restriction of the powers of the Boaid
A solution of the problem might perhaps be found in allowing an appeal to the Council against
decisions of the Board.


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the amendment moved by M. Bourgois
was a final stage in the gradual reduction of the powers of the Board. It had originally been
proposed that the Board should definitely determine, on the basis of estimates to be furnished
to the Government, the amount of drugs to be manufactured each year and that imports and
exports should be limited to the quantities specified in the estimates. These proposals had
been strongly resisted and a compromise had been proposed by the Advisory Committee.
Under this compromise each country had to undertake to furnish an estimate of its require-
ments and not to import in excess of these estimates unless revised estimates were submitted
to the Board.
Exporting countries were to undertake not to export drugs in excess of the estimates.
Moreover, if estimates appeared to be excessive, it had been proposed that the Board should
nave the power itself to fix the amounts. This compromise had in turn been resisted and a
last attempt had been made to arrive by conciliation at an agreed scheme. The agreed scheme
w- that embodied in Article 6. All powers of the Board to exercise compulsory control
had been swept away, and it now had only power to supervise and to recommend. It would
be empowered to watch the traffic and to ask for explanations of excessive imports. In the
absence of any satisfactory explanation, it would be empowered to make a recommendation.
Ine Governments were not obliged to act upon this recommendation unless they thought fit.
The recommendation of the Board, to be effective, must be acted on promptly. Under
the scheme, as it stood, it might be as much as from four to five months after the excessive imports
fiad taken place before such a recommendation could be made by the Board .A further
delay was now proposed, so that the matter might be referred to the Council. The proposed
amendment was a serious weakening of the scheme, and he would be very sorry to see it adopted.
i V I SC  l Un I t Cecil ( Britis h Empire) said that, after hearing the discussion which had taken
place, he had corne to the conclusion that it would be a grave mistake to make the recommenda-
tions of the Board subject to a decision of the Council. He did not think that the sovereignty
01 dignity of a State could in any way be offended by receiving a recommendation directly
rom the Board. The weight to be attached to the recommendation would depend entirely
opinion 61 recommendatlon were justified and would depend upon the pressure of public
not( r the > suggestion made by Mr. Porter concerning a possible appeal from
the Board to the Council This would be an additional safeguard, which would remove all
possible danger. He would ask M. Bourgois whether he was prepared to accept this sugges-
tion as a compromise. 55
M. Bourgois (France) asked what was the text of the amendment it was proposed to
make to paragraph 2 in order to introduce the right of appeal.
\ iscount Cecil (British Empire) submitted the following text ;
, The country concerned, and any country which exports the substances in question
o it shall be entitled to appeal to the Council of the League against any decision of the
Board under this paragraph.? J
tpn G u IM ST (Ja f?l n) submitted that an appeal to the Council involved some inconsis-
tency. It had been felt necessary to guarantee the technical independence of the Board
Rnir y - deCIS1  n t] J a V he Council might take could not in any way affect the opinion of the
oard given on a technical question. If the Board decided that there had been excessive
impoits, the Council could not invalidate such a decision.
v Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said that the technical decision would not be questioned
by the Council. The Council would have to decide whether, taking into consiLratlon ah the
e ned Te * taken M to Pr  hibit fUrther im P orts into the country con-
cerned He hoped that M Sugimura would not oppose the suggestion of an appeal to the
Council, which seemed to offer a convenient way out of a rather difficult position. PP
i Bourgois (France) insisted that he had no wish to weaken the powers of the Board
Hi^Cauncfi 0 S H e engthen the ?? ard by reinforcin S its recommendations with the
which lid been puffo'warf by MnTorter ?*** * on the basis of P?posal
Cecil He WoUld therefore like t0 exam * ne the text of the amendment submitted by Viscount
aft a h f a ? endm  nt submitted by Viscount Cecil was again read to the Committee and
? Pr  that he would
Paragraph 2 of Article 6, with this amendment, was thereupon adopted .
Article 2, paragraph 7.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) moved the following addition to paragraph 7 :
BoardWanv ?G"? f S  ries to draw the attention of the
 m to any matter which appears to it to require investigation.?


Every State had the right referred to in the amendment, but it would be well to lay
this down explicitly so that States might be encouraged to act. It would clearly be easier for
the Board to take action if its attention were called by a Contracting State to a particular case.
The amendment moved by Mr. Neville was unanimously adopted.
Article 9.
The British delegation submitted the following amendment to Article 9 :
?The Central Board shall present an annual report on its work to the Council of
the League. This report shall be published and communicated to all Contracting
Parties... All information received by the Board, in so far as it is not published in
the annual report or under Article 6, shall be treated as confidential, and the Board shall
be careful not to make public any information which might facilitate the operations of
speculators or injure the legitimate commerce of the country concerned.?
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) explained that the above amendment added
two points to the original draft. First, there was the requirement that the annual report of
the Board should be published. This was implied, but a request had been made that it should
be expressly stated. Secondly, there was a provision which was designed to prevent the use of
information received by the Board by speculators and to safeguard the legitimate trade of
the country furnishing information against the possible disclosure of facts which had been
communicated confidentially.
M. Sugimura (Japan) thought that the amendment required further precision. First,
it was necessary to define more exactly the nature of the information to be treated as confi-
dential, Secondly, it was necessary to define more exactly the meaning of the term ?confi-
dential?. He begged to submit the following text as a substitute for the proposed
amendment :
?The Central Board shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the figures,
information and explanations which it receives under Articles 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of the pre-
sent Convention shall not be used for the purposes of trade or speculation.?
Mr. Porter (United States of America) thought that the text submitted by M. Sugimura
Was an improvement on the amendment. It would be for the Board to decide in its discretion
how best to safeguard legitimate trade and not to offer an opportunity for speculation.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) agreed that a more precise definition of the
terms of his amendment might be necessary. He would prefer, however, to state more
explicitly the object of the amendment, with a view to reassure traders that the information
supplied by the Government would not be used against them.
After some further discussion, it was decided to combine the two texts, and the following
draft was adopted :
?The Central Board shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the figures,
information and explanations which it receives under Articles 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of the
present Convention shall not be made public in such a manner as to facilitate the operations
of speculators or injure the legitimate commerce of any Contracting Party.
Article Z.
The British delegation submitted the following text :
?Nothing in the present Convention shall be deemed to restrict in any way the powers
of the Council or the Assembly of the League of Nations under Aiticle 23 {&) of the
Covenant.?
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said that, in view of the provision concerning an appeal
to the Council embodied in paragraph 2 of Article 6, it was perhaps not necessary to add this
further provision.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said he did not think there was any necessity
for the new article.
M. Bourgois (France) said that, in view of the explanations given, there did not appear
to be any necessity for the new article.
Article Z was withdrawn.
The Chairman said the Committee would now pass to a consideration of the draft articles
submitted by the British delegation to replace Articles 3, 3()> 4 and 5 of the original draft
(Annex 8).


Article 3.
The amendments to Article 3 were read to the Committee.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) briefly explained the purpose of the amendments.
carefu] r ?sf l ?d R J ER ir Un i StatGS  f America) said he had not had time to give the text sufficiently
careful study. He had no immediate objection to offer. He thought that paraeranb J\
XX?  ne  f th  pr j nci P al of the Board would be to prevent smuggling
did d Tfnt y fL?nL r ?L atlon f m re fP ect  f seizures would be of great assistance to the Boarci He
p n f t I thll J bls mformatl on should be limited to the amounts of the seizures but
Board should be authorised to ask for full information as to the wa7 in which the seiXe
vere effected and what was being done with the substances seized. ' He would suggest the
in regT/d thereto SeiZUreS and SUCh  ther ?nation
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) suggested the following text ? ?and the
reguto? 5  ther information in  hereto fs may? be prescribed bythe?
Z'mfoVieliZT '****? *
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) read the following statement
?he m after having
following way: When a wholesale trader
a chemist wishes to buy drugs from a whnlecaip u g f a manufacturer, or when
a permit stating the quanSf he to , '^ mUSt opium office
tities purchased have been noted in the books of the nnrrhpi 6 ?? de lvered after the quan-
Health Office notes in its registers the different w ? T wlce a year the Government
in the books of the traders. 8 At the same time theX* 1 mga l ngs and tbe outgoings shown
amount of their stocks Bv comparing thk 1 ? S m guest J n a re obliged to declare the
books of the firm, it is possible to ascertain whethl^+h 1011 the guantities shown in the
a permit. The j ? b f en any sale of dru  s without
firms authorised to carry on the trade is crmfirle m a Slmdar manner. The number of
number of officials are therefore necessary to 6 se\eral hundreds, in fact. A large
of control which has been described. The Opium to CaiTy P rocedure
at the moment staffed by about twenty offidT In i r Government Health Office is
being overwhelmed with work at certain periods of fho to prevent these officials from
the whole year in the following manner ? One half fhl n ? t ! l  Work dl stnbuted over
Office (firms with names beginning from Ato S h n TS Sh  Wn m the re  isters of the
and July, the other half (from Lto Z?from m  nths of January
the previous half-year. As a result of this system if ? tober ? a .nd this verification covers
moment in the yeL the quantities & U Toffisa leVerf *
the measures of control now proposed hv tu , a c aealers .
many, in view of the fact that they would entail a cornet? 6 h Uld acce P ted h Y Ger "
control, which is working excellently. Such would existm g system of
but would also necessitate a considerable increase In ih ld not only entail great expenditure
it would not achieve the desired  Despite thls '
of stocks could be made three months after the end of the yearpf ? mcatlon  f the am unt
question are valid for three months, for if this were not so afi +L 1 Germany, the permits in
be upset. It would be impossible therefore to draw the regular trade in drugs would
year! as all the by permits would no P f hTf at the end of the
during a period which extended beyond the end of the ded but be con clude^
of time must be allowed to draw up statistics coverin/thp Consequently a longer period
the period of three months during which States are required To send P rolon g in 
not render it possible to state at the end of the ralend? end m tbeir figures would
by dealers, for it would be necessary at the veryleastt doSrt f f dmgS held
The control rendered necessary by the S system oXlr  f . pium office-
the price of drugs by about 50 marks a kilogramme A new tlon has alread y increased
in view of the fact that it would occur at fhemlenl Xn l5 desi J able >
drugs would become more and more restricted. th t]raffic and consumption of
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said he understood that the Hiffip u f+p
German Government related only to stocks. Nat tbe dl *fi cid ty f the
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) agreed.
derstand?g amounf TT sli^ht
granted were not always immediately exported vdid' Vh
required applied only to actual exports and imnnrfc r+ ieall y valid. The information
for' which licences had been giSK'telSd not vet ???^?bstances
fore, think there would be Jy difficulty " ot -'


The practice of the British Government in regard to stocks was to call at the end of the
year for a return from wholesale dealers. Would there be any difficulty in calling for such
returns from the wholesale dealers in Germany ? The dealers must take stock for their
own purposes, and the information should be easily available.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) said the German Government was unwilling to forward figures
received from the dealers until they had been verified. Moreover, there were over 300 whole-
sale dealers in Germany.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) did not think the dealers would be likely
to falsify their figures in view of the fact that these figures would be checked by the Govern-
ment in the ordinary exercise of its control. The errors were not in any case likely to be large
or seriously to affect the general returns.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) said it might be possible to give the stocks held by the manu-
facturers, but not those held by the wholesale dealers.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said that the figures required were merely the
returns furnished by the dealers and that there was nothing in the article which implied that
the Governments were bound to verify these figures before forwarding them to the Board.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) said that the German Government would be most unwilling
to forward figures which were not guaranteed. To enable the verification of the figures to
be made a period of six months would be necessary.
The Chairman said that the point at issue was one of detail which might be raised at
a later stage.
M. Bourgois (France) said that the period of three months referred to in the first para-
graph of Article 3 would have to be reconsidered by the Committee of Sixteen. He had
always maintained that this was too short a period, and a period of twelve months had been
suggested.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) said that, as far as Germany was concerned, a five-months
period would suffice for stocks and a three-months period for the other statistics required.
The Chairman said the Committee would now pass to Article 4.
Article 4.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) referred to the last paragraph of Article 4, which
was as follows : ?It is understood that it shall not be within the competence of the Board
to question or express any opinion upon these statistics, and the provisions of Article 6 are
not applicable to the matters dealt with in this article?. He had already had private conver-
sations with the representatives of the Netherlands and Great Britain and desired to thank
them for the spirit of conciliation which they had shown in meeting his views. He was per-
fectly satisfied with the article, except for the paragraph which he had quoted. There appeared
to be some misunderstanding in regard to this matter. The Central Board, under Article 6,
had the right to request explanations only when there was evidence of an excessive accumu-
lation of the substances concerned which was likely to give rise to illicit traffic. Surely it
was not the intention of the present paragraph to prevent the Board from raising any question
in such circumstances. The Board must have the right to question any excessive imports,
though it would not, of course, criticise the internal arrangements for the control of the traffic
in States where there was a monopoly, or interfere in any way with the internal administra-
tion of the Governments. In some States, however, the trade was imperfectly organised,
and there was particularly danger of evasion or leakage in countries where the system of
farming was practised. The Board should not be debarred from asking for explanations or
information in such circumstances. He would suggest that the paragraph should be completed
by the following addition : ?in so far as these are domestic matters and do not affect interna-
tional traffic?.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) pointed out that the accumulation of stocks
of raw opium was sufficiently covered by paragraph ( e) of Article 3. As to the possible
leakage of opium in countries where the farming system prevailed, it was agreed that Article 6
should apply.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) represented that Article 4, as it stood, was open
to misconception. ,
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said there was substantial agreement between Sir Mal-
colm Delevingne and Mr. Neville as to the object to be secured by the paragraph, and thought
that the text might be adopted as it stood, subject to any revision which the Drafting Com-
mittee might think necessary to make.


M. van Wettum (Netherlands) agreed there was no real difficulty of substance
Article 4 was accepted, subject to the above observations.
Article 6.
M. Bourgois (France) reminded the Committee that paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of Article 6
had not yet been considered, and he desired to move an amendment to paragraph 4. Paragraph
4 was as follows ; ?The Central Board shall have the right to publish a report on the matter
and communicate it to the Council and all the Governments?. He asked that the paragraph
might be amended as follows : ?The Central Board shall have the right to publish a report
on the matter which, after having been submitted to the Council, shall be communicated
to all the Governments?.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) enquired whether it was the intention of this amend-
ment to make it possible for the Council to revise the report of the Central Board before
sending it to the Governments.
M. Bourgois (France) said that his formula left the question open.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) objected that it had already been agreed in principle
that the Board should be entitled to communicate its report to the Governments without
haying this report revised or amended by the Council. He had no objection to the report
being forwarded to the Council for transmission.
M. Bourgois (France) said it was the purpose of his amendment to suggest that there
was substantial agreement between the Board and the Council in regard to the report.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) suggested that the amendment should read as follows :
?The Central Board shall have the right to publish a report on the matter to be
communicated to the Council, which shall thereupon forward it to all the Governments.?
M. Bourgois (France) accepted this amendment.
Paragraph 1 of Article 2.
M. Sugimura (Japan), referring to the discussion which had taken place on paragraph 1
of Article 2 at the previous meeting, said he wished to move that the non-members of the
League should appoint two States to act on the electoral Board. The object of this amend-
ment was to give Germany a guarantee that she would be included.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he thought it would be better to defer this question
until the final texts of the article came to be considered.
. f he Sub-Committee decided, after an exchange of views, to consider the final text of the
articles on the following day, and, on the proposal of M. Bourgois, Sir Malcolm Delevingne
n , tls r was appointed Rapporteur to draft the text and to submit a report on the
work of the Committee.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) undertook to present a revised text at the
until ffite/  6 ommi^eo, u t he did not think it would be possible to prepare a report
ELEVENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, January 30 th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
17. Approval of the Draft Articles.
The Chairman said that a text of the draft articles (Annex 9) had been distributed and
would now be considered by the Committee He nm +w AT ~ , 1 ~ ,
paragraph by paragraph. P ro P osed th *>t the articles should be read
Article 1.
The article was adopted, subject to the following amendments :
inserted o P fXe E artid?tnd S ttrtord^Vd-? a) ' h W  rd "^ n , nual ! y ? Wa |
?or? at the end of the first paragraph ? h d ? d WaS substltuted f r the word


On the proposal of Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), the words ?quantities
of substances? in the first paragraph were replaced by the words ?quantities of each of the
substances?.
On the proposal of M. Sugimura (Japan), the expression ?Contracting Parties? was
substituted for the expression ?Contracting Powers?.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said the discussions of the Committee had
revealed some doubt as to the precise meaning of the word ?consumption? in paragraph i
of the article. The word ?consumption? was not intended to cover substances imported for
manufacturing purposes, and he proposed to make this clear in his report.
Article 2, paragraph 1.
The first sentence of Article 2 was as follows : ?A permanent Central Board shall be
appointed by the States which are represented on the Council of the League of Nations?, etc.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) proposed that the above sentence should read as follows :
?A permanent Central Board shall be appointed by the following States, viz. : France,
Germany, British Empire, Italy, Japan and the United States, together with those States
which have non-permanent seats on the Council?. This amendment was intended to meet
the difficulty which had arisen in regard to the possible omission of Germany from the Appoint-
ing Board. It had been suggested that this difficulty should be met by a provision to the
effect that two members of the Board should be appointed by four non-members of the League
There was, however, serious objection to such a provision, and the difficulty was equally
well met by the text which he had ventured to submit.
M. Sugimura (Japan), Mr. Porter (United States of America) and M. von Eckardt
(Germany) accepted the amendment.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) and M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) accepted the amend-
ment under reservation, as they could not say whether their Governments would approve of
a text in which the Council did not appear as the responsible body.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) submitted that there could be no real difficulty. The
United States was a Power with a special position under the Treaty of Versailles, and it was
recognised that, in the event of Germany becoming a Member of the League, she would have
a seat upon the Council.
Article 2, paragraph 2.
Paragraph 2 was adopted with an amendment proposed by Mr. Porter (United States
of America) to the effect that the word ?Members? should be inserted after the word ?four.?
Paragraph 2 was adopted.
Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 4.
Paragraph 3 was as follows : ?The Board shall settle its Rules of Procedure and may
make regulations prescribing the manner in which the statistics to be furnished to it under
Articles 4 and 5 are to be drawn up and forwarded?.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) proposed that the paragraph should end at the
word ?procedure?. The provision contained in the rest of the paragraph could be more
properly included in Articles 4 and 5. It would be necessary to make the following additions
in Articles 4 and 5 if this provision were struck out from Article 2.
The first sentence of Article 4, paragraph 1, would read : ?The Contracting Parties
agree to send annually in a manner to be prescribed by the Board?, etc.
The same phrase, viz. ?in a manner to be prescribed by the Board?, would also
have to be inserted in the second paragraph of Article 4 after the phrase ?The Contracting
Parties agree to forward?, and in the same paragraph the words ?by regulations made under
Article 2? would have to be deleted.
The phrase ?in a manner to be prescribed by the Board? would also have to be inserted
in the first paragraph of Article 5 after the word ?forward?.
M. Bourgois (France) said that the Central Board could not possibly be familiar with the
administrative regulations of all the various countries with which they would be concerned,
and that it might make requests with which it was not possible to comply. He did not,
however, desire to press this objection.


Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said that the objection applied equally to the original
text as to the amendments suggested by Mr. Porter.
Paragraph 4 of Article 2 was adopted with the amendments proposed by Mr. Porter.
Article 3.
T The Chairman said he had an amendment to move to the third paragraph of Article 2.
e third paragraph was as follows: ?I he Board shall, subject to the approval of the Council
fPP eir secretary and staff?. He proposed that this paragraph should be deleted and
t at the following text should be substituted : ?The Secretary-General shall appoint the
secretary and staff of the Board on the nomination of the Board and subject to the approval
ot the Council.
, Secretar y-G e ne r al of the League had pointed out that it was the usual procedure
tor the Secretary-General to make such appointments in exercise of his powers under Article 6
ot the Covenant.
Mr. Ineville (United States of America) said he had considerable doubts in regard to
Article 3. It had originally been intended by the Committee that the Secretary of the Board
siould be in a position of complete independence, though it was agreed that the staff of
the f ard should be taken over by the League in the usual way. He did not quite know what
would be the effect of the new arrangement. Was it necessary to specify so clearly the rela-
tions of the Board, the Secretary-General and the staff ? Was it, in fact, desirable to lay
down that the Secretary-General should act in this way, or would it not be better to leave the
matter to be implied ?
m , Visco . unt Cecil (British Empire) said that, under Article 3, the Council was asked to
?tr? .C l the . organisation of the Board on general lines, with two objects in view :
rst, that the Board should be independent in the exercise of its duties, and, secondly that
a mimstrative control should be in the hands of the Secretary-General. The text submitted
by the Chairman did not, in substance, alter the position. The Secretary-General would make
the appointment with the approval of the Council, but he would make the appointment on the
nomination of the Board. There would be no real difference in practice. He would be himself
opposed to the amendment if it could be shown that there was any real danger of the
independence of the Board being in any way prejudiced.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said he quite realised the difficulty of setting
up a system which might involve separate control in the performance of similar duties. It
nnf rIp OW Tf ? m 6n th  mtentlon  f the Committee that the Secretary of the Board should
not depend for his nomination on the views of any particular person. He ought not, in the
* de  ee ? jJ ee hlmself md ebted to any permanent official. He should be the agent
of the Board, and his appointment and tenure should receive the same consideration as was
given to the members of the Board themselves. The appointment of the secretary was, in
fact, on quite a different footing from that of the administrative staff.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he hoped Mr. Neville would not persist in opposing
the amendment He was convinced that there was no difference of substance between the
two texts. Under the original text, the nomination would be submitted to the Council which
would automatically consult the Secretary-General as to the appointment The
would thus be in practice identical. procedure
He would suggest that special mention might be made in the report of the Committee of
the considerations urged by Mr. Neville, and that the desire of the Committee sLu?learlv
expressed that the independence of the Secretary should be safeguarded in every possible
, m l 'A*?? 0015 < Fra " ce ) sai ? that . !n the French text, the expression ?sous
eXpr6SS the P  Sltlon aS defined Viscount Cedi the expression ? SOT(S
direcffTTG^Cof' ** eXPreSSi  n '? SO ? S was a more
Mr. Riddell (Canada) said that the whole Committee was agreed as to the necessitv
of securing complete independence for the Board ; but the secretary, if nominated by the
Board would be quite safe from any outside influence. The Secretary-General would
naturally accept the nomination, unless there was some very good reason to the contrary.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said that if the question at ie?- WPrA ? ,
a matter of drafting he had no further objection to urge. He would, however make 6 a
personal reservation in regard to the matter. However, make a
The amendment was adopted, it being understood that a paragraph would be inserted in the
report of the character indicated by Viscount Cecil. S F inserted in the


Article 4.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) proposed to insert in paragraph 3, after the word
?derivatives", the words ?whether mentioned in the Convention 01 not .
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the other derivatives to which
reference was made would be substances which were not mentioned in the Convention.
Paragraph B was accordingly adopted, with the addition of the words "not covered by the
Convention?.
M. Sugimura (Japan) drew attention to a discrepancy between the French and English
texts in paragraph E. ~
It was agreed that the English text should read ?disposal of the seizures and that the
French text should be brought into agreement.
The remaining paragraphs of Article 4 were adopted.
Article 5 was adopted.
Article 6
M Sugimura (Japan) draw attention to the fact that the words ?within a reasonable
time? had been omitted from the English version, and Mr. Neville (United States of America)
said that it would be necessary, in the final draft, to specify the exports referred to in the
paragraph.
Mr Porter (United States of America), referring to paragraph 3 of Article 6, said he
did not think it was necessary that the ' Government cQnecmed S m;J
as well as the Central Board, and he moved that the words and the Council should be deleted
from the paragraph.
M Bouegois (France) opposed this amendment, on the ground that it was more natural
for the Governments to communicate with the Council than with a board of experts.
The amendment proposed by Mr. Porter was adopted, subject to a reservation by M. Bourgots.
Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 were adopted without any modification.
Paragraph 7.
Paragraph 7 was as follows ; ?It shall be the friendly right of any of the signatories
to draw the attention of the Board to any matter which appears to it to require mvestiga 1
Mr Porter (United States of America) proposed that this paragraph should form a new
article. It was a general proposition which should not appear to be limited to the ma t
dealt with in Article 6.
M. Sugimura supported this proposal.
It was agreed that paragraph 7 of Article 6 should form a separate article under the heading
of Article 6 {a).
M van Wettum (Netherlands) enquired whether it would not be necessary, as a result
nf turning this naragraph into a separate article, to amend the last paragraph of Article 5,
where Zion whs made to the provisions of Article 6 It would appear to be necessary to
allude to the provisions of Article 6 and of Aiticle 6 [a,.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said he could not agree. The provision which
now figured as Article 6 () was a general provision. It affirmed a right which already exist.
Ser the Hague Convention, and he attached great importance to this right being explicitly
confirmed in the new Convention.
M Rottrcois (France) said that the right existing under the Hague Convention was not
in any?way imperilled. Representations could always be made under the Hague Convention
through the ordinary diplomatic channels.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) did not think that an allusion to the provisions of Article
6 (a)Tn Articlel rea ly affected the decision. As a matter of drafting, he thought it would be
Lttlrnot to reirffi Article 5 to Article 6 (a). which was a general clause, and to which allu-
sion appeared unnecessary in an article which referred to specific cases.
M van Wettum (Netherlands) said he could not decide as to the propriety of making
a septateVutidJof*the provision ilnder discussion. Ho would like to make a personal reser-
vation on this matter.
M. Bourgois (France) associated himself with the reservation of M. van Wettum under
Article 6 {a).
Article 7 was adopted without modification.
Ayticle 8.
M. Sugimura (Japan) suggested that the word ?figures? should be replaced by an expres-
sion rather more exact.
After some discussion, *7 was agreed that the word ?figures" should be replaced by the
words ?estimates and statistics."


18. Statement by M. Palacios (Spain).
M. Palacios (Spain) then made the following statement on behalf of the Spanish delegation;
The Spanish delegation submits a formal reservation in regard to all and each of the
articles under discussion. The Spanish delegation has not had the opportunity of participating
in the framing of the texts submitted to the Committee two or three days ago, and has not
been in a position sufficiently to appreciate their significance. The Spanish delegation, in
order not to complicate the position or cause any further delay, has abstained from any
intervention in the discussion. Moreover, it appears that two other Sub-Committees are
dealing with questions which have still to be dealt with by the Co-ordination Committee
before being brought before the plenary Conference. The Spanish delegation will accordingly
wait until it is in possession of the texts which will be presented to the Conference before
determining its attitude, reserving to itself entire freedom in respect of the texts which Sub-
Committee A has just approved.
19. Proposal by the American Delegation concerning the Central Board.
Mi. Porter (United States of America) submitted the following proposal :
Sub-Committee A recommends to the Conference that the Conference suggest by reso-
rt 101 * to the appointing authority that the Central Board shall comprise two members
irom producing countries, two members from manufacturing countries, two members
rom countries which neither produce nor manufacture any of the substances covered
by the Convention, and one qualified medical practitioner.?
He said there was considerable feeling in favour of the expression of some opinion on
the part of the Committee as to the composition of the Central Board. He was not sure
whether the text which he had submitted should be included in the Convention, but he did
not think the proposal could do any harm. It might, on the contrary, serve to secure an
effective representation on the Committee of the principal interests involved.
iscount Cecil (British Empire) said that he hoped Mr. Porter would reconsider his pro-
posal. The members of the Board were to be experts chosen solely for their qualifications
and it was indispensable that they should be admittedly quite impartial and not in any wav
bound to consider particular interests. It would, in his opinion, be fatal to indicate by an
express resolution that there should be a representation of particular interests on the Board.
If any recommendation were made, it should be to the effect that it was essential to secure
the utmost impartiality and disinterestedness. It was even doubtful whether the reference
to a medical practitioner was desirable, as it might well happen that a man of science or research
would have the better claim. Ihe only possible procedure was, in his view, to leave the
ifl tm6nt f 5 0 ex P rts to . the discretion of the Appointing Board, which would act under
the influence of the public opinion of the world. Once the principle of the representation of
particular interests was admitted, all the interests concerned would endeavour to secure repre-
sentation, and the prestige and position of the Board would be placed in danger.
v . Mr. Porter (United States of America) said that, in deference to the observations of
Viscount Cecil, he would defer his proposal.
? * The Cbairmar said it was understood that the proposal submitted by Mr. Porter would
not be added to the articles. These articles would be forwarded to the President of the Con-
ference, with the request that the Committee of Sixteen should be asked to consider them
TWELFTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, February 2nd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
20. Amendments and Reservations to the Draft Articles.
sentencemn a^foUows^ 5 ? 1 Empire) Pr  P  Sed ? amendme "? to Article 2. The second
for  mPr * Se Se ' en ex P erts ? chosen solely on the ground jf their qualifications
that?%Vp^in id QuTstt3shou, 0 d b h PartiCU l ar ! y o U nate - as it was essential to emphasise
following text : P should be lm P artlal and disinterested. He would propose the
o r Ex P erts who > by th eir technical competence, impartiality and disinterestedness
are likely to command general confidence, chosen?, etc. Y disinterestedness,


M. Sugimura (Japan) said he accepted the above amendment.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) said he was prepared to withdraw his reservation to
Article 6 [a), provided the following clause were added :
?Provided that this article shall not be construed as in any way extending the powers
of the Board/'
M. Bourgois (France) said he supported this emendation.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said he did not see any necessity for the proposed
addition. Article 6 [a) could not possibly extend the powers of the Board. It merely asserted
the right of signatory States to draw attention to certain matters arising out of the interna-
tional traffic, as, for example, the probability of the fact of illicit trade being carried on in
certain places. He made no objection for the moment to the proposed addition, but he woul
ask for time to consider the matter, and proposed to discuss it with M. van W ettum.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that the reservation which the Swiss delegation had
made in regard to Article 2 was a question of drafting and not of substance. The intention
of the Committee was to state that the Central Board would be appointed by the States which
were represented on the Council, etc. The first draft had been replaced by a new one in
which certain States were enumerated. The disadvantage of the present text was that it
appeared for the future to settle which States were the permanent Members of the Council
a question on which only the Council and the Assembly of the League were able to pronounce.
It would, in his opinion, be better if the States appointing the Board were described as the
States represented on the Council, together with the United States and Germany.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said that several delegations had come to the conclusion
that, for political reasons, it was desirable not to give the impression that the Board was the
nominee of the Council and of certain States which had been asked specifically to co-operate
with the Council. He thought the present drafting was less likely to lead to difficulties than
any other which had been proposed. There was no difference in substance between the present
draft and that suggested by the Swiss delegate, and he accordingly hoped that the Swiss
delegate would not press his amendment.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that he would not press his amendment if it were inad-
visable for serious political reasons to do so. He had made his suggestion with a view o
avoiding the possibility of having to amend the Convention in the event of the number ot
the permanent members of the Council being increased.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands), explaining his reservation to Article 2, pointed out that
the interests of the Netherlands were represented by the Council, since the Netherlands was
a Member of the League. These interests, however, were not represented by the Britisn
Empire, France, Italy, etc., as individual Governments. He had no objection to the present
draft in substance, but would very much have preferred a text in which the difficulty o
which he had referred might be avoided.
M. de Palacios (Spain) said he had not intended to intervene in the discussions of the
Committee and that he had already made a general reservation to this effect. On tins par-
ticular point, however, the reservation of the Spanish delegation was more direct Ihe pre-
sent draft did not appear to him to be particularly fortunate. It divided the Members of
the Council into a group of Powers which were named and the non-permanent members.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) said that the present draft represented a good
deal of consideration and thought by many members of the Committee. It appeared to be
the best way of solving a very difficult situation. There were objections, but these concerned
only a matter of form. In any case, there would be twelve States which would elect the Boar .
M. Bourgois (France) said he now desired to withdraw his reservation to paragraph 3
of Article 6 and to Article 6 [a).
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) enquired whether M. Bourgois withdrew the reservation
which he had made during the discussions of the Committee in regard to the three-mont s
period mentioned in Article 4.
M. Bourgois (France) reminded the Committee that when this article was discussed
he had refrained from opposing the period of three months on the ground that it wou
have to be considered by the Committee of Sixteen. He had accordingly made a reservation
in regard to the matter.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he had understood that the three-months period
represented a compromise which had been accepted by the British delegation in that spirit.
If the question were re-opened, the British delegation must reserve the right to ask lor a
shorter period than three months.
Mr Riddell (Canada) said he also understood that the three-months period represented
a compromise. His own Government would suggest a shorter period if the question were
again discussed.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) also reserved the right to suggest a shorter
period.


21. Draft Report of the Committee.
to the r Commitoe DELEVINGNE (BrhiSh Empire) preSented his draft report, which was read
of ?? h /he qualifications of the members
conform with the amendment made in Article 2of the draft'articles" ? ? ? make h
Ihe Committee further decided to delete the W QPT ,f PtI/ , fl n .
it was proposed to suggest an annual cum tn &+V ltei } ce P aia graph (d), in which
f y u suggest an annual sum to cover the annual expenditure of the Board
Ihe Committee then considered the following passage of the report :
in aCt 7 Un r I he  rders  Board
salary, leave, discipline, etc. 'as rart of f/i-n admmistrat ;ve Purposes, such as
the authority of the Secretary General in t-po- a  f League and should be subject to
the work inks way k kafekr serv cefoG?G f' 1 matter ,G M reover. by organising
Board with a greaf gam of effictncTand ecGoiGTe? Vt g TT' ? the
nftMdte arrangements for
Board should nominate it g 11 } 211 ta * lc, u with the Board, and that the
subject to the approval ofthe Conned Asi appointment by the Secretary-General
Committee whether the of anpointmentTf r? ? *? en \ x P ressed  the Sub-
might not affect the independence nt h, ra ? l "' . :i - v the Secretary-General
thinks it desirable to place on^ Zord f a t?? m regard to its work, the Sub-Committee
the Board would be contrary to its intention and fit TGmn / r J? outslde in 1 ll<; work of
General, who has been consulted in fhp f ? may add) to the views of the Secretary-
isation of the The Seckarv wil fZ"! a Art ?t le 3 ? which deak with the organ-
of the Board from the Board kne ami subject T $ regard .? ? he ac tual work
of the work of the staff.? t t J to its directions, will have full control
?such as C Taty E kk? dtclir et T? the firSt Sentence f  words
??? ots SMt-?
! uiew f IffC im P o, ' f t nt '?" the point
than mere questions concerning saLry lelvf andZ? th  Staff went a little further
instructed its Secretary to writkto a Goverkent t? "Gr Suppo ? e ? f  r exam P le - the Board
tary-General, and it was essential that the W,G, !" S letter would be signed by the Secre-
and approve the document issued for his signature" There haVe authorit y to revise
experts who had drafted letters which no Governl , Ther f bad bee n cases in the past of
the Secretary-General to see that nothing in would acce Pt. It was important for
offence The staff to be appointed would be eT to , g ! Ve le  itimate
act under the direction of the Board so far as it* wnr h y t ie Secretary of the Board and
m which it would necessarily be subject to the SerrPf S5 )ncerl } ed - but there were matters
the first sentence should end at the woald P ro that
should be inserted before the word ?authority ? y 1 ? and the word ? customary?
misunderstood tn ArtidTb fT the Secretar y-General had
ask the Secretary-General to make enouirie of f r draft P ro P? als - The Board would
would then write his own letter to the Government The? 61nt - and . the Secretary-General
Secretary-General to sign a letter dnfwi u c' Th e was no mt ention of asking the
the customary authorityof the the B  ard ' He thought'thS
went further than would be adrStedVtheLZT.f d over members of the Secretariat,
compete direction of the work of the Secretariati Tl ?s authority extended to a
would act under the instructions of the Bofrd ? the  f the Central Board
vingne had reg^to* eXplanatio , n which Sir Malcolm Dele-
for the Secretary of the Board to *af a kttlr to heGT Pr  Cedu / e in such cases would be
own revision and approval of the text This Gs Government concerned, subject to his
bodies. The Secretary-General did not direct The Go ? roc , ed !; re Allowed by other technical
such as the Economic Committee, the Transit Committee etc Tl, "'?r tecl ? nical committees,
tions as to the carrying-out of their work and dw ? ! * TheSe Committees gave instruc-
work, and these instructions were followed by the staff


the Secretary-General deciding, if necessary, how this work should be done. The only diffe-
rence in the present case appeared to be that the other technical committees were committees
of the League and dependent on the Council, whereas the Board would be independent.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said it was in view of the difficulties to which
the Secretary-General was alluding that he had thought it wiser to say as little as possible
in regard to the relationship of the Board and the Secretariat. The members and Secretary
of the Board had better be left to settle such details with the Secretary-General himself.
It did not seem either necessary or advisable to hamper them by embodying any details of
this character in an international document. Personally, he would prefer to leave all such
points out of the Convention.
Viscount Cecil (British Empire) said he very largely agreed with Mr. Neville. Diffi-
culties of this kind had arisen during the discussion on Article 3, and it had then been decided
to lay down only general provisions, leaving it to the Board to work out the details in consul-
tation with the Council. He suggested that the first sentence should read ;
?It is desirable that the staff of the Board, while acting under the orders of the Board
in regard to its actual work, should be organised for administrative purposes as part
of the staff of the League.?
Then should follow the sentence : ?Moreover, by organising the work in this way?, etc.
The passage should conclude with a general statement to the effect that the necessaiy an ange-
ments for the work of the Board should be made by the Council of the League in consul-
tation with the Board.
The Secretary-General said that this proposal entirely met his views on the subject,
but he would ask that the text adopted should conform as closely as possible with the words
used in Article 3.
The proposal of Viscount Cecil was adopted.
After some further discussion, it was decided that the last two sentences of the above
text beginning with the words ?as some doubt has been expressed in the Sub-Committee?
and ending with the words ?will have full control of the woik of the staff should be deleted.
The report, subject to these amendments, was adopted.
M. Bourgois (France) congratulated Sir Malcolm Delevingne on his report. He desired
to pay a cordial tribute of admiration to the impartiality and skill with which Sir Malcolm
Delevingne had presented the results of the discussions of the Committee. He would not
be suspected, in paying this tribute, of undue partiality. He had worked for a long while
with Sir Malcolm Delevingne, and it had often seemed that agreement between them would
be impossible.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the tribute paid to him by M. Bour-
gois was particularly gratifying. During the whole of the last twelve months, he had been engaged
in continuous controversy with M. Bourgois, who was a very dangerous opponent and a
strenuous fighter. The tribute just paid to him was the best possible testimony to the spirit
of conciliation which had prevailed in the Committee and of its desire to reach a satisfactory
conclusion of its work.
The Chairman, on behalf of the Committee, thanked Sir Malcolm Delevingne.
22. Reservations to the Draft Articles.
The Chairman enquired whether Mr. Neville had decided to accept the amendment pio-
posed to Article 6 (a) by M. van Wettum.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said he would like further time to think o\ci
the matter, which was primarily a question between himself and the delegations of France and
the Netherlands.
The Chairman enquired as to the position in regard to the reservation of the American
delegation to Article 3.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) said he would not withdraw that reservation.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) said he would still maintain his reservation to Article 2,
as he had not yet received instructions on the point.


THIRTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Sjostrand (Sweden).
23. Reconsideration of Article
Chairman said that the draft articles approved by the Sub-Committee on February
considered by the Drafting Committee and that some doubt had arisen in that
Committee as to the meaning of the first sentence of paragraph 2 of Article 6 :
factory the rStSIB 0 " a g l ? V ?. n I , withi |? a reasonable time, or the explanation is unsatis-
nd Thp f i B ,? d s l hall have the n g ht call the attention of all the Governments
furtheEtno C ? Un a ul the  ague  f Natlons t0 the matter and to recommend that no
~ ;? N rt r S ? a b ."' ? ade . to the country in question until the Central Board reports
substances ? ? ? Sltllatlon ? that Country in ard t0 the trade the
covered bTthe Convention aT w  f excesslve quantities of one of the substances
there should be XZ accumulating a "y country, the Board should recommend that
this exports to that country of the substance in question or whether
by tte cZeSta ff f U n d relate t the export of any or all the other substances covered
lation .1 morphia, ii, . p.ra.Eo'.Mr'y. TaM X B S,? SSp? o" SJS,?SSS
- * aawtyas?
been d'iscussed?in P^ E r VINGN f t (British Empire) said it was true that this question had never
he had a.^ TjSHZ
prohibit in%uch bpV-: 3 h.'*?' th f f her ? somethl ng faulty m its administration. To
There wei-e. for
as Ut so W p^:n e t e of n moSnl atl0 B S  f S  me  f theSe
and s theoard & , If a CoUntry had accumulated excessive quantities of morphine
*? Kircher (France) represented that an accumulation of excessive Quantities of snh
wiTTh n aZin^att? r C ? T, a * not necessarily a P roof that there was something wrong
purposes, fZreZx poT? be ?-1-ted for leg g it,matf
mffialf the ar ? iCle  nly aPPHed ? SUbStanCCS
3? Sb? 2
ato , si3a i srrjKS? " bs "" ?> -


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said his amendment was meant to apply to
substances which replaced the substance in question for purposes of addiction and not for
medical purposes. Extracts of opium were often used by addicts as a substitute for
morphine.
M. Kircher (France) said it would be very difficult to make the necessary distinction
between legitimate and illegitimate use of the substances in question. A prohibition relating
to substances which could be used as a substitute by addicts might cover drugs which were
required for legitimate medical purposes.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said it was necessary to have confidence in the
Board. It would be a board of experts which would exercise its discretion in a reasonable
manner. He did not see why it should be necessary to protect the interests of a country
which was accumulating stocks for illicit trade. It was more important to prevent such a
country from flooding other countries with drugs for illicit purposes than to safeguard it
from any inconvenience which might result from the suggested prohibition.
D r . Anselmino (Germany) said it was not possible to use extracts of opium as a substitute
for morphine for addiction purposes.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) disagreed.
M. Kircher (France) did not think it would be just to penalise the inhabitants of a country
owing to the illegitimate activities of smugglers or to a failure of its administration.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said this was not a question of smuggling but
of Governments which deliberately allowed the import of excessive quantities of drugs, as
shown in their own import and export statistics.
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that he had originally agreed with Sir Malcolm Delevingne,
but he had since reconsidered the matter and regretted that he had come to a different opinion.
Dangerous drugs might also serve a useful purpose, and no measures should be encouraged
that might have the result of depriving the sick of the drugs that were necessary.
The Governments of countries where excessive quantities were accumulated were not
necessarily to blame in a moral sense. The accumulation might be due to faulty adminis-
tration, and the accumulated stocks might be in the hands of smugglers and not of the druggists.
Article 6 was an extraordinary and a severe measure, and, if the boycott were to cover sub-
stances other than those accumulated, it would, in his opinion, be too drastic a measure. Ihe
effect of a recommendation by the Board would be moral rather than material, and the moral
effect of the recommendation would be as great if it referred to one substance as if it referred
to others.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought the question was delicate and complex. In prin-
ciple, he did not think that the boycott should be interpreted extensively. This consideration
applied equally to the powers of the Board, which were limited to recommendation and enquiry.
The sanctions of the Board were, in fact, of a moral character. He would accordingly recom-
mend that the express recommendations of the Board should apply only to the specific sub-
stance which was accumulated. The Board might, however, at the same time, draw attention
by way of comment to the fact that there were other substances which might be used as sub-
stitutes. He agreed in principle with Sir Malcolm Delevingne, but he did not think that the
substitutes should be put on the same footing as the substance itself.
He wished to point out, in passing, that it was not so much the control exercised by the
Central Board which would be effective in preventing smuggling as the surveillance exercised
by Governments along the frontiers of their countries, and if cases of the irregular import of
drugs occurred, Governments would be able to make use of the ordinary diplomatic procedme
in order to lodge a protest with the Government of the exporting country against any
infringement of the terms of the Convention.
M. Kircher (France) said he was much attracted by the proposal of M. Dinichert. He
did not think, however, that it would be wise to extend the powers of the Board in this matter
since the boycott was a very drastic weapon. He thought it would be better to limit the Board
to making a recommendation confined to the substance of which excessive quantities wen
accumulating.
Mr. Riddell (Canada) said that Article 6 was one of the most important articles of the
Convention. It contained the only provisions which enabled the Board to fulfil its duties
of protection and recommendation. He could not understand why certain members desiied
to limit the powers of the Board. The substitution of one drug for another was a frequent
practice in his own country, and the powers of the Board should not be limited in the way
which was being suggested. He would himself prefer to leave Article 6 as it stood, in which
case it would, in his opinion, enable the Board at its discretion to extend its recommendation
to all substances covered by the Convention. He was, however, prepared to accept the com-
promise suggested by Sir Malcolm Delevingne.


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that, if his draft were accepted, it would
be easy to insert words which would safeguard medical supplies. It was essential to lay down
that, if a country had allowed excessive imports of opium, the Board should have the right
to call the attention of Governments to the facts and to recommend that no further exports
should be allowed of any of the substances likely to be used for purposes of addiction. The
Board might make any exception it thought desirable in regard to medical supplies.
M- van Wettum (Netherlands) suggested that licences for the export of any substances
vyhich might be used as a substitute for the substance accumulated should be endorsed bv
the Board. J
M. Kircher (France) objected that this would give the Board a right to intrude upon the
so\eieignty of states. Every country had absolute discretion in issuing its own licences.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) submitted a text to the effect that the Board, in making
its recommendation to a Government, could notify the substances that might be used as
substitutes for illicit purposes.
M. Sugimura (Japan) objected that no special notification of this kind appeared to be
necessary, as a list of all possible substitutes could be provided once for all by medical experts.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said he had submitted an amendment which
menf Should behead 1 GXlStmg t6Xt  f Artide 6 less ambi guous. He asked that this amend-
The Chairman said that the amendment was in the following terms :
r A rec ommendation of the Board may extend to any other substances covered by
the Convention which the Board think likely in the particular circumstances to be used
m order to replace the substance in question for illicit purpose* ?
fE KIRCHER (F ranc e) said the whole difficulty appeared to him to arise from the fart
that theie was no definition of the substances covered by paragraph iof Article 6. He pro-
posed to amend the second sentence of paragraph i ; ?
.... ? If , the inf rmation at its disposal leads the Board to conclude that excessive quan-
tities of one or more of the substances covered by the Convention are accumulating in
any country and are likely to be used for illicit trade, ? etc.
.. . J* g ra P h 1 were amended, it would only be necessary to refer in paragraph 2
T J substances m question these substances being those already defined in paragraph 1
BoSd Toffid nofarffie  f definition > and the questions of the competence of the
rw if Mal u lm LE ? GNE (British Empire) said that this was an ingenious proposal, but
? result would be to amend the article in the sense desired by M. Kircher and contrary
to the sense desired by himself. The only argument of substance which had been directed
ffir mfdkalnurnoSs P . S f lblllt F ? f , a countl T being deprived of substances necessary
toi medical purposes. To coyer this point, he was prepared to add the following words to the
text which the Chairman had just read ? 5 luine
??ln such cases ? the recommendation must include such conditions as may be neces-
sary to secure any medical supplies required by the country in question.? y
M. Kircher (France) objected that this was not a practical recommendation. The
xportmg country could not say whether any particular substitute was required for medical
purposes or not. The exporting country would be recommended not to send substitutes but
purposes 6 6 t0 theSe substitutes if they were required for medical
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said he was sorry he could not accept M. Kircher?s
suggestion, and proposed that the Committee should adjourn.


ANNEXES
i Observations of the Dutch Delegation on the Series of Measures submitted by the a  e
Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium and other Dangerous Drugs; Statement
by the Delegate of the Netherlands 125
2. Observations of the Japanese Delegation on Paragraphs 2, 4, 5 and 6 of Part I
of the Advisory Committee?s Scheme 120
01 i i 1,,. l\/T RnrJ-omnnl-A 128
3. Statement submitted by M. Bustamante (Spain) I2<
o j _ j _ j. 1 n/r a n 128
4. Statement by M. Hulftegger (Switzerland) 12(
5. Committee of Five : Articles adopted (ad referendum) on December 17th, 1924 . 13
6. Statement by M. Sjostrand (Sweden) 1 3 1
7. Amendments proposed in Articles adopted (ad referendum) by Sub Committee A U3~
8. Draft Articles submitted by the British Delegation to replace Ai tides 3> 4> an - 5- I^>3
9. Draft Articles 1
10. Draft Report .
Annex 1.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE DUTCH DELEGATION ON THE SERIES OF MEASURES
SUBMITTED BY THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE TRAFFIC IN OPIUM
AND OTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS.
Statement by the Delegate of the Netherlands.
Geneva, November 28th, 1924.
Mr. Chairman.
I want to state as briefly as possible the position taken by the Government of the Net
lands towards the series of measures suggested by the Advisory Committee a base for the
deliberations of this Conference. My Government accepts this series of measures as
As regards the measures contained in the first section, the most important feature of
which is to be seen in the establishment of a powerful Central Board my Governmeirl.is g
to accept in principle such a Board and to entrust to it not only tie rig u o P ,
even of interference, if necessary, in the traffic in drugs of any country, withl the clear u
standing, however, that all Governments represented here do the same. As this is not the
case, for obvious reasons mentioned by other delegations, the Board s 10
as to serve only the purpose of centralisation of the statistics of the diffci Q+atisfics
the Board should only have the right to publish the conclusions drawn from those statistics
either in its annual report or, if necessity should arise, at any time wic 1 e ? s ?
This right may perhaps appear to be rather insignificant if compare w P .
of the Board as outlined in Article 5 ; in my opinion, however, the moral f
from these publications will prove to be a strong incentive for all Gov eminent
t0 fU The secondYmpol-tant feature of the first section is the estimate of national requirements ;
for much the same reasons as have already been given by other delegations vve Ar G c le^i
this provision. In our opinion, the estimate is superfluous, as we have alrea d yin-Art. 1 4
the obligation to furnish detailed statistics, which will give us all the facts
supervise the national and international traffic. The estimate is, moreo^^ e f o^fri^s ^ r e
be subject to never-ceasing alterations, as the fluctuations even m co | k
considerable, whilst in manufacturing and exporting countries they may be so great a. to
an estimate a mere guess at random without any value whatsoever. maintained
If, on the other hand, it were understood that the estimate should b e mamta
it would raise unsurmountable difficulties, as in that case the estima epr + n bottom even
rationing; once you start with rationing, you will be forced to ration fr ?\ to P cornere d?by a
your smallest chemist shops, veterinareans, etc; otherwise the drugs would ?
few individuals aiming at a monopoly, and a fair distribution o e' ible as wou ld
Rationing from top to bottom is, however in my opinion, qmte inp^^fL svltem
require a very large, well-paid official staff, while, moreover, under a rigid ratl  systtm.
he licit manufacturer and trader could not possibly survive ; a complete
poly for the importation, manufacture, distribution and sale of the drug wouldbe
more acceptable than the rationing system as implied in the P r oP be either to
mittee. The only means for manufacturers and traders 10 try to survi factories or
lay up enormous stocks or to furnish estimates equal to the fu cap y cur t a ilment or
commercial relations, so as to safeguard their trade against the possibility of a curtailment
cutting-off of their necessary and legitimate supplies.


?, , T( ? sum II P. the estimate is superfluous, useless and dangerous, and the purpose which
' ? to^r* CCo,?l^*h^ by the fUr , nishing of statistics to a Central Board.
,? i? T - 1 L^m B? to the Commission these general remarks tending to suggest some alte
tTe NcihT 1 1Ch A h 7i eVer + - important ? maintain general principles in our basest discussion
the Netherlands delegation, on its part, declares to be ready to consider in a most favour^
ourhaseCf d Sa S Wlthm the SCOpe  f , the Conference from other delegations tending to ameliorate
our base of discussions so as to make it more acceptable to all members of the Conference
Annex 2.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE JAPANESE DELEGATION ON PARAGRAPHS 2, 4, 5 AND
6 OF PART I OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE?S SCHEME.
Paragraph 2.
manufacture wbTif prohibit the importation of the substances mentioned : their
Itf, , Ure within the territory in quantities greater than those fixed in Article 1 must be
fo
Paragraph 4, suh-paragraph ( b).
he mcreased to
has convinced, are best suited to the pScalrequirementl long ?P 6 ?" 06
the of eacli halfVeaC s *] o^ 6 f t Umished  f the stocks in the hands of
" it T tfi^ y
exposed tohteks of In SiS WOU,d then be
Paragraph 4, suh-paragraph (c).
entirely arbitrary estimates - which would be ?n the aC" P
is. as c? sar* r?
being that the latter are free to take action or not Th? 1 ceitain facts the implication
becomes an obligation. This obligation, however ? becomes void ?Z 0 ?
IBS
s
Paragraph 5.
purposes, it ZfiZ 6  a " d medical
own estimate of the requirements of that ?l, tu B  ard 15 J ustlfied in naming its
or a punishment for bad faith. Further on hr , 18 0ld( ? a penalty for negligence
?appears? to the Central Board to be P-reaVi . vever ? men f l on is made of an estimate which
be likely to be used in part for the ilhcit traffic term* requirement " and to
titles every objection to the risks of an estimate. PP 15 S  thatitjuS '


Is the mere fact that an estimate appears to the Central Board excessive sufficient to
invest it with dictatorial powers to fix the legitimate requirements of opium ? We cannot
conceive the possibility of granting such powers ; it would be contrary to the fundamental
principles of the League, which is an association of free peoples and not a super-State having
sovereign powers. Moreover, there is no absolute guarantee that the Central Board will
not make mistakes in its estimates a point which it is all the more important 1o note, since,
if the Board commit errors of judgment, it will be guilty of abuse of power. The creation
of entirely new machinery of this kind contravenes the very spirit of the League and might
obviously give rise to rash statements and regrettable misunderstandings. We must
not create a machine which will engender mutual suspicion but rather inaugurate a great
undertaking which will inspire sincere mutual confidence. We cannot succeed in our efforts
to improve humanity unless we appeal, above all, to the great moral forces which guide
the destinies of peoples and upon which their true happiness is founded.
Paragraph 6.
This paragraph again supplies evidence of the regrettable tendency of the Convention to
accord preferential treatment to vendor countries. If importing countries are not to be
given any guarantees against the possibilities of mistakes in the estimates of the Central
Board, it is, in my opinion, most extraordinary to grant the privilege of summoning a special
Conference to exporting countries only. Since all of us who have met here are equally desir-
ous of working together in all loyalty and sincerity for the betterment of mankind, it is essen-
tial that all the contracting States should be accorded equally favourable treatment and that
no unjust discrimination of any kind should be allowed in favour of exporting countries.
In conclusion, I should also be glad to receive information as to what will be the exact
position of the Advisory Committee if a new Central Board is created. It is most important
that disputes regarding competence and overlapping should be avoided.
Suggestions of the Japanese Delegation concerning the Organisation and
Competence of the Central Board.
(i) The Central Board shall form part of the League of Nations, and its members shall
be appointed by the Council.
Members of the Central Board shall possess special technical qualifications in matters
relating to the traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs, shall be persons of high moial
standing, and shall not act under the orders of their respective Governments.
(2) The proceedings and decisions of the Central Board and all other matters relating
to it shall be published whenever possible.
(3) Each of the contracting Governments shall submit an annual report giving an esti-
mate of its requirements as regards opium and other dangerous drugs. These reports shall
be published, in order that the requirements of the various contracting Governments may be
compared. (The fixing of the requirements for each country comes under the general
question of requirements and not under questions concerning the Central Board. We do no
propose, therefore, to go into details at this point. Each of the Governments, however, must
furnish ?in its report an estimate of its requirements for purposes of importation and the
Central Board must allow each Government a certain degree of liberty in regaro to the modi-
fication of its estimate as the result of any unforeseen contingency.)
(4) The quantities of opium and other dangerous drugs which may be imported shall be
fixed for a period of three years during the first few years after the entry into force of the pre-
sent Agreement. (Special provision will be made for exceptional circumstances, such as
epidemics.)
(s) If any State has not sent in the estimate required by the date fixed, the Central
Board shall direct its attention to this fact. If, despite such notification no estimate has
been furnished within six months, the Central Board shall forward an estimate to the Govern-
ment in question and shall request it to accept it within a reasonable period.
(6) Should any Government furnish an estimate which appears to the Central Board
to be in excess of its requirement, the latter will inform the said Government of tts op.mon
and request it to reply within a reasonable time.
(7) If in the two cases referred to above, the Government fails to reply within the time
fixed or furnishes a reply which the Central Board does not regard as satisfactory, the a ei
shall make this fact public and shall, if necessary, publish its own opinion at the same time.
(8) Should the Central Board think fit, it may ask the opinions of the contracting
Governments on any point and publish these opinions.
(9) The Central Board may, if necessary, further propose the convening of a conference
of the contracting Governments.
(10) The Advisory Committee shall cease to exist after the constitution of the Central
Board.
(11) The costs of the Central Board shall be borne by the League of Nations.


gP? ? ? ?. 387>5oo kilos.
Extract of opium 45 i 00
Alkaloids of opium 1^1016
Alkaloid salts 348,165
Other derivatives (heroin, narcil, etc.) 134,250
Pantopon 12 kilos 30,460 compressed ampullas, 100 bottles of
Papaverine
Sedol
Phrenix ampullas . . .
Spalmagine
Coca leaves
Cocaine and salts . . .
Indian hemp
syrup.
2 Aoo
STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY M. BUSTAMANTE (SPAIN) TO SUB-COMMITTEE A.
Alt^ oug k Spanish delegation to this Sub-Committee has already stated the require-
ments of my country as regards narcotics, I propose to review this question briefly.
Qnprifipd in ta rif tIC ? S Spain regarding her legitimate requirements of the drugs
specified m Chapter 111 of the Convention should only be regarded as a guide or rather as
if 1 attempt to repiy to the League?s request for information, regarding the year 1923 and the
true nature 1 not SU suffidentl y reliable information for the
true nature of this important subject to be appreciated.
Furthermore, as these figures were based on data supplied by the Customs, they naturally
correspond to the importation of this period, which is not at all the same thing as the quantity
consumed Indeed man exclusively consuming country such as Spain, the statistics of
requirements must be the importation figures minus the amounts still in stock, and as it has
n impossible to ascertain these amounts with sufficient accuracy, the statistics supplied
by Spam cannot be a reliable guide to the real consumption of these substances. ??
1 gn e below the imports of Spain during the year 1923 :
A comparison of these quantities with those of the first quarter of the present vear has
shown certain variations which have led Spain to take the view that, in order to ensure the
necessary supply of these substances, the above quantities must be increased by 20 per cent
Ho-nr rf i PamSh G( f er * ment ; being very anxious to supply all the necessary data for throwing
ght on the important questions which the Conference is studying, will pursue its investi-
gations so as to be able to supply more concrete information as soon as possible and with
all the accuracy permitted by the difficulties inherent in the question.
to tMs\?e I s7io t n r General  f Public Health is now  ivin g his active and personal attention
In conclusion I wish to say that Spain is ready to do all that lies in her powder to
co-operate in reaching an agreement. P
{Signed) Franco Bustamante.
Annex 4.
STATEMENT BY M. HULFTEGGER (Switzerland).
The Swiss Government has carefully considered the ?measures suggested by the Advisorv
Committee as a basis for the deliberations of the Second Conference" In undertaking 'this
examination, the Government was animated by the desire to co-operate effecti elv in
strengthening the Hague Convention of 1912. On this matter the Swiss represent on
PartT^p C sU ,n r tatementS * With rCf ? ard t0 Part 11 of the ?Measures",
u n +^ C  ect u li? , 6 Swiss Government agrees in principle with the views out before
us by the French and Netherlands delegates. The Swiss Government recognifel thehliditv
of the arguments which M. Bourgois and M. van Wettum have adduced limitation n
their remarkably full and lucid statements. I wiU therefore make no further rSerence o
CoTmUtVe h : n S ?b;r that they Said at the meetin g s of Sub-
-01 limitation as
(a) Reasons specifically Swiss ;
(b) Technical and practical objections ;
(c) General considerations.
[a) Reasons specifically Swiss.
based on the f . law on narc tic drugs. This law is
g vomcntion of 1912 and contains strict provisions for control on the lines


of Part II of the ?Measures?. The law will not enter into force for a few months ; it will,
however, not allow the imports and exports of the products to which it refers to be limited
to quantities fixed in advance. If limitation were introduced, the law would have to be
amended on coming into force. It will suffice to recall the constitutional difficulties encoun-
tered by the law on narcotic drugs in Switzerland difficulties which regrettably delayed
the ratification of the Convention to understand that the law, which in many respects
goes further than the Hague Convention, could not be modified before coming into force.
In Switzerland, such amendment would meet with obstacles, both juridical and legislative.
Moreover, in our country, where the laws are strictly enforced, it would not be understood
why the strict measures of control provided in the narcotic drugs law were inadequate.
The reasons which I have just given may not perhaps appeal to the organs of the League
of Nations, but the Swiss authorities are compelled to take them into account in deciding
what is practicable in the sphere of our present action.
( b) Technical and Practical Objections.
I will not go into details, as these objections have already been effectively put by the
French and Netherlands delegates. The Swiss Government concurs in their arguments.
It would particularly emphasise the fact that any limitation would have also to be applied
within the country. This would necessitate the distribution of quotas among individuals
and firms. Such a course is not possible, owing to practical difficulties, unless we have recourse
to a State monopoly a solution which may from the beginning be said to be impracticable
in Switzerland. J
The practical difficulties in the way of limitation have also been pointed out by the dele-
gate for Japan. ~ , ,
It is certain] that the~control ffixtrcised by Board would be attended by
great disadvantages to importing countries. Products designed for legitimate purposes would
inevitably suffer a rise in price, and it would be easy for foreign suppliers to raise prices as
they thought fit by temporarily withholding their goods. Furthermore, illicit commerce
in the form of smuggling would be in a position to pay higher prices than the legitimate trade
could pay, and this, too, would contribute to raise prices. These disadvantages would increase
in proportion to limitation .
The Japanese delegate declared in his remarkable statement that the periods for fur-
nishing statistics were too short, and he requested that they should be extended. Here e
revealed a fresh difficulty in the limitation system. It would be practically impossible to
supply the statistics referred to in paragraph 4. The method proposed by the Japanese dele-
gate, by which the period would be extended, would certainly not attain the end in view, seeing
that it is precisely on the strength of the statistics furnished at relatively short intervals that
the Central Board could check whether the amounts referred to in paragraphs 4-6 had not
been exceeded. That is why the periods within which the statistics should be furms e
ought to be short. An extension of these periods would render contiol largely illusory.
lam in agreement with all that the honourable delegate for Japan said the el r. r i
Board and its competence. It is more than doubtful whether so complex a body which
would be placed over States could be established. The Swiss Government declares that,
for its part, it cannot accept this organisation in the form proposed. These few objections
suffice in themselves to reveal the weak points in the main provisions of Part .
Consequently, Switzerland is of the opinion that the measures indicated in Fart i are
impracticable. As the French delegate has rightly pointed out, a central office which won c
collect statistical information and facilitate the discovery of smuggling centres would perform
valuable services and might be immediately established without encountering serious
opposition.
(c) General Considerations.
The Swiss Government would welcome the adoption of measures calculated to strengthen
as effectively as possible the control of the international traffic. The Swiss Law on Narcotic
Drugs will permit Switzerland to give her active co-operation. The Government therefore
would greatly regret that the technical difficulties in the way of the introduction of the system
referred to in Part I should delay or even perhaps jeopardise the practical realisation of the
measures of control referred to in Part 11. The fact that it has been recognised on all sides
and Sir Malcolm Delevingne has himself admitted it that the statistics on which t e
whole system in Part I would be based would be far from corresponding to medical and scien-
tific requirements may be said to dispose of another main reason urged in suppor o is
SySt The Swiss delegation is therefore of opinion that all efforts should be directed towards
giving effect to the measures of control referred to in Part 11, which will ensure an indirect
limitation of narcotic drugs. , r . , A
In conclusion, the Swiss delegation would like to observe that limitation of imports and
exports, as contemplated in Part I of the ?Measures?, would only be justified and would only
attain its end if, as is provided in the draft of the American delegation, limitation were applied
not only to manufactured products but also to the production of the raw material. It seems,
however, clear that it is precisely the main producers who are opposed to this solution.
It is on the lines indicated above that the Swiss delegation confidently hopes to contnbut
towards accelerating the proceedings of the Conference in order that the latter may soon
arrive at positive and practical results.
Geneva, December 2nd, 1924.


Annex 5
COMMITTEE OF FIVE : ARTICLES ADOPTED {ad referendum,
ON DECEMBER 17TH, 1924.
The Contracting Powers agree to send in before December 31st to the Permanent Central
Board set up under Article II estimates of the quantities of substances covered by the Con-
vention to be imported for internal consumption during the following year into their territory
for medical and scientific purposes. (Mr. Neville reserved the right to add the words ?for
other purposes?.)
These estimates are not to be regarded as binding on the Government, but will be for the
purpose of serving as a guide to the Central Board in the discharge of its duties.
Should circumstances render necessary an increase in these quantities in any country
in the course of the year, such country may send revised figures to the Central Board.
After consultation with the Advisory Committee, a Permanent Central Board shall be
constituted by the Council of the League of Nations. It shall comprise five experts, chosen
solely on the ground of their qualifications for the work, from a list on which each of the signa-
tories of the Convention shall be entitled to place one name. (M. Bourgois reserved the right
to bring up the question of the number of the experts at a later date.)
The members shall be appointed for a term of three years and they will be eligible for
re-appointment. The Board shall settle its rules of procedure, but the decisions of the Board
relative to Articles 6 and 7 shall be taken by an absolute majority of the whole number of the
Board.
The Council shall, in consultation with the Governments of any States which are not
members of the League, take the necessary measures to allocate the expenses of the Board
among the signatory States.
(Mr. Neville will recommend the constitution of the Board, but reserves the right to
discuss it again, as well as the number of experts.)
The Contracting Powers agree to send annually within three months after the end of
the year, to the Central Board the complete statistics relative to the preceding year as follows :
1. The production of raw opium and coca leaves.
2. Manufacture of the substances covered by Chapter 111 of the Convention and the
raw material used for such manufacture.
3. Stocks of the substances covered by Chapters I and 111 of the Convention in the hands
of wholesalers held by the Government for consumption in the country other than Government
consumption.
4. Consumption, other than Government consumption, of the substances covered by
the Convention, as nearly as possible.
These statistics shall be communicated by the Central Board to the Contracting Parties.
The Contracting Powers agree to forward to the Central Board within four weeks after
the end of each two months the statistics of its imports from and exports to each country
of each of the substances covered by the Convention during the preceding two months. These
statistics will, if necessary, be sent by telegram, except when the quantities fall below a
minimum amount which shall be fixed in the case of each substance by the Board. (M.
Bourgois does not accept the period of two months.)
In furnishing the statistics in pursuance of Article 3 and Article 4, the Governments
shall state separately the amounts imported or purchased for Government purposes, in order
to enable the amounts required in the country for general, medical and scientific purposes
to be ascertained. It shall not be within the competence of the Central Board to question
or to express any opinion on the amounts so imported or purchased or the use thereof.
(M. Bourgois does not accept Article 5. He could only accept the text ?the preceding
statistics will not refer to substances intended for Government use?.)


i. The Central Board shall continuously watch the course of the international trade.
If the information at its disposal leads the Board to conclude that excessive quantities ara
accumulating in any country, the Board shall have the right to ask for explanations from the
country in question.
2. If no explanation is given or the explanation is unsatisfactory, the Central Board
shall have the right to call the attention of all the Governments and of the Council of the
League of Nations to the matter and to recommend that no further exports shall be made
to the country in question until the Central Board reports that it is satisfied as to the situation
in that country in regard to the trade in the substances. The Central Board shall at the same
time notify the Government of the country concerned of the action taken by the Board.
3. If any Government is not prepared to act on the recommendation of the Central
Board, it shall immediately inform the Central Board and the Council, explaining, if possible,
why it is not prepared to do so.
4. The Central Board shall have the right to publish a report on the matter and commu-
nicate it to the Council and all the Governments.
5. If in any case the decision of the Central Board is not unanimous, the views of the
minority shall also be stated.
6. Any country shall be entitled to be represented at a meeting of the Central Board
at which a question under this article directly interesting it is considered.
(Mr. Neville makes a reservation with regard to giving Contracting Powers the right to
call the attention of the Board to any situation in regard to the traffic and to ask the Board
to make an investigation.)
VII.
In the case of a country non-signatory, the Central Board may take the same measures
as are specified in Article 6, if the information at the disposal of the Board leads it to conclude
that there is a danger of the country becoming a centre of the illicit traffic, and in that case
shall take the action indicated in that article as regards notification to the country concerned.
The country shall be entitled to be represented at the meeting of the Central Board at which
the question is considered.
VIII.
The Central Board shall appoint a secretary and an adequate staff. The appointment
of the secretary to the Board shall be subject to the approval of the Council of the League.
(Mr. Neville makes the same reservation as for Article 2.)
The Central Board shall present an annual report on its work to the Council of the League.
This report shall be communicated to all Contracting Parties.
Annex 6.
STATEMENT BY M. SJOSTRAND (Sweden).
The members of the Committee of Five have agreed amongst themselves that estimates
should be sent in at the end of each year, covering the next year. At the same time, the
binding character of the estimates has been taken away, and the estimates are only to serve
as a guide or a basis for the Central Board in its endeavours to bring about a voluntary limi-
tation of the exports into a country where the consumption seems to be excessive.
By such an arrangement, the estimates will, of course, lose an essential part of their value
as contemplated by the Advisory Committee, that is, as a means of bringing about a com-
pulsory reduction of exports and imports. They will be nothing more than a source of infor-
mation for the Central Board, and it might be objected that they will be quite superfluous
alongside with the statistical returns to be sent in monthly or annually. But it must be kept
in mind that, in the case of many countries, available statistics have so far not been a
reliable source of information. The statistics, therefore, need to be corrected, so as to corre-
spond more closely to actual facts, and allowance will have to be made for unforeseen contin-
gencies, the state of crops, etc. An improved medical service, changes in the methods of
treating diseases and other legitimate needs will perhaps also have to be taken into account.
The estimates, therefore, will serve as a sort of corrected statistics.


Further, the obligation of sending in estimates, differing more or less from the statistical
returns, will cause Governments to give explanations in order to account for the differences.
Perhaps also they will feel it a duty to undertake a special investigation of their legitimate
requirements or to try to make up a complete inventory. In this way the attention of the
Governments will be drawn to the subject, and they will be induced to keep a closer watch
over conditions on the drug market, including the illicit traffic.
On the other hand, the Central Board will have at its disposal more complete and valuable
material for ascertaining the legitimate needs of different countries. The explanations given
by a Government may call forth a demand for further information, and in this way an exchange
of views will take place, with profitable results for both parties.
In the case of Sweden, statistics of exports and imports could presumably be given monthly.
These statistics could be based upon the improved licence system proposed by the Advisory
Committee in Part 11. Some points of detail, however, ought to be cleared up, e.g., if
separate statistics are to be given of imports to and exports from free ports and free zones ;
further, if returns are to be given of seizures. Complete statistics of seizures cannot be given
from Sweden, because goods seized after having passed the Customs barrier are not accounted
for in the same way as other seizures. Further, the question arises whether the countries
of first origin and ultimate destination are to be indicated as well as the countries of sale and
purchase, etc.
If the statistics asked for in the Sub-Committee?s proposal are more comprehensive than
in the Advisory Committee?s plan, the Governments ought, of course, to be consulted, in order
to be able to submit the opinion of their experts.
I think it is a distinct advantage that the sanctionary measures contemplated in the Advi-
sory Committee?s plan have been dropped. It must be kept in mind that the obligation pro-
posed to be laid upon Governments would have entailed a series of legislative measures in the
different countries. How such a system would work out in practice is difficult to foresee, but
it seems likely that several countries would have felt reluctant to give up their autonomous
powers in these matters.
It may be confidently expected that the publicity to be given to the findings of the Board
will bring strong moral forces into play in the respective countries and will in the end prevail
upon recalcitrant or offending Governments. This system has the advantage of being more
supple and more easy to adapt to various conditions in different countries and arising cases of
emergency. Also it will most probably secure a more general adhesion to a convention and
thus mark a considerable advance towards the end in view.
Should it, however, prove ineffective, measures of a more strict and binding character
will, of course, have to be taken under consideration.
I think it is also right that the Central Board should consist of experts chosen from all
countries by the Council of the League. It is not expressly provided that at the election
due consideration ought to be given to representation from consuming countries, but possibly
such a provision might prove useful.
Annex 7.
AMENDMENTS PROPOSED IN THE ARTICLES ADOPTED {ad referendum)
SUB-COMMITTEE A.
Article I.
First paragraph, fifth and sixth lines : read ?for medical, scientific or other purposes?.
Article 2.
Replace the present draft by the following
A permanent Central Board shall be constituted by the States which are represented
on the Council of the League of Nations, together with the United States of America. It shall
comprise seven experts, chosen solely on the ground of their qualifications for the work,
from a list on which each of the signatories of the Convention shall be entitled to place
one name. The members shall be appointed for a term of five years, and they will be
eligible for re-appointment.
?At meetings of the Board four shall form a quorum.
The decisions of the Board relative to Articles 6 and 7 shall be taken by an absolute
majority of the whole number of the Board.
The Board shall settle its rules of procedure and may, subject to the approval of the
States referred to in paragraph (1) of this article, make regulations prescribing the manner
in which the statistics to be furnished to it under Articles 3-5 are to be drawn up and
forwarded.?


Article 2a.
Replacing the last paragraph of Article 2 and Article 8 :
?The Council shall, in consultation with the Board, make the necessary arrangements
for the organisation and working of the Board with the object of assuring the full technical
independence of the Board on carrying out its duties under the direction of the Council, while
providing for the control of the staff in administrative matters by the Secretary-Getieral.
?The Council shall also, in consultation with the Governments of any Contracting
Parties which are not members of the League, take the necessary measures to allocate the
expenses of the Board among the Contracting Parties. _ . ~
?The Board shall, subject to the approval of the Council, appoint its secretary and staff.
Article 3.
Sub-paragraph 2, first and second lines : read
?substances covered by Chapters II and 111 of the Convention/?
Third line : read , , jr . , ~
?such manufacture, as well as the amounts of such substances used for the production
of other derivatives.??
(Other amendments proposed in Articles 3, 4, 5 an d 6to follow.)
Article 6
Paragraph 4 : add at end
?It shall also have the right to request the Council to take any further action which may
be desirable.?? '
Add new paragraph 7 :
?It shall be the friendly right of any of the signatories to draw the attention of the Board
to any matter which appears to it to require investigation.??
Article 9.
?The Central Board shall present an annual report on its work to the Council of
the League. This report shall be published and communicated to all Conti acting
Parties... All information received by the Board, in so far as it is not published in the annual
report or under Article 6, shall be treated as confidential, and the Board shall be careful not
to make public any information which might facilitate the operations of speculators or injure
the legitimate commerce of the country concerned.??
New Article.
?Nothing in the present Convention shall be deemed to restrict in any way the powers
of the Council or the Assembly of the League of Nations under Article 23 (e) of the C ovenant.
Annex
DRAFT ARTICLES SUBMITTED BY THE BRITISH DELEGATION TO
REPLACE ARTICLES 3, 3 (), 4 and 5.
Article 3.
(i) The Contracting Powers agree to send annually, within three months after the end
of the year, to the Central Board the complete statistics relative to the preceding year as
follows :
(a) The production of raw opium and coca leaves ;
(b) Manufacture of the substances covered by Chapter 111 of the Convention and
the raw material used for such manufacture. The amount of such substances used for
the production of other derivatives shall be separately stated ;
(c) Stocks of the substances covered by Chapters I and 111 of the Convention in
the hands of wholesalers or held by the Government for consumption in the country
for other than Government purposes ;


(d) Consumption, other than for Government purposes, of the substances covered
by Chapters I and 111 of the Convention, as nearly as possible ;
amounts of seizures effected of each of the substances covered by the Conven-
tion which have been illicitly imported or exported.
These statistics shall be communicated by the Central Board to the Contracting Parties.
(?) Th *r Contracting Powers agree to forward to the Central Board within four weeks
after the end of each three months the statistics of their imports from and exports to each
country of each of the substances covered by the Convention during the preceding three months,
these statistics will, in such cases as may be prescribed by regulations made under Article 2
be sent by telegram, except when the quantities fall below a minimum amount which shall
be fixed in the case of each substance by the Board
(3) In furnishing the statistics in pursuance of this article, the Governments shall
state separately the amounts imported or purchased for Government purposes in order to
Set ! 10 a ? ou! }? s required in the country for general medical and scientific purposes to
be ascertained. It shall not be within the competence of the Central Board to question or
to express any opuuon on the amounts imported or purchased for Government purposes or
, J4) For the purposes of this article, substances which are held, imported, or purchased
GovernmaTt 6 purposes 0 ' 6V6ntUal re  arded M hdd ' im P ort " d  r Phased tor
Article 4.
In order to complete the information of the Board as to the disposal of the world?s supplv
of raw opium the Governments of the countries where the use of prepared opium is temporarily
permitted shall in addition to the statistics provided for in Article 3, forward annually within
(1) Manufacture of prepared opium and the raw material used for such manufacture;
(2) Consumption of prepared opium.
nr I understood that it shall not be within the competence of the Board to question
oi to express any opinion upon these statistics, and the provisions of Article 6 are not aDoli
cable to the matters dealt with in this article. PP
Annex 9.
DRAFT ARTICLES.
Article 1.
sss.lasssr mp ?" ,1 "?
These estimates are not to be regarded as binding on the Government but will be for
the purpose of serving as a guide to the Central Board on the discharged iti duties
ih Sh d circumstances render necessary an increase in these quantities in any countrv in
the course of the year, such country may send revised figures to the Central Board Y
Article 2.
the CounSTof B ? M d *- h * appointed by the States which are represented on
" ( f i , the Lea  ue of Nations, together with one State chosen by those Contracting
Parties which are not members of the League as their representative. It shall comnrisf
? whi e cFS| O C f the?sigriatories to place "jhe
majority of thewho]e numbeTof Articles 6 and 7 shall be taken by an absolute
The Board shall settle its rules of prodecure and may make regulations nresrrihirm fbp
? forwarded! 16 * be f ? shed to * und - to'beZawn


Article 3.
The Council shall, in consultation with the Board, make the necessary i for
the organisation and working of the Board with the object of assuring the full technical in
pendence of the* Board in casing out its duties under the present provrdmg
for the control of the staff in administrative matters by the Becretary-General. .
The Council shall also, in consultation with the Governments of any Contractu g
which are not members of the League, take the necessary measures to allocate the expenses
 f of the Council, appoint its secretary and staff
Article 4.
(j\ The Contracting Parties agree to send annually, within three (in the case of para
graph C, Se) momhfaffer the end g of the year, to the Central Board thecompletestatist.es
relative to the preceding year as follows :
(a) The production of raw opium and coca leaves ;
( 7,| Manufacture of the substances covered by Chapter 111 of the Convention and
the raw material used for such manufacture. The amount of such substances used for
the production of other derivatives shall be separately stated ,
(c) Stocks of the substances covered by Chapters I and 111 of the
the hands of wholesalers or held by the Government for consumption in the country for
other than Government purposes ;
id) Consumption, other than for Government purposes, of the substances covered
by Chapters I and 111 of the Convention, as nearly as possible ;
(e) The amounts of seizures effected of each of the substances covered by the Conven-
tion which have been illicitly imported or exported and the dispoation of the r
and such, other information in regard thereto as may be prescribed by the regulatio
the Board. . ~
These statistics shall be communicated by the Central Board to the Contracting Parties.
(2) The Contracting Parties agree to forward to the Central Board witWn four weeks
after the end of each three months, the statistics of their imports from and exports to each
country of each of the substances covered by the Convention during the preceding three mont is.
TheseTatS.cs^will, in such cases as may be prescribed by regulations made under Article 2
beTent by telegram, except when the quantities fall below a minimum amount which shall
be fixed in the case of each substance by the Board.
/o\ i n furnishing the statistics in pursuance of this article, the Governments shall
state separately the amounts imported or purchased for Government purposes, in order to
enable the amounts required in the country for general : medical and
hp ascertained It shall not be within the competence of the Central Board to question
opinion on the amounts imported" or purchased for Government purposes or
the use thereof.
For the purposes of this article, substances which are held, imported, or purchased
by the? Government for eventual sale are not regarded as held, imported or purchased for
Government purposes.
Article 5.
In order to complete the information of the Board as to the disposal of the world?s supply
of raw opium, the Governments of the countries where the  f WoriXHnnuaUy within
to the preceding year as follows :
(1) Manufacture of prepared opium and the raw material used for such manufacture ;
(2) Consumption of prepared opium.
It is understood that it shall not be within the competence of the Board to question ?
to express any opinion upon these statistics, and the provisions of Article 6 are not appl.cab
to the matters dealt with in this article, except in cases where the Board may find that
international transactions are taking place on an appreciable basis.
Article 6.
r The Central Board shall continuously watch the course of the international trade.
If the informaSn at its disposal leads the Board to conclude that excessive quantities are
accumXtingtn any country the Board shall have the right to ask through the instrumenta-
lity of the Secretary-General of the League, for explanations from the country in question.


2. If no explanation is given or the explanation is unsatisfactory, the Central Board
shall have the right to call the attention of all the Governments and of the Council of the League
of Nations to the matter and to recommend that no further exports shall be made to the country
in question until the Central Board reports that it is satisfied as to the situation in that country
in regard to the trade in the substances. The Central Board shall at the same time notify
the Government of the country concerned of the action taken by the Board. The country
concerned, and any country which exports the substances in question to it, shall be entitled
to appeal to the Council of the League against any decision of the Board under this paragraph.
3. If any Government is not prepared to act on the recommendation of the Central
Board, it shall immediately inform the Central Board and the Council, explaining, if possible,
why it is not prepared to do so.
4 ? The Central Board shall have the right to publish a report on the matter and com-
municate it to the Council, which shall thereupon forward it to all the Governments.
5; If in any case the decision of the Central Board is not unanimous, the views of the
minority shall also be stated.
6. Any country shall be entitled to be represented at a meeting of the Central Board
at which a question under this article directly interesting it is considered.
7. It shall be the friendly right of any of the signatories to draw the attention of the
Board to any matter which appears to it to require investigation.
Article 7.
In the case of a country non-signatory, the Central Board may take the same measures
as are specified in Article 6, if the information at the disposal of the Board leads it to conclude
that there is a danger of the country becoming a centre of the illicit traffic, and, in that case,
shall take the action indicated in that article as regards notification to the country concerned.'
The country shall be entitled to be represented at the meeting of the Central Board at which
the question is considered.
Article 8.
The Central Board shall present an annual report on its work to the Council of the League.
Ims repoit shall he published and communicated to all Contracting Parties. The Central
Board shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the figures, information and explana-
tions which it receives under Articles 1, 4, 5, 6 or 7 of the present Convention shall not be
made public in such a manner as to facilitate the operations of speculators or injure the
legitimate commerce of any Contracting Party.
Annex 10.
DRAFT REPORT
0.D.C./S.C. A/7.
February 2nd, 1925.
w^ b r C T m ? ttee , A u W f a PP mted t consider that part of the task entrusted to the
Conference winch relates to the ?limitation of the amounts of morphine, heroin and
cocaine and their respective salts to be manufactured" and the Conference gave the Sub-
fw ne a a T Lnda 7 7 co, ! sld, : T the suggestions which had been made, or might
ut, r 17, l ]! at n rid ' In r v a c U 7 r ? the Conference referred to it the first part of the proposals
"? ad A 7? Up the Opmm Advisory Committee of the League of.Nations at its
bask of it. TtT T 4 and T h ?. ch W6re ad P ted b y the Conference at its first meeting as the
fTbetlC7,! e n b r at l 0nS ? a ', l ' , the corresponding proposals in the scheme submitted by the
of the Advisory Commi'ttee 1C "** bMed Up  n ? and largel y in agreement with, the proposals
divergence PlP. osals were ( exa miried very thoroughly by the Sub-Committee and a wide
concernediAC W f , found to axlst between the delegations of the countries mainly
concerned in the manufacture of and commerce in these drugs.
Committed A (
a Conference flip lll 1 9 2 3> a t which it formulated the proposal for the holding of
Committee conceminc^fti 60 ? e Committee reported ?that the information obtained by the
it possible now to form c manufacture of drugs was steadily increasing and seemed to make
considered reeardine the li estimate of the world?s requirements. Suggestions were
the Committee reached flip l  the manufacture of morphine, heroin and cocaine and
OfMStS conclusion that it now seemed possible for the Governments
understanding?. & With this obiecf?That ifof Wlthaview to reaching a general
drills manufacturer! Vrrl ni!Ta at 1S) of, securing a limitation in the amounts of the


[a) Every country should frame, annually, an estimate of the amounts it would
require to import in the following year for medical and scientific purposes of each of the
substances covered by the Hague Convention, whether required for domestic consumption,
for manufacture or for commerce.
( b) The Governments should undertake not to allow the importation of more
than the quantities specified in their estimates unless in the course of the year they found
it necessary to frame a revised estimate.
(c) The exporting countries should undertake that their exports to any country
should not, together, exceed more than the amount estimated by that country.
{d) A Central Board should be constituted by the Council of the League. The
Board should receive, at the beginning of each year, the estimates of the countries and,
during the year, quarterly statistics of the imports and exports from and to each country,
and should keep the Governments of the exporting countries informed when the imports
into any particular country had reached the amount estimated.
( e ) The Board should also have the important power of revising any estimate
furnished by a Government which appeared to the Board ?to be greatly in excess of the
reasonable requirements of the country and to be likely to be used in part for the
illicit traffic?.
Strong objection was taken to these proposals by several delegations on various grounds,
the principal of which were that Governments were not in a position at present to frame esti-
mates, which could be regarded as binding, of their annual requirements ; that in any case,
owing to the fluctuations in the annual opium crop and the speculative character of the trade,
it would always be impossible to frame in advance estimates of their requirements for manu-
facturing or commercial purposes ; and that a limitation of the imports of a country to a
definite figure would lead to attempts on the part of dealers to corner the markets and would
entail a complete system of rationing. The delegations which held these views considered
that a more practical method of control would be to obtain the statistics of the trade in the
drugs at the end of each year and to give the Central Board the duty of examining the statis-
tics and calling attention to cases in which the figures appeared to indicate that excessive
quantities were being imported and that there was a danger of a country being the centre
of an illicit traffic.
The delegations which supported the scheme of the Advisory Committee pointed out
in reply that, if reliance was to be placed on statistics which were only to be received after the
close of the year in regard to the transactions in that year, no effective action could be taken
by the Board to prevent illicit traffic, as the statistics would not be received at the best until
many months after the event ; that it would not be expected of the Governments, at any
rate in the early years of the working of the scheme, that they should furnish exact estimates
of their requirements ; that, in the first instance, they would be able to allow a sufficient
margin in their estimates to provide against a possible shortage, and would always be able,
in the event of a shortage actually occurring, to forward a revised estimate, and that, as expe-
rience grew, the estimates would become more and more exact ; that there was no reason why
a Government in a year of abundant crop and low prices should not allow its traders and manu-
facturers to take advantage of it by laying in supplies for a longer period than the current year,
a revised estimate being submitted for the purpose ; and that any attempts on the part
of dealers to corner the market and to raise prices would be improbable as the trade in these
particular drugs, in most cases, forms only a small part of their total business and would
prejudice their other business, and in any case, such attempts could easily be countered by
the Government, whose permission the dealers would require for carrying on the trade in these
drugs.
Long discussions took place both in the Committee itself and in a small Committee of
Five which was appointed with a view to finding a basis of agreement. The objections to the
scheme of the Advisory Committee were maintained and it became evident that, if an agree-
ment were to be reached, it would have to be on a different basis.
Eventually a compromise was reached on the following lines :
The establishment of a Central Board was retained, but with functions of a different
character. Its main duty would be to keep a watch on the international traffic, to note where
the drugs were going to, and to investigate the case of any country where quantities greatly
in excess of its probable requirements were accumulating. To enable it to carry out its duties,
it would be furnished, at short intervals, by each country with statistics of its imports from
and exports to each country of each of the drugs. It would also be furnished at the beginning
of the year with the estimates of the probable requirements of each country, but these esti-
mates would not be binding on the country as under the Advisory Committee?s scheme,
but would be merely for the purpose of serving as a guide to the Central Board in carrying
out its task. The Board would also have the power of asking for explanations from any country
where the imports appeared to be excessive, and, if no satisfactory explanation were
forthcoming, of calling the attention of all other Governments to the position and recommending
that the exports to the country in question should cease until the Board was able to report
that the situation in that country was satisfactory.
This scheqne is embodied in the draft proposals which are submitted by Sub-Committee A
for the consideration of the Conference and which are annexed to this report.


It will be observed that, under this scheme, no compulsion is placed upon any Government
and that the powers of the Central Board are powers of enquiry and recommendation only.
No country is compelled to cease either its imports or its exports of the drugs. The sanction
behind the action of the Board will be a moral sanction only -?? the pressure of public opinion.
The Board will publish its findings and the grounds on which they are based and will commu-
nicate them to the Council of the League and through the Council to all the Governments. The
Board will take the decisive action of recommending the stoppage of exports to a particular
country only when the case is perfectly clear, and in such a case it can hardly be doubted
that responsible Governments which put their signatures to the new Convention will act in
accordance with the recommendation. Should a Government not be prepared, however, to
act on the recommendation, it will be required to inform the Central Board, and, if possible,
to give its reasons. It was felt by one or two delegations that in some cases there might be
political or other serious reasons for not stating the grounds of the decision of the Government.
It is understood that such cases would be exceptional.
In order that every possible safeguard be provided against the possibility of error
or arbitrary action on the part of the Board, it is proposed in the scheme submitted to the
Conference that a recommendation of the Board shall be made only if a clear majority of the
whole number of the Board is in favour of it ; that any country shall be entitled to be repre-
sented at a meeting of the Board when any question of action with regard to it under Article VI
is being considered ; that, where there is a division of opinion in the Board, the views of the
minority shall also be stated in their report ; and, finally, that any country shall have the right
of appeal to the Council of the League against the decision of the Board.
The scheme now proposed is less drastic than the scheme proposed by the Advisory
Committee, which was itself less drastic than the schemes of limitation put forward by certain
countries in the Committee which was appointed by the Council of the League to prepare a
programme for the Conference. The Sub-Committee believe, however, that the scheme
they have elaborated will be a valuable instrument in checking the illicit traffic and securing
the limitation of the manufacture of, and trade in, the drugs to medical and scientific require-
ments as provided for in the Hague Convention. The success of the scheme will depend
on the active co-operation of the Governments in supplying the statistics and other material
which will be required by the Board to enable it to carry out its duties.
It remains to comment briefly on the details of the scheme ;
i. The Constitution of the Central Board.
[a) The Electoral Body. The Sub-Committee consider that the Electoral Body, which
will appoint the Central Board, should be fairly representative of all countries, and they have
therefore had to take account of the fact that some important countries are not Members
of the League of Nations. After much discussion, they came to the conclusion that the body
which is to appoint the Central Board should be constituted by all the countries which are
represented, whether by permanent or non-permanent seats, on the Council of the League
of Nations, together with the United States of America and Germany. In this way the
interests of all countries, whether consuming or producing or manufacturing countries, will
be adequately protected.
( b ) Qualifications of members of the Central Board. It is essential that the members of
the Board should be absolutely impartial and independent on the one hand, and that, on the
other, they should have an expert knowledge of the matters with which they will have to
deal. Unless they possess both these qualifications, they will not be able to command the
general confidence both of the countries affected and of the world at large, on which the success
of their work will depend. The Sub-Committee has accordingly proposed that the members of
the Board shall be experts who are chosen solely on the ground of their qualifications for the
work, and they have not seen their way to accept a suggestion that consuming, producing
and manufacturing countries should be separately represented on the Board. It would, in
their view, be fatal to the success of the scheme if the Board were to be representative of
?interests?. They recognise, however, the importance of preventing any suspicion that the
Board is selected from a particular group of countries and of ensuring a wide field of candidates
from which the Electoral Body can make its choice, and they have accordingly accepted the
proposal that the selection shall be made from a list on which every signatory of the Convention
would have the right to place one name. The Sub-Committee must emphasise the importance,
however, of the signatory Governments, in the exercise of this right, taking the greatest care
to put forward only the names of persons who possess the qualifications mentioned above.
Different opinions were expressed as to the most suitable number of members to be
appointed on the Board. The Committee of Five, which prepared the scheme, recommended
five, but the Sub-Committee finally decided in favour of seven. It was felt that the larger
number would ensure a more adequate representation and strengthen confidence in the
decisions of the Board. It will also make it easier to secure a quorum for meetings of the
Board in cases of urgency.
(c) Or ganisation of the work of the Central Board. If the Board is to command general
confidence and its decisions are to be accepted, it must be completely independent in carrying
out its work, and it is of the utmost importance that no ground should be given even for a sus-
picion that it is liable to any outside influence. On the other hand, it is not possible, nor
desirable, to dissociate the organisation from the League of Nations, which, under Article XXIII
of the Covenant of the League, is entrusted with the general supervision of the traffic in opium
and other dangerous drugs. It is desirable that the staff of the Board, while acting under


the orders of the Board in regard to its actual work, should be organised for administrative
purposes, such as salary, leave, discipline, etc., as part of the staff of the League and should
be subject to the authority of the Secretary-General in regard to such matters. Moreover,
by organising the work in this way, the ?material?' services of the League will be at the dis-
posal of the Board, with a great gain of efficiency and economy in expense. The Sub-Committee
accordingly proposes that the necessary arrangements for the work of the Board should
be made by the Council of the League in consultation with the Board, and that the Board
should nominate its secretary and staff for appointment by the Secretary-General subject to
the approval by the Council. As some doubt has been expressed in the Sub-Committee whether
the fact of appointment of the staff by the Secretary-General might not affect the indepen-
dence of the Board in regard to its work, the Sub-Committee thinks it desirable to place on
record that any intervention from outside in the work of the Board would be contrary to their
intention and (it may add) to the views of the Secretary-General, who has been consulted in
the framing of Article 111, which deals with the organisation of the Board. The secretary
will take his directions in regard to the actual work of the Board from the Board alone and,
subject to their directions, will have full control of the work of the staff.
[d] Expenses of the Central Board. It is proposed that the expenses of the Board and
its staff should be borne by the Powers which sign the Convention and that the allocation
should be arranged by the Council of the League in consultation with the Governments of
States which are non-Members of the League. The Sub-Committee do not anticipate that the
cost of the Board will be considerable. It cannot be expected that it will be possible to obtain
the services, as members of the Board, of persons who possess the qualifications necessary and
who will be willing to give the amount of time which the work of the Board will require unless
they receive a remuneration for their services. This remuneration will necessarily be at
a high rate if men of the first class are to be secured, but, on the other hand, they will not be
required to give the whole of their time or even a large part of their time to the work of the
Board. The Sub-Committee anticipates that the work will be carried on somewhat in the
following manner :
The secretary and staff (who will be permanent officials and who will be provided with
office accommodation, presumably at Geneva), would carry on the work of tabulating and
analysing the statistics of imports, etc., as they come in ; would circulate the summaries of
the analyses, etc., to the members of the Board as quickly as possible ; and would call attention
to any cases which might appear to demand the special consideration of the Board. In cases
where urgent action would appear to be required, they would immediately warn the members.
It is impossible to forecast the number of meetings which the Board would require to hold
each year, but it is possible that four quarterly meetings, or even less, with an occasional
emergency meeting, might prove to be sufficient.
As regards the staff, it will be necessary to employ a secretary to be in general charge
of the work. His position will be an important one and he will require to have similar
qualifications to those required by the members of the Board, though he need not be of the same
standing. He would occupy a confidential position of considerable responsibility. It would
be necessary, therefore, that he should be adequately remunerated.
In addition to the secretary, some officials experienced in the handling of statistics would
be necessary, but the statistics would not be of great volume and the number of officials
required would be small.
Possibly a sum of would cover the whole annual expenses of
the Board.
2. Information to he furnished by the Governments.
This can be grouped under four headings
( a) Quarterly statistics of imports and exports. These will be the main foundation of the
work of the Board as it is by these that they will be enabled to follow currently the course of
the international traffic.
A proposal was made when the scheme was first brought forward that these returns
should be made monthly, but objection was taken by certain delegations on the ground
of the difficulty of supplying the figures at such frequent intervals, and the Sub-Committee,
to meet these objections, agreed that the returns should be made quarterly. With quarterly
returns the Board will not be able to follow so closely the course of the international traffic,
but the Committee think that, at the commencement at any rate of the scheme, this com-
promise should be accepted.
( h) Annual statistics of production , manufacture, consumption and stocks. These
statistics will also be of great importance, as, in conjunction with the figures of imports and
exports, they will Central Board to trace what has become of the amounts of the
raw material produced and of the drugs manufactured in the several producing and manufac-
turing countries. For instance, if in the case of any country the figures of manufacture
and import of the drugs are found to be greatly in excess of the exports, consumption and
stocks, the possibility of a leakage in* that country into channels of illicit traffic would be
indicated and would be examined by the Board.
(c) Estimates. Each country will be asked to furnish an estimate at the end of the year
of its probable requirements during the ensuing year of each of the substances covered by
the Hague Convention for internal consumption. As already stated, these estimates are
not to be binding on the Governments and are intended to serve as a guide to the Central


Board as to the probable requirements of the different countries. The value of the estimates
for that purpose will, of course, depend on the care with which they are prepared. The
Sub-Committee consider that it should be possible, especially after a few years' experience,
for the Governments to frame fairly close estimates of their requirements by one or more of
the methods which have been mentioned in the Sub-Committee.
As some doubt was expressed in the Sub-Committee as to whether the words ?internal
consumption? would include consumption in the country for purposes of manufacture, the
Sub-Committee desire that it should be made clear that this is not the case.
(d) Seizures. It will be of great assistance to the Board if they can be furnished annually
by the Governments with information as to seizures of contraband drugs, as these will throw
light on the extent and course of illicit international traffic. A provision on this point has
accordingly been inserted in Article IV (i) [e). The drafting of this provision will require to
be considered by the Drafting Committee.
A word of explanation is required in regard to the proposal in Article V that statistics
in regard to the manufacture and consumption of prepared opium should be supplied to the
Board. Except in the one case mentioned below, the Board will have no duties in regard to
the manufacture of, trade in, and use of, prepared opium in those territories in which opium
smoking is still temporarily authorised under Chapter II of the Hague Convention. It was
suggested, however, that it would help the Board in keeping a watch upon the international
traffic and in ascertaining what becomes of the supplies of raw opium placed upon the world?s
markets, if information as to the amount of raw opium imported for the purpose of smoking,
and the amount used in the manufacture of prepared opium, were supplied to the Board.
The Sub-Committee, in order to make it perfectly clear that it will not be within the compe-
tence of the Board to intervene in the question of the use of opium for smoking, has inserted
the last paragraph in Article V. There is one class of case, however, in which it would be
competent for the Board to intervene ; that is, in a case in which the Board might find that
an extensive smuggling of opium from one of the territories in question was taking place.
In such a case the Board would have the same power to ask for explanations and to make
recommendations as in other cases.
3. Powers and duties of the Central Board.
the functions of the Board have been explained above and little further remains to be
said. An important discussion took place in the Sub-Committee on the proposal that the
decisions of the Central Board should be subject to the approval of the Council of the League.
This proposal was felt by the Sub-Committee to be open to strong objection on several grounds
and was not accepted by it. It appeared to the Sub-Committee that its adoption would
have affected the independent status of the Board, would have made it much more difficult
to secure men of the highest standing as members of the Board, and would have led to serious
delays in taking any necessary action in cases of illicit traffic.
The Sub-Committee has considered it necessary to define as precisely as possible the powers
and duties of the Board. This is important in order to prevent any question being raised
in the future by any Government as to the competence of the Board in regard to any action
it might take and also to avoid overlapping and confliction of jurisdiction with the Opium
Advisory Committee and the Secretariat of the League. While the task of examining the
statistics of the traffic furnished by the Governments and watching the course of the inter-
national trade will now fall to the Central Board, the Advisory Committee will still remain as
the advisory organ of the Council and Assembly of the League with important functions, and
it is very desirable to prevent any conflict of jurisdiction between the two bodies.
A word of explanation is necessary in regard to Article VI (a). It was considered by
the Committee to be desirable that Governments should have the right to bring to the notice
of the Board any matter within the scope of the duties of the Board which might appear to
require investigation, as, for instance, a case in which any country had evidence of illicit
traffic being carried on. Such information will be of special value to the Board as regards
countries which are not signatories of the Convention and from which the statistics and other
information provided for in the scheme is not received by the Board. The Article is not
to be constructed as extending the powers of the Board, as laid down in Articles VI and VII.
Lastly, the Sub-Committee desires to insist on the importance of the utmost discretion
being used by the Board in dealing with the information which it receives from the Govern-
ments. The information of the imports, exports, etc., of particulars countries, if divulged,
might be of great value to speculators in the trade, or might be used to injure the commer-
cial interests of a country, and they have accordingly inserted a provision in Article XIII
on the point.
The Sub-Committee recognises that the scheme which it now submits for the approval
of the Conference may not fulfil as completely as could be wished the hopes which were enter-
tained in many quarters that an effective scheme would be worked out by the Conference for
limiting the amounts of the drugs manufactured to the quantities actually required for the
voild s medical and scientific needs. At the same 4ime, it believes that, if the Conference
adopts the scheme which it proposes, the first, and most important, steps will have been taken
in the diiection of establishing the control over the traffic in these drugs which all Governments
desire. If, as it confidently expects, the Central Body proves itself to be an effective
r * r canyin duties entrusted to it under the scheme and obtains the confidence
of all countries and parties interested, it will be easy to enlarge its functions and to extend
the scope of its work as circumstances may show to be desirable.


MINUTES
SUB'COMMITTEE B.
Geneva, November 28th , 1924, to February 6th ,


CONTENTS
Page
List of Members
First Meeting, Friday, November 28th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
1. Consideration of the Programme of Work of the Sub-Committee : Appoint-
ment of Rapporteurs 143
Second Meeting, Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
2. Statement of the Delegate of the Dominican Republic 144
3. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert 144
Third Meeting, Thursday, December 4th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
4. Approval of the Minutes of the Sub-Committee 145
5. Reference of certain New Questions to the Sub-Committee 145
6. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert (Continuation) . . 145
Fourth Meeting, Friday, December sth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
7. Representation of India on the Sub-Committee 146
8. Communication of Dr. Betances : Statement to Sub-Committee A and the
Second Committee 145
9 ? Limitation of the Production of Raw Opium : Statement made by Mehmed
Sureya Bey (Turkey)
10. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert ( Continuation ) . . 147
Fifth Meeting, Saturday, December 6th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
11. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert ( Continuation). . 147
Sixth Meeting, Tuesday, December 9th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
12. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert (Continuation). . 140
Seventh Meeting, Wednesday, December 10th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
13. Statement by M. Zahle regarding a Proposal for the Adjournment of the
Conference
14. Meeting of the Sub-Sub-Committee J32
15. Consideration of Article lof the United States Suggestions 153
16. Meeting of the Sub-Committee ; Consideration of the Preliminary Report
of M. Dinichert (Continuation) 133
Eighth Meeting, Thursday, December nth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
17. Conditional Adoption of Proposal made by Mr. Clayton at the Seventh
Meeting. 154
18. Meeting of the Sub-Sub-Committee 134
19. Consideration of the Australian and Cuban Proposals ] ? 3:33
Ninth Meeting, Friday, December 12th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
20. Composition of the Indian Delegation : Appointment of Mr. Walton ... 156
21. Limitation of the Production of Opium : Resolution proposed bv Mrs.
Hamilton Wright
22. Consideration of the Draft Report prepared by M. Dinichert ( Continuation) 137
Tenth Meeting, Monday, December 15th, 1924, at 10 a.m.
23. Appointment of Representatives to the Co-ordination Committee 157
24* Consideration of the Draft Report prepared by M. Dinichert (Continuation) 157
25. Meeting of Sub-Sub-Committee : Consideration of the Persian Memo-
randum jHQ
TT TT7 T 7T? XT'TTT I\/T
Eleventh Meeting, Wednesday, December 17th, 1924, at 11 a.m.
26. Consideration of the Persian Memorandum ? r6i
27- Consideration of the Report on the Work of the Sub-Sub-Committee ?. . 162
Twelfth Meeting, Thursday, December 18th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
28 . Article lof the United States Suggestions : Statement made by the Indian
Delegation
29. Consideration of the Second Report of Sub-Committee B ! ! . 166
30. Limitation of the Production of Opium : Second Report of Sub-Com-
mittee B
31. Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee (Document 5.C.8.6, Annex 4) . . . . 167
32 . Appointment of Representatives of Sub-Committee Bto the Committee of Co-
ordination
OO A rjinnt-n C,, ?U r* ?1 1 _ f nr 1 /
33. Adjournment of the Sub-Committee?s Work V . ... . 168
Thirteenth Meeting, Friday, January 30th, 1925, at 4 p.m.
34. Article lof the United States Suggestions : Note of the Indian Delegation 168
Fourteenth Meeting, Monday, February 2nd, 1925, at 10.30 a m
35 ? Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee . .? 160
Fifteenth Meeting, Tuesday, February 3rd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
36. Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee (continuation of the
discussion) 17 -
Sixteenth Meeting, Wednesday, February 4th, 1925, at 11.30 a.m.
37 ? Consideration of the Supplementary Report of Sub-Committee B : Adoption 177
3 . Representation of Sub-Committee Bon the Committee of Co-ordination . . 179
Seventeenth Meeting, Thursday, February s th, 1925, at 4 p.m.
39. Work of the Co-ordination Committee I7Q
40. Close of the Work of the Sub-Committee. . . rftr
Annexes ?


SUB COMMITTEE B.
LIST OF MEMBERS
Chairman : M. Chodzko (Poland).
The following countries were represented on the Sub-Committee :
United States of America. Egypt Poland.
Australia. Greece. Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
China. India. and Slovenes.
Dominican Republic. Persia. Switzerland.
Turkey.
The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee
and adopted by the First Committee at its second meeting held on November 25th, 1924.
FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, November 28 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
1, Consideration of the Programme of Work of the Sub-Committee : Appointment of
Rapporteurs.
The Chairman recalled the programme the Committee had been constituted to consider
and proposed the appointment of two Rapporteurs to consider paragraphs 3, 4, 5> 6 and 7
of Section I of Annex 1 of the report of the Advisory Commission and paragraph 6 of the reso-
lution adopted by the Assembly on September 27th, 1923 (Document A. 131. i 9 2- XI).
He thought the reports presented by Persia, America and Australia might also be considered.
Mrs Hamilton Wright (United States of America) proposed that the Committee should
begin with a general discussion of the programme.
Mr. Campbell (India) said he thought it would be preferable that no question objected
to as outside the competence of the Committee should be raised at present, particularly as the
question of competence was to be discussed during the afternoon session of the Conference.
It would be advisable to proceed with the other subjects on the agenda.
The Chairman said he had proposed discussion of the American proposals only in so far
as they came within the terms of reference of the Committee.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) remarked that the resolution of Sep-
tember 28th, 1923, was based on the principles of the American report. Could they not now
at least discuss the Australian proposals ?
The Chairman said it was useless, under the circumstances, to discuss general principles.
He suggested the appointment of the Australian delegate as Rapporteur for the first part of
the work and the Chinese delegate for the second part.
These members being unable to accept the position, Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia)
proposed that M. Dinichert (Switzerland) should undertake the office of Rapporteur for the
first group of subjects.
This proposal was unanimously adopted.
The Chairman proposed the name of Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) as second Rappor-
teur, in association with Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey).
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh insisted that it was impossible for him to accept the position, and
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) was appointed Rapporteur for the second group.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) asked for an exact statement of his duties as Rapporteur.
The Chairman said the Rapporteurs would have documents placed before them and
on that basis would make a report which the Committee would discuss.
Mr. Campbell (India) said his Government would be glad to accept the Advisory Com-
mittee?s scheme. If the representatives of the other Governments were prepared to signify
their acceptance also, the work of the Committee would be simplified. It was not for the
Rapporteurs, but for the delegates, to express their opinions on proposals, and this course
had always been adopted in his experience.


M. Dendramis (Greece) and Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) signified
their acceptance of the Advisory Committee?s plan, Mrs. Hamilton Wright reserving her
right to propose amendments to it in conformity with the American plan.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that his Government accepted it, with the
reserves already made in the memorandum presented to the Conference.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought the Rapporteurs should study the report of the
Advisory Committee and study the points contained in it, so that their exact import
might be made clear. They should then present the result of this study to the Committee.
M. Dendramis (Greece) and Mr. Shepherd (Australia) expressed agreement with the
opinion held by Mr. Campbell.
M. Sze (China) did not wish to state the position his Government proposed to take up
at that moment.
Mr. Campbell (India) moved that all delegates should be asked to prepare their amend-
ments if any, to the Advisory Committee?s scheme and submit them to the Sub-Committee
on Tuesday, December 2nd, while M. Dinichert would meanwhile proceed with his study of
documents.
This proposal was accepted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) agreed to circulate his note to delegates during the week-end.
The Chairman announced that he would discuss personally with Sureya Bey, Rapporteur
of the second group, the measures to be taken under that heading.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : D r . Chodzko (Poland).
2. Statement of the Delegate of the Dominican Republic.
A letter from M. Pilya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes), designating M,
Militchevitch as substitute delegate, was read and noted by the Committee.
Dr, Betances (Dominican Republic) read the following statement ;
?The delegate of the Dominican RepubliUconsiders that any definite quantity pro-
posed in connection with the limitation of the manufacture and distribution of drugs can
only be arbitrary, as it is not possible to establish it by any scientific method. It would
be dangerous to fix quantities for different countries by the number of inhabitants
without taking into consideration unforeseen needs which may arise. Even if definite
quantities could be established it would be necessary to maintain some surplus, the
limits of which would, to a certain extent, be undefined, in order to meet unforeseen
medical and scientific requirements. This surplus should be strictly controlled.
?The delegate of the Dominican Republic considers that, if the Conference should
decide to extend the rules contained in the Opium Convention to other narcotics, this
extension should be made to include all natural or manufactured products from whose
abusive or prolonged use in any form evil results similar to those produced by opium and
other dangerous drugs can arise, either directly or indirectly.?
These statements were noted by the Sub-Committee.
3. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of IVI. Dinichert.
The Chairman called on M. Dinichert (Rapporteur for paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of
Section I of the Report of the Consultative Committee) to read his report, which has been
communicated separately to members of the Sub-Committee, (Annex 1.)
It was agreed to consider the articles of this report one by one.
Article 4 (b) of the ?Measures? and Article 20 -D (1) (a) of the United States Suggestions.
Mr. Campbell (India) suggested that the heading of this article should include Article
20-D (i) {b) of the American proposals.
This proposal was accepted.
Mr. Campbell (India) pointed out that in paragraph 1 there was no mention of re-exports,
whereas these had been mentioned both in the American proposals and in the Advisory
Committee?s report, and should be included in the report of the Sub-Committee.


M. Dendramis (Greece) and M. El Guindy (Egypt) supported this proposal, which was
accepted.
Mr. Campbell (India) said that both schemes before them had laid stress on the words
"if possible" and suggested their insertion.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) proposed that, owing to the inequality of development of statis-
tical services in different countries, reports should be submitted every six months instead of
every three.
The Chairman asked members of producing countries to state at what periods they
would be prepared to submit reports.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) said it would hardly be possible to do so, even in a year,
in Persia, because of the difficulty of communication.
M. Dendramis (Greece) and M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes) thought it would be difficult to provide statistics every three months.
Mr. Campbell (India) said his Government could undertake to provide statistics
quarterly.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) could give statistics, but could not yet say whether they could be
supplied every three or every six months.
M. Sze (China) said cultivation and production were illegal in China.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) proposed that countries should be invited to undertake
to provide annual statistics from three to six months after the end of the financial year
concerned. The final draft of the article would be distributed later.
This proposal was accepted.
THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December yth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
4. Approval of the Minutes of the Sub-Committee.
The Secretary read the Minutes of the first meeting of the Sub-Committee.
Mr. Campbell (India) suggested that the Minutes should not be read but should be dis-
tributed to members, who would make all the corrections they desired and return copies
to the Secretary.
This proposal was accepted.
5. Reference of certain New Questions to the Sub-Committee.
The Chairman observed that three new questions had been submitted to the Committee
[a) a memorandum by the Persian delegation Annex 7; {h) proposal by the United States
delegation 1 ; (c) report of Sub-Committee F 2 . He asked the opinion of M. Dinichert as to
their allocation to the different Rapporteurs.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought that all three might be dealt with by the same
Rapporteur.
The Chairman proposed that they should be referred to the delegate of Turkey, who
had charge of the general question.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) was appointed to report on the three new questions,
with the assistance of the American and Persian delegates.
It was agreed that the Rapporteur should prepare a preliminary report, which would he
discussed in the Conference.
6. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert ( continuation ).
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that the expression "stocks" in point 2 of his report
referred to ?stocks of a certain importance".
1 Article 1 of the Suggestions of the United States of America, See Record of Plenary Meetings,
Annex 6.
2 See Record of Plenary Meetings, Annex 25.


Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed that the Committee should use the wording which
occurred in the Advisory Committee?s report and in the United States Suggestions.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) pointed out that the two texts were not identical. The
Advisory Committee referred to "stocks in the hands of the wholesale dealers , whereas the
American proposals mentioned "wholesale stocks, whether in Government or m private hands
He proposed the adoption of a formula : "stocks held by Governments or wholesale dealers .
Mr. Campbell (India) suggested that the English text of the American prop s al on this
point should be accepted as a basis and that the French translation should be altered to
correspond.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, and Slovenes) agreed to this suggestion,
provided that his Government were allowed to decide for itself the meaning of the term
?wholesale dealers?.
Mr. Campbell?s proposal was accepted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said Mr. Campbell had called attention to the words if
possible? in Article 2. It should be made quite clear that States accepting this clause agreed
to supply the information asked for if it were materially possible to do so it the morels
"if possible? were to remain, they should not imply that States could supply information
if they thought fit and not otherwise.
Mr. Campbell (India) said these words implied a continuous obligation on States if and
when it became possible for them to supply figures. The Committee would probably be able
to arrive more easily at a formula if the different producing countries would first state their
positions.
M Emmanuel (Greece) said it would be difficult for his Government to supply statistics
with regard to stocks. Probably, at a later date, a Government monopoly would be established
and figures could then be supplied.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) said the production was
between 40,000 and 45,000 kgs. per year in that part of his country where opium was the
primary means of subsistence of the inhabitants. The other part of the country produced
from 30,000 to 35,000 kgs.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) said the annual production in Persia was about two million
English pounds. He could give statistics for at least three-quarters of the production.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought that, unless it were explained in any report made that
the figures were incomplete, those countries which had the best information service would
appear to be the largest consumers.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that it would be for the Central Board to state the
completeness or incompleteness of the figures.
It was agreed to leave the words ?if possible? in the Advisory Committee s plan and in the
American scheme. , 7 ~
The Committee decided that annual reports on stocks should be submitted three months after
the expiration of each financial year.
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, December yth, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
7. Representation of India on the Sub-Committee.
A letter from Mr. Campbell (India) to the President, designating Mr. Clayton as delegate
of India on the Sub-Committee, was read and noted.
8. Communication of Dr. Betances : Statement to Sub-Committee A and the Second Committee^
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), with reference to the statement placed before the Sub-
Committee by the representative of the Dominican Republic, thought the first part belonged
rather to the province of Sub-Committee A and the second part to that of the Second Committee.
He proposed that the Sub-Committee should ask the delegate of the Dominican Republic
to present it to these bodies.
This proposal was accepted.
It was decided to record that the statements had been discussed by the Committee and to
communicate the decision to the Dominican representative.


9. Limitation of the Production of Raw Opium
(Turkey).
Statement made by Mehmed Sureya Bey
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) read the following statement ;
?Before suggesting in what manner the producing countries should attempt to limit
cultivation, it is first necessary to obtain more exact information as to the actual conditions
of the countries concerned.
?Persia has already presented an admirable report as to the situation in her country.
Egypt has also sent in a report. It is therefore requested that the other countries here present
send in statements as to the attitude of their respective Governments toward the question
of definite limitation and the obstacles, if any, standing in the way of its fulfilment.
?After an examination of conditions as existing in the various countries concerned, it
will then be possible to consider the essential features common to all and the means whereby
the limitation of the production of raw opium may be accomplished without undue economic
or political disturbance to the countries concerned. When will the representatives of these
countries be able to present their reports ? If they find it impossible to present absolutely
complete documents, they should provide the Committee with as much information as they
find possible.?
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) remarked that he had
prepared a report, which was not, however, quite complete.
It was agreed that this report should be communicated to the members of the Committee.
The delegates of the remaining producing countries agreed to present reports at an early
date.
10. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert ( continuation).
The Committee then proceeded with the examination of Article 4 of the Advisory Com-
mittee?s report and Article 20-D (3) of the American proposals.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) pointed out that the American proposals asked for figures
of both production and annual consumption.
It was agreed that all States represented could provide annual statistics for consumption
within three months after the end of each year.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) said it would not be
possible for him to provide official statistics of production, but he could give semi-official
statistics which would be approximately accurate.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) and Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) made the same reser-
vation.
It was agreed to provide figures of production, as far as possible, within three months from
the end of the year concerned.
With reference to the last paragraph of Article 4 of the Advisory Committee?s plan,
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) asked whether producing countries would be able to stop supplies
in the case mentioned.
After discussion, the members of the Committee agreed that this was possible, in so far as the
opium produced was exported through legitimate channels.
A system of export licences would probably be recommended by another Committee.
The last paragraph of Article 4 was then accepted.
FIFTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday, December 6th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
11. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of IVI. Dinichert ( continuation ).
The Chairman requested M. Dinichert, Rapporteur, to continue the reading of his note.
M. Dinichert (Rapporteur) read Article 5 of the Advisory Committee?s Measures and
Article 20-E of the United States Suggestions which were referred to in his questionnaire.
He thought that the Central Board was the proper body to organise the control of the estimates
to be furnished by the various countries. As regards the words ?reasonable requirements?,
mentioned in paragraph 5 of the Advisory Committee?s Measures, (Document A. 32 (a).
1924. XI, O. C. 216 (5)), he thought that this expression was equivalent to ?medical and scien-
tific requirements?.


The Chairman pointed out that, in paragraph XIII of Part II of the document referred
to, the word ?reasonable? was not to be taken as synonymous with the expression medical
and scientific?, but was intended to supplement the latter expression. The principle submitted
by the American delegation must be adopted, so as to give the Central Board a definite basis
upon which to work, failing which the labours of the Board would be of no value. T e words
?medical and scientific needs? included the factors of climate, special circumstances, sanitary
conditions, etc. They must therefore be maintained, while the word reasonable should
be omitted.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) asked if it would be possible to take
Article 5 of the Measures in conjunction with Article 20-A of the Ameiican pioposals.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) was of opinion that the whole question was governed by Article
20-A and that the terms of that article must be maintained if the articles already adopted
were not to be modified.
Mr. Clayton (India) stated that the question raised by the Chairman involved the working
and administration of the Central Board and was most important. It was exceedingly
difficult, however, to define the medical and scientific needs of the various countries, and these
requirements might vary; the Central Board, therefore, must be in a position to estimate
them and to judge if they were ?reasonable?, without conducting investigations on me spot.
It would be necessary, in making this estimate, to take the medical and scientific needs of
an average country, due regard being had to the special features of each country, in order to
establish a standard in each case.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) thought that the term reasonable was vague ,
the meaning of the words ?medical and scientific requirements? was the same in every country,
and these words occurred in all the articles of the Convention. There was no need, therefore,
to mention climatic and sanitary conditions, which were already included by implication in
the expression ?medical and scientific requirements?.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) agreed with the interpretation to be
placed, on ?medical and scientific requirements?, but thought that the adjective ?reasonable
to define them and that its inclusion in the text was warranted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, directed attention to a certain aspect of the
question. Requirements were essentially different in the case of countries which were simply
consumers and in the case of manufacturing countries. A distinction must therefore be made
between the estimates to be furnished in these two cases. A country might have legitimate
requirements as regards its domestic consumption of opium and might have other equally
legitimate requirements as regards the quantities of raw opium to be converted into manufac-
turing products for the use of countries which were consumers. Article 20-A of the American
suggestions was therefore perfectly correct in referring to medical and scientific requirements,
whether for domestic consumption, manufacture or commerce.
M. Sze (China) was of opinion that the most accurate terms should be used in order to
avoid any possible misunderstanding.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) considered that the ultimate aim of the Convention was to
put an end to the illicit traffic in opium and consequently to restrict the quantities of the
drug to such requirements as the Central Board, after taking into account the particular
factors in the case of each country, might think ?reasonable?. The article must be read
in conjunction with Article 1, and all factors would have to be considered by the Board.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) pointed out that the two texts in
question made it quite clear that the word ?reasonable? applied to medical and scientific
requirements.
The Chairman directed attention to the fact that paragraph XIII of the Advisory Com-
mittee?s Measures made use of the term ?medical and scientific needs? and that this led to
confusion.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, said he would try to elucidate matters. He
suggested the deletion of the word ?reasonable?, which appeared to him superfluous. He
thought that they should take into account the three classes of requirements which might
arise in any country, namely ; those connected with domestic consumption, manufacture
and commerce, all of which were covered by the word ?legitimate?.
Mr. Clayton (India) pointed out that controversy might arise between the Central Board
and a particular country as regards the interpretation of these ?legitimate? requirements.
In the case of such differences of opinion, the Board, which would be composed of experts and
would be in possession of various statistics, including those furnished by the country in ques-
tion, might then fix a quantity which would represent the reasonable requirements of that
country. The word should, in his opinion, be retained.
The Chairman remarked that, in the event of dispute, it would be the decision of the
Central Board which should be described as reasonable.
A discussion followed as to whether the word ?reasonable? should or should not be main-
tained in the text. The Rapporteur explained that the task before the Conference was the


drafting of an international Convention in which there could be no place for commentaries.
Some delegates urged strongly that the word "reasonable" should be retained, as Article 5,
in which it was to be found, would be read and interpreted in the light of Article 1. Moreover,
Sub-Committee B was concerned with the drafting not of the Convention itself but of the report
to be submitted to the First Committee.
The Chairman stated, in reply to a question by Mrs. Hamilton Wright, that epidemics
were covered by the term "medical requirements".
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) added that this last point was dealt with in Sub-
Committee F?s report.
The Chairman referred to the Drafting Committee which was to be set up and which
would put together the reports of the various Sub-Committees. Sub-Committee B must
give a definite decision on the question submitted to it.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) urged that the word ?reasonable" should be retained as a
guide for the fixing of estimates and for the work of the Central Board.
Article 5 could only be interpreted in the light of Article 1, which specifically leferred to
medical and scientific requirements, whether for domestic consumption, manufacture, or
commerce.
The Australian delegate then made the following proposal :
"We agree in principle with the provisions laid down in Article 5, but would ask
the Rapporteur to make a note that the Sub-Committee understands ?reasonable to
mean the requirements of a country as set out in Article 1.
Several delegates approved of this definition.
The Chairman pointed out, however, that the adoption of this motion did not solve the
difficulty in regard to drafting a difficulty which would arise again when they came to decide
on the text of the final report to be submitted to the First Committee. He suggested, never-
theless, that the Australian delegate?s proposal should be adopted.
The Chairman's proposal was adopted.
SIXTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December gth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
12. Consideration of the Preliminary Report of SVi. Dinichert ( continuation).
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, continuing his examination of the aitides of
the Advisory Committee?s report and of the proposals of the United States of America, pro-
ceeded to deal with Article 5 of the ?Measures? (Document A. 32 {a). 1924. XI) and Article
20-E of the American proposals (Document O.D.C. 34).
He considered that this article raised two kinds of problems. The first was the purely
technical problem, similar to that raised by Article 4, from which it differed, in that it was the
Central Board which, in that case, fixed the import amounts to be granted to a country that
had not furnished an estimate of its requirements or had given a figure which was too high.
Mr. Clayton (India) observed that there should be inserted in the text of the ai tide
a statement to the effect that exports to a country whose estimate had been revised by the
Central Board would be stopped at the request of and on receipt of a decision of this Central
Board.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, explained that States producing the law mate-
rial were in a position to prevent any further export from the moment that the request of the
Central Board* was submitted to them. The reply was, therefore, the same as that given to
Article 4.
All the delegates were in agreement with this conclusion.
M. Dinichert, commenting on paragraph 4 of Article 5 of his report, considered that thit
paragraph referred particularly to the consuming countries and he consequently was nos
sure that Sub-Committee B was competent to deal with it. This question of the intervention
of the Central Board in face of an estimate furnished by a given Government appeared to
him to be also in the nature of a political question.
Mr. Clayton (India) remarked that every international convention involved a certain
sacrifice of sovereignty on the part of the signatory States. India, for her part, was ready
to accept the decision of the Central Board as soon as the latter should have determined the
authorised amounts to be exported.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) also gave the assent of his Government to this clause.


The Chairman, speaking as delegate of Poland, could only promise the adhesion of his
Government to the article in question on three conditions :
1. The Central Board must be composed of a certain number of experts, of whom
half would represent the producing countries and half the consuming countries ;
2. The said organisation should not begin to apply the measures laid down in para-
graph 5 until three years after it had entered upon its duties. The Polish Government
considered this lapse of time necessary in order to establish, beyond doubt, the correct-
ness of all the necessary statistical data supplied by the different countries data required
in order to provide a sound basis for any contemplated action.
3. The Polish Government could not agree to the introduction of the new term
?reasonable requirements? into the text of the new agreement unless its real meaning
was exactly defined, seeing that in paragraph XIII of Article 7 of the report of the Advi-
sory Committee (Part 11, Annex 1) the same term was employed in conjunction with the
words "medical and scientific?. The latter formula, therefore, should alone be retained
in this last paragraph.
Finally, the Polish Government also considered it necessary to delete from the text of
Article 5 (Document A. 32 (a). 1924. XI) the following words ; ?climatic and hygienic con-
ditions and all other factors which appear to the Board to be relevant, as well as any other
special circumstances which the said country will be at liberty to submit to the Board?.
Furthermore, the Polish Government considered that the States which were parties to
the Convention, especially after the introduction of a complete and general system of import
certificates in conformity with the amendments proposed in Part II of Annex 1, should not be
restricted in their rights to issue import licences for raw materials and manufactured products
intended for medicinal and scientific use to meet the needs of their populations and for export,
provided that they strictly fulfilled the duties imposed by the introduction of the import
certificate system.
The Polish Government, was not opposed to the exercise by the Central Board of the
powers conferred upon it by Article 5 of the Advisory Committee's report, on condition,
however, that the three reservations above mentioned weai accepted.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) observed that the first of these conditions (composition of the
Central Board) had already been provided for by Sub-Committee D.
M. Sze (China), in view of the fact that Chinese action must depend upon the action of
the Governments of those States to whom she was bound by extra-territorial treaties, preferred
to make no statement.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) pointed out that the amount fixed by the Central Board in
accordance with Article 5 could only be determined after an enquiry conducted in the country
in question. Furthermore, Sub-Committee D had decided to delete from the text the follow-
ing phrase : ?and to be likely to be used in part for the illicit traffic?, as containing an
insinuation against the bona fides of States.
The Chairman, reverting to the proposals of his Government, stated that it was in order
to avoid criticism that Poland proposed a period of three years before the Central Board should
exercise the powers conferred on it.
Mr. Clayton (India), while accepting the article as drafted, had no objection to the modi-
fications suggested by the Chairman.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) accepted the proposals of the Polish Government.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) also agreed with these
proposals.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), in his capacity as Rapporteur, was willing to include this
decision in his report. He was apprehensive, however, of differences in the preparation of
the various reports of the Sub-Committees.
? Passing on to the views of the Swiss Government, whose representative he was, he said
that that Government was prepared to co-operate to the utmost possible extent in the control
of the export and import of narcotics. In view of the fact that the penalties provided by
Swiss law for smuggling were extremely heavy, smuggling would soon be suppressed, and the
control would become practically perfect. For that reason, the Swiss Government did not
see the need of the measures laid down in Article 5.
The speaker was not aware that a Government had ever undertaken an international
obligation by which they would have to furnish certain information to an international
organisation, admitting, at the same time, that this organisation might find the information
unreasonable or incorrect.
The Swiss Government could not think of undertaking such an obligation, unless it was
proved that the measures laid down in Article 5 were absolutely necessary, which, in his
opinion, was not the case.
The Chairman then asked M. Dinichert whether, as representative of the Swiss Govern-
ment, he proposed to delete Article 5.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, said he preferred not to raise this question
in Sub-Committee B. He would only wish to insert a statement in the report that the ques-
tion had been dealt with, but not discussed in all its aspects. He was also of the opinion
that the powers of the Central Board should not in any case become operative until two, three
or four years after the creation of this body.


In reply to the Chairman, Mr. Clayton (India) suggested that the proposal of the Chair-
man, as the representative of Poland, should be included in the report, it being made clear
that the said proposal had been accepted by the producing countries.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) desired to impose another condition upon the activities of the
Central Board, which was as follows ;
?Apart from the question of the time-limit suggested by our Chairman, the honour-
able delegate for Poland and Danzig and of which lam in favour I pioposc that the
international organ should only intervene if the estimate of a Government is flagrantly
in excess of the amount which it requires and which is fixed in accordance with the pio-
visions of the Convention, and if the Government in question has not first given satisfac-
tory reasons for its increased demands.?
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) suggested that the example of Sub-Committee D should be
followed and the article divided into two parts. Ihe first part would deal with the case of
a country which did not furnish estimates. .
As regards the second part, the Central Board would fix a figure on its own initiative,
but only after having made an enquiry and published a report which would be circulated to
all the States signatories of the Convention.
M Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, in order to avoid all misunderstanding, empha-
sised that, in the case of a consuming country, the estimate of its requirements was a compara-
tively easy matter. It was simply a question of the medical and scientific requirements of
suming and manufacturing country, was quite unable to furnish such estimates. In Earning
these estimates, account had to be taken of the requirements of domestic consumption an
of the demands of twenty or thirty other countries for manufactured products it was,
however, within the power of a country to prove that all its exports were duly made in
virtue of regular licences.
Mehmed SuREYABey (Turkey) agreed with the proposal of the Chairman and of the dele-
gate for Australia.
Mr. Clayton (India) referred to the first two conditions of the Polish Government and
said he accepted them.
M Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, proceeded to examine Article 6, which dealt
with the right of an exporting country to demand that a conference of all the countries which
had similar relations with the importing countries should be summoned to consider whether
any limitation that had been imposed should be maintained.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) remarked that this conference was unnecessary, in view of the powers
of the Central Board, which, backed by the competence of its experts, was best qualified to
decide upon amounts.
The Chairman said he was glad to be able to state that his Government entirely shared
that point of view. He therefore proposed that the whole paragraph should be deleted.
Mr. Clayton (India) mentioned that cases might arise in which the attitude of a given
country not a party to the Convention would justify the application of Aiticle 6.
The Chairman replied that that particular case was provided for in paragraph XIII
of Article 7 (Document A. 32 (a). 1924. XI) and in Annex II of the report (same document).
M El Guindy (Egypt) pointed out that it was the business rather of a consuming country
to claim the amount of substances which it considered to be necessary for its requirements,
in spite of the estimate of the Central Board.
M. Sze (China) said that he was prepared to delete Article 6.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) mentioned that Sub-Committee D, although prepared to delete
this article from the text, had not taken a decision on this matter, as it did not know the
reasons which might have prompted its insertion.
Mr. Clayton (India) shared this view.
After a short discussion, the Chairman proposed the following formula :
? We are prepared to delete this article, but in the absence of exact information as
to the reasons which prompted it, we reserve our final decision on the matter .
This proposal was unanimously adopted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, proceeded to examine Article 7 of the Advisory
Committee?s report relating to countries which were not parties to the agreement. Were the
producing countries prepared to accept the amount fixed by the Central Board for exports to
these countries ?
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) observed that that article was mainly intended to protect the
interests of the signatory countries.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) asked whether non-signatory countries were subject to the same
obligations as signatory States.


M. Dinichet (Switzerland), Rapporteur, replied in the affirmative.
Mirza Eissa Kahn (Persia) then made the following statement :
"The Persian delegation makes a general reservation in regard to all questions forming
part of the present Convention. Persia will accept no convention unless its proposals are
accepted as they were formulated in the memorandum by the Persian delegation? (Document
O.D.C. 24 x ).
Passing to the examination of Article 20-A of the American proposals, the delegates asked
Mrs. Hamilton Wright to be so good as to submit a revised text of this article, drafted in the
light of the explanations supplied with regard to its application by the delegates for the King-
dom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, India, Turkey, Persia, Egypt, etc.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright undertook to prepare a new text.
The Chairman proposed to devote the next meeting to examining the text amended by
Mrs, Hamilton Wright and then to form a Committee from the Sub-Committee, consisting
of members of the producing countries, India, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes,
Persia, Turkey and Greece, with the collaboration of Mrs. Hamilton Wright. This meeting
would be presided over by Dr. Chodzko himself, and provision would be made for a Vice-
Chairman. This new Sub-Committee would only deal with reports submitted by the delega-
tions of the producing countries.
This proposal was adopted.
SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva, on Wednesday, December 10 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
13. Statement by M. Zahle regarding a Proposal for the Adjournment of the Conference.
M. Zahle, President of the Conference, made a statement to the Sub-Committee. He
wished to inform members that he would be opposed to any proposal for an adjournment
of two or three weeks? duration at Christmas. This would give rise to difficulties and might
even hinder the reaching of a successful result by the Conference. No such proposal would
therefore be put forward by the Presidency.
This statement was noted by the Sub-Committee.
14. Meeting of the Sub-Sub-Committee.
Mrs Hamilton Wright (United States of America) proposed the election of Mr. Clayton
(India) as Vice-President.
This motion was carried unanimously.
Mr. Clayton (India) said they should consider Article 1 of the American proposals and
the Australian and Cuban suggestions in addition. The attitude of each country represented
should be ascertained.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) agreed. Obstacles had been pointed
out in the Persian report and would probably arise with regard to other countries. Some
anti-opium laws in America were more severe than any in other countries, but this had not
stopped the traffic. It was necessary to get co-operation from the producing countries.
A small Committee, composed of agriculturists, bankers, etc., should be sent to Persia and other
producing countries to enquire into their needs and see what steps could be taken.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) thanked Mrs. Hamilton Wright for her kind words with
regard to Persia. He gladly accepted her proposal. He added that the League of Nations
should pay the expenses of the mission.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) accepted on the same conditions.
The Committee agreed to formulate this plan as a voeu.
1 See Annex 7.


15. Consideration of Article 1 of the United States Suggestions.
Mr. Clayton (India) asked the meaning of ?strictly medical or scientific purposes?.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) said it implied that drugs would
only be supplied under prescription from a qualified doctor. With regard to veterinary
surgeons, the same position applied.
Mr. Clayton (India) said that, in view of these statements, it was impossible for India
to agree to Article i. In that country there were districts containing more than a million
inhabitants with only one doctor of recognised qualifications. The article would mean
that the people would be deprived of the only available remedy.
During the influenza epidemic, when natives had been unprotected against the illness,
the nature of which was not known, more than six million people had died. What would
be the result if there were a cholera epidemic and the standard remedy were not available ?
Colic was frequent among cattle, and a remedy was immediately necessary when it
occurred.
Mr. Clayton believed in the gradual strengthening of control, which had produced good
results in India, where the average consumption of opium per head was i.i grammes. As
Indian opium contained 8 per cent morphine, this should be reckoned as .74 per cent, of which
it was not unreasonable to deduct one-third as used for cattle. The average human con-
sumption per head was then .49 grammes. Could not other countries get estimates per head
of the population ? If average consumption were accepted as the text of efficient control,
then each country might be left to work out its own method of domestic control.
The Chairman thought the words in question necessary if any reliable estimate were
to be made. Difficulties existed in other countries as well as in India. He suggested that
Mr. Clayton should introduce an amendment to paragraph 2 of Article 1.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) said opium was not used on the great
cattle ranches in America, and was recognised by all medical men as poison for human beings.
She expressed surprise that in India alone people used opium without evil results. It was a
scientific fact that there was no difference in its effect on Orientals and Occidentals. The use
of the drug in India had, she thought, sometimes resulted in disaster.
Mr. Clayton (India) asked for an example, which Mrs. Hamilton Wright said she would
provide at a later session. Mr. Clayton added that the people of India were ascetic and
temperate beyond others, and public opinion was strongly against even moderate use of
opium. Contraband trade did not enter into the figures of the United States, whereas India
had no contraband trade. He referred to The Servant of India, a paper published by an
independent society, which provided a complete vindication of the Indian Government?s
policy.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) quoted Sir John Jordan, who had said
that opium, wherever produced, would always meet the consumer. They had failed to repress
its use in America and came to ask producing countries to help them.
16. Meeting of the Sub-Committee : Consideration of the Preliminary Report of M. Dinichert
{continuation).
The Sub-Committee proceeded to examine Article 20-A of the American proposals.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) said she did not insist on too rigid
an application of these proposals, which were really only suggestions. They could be modified
according to circumstances. It might be possible to substitute paragraph (3) of Article
20-D for paragraph (2) of Article 20-A. She thought it essential that the functions of the
Central Board should remain practically unchanged.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) said his country could not furnish estimates by July Ist.
It was agreed that estimates should he supplied between July Ist and September Ist of the
current year.
Mr. Clayton (India) proposed that Article 20-A (2) (a) (1) should read ?for domestic
consumption?, and that Article 20-A (2) (a) (2) should read ?for export?. The rest of Article
20-A, paragraph 2, should be deleted.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) asked for time to consider this
proposal.


EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December n th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
17. Conditional Adoption of Proposal made by Mr. Clayton at the Seventh Meeting.
Mr. Clayton (India) suggested that, in the absence of Dr. Chodzko (Poland), Mr. Shepherd
should act as Chairman.
The Committee agreed to this proposal.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) then took the Chair.
The nroposal made by Mr. Clayton (India) at the end of the previous meeting was put
to the vote, after Mr. Clayton had pointed out that the four articles in question became useless
if Article 1 of the American proposals were accepted.
The Committee accepted the proposal contingently on the adoption of Article 1.
18. Meeting of the Sub-Sub-Committee.
M. Sze, Dr. Carriere, M. Dendramis and Dr. Betances withdrew.
The Chairman asked delegates whether they could accept Article 1 of the proposals.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) agreed, with the reservation that the Persian memorandum
to the Conference should be accepted.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) found it impossible to make a state men a pi . .
He could neither accept nor refuse on the information available, but he would be able to m
a decision on receipt of the report of the Committee proposed by Mrs. Hamilton vv right.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) could accept on the
conditions explained in his memorandum (Annex 9).
Mr. Clayton (India) could not agree to the proposal. He suggested that Article 1 of
the Hague Convention should first be accepted and the Committee could then formulate a
vceu.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) moved the following resolution.
?That a Committee of Enquiry be appointed to fully investigate every phase of
this question after an examination of the memorandum submitted by the various dele-
gations and after visiting producing countries. The examination would bear paiti-
cularly on the following points : (The points in question would be decided later.)
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) remarked that he had instructions not to accept wit ion
consulting his Government. He would therefore accept Mrs. Hamilton Wrights proposa
with regard to the formation of a Committee ad referendum.
Mr. Clayton (India) then submitted the following proposal :
?That the Sub-Sub-Committee is of opinion that no modification of the existing
wording of Article 1 of the Hague Convention is possible until further information is
available as to the conditions prevailing in the producing countries.
He asked what would be the authority which would appoint the proposed Commission
and thought some such indication should be included in any recommendation they might
make. He could not consult his Government on Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s proposal until he
had a more definite proposal before him.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) thought the Commission should be appointed by the League of
Nations and consist of representatives acceptable to the producing countries.
Mr. Norris, Technical Adviser to the United States delegation, said the effect of Mr.
Clavton?s resolution would be that the Conference would be unable to put into execution the
principles for which it had been called. Countries could accept the principle of Article 1
of the United States proposals and make reservations. He reserved the right to bring the
matter up again in Sub-Committee B and in the plenary Conference.
Mr. Clayton s proposal was then put to the vote.
The representatives of Turkey and India voted in favour, the United States delegate against,
whilst the representatives of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Persia and Egypt
abstained.


Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) made the following proposal ;
?In order that no confusion may exist, I move that the Sub-Sub-Committee report
to Sub-Committee B that the producing nations here represented are prepared to accept,
in principle, Article I of the suggestions of the United States, but owing to economic
considerations they are not prepared to accept Article I without reservations as to the
time when, and the conditions under which, they will be prepared to give Article i complete
and effective application in their territories.??
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) accepted, in principle, with a reservation as to the
economic question.
Mr. Clayton (India) said, in view of the interpretation placed by the United States on
the terms ?medical and scientific use?, he could not accept, even in principle.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) had definite instructions from his Government not to
accept Article las it stood. In view of the proposed dispatch of a Scientific Commission to
producing countries, he would, however, ask for fresh instructions.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) accepted.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) was not against the prin-
ciple of the suggestion but could not accept it until he had received new instructions, for
which he had asked. He was not sure that the proposal could be applied in practice in his
country.
On the proposal of Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey), the United States delegation agreed
to prepare a draft project with reference to the composition, methods of nomination, cost,
etc., of the proposed Commission, as a basis of discussion.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) remarked that the Persian delegation had made an excel-
lent report. Could not the American delegates examine it and make suggestions on that basis?
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) hoped other producing countries
would also make suggestions.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) thought that, if the Commission went to Persia, it could
only reach the conclusions contained in his memorandum. It would be better to act on
these now than later.
The Chairman invited the opinion of the members as to whether a Commission should
be appointed.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) accepted, in principle, ad referendum.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) also accepted on the same terms.
Mr. Clayton (India) and M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes)
had no instructions but would refer to their Governments.
It was agreed that delegates should consult their Governments as early as possible.
The Committee decided to note the intention of the United States delegation to prepare
the draft of a voeu with reference to the establishment of this Commission.
19. Consideration of the Australian and Cuban Proposals.
The Chairman observed that Sub-Committee D had considered the Australian proposals
as representing both, and suggested that the same procedure should be adopted.
In that Sub-Committee, the following conditions had been attached : (i) that pro-
ducing countries should agree to reduce their production ; (2) that the interests of consuming
countries in obtaining the amounts necessary for their medical and scientific needs should be
protected.
Mr. Clayton (India) accepted this proposal with the attached conditions.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) asked what would be the position of Egypt, which did not export
and only produced a part of its own medical and scientific requirements.
The Chairman thought that, as non-producing countries had agreed to give up their
right to produce, Egypt might agree to reduce its production.
M. El Guindy (Ugypt) could not accept the motion.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) could not discuss the matter before knowing what
decision would be taken with reference to the Persian memorandum.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) was unable to give an answer until some decision should
have been reached as to Article 1 of the American proposals.


Mrs Hamilton Wright (United States of America) said that the only attempt made
which she felt that she could at the time express an authoritative op.mo .
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) saw nothing against
the proposal, but would also have to ask for instructions.
Siberia and the manner in which it was used.
After an exchange of views with other members of the Committee, Mrs Hamilton Wright
withdrew this suggestion.
Mr. Clayton (India) moved a vote of thanks to the Chairman.
This was carried unanimously.
NINTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, December 12 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
20. Composition of the Indian Delegation : Appointment of IVlr. Walton.
Tbp Secretary read a letter from the British India Office appointing Mr. J. C. Walton
lndia to the Conference, in place of Mr. Campbell, who was obliged
to return to other work.
This communication was noted.
21. Limitation of the Production of Opium : Resolution proposed by Mrs. Hamilton Wright.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) moved the following resolution:
?Having noted with interest the reports submitted by Persia 1 , the King-
dom of the g Serbs, Croats and Slovenes 3 , Greece 1 and Egypt 5 settii ?torts
and political difficulties with which their Governments are confronted in their effort
to obtain an effective control over the production of opium , and . . .
?Recognising that in some cases the situation as described may require Internationa
*? Sub-Committee B recommends to the Conference that careful consideration be
given to the question of the appointment of a Commission to visit the countries mentioned
above for the purpose of making a careful study of all the problems connected vitl t
production of, traffic in, and use of opium in those countries, and especially with reference
to the possibility of substituting therefore the cultivation of other agricultural products,
the development of mineral resources, the improvement of transportation facilities
and such other measures as may be deemed necessary to the end that production of and
traffic in raw and prepared opium within the countries mentioned in _ order that tne
exportation of such products therefrom shall be limited to strictly medicinal ano scien-
tific P^P^ s mmission shall be appointed in a manner to be determined by the Conference
with the approval of the producing countries concerned, and it shall consider carefully
the reports which have been submitted to the Conference by the Governments of Persia,
Turkey, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt. To the
Conference shall also be referred the questions of the number and qualifications of the
members of the Commission and of the steps to be taken to obtain the funds necessary
to meet the expenses of the Commission for the purpose as described above.
?The Commission shall be instructed to make its report in a manner to be determined
by the Conference. The report, together with the recommendations of the Commission,
shall be communicated to the Powers signatory to the Convention. The signatory Powers,
especially the Governments of Persia, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes,
Greece and Egypt, agree to give due consideration to the report and recommendations
of the Commission.?
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) accepted this proposal ad referendum. He thought the
Commission should be placed under the authority of the League of Nations.
1 Annex 7.
2 Annex 8.
3 Annex 9.
LSee Minutes of Sub-Committee F, Annex 2.
5 Annex 10.


Mr. Clayton (India) agreed with the Persian delegate?s suggestion and accepted on the
same conditions. The representatives of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
accepted the suggestion ad referendum.
The resolution was accepted, with the addition of the Persian amendment.
22. Consideration of the Draft Report prepared by IVI. Dinichert ( continuation ).
The Committee then considered the draft report prepared by M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
(Annex 2).
On the proposal of Mr. Clayton (India), it was decided that, in the absence of an English
translation, the interpreter should read through proposals made and that the Committee should
accept provisionally those in connection with which no difficulties were raised.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) announced her intention of abstaining
from voting.
Paragraph 2 of page 45 beginning, ?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Central
80ard...? as far as ?at the end of the year?? was provisionally adopted.
The Committee decided to accept provisionally the paragraphs relating to figures of total
consumption of raw opium and the total yearly production, as well as the paragraph concern-
ing statistics of production and consumption. The choice between these alternative texts was
postponed to a later meeting.
The following paragraphs were also provisionally accepted with the same reservation as
to necessary alterations being made in the English text, Mrs. Hamilton Wright abstaining
from voting: importation in excess of figure given in estimates, failure to supply estimates ;
estimates exceeding ?reasonable requirements? ; the paragraph dealing with Article 6 of the
United States suggestions and the paragraph on estimates of production and requirements.
The paragraph dealing with export to non-signatory countries was also read, and it was agreed
to postpone discussion upon it until the Rapporteur should be present.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that his acceptance of the whole report was
subject to the provision that the conditions of the Persian memorandum were also accepted.
TENTH MEETING
Held' at Geneva on Monday, December 15 th, 1924, at 10 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
23. Appointment of Representatives to the Co-ordination Committee.
The Chairman proposed that M. Dinichert and Mr. Shepherd, the respective Rapporteurs
of Sub-Committee B and of the Sub-Sub-Comrnittee, should be appointed to be his collabora-
tors on the Co-ordination Committee to deal with the documents prepared by the different
Sub-Committees.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) desired that a member of Sub-Committee B representing the
producing countries should sit on this Co-ordination Committee.
The Chairman pointed out that it was only a question of co-ordinating texts that was
to say, a question of drafting.
Mr. Clayton (India) expressed the wish that they should examine the form in which the
reports of M. Dinichert and Mr. Shepherd should be presented. If these documents were
accepted in their entirety, their authors would naturally be appointed to collaborate with the
Chairman on the Co-ordination Committee.
24, Consideration of the Draft Report prepared by IVI. Dinichert ( continuation ).
The Chairman asked M. Dinichert to read his report.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, read point I of his report
With regard to the wording of the provision in Article 4 (6) of the ?Measures? (Article
20-D, 1 (a) and ( b ), of the American suggestions), which runs as follows :
?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Permanent Central Board, within six
months after the end of each year (or each financial year), statistics of their exports
and re-exports, specifying the country of destination, during that year or financial year?,
Mr. Clayton (India) proposed to keep the term ?annee du calendrier? in English :
?calendar year?.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) preferred the term ?financial year?.


M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, preferred the term year purely and simply.
The texts of the reports and the Minutes of the meetings could always be referred to for any
interpretation of the articles of the Convention, but the employment of the two formulas
?year? or ?financial year? would facilitate the co-ordination of the texts.
The Chairman, recalling the fact that the financial or budgetary year began in Germany,
England and Egypt, for example, on April ist, thought that it would be dangerous to employ
this term. He thought that the expression ?calendar year? would satisfy everybody.
After an exchange of views, M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, submitted the
formula ?at the end of each budgetary year?, it being understood that the Chairman of the
Sub-Committee would have the right to abandon this formula for the purpose of obtaining
agreement if this were necessary.
This proposal was adopted.
Passing to the second part of point I:
?The Contracting Parties agree that, if possible, they will send to the Permanent
Central Board, within three months after the end of each year, the statistics of the stocks,
whether in Government hands or in the hands of wholesale dealers, at the end of that
year?.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, replaced the word ?send [envoyer) by indiquer .
A discussion followed on the word ?chiffre? of the stocks, which it was thought might
lead to confusion.
The Chairman then proposed the following formula : ?les quantites en stock .
This formula was adopted for the French text.
With regard to the English text, it was proposed to adopt a corresponding formula.
M. Sze (China) said that the words ?quantites en stock?? did not indicate the different kinds
of opium in question. It would be necessary to distinguish between these kinds and to show
the origin of the opium in stock, in view of the fact that the percentage of morphine varied
with the countries of origin.
Mr. Clayton (India) said that holders of stocks could not reasonably be required to state
their different percentages of morphine.
M. Sze (China) insisted upon the necessity of knowing the origin of the opium in question,
for it was possible to ascertain the approximate proportion of morphine in the different
qualities of opium according to the origin of that opium.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) mentioned the difficulty
of furnishing information with regard to the origin of the opium stocks, seeing that mixtures
were often employed in order to obtain a given percentage.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, expressed the wish that rules should be found
acceptable to all and that the question should not be unduly complicated.
M. Sze (China) emphasised the fact that the indication of origin was calculated to safe-
guard the interests of both the consumer and the manufacturer.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) reminded the Sub-Committee that its work for the moment
consisted in comparing the Rapporteur?s text with the decisions taken by the Sub-Committee,
which decisions this text must faithfully reflect.
M. Sze (China) did not find this discussion out of place, since a delegate had always the
right to defend his opinion.
M. El Guindy (Egypt), agreeing with the view expressed by M. Sze, also wished to see
an indication of origin in the statistics supplied by the Governments.
The Chairman, regarding M. Sze?s proposal as an amendment, put it to the vote.
M. Sze?s amendment having been rejected by five votes to three, the Chinese delegate
stated his intention of putting the question again at a plenary meeting.
Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) supported this decision. He thought that the demand of
the honourable delegate for China was further justified by his desire to protect the producing
countries.
The Chairman declared that the Sub-Committee agreed to the following text :
?The Contracting Parties agree that they will inform the Permanent Central Board,
within three months after the end of each year, if possible, of the quantities in stock,
whether in Government hands or in the hands of wholesale dealers, at the end of that
year.?
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, then passed on to points II and II [a) of his
report.
The text of the undertaking to be given was made more clear in the following way ;
?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Permanent Central Board, within
three months after the end of each year, as accurate statistics as possible of the total
quantity of raw opium (i) produced, (2) consumed.?


During the examination of point 111 (Article 4, last paragraph of the "Measures"),
Mr. Clayton (India) pointed to a difference of wording in the English and French texts.
The word "specially" appeared in the English text only.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, considered that the word "specially" should be
removed from the English text, since the article in question already dealt with a definite
case.
M. El Guindy (Egypt), proceeding to another question, wanted to know how the Central
Board would be able to notify to a consuming country that its amount had been exceeded,
since statistics would not be submitted until the end of the year.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), Rapporteur, said he had considered this objection, but he
admitted that the Central Board would find the necessary materials for this purpose, based
particularly on the export figures of the Customs offices.
The drafting of point 111 was adopted.
Passing to point IV of M. Dinichert?s report, the Chairman observed that this text included
two variants ; (1) reasonable requirements, and (2) requirements for medical and scientific
purposes.
The Sub-Committee decided to adopt the formula ?requirements for medical and scientific
purposes?, hut, at the suggestion of Mrs. Hamilton Wright, left it to the Co-ordination Committee
to make the final choice, guided by the recommendations of the majority.
Mr. Clayton (India) proposed that the word "experts? in No. 1 (referring to the composi
tion and powers of the Central Board) should be replaced by the word "members".
This proposal was adopted.
The Chairman proposed to submit the three points relating to the Central Board as
recommendations of Sub-Committee B.
The Chairman s proposal was adopted.
The examination of Article 6 (point V of the report) was- referred to the competent authority.
With regard to Article 7 (XIII) of the ?Measures" (point VI in M. Dinichert?s report),
the delegate for Persia remarked that the reservations made by his delegation should be
approved by the Conference and not by the Central Board.
zls these reservations were of a general kind, it was decided only to mention them at the end
of the Rapporteur?s report.
Proceeding to the examination of point VII (Article 20-A (2) of the American suggestions),
Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United States of America) pointed out that Sub-Committee A
might wish to obtain some further information with regard to "domestic consumption for
all purposes."
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) asked that the following text should be kept ;
"Their total production and requirements for domestic consumption for all purposes
and for export for all purposes."
Mr. Norris (United States of America) desired a wording sufficiently elastic to allow
the insertion of the four points in the text of the American proposals should the Co-ordination
Committee decide to retain them.
Mr. Clayton (India) said he had complete confidence in the Chairman and the two Rap-
porteurs as regards the formulas to be finally accepted.
The Chairman thanked M. Dinichert, on behalf of the Sub-Committee, and complimented
him upon the judicious manner in which his report had been prepared.
The Sub-Committee associated itself with this expression of thanks.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) warmly thanked the Chairman of Sub-Committee B on behalf
of all the delegations.
At the request of the Chairman, M. Dinichert consented to become a member of the
Co-ordination Committee.
25. Meeting of Sub-Sub-Committee : Consideration of the Persian Memorandum.
The Chairman called upon the Persian delegation to read the points in its memorandum
to which it wished to draw particular attention.
Mirza Eissa Kahn (Persia) read the passage relating to "Persian Policy on Opium
Restriction". He next passed on to "General Policy" and then to the section ?Conditional
Assurances".
He then proceeded to read the three conditions the fulfilment of which would enable his
Government to effect a curtailment of opium production : (1) a loan of 10 million tomans
for twenty years (the details are to be found under the heading ?Source of Funds", page 34
of the French text and page 24 of the English text) ; (2) granting of a moratorium by foreign
Governments having claims against Persia ; (3) removal of Persia?s present restrictions as
regards Customs tariffs.


The Chairman read the following document:
?For the Protocol.
? The Conference further passed the following resolution .
" 'The Conference has had presented for its consideration a very complete and valuable
memorandum prepared by the Government of Persia setting forth m a clear; an compre-
hensive manner the existing situation in Persia with regard to the P an t a e
in opium and the numerous measures agricultural, economic and financial which
must necessarily be carried out before any effective scheme for the reduction and control
S production can be introduced in that country. These measures require for their
initiation the obtaining by the Persian Government of financial assistance from the Powers,
which this Conference is not in a position to secure. . XT x- ,
? ?The Conference therefore recommends to the Council of the League of Nations t at
a committee of experts with the necessary qualifications be sent under the auspices of the
League to make a full enquiry into the practicability of the proposed measures and their
suitability for the attainment of the end in view namely, the effective control and
limitation of the production of opium in Persia m the hope that the report of the said
committee may demonstrate that adequate guarantees as to the probable success of the
proposed measures are obtainable to justify the taking of the measures proposed by the
Government of Persia and the issue of a loan in the money markets of the world for the
purpose of providing the Government of Persia with the financial assistance required.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that the document that had just been read was
a draft for the final Protocol and should in no way prejudice the Persian memorandum, which
he would like discussed at once.
The Chairman explained that the wish of the Persian delegate was to draw the attention
of the Conference to the points referred to in the document that had just been read.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) withdrew the draft resolution for Final Protocol,
strongly urging that the discussion should deal exclusively with the delegation s memorandum.
Mr. Clayton (India) said that he had read the Persian memorandum with great interest,
but as he had no personal experience in the matter, he thought it would be necessary to hold
an enquiry on the spot, based upon the very clear and definite resume of the Persian delega-
tion. In agreement with his colleague, the American delegate, he proposed that the memo-
randum should be submitted to the Conference with a recommendation for the appointment
of a Commission of Enquiry. .
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) pointed out that, in addition to the three points (the
loan, the moratorium and Customs tariffs) in the Persian memorandum, there were other
equally interesting points of a commercial, an agricultural and even a political natme.
The enquiry would be decided upon as soon as Persia?s three conditions were accepted
in principle. It would then be for the Commission of Enquiry to determine how and to
what extent these requests might be effectively complied with.
The Chairman drew the attention of the Persian delegation to the material and prac-
tical side of its request. He said that it was impossible for Sub-Committee Bto examine
it in the absence of information collected by experts on the spot.
M. Sze (China) appreciated the efforts of the Persian delegation as representing a produc-
ing country prepared to limit its production and to meet the wishes of the majority of ? the
delegations at the Conference, provided it was supplied with means to do so. He sympathised
with Persia and hoped that help, financial and otherwise, including fiscal autonomy, would
be given to her to enable her to accomplish the sacrifice which w T as asked of her. The Sub-
Committee, not being composed of experts, however, could not fix the figures of a loan or
consider the details of the fulfilment of the other conditions. It was, nevertheless, in a posi-
tion to recommend to the Conference that these conditions were just and reasonable, and it
could express the wish that the Powers which lent their assistance to Persia should do nothing
to infringe the financial autonomy of that country.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) observed that it w r as for the Council of the League of Nations
to establish relations with the various financial and political organisations which were capable
of giving Persia effective aid. The statement of the Persian delegation indicated the programme
to be carried out and the difficulties to be overcome so clearly that it deserved to be recom-
mended to the Council for consideration, the Council being the only authority competent to
take the action which the memorandum required.
After an exchange of views, M. Sze (China) proposed the adoption of the following text ;
?Sub-Committee B recommends to the Conference the favourable examination
of the request made by the Persian delegation in Memorandum 0.D.C./24 with a view
to financial assistance, and especially as regards its desire to obtain liberty of action in
tariff questions, in order that the Government may take the necessary measures to limit
the production of opium to that requisite both for medical and scientific purposes within
the territory of Persia and for exportation for the same purposes.


?The Sub-Committee further recommends that the Conference should request the
League of Nations for the reasons explained above to propose that a Committee
of experts with the necessary qualifications be sent to Persia to make a full enquiry into
the practicability of the proposed measures and their suitability for the attainment of
the end in view, namely, the effective control and limitation of the production of opium
in Persia.?
Mr. Clayton (India) had not received such instructions from his Government as would
enable him to accept this draft resolution.
The Chairman, believing that they could reach an agreement upon the drafting of this text,
convoked the delegates for Switzerland, Australia, Persia and China for the following morning
at 10.15 in order to prepare a draft recommendation which would satisfy everybody.
In reply to a question put by M. Sze (China) with regard to the second report of Sub-
Committee B to the Conference, he said that this report would be presented before the adjourn-
ment should they agree upon its wording, as he thought it probable they would.
ELEVENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December I9 2 4> 11 a - m -
Chairman : Dr, Chodzko (Poland).
26. Consideration of the Persian Memorandum.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) presented to the Sub-Committee some notes (Document
0.D.C./5.C.8.8) on the memorandum of the Persian delegation. He proposed that there should
be added to the list of the passages in the Persian memorandum, to which it was expedient
to refer, the passage relating to revenues.
He also proposed, to amend the Australian motion (Document 5.C.8.8) as follows :
?The Sub-Committee continued the examination of the Persian memorandum and
adopted the following resolution :
??The Sub-Committee, having given consideration to the Persian memorandum,
particularly those clauses relating to :
Revenues; Persian policy; general policy ; unconditional assurances ; source of
funds ; moratorium; Customs.
fully appreciates the difficulties confronting Persia in immediately carrying out the desire
to reduce the production of opium in Persia to amounts required for medical and scientific
purposes in Persia and for export for the same purposes.
? ? It therefore recommends to the Conference the following resolution :
??The Conference has had presented for its consideration a very complete and
valuable memorandum prepared by the Government of Persia setting forth in a
clear and comprehensive manner the existing situation in Persia with regard to
the production and trade in opium and the numerous measures agricultural,
economic, and financial which, in the opinion of the Persian Government, must
necessarily be carried out before any effective scheme for the reduction and control
of production can be introduced in that country. The memorandum points out that
these measures require for their initiation the obtaining by the Persian Government
of financial assistance from the Powers which this Conference is not in a position to
secure. The Conference considers that a case for enquiry has been made out and
therefore recommends to the Council of the League of Nations that a committee
of experts with the necessary qualifications be sent under the auspices of the League
to make a full enquiry into the facts as stated in the memorandum as well as into the
practicability of the proposed measures and their suitability for the attainment of
the end in view, namely, the effective control and limitation of the production of
opium in Persia in accordance with the terms of the Convention to he adopted by this
Conference, in the hope that, in the event of the case of the Persian Government
being established, the report of the said Committee may demonstrate that adequate
guarantees as to the probable success of the proposed measures are obtainable to
justify the taking of the measures proposed by the Government of Persia and,
if necessary, the issue of a loan in the money markets of the world for the purpose
of providing the Government of Persia with the financial assistance required, or
such assistance as the Commission may find to be required.? ?
This text was adopted.


27. Consideration of the Report on the Work of the Sub-Sub-Committee.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) submitted his draft report (Annex 4).
Mr. Norris (United States of America) proposed the following amendment of the draft
IeP  rt ? , <The result of this vot e, therefore, was not decisive and showed that certain dele-
gates required further instructions from their Governments.
The amendment was adopted.
He further proposed the following modification in the reference to the vote of the United
States delegation: . . , , J . , ?
?The United States were able to accept the proposal in principle, but only on certai
conditions which would be subsequently defined.
The amendment was adopted.
Mr. Norris also proposed to modify as follows the two paragraphs referring to Article I
of the American proposal ;
?As the above votes showed that the Sub-Committee was unable to urnvei at a
final decision as regards the acceptance or rejection of Article 1, it was unanimously Welded
that the United States delegation should submit a concrete proposition for the app
ment of a Commission of Investigation to visit producing countries.
These amendments were adopted.
The Chairman asked whether the second paragraph was to be
the American delegation was withdrawing Article I of its proposals until they should be in
possession of the results furnished by the Commission of Investigation.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) replied that Article 1 of the American proposals
still held good.
Mr. Clayton (India) summarised the position as follows : The Sub-Sub-Committee; had
been unable to arrive at a conclusive vote either on the American proposals or on th e proposal
of the Indian delegation. Accordingly, the question remained in suspense and Sub-Com-
mittee B?s report should confine itself to recording this fact. This report would be sent to
the Co-ordination Committee to examine which formula it should adopt the American or the
Indian In either case, the delegations retained full liberty, and that delegation w
formula was not adopted would preserve the right to submit its text again m plenary conference
in the form of an amendment.
The Chairman did not agree. The present draft report set forth the discussions of Sub-
Sub-Committee. For that reason, it restricted itself to mentioning that no decisive vote
could be given either upon the x\merican proposal or on the Indian proposal. On the ot
hand Sub-Committee B, composed of representatives of both producing and consuming
countries, had to pronounce either for or against one of the two proposals.
Mr Clayton (India) supposed that in these circumstances the various delegations would
have to repeat in full Sub-Committee B the long statements that they had already made at
the Sub-Sub-Committee. The discussions would thus be considerably piolonged without
there being any chance of agreement.
M. Sze (China) agreed with the Chairman.
Mr Shepherd (Australia) considered that the report in its present form did not bind
any delegation. The question could be re-opened in plenary conference.
The Chairman recalled that the Sub-Sub-Committee had drawn his attention in particular
to several proposals : that of the American delegate, that of the Indian delegate, toMre.
Hamilton Wright?s proposal and to that of the Australian delegate. It was desirable to
reconsider rapidly these various proposals. If no agreement could be arrived at upon any
of them, the various points of view should be mentioned in the final report of
mittee B, accompanied by explanatory notes.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed that in this case Document 5.C.8.7 (Annex 5), which
contained a summary of the various proposals, should be examined.
M. Sze (China) remarked that, when voting on Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s motion the Ind jan
delegate had stated that he was not prepared to accept the article in view of the interpretation
placed bv the American delegation on the term ? strictly medical and scientific s* .
The Chinese delegate desired to know what were the respective interpretations wme t eh
and American delegations placed upon the term ?strictly medical and scientific purposes.
Mr. Clayton (India) explained that both interpretations appeared in Document b. .
P.V.7 1 . In reply to the definition given by Mrs. Hamilton A right at that meeting, the In lan
delegate had declared that he could not accept the American interpretation, in view ot e
absence of any medical and veterinary services in India.
1 See record of the seventh meeting of the Sub-Committee.


Mr. Norris (United States of America) recalled the fact that Mrs. Hamilton Wright
had then said that she would provide evidence at a later session to show that the attitude
adopted by India could not be justified.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought that Sub-Committee B had the choice of several
solutions in drawing up its second report. It could simply issue a report of the facts setting
forth the discussions and containing no conclusions. This seemed to be the trend of the two
reports under discussion. It could go further and propose either to maintain Article i of
the Hague Convention in its present form or to modify it by submitting conclusions, for example,
on the American proposals. In point of fact, these proposals had been referred to the
Sub-Committee, and the Co-ordination Committee, the Drafting Committee or the Conference
would be entitled to enquire what conclusions it had arrived at. As things were, the Sub-
Committee seemed to have thought that the adoption of the American proposals would be
commendable but premature, and that before arriving at a definite conclusion it was neces-
sary to carry out a previous investigation under the auspices of the League of Nations.
The report, however, in its present form did not state whether the Sub-Committee desired
to present definite conclusions.
The Chairman repeated that in his opinion the report could not be confined to summa-
rising the discussions of the Sub-Committee. These discussions appeared in the Minutes.
He therefore proposed to take, one by one, the various proposals that the Sub-Committee
had examined with a view to arriving at a conclusion. If, as seemed probable, opinions were
divided into a majority and a minority, the latter would still be able to maintain its point
of view at the plenary Conference.
Mr. Clayton (India) was inclined to agree to this procedure if it were decided upon.
At the same time, he proposed, in that case, to examine Documents S.C.B.6 1 and S.C.B.y
together as forming a single whole.
The Chairman approved this point of view.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) desired to put a question to the representative of the United
States. Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s proposal (Document S.C.B.y) provided for the constitution
of a Commission of Investigation. Was it to be concluded that, in the opinion of the United
States delegation, Article iof its proposals ought not to be adopted at present ? In other
words, did not Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s proposal imply in some way or other that Article i
might be adopted at a later period ?
Mr. Norris (United States of America) considered that the opinion of the United States
delegation was clearly expressed in the motion submitted by Mrs. Hamilton Wright. The
representative of the producing countries had accepted the principle of the United States
suggestions, but made reservations about the date and the conditions of their application.
He thought that the Sub-Committee should proceed to vote on this motion.
The Chairman agreed.
Mr. Clayton (India) emphasised that the American delegation proposed to include in
the Convention an obligation in principle, adding that the possibility of putting this obliga-
tion into practice would depend upon the result of an investigation. There was thus a con-
tradiction in the two terms of this proposal. In order that the various delegations should
know whether they were able to recommend to their Governments the adoption of Article I,
proposed by the United States delegation, it was essential that this delegation should define
its point of view.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) explained that his delegation did not intend to
withdraw its proposed text for Article I pending the results of the investigation. It proposed
to adopt Article i and, in order to permit producing countries to solve the difficulties set forth
in their memoranda, it proposed the despatch of a Commission of Investigation which, by
its findings, might help the countries in question to apply this Article i. He repeated that
Sub-Committee B, to which the report of its Sub-Committee had been submitted for conside-
ration, must vote on the United States suggestions.
Mr. Clayton (India) thought that some doubt still subsisted as to the meaning of Mrs.
Hamilton Wright?s proposal. Why claim to impose upon States an obligation in principle,
while those who originated the proposal considered it essential to investigate the possibilities
of putting this obligation into practice ? He requested the American delegation to clear up
this difficulty, and he asked that its formula should be sent to the Co-ordination Commission.
The report of Sub-Committee B would remain in its present form.
The Chairman suggested the following solution ; The Sub-Committee might accept
Article i in principle ; at the same time, producing countries might make the application
of this article conditional upon a previous investigation conducted under the auspices of the
League of Nations and defining the conditions in which this article should be applied.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) mentioned that the reservations which had been
made by the producing countries only referred to the date and conditions of application ;
that was a matter for the Commission of Investigation.
Mr. Clayton (India) thought that, if it were only a question of the acceptance of prin-
ciple, the United States proposal should be placed not in the body of the Convention but
in the Preamble.
1 Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee.


Mirza Eissa Khan (Persia) remarked that the representatives of two producing countries
Turkey and Egypt had left Geneva. As for the Persian delegation, it declared its unre-
served acceptance of Article ias proposed by the United States delegation. For the Persian
delegation, the despatch of a Commission of Investigation was an incidental matter and did
not constitute a condition for its acceptance ; this only depended on the conditions set forth
in the Persian memorandum.
Mr. Norris (United States of America), in reply to the observations of the Indian dele-
gate, did not think that a reservation with regard to an acceptance of principle should be
inserted in the Preamble.
M. Sze (China) noted that the United States and Indian delegations were not in agreement
as to the object of the proposed investigation. The Indian delegate considered that the object
of this investigation was to show whether the obligation of principle could be applied in practice.
In the view of the United States delegate, the aim of the investigation was simply to determine
the methods of application. It was therefore desirable to define the scope of the investigation.
As regards the place to be given to the American proposal in the Convention, a precedent
might be quoted. Article 7 of the Hague Convention read as follows :
?The Contracting Powers shall prohibit the import or export of prepared opium ;
those Powers, however, which are not yet ready to prohibit immediately the export of
prepared opium shall prohibit it as soon as possible.?
Thus it was seen that this article contained first an obligation of principle and then a
reservation as regards application in practice, but this had not prevented the inclusion of
the article within the body of the Convention.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) proposed that Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s motion
in Sub-Committee B?s report should be drafted as follows :
?In order that no confusion may exist, Sub-Committee B reports to the conference
that the nations here represented are prepared to accept, in principle, Article 1 of the
suggestions of the United States, but, owing to economic considerations, certain of these
nations cannot accept Article 1 without reservations?, etc.
Mr. Clayton (India) remarked that, for lack of a clear statement by the United States dele-
gate, the Indian delegation ran the risk of finding itself in an embarrassing situation. An
adjournment had been proposed in order to allow the delegations to consult their Governments.
These delegations, however, were left in some doubt. The Indian delegate had already
pointed out the contradiction which existed in his opinion between the two terms of the
American suggestions, namely, the adoption in principle of Article 1 and the appointment of a
Commission to examine the possibilities of its application in practice. The delegate for
Switzerland had also drawn attention to this contradiction. If the United States delegation
only desired an adhesion in principle it would be best to maintain the status quo, that was,
to retain Article 1 of the Hague Convention and merely to confirm the principle in the Preamble.
In this case, the United States delegation should openly state whether that was its point
of view. If this explanation were not now forthcoming in Sub-Committee B, some delegations
might find themselves in plenary conference faced with a fait accompli, that was to say, faced
with the formal acceptance of the obligation.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) defined the point of view of the United States
delegation as follows :
Of the 39 States represented at the Conference, the majority were prepared to accept
Article 1 of the American proposals, not only in principle but also as regards its application
in practice. On the other hand, two or three of these countries, for economic, financial and
other reasons, could not immediately bind themselves to this complete and effective appli-
cation. For these countries a reservation regarding immediate application had been provided.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), referring to a remark of the Indian delegate, stated that he
had not drawn attention to a contradiction between the two terms in the American proposals.
He had simply remarked that he did not clearly see what conclusions could be drawn from
these proposals. Did the United States propose to enter forthwith into the obligation con-
tained in Article 1 and then to send a Commission of Investigation, or, satisfied with the
eventual acceptance of principle, did they propose to send a Commission of Investigation
first and not to consider the obligation contained in Article 1 as binding until after the results
of the investigation would have been published ? The explanation given by the United
States delegate had dispelled all doubt. The United States delegation proposed to sign
Article 1 forthwith, but it accepted, as sometimes happened in regard to conventions, all
reservations on the part of interested countries with regard to the date and the conditions
for the carrying-out of this obligation. It would, perhaps, not be possible to pronounce
to-day upon the proposal as thus defined ; in this case, the three weeks? suspension which had
been arranged for would enable the producing countries in particular to form an opinion.
Mr. Clayton (India), repeating his previous proposal, urged the mere despatch of the
Australian delegate's report accompanied by the following note :
?Sub-Committee B regrets that its discussions have not led to precise or definite
conclusions on Article 1 of the American proposals and the Australian and Cuban proposals.
It therefore forwards the agreed report of its proceedings to the Co-ordination Committee
for information. It is understood that, when the draft Convention is presented to the
plenary session of the Conference, each delegation reserves the right to take such action
as it may see fit to secure the adoption of its views.?


The Indian delegate added that this text appeared to have received the approval of the
United States delegate and that it would permit the Co-ordination Committee to grasp the
tenor of the discussions in Sub-Committee B.
The Chairman remarked that this would not be the case, since, if this solution were accepted,
no conclusion would be contained in Sub-Committee B?s report.
M. Sze (China) did not think that it would be a wise procedure to ask the Sub-Committee
to pronounce upon a text drawn up as a result of private conversations. Moreover, would
the proposed statement be made in the name of the American and Indian delegations or in the
name of the Sub-Committee ?
The Chairman explained that this statement would be made in the name of the Sub-
Committee as a whole, should the latter decide to accept it.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) informed the Sub-Com-
mittee that his Government was entirely in agreement with Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s proposal
concerning the despatch of a Commission of Investigation.
On the proposal of the Chairman, the Sub-Committee decided to adjourn the continuation
of its discussion until the following morning.
TWELFTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December 18 th, I9 2 4> a t Io *3 a -' m -
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
28. Article 1 of the United States Suggestions : Statement made by the Indian Delegation.
Mr. Clayton (India), in view of the explanations given the previous day by the United
States delegate, submitted the following statement on behalf of the Indian delegation .
?The Indian delegation has nothing to add to the report of the Sub-Sub-Committee as
framed by its Rapporteur ; if, however, it is sought, at any subsequent stage of the proceed-
ings of this Sub-Committee or elsewhere, to modify the conclusions arrived at in the Sub-
Sub-Committee and to recommend to the Conference the insertion in the Convention to be
drawn up of Article i of the American proposals without modification, then the Indian dele-
gation will require the insertion of an additional paragraph in the said article in order to secure
the administrative and constitutional position in India. The wording of the addition will
be somewhat as follows :
? ?Notwithstanding anything in this article, the right is expressly reserved to the
Government of India and the provincial Governments in India to control as heretofore
the production and distribution of raw opium within their territories in accordance with
the provisions of Article i of the Hague Convention 1912, provided always that no surplus
shall be available for export save under conditions expressly provided for in the present
agreement.? ??
The speaker added that, as one of the reasons for the adjournment of the Conference
was to enable the delegations to consult their Governments, he wished, in the name of the
Indian Government, in most formal fashion, to request the United States delegation to ascer-
tain definitely whether its Government would accept an arrangement whereby, should a
difference of opinion arise concerning the interpretation of an international con\ ention
between two sovereign and independent States which were both signatories to that convention,
the final court of appeal should be the Permanent Court of International Justice or such
authority, it any, as might be designated in the convention.
In reply to a question by the Chairman, the speaker said that his statement was not
equivalent to a motion of adjournment.
Mr. Norris (United States of America), in reply to the Indian delegate, said that he
would lay his statement before the head of the American delegation.
The Chairman took note of the Indian delegate?s statement, which, he said, would be
included in the Minutes.


29. Consideration of the Second Report of Sub-Committee B.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) remarked that there were only a few delegates present at the
meeting and proposed the adoption of the following motion :
?When the Conference adjourned, Sub-Committee B had not completed its labours,
and the accompanying - notes 1 of the Rapporteur on the deliberations of the Sub-Sub-
Committee are therefore submitted for information and on the understanding that they
are not final conclusions.
?In view of the arrangement under which the Conference was adjourned, it was not
considered advisable to continue the discussion but merely to place on record the position
of the Sub-Committee at the time of the adjournment.??
The speaker explained, in reply to a question by the Chairman, that this note would
be sent to the President for purposes of information at the same time as the report, which
would be forwarded as it stood and would be simply a record showing the position of the Sub-
Committee?s work.
Mr. Clayton (India) supported the Australian delegate?s motion.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) was of opinion that the course proposed was not only the
wisest but also the only possible one, considering the actual state of the Sub-Committee?s
work and the fact that the delegations of certain countries specially concerned were not pre-
sent. He had felt yesterday that it would be a mistake for the Committee to leave its work
in the inconclusive state conveyed by the two reports, and that if the Sub-Committee hoped
to come to any decision it should have more concrete proposals placed before it. If it adopted
the Australian delegate?s motion, that would make it plain that its work was not finished but
only suspended until the reassembling of the Conference. Meantime, the reports would be
sent to the President, so that he might know what had been accomplished by Sub-Committee B.
It would seem useless to send them except, of course, the first report of the Sub-Committee,
which had already been circulated to the Co-ordination Committee.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) declared that that was the purpose of his motion.
The Australian delegate s motion was a.dopted.
30. Limitation of the Production of Opium : Second Report of the Sub-Committee.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) proposed the following addition to the Persian repre-
sentative?s statement (Document S.C.B.y, (Annex 5) :
? . . . and that it should be placed under the League of Nations, which should
pay the expenses.?
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) wondered whether it would not be better to adopt a more
elastic formula such as :
? . . . and that it should be appointed by the Council of the League of Nations,
which would make the necessary financial arrangements.?
The Persian delegate?s reservation had been supported by the Indian, Turkish, and
Greek delegations, and they must not preclude the possibility of the League obtaining financial
resources other than those furnished by its Members.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) urged that his amendment should be allowed to stand
as drafted, as this was the only means of avoiding all misunderstanding. It did not preclude
the possibility of the League negotiating with a non-Member State as regards financial parti-
cipation in the work of the Commission.
M. Dendramis (Greece) proposed the following wording, which he thought would recon-
cile the views of the Persian and Swiss delegates :
?The expenses of the Commission shall not be defrayed by the producing countries
visited by it.??
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought that they could hardly open a discussion on the amend-
ment proposed by the Persian delegate. The latter had formulated his reservation during the
proceedings of the Sub-Committee and it was only by an oversight that that reservation was
not referred to in the report. It should therefore simply be noted and not discussed.
The Persian delegate?s amendment was adopted without modification.
M. Dendramis (Greece) proposed the following amendment to the statement made by
the Greek delegation (page 2) ;
?Greece accepted on the understanding that the expenses of the Commission shall
not be defrayed by the producing countries.?
This amendment was adopted.
1 See Annex 4.


Mr. Norris (United States of America) proposed an addition after the last paragraph
on page 2 ;
?It was therefore agreed that the proposal should be amended in such form as to pro-
vide for the appointment of the Committee under the auspices of the League of Nations.
The American delegate, however, reserved this point for further consideration .?
This amendment was adopted.
It was decided to delete in Document 5.C.8.7 the last part of the report, as from the
paragraph : "The report of the Rapporteur (M. Dinichert) was next considered?.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) asked if it would not be better to maintain the last
paragraph, which reads as follows : ?The Persian delegate desired that a record should be
made of his acceptance of the text by the Persian delegation, subject to the acceptance of the
conditions set out in the Persian memorandum?.
The Persian delegate explained that the Persian reservation mentioned referred only to
the appointment of a Commission of Investigation and to the payment of expenses by the
League. He wanted to make it quite clear that his reservation related to the whole of the
report under consideration, as in the case of the Australian delegate?s other report.
The Chairman was of opinion that a second reference to the Persian reservation would
be superfluous and that it was not necessary to maintain the last paragraph.
This was agreed to.
Mr. Shepherd?s report (Document S.C.B. 7) was adopted under the title of ?Second Report
of Sub-Committee B??.
31. Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee (Document 5.C.8.6) (Annex 4).
The Chairman asked the members if they had any amendments to propose to this docu-
ment. He mentioned that the introduction had been deleted, as it covered the same ground
as the Swiss delegate?s report.
M. Dendramis (Greece) pointed out that, as the Greek delegation was not present at the
discussion on Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s motion, it had not been able to express its views.
He stated that he was entirely in favour of the motion.
The Chairman took note of the Greek delegate?s approval of the motion. He added
that the United States delegate had proposed to amend it (see Minutes of eleventh meeting),
but that the amendment was still pending, as the Sub-Committee had reserved discussion on
the motion.
The Sub-Committee decided to adopt the report and to communicate it to the President of
the Conference for purposes of information.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) proposed that when the three reports were sent to the Pre-
sident of the Conference the latter should be asked to communicate them, for purposes of
information, to all members, in the hope that the same procedure might be followed in the
case of the reports from the other Sub-Committees. In this way, during the adjournment of
the Conference, the various delegations would be in possession of a complete documentation,
which would be of great value to them when consulting their Governments.
This proposal was adopted.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) proposed that, along with these documents, the
Australian delegate?s motion should also be forwarded.
This was agreed to.
Mr. Clayton (India) asked that the text of the statement which he had made at the
beginning of the meeting might be communicated for purposes of information to the various
delegations ; the Indian delegation might find it necessary to make a statement later, and
it was advisable that the other delegations should know this in advance.
This proposal was adopted.
32 Appointment of Representatives of Sub-Committee Bto the Committee of Co-ordination.
The Chairman reminded the Sub-Committee that it had already appointed M. Dinichert
to represent it on the Co-ordination Committee. It had to appoint a second member. The
Australian delegate had been elected but had said that he thought it fairer for the second
member to be a representative 01 a producing country.
Mr. Clayton (India) urged that the Australian delegate should be appointed.
M. Sze (China) proposed that a member of the United States delegation be elected.


Mr. Norris (United States of America) pointed out that Mrs. Hamilton Wright was
away and that it was not known when she would return. He proposed, therefore, that
M. Dinichert, Mr. Shepherd and the Chairman should represent the Sub-Committee on the
Co-ordination Committee.
This was agreed to.
33. Adjournment of the Sub-Committee?s Work.
The Chairman declared the Sub-Committee?s work adjourned.
Mr. Clayton (India), on behalf of his colleagues, thanked the Chairman for the tact
and impartiality with which he had presided over the Sub-Committee?s work. They had
also been fortunate in having the assistance of M. Dinichert and Mr. Shepherd.
The Chairman declared that the members of the Sub-Committee had carried out their
difficult task in a spirit of conciliation and mutual understanding. He hoped that on the
resumption of their discussions they would be able to arrive at definite results and that they
would have the help of all the members without exception. He thanked the Indian delegate
for his kind remarks and associated himself with his appreciation of the work of M. Dinichert
and Mr. Shepherd. He thanked the members of the Secretariat for the help which they had
given the Sub-Committee.
M. Sze (China) associated himself with the Chairman?s remarks.
THIRTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Friday, January 30 th, 1925, at 4 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
34. Article lof the United States Suggestions : Note of the Indian Delegation.
The Chairman reminded the meeting that when the Sub-Committee adjourned, before
the suspension of the work of the Conference, it had under consideration the provisional
report of the Sub-Sub-Committee on Article 1 of the American proposals. It was that report
which had now to be discussed. He hoped that the Sub-Committee would arrive at a posi-
tive result in the same conciliatory spirit which it had shown up to the present. He invited
the Indian delegate to comment on the note of his delegation (Annex 6).
Mr. Clayton (India) stated that the Indian delegation, during the suspension of the
Conference?s work, had very carefully considered the question of Article 1, endeavouring to
get as near as possible to the views of the American delegation. The essential point of the
discussion, in the Indian delegation?s view, concerned interference in the internal affairs
of the Contracting Powers. The memorandum communicated by the Indian delegation
referred to the question of the interpretation of the Hague Convention. If Article lof the
American proposal constituted a correct interpretation of Article 1 of the Hague Convention,
this meant that the signatories of that Convention had accepted such interference. This
was not the opinion of the Indian delegation, which showed in its memorandum that the
signatories of the Hague Convention interpreted it in a manner different from the interpre-
tation proposed by the American delegation. The Indian delegate regretted that, on account
of the absence of the American delegate from their Sub-Committee, it was not possible for
the latter to ascertain the American point of view. He nevertheless wished to state at once
that Article 1 of the Hague Convention and Article 1 of the American proposal were not
identical.
Consequently, he proposed that the Sub-Committee should accept Article 1 of the
American proposal, with such alterations as would prevent its affecting the internal control exer-
cised by each State in its own territory. There were two methods of solving the difficulty :
(1) to adopt the American text with the addition of the words ?for export? ; (2) to adopt
the text of Resolution 111 ( b ) appearing at the end of the Indian delegation?s memorandum
and worded as follows :
?The Contracting Powers shall enact effective laws or regulations for the control
of the production and distribution of raw opium and the suppression of its abusive use.
In particular, they shall undertake effective measures to prevent any export of raw opium,
either licit or illicit, not specifically permitted by the provisions of this Convention.?
these two solutions would have the same effect, and the Indian delegation had no
preference for one or the other.


The Chairman stated that he had received a letter from Mr. Porter, first delegate of the
United States, informing him that Mrs. Hamilton Wright had been suddenly prevented by
illness from taking part in the meeting of Sub-Committee B ; further, the other members
of the American delegation were detained by the meeting of Sub-Committee A ; the American
delegate therefore requested that Sub-Committee B should adjourn its discussion on Article i
of the American proposal.
The Chairman proposed to accede to this request and for the present merely to take note
of the Indian delegation?s memorandum and of Mr. Clayton?s statement.
This was agreed to.
FOURTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, February 2nd, 1925, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Shepherd (Australia) (in the absence of Dr. Chodzko).
As Dr. Chodzko, the Chairman of the Sub-Committee, was unable to be present at the
beginning of the meeting, M. Sze (China) proposed that Mr. Shepherd (Australia) should
take the Chair.
The Sub-Committee decided accordingly.
35. Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee
The Chairman, summing up his report (Doc. 0.D.C./5.C.8./10), referred to the
various stages of the Sub-Committee?s work : the vote on Article 1 of the American pro-
posal, the proposal for the appointment of a Commission of Investigation, the Indian dele-
gation?s amendment to that proposal, and Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s motion. When the Conference
adjourned, no positive result had up to then been arrived at. Since the resumption of its
work, the Indian delegation had submitted a memorandum (Doc. O.D.C. 83) and a draft
proposal, concerning which it was desirable that the views of the various delegations, and par-
ticularly the American delegation, should be ascertained.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that he had already declared his acceptance of
the proposal that a Commission of Investigation, consisting of technical, engineering, agri-
cultural and financial experts, should visit producing countries.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) enquired whether the present discussion was on the
whole of the Sub-Sub-Committee?s report or only on the Indian delegation?s motion. On the
Chairman replying it was on the whole report, he requested that delegates of producing coun-
tries might be asked to state whether their Governments were prepared to accept Article 1
of the American proposal as it stood and to put it into force immediately without reservation.
The Chairman wondered whether such a procedure would serve any useful purpose,
as the delegations had already given their views on the American proposal, as stated in the
report.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) pointed out that since the report had been drafted
Egypt had accepted the American proposal, and during the adjournment of the Conference
two other delegations were going to ask their Governments for fresh instructions concerning
the American proposal. The report showed that the votes given were not final. As this
was the case, the question should be brought up again.
The Chairman thought that there might have been some confusion between the votes
given on Article 1 of the American proposal and on the proposal for the appointment of
a Commission of Investigation, but, as the American delegate still maintained his request,
he would ask the delegates to state whether their Governments were prepared to accept
Article 1 of the American proposal as it stood and to enforce it immediately without
reservation.
M. Sze (China) stated that the production of opium was prohibited in China. The
Chinese laws on the subject were very definite, very strict and very comprehensive. Unfor-
tunately, poppy-growing had again increased owing to the disturbed condition of the country.
The Chinese Government, however, had not altered the laws, and the production of opium
was still prohibited. The speaker was authorised by his Government, therefore, to state,
both in the Sub-Committee and in the Plenary Conference, that China was still entirely in
favour of the suppression of poppy-growing for other than medical and scientific purposes.
The Government was determined to pursue this policy, no matter what attitude might be
adopted by the other Powers. It was to be hoped, however, that the latter would adopt
the same policy, as the measures enforced by one country were bound to react on the situation
in other countries. China was prepared, accordingly, to accept Article 1 of the American
proposal without reservation.


Mr. Clayton (India) stated that the Indian Government was not prepared to accept
Article i of the American proposal or to enter into undertakings more far-reaching than those
already agreed to under Article iof the Hague Convention. The Indian Government had
fulfilled those undertakings and was prepared to enter into others that might be laid down
in any Convention adopted by the Conference, but it refused to admit the right of an interna-
tional conference to deal with domestic questions which involved the sovereign rights of the
States. The Indian Government would accept Article iin so far as it concerned exportation
and international traffic, but it would refuse to extend the provisions of that article to domestic
questions. The Indian delegation proposed, therefore, that the words "for exportation"
should be added to Article i of the American proposal, or, alternatively, that the text of
paragraph (b) of Resolution 111 of the memorandum should be substituted for Article I.
M. Dendramis (Greece) stated that he accepted Article i of the American proposal in
principle. As Greece?s production was, however, very low (260 kilogrammes), he thought
they ought to consult the chief producing countries. If the latter accepted the article in
question, Greece would do the same.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) declared that his dele-
gation was prepared to accept Article lof the American proposal in principle. He wished,
however, to point out that the provisions of Article 1 of the Hague Convention had already
been applied by his country, whose production had been reduced from 150,000 kilogrammes
to 80,000 kilogrammes. If production were to be still further reduced, they must substitute
other crops for the poppy in order to avoid social difficulties, as had been pointed out in the
memorandum submitted to the Conference. That was why the Serb-Croat-Slovene delega-
tion had accepted the proposal for the setting-up of a Commission of Investigation. Unless
that Commission could proceed as laid down in the memorandum, the delegation could only
accept Article 1 of the American proposal subject to 'reservations, as the Serb-Croat-Slovene
State could not reduce its production any further without the risk of grave internal disorders.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that the instructions he had already received
from his Government were so clear that he had not thought it necessary to ask for fresh ones.
The Persian delegation was to support the American delegation?s proposals, provided that the
three points raised in the Persian memorandum were satisfactorily dealt with, and provided,
of course, that the American proposal was adopted by a majority of the Conference.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) desired to inform the Sub-Committee of the instructions
he had just received from his Government concerning the League Commission of Investigation
which was to visit the producing countries and to investigate the question of substituting
other crops for the poppy as a part of the international scheme to limit the production of
opium to medical and scientific requirements :
(1) The Turkish Government had signed the 1912 Hague Convention and was enforcing
the provisions of that Convention,
(2) The Turkish Government would be prepared to accept further obligations in addi-
tion to those entered into under the 1912 Convention, provided that it was given the capital
required to substitute sugar-beets and the sugar industry for poppy-growing. The Turkish
Government was of opinion that if but only if the Conference accepted this demand in
principle and decided to investigate the climatic and other conditions necessary for beet-
growing, a Commission of Investigation might with advantage visit Turkey.
(3) The Turkish Government could not assume obligations other than those entered
into under the Hague Convention, unless it received the capital required to substitute beet-
growing for poppy-growing in Asia Minor.
(4) In view of the difficulties involved and the time which would be required if beet-
growing were to be substituted for poppy-growing, the Turkish Government asked that the
Commission of Investigation should allow a reasonable length of time before the clauses of the
new Convention were put into force.
The Turkish delegate referred to the various points in his statement. As was shown
by the memorandum already submitted to the Conference, poppy-growing was the main
means of livelihood for thousands of Turkish peasants. It would hardly be possible and would
be most unjust to oblige them to conform to a Convention which was at variance with their
vital interests. The fairest and most practicable way of attaining the desired object was to
provide them with the means of cultivating other crops. Poppy-growing was a very profit-
able undertaking, and the climate and soil were both particularly suitable. If the Govern-
ment decided to adopt forcible measures for suppression, this would simply encourage smuggling.
The speaker quoted the Turkish tobacco regie as an example. Under one of the clauses
of the Tobacco Monopoly Concession, the country was divided into different districts. In
certain districts, tobacco-growing was prohibited ; in others, growers were obliged to obtain
a licence and to sell their tobacco to the Administration. All these measures of restriction
and limitation led to smuggling and gave rise to sanguinary encounters between the police
and smugglers. For practical reasons, therefore, the Turkish Government would certainly
not be ready to sign an international undertaking which it would have difficulty in enforcing
and which might give rise to internal difficulties.


The speaker felt sure that the United States delegation would agree with this view. The
first United States delegate had already spoken on more than one occasion on respect for
treaties and had dwelt on the misery brought on the human race by opium and its derivatives.
The speaker was sure that no one would ask his country to undertake an obligation which
it was unable to fulfil or to shoulder sacrifices which would impose an inhuman burden on the
whole country. He declared his acceptance of the American proposal, therefore, subject to
the reservations which he had just submitted.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) declared that Egypt was prepared to co-operate in the anti-opium
campaign loyally and wholeheartedly and was ready to make material, administrative and
political sacrifices. The Egyptian delegation, therefore, accepted Article iof the American
proposal without reservation.
Mr. Clayton (India) requested that, as the Indian delegation was the only one, apart
from the United States delegation, which had proposed an amendment to Article i, the ques-
tion which had been asked of the various delegations concerning Article i of the American
proposal should also be asked with regard to the proposal embodied in paragraph ( b) of Reso-
lution 111 in the Indian memorandum.
The Chairman raised no objection to the motion, but thought that it would be better
to consider it a little later. He noted that the statements just made revealed no change so
far in the situation with which they were all familiar. China and Egypt were the only States
which had accepted Article i of the American proposal without reservation.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) desired to ask a few questions of certain dele-
gates. He wished to ask the Egyptian delegate whether his country produced opium for
purposes of exportation.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) replied in the negative.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) understood from what the Serb-Croat-Slovene
delegate had said that his country was of opinion that it would be inexpedient at the present
juncture to effect any further reductions in the production of opium.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) pointed out that he
had not stated that further reduction might not be possible later. He had declared that his
country could make no further reduction, unless it was assured by a Commission of Investigation
that such reduction would not affect the social and economic position of persons engaged in
production.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) concluded from this explanation that, pending
the results of the proposed investigation, the present annual production of 80,000 kilogrammes
would not be reduced.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) confirmed this view.
80,000 kilogrammes was given as the maximum quantity which could be produced in the
area at present under cultivation ; he referred members to the memorandum submitted by
his delegation. 90,000 kilogrammes could only be reached under the most favourable con-
ditions as, for example, in 1919. If production were to be further reduced, this would be
bound to effect the area under cultivation to which he had just referred. Some compensation
would be necessary, as otherwise there would be the danger of grave social disturbances in
the country. The speaker did not think that the United States delegation wished to insist
on a reduction which would entail such consequences. He added that the production in
the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes was among the lowest, and that only in Greece
and Egypt was it lower still. Moreover, the opium produced was not manufactured into opium
for smoking ; most of it was sent to factories in the United States, Germany and India.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) replied that the American delegation certainly
had no wish or right to force a country to enter into an undertaking which might expose it
to domestic disturbances. It simply wished to know what exactly was the position of the
Serb-Croat-Slovene Government.
The Chairman proposed that the various delegations should be asked to give their
opinions on the Indian delegation?s proposal, as had been done in the case of the American
proposal.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) understood that paragraph ( b ) of the Indian dele-
gation?s proposal represented a combination of Articles 1 and 3 of the Hague Convention.
Mr. Clayton (India) explained that, according to the Indian delegation?s view, paragraph
(6) of Resolution 111 in the Indian memorandum represented what the Indian Government
regarded as the obligations entered into under the Hague Convention. It was quite true that
the proposal embodied in paragraph ( b ) was, as it were, a summary of Articles 1 and 3of
the 1912 Convention. The Indian delegation had thought that it would be expedient, for
the sake of greater clearness, to sum up in one single article the obligations entered into
by a producing country. It offered no objection to the maintenance of the 1912 text as it
stood ; it would also agree, as had already been said, to the addition of the words ?for
exportation? in Article lof the American proposal. In any case, the Indian Government
considered that the obligations which it had assumed under the Hague Convention were
covered by paragraph ( b ), and it was not prepared to go any further.


The Indian delegation thought that the text might be amended, but could not agree to
the words ?abusive use? being replaced by a reference to medical and scientific purposes.
(Dr. Chodzko took the Chair.)
The Chairman asked the United States delegate whether he wished to submit an amend-
ment on the words ?abusive use??.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) declared that, as the American proposal had been
put to the vote as originally submitted, it was only right that they should vote on the
Indian proposal as it stood. The question of amendments could be discussed later.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) was of opinion that the words ?abusive use?? were open to varying
interpretations. He proposed that they should speak of requirements for purposes not strictly
medical or scientific.
Mr. Clayton (India) explained that the words ?abusive use?? must be understood as
meaning the abuse of opium in the opinion of the Government concerned. The Indian dele-
gation was of opinion that it should rest entirely with the authorities of the country to decide
whether there was any abuse and that no other authority could settle this question, which was
of a purely domestic character.
M. Dendramis (Greece) asked what would be the practical effect of any vote on the Indian
proposal. If the latter were adopted, would the American proposal be withdrawn ?
Mr. Norris (United States of America) replied that, even if this were the case, his dele-
gation would not withdraw its motion. If the Sub-Committee?s decision were not satisfac-
tory in the view of the American delegation, the latter would submit a reservation to be
recorded in the Sub-Committee?s report.
Mr. Clayton (India) understood that the purpose of the discussion was to consider the
possibility of arriving at an understanding. The Indian delegation s intention was to submit
its motion as representing the minimum basis for possible agreement. They must find out
how much further they could go.
The Chairman invited the delegations to give their views one by one on the Indian
proposal.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) proposed that the words ?abusive use? should be supplemented
by the words ?for purposes not strictly medical or scientific??.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) was of opinion that the Turkish delegation?s amendment
was practically the same as the one submitted by the American delegation. He wished to
know the Indian delegate?s view of the matter.
Mr. Clayton (India) insisted that, as in the case of the American delegation s proposal,
each of the delegations should give its opinion on the Indian proposal and say whether it
accepted it without reservation or amendment.
M.. Dendramis (Greece) stated that he accepted the Indian proposal as it stood.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) also declared his accep-
tance of the proposal as it stood.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) repeated that, according to the instructions he had
received, he must support the American delegation, provided that the claims laid down in
the Persian memorandum were satisfactorily dealt with. If, therefore, the American delega-
tion did not accept the Indian proposal, the Persian delegation would also be obliged to
reject it.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) recalled the fact that Article [h] of the Indian
proposals was a combination of Articles i and 3of the Hague Convention. At first sight, the
American delegation was not inclined to approve these proposals, but the United States were
not producers of opium, and it was principally the producing countries which should be
consulted.
Speaking unofficially, the United States delegate stated that his delegation would provi-
sionally offer no opposition to the Indian proposals. At the same time, he urged the necessity
of hearing the opinion of the producing countries.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) declared that, in accordance with his instructions, the
Turkish delegation was unable to accept other engagements than those arising out of the Con-
vention of 1912, unless the reservations and proposals which had just been mentioned should
be accepted.
M. Sze (China), referring to the fact that, according to the Indian delegation, its proposals
were a combination of Articles 1 and 3 of the Hague Convention, thought that the present
Conference, which was assembled in the name of humanity, could not confine itself to accepting
engagements which already figured in the Hague Convention but should go a step further.
As the Chinese delegation had already accepted the American proposals, it would be diffi-
cult for it to go back on that now. Furthermore, the Chinese delegate desired to draw the
attention of the Committee to certain points in the Indian memorandum. He was not sure
whether he quite understood some of the passages in this document. In particular, there
seemed to him to be a contradiction between the two first paragraphs in the first proposal of
the Indian delegation. The first paragraph approved of the revised American text of the


Hague Convention, while the second rejected the interpretation whereby the internal regula-
tion of domestic consumption was within the scope of the Convention. A little further
on, the expression alleviation of disease? lacked clearness. In the second paragraph of the
second proposal, the word ?abuses? was vague and lent itself to different interpretations.
In making these observations, the Chinese delegate did not intend to criticise but only wished
for explanations from the Indian delegation, in order that he might make them known in
China when he returned home.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) thought that, although he represented a non-pro-
ducing country, he was qualified to express an opinion. He could have accepted the Indian
proposals but for the explanation which the Indian delegate had given of the interpretation
of the words ?abusive use?. If this interpretation was to depend upon each individual coun-
try, the result might be dangerous. Accordingly, the delegate for the Dominican Republic
supported the Egyptian delegate?s amendment.
Mr. Clayton (India) asked what danger his colleague saw in permission being given to
the authorities of a country to decide what constituted an abuse from the domestic point
of view.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) replied that if, for example, a producing country
considered that there was no abuse provided a smoker did not die or fall ill, that was an inter-
pretation to which he could not agree. In his opinion, it was an abuse to consume opium
for other purposes than those of medicine or science.
Mr. Clayton (India) gathered from the last observation that the inhabitants of India,
for example, might be exposed to danger and that other nations might be better judges of
the dangers run by the inhabitants of India than the Indian authorities themselves. If
that was the opinion of the representative of the Dominican Republic, would he be prepared
to substitute the Dominican Republic for India in the example just quoted ?
Mr. Norris (United States of America) gathered that, according to the Indian proposals,
questions of production and distribution lay with the national authorities, as far as concerned
the interior of a country. Furthermore, it would be for the national authorities to decide
the point at which ?abusive use? began. According to the Indian delegation, Article i
of the American proposals would therefore denote an interference in the internal affairs of
a country and would be inacceptable. But under Article 6of the 1912 Convention, the Con-
tracting Powers must take measures ?for the gradual and effective suppression of the manu-
facture of, internal trade in, and use of prepared opium?, etc. These words showed that
the Contracting Powers had given an undertaking substantially the same as that implied in
Article lof the American proposals as regards the internal affairs of the State. The American
delegate enquired why a principle which was accepted in Article 6 of the 1912 Convention
was questioned in regard to Article 1 of the American proposals.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) urged the adoption of the amendment regarding the
words ?abusive use?. The Dominican Republic a non-producing country considered
that all the States represented at the Conference had met in order to adopt a humanitarian
Convention, and that every country, even if it were not a producer, had the right to express
its opinion, for in such matters the question of sovereignty did not arise. When a country
was ravaged by plague, for example, other countries had the right to draw a sanitary cordon
round it, even if this were detrimental to its interests. The question of sovereignty, therefore,
did not arise when it was a case of national safety.
M. El Guindy (Egypt), speaking from the general that was to say, the medical
point of view, declared that this was the only aspect of the question which the Conference
ought to consider. From the medical point of view, the use of any of these drugs for purposes
other than medical or scientific was illegal, abusive and dangerous. The present Conference
had a Sub-Committee of Experts, which included doctors, pharmacists, etc., well-versed in
the matter. These experts had fixed a uniform rate, which it would be dangerous and
abusive to exceed. It was in this sense that the Egyptian delegate desired to define the
words ?abusive use?.
Mr. Clayton (India), speaking in reply to the last remark of the delegate for the Dom
nican Republic, noted with satisfaction that that delegate was really of the same opinion
as himself. To revert to the example of an outbreak of plague, the other nations had the
right to impose quarantine upon the frontiers of the plague-stricken country, but they had
not the right to intervene within that country.
In reply to the American delegate, he admitted that there were a certain number of inter-
national conventions the effect of which was to interfere in the internal affairs of a country.
In all cases, however, these measures had been adopted by the unanimous vote of all countries,
including the country concerned. Moreover, measures of this kind were only included in
international conventions when the methods and principles of the different Governments
were sufficiently similar to be standardised by means of an international agreement. This
did not apply to the case in point.
In reply to the Egyptian delegate?s observations on the work of Sub-Committee F with
regard to the maximum individual consumption of narcotics, the Indian delegate, referring
to the memorandum issued by his delegation, said that the estimates of the present consump-
tion of narcotics in India showed that the average figure was about half a gramme that


was to say ; approximately the figure allowed for by the experts. The figure for Indian
consumption was very satisfactory if compared with the figures of most European countries.
Consumption was only kept down to this figure, however, thanks to the measures taken by
the Government of India. The methods adopted by that Government were therefore the
best, and for her own part India could not accept the addition of the words ?for purposes
not strictly medical or scientific.?
The Indian delegate was glad that his American colleague had repeated his assurance
that the United States did not wish to compel a country to take measures which might cause
internal difficulties. This would be the case in India if the Egyptian amendment were adopted.
The difficulties that would arise would be of a political nature, inasmuch as the administration
of opium was in the hands of the provincial Governments, which were autonomous. There
would also arise difficulties of a medical and social character. In short, these difficulties
would be so serious that the Government of India was not inclined to go beyond the position
that it had at the moment assumed.
He desired to point out to the Committee that the Government of India, which had signed
the Hague Convention, was the only producing country which had fully applied this Convention,
since the consumption per head in India had been brought below the figure for European
consumption. If other countries thought they could obtain better results by other methods,
they were free to try them, but the Committee ought not to make demands on the Government
of India which it could not accept.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) recalled the fact that his delegation had taken
every opportunity offered to it to declare that it had neither the intention nor the right to
interfere in the internal affairs of any country. At the same time, the situation must be judged
from another point of view. Thirty-nine nations had met with a desire to take a step forward.
Because one nation was not inclined to take this step, were the 38 others to stand still ?
There was no question of forcing India to adopt measures to which she objected. The Indian
delegation had the right to make reservations and to explain why she could not accept the
proposals made. A country was only bound within the limits of its own reservations. But it
would be inadmissible that the opposition of a single country should check other countries
in their desire to go forward. The delegate for India opposed the acceptance of the words
?for purposes not strictly medical or scientific?. The words ?exclusively to medical and
legitimate purposes? appeared in Article 9 of the Hague Convention, which had been accepted.
It was obvious that if, at the time this Convention was signed, a State had declared that it
made reservations on this point, that agreement could not have been signed. The American
delegate was sure that his colleague did not understand by ?legitimate requirements? anything
else but the requirements of medicine and science. Indeed, the proposal in paragraph ( a)
of the third Indian proposal consisted in inserting in the preamble an affirmation of the
American principles. It was true that for political, social and health reasons these principles
would not be applicable in India. Thus, although recognising the excellence of these principles,
the Indian delegate was unable to accept the obligation arising from them, because conditions
in India did not allow it. The American delegate enquired of his colleague whether this was
a sufficient reason for paralysing the action of 38 other countries.
M. Sze (China) considered that the declarations which had just been made, particularly
those of the Indian and United States delegates, were of the greatest importance.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) remarked that he had only spoken unofficially.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) inferred from the Indian delegate?s statements that that country?s
consumption was not higher than the quantity allowed by Sub-Committee F and that, on the
Indian delegate?s own showing, it would be possible in the present state of India to make
still greater reductions. In these circumstances, why not retain the words ?medical and
scientific purposes?, since they did not prejudice the domestic interests of India ?
The Egyptian delegate, while disclaiming any wish to interfere in the domestic affairs
of another country, also enquired what was the nature of the grave disturbances which the
Indian delegate apprehended in his country, seeing that the interests of the natives would not
be affected. The Persian and Turkish delegates had clearly explained the difficulties to which
their countries might find themselves exposed. But the same did not apply to India.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought that the discussion was on the wrong track and that
no practical results could be hoped for on the present lines. He did not share the Chinese
delegate?s opinion regarding the importance of the statements which had been made. The
Indian delegate?s opinion had already been expressed on several occasions, and the United
States delegate had also repeatedly stated that he had no intention of interfering in the domes-
tic affairs of other States while submitting a proposal which really constituted such inter-
ference. The situation was as follows : The States represented on Sub-Committee B had
given their reply ; only two had accepted the American proposal, and of these two one was
not a producer of opium. Personally, the Australian delegate was not disposed to accept the
American proposal. Seeing that six producing countries had not accepted this proposal and
that they were really the masters of the situation, what purpose could be served by a conven-
tion adopted in these circumstances ? A unanimous agreement was essential. It seemed
clear that the producing States were not prepared to accept the American proposal without
the words ?for exportation.? If the United States did not intend to interfere in the domestic
affairs of other States, why could it not accept these two words ? They must be reasonable
and practical if they wished to make any progress and be content with what could be achieved
to-day in the hope of going farther on a later occasion.


Certain delegates were apprehensive concerning the lack of precision of the term ?abusive
use?. These fears were unjustified. Each signatory State undertook to pass effective laws.
These laws would, no doubt, not be the same everywhere, and each State would have to inter-
pret what constituted an abuse under its own legislation. An abuse would be an act contrary
to the laws which it had passed.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic), returning to the question of sovereignty, said he
did not intend to go into this question in detail. He simply pointed out that, when a sanitary
cordon was drawn round a State, that State?s sovereignty was infringed, since the freedom
of circulation of its inhabitants, commerce, etc., was restricted.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) observed that all the delegates were agreed as regards limiting
opium intended for exportation, but if the internal production of opium remained the same,
the result would be that the producing countries would have an over-production which would
become either a source of contraband or a danger to the country itself.
M. Sze (China) said he had been much impressed by the Australian delegate?s defence of
the Indian delegate. He would therefore prefer the Committee not to come to a decision
during the present meeting. The present Sub-Committee had been appointed by the Con-
ference to submit to it a report. Why not let the other members of the Conference have the
benefit of the statements made in the present Committee, even if the latter had already heard
them several times ?
Mr. Norris (United States of America) supposed that, even in the most favourable event,
it was unlikely that the future convention would be accepted without reservations. It was
already known that reservations had been put forward in Sub-Committee A and elsewhere.
Why should not reservations be made on Article i as on the other articles ?
The American delegate agreed with the remarks of the Egyptian delegate, who had shown
that in practice there was no difference between the control of production for medical and
scientific purposes and the control of export. To take, for example, the case of a country like
Turkey, which produced considerable quantities of opium which it did not consume, this
country would accumulate a large stock which it could not dispose of entirely by means of
export to meet medical and scientific needs. The result would be a danger of contraband,
a fall in prices, etc. Controlling export would therefore mean controlling production, since
the two measures would have the same effect. The representatives of the producing countries
realised the necessity of taking effective measures regarding export. The adoption of the
words ?for exportation? would therefore have the same effect as the adoption of the American
proposal.
Mr. Clayton (India) did not for the moment wish to make a statement of the situation in
India, as the Egyptian delegate had asked. He considered the last point raised by the Ameri-
can delegate to be extremely important. In order to facilitate the work of the Conference,
he suggested that the proposal to add the words ?for exportation? to Article i of the American
draft should be discussed first, and he asked the representatives of the producing countries
to consider very carefully the question which the American delegate had raised as to the posi-
tion in which these countries would be placed if the words ?for exportation? were adopted.
The continuation of the discussion was adjourned to the next meeting.
FIFTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, February yrd, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland)
36. Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee (continuation of the discussion)
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought that, in view of the discussion of the previous day
and the inconclusive results of the voting on the American and Indian proposals, there was
little likelihood of unanimous agreement on Article 1. It seemed useless to continue the dis-
cussion on that article, and he proposed the adoption of a draft report on this question which
he read (Annex 13) and which he said would serve as a basis for the Sub-Committee?s report
to the Conference. He was prepared to accept any amendments to his report.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) pointed out that the Persian and Turkish delegations? reservations
did not refer specifically to the American proposal but that they would apply to the whole
ot the new Convention if the Conference rejected the Persian and Turkish proposals.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) desired to repeat the statement which he had already
made. According to the instructions which he had received from his Government, he was
to agree to any resolutions passed by the Conference and to the American proposals, provided
that the Conference duly took into account the claims set forth in detail in the Persian memo-
randum. He wished his statement to be formally noted.


M. El Guindy (Egypt) declared that if this was the case the American proposal might
be regarded as accepted by the Persian and Turkish delegations, as well as by those of China
and Egypt.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) could not agree to this view ; the Persian and Turkish dele-
gations had made even stricter reservations than the other delegations.
Mr. Clayton (India) thought that the position was as follows : Persia and Turkey were
keeping to the provisions of the Hague Convention. As he understood the matter, the Persian
reservations also applied to the Hague Convention.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) explained that Persia had submitted a reservation
in regard to paragraph (a) of Article 3 of Chapter I of the Hague Convention. He referred
the Indian delegate to the Persian memorandum, in which Persia?s attitude was clearly
explained.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) declared that the Turkish delegation had not come to Geneva
simply to keep to the provisions of the Hague Convention. It would accept any Convention
that might be concluded, provided its claims were satisfactorily dealt with.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) declared that, it would serve no useful purpose to con-
tinue the discussion.
The Chairman asked the Sub-Committee whether it wished to vote on the draft report
or to revert to the proposals submitted the previous day. They must pass some motion if
the discussion was to be brought to an end.
M. Sze (China) proposed various formal amendments to the report submitted by the
Australian delegate, by whom they were accepted.
In reply to a question from the Chairman, he declared that he supported the motion,
although he regretted that agreement had not been reached on the proposals previously
submitted.
M. Dendramis (Greece) mentioned that, so far as he recollected, the American delegation
had not formally voted against the Indian proposal at the previous meeting.
Mr. Porter (United States of America) suggested certain slight formal amendments in
the text of the report.
In reply to a question by the Chairman, he stated that he could not agree to the draft
leport but that he had no objection to a vote being taken on it, as there appeared to be no
point in prolonging the discussion.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) explained that when he drafted his report he had not intended
to give an opinion one way or the other. If any delegates thought that it did not represent
the actual state of affairs, he was ready to accept their amendments.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) thought that the Sub-Committee should first vote on the proposals
previously submitted namely, the American and Indian proposals and the Egyptian
amendment.
M. Dendramis (Greece) did not think that the Australian delegate?s report completely
summed up the previous day?s discussion. The United States delegate had declared that he
had no wish to interfere with the domestic affairs of any country and had not formally rejected
the Indian proposal.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) stated that the discussion at the previous meeting
had made it clear that the Indian proposal represented a combination of Article 1 and Article
3of the Hague Convention. The United States delegation could not accept these articles
in place of the new article which it had submitted.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) pointed out that only representatives of the producing countries
had been consulted the previous day. I hey did not know, for example, what was the
opinion of the Dominican Republic.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought that the Australian report was perhaps too concise
and did not give a complete idea of the position. It was a reproduction of paragraph ( b ) of
the Indian delegation s third proposal, d hat proposal appeared to contain other important
points for example, the suggestion to insert in the preamble an explanation of the
words ?abusive use?.
Mr. Clayton (India) thought that the discussions on the previous day had made the
matter sufficiently clear on this point: the Indian delegation?s view was that it was for the
authorities of each country to decide what constituted abusive use. It must not be forgotten that
India?s acceptance of the American proposal was contingent on the reservations formulated in the
Advisory Committee and referred to in the Indian memorandum. The Indian delegation
would accept the American proposal in so far as it concerned international measures but not
as regarded purely domestic matters.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) thought it desirable not to deal with the question as to
who was competent to decide whether the use of the drug was or was not abusive. In his
view, the expression ?abusive use?? was intended, according to the Indian memorandum to
denote use for purposes which were not medical or scientific.


Mr. Clayton (India) could not accept the words "for medical and scientific purposes" as
a criterion for determining the limits between an abusive and a legitimate use of the drug.
So simple a formula could not be applied in a country of 320 million inhabitants with very
varying customs. Ihere were semi-medical uses and social and religious customs which must be
taken most carefully into account, and in regard to which the expression referred to would
be either too far-reaching or too strict. In actual fact, as a result of the general control
exercised by the Indian Government, the average consumption in India was now very satis-
factory as compared with countries which kept to the formula "for medical and scientific
purposes".
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) pointed out that his report was merely intended as a statement
of the actual position and that it could be amended by any delegates who thought it inaccurate.
The only part of the Indian memorandum which had been discussed the previous day was the
part reproduced in the report.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) asked that if a vote were taken on the Australian motion and
proved to be inconclusive, the whole question, together with all the proposals submitted, should
be referred to the plenary Conference without any reference to the views reflected in the voting
or to the reservations formulated, etc. It would be for the plenary Conference to decide the
matter. He asked the Australian delegate to add to his text the words : "The producing
countries have not been consulted on the matter".
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) accepted this amendment.
The report drafted by Mr. Shepherd was accepted by the Sub-Committee, the United States
delegation abstaining from voting and reserving full liberty of action.
The Chairman stated that the report just adopted would serve as a basis for the final
report to be drafted by the Turkish delegate, to which the proposals and amendments sub-
mitted would be annexed. The Sub-Committee would hold a final meeting in order to adopt
this report.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) noted that certain points referred to in his two reports were
still undecided : (1) the United States motion concerning the appointment of a Committee
of Enquiry a question which the United States delegation had intended to bring up again ;
(2) Mrs. Hamilton Wright?s motion, concerning which the Indian delegation had submitted
a reservation ; (3) a proposal concerning a Commission of Enquiry to visit Persia.
Mr. Norris (United States of America) stated that the first point referred to by the Aus-
tralian delegate had been dealt with in a report ; the question was no longer one for the Sub-
Committee but for the Conference. As regards the second point, in view of the discussion of
the previous day, there was no need to revert to it. The last point the claims of the Persian
and Turkish Governments was a matter for the plenary Conference.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) agreed with the American delegate.
SIXTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, February yth, 1925, at 11.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
37. Consideration and Adoption of the Supplementary Report of Sub-Committee B.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia), Rapporteur, explained that his report (Annex 14) constituted
to some extent a combination of the two former reports, which were rather complicated
and required simplifying. Moreover, it was necessary to take account of the decisions reached
on the previous day. The present document summarised the work of the Sub-Sub-Committee
as well as that of the Sub-Committee itself. It therefore contained a complete account of the
decisions of the Sub-Committee. The Rapporteur thought that the text could be slightly
modified in certain places :
1. First paragraph of the chapter dealing with Article 1, the words "the Committee"
should be replaced by "a Committee of the Sub-Committee".
A dopted.
2. At the end of the same paragraph, the words "unless it was clearly stated that the
provisions applied only to export trade? should be deleted. This question had been discussed
during the last meeting by the Sub-Committee and not by its smaller Committee.


M. Dinichert (Switzerland) was also in favour of deleting the words in question, which
were liable to cause confusion.
The last words of the paragraph were deleted.
3. At the request of the United States delegation, ?American ? should be replaced by
?of the United States of America?.
A greed.
4. The report just distributed made no mention of any decision with regard to the
Cuban and Austrian proposals. The Sub-Committee had taken the Australian proposal as a
basis for discussion as being the most comprehensive, but it had been impossible to obtain
agreement on this proposal. The Cuban proposal, which had also been examined by other
Sub-Committees, dealt with a question of principle which had been discussed in full con-
ference, but no decision had been taken on this point. Accordingly, the Rapporteur
proposed to add to his report the following paragraph :
?In view of this result, the Sub-Committee was unable to agree upon a decision with
regard to the Cuban and Austrian proposals.?
This paragraph was adopted.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) observed that the Indian proposal reproduced in the report
contained the following sentence : ?In particular, they (the Contracting Parties) shall
undertake effective measures to prevent any export of raw opium, either licit or illicit, not'
specifically permitted by the provisions of this Convention?. It was hard to understand
how exportation could be licit if it were not permitted by the Convention, or illicit if it were
in conformity with this Convention.
Mr. Clayton (India) pointed out that these words appeared in the text originally sub-
mitted to the Sub-Committee. Their object was to show that the Contracting Parties accepted
the obligation not only as regards licit traffic but with a view also to suppressing smuggling.
At the same time, the Indian delegate did not insist upon the retention of the words in
question.
The words ?either licit or illicit?? were deleted.
Reservation by the Persian Delegation
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) stated that, when Mrs. Hamilton Wright had submitted
the motion with regard to sending a Commission of Enquiry, she had handed to him the text
of a telegram to the Persian Government explaining the object of the United States proposals.
The Persian Government, after taking cognisance of this telegram, had telegraphed to its
representative at the Conference accepting the American proposals. This acceptance by the
Persian Government, applied to the proposal as it had been stated in the telegram that
was to say, in a much shorter form than that which it assumed in the report. In fact, the tele-
gram simply said that the United States proposed to send a Commission of Enquiry composed
of technical experts on engineering, agriculture, finance, etc., to make an investigation on the
spot and submit a report to the Council. In these circumstances, the Persian delegate declared
that he accepted the proposal to send a Commission of Enquiry, as explained in the report,
but that this acceptance was subject to the approval of his Government. Furthermore, the
text of this proposal in the report contained the words "in the event of the case of the Persian
Government being established. . .? The Persian delegate declared that he could not accept
this phrase. Accordingly, he desired to make a reservation upon the two points he had
just mentioned.
There followed an exchange of views on this matter.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) pointed out that the proposal in question had already been
accepted.
The Chairman replied that nevertheless each delegation ought to be allowed to make
reservations according to the instructions which it might from time to time receive from its
Government.
After various modifications of form proposed by the Chairman, M. Dinichert (Swit-
zerland) and Mr. Shepherd (Australia) had been accepted by the delegate for Persia, the
Sub-Committee decided that the reservations of the Persian delegate should be embodied in
the report as follows :
?At a later meeting of the Sub-Committee, the Persian delegate, Prince Arfa-
ed-Dovleh, declared that, apart from the proposals of the United States, of which the
English text had been sent to Teheran and to which he had received a reply from his
Government, he could not accept anything in this report which directly concerned
Persia without reference to his Government. He made an express reservation with
regard to the following paragraph in the above-mentioned resolution : 'in the hope that,
in the event of the case of the Persian Government being established, etc., since he
believed and maintained that his Government?s case was perfectly valid and had been
established.?
The report of the Sub-Committee was adopted, with the various amendments introduced during
the discussion.


38. Representation of Sub-Committee Bon the Co-ordination Committee.
The Chairman mentioned that the Co-ordination Committee was to start work on the
afternoon of that day. Sub-Committee B was represented on this Committee by M. Dinichert,
Sureya Bey and its Chairman. It was possible that there would be divergencies between the
texts adopted by Sub-Committee B and those of the other Sub-Committees. The Chairman
asked the Sub-Committee whether its representatives would have the right to accept sub-
sequent changes in the texts it had adopted or whether they ought first to refer them to the
Sub-Committee.
Mr. Clayton (India) proposed that the Sub-Committee should give full powers to its
delegates to accept any changes they might consider necessary. Nevertheless, if the dele-
gation was of the opinion that some proposed change would not be acceptable to Sub-Com-
mittee B, it should reserve the right of members of the Sub-Committee to raise the question
in full Conference.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) supported the Indian delegate?s proposal with the following
reservation : If the question at issue were an important one, the Chairman of Sub-Committee
B could, if he thought fit, call a meeting of the Sub-Committee to consider whether it was
possible to agree with the other Sub-Committees on disputed points. Such a procedure would
avoid discussions in full Conference.
Mr. Clayton (India) feared that this procedure would involve unnecessary delay. At
the same time, he did not oppose it, and he proposed to leave it to the Chairman?s discretion
to take what measures he pleased.
The proposal of the Indian delegate, as amended by the delegate for Switzerland, was adopted.
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, February yth, 1925, at Afp.m.
Chairman : Dr. Chodzko (Poland).
39. Work of the Co-ordination Committee.
The Chairman said he had called together the Sub-Committee in order to consider the
discussion which had taken place on the previous day in the Co-ordination Committee. The
Co-ordination Committee had noted certain divergencies between the recommendations
of Sub-Committee A and Sub-Committee B. The most important of these divergencies related
to the statistics to be furnished by the Governments to the Central Board. Sub-Committee B
had thought it would be impossible for Governments to do more than furnish annual statistics
of imports and exports. Sub-Committee A, on the other hand, had come to the conclusion
that these statistics could be furnished quarterly. During the discussion of this question
in the Co-ordination Committee the Turkish delegate had accepted the period of three months.
It was, however, necessary to obtain the views of the other producing countries. He would
ask M. Dinichert, Rapporteur, to explain the position.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that the Co-ordination Committee had met on the pre-
vious day for a meeting ?which had lasted only for an hour and a-half. It had considered
a short memorandum on the divergencies which had been noted between the reports submitted
by Sub-Committee A and the other Sub-Committees, more particularly Sub-Committee B.
The memorandum was brief and had only mentioned points which were regarded as important.
There was one point in particular which had engaged the attention of the Co-ordination
Committee namely, the periods at which Customs statistics should be furnished to the
Central Board. This question had been very fully discussed by Sub-Committee Bin November-
December 1924. Sub-Committee B had been asked whether it would be possible for Govern-
ments to furnish these statistics every three months and within three months following the
period. It had decided, in view of declarations made by the representatives of the producing
countries, that the statistics could not be furnished more frequently than once a year and
within six months following the period which they covered. He had presented this decision
to the Co-ordination Committee as the unanimous decision of Sub-Committee B.
Sub-Committee A, however, did not think that annual statistics would be sufficient and
had decided to recommend that Customs statistics should be furnished quarterly and within
four weeks after the end of the quarter. The period of four weeks had never even been dis-
cussed in Sub-Committee B, because no proposal had been made concerning it. The question
now arose whether of Sub-Committee B were prepared to associate themselves
with the proposals of Sub-Committee A and to substitute quarterly statistics furnished
within four weeks for annual statistics furnished within six months.


The Chairman asked the delegates of the producing countries to reply individually to
this question.
Mr. Clayton (India) said he was prepared to accept quarterly statistics furnished within
a period of four weeks.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) said that he could not depart from the opinion which
had been expressed by the financial expert of the Persian delegation, who, as Minister of Finance
at Teheran, was intimately acquainted with all the necessary details. He could only refer to
the declaration made by his colleague as contained in the minutes of the Sub-Committee. It
would be quite impossible for Persia to furnish quarterly statistics within four weeks, in view
of the fact that Persia had not telegraphic facilities in many parts of the country and that the
Persian posts were irregular.
Mehmed Sureya Bey (Turkey) said he accepted the proposal for quarterly statistics
furnished within a period of four weeks.
M. El Guindy (Egypt) also accepted the proposal of Sub-Committee A.
M. Pilya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) said he could not accept
the proposal of Sub-Committee A. He would refer to the statements which had already been
made by his delegation. The administrative services of his country still suffered from the
consequences of the war. They could not for the moment undertake to furnish quarterly
statistics and might not be able to do so for two or even three years. Statistics in regard to
opium did not figure separately in the returns of his administration but were given along with
statistics relating to other articles.
M. Dendramis (Greece) said that his Government could undertake to furnish quarterly
statistics, but that it could not possibly forward them within four weeks. It would agree to
forward them within three months.
M. Sze (China) said that in China the cultivation of the poppy was illegal and that the
Chinese Government desired to suppress it entirely. The question accordingly did not arise
so far as his country was concerned.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland), referring to the statement of M. Pilya to the effect that
statistics in regard to opium were not separately given in the Serb-Croat-Slovene returns, pointed
out that, under the Convention, the system of import and export licences would be introduced
and that this system would make it easy to obtain separate figures relating to opium.
M. Pilya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) agreed.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) noted that three out of six producing countries accepted in
full the proposal of Sub-Committee A. Greece had accepted the proposal for quarterly
statistics, but required a period of three months within which they would be forwarded.
Persia maintained her original point of view, and the delegate for the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes had stated that he could not at present undertake to furnish quarterly
statistics.
M. Pilya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) again insisted that it would be
quite impossible for his country to furnish quarterly statistics for the moment, but he hoped
that shortly, when the Customs services had been instructed as to their new duties, it would
become possible to carry out the proposal of Sub-Committee A. He would therefore make
a reservation to the effect that, if quarterly statistics were immediately required, his Govern-
ment would not be in a position to supply them.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that, in the Co-ordination Committee, attention had
been called to another point: Sub-Committee B had referred in its proposals to the financial
year as the period to be covered by the statistics. He had been asked to ascertain whether
Sub-Committee B desired to maintain this reference. More particularly, he would ask the
delegate for Persia, who was especially interested in the matter.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) said that the Persian year began on March 21st and
that this would be the more convenient period for his Government. If the observation in
regard to the financial year were not retained, it would be necessary for him to make a reser-
vation in regard to the point.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said he understood that Persia would be able to furnish
statistics at the end of each budgetary year, within six months of the end of the year, and that
the Persian delegate could not agree to withdraw the reference to the budgetary year.
Prince Arfa-ed Dovleh (Persia) agreed.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said that the Co-ordination Committee had noted a further
divergence between the proposals of Sub-Committee A and Sub-Committee B. Sub-Committee
B had considered that it would be possible for annual statistics in regard to stocks to be fur-
nished by the Governments to the Central Board within three months of the end of the year.
Sub-Committee A did not think that this was a practicable proposal and was recommending
that the period should be within five months of the end of the year. He would enquire
whether there was any objection to accept the proposal of Sub-Committee A.


Mr. Clayton (India) said that, from the point of view of the producing countries, the
period of five months would be obviously more convenient.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) reminded the Committee that the question of the period
within which statistics regarding the stocks should be furnished had been the subject o
considerable discussion. Both Sub-Committee A and Sub-Committee B were agreed that
statistics regarding stocks should be furnished annually, but there was a difference of opinion
in regard to the period within which they should be forwarded. Sub-Cnmmittce B had
unanimously accepted the period of three months. The question was not whether this penoc
were more convenient to the Governments, but whether the shorter period was practicable
and would make the supervision of the Board more effective.
M El Guindy (Egypt), on a point of order, enquired whether the Co-ordination Committee
was sending to the Drafting Committee the texts of the proposals of Sub-Committee A and
of Sub-Committee B. If so, he would like to know how the Drafting Committee would decide
between the divergent texts.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said it was proposed to send to the Drafting Committee
minutes of the views expressed during the present discussion.
Prince Arfa-fd-Dovleh (Persia) said that the five-months period would certainly
be more convenient for certain Governments. Governments, however, could furnish c
information within three months if they so desired.
The Chairman said it appeared to be necessary to consult the producing countries
individually.
Mr Shepherd (Australia)-said the only point to decide was whether the producing
countries accepted a period of five months instead of three months These countries had
accepted the period of three months with reluctance, and they should accordingly welcom
a proposal to extend the period.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) again insisted that this was not a question of meeting the
convenience of the Governments but of attaining the object for which the Convention was
being prepared. It was false reasoning to say that the Committee should accept the foi g
period only because it was more convenient.
Mr Clayton (India) said that Sub-Committee B had originally been asked to state whethei
it could accept the period of three months. It had replied that it could accept fhe period
of three months with difficulty. The question now was whether Sub-Committee 15 coi
accept the period of five months. The Committee was not being asked to decide on the me .
of the question, and an answer in the affirmative could immediately be given.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) pointed out that he had intentionally refrained from that
line of argument in the Co-ordination Committee. He might equally well have urged u -
Committee A to accept the proposal to furnish the Central Board with annual statis ics
imports and exports instead of the quarterly statistics proposed by Sub-Committee A as
being obviously more convenient for Governments.
M. Pilya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) said he accepted the period of
five months.
M. Dendramis (Greece) also accepted the period of five months.
The Chairman said that, the period of five months now having been accepted, it would
appear desirable to delete the words ?if possible?. This phrase had been inserted m the
original proposal in deference to the representations of certain delegates to the effect tr a
could not otherwise give the undertaking to furnish statistics relating to stocks within t r
months. Now that the period had been extended, it did not seem to be necessary to maKe
the exception.
It was agreed to note in the Minutes that Sub-Committee B, having considered the proposal
of Sub-Committee A, was prepared to accept the period of five months, though, if necessary,
it would have accepted the period of three months.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) said there was another point to which he desired to draw
attention. Statistics relating to raw opium were to be furnished annually within three mont s
of the end of the year. These statistics were to be ?aussi exactes que possible . Sub-Committee
A desired to suppress this phrase, and he would like to know whether the members of Sub-
Committee B wished them to be retained.
The individual members of the Committee were consulted, and it was unanimously decided
that the phrase should he retained.
40. Close of the Work of the Sub-Committee.
The Chairman wished to take this opportunity of thanking Mr. Shepherd, the Rapporteur,
for his valuable work.
M. Dendramis (Greece) desired to express to the Chairman his thanks and that of all
his colleagues for the impartial and courteous manner in which he had presided over the
work of the Sub-Committee.
M. Dinichert (Switzerland) associated himself with the Greek delegate?s remarks.
M. Sze (China) desired also to pay a tribute to M. Dinichert and conveyed the Sub-
Committee?s congratulations to the Secretariat.


I.
Note presented by M. Dinichert, Rapporteur of Sub-Committee B
Page
182
2 .
First Draft Report of Sub-Committee B. Rapporteur: M. Dinichert (Switzerland)
184
3-
Notes on the Work of Sub-Committee B, prepared by Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
187
4-
Draft Report on the Work of Sub-Sub-Committee at its meeting held on December
nth, 1924. Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia)
188
5-
Draft Report of the Meeting of Sub-Committee B, held on December 12th, 1924.
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia) y 4
191
6.
The Position of India as regards the Domestic Production and Consumption of
WShlb-Commlnee 0 B LXP  rt 1 Memorandum b T the Indian Delegation submitted
192
194
7-
Memorandum on Persian Opium, submitted by the Persian Delegation.
8.
Republic d 0 'f?urke} P  PPy ? gr0Win8 a ? d ? he Production of Raw Opium in the
9-
Memorandum on the Cultivation of the Poppy and the Production of Raw Opium
in the Kmgdon of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
213
216
10.
Memorandum by Dr. A. H. Mahfooz Bey, Delegate of Egypt, as to the quantities
of narcotic drugs produced or consumed in Egypt
II .
T O
? n f ? Sl, T d !* y the ? Delegation on the Product.on of Opium in
Vladhmstock) urkestan and the Maritime Provinces (in the neighbourhood of
219
ANNEXES.
12. Report of the Sub-Sub-Committe. Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia)! ! 220
13- Article lof the American Proposals : Note by Mr. Shepherd (Australia) . . . 222
14 ustmba^ 3X7 Dmft Rep  rt  f Sub -Oommittee B. Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd
222
Annex 1.
NOTE PRESENTED BY M. DINICHERT, RAPPORTEUR OF SUB-COMMITTEE B.
The object of the present note is to indicate clearly the obligations which countries nrn
ducmg raw opium would have to assume, particularly as regards the statistics and estimates
they mus urnish concerning their production, consumption and export of rfw opium done
The following articles are relevant in this connection : P
Traflk r )n le Oplum. and &  f I  f " Measures ? Proposed by the Advisory Committee on
Article 7, paragraph XIII, of Part II of these "Measures?.
America 0 ' 05 2 ? A ? 2 " D ? 2 ~ E &nd 2<>L  f * he P ro P osals submitted by the United States 01
for 7 V' al , n o Uuti ?, and organisation of the Permanent Central Board provided
for by Article 3of these ?Measures" and Article 20-C of the American proposalsTA not
touched upon here The consideration of this problem primarily falls within ?heCompetence
with U simu?t l ane e ous?ly a ? W  U ? d Se6m Undes!rable tbat two Sub-Committees should deal
Article 4 (b) of the "Measures" and Article 20-D 1 (a) of the American Proposals.
1 1 Countries producing raw opium will be required to send to the Permanent Central Board ?
(1) within three months after the end of each quarter, statistics of theb eAAts to each
country during that quarter; (2) within three months after the end of each half-year
half year.  f h  s *? m ha " dS e ? ther  f the State 0r of private P ers ons at the end of the
and Kbe ?to wAhi the ? ioUS ?es ?
year A and Ss* 6 ? 8 ?? 5 f  r St  kS ? hand the end  f eachbalf -
Article 4 (c) of the "Measures" and Article 20 -Paragraph 3, of the American Proposals.
statisth-ToAn 111 * 16 * 5 , Wlll be re< f ubed t0 send . within three months after the end of each year
Wdl Oh t0l r ( s uan . tlty , f raw P lum consumed in their country during the year?
Will it be possible to give these figures ? and that within a period of three months f
Article 20 -B, Paragraph 3, of the American Proposals.
These countries will be required to furnish, within three months affpr ori d r u
year wm? ! fb S  f ?mi 10 /" 1 3 ua ntity of raw opium produced during the year
Will it be possible to give these figures ? and that within three months??


Article 4, Last Paragraph, of the ?Measures?.
Should it appear that the imports of raw opium already received in any country during
the current year have exceeded the amounts specified in the estimate furnished by that country,
the Permanent Central Board shall call the attention of the Governments specially to the fact.
In that case, each Government undertakes not to export any further consignment of raw opium
to the said country during the same year, unless a revised estimate of its requirements in raw
opium shall have been furnished by that country. ,
Can such an undertaking be entered into that is to say, would the Governments ot
producing countries be able to prevent any further exportation to a country whose importation
had exceeded its own estimates ? .
In the event of the latter being revised, how should the division between the various
producing countries be effected ? Or, failing such division, by what measures could the new
exports from producing countries be kept within the limjts of the revised estimates ?
Article sof the ?Measures? and Article 20 -E of the American Proposals (the latter in a modified
sense).
If any country furnishes no estimate of its requirements or furnishes an estimate which
appears to the Central Board to be greatly in excess of the reasonable requirements of the
country, the Board shall fix the amounts of the reasonable requirements of that country, after
taking into account all factors which appear to the Board to be relevant. The Board shall
notify the amounts so fixed to all Governments. Each Government will agree not to allow
the export to that country of amounts which, taken in conjunction with the exports from other
countries, would exceed the amounts fixed by the Board.
Is it possible for the countries concerned to undertake to prevent, or at least not to
authorise, the excess exports referred to ? . , ,
By what means could all the other Governments concerned be informed in time ot me
total amount of the exports from other countiies ? . <( ?
Further, could the intervention of an international organ, laying down the reasonable
requirements of any given country in opposition to the estimates of its own Government, or
even in the absence of such estimates, be considered compatible with the sovereignty of Mates
or with the safeguarding of the interests of which each State should alone have the right to
ludge ?
The latter question, of course, arises in connection with any State to which the proposed
measure might, should occasion arise, be applied.
Article 6 of the ?Measures?.
If any country exports raw opium to a country for which the Central Boaio has fixed
the total amount of its imports, and if it considers that this amount is not large enough, the
Government of the exporting country shall have the right to demand that a special conference
of all the countries which have such relations with the importing country shall be summoned
to consider whether such limitation or any other measure should icmain in force.
Do the producing countries consider that they can agree to the proceduie proposed .
Do they consider this procedure practicable ?
Could the importing countries which it may concern, for their part, agree to such a pro-
cedure ?
Would the opinion of the Governments represented at such a conference prevail against
the decision of the Central Board ?
Article 7, Paragraph XIII, of the ?Measures? (Part II) an d Article 20 -L of the American Proposals.
In the case of a country which is not a party to the agreement to be concluded, the pro-
ducing countries shall forbid the export of raw opium to such a country, except such amounts
as may be fixed by the Central Board as being required for the legitimate needs of that country.
Is it possible to assume such an obligation ? and can it be cairied out ?
In what manner and by whom will the division, as between the various producing countries,
of the whole amount of raw opium to be imported into a country not party to the agreement
be effected ? Would the producing countries be able to ensure that the amount ot exports
to which they were entitled was not exceeded ?
Article 20-A (_paragraph 2) of the American Proposals.
The producing countries shall furnish annually to the Central Board, not later than Apiil
Ist for the calendar year beginning January Ist following, estimates, on the one hand of their
production of raw opium and, on the other, estimates of their requirements for domestic
consumption for all purposes and for domestic consumption for medical purposes, as well
as their requirements for export. , *
Would it be possible to furnish such estimates ? and would it be possible to do so by
the date fixed ?
These appear to be the most important questions which arise upon a first examination
of the proposals discussed in the present note.
December Ist, 1924,


Annex 2
FIRST DRAFT REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE B.
Rapporteur : M. Dinichert (Switzerland).
dividtV(To fi rlfinw ting ' W F Ch ? s T eld 0,1 Nove mber 28th, Sub-Committee B decided to
the limitation of tlieTi-JT V t lst wa , s to include all questions and proposals concerning
esneddlv fromt ?? of / aw P mm m general, and the second (considered more
proposals contained ?n "M  U . be countn f v producing raw opium) was to include the
p posais contained in the Measures suggested by the Advisory Committee on the Traffir
2i6 o ( P s\Tand theT 5 f  r t the deli K er . atio , n ? of the Conference (Document A. 32 1924. X/I.OX
(5) ) a d the suggestions submitted by the United States delegation (Document O D C aai
Two separate reports were to be drawn up on these two groups of questions
???=s
fhp rtK v f aSIS f  r the - dlscusslon of these questions was a Note (Annex i) defining
regard! thTstatTsUcs and"*" ? XXX raw P ium would ha ? to assume, particularly a!
Senconcerning their nld t? 168 ? 6y mUSt furnish and certain s P ecial measures to be
Th P Sr g th !l pr 9 du I ctlon * consumption, export and re-export of raw opium alone
I. Article 4 (b) of the "Measures' and Article 20-D (1) (a) and (b) of the American Suggestions.
to ??tries producing raw opium would undertake to send
stafktirs nf fU 1 C t p Board : (1) within three months after the end of each quarter
quarter 2 d and re-exports, specifying the country of destination? during Thai
i the a*
dffferent countries "" fManClal year ? the dates of whici > he not the same in the
follows 11 - ProViSi  n in the ConVention relating t0 this point might therefore be drafted as
six momL^derrt!! 11 ! J a r ties u? 66 t0 send * the Permanent Central Board, within
specifying the country ? eXP  rtS ? d re ' eX P ort -
not informaC 1 examina ?i n > as the countries concerned are
regards the stocks of raw opium in privaThaihs^Tf 1 k TXffi especially as
definition of a wholesale dealer ? and the , , ' 15 also dlfficult to give a satisfactory
latitude in deciding The point US Governme nts must be allowed a certain
the lltteTThouldTkrf" 5011 T between the statistics furnished by the various Governments
Te ofreaivaX and theSSflf XT indis P e -able if the statistics? eto
panied by all necessary explanation. U ' 866 that th 6 statlstlcs Published by it were accom-
constitute the t nul I !! e case C possible ? mcluded in this article would
present conditions to furnish all m-en ' , ( Governments which were unable under
would not exempt them from rte owf/rt '  the Statlstlcs re P uired - but that these words
was in their power so toX  bllgatlons t0 ?mmumcate such statistics as soon as it
year instead? of at theemi* half-vea +R n f ho V ld be collec fed at the end of each
months after the end of the year that the T slloldd be communicated within three
This point might be drafted as follows :
within^tbTeemonths* afteTthe inf ? the Central Board,
whether in Government hands or in the hands?/ I P I OSSIb ? of the quantity of the stocks,
l lianas or m the hands of wholesale dealers, at the end of that year.?


11. Article 4 (c) of the ?Measures? and Article 20-D (3) of the American Suggestions.
The question which the Sub-Committee had to decide was whether the countries producing
raw opium would be able, within three months after the end of each year, to state the quantity
of raw opium consumed in the country during the course of the year. It was found that the
countries concerned would be willing to undertake to do so, although in certain cases the
statistics furnished could only be approximate, and if there were no domestic consumption of
raw opium there would be no statistics to collect or forward. The undertaking might be drafted
as follows:
?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Permanent Central Board, within
three months after the end of each year, as accurate statistics as possible of the total
quantity of raw opium consumed during that year.?
11. A. Article 20-D (3) of the American Suggestions.
Is it possible for the producing countries to state the total quantity of raw opium pro-
duced during the year within three months after the end of each year ?
All the delegations in question thought it was possible to reply in the affirmative, but
they pointed out, however, that in cases in which thereywere no official statistics or only
incomplete statistics the data would only be approximate.
Subject to this reservation, the following formula might be accepted :
?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Permanent Central Board, within
three months after the end of each year, as accurate statistics as possible of the total
quantity of raw opium produced during that year.?
The two formulas given above might, if necessary, be combined as follows ;
?The Contracting Parties agree to send to the Permanent Central Board, within
three months after the end of each year, as accurate statistics as possible : (1) of the
total quantity of raw opium produced, and (2) of the total quantity consumed, during
that year.?
111. Article 4, Last Paragraph, of the ?Measures?.
This provides that, should the imports of raw opium received in any country during the
current year have exceeded the amounts specified in the estimate furnished by that country,
the Central Board shall call the attention of the Governments specially to that fact, and each
Government undertakes not to export any further consignments of raw opium to the said
country during the same year unless a revised estimate of its requirements shall have been
furnished by the country.
The countries producing raw opium are prepared to enter into and observe an undertaking
of this nature in so far as it is possible for them to do so, having regard to the difficulties -
sometimes very great ?of controlling their very long frontiers. Obviously, it would be for
the Central Board to see that the Governments concerned are notified in good time if the imports
specified have been exceeded and if a revised estimate has been allowed. Subject to the limits
of the original estimate or of any revised estimate, the importing country shall be at liberty
to obtain these stocks wherever it pleases.
The undertaking might be drafted as follows :
?Should the imports of raw opium into any country during the current year exceed
the amounts specified in the estimate furnished by that country, the Permanent Central
Board shall call the attention of the Governments specially to the fact, and the Contracting
Parties undertake in such a case, so far as the controlling of their frontiers permits, not
to allow the export of any further consignments of raw opium to the said country during
the same year, unless a revised estimate of its requirements shall have been furnished
by the country.?
IV. Article sof the ?Measures? and Article 20 -E of the American Suggestions.
The above articles deal with the case of a country which furnishes no estimate of its
requirements in raw opium or furnishes an estimate which appears to the Central Board to be
greatly in excess of the reasonable requirements of the country. In such case, the Board
would fix the amounts of the reasonable requirements of that country after taking into account
all relevant factors. The Board would notify the amount so fixed to all Governments and the
latter would agree not to allow the export to that country of amounts which, taken in conjunc-
tion with the exports from other countries, would exceed the amounts fixed by the Board.
There was at first some discussion as to the desirability of retaining the word ?reasonable?
to describe the requirements in question. It was stated that the expression should be retained,
as it represented the requirements or the quantities referred to in Article 1 of the ?Measures?.
Most of the members of the Sub-Committee, however, considered that the use of the word
would involve the introduction in the future agreement of a vague and indefinite term which
would be likely to give rise to confusion or misunderstanding, since ?reasonable? requirements
were simply the requirements for medical and scientific purposes of every description referred
to in Article 1 ; they thought that it was better, therefore, to keep only the latter expression.
It was also pointed out, on this occasion, that Article XIII (7) of the ?Measures? spoke of
?amounts. . . reasonably required for . . . medical and scientific needs?, from which it
must be understood that ?amounts . . . reasonably required? were regarded as supplemen-
tary to "medical and scientific needs?. Such, however, is not the case, as they are identical.


As xegards the principle underlying this question, the Governments producing raw opium
would be prepared to deal with the matter in the same way as with the preceding question ;
they would undertake, so far as the controlling of their frontiers permitted, not to allow
exports of raw opium in excess of the amounts specified.
The article might therefore be drafted as follows :
If any country furnishes no estimate of its requirements or furnishes an estimate
which appears to the Permanent Central Board to be greatly in excess of the medical
and scientific requirements of the country whether for domestic consumption or for
manufacture or trade the Board shall fix the amounts of such requirements and shall
notify all Governments of the amounts so fixed. The Contracting Parties agree, so far
as the controlling of their frontiers permits, not to allow the export to that country of
amounts of raw opium which, taken in conjunction with the exports from other countries,
will exceed the amounts fixed by the Board.?
A discussion followed as to the conditions in which it would be desirable for the Central
Board to exercise its control and to take any of the important decisions in question. It was
decided to suggest that, should these powers actually be conferred upon the Central Board:
(i) it should be composed of members belonging half to the producing countries and half
to the consuming countries ; (2) the decisions of the nature referred to should be taken by
it only after it had been in existence for two, three or four years, in order that it might have
adequate data for its estimates ; (3) before such decisions are taken, an enquiry should
be held, the results of which should be made public.
V. Article 6of the ?Measures?.
This provides that if any country, which has commercial relations, in the matter of any one
of the substances mentioned in the Convention, with a country for which an amount has
been fixed for its imports by the Permanent Central Board, considers that the amount so fixed
is too low, the Government of the exporting country shall have the right to demand that a
special conference of all the countries which have such relations with the importing country
shall be summoned to consider whether the limitation fixed shall be put into force.
The Sub-Committee thought that such a provision was neither useful nor expedient and
that it should be omitted, but as it did not know the reasons for which this proposal had
been made, it did not think it advisable to submit a formal request for its deletion.
VL Article 7 paragraph XIII of the ?Measures? (Part II) and Article 20-L, of the American
Suggestions.
In the case of a country which is not a party to the Convention, the Contracting
Parties undertake to allow the export to such a country of any of the substances covered
by the Convention only in such amounts as may be fixed by the Permanent Central
Board as corresponding to the medical and scientific needs of the country, whether for
domestic consumption or for manufacture or commerce. The Central Board will inform
the various Governments of the amounts fixed for the country in question and will supply
them with data from time to time concerning exports and re-exports to the said country.?
The countries producing raw opium would be prepared to accept a clause such as the above.
VII. Article 20-A (2) of the American Suggestions.
This clause provides that the producing countries shall furnish annually to the Central
Board, not later than April Ist for the calendar year beginning January Ist following, estimates
of raw opium in respect of their production and requirements for the following purposes :
domestic consumption for all purposes ; domestic consumption for medical and scientific
purposes ; export for all purposes ; export for medical and scientific purposes.
It was found, on examination, in the case of production especially, that these estimates
could not be furnished before September Ist for the current year. This date was therefore
agreed to and it was decided that requirements should be indicated under two headings only :
domestic consumption and export. To meet the wish expressed by the United States dele-
gation, it was, however, agreed that the representatives of the Sub-Committee on the Co-ordi-
nation Committee would draw its attention to the request for more complete information
formulated in this article of the American draft.
The Chinese delegation pointed out that the Chinese authorities would have difficulty
in furnishing the statistics in question, in view of the extra-territorial rights which most
foreigners enjoyed in China ; it also directed attention to the fact that domestic consumption
was prohibited in China.
The article might be drafted as follows :
?The Contracting Parties shall furnish annually to the Permanent Central Board
not later than September Ist for the current year, in respect of raw opium, estimates
of ie * r total production and of their total requirements : (1) for domestic consumption
for all purposes and (2) for export for all purposes.?
In respect of all the questions dealt with in the present report, the Persian delegation
renewed us general reservation to the effect that Persia will only agree to a convention on
condition that its proposals, as formulated in the note on Persian opium presented by the
Persian delegation (Document 0.D.C.24), are adopted.
This covers all the questions to be dealt with in the Sub-Committee?s first report.


NOTES ON THE WORK OF SUB-COMMITTEE B (TUESDAY, DECEMBER i6th, 1924),
PREPARED BY MR. SHEPHERD (AUSTRALIA).
The Persian delegate submitted a resolution (attached) and supported it by reading
the following clauses from the Persian memorandum (Document O.D.C. 24) : General policy,
Conditional assurances, Source of funds, Moratorium, Customs.
The Persian delegation wished it to be understood that the resolution was for conside-
ration by the full Conference and not by this Sub-Committee. He wished the memorandum
to be considered by the Committee, particularly those clauses referred to above.
Egypt considered should discuss memorandum first.
India considered it was a case for enquiry. With slight modification, was prepared to
support resolution for submission to the Conference. >
Turkey suggested agreement on the main points loans, moratorium, Customs.
Persia would accept the Turkish suggestion, viz., pronounced on the main points before
taking the draft resolution. Enquired whether the Committee accepted the proposal in
principle.
Chairman (Poland) considered Sub-Committee not qualified to pronounce on the proposals.
Could lay down general principles on certain points.
China did not think Sub-Committee could arrive at definite conclusions on some of the
points mentioned. Could give favourable consideration and recommendation to some of the
proposals.
Switzerland, Sub-Committee could say we have considered the Persian memorandum and
recommend it to the consideration of the Council, through the full Conference. Sub-Committee
was not able to deal with the provisions of the memorandum.
Australia submitted motion
?The Sub-Committee, having given consideration to the Persian memorandum
particularly those clauses relating to :
1. Loan of ten million Tomans for a period of twenty years (the details of
which are given under the heading ?Sources of the funds required?).
2. The granting of a moratorium by foreign Governments having claims on
Persia ;
3. The abolition of the restrictions to which Persia is subject at present in
respect of Customs tariffs,
Is in full sympathy with the Persian situation but is unable to arrive at any
definite conclusion on the proposals.
?It therefore recommends to the Conference the following resolution
Persian proposal for the Protocol.
The Conference further passed the following resolution
?The Conference has had presented for its consideration a very complete and valuable
memorandum prepared by the Government of Persia setting forth in a clear and
comprehensive manner the existing situation in Persia with regard to the production and
trade in opium, and the numerous measures agricultural, economic and financial which
must necessarily be carried out before any effective scheme for the reduction and control
of production can be introduced in that country.
?These measures require for their initiation the obtaining by the Persian Government
of financial assistance from the Powers which this Conference is not in a position to
secure.
?The Conference therefore recommends to the Council of the League of Nations
that a committee of experts, with the necessary qualifications, be sent under the
auspices of the League to make a full enquiry into the practicability of the proposed
measures and their suitability for the attainment of the end in view, namely, the effec-
tive control and limitation of the production of opium in Persia, in the hope that the
report of the said Committee may demonstrate that adequate guarantees as to the
probable success of the proposed measures are obtainable to justify the taking of the
measures proposed by the Government of Persia and the issue of a loan in the money
markets of the world for the purpose of providing the Government of Persia with the
financial assistance required.??
Persia could not accept the proposal. It had set out its conditions and could not agree
to anything else.
Australia, in view of the statement made by the Persian delegate, suggested that his motion
should read as follows :


??The Sub-Committee, having given consideration to the Persian memorandum,
particularly those clauses relating to :
?i. Loan of ten million Tomans for a period of twenty years (the details of
which are given under the heading ?Sources of the funds required?;
?2. The granting of a moratorium by foreign Governments having claims on
Persia ;
?3. The abolition of the restrictions to which Persia is subject at present in
respect of Customs tariffs,
?Is in full sympathy with the Persian situation, but, as the conditions laid down
as an essential preliminary to the co-operation of the Persian Government are outside
the scope of the Sub-Committee, it is unable to arrive at any definite conclusion on the
proposals.?
Phis'was supported by India.
China, however, submitted the following resolution, as the Chinese delegate considered
that the Australian proposal was excellent but did not give expression to what he desired.
?Sub-Committee B recommends to the Conference favourable consideration of the
request of the Persian delegation, as stated in its memorandum (Document 0.D.C.24),
for financial and other assistance and especially its desire for greater Customs autonomy,
in order that its Government may be enabled to take the necessary steps for the limitation
of the production of opium in Persia to amounts needed for medicinal and scientific
purposes within Persia or for export for such purposes.
?The Sub-Committee therefore further recommends that the Conference should
ask the League of Nations that, in view of the above, it should propose that a Committee
of Experts, with the necessary qualifications, be sent under the auspices of the League
to make full enquiry into the practicability of the proposed measures and their suitability
for the attainment of the end in view, namely, the effective control and limitation of
the production of opium in Persia, in the hope that the report of the said Committee
may demonstrate that adequate guarantees as to the probable success of the proposed
measures are obtainable to justify the taking of the measures proposed by the Govern-
ment of Persia and the issue of a loan in the money markets of the world for the purpose
of providing the Government of Persia with the financial assistance required.?
Persia thought to add expense should be defrayed by the League of Nations.
India, no instructions which would permit support of the Chinese motion. All anxious
to do something for Persia; could only agree in general way. Persian Government submitted
a proposal but did not desire us to support it; we can therefore only say we are unable to make
any practical suggestion.
As an agreement did not appear to be possible, the Chairman suggested that a small
Committee, consisting of the delegates of Australia, Switzerland, China, Persia and Poland,
should meet on the following morning at 10.15 a.m. to endeavour to arrive at a text which
would be acceptable to all parties.
Annex 4.
DRAFT REPORT OF THE SUB-SUB-COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,!
DECEMBER iith, 1924.
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
The Sub-Sub-Committee proceeded with the discussion of the proposal that had been
made by Mr. Clayton (India) on the previous day, namely :
?That Article 20-A (2) {a) (1) should read ?for domestic consumption?, and that
Article 20-A (2) {a) (2) should read ?for export?. The rest of the Article 20-A, paragraph
2, should be deleted.?
This proposal was adopted, with a reservation made by Mrs. Hamilton Wright (United
States of America) that it was contingent on the adoption of Article 1 of the American
proposals.


Draft Report of the Sub-Sub-Committee.
The Committee proceeded to a discussion on Article lof the American proposals. Each
delegation was asked to express its views on this article, the result being as follows ;
America accepted.
India could not accept.
Persia accepted with a general reservation already made by that delegation, namely, that
they could only accept on the conditions laid down in the Persian memorandum.
Turkey could not accept without further investigation by a Committee on the lines
suggested by the American delegation and in accordance with the principles set out in a memo-
randum prepared by the Turkish delegation.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes could only accept on the conditions as set
out in the memorandum submitted by that delegation.
Egypt could only accept with a general reservation that the conditions stipulated in their
memorandum were accepted, but were agreeable to a Committee of Investigation.
The result of this vote clearly demonstrated that no State, except America, could accept
unconditionally or without further investigation.
The American delegate then submitted a motion in the following terms :
?That a Committee of Enquiry be appointed to fully investigate every phase of
this question after an examination of the memoranda submitted by the various delegations
and visiting producing countries, and particularly on the following points :
1. .
2 . .
3. . . (To be set out by the American delegation).
4. . .
5- ? ??
This was on general lines and was subject to redrafting and elaboration.
Mr. Clayton (India) moved an amendment on this proposal in the following terms;
?That Sub-Sub-Committee B is of opinion that no modification of the existing
wording of Article 1 of the Hague Convention is possible until further information is
available as to the conditions prevailing in the producing countries.?
On this amendment being put to the vote, the result was as follows
India Yes.
Turkey Yes.
America No.
Persia Abstained
Egypt 
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes . 
The three abstentions, therefore, practically rendered this proposition abortive.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright then moved the following motion :
?In order that no confusion may exist, I move that Sub-Sub-Committee B repoit
to Sub-Committee B that the producing nations here represented are prepared to accept
in principle Article I of the suggestions of the United States, but owing to economic
considerations they are not prepared to accept Article I without reservations as to the
time when, and the conditions under which, they will be prepared to give Article i
complete and effective application in their territories.?
The result of the voting on this motion was as follows :
Persia accepted in principle, with the reservation as set out in their memorandum in
other words, certain economic conditions have to be complied with before putting Article
into operation.
India was not prepared to accept the article, in view of the interpretation placed by the
American delegation on the term ?strictly medical and scientific purposes .
The delegate of Turkey had definite instructions from his Government not to accept
Article I of the American proposal as printed, but, as the American delegation had approver
of the suggestions contained in the Turkish memorandum as to sending out a scicn 1 c
mission to producing countries, he would ask his Government for further instructions.
Egypt accepted the American proposals as printed.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes must ask his Government for instructions to
accept the proposal in principle, but he could give no definite acceptance of approval.


The result of this vote, therefore, was that the motion as submitted was not acceptable
to the Committee and that the delegates required further instructions, or it was acceptable
only on certain conditions.
Further consideration was then given to the question of the appointment of a Sub-Com-
mittee of Investigation. The Committee was unable to express a definite opinion on this
point until it knew exactly what the proposal of the American delegation was. The Ameri-
can delegate was therefore asked to submit a definite proposal to the next meeting of the
Sub-Committee setting out clearly the complete scheme for the investigation :
, The authority to appoint the Commission; of whom it should be composed; how
it should be financed ; time to be taken in its investigation, and the particular points
on which the investigation was to be made.
The remaining items on the agenda were the Australian and Cuban proposals.
. Australian proposal was the most definite and comprehensive,it was taken as the
basis for discussion. It recommends that the production of the growth of the raw materials
in all countries which did not at present produce poppy or coca leaf should be prohibited.
It was explained by the Vice-Chairman that Sub-Committee D had passed the following
resolution : b
The Committee realises that this proposition imposes a very heavy obligation
on non-producing countries, but as restriction of production is the only practical method
of combating the evil, agrees to the Australian proposal in principle but on the following
conditions : b
?i. That the producing countries agree to reduce their production;
u 2 ' . That , tlie interests of the consuming countries are fully protected in the matter
of their obtaining adequate supplies to meet their reasonable 'requirements for medical
and scientific purposes.?
After discussion, the voting on this proposal was as follows :
Egypt did not grow opium for export but only produced to partially meet home require-
a ? ept t0 redU ? produCtion - If th y ex P rted the y would agree to reduce
Persia could not discuss proposal before knowing what would happen to their proposals.
India was prepared to reduce for export in accordance with the wishes of importing
countries and that no opium should leave India for illicit traffic and none should be exported
except under certificate of responsible Governments.
Turkey could not give a decision until knew what happened to the American proposal.
i\ons^ m^d  m th& Serbs ? Croats an(i Slovenes would have to ask his Government for instruc-
United States could not accept proposal without consulting Government.
r^ 1 ! pr  duC ! ng co i unt n es present fully concurred in the Australian proposal that non-
pi oducmg countries should give up their right to production ; but, as will be seen from the
a ove result of the voting the producing countries were not prepared to accept the condition
laid down by Sub-Committee D - that they should reduce production - except wbhout
certain conditions being first fulfilled. p wunout
Persian Proposal.
to be T dmtr? S CtT P t Am PrOPOS^, WaS .P oStpon t d until after the rece! P t of the memorandum
Enquiry American delegation on the constitution of the proposed Committee of
Die position may therefore be briefly summarised as follows :
Article 20-A of the American proposal amended to read :
?(a) For all purposes
"i. For domestic consumption.
?2. For export.?
Article I of the American Proposals.
Not acceptable m its present form until further investigation had been made
CommionThLS atl i to submit a concrete proposition for the appointment of a
mmission of Investigation to visit producing countries.
Australian and Cuban proposals.
D noTaccintable Countri fi but conditions laid down by Sub-Committee
Government M Producing countries nor by America without further instructions from its


Annex 5
DRAFT REPORT OF THE MEETING OF SUB-COMMITTEE B, HELD ON DECEMBER
I2TH, 1924.
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia.)
Mrs. Hamilton Wright submitted the following proposal
?Having noted with interest the reports submitted by Persia, Turkey, the Kingdom,
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt, setting forth the economic and poli-
tical difficulties with which their Governments are confronted in their efforts to obtain
an effective control over the production of opium ; and
?Recognising that in some cases the situation as described may require international
co-operation ;
?Sub-Committee B recommends to the Conference that careful consideration be
given to the question of the appointment of a Commission to visit the countries mentioned
above for the purpose of making a careful study of all the problems connected with the
production of, traffic in, and use of opium in those countries, and especially with reference
to the possibility of substituting therefor the cultivation of other agricultural products,
the development of mineral resources, the improvement of transportation facilities, and
such other measures as may be deemed necessary to the end that the production of, and
traffic in, raw and prepared opium within the countries mentioned, and the exportation
of such products therefrom, shall be limited to strictly medicinal and scientific purposes.
?The Commission shall be appointed in a manner to be determined by the Confe-
rence, with the approval of the producing countries concerned, and it shall consider
carefully the reports which have been submitted to the Conference by the Governments
of Persia, Turkey, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt.
To the Conference shall also be referred the questions of the number and qualifications of
the members of the Commission and of the steps to be taken to obtain the funds
necessary to meet the expenses of the Commission for the purpose as described above.
?The Commission shall be instructed to make its report in a manner to be determined
by the Conference. The report, together with the recommendations of the Commission,
shall be communicated to the Powers signatory to the Convention. The signatory
Powers, especially the Governments of Persia, Turkey, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt, agree to give due consideration to the report and
recommendations of the Commission.?
On this being put to the Committee, the delegations made the following comments :
Persia accepted, subject to the confirmation of his Government and that it should be
under the League of Nations.
China reserved its remarks until after a careful examination of the document.
India accepted, subject to the same condition as the Persian delegate that it should be
under the League of Nations, as the Conference could not vote funds.
The Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes accepted, subject to the confirmation of
its Government, but drew attention to the statements made in its memorandum.
Turkey agreed with the remarks of the Persian delegate.
Greece agreed with the remarks of the Persian delegate.
It was therefore agreed that the proposal should be amended in such form as to provide
for the appointment of the Committee under the auspices oi the League of Nations.
The report of the Rapporteur (M. Dinichert) was next considered.
In view, however, of the fact that no English translation was available, it was not pos-
sible to arrive at any definite conclusion, and it was clearly understood that the acceptance
or otherwise of the text of the recommendations as set out by the Rapporteur were only
provisional and subject to a complete examination of the English text.
With this understanding, the Committee provisionally adopted the whole of the Rappor-
teur?s suggestions, with the exception of ?II a. Article 20-D, No. 3, of the American Proposals?
and ?VI. Article 7. XIII of the ?Measures? (Section II) and Article 20-L of the American Pro-
posals?. The last paragraph under ?II a. Article 20-D? was an alternative to other sugges-
tions, and under ?VI. Article 7. XIII? the question was raised as to whether the last sentence
of the American draft should not be included.
The Persian delegate desired that a record should be made of his acceptance of the text
by the Persian delegation, subject to the acceptance of the conditions set out in the Persian
memorandum.
[Signed) M. L. Shepherd.


THE POSITION OF INDIA AS REGARDS THE DOMESTIC PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION OF OPIUM AND THAT OF EXPORT.
Memorandum by the Indian Delegation submitted to Sub-Committee B.
Indian delegation associates itself wholeheartedly with the wish expressed by the
anTereed B that the deliberations of the Sob-Committee may enh in
consiTrCnUAt, F th ? S p , llrp  se '? has - dunn g the adjournment, given the most anxious
miHrr mo k 1 1 h x ereby the opposing views hitherto put forward in the Sub-Com-
mittee may be reconciled. Before putting forward its definite proposals to that end the dele-
gation desires to summarise the existing position in India under the two headings of domestic
production and consumption and that of export. g domestic
Indi^L r s o establkh^ eS i iC product / on and consumption of raw opium, the Government of
" -ia has established a system of complete monopoly, which assures to it absolute control
TndLnht P1 t Um f Prod T ed m Brltlsh India from the moment of production, and in the case of
an States from the moment it enters British India until it reaches the final consumer
Every stage is regulated by a most elaborate code of rules. No production beyond the needs
ocal consumption and export is permitted, and the average consumption per capita has
been reduced from 27 grains in 1893 to 17% grains, or 1.1 grammes in 1023-4 When the
necessary reduction has been made to allow for the 8 per cent morphine content in Indian
y? as compared with the 12 to 16 per cent morphine content of Persian, Turkish and East
uropean opium the average per capita consumption in India falls to 0.79 grammes If medical
to eveTlwo oTt e h oCk '  f wh V*. the " **? t0 the Gove?U?us, he had
consumption LI P pu h tlon - be fu f ther taken into account, the estimated annual
axu u Pt per capita oi the human population is approximately half a gramme onlv
l Ef TftET favaurabl y with the figures for most European countries! fnd hnot fT
countries i.o.Tme TTv ? Sub : Comm,tte e F for the annual consumption of European
i! a well-organised system of medical assistance. Further the Indian
J except in Burma, practically eliminated all contraband opium both from internal
may sXxL ? P  rt ' and ??  f ha,f a gramme therefore P covers all ?whch
the hhhmihliTufk'lhtlt lmder th<s Constit tition introduced in 1919, been transferred to
;; f g Councils of the various provinces, except in one instance, and further restric-
powers S thTTeuT f r matter f  r ?E se Councils to deal with and is no longer within the
.... a, .'"5,
to conhof f tlo f undertaken hy a signatory of the Hague Convention are twofold First
prevent its doSiTpTodXon eXrToXmm
fulfilled To T r T ed by ? her natl  nS - BoTh?h?? S s TnXX
thehfore Xv iTlTgs mahfaclheT'oSeTlh ls
coders that 2 S
that 'position?with ? Wy X the C ? Untri ? produdn g opium aad , in order
their production, compiled from such sourTT asTre ?


China : 12,000 tons. Reduction of 20 per cent on estimate by International Opium
Association, Peking, not accepted by Chinese delegation. No alternative estimate available.
India ; 820 tons. Official figures for 1923 lor British India domestic consumption
and all exports.
Persia : 870 tons. Figures in Persian Memorandum, page 7.
Turkey ; 500 tons. Estimate.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece, Egypt, Russia, Afghanistan,
etc., 1,200 tons. Estimate.
Making a total of 15,390 tons.
It appears to the Indian delegation that the position as regards the production of opium
would be effectively secured if all producing countries represented at the present Conference
were to bind themselves (1) to secure effective control of the domestic production and distri-
bution of raw opium and the suppression of abusive uses ; (2) to prevent any export (licit
or illicit) not specifically permitted by the provisions of the Convention to be drawn up by
the present Conference. The adhesion of the countries not here represented would require
to be obtained at a later date, as in the case of the Hague Convention of 1912.
The Indian delegation has drawn up three resolutions, which it presents to the Sub-
Committee for adoption. The first resolution is intended as a means of clearing up the mis-
understandings which have arisen in the past between India, the United States and other
countries, and to indicate the existence of a common basis for agreement.
The second resolution lays stress on an important principle which underlies the Hague
Convention and has always been respected by the League of Nations.
The third resolution, as to the second portion, indicates the effective provisions which
India desires to see entered in the new Convention, and, as to the first portion, manifests
India?s willingness that similar recognition should be given to the American principles in
this Conference to that extended to them by the Advisory Committee and the Assembly of
the League in 1923.
Sub-Committee B concurs in the opinion expressed by the Advisory Committee on Opium
and Drugs in Resolution I passed at its meeting of June sth, 1923, and subsequently adopted
by the Assembly of the League of Nations on September 27th, 1923, namely, that the two
principles submitted by the representatives of the United States, as set forth in the preamble
to the American redraft of the Hague Convention, embody the general principles by which
the Governments should be guided in dealing with the question of the abuse of dangerous drugs,
subject to the reservations made by certain nations. In expressing this concurrence, the
Sub-Committee does so on the understanding that the wording of the principles is to be
interpreted in its strict dictionary sense, medicinal purposes being taken as those which have
in view the cure or alleviation of disease.
At the same time, the Sub-Committee is unable to accept those principles as an inter-
pretation of Chapter I of the Hague Convention.
In that Chapter the obligations assumed by signatories to the Convention are clearly
and simply defined, and it appears that at the Conference of 1909-12 the internal regulation
of domestic consumption was expressly excluded from discussion.
In any case, the Sub-Committee considers that the best judges of the intention and scope
of this part of the Convention are those who framed it.
The Sub-Committee therefore accepts as the correct interpretation of Chapter I, and
particularly of Article 1 of the Hague Convention of 1912, that placed upon it by Mr. Hamilton
Wright in the report dated August 15th, 1912, signed by him on behalf of the American dele-
gates to the International Opium Conference 1909-12, the Right Rev. C. H. Brent, Mr. Hamil-
ton Wright and Mr. Henry J. Finger ; submitted to Mr. P. G. Knox, Secretary of State,
subsequently transmitted to Congress by the President, Mr. Taft, with a Presidential
message, and ordered to be printed as Document 733 of the Sixty-second Congress, Second
Session.
This interpretation, so far as regards Article 1, reads as follows :
?By Article 1 of the Convention, the Contracting Powers pledge themselves to enact
effective laws or regulations to control the production and distribution of raw opium,
unless their existing laws and regulations have already regulated the matter. That is,
by this article the interested Governments must effectually bring under some sort of
Government supervision, either by the monopoly system as practised in India or by
authorisation of persons, the production and distribution of raw opium.?
Sub-Committee B accepts the principle followed by the provisions of the Hague Conven-
tion and reaffirmed by the Consumers Sub-Committee D of this Conference, viz., that it should
be left to each contracting country to control its internal consumption.
The Sub-Committee holds that the acceptance of this principle involves, in the case of
opium-producing countries, that the control of the internal production and distribution should
be left to the discretion of their Governments on their undertaking to take effective measures


for the suppression of abuses and to prevent any export of opium, whether licit or illicit, not
specifically permitted by the provisions of the Convention to be drawn up by the present
Conference.
Holding the above views, Sub-Committee B recommends
{a) 1 hat in an appropriate clause of the new Convention, preferably in the Preamble,
the Contracting Powers should declare their adhesion to the American principles in the
manner set forth at the commencement of Resolution I above ; thus associating them-
selves with the opinions expressed by the Advisory Committee on Opium and Drugs and
the Assembly of the League in 1923 ;
(b) That the effective article of the new Convention dealing with the production
and distribution of raw opium should be as follows :
?The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations for the control
of the production and distribution of raw opium and the suppression of its abusive
use. In particular, they shall undertake effective measures to prevent any export
of raw opium, either licit or illicit, not specifically permitted by the provisions of
this Convention.?
Annex 7
MEMORANDUM ON PERSIAN OPIUM.
Submitted by the Persian Delegation
Obligations already Assumed.
Persia was one of the twelve nations represented at the original Opium Commission
which met at Shanghai in 1909, and was also represented at the First International Confer-
ence at The Hague in 1912 and signed the Convention, with the exception of Article 3 {a),
Chapter I, and of the Chapter referring to China. Article 3 ( a ) provides that the contracting
Powers shall ?prevent the export of raw opium to countries which shall have prohibited its
entry?.
The reservation concerning the Chapter dealing with China was based on the fact that at
that time there were no treaty relations between the two countries.
At the meeting of the Assembly of the League of Nations in September 1923, Prince Arfa-
ed-Dovleh declared that he had been instructed to state that ?Persia is willing to undertake
such investigation as the acceptance of the American principles would entail? and was also
ready to withdraw its reservation in regard to Article 3 of the Treaty of 1912 as soon as the
Persian Government was in possession of a satisfactory constructive scheme providing
for the substitution of other crops for opium, if it could be allowed a certain period of time
in which to put the scheme in practice.
The ?American principles? to which the Persian delegates had reference were proposed
by the American representative at the May 1923 meeting of the Opium Advisory Commission
in Geneva and confirmed in House Joint Resolution 162, First Session, 68th Congress of the
United States.
These principles are briefly as follows :
(a) The use of opium products for other than medical and scientific purposes is
abuse and not legitimate.
{b) In order to prevent abuse, it is necessary to control the production of raw opium
in such a manner that there will be no surplus available for non-medicinal and non-scien-
tific purposes.
Additional Obligations Proposed for Persian Acceptance.
The proposals listed below have already been made to the Persian Government :
{a) Withdrawal of reservation to Article 3 {a), Treaty of 1912, as, without the cessa-
tion of both direct and indirect shipments of opium to countries which have prohibited
its entry, the efforts of the nations of the world to suppress the trade in dangerous drugs
must largely remain futile.
{b) Acceptance of the system of import certificates devised by the Opium Advisory
Committee and unanimously approved by the Council and Assembly of the League of
Nations. This system requires the procurement by intending importers of dangerous
drugs of a certificate from the Government of the importing country to the effect that


the importation is for legitimate purposes and, in the case of drugs covered by Article 3
of the Convention, an additional certification that they are solely for medicinal and
scientific purposes.
(c) Reduction in production of opium to the quantity required for medicinal and
scientific purposes to conform to the principles proposed by the American delegates to the
May 1923 Conference at Geneva.
Measures taken to Execute existing Laws and Obligations.
The Persian Parliament, realising the danger of the constantly increasing use of opium
within the Empire, enacted a Law dated 12th. Rabi-01-Avval A.H., 1329, solar year 1298,
A.D. 1910, which provided for the following :
1. Government monopoly of shireh of soukhteh dross and its manufacture and
sale.
2. Tax increase of three shahis per miscal per annum on shireh of soukhteh and
stick opium.
3. Prohibition of use of shireh of soukhteh and destruction of all Soukhteh pro-
duced after seventh year.
4. Prohibition of use of opium for other than medicinal purposes after the seventh
year (for text of this law, see Appendix II).
Regulations were drafted for the execution of this law which made the monopoly of
soukhteh effective and provided for the centralisation of the opium sap and its manipulation
in Government warehouses, in order to permit control over the local consumption of opium.
Practically all shireh dens have been placed under direct Government supervision.
Shireh, which is manufactured from the residue of soukhteh remaining in the pipes after
opium has been smoked, is the most dangerous opium derivative now used in Persia. It has
been made a Government monopoly and is under strict control. It has not, however, been
possible to collect the entire quantity of soukhteh, as the commission of three shahis per
miscal provided in the original law for its collection was too low and was further reduced to
one shahi per miscal in A. H., 1333, solar year 1293, A.D. 1914, by an amendment to the
original law. This rendered smuggling profitable. Authority was later secured for an increase
of two shahis per miscal, and a study is now being made with a view to determine whether
further increase is necessary.
The increase in the tax on shireh of soukhteh and on opium was made effective as pro-
vided in the law until 1916, rising in that period from 12 shahis per miscal for shireh in 1910
to 27 shahis per miscal in 1916 and from six shahis per miscal for stick opium in 1910 to 21
shahis in 1916.
The resulting disorder in the country during the World War, when Persia was invaded
and made the battle ground of Russian, British and Turkish troops, weakened the power
of the central Government and rendered impossible the enforcement of the opium regula-
tions.
In few places was the Government sufficiently strong to centralise the opium sap in
the Government warehouses, which, next to reduction in production, is the first essential in
any plan to control either the local consumption or the export trade.
In Isfahan, an attempt to centralise the opium sap resulted in the burning of the opium
office by the populace. Ten or twelve opium officials were killed or seriously wounded in the
various provinces in an attempt to enforce the regulations.
Thus, when Seyd Zia-ed-Din became Prime Minister in 1921, it might be said that, with
the best of intentions, the actual results in curtailing production, reducing consumption, or
controlling the export traffic, had been negative.
At this time the tax on opium was advanced from 21 to 31 shahis per miscal, but, owing to
the distrubed conditions in the country, a loss rather than a gain in revenue resulted, and it
was again reduced to 21 shahis the following year.
When Sarder Sepah, the present Prime Minister and Minister of War, took over the
collection of the Indirect Taxes, 1922, to guarantee the payment of the Army budget, distinct
progress was made in the centralisation of opium.
Fairly complete centralisation of the opium sap was effected in the provinces of Teheran,
Kermanshah, Shahround, Korman, Hamadan, Teyserkan, and Yezs, and partial centralisa-
tion in Khorassan. An effort was made to put the centralisation programme into effect
in Isfahan, but was abandoned owing to the popular agitation against the measure.
When the American Financial Mission took over the collection of Indirect Taxes, in
December 1922, every effort was bent to complete the centralisation programme. Credits
double those previously granted were given and a closer control effected in the provinces in
which the principle had already been applied.
Attempts to effect centralisation in Isfahan resulted in serious disturbances. A general
strike broke out in the city which tied up practically all commercial activities for a month.
More than 7,000 peasants from villages all over the province came to the city and took ?bast?
or refuge in the Telegraph compound, as a protest against the execution of the regulations.
Through the active support of the Council of Ministers, the Minister of War and of the
local Governor-General and Army Commander, the regulations were finally put into


Land taxes
Other internal taxes
1,350,000 
Customs
Total
effect, though not until after martial law had been declared and several peasants had been
killed in an attempt to return to the town and sack the warehouses and Government offices.
In 1924 the gains made in 1923 were consolidated. All opium in the province of Isfahan
was centralised, including the peasants? share, which, as a necessary concession, had been left
free in 1923. In this year also the centralisation scheme was put into effect in Shiraz on the
same basis as was done in Isfahan in 1923. The centralisation was also extended with
considerable success to Borujerd.
A fairly efficient inspection system has, within the last two years, been established in all
provinces and is being constantly improved.
There is still much opium smuggled out of the country, particularly from Khorassan, and
also considerable smuggling for local consumption, but this, especially the latter, has been
reduced maderially.
The transportation of opium sap, sticks, and cakes has been brought under control and
is conducted under a closely supervised permit system which checks the opium from point
of production to destination.
A Civil Service Law has been -enacted and placed in effect, which provides that opium
users who do not abandon the habit within a fixed period are discharged from the Government
Service.
The use of morphine for other than medicinal purposes has been prohibited and the pro-
hibition rendered effective by a strict control at the frontiers and throughout the Empire. Large
quantities of morphine and morphine syringes have been confiscated.
When the suggested restrictions on opium shipments in British bottoms first became
known, tentative proposals were submitted foi the establishment of a factory for the conver-
sion of opium into morphine and other opium derivatives. The establishment of such a
factory would have rendered the opium products so easily transportable that the harmful
effect of the shipping restrictions would be greatly minimised. The proposal was, however,
not entertained, as the shipment of opium from Persia in the form of morphine or other deri-
vatives would have been infinitely more dangerous and a greater menace to drug control
than is the case with shipments of cake opium.
Ihe manipulation of opium for local consumption and for export has been brought under
practically complete control in all the large towns and is conducted either in the Government
warehouses, or in the factories of the merchants under Government supervision.
Difficulties in Way of More Complete Acceptance at this Time.
As will have been noted in the remarks relative to progress made in the centralisation,
the greatest difficulty is experienced in any effort to bring the Persian opium trade under
control. This is due to several factors, the most important of which are its economic importance,
the vested interests in the trade and the popular and political opposition to any attempt
either to curtail a fruitful source of profit, or to interfere with the liberty of the individual
even in the use of a dangerous drug.
Ihe economic importance of the opium traffic to Persia cannot well be over-estimated.
A description of methods of cultivation and trade channels with estimate of total production
is given in Appendix 111, and available statistics as to import and export are given in Appendix
X V.
The following will, however, give a general idea of the situation in this respect:
Persia has an area of approximately 682,000 square miles and a population estimated
at twelve millions.
Opium cultivation is scattered in 18 out of 26 provinces, or over an area of approximately
400.000 square miles. " J
I'he total production of opium sap in Persia is approximately 300,000 batmans, or
1.950.000 lbs.; two-thirds of this quantity enters the Government warehouses and is thereby
brought under control,
The opium production of Persia should, under normal conditions, yield to the proprietors
and peasants an average of 35 tomans per batman of sap, or a total of 10,500,000 tomans
The opium crop is usually divided on the basis of two-thirds to the peasant and one-third
to the proprietor. The propiietor?s share would therefore be 3,500,000 tomans and the
Government?s tithe thereof 350,000 tomans per annum, or one-tenth of the proprietor?s
share. The exact amount received from this source cannot at present be accurately deter-
mined, and the land tax on opium is merged with the general land taxes. The revenues esti-
mated may, however, be accepted as approximately correct.
Other internal revenues collected under various headings amount to 1 450 000 tomans
and export charges to 247,000 tomans. The total opium revenues are therefore approximately
(For detail of taxes on opium, see Appendix IV).
The total revenues of Persia are approximately 23,000,000 tomans per annum The
opium revenues therefore comprise 8.9 per cent of the total.


The principal export of Persia, which is oil, does not affect the trade balance, except in
so far as funds are imported to cover payment or royalties to the Government and of wages
to employees.
In Tangoux-il, 1302 (1923-24), the total exports of Persia amounted to 38,400,000 tomans,
exclusive of oil, and the opium export through the Customs houses to 6,021,971 tomans, or
15.6 per cent of the total export trade of Persia exclusive of oil.
The export figures are based on exporters? declarations, which are low, owing to the natural
desire to conceal profits from the producers.
The average value of the Persian opium exports as indicated by exporters? declarations
was 402 krans per batman of 6V Z pounds in 1301, and 566 krans in 1302 (1923-24). These
declarations are much below the actual value of the exports. Making due allowance for
under-valuation and for the export of contraband opium, the opium exports may safely
be calculated at from 20 to 25 per cent of the total export of Persia, exclusive of oil, instead
of 15.6 per cent as indicated by Customs declarations.
It must be understood that it is absolutely impossible to furnish accurate statistics of the
Persian opium trade owing to the wide area over which the poppy is grown, the extensive
traffic in contraband opium and the secrecy observed by the merchants as to processes of
manipulation.
The foregoing estimates have, however, been made after a most careful analysis of all
available data and reports, and are probably nearly correct.
The data presented above gives, however, but a faint idea as to the importance of the
economic aspects of the Persian opium problem.
In many provinces opium is practically the only crop which yields cash returns in any
way commensurate with the labour of cultivation. An immense number of people are par-
tially or wholly dependent on its cultivation or commerce for their livelihood.
In Isfahan, out of a population of approximately 80,000, there were found to be at least
5,000 who gained all or a large part of their income through the commerce in opium. These
included opium pedlars, brokers, bazaar traders, and manipulators of stick
and cake opium. If we assume an average of three dependents, which is low, it will be seen that
at least 25 per cent of the entire population of the city is dependent to a considerable extent
on the opium trade. These figures do not include the opium cultivators resident in or near
the city.
The same is true, in general, though to a lesser degree, ofall the great opium centres
of Persia. ,
There is no industry in the country to absorb these workers in the event of suppression
or serious curtailment of the opium trade, nor can the proprietors or peasants at the present
time substitute other crops for opium without serious hardship and loss.
Even if the technicians and the capital required to enable the substitution of other crops
were furnished, as they should be, by those to whose interest it is to curtail the production
of opium in Persia, it would take the cultivators years to secure enough income from other
crops to compensate the losses involved in opium suppression.
As stated above, the opium taxes amount to approximately 8.9 per cent of the total
revenues of the country and the opium exports to a recorded total of 15.6 per cent and a
probable actual total of 20 per cent of the total exports of Persia exclusive of oil.
In view of the existing adverse trade balance as indicated in Appendix IV, a further
decrease in exports necessitated by reduction in the cultivation of opium will be very serious.
Neither can the loss of nearly 9 per cent of the revenues of a country, or even of any considerable
part thereof, be lightly regarded, nor can the shifting of that percentage of the total tax
burden from one product or activity to another be lightly undertaken.
Substitute crops would not for several years produce sufficient net income to warrant
taxation and the loss in revenue would be for some time in almost direct ratio to the reduction
in opium cultivation.
Eventually the probable increase in the price of opium should warrant reassessment
of taxes on opium-growing lands and recovery of at least part of the loss. The substitute
crops would also in time replace another part, but to produce anything like the same revenue
from land taxes that is now secured from direct and indirect taxes on opium, a much larger
area would have to be brought under cultivation than at present, as no othci Persian crop
yields such cash returns. .
As indicated above, the loss of revenue at first would be in almost direct ratio to the
decrease in the cultivation of opium. The reverse would, however, not be true in the case of
increases in production due to the introduction of new ciops. Export taxes would certainly
at first have to be nominal or entirely remitted. Furthermore, with the existing tax system
and legislative machinery, tax collection will always lag from one to three years behind increases
in production. This is due to the necessity of revising and reassessing the entire production
of a property before tax increase can be ordered.
Part, ah least, of the loss in revenue could be made up by tariff adjustments in the
interest of Persia. ? This is, however, difficult, as Persia?s two powerful neighbours claim rights
in this connection, which have heretofore had the practical effect of depriving Persia of tariff
autonomy and of rendering it impossible to devise and enforce a tariff which would protect
either the revenues or the commerce of the country. (A brief resume of the tariff history of
Persia, with abstracts from treaties pertaining thereto, is given in Appendix VI).
Political Obstacles to Opium Control.
We come now to the political and other internal difficulties which beset the Government
in any attempt to control the opium traffic. The opium merchants and growers are probably


the wealthiest class in Persia. The latter include many of the most influential clergy of the
country, who own or control a considerable portion of the ceded public domains and public
endowments or bequests of privately owned lands for charitable or religious purposes.
A.ny attempt to interfere with the production, manipulation, or export of opium arouses
the organised opposition of these classes, partly because of their private interests involved,
but largely also because of their knowledge of the widespread suffering and even ruin that
must ensue if the capital and labour engaged in the opium trade are left without occupation.
Unless equally remunerative outlets are provided for the capital and labour of the opium
trade, the Government will have to face the opposition, in any programme of restriction, of
the merchants and traders who exercise, through the Chamber of Commerce, great influence
in all the bazaars of the country, of the clergy of the opium-growing provinces, who have a
political and religious power difficult of comprehension to the modern Occidental mind, and
of the landowners, who absolutely control in such matters the action of the peasants, and who,
futhermore, in a parliament composed mainly of landed proprietors, or their avowed represen-
tatives, frequently exercise a decisive power in legislation.
There is, also, the almost universal lack of capacity to understand more than the most
primary economic phases of the questions and, in the case of the agricultural population,
opposition born of ignorance and of the inherent dread of any change in their established
customs and routine.
Promises of assistance after suppression or partial suppression will be of no effect ; the
Persian has been ruthlessly exploited in the past and has bitter reason to distrust not only
the proposals of his own Government, but those of foreign nationals or foreign Governments
heretofore interested in Persian affairs.
Still another consideration enters here. The opium - growing areas are for the most
part in provinces only now, for perhaps the first time in the last century, being brought
under the control of the Central Government.
Sardar Sepah, the Prime Minister and Minister of War, is steadily gaining ground in
his programme for the pacification of the country and the disarmament of the tribes. It
will, however, take years for this programme to be made fully effective and, until the time
comes, some of the most important opium - growing areas, including those of Arab tribes
of Pars, the Lors of Borujerd, and the tribes of Khorassan cannot be effectively controlled.
Danger of Arbitrary Restrictions.
Any pressure brought to bear upon Persia has, of course, for its object proper international
control over the transportation of dangerous drugs and not the infliction of unnecessary
hardships upon the Persian Government and people.
Unless such restrictive measures as may be proposed or adopted are carefu ly planned
and executed in a spirit of fairness and justice, they are likely to defeat their own ends.
It will have been noted earlier in this report that the mere mention of the possibility
of restrictions on the shipment of Persian opium in British bottoms brought forth an immediate
suggestion for the establishment of a morphine factory in Persia. While the proposal was
at once rejected, it must be considered as significant of the temper of the opium traders.
Another matter which must be regarded as significant is the sudden increase in decla-
rations for export of opium to Russia.
In 1296 (1917-18), when the Russian supply of drugs from Europe must have been largely
curtailed, and, when, owing to war conditions, the normal trade channels of Persian opium were
interrupted, the exports of opium to Russia reached a total of 38,844 batmans. The next
year, following the armistice, the exports dropped to 6,557 batmans.
The reduction continued during each of the following three years until, in 1300 (1921-22),
the exports amounted to only 3,814 batmans.
In 1301, however, the export to Russia was seven times that of the previous year, reaching
a total of 22,048 batmans, and in 1302 (1923-1924) there was another tremendous increase to
69,427 batmans, three times the export of the previous year, and nearly twice the volume of
export to Russia under war conditions.
This large increase is certainly not destined for Russia proper, as the exports over the
northern frontiers show a decline as indicated by the analysis of exports to Russia given in
Appendix 11.
The entire increase is through the Persian Gulf port of Bushire. Whether or not this
increase in the export to Russia from 9 per cent of the total opium export in 1300 (1921-22)
to 65 per cent in 1302 (1923-24) represents actual shipment to Russian territory or whether
the opium never reaches its declared destination, it is clear that either a new market or a
new trade route has been developed, and that restrictions on the shipment of Persian opium
can only result in diverting the traffic and, by so doing, creating virtual monopolies, which
will cause heavy losses to Persia in the selling-price of opium, without in any way reducing
the total quantity exported or increasing the international control over the traffic.
Possible Extension of Control.
1 here are many in Persia in the Government, the Parliament, among the clerev
and the professional, commercial, and other literate classes who realise better than anv
foreigner the vital importance to the moral and economic welfare of the Persian people of
suppressing the victims? degrading and debilitating practices of smoking and eating opium.


Many of these though, of course, a such smaller number, also realise the justified
moral obloquy and possibly disastrous economic effects to Persia if the export trade is not
brought under control to an extent that will be reasonably satisfactory to the Governments
concerned in the suppression of the illicit trade in dangerous drugs.
These will welcome any measures leading to the substitution of other crops or other
industries?for opium. ,
Certain measures leading to the extension of Governmental control o\ci tnc opium
traffic can be taken at once and others after means have been found to afford another outlet
for the capital and labour employed in the opium trade and new revenue sources have been
developed to compensate the Government for the less in opium revenues.
The measures which can be taken unconditionally are those concerning a closer control
over opium cultivation, transport, manipulation, local consumption and export without the
imposition of undue hardships on the Government or the private interests in the trade.
They include (i) completion of centralisation of opium sap ; (2) prohibition of increased
production ; (3) prohibition of cultivation except by permit (no permit to be issued to new
cultivators or for lands not cultivated, or for an area greater than cultivated in 1924) ; 4
completion of control over manipulation of opium for local consumption or export (5)
completion of control over transport; (6) registration of smokers (considerable unofficial
progress has already been made in this respect) ; (7) issuance of cards to smokers, authorising
them to purchase a limited quantity of opium for their personal use (these allowances to be
reduced from year to year) ; (8) extension of control over opium and shireh dens , (9) a
gressive increase in tax levied on opium for local consumption as provided in law ; (10) prohi-
bition of importation of opium from Afghanistan and British India into Persia (large quantities
of such opium have heretofore entered the country to be shipped to countries to which it
could not be shipped direct from the country of origin 386 cases (approximately 62,725 lbs.)
of opium from India sent to Bushire for transhipment have been provisionally held up pending
decision on this proposal) ; (11) extension of inspection system in interior of the country to
prevent illicit cultivation, transport, and export of opium to the limit of available budgetary
credits ? (12) extension of system of frontier patrols to prevent contraband opium entering
or leaving Persia, within limits of available credits ; (13) preparation of statistics of known
and estimated consumption in the Empire, estimates of quantity smuggled out of the country
(stating routes employed), and quantities exported through the Customs ; (14) continuation
of present policy of encouraging and assisting in substitution of other crops for opium wit
proportional reduction in opium cultivation as results are obtained ; (15) adoption ot policy
to centralise opium cultivation as far as possible in provinces most dependent on opium tor
cash crops, and where the best grades are produced and the cultivation can be most easily
understood that the foregoing measures, while they will show marked bene-
ficial results in bringing the opium traffic under control, cannot be expected materially to
reduce the total cultivation of opium for some time to come. , .
The amount of capital invested in the cultivation and commerce in opium and the number
of people dependent thereon for support is so great that a carefully worked-out plan o crop
substitution, a large capital investment, and the provision of adequate technical advice
and direction is necessary before any serious progress can be made.
On the other hand, if the foregoing are provided, it is a practical certainly that the pro-
duction of opium in Persia can be reduced to medicinal and scientific requirements within an
approximate period of ten years.
On the conditions stated above, the following assurances can be given .
(1) That the cultivation will be reduced annually by approximately one tenth
of the total cultivation of the year in which the conditions are met until the point is
reached at which the production suffices only for medicinal and scientific requirements ;
(2) That cultivation of opium will be prohibited in the provinces least dependent
thereon for their cash crops within a period of three years in so far as the then existing
conditions permit ;
(3) That when cultivation has been reduced to the medicinal and scientific requi-
rements, the system of ?import certificates? will be accepted without reservation.
Crop Substitution.
In considering the substitution of other crops for opium, it must be borne in mind that
opium yields a very high return for a given area, that it is not dependent upon railroads 01
even good roads for its transportation, that the process of marketing is simple, and that t ere
is practically always a demand at a good price for both the opium sap and foi the export
In addition to yielding a higher return per acre than any other Persian crop, opium requires
little water and that, at a time during the 60 days after Nowrouz (March 21st), when water
is both plentiful and cheap. Other crops can also be planted on the same ground after the
opium crop has been gathered. . f ...
Therefore, to enable a cultivator to secure the same net income from other crops, it is
necessary that he cultivate a great area and use more water. It is also necessary that a market
be provided for the substitute crops.


he opium-growing areas are for the most part in provinces where there are practically
o b ooc ioacs and where transportation is almost entirely by camel or donkey caravans,
ine cost ot transport by such means prohibits at present the export of any item which is
u yor weighty in proportion to its value. The wheat for instance, of such regions costs
more delivered at a Persian port than it would bring in foreign markets.
To enable crop substitution, it is therefore necessary that additional water be provided
at lower cost, that economical means of transport be provided, and that such technical
assistance be given as will enable much more intensive cultivation than is possible with the
existing agricultural methods and implements.
The opium substitutes which may be considered are wheat, silk, tobacco, cotton, beetroot
tea hemp, flax and dried fruits. The foregoing substitutes naturally do not apply solely
to the opnum-growmg areas. 1 hese areas must be given the first consideration to take care
o e private interests in the opium trade, but substitute crops and extension of cultivation
in such areas cannot yield revenues to the Government to compensate those which will be
lost through reduction in opium production. It is therefore necessary that agricultural
conditions be improved in non-opium-growing areas also in order to provide new or additional
revenue sources.
The following observations apply to the substitutes above-mentioned :
Wheat.
Further planting of wheat or other cereals is impracticable without improved means of
communication, as transport conditions and costs are such that wheat may rot in the fields
or the storehouses of one province while boo miles distant people suffer and even die for lack
of bread. There is a market in India and a temporary market in Russia for the wheat of
Khomassan and Seistan, a temporary market in Russia for the wheat of Azerbaidian and
of the Provinces bordering on the Caspian, and the world markets are open to wheat which
can reach the Persian Gulf ; yet, except in time of world shortage, export will be impossible
until suitable roads or railroads are built. 5 1 uupossioie
Silk.
The silk industry, which appears to offer the greatest possibilities as an opium substitute
demands capital, technicians, and, above all, time. At least six to ten years, depending on
on a reaHy' profitabTf baTs ? mulberr y from seed and mOTe to put the industry
Tobacco.
Tobacco can be grown well in Persia, but the market for the tobacco now grown is limited.
Experts must be employed suitable varieties developed, the peasants trained, and marketing
arrangements perfected. Again time and capital are required.
Cotton.
Cotton can be grown to advantage over great areas in Persia, but export advice seed
and capital for irrigation and transport are lacking.
Tea.
Tea-growing is in an experimental, but promising, stage.
Hemp and flax.
Hemp and flax should do well in Persia, but will require time for experimentation
Sugar.
Beetroot has been successfully grown. Sugar-cane can probably be grown profitably
ong the Persian Gulf and Caspian littorals. With proper direction and adequate
for ar COnsumed m Persla can be manufactured in the country with a surplus available
Dried fruits.
growing areas* tS ? 11 ? ? ime ? be re - established as an export, but mainly from non-opium
Beef export.
Raising beef cattle for export is a possible experiment with fair hopes of success Beef
befTratpr m , Persia and no attention ha * heretofore been paid to
0fl^l:-stSwdlt^S and the eStablishment of breeding-farms and importation
Wool and lambskins.
, There 15 an . excellent market for wool and lambskins. The methods employed are
low ever, so unscientific and wasteful that it has been found necessary to prohibit the export


of the latter. With proper direction, importation of blooded stock and strict control, a paying
industry can be developed without dangerous flock depletion.
Mineral resources.
In addition to agricultural development, there is a strong probability that a survey of
the mineral resources of the country would develop the possibility of new and important
sources of revenue. To mention only a few coal, iron, copper, alum, opriment, red oxide,
lead, zinc, salt, and precious stones such as turquoise are known to exist in considerable quan-
tities. Gold has been found, but no information is at hand as to whether its exploitation is
commercially practicable. ?
Persian Policy on Opium Restriction.
In view of the foregoing statement as to the actual conditions in Persia and the measures
necessafy to establish a strict control over the opium traffic and permit the eventual reduction
of cultivation to medicinal and scientific requirements, the following instructions to the
Persian Delegates to the Geneva Conference are submitted for consideration. These instruc-
tions are under two heads : (i) general policy with statement of what unconditional and
conditional assurances can be given ; ? (2) statement of measures necessary to enable cur-
tailment of opium production.
General Policy
The Persian Government is in full accord and sympathy with the efforts of the League
of Nations to eradicate the illicit trade in dangerous drugs, which offers so great a menace
to the health and welfare of the peoples of the world, it accepts the American principles
for the interpretation of the Opium Convention and will withdraw its reservation to Article
3 of the Treaty of 1912 and accept the system of opium import certificates as soon as it is
economically possible to do so.
Unconditional Assurances.
1. The regulations relative to the centralisation of the opium sap and its manipulation
under the Government?s supervision will be strictly enforced and constantly rendered more
effective.
2. Steps will be taken to register smokers, to cure present and to prevent new addicts,
to control opium dens, and otherwise to bring under control and to reduce the present con-
sumption of opium and its derivatives in the Empire.
3. Control, as far as funds permit, will be exercised at the frontiers to prevent opium
being smuggled into or out of the country.
4. The policy as to opium cultivation will be as follows ;
{a) Opium cultivation will hereafter be permitted only upon permit ;
( b ) No cultivation will be permitted on a greater area than stated in the permit ;
(c) No permit to be issued to cultivators for land not cultivated in 1924, or for a
greater area in the case of any individual than cultivated in 1924 ;
(d) No permits to be issued except to cultivators who agree to deliver entire crop
to Government warehouses ;
(e) Efforts to be made to immediately reduce the cultivation in provinces least
dependent on opium for their cash crops.
(/) Cultivation to be confined as far as practicable to provinces where the best
grades are grown and where the product can be most easily controlled ;
( g ) The tax on the local consumption of opium to be progressively increased as
provided in the law.
5. The importation of opium for re-export to countries to which it cannot be shipped
from country of origin, will be prohibited.
6. Beginning with the present year, a careful record will be kept of opium cultivation
in all provinces. This, taken in connection with records and estimates of local consumption
and customs records of exports, will afford a fair basis for estimate of that smuggled out of
the Country and enable the necessary preventive measures being taken.
7. As far as funds permit, the Government will continue its present encouragement
to the cultivation of cotton and tobacco and to the planting of mulberry trees. As these
and similar measures produce results, the cultivation of opium will be proportionally reduced,
but it must be understood that, with the limited funds available, this will be a slow process.


Conditional Assurances.
The following measures will be placed in effect as soon as the necessary funds and tech-
nical assistants are obtained to afford another outlet for the capital and labour employed
in the opium trade, and to provide new revenue sources for the Government to compensate
for the loss of opium revenues :
i ? An annual reduction in the permits issued to the amount of one-tenth of the total
area authorised for cultivation in the year in which the above conditions are met. This
annual reduction to continue, until production has been reduced to actual requirements for
medicinal and scientific purposes.
2. Within three years after the above conditions are met, the cultivation of opium will
be prohibited in the provinces least dependent upon it in so far as the then existing condi-
tions permit.
3 ? After the cultivation has been reduced as above provided to the amount required
for medicinal and scientific purposes the Persian Government can successfully enforce the
provisions of Article 3 of the Opium Convention of 1912 and its reservation thereto will then
be withdrawn and the system of opium import certificates placed in effect.
Measures necessary to enable Curtailment of Opium Production.
It is not possible with the data available to lay down any definite programme and cost
estimate covering the measures necessary to enable curtailment of opium cultivation. The
following, however, may be considered in this connection :
1. Preliminary survey by experts in wheat, cotton, silk, tea,
tobacco, hemp, flax, beetroot, and sheep- and cattle-raising accompanied
by irrigation engineers and transportation and foreign trade experts.
Estimated cost.
(Appendix 111-A) 100,000 tomans
2. Preliminary survey of mineral resources.
(Appendix 111-B) 100,000 
Transportation.
3 ? Road between Isfahan, Shiraz and Bushire. Possibly road be-
tween Kerman and Dozdab and Kerman and Bandar Abass. Road or
light railroad between Khorassan, Seistan, and Dezdab. (Appendix
3,000,000 
4. Irrigation (For list or project under consideration, see Appen-
dix 111-D) 1,000,000 
5 . Crop substitution and improvement of agriculture. (Appendix
111-E) 800,000 
6. Reproductive Public Works. (For list of projects under con-
sideration, see Appendix 111-F.) 725,000 
7. Improvement of Public Domains. (For list of projects under
consideration, see Appendix 111-G) 525,000 
8. Loans to proprietors to repair, rebuild or extend villages, to
purchase agricultural machinery and seed and to make necessary
advances to peasants. (Appendix 111-A) 2,000,000 
9. Employment of technicians, establishment of model farms
and agricultural experiment stations, five years? period. (Appen-
dix HI-1) ........ 1,250,000 
10. Prevention of smuggling 100,000 tomans per annum
for additional patrols and inspectors for five years. (Appendix 111-J). 500,000 
Total 10,000,000 tomans
Source of Funds.
Persia is not in a position to provide for any such expenditures at the present time. The
revenues now barely sufficiently meet the current expenses and many important and
necessary projects cannot be now undertaken for lack of funds. Any additional revenues
which it may be possible to secure through the proposed tax projects must be devoted to
reproductive public works in addition to those rendered necessary by the curtailment of the
opium crop.
With the existing revenue shortage and the prospective diminution of receipts, due to
the loss of opium taxes, it would be difficult to meet the service of a loan to enable the sub-
stitution of other crops, until such time as the new crops and the revenue-producing public
works are established and on a paying basis. Ihis will take at least five years.
202


Therefore, to enable active work to be undertaken and prompt results secured in the
reduction of opium cultivation to that required for medicinal and scientific uses, the follow-
ing will be required :
1. A loan of ten million tomans for twenty years not to exceed 5 per cent per annum.
2. No interest charges for the first five years.
3. One-tenth of the loan to be repaid annually after the tenth year.
This would cost the concerned Governments approximately 500,000 tomans per annum
for the first five years, but they would thereby secure,'within a period of ten years, practically
the entire suppression of the Persian production of opium not required for legitimate purposes.
It will cost Persia infinitely more in loss of revenue during the period of transition.
Moratorium.
In addition to the foregoing, it is of the utmost importance that, during the period of
transition, a moratorium be granted by foreign Governments having claims against Persia.
Were existing claims funded and paid, an additional burden of from one to two million
tomans per annum would be placed on the country, which would render impracticable any
measure involving losses of existing revenues.
Customs.
Another matter demanding the most serious consideration in this connection is the
removal of restrictions on Persia's liberty of action in tariff questions and the securing of the
assistance of the interested Governments in increasing the Customs revenues.
*
* *
In the consideration of the above report and recommendations, it should be borne in
mind that Persia, though a neutral, was one of the countries suffering most severely from the
war. The existing revenue and adverse trade problems the country has now to face arise,
at least in part, from the devastation during the war. No reparations have been paid to
Persia, nor has Persia, during the post-war period, floated any loan for reconstruction.
Under the present depressed conditions, with the country hovering on the verge of
bankruptcy, it would be fatal to complicate matters by such a serious economic disturbance
as would be caused by the suppression of the opium industry, unless, prior to taking the initial
steps, a carefully worked-out and practicable programme of substitution was at hand, with
the requisite technical assistance and the capital required for its execution.
It should also be borne in mind that, while any non-medicinal use of opium is harmful,
and the Persian Government, realising its dangers, is determined to suppress its use within
the Empire, yet the form in which it is used in Persia is the least harmful of any, and that
there is consequently no drug problem here to be compared to those of the great industrial
nations with congested urban populations.
To the League of Nations as an institution and to its non-opium-growing member Govern-
ments, the question of opium is merely a detail in the general problem of drug control. To
Persia, however, the question assumes an intensely practical aspect, affecting as it does a fifth
of her exports, a twelfth of her revenues and the means of livelihood of a very great number
of her citizens.
Under the circumstances, when an impoverished country such as Persia and one of those
least able to bear losses of revenue, is asked to undertake a programme involving great mone-
tary sacrifices and the possibility of serious political difficulty for the sake of vastly richer
nations, it is only fair to expect that they, at least, should defray the cost.
Appendix I.
Opium Production.
In considering plans for opium substitutes, it is desirable to have a general picture of the
system of opium cultivation and of the trade channels through which the opium sap and the
manufactured product moves.
Opium is produced in 18 out of the 26 provinces of Persia. The cultivation is thus scat-
tered over an area of approximately 400,000 square miles. The only provinces lying outside
of the zone of cultivation are those in the Persian Gulf littoral and the northern provinces,
such as Azerbaidjan, Guilan, Estarabad, Khamseh, and Kurdistan.
An area of approximately 1,000 square zars is required for the production of one batman
of opium sap. With a total production of not less than 300,000 batmans of sap, the area
under poppy cultivation may therefore be estimated at 300,000,000 square zars or 70,000
acres.
The problem of control of production is greatly complicated by the wide geographical
distribution of poppy culture, by the possibility of profitable cultivation on veiy small pieces
of ground, such as the gardens of anderouns or harems, where supervision by Government
agents is practically impossible, and by the further fact that many of the best producing areas
are only now beginning to come under the control of the Government.
The opium poppy is sown in the months Mizan and Dalve (October-December). The
crop requires no irrigation until after Nowrooz (March 21st), but during the succeeding two


Amount of Opium Sap
Year
entered in Government Warehouses
Batmans. Pounds.
Yount-il
1297
(1918-19)
73,486
477,659
Ghouy-il
1298
(1919-20)
7IG33
462,364
Pitchy-il
1299
(1920-21)
97,673
634,874
Takhaghouy-il
1300
(1921-22)
58,808
382,252
It-ill
1301
(1922-23)
i 77,859
1,156,083
fanguz-ill
1302
(1923-24)
211,177
1,372,650
mon.th s is watered once in twelve days. During this period water is both plentiful and cheap,
this is a point of utmost importance when considering crop substitution, as irrigation is very
costly in Persia, and the crops which may be substituted for opium require much more water
and at periods when it is scarcest and most expensive.
Ihe crop is usually gathered from Jowza (May) to iVssad (August). In the southern pro-
vinces, the harvest begins in Hamal (March-April) and ends in early Saratan (June). After
the opium crop is harvested, other crops are generally sown which enable a double harvest
from the same land in a year. This is not practicable with the principal substitute crops.
Control of the opium sap is rendered very difficult by the large number of people who enter
the opium-growing areas at the time of harvest. Up to this time, cultivation is carried on
by the peasants, but the poppy head must be scratched as soon as ripe, or no juice will be
obtained. This necessitates the employment of a large number of extra hands. Many
of the extra day labourers are procured from nearby towns or villages, but a large number
follow the harvest north for long distances, as do harvest hands in the Western United States.
These men are usually paid in opium sap or partly in sap and partly in cash.
During the harvest pedlars and small store-keepers, who have advanced goods on credit
to the peasants during the year, go to the villages and secure their payment in opium sap.
Occasionally, at this time gifts of sap are made to the village mullahs, and the village barbers
and carpenters are paid for their services in the same medium. As soon as the sap-gathering
begins, tnousands of vendors of small wares and sweetmeats go out from the large towns and
barter their wares for sap in the poppy fields. Dervishes, story-tellers, beggars, musicians,
and owners of performing animals go from one field to another and are rewarded or given alms
by having the flat side of the opium knife scraped on to their palms, or on to the small bowls
carried by the dervishes. These are followed by travelling opium-buyers who purchase
their accumulations and also buy from, the peasants. When it is realised that there may
be easily from three to five thousand strangers in a single area during the harvest season,
each with opium sap in his or her possession, the difficulty of centralising the entire crop
becomes apparent. As most of these people depend on their gains during this season for a
considerable portion of their annual income, the hardships imposed on them by complete
centralisation may also be seen. When the proprietors and peasants are required to place
all their sap in the warehouses as soon as gathered, thousands of these more or less legitimate
middlemen are deprived of their occupation. Much of the profit which went to them is now
secured by the proprietors and peasants themselves and, as they come to realise this, their
opposition to centralisation is diminishing.
In addition to the foregoing classes interested in the collection of the sap, there are, in
the important opium centres, the opium brokers, opium commission merchants and the mer-
chants who manipulate opium for local consumption and export. These, with their staffs
and the carpenters, packers, porters, copper-smiths, etc., partially dependent on the opium
trade, constitute a numerically and politically very important section of the population.
The foregoing has been presented in some detail to point the necessity for the greatest
piudence in the execution of any plan either for centralisation of the sap or reduction in
the opium cultivation. Under the present conditions, no other employment is open to either
the capital or labour of the opium industry and new outlets must be provided before any serious
progress can be made.
To indicate the progress made to date in the centralisation of opium sap in the Govern-
ment ambars, the following tabulation of entries for the last six years is given. The entries
for 1302 (1923-24) represent in the neighbourhood of two-thirds of the total production.
This indicates that at least 88,823 batmans, or 577,349 pounds, were dealt in as contra-
band during the last year. Illicit transactions in opium are of three principal kinds : retention
by cultivators for their own use, smuggling within the country for local consumption, and
import and export smuggling. Of these the second is by far the most important. The tax
on opium for local consumption is very heavy and smuggling for local consumption is highly
organised. During the last year one such transaction was discovered in which the contraband
opium was guarded in transit by 150 well-armed horsemen.
Despite all the difficulties mentioned above, steady progress is being made in bringing
the traffic under control and, with the extension of the power of the Central Government,
there is good reason to hope for the practical elimination of the contraband trade in the country.
If, at the same time, necessary financial and technical assistance is provided to enable crop
substitution, it may confidently be anticipated that, within a period of ten years after the
provision of such assistance, the production of opium in Persia may be reduced to the medicinal
and scientific icquirements, without placing an undue burden on the country during the tran-
sition peiiod, and with an eventual increase in prosperity to those now engaged in the opium
industry, and to the country as a whole.


Appendix 11.
Persian Imports and Exports of Opium
Imports.
Importation of opium into Persia is from two countries only Afghanistan and British
India. The importations from India are not landed but transhipped at Bushire. Until
the last two years, the importations from Afghanistan have for the most part been smuggled
into Persia without payment of duty. For the four years prior to 1301 (1922-23), the impor-
tations through the Customs averaged 70 batmans per annum. In 1301, however, the patrols
on the Afghanistan frontier were strengthened, with the result that the importations through
the Customs jumped to 2,313 batmans in that year and to 3,396 batmans in 1302 (1923-24).
The latter figure may be taken as the minimum importation for the past several years.
The following tabulation gives the importations of opium into Persia for the period
1292 (1913-14) to 1302 (1923-24) :
Year; A.H. Solar A.D. Batmans Pounds Value: Krans
1292 19i3 -1 4---- 717 4.660 , 248,594
1293 1914-15.... 439 2,853 87,036
1294 1915-16.... 11 7 1 3.335
1295 1916-17.... 770 5.5 258,382
1296 1917-18.... in 7 21 3. 0 98
1297 1918-19.... 67 435 23.565
1298 1919-20.... 17 no
1299 1920-21.... 44 286 8,753
1300 1921-22.... 147 - 955 4 X .474
1301 1922-23.... 2,313 15,034 622,741
1302 1923-24.... 3.396 22,074 1,038,681
Transhipments of Indian opium do not appear in the records prior to 1302 (1923-24),
at which time they commenced, probably due to the increasing severity in the execution of
the export regulations by the Indian Government. In that year the transhipments at Bushire
reached a total of 10,439 batmans. As soon as this was discovered, representations were
made to the Council of' Ministers that this trade was totally to the disadvantage of Persia
in that it enabled Indian opium to be exported to countries to which it could not be exported
direct from India, while Persia incurred the odium on account of the fictitiously augmented
exports, and at the same time suffered an inevitable depression in the market value of
Persian opium. The same being true of imports from Afghanistan, it was recommended that
all such importations and transhipments be prohibited. Correspondence from the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs indicates that similar representations have been made by the British Lega-
tion. It is understood that these proposals have been approved by the Council of Ministers.
The transhipments of Indian opium at Bushire in 1302 (1923-24) were as follows :
For China 1,000 batmans 6,500 pounds
 France 243  U579 
 Hungary 9,196  59,774 })
If the declarations represent the actual destinations, there is little doubt that these repre-
sent illicit transactions, as otherwise the shipments to Europe could have been made direct from
Indian ports. In the ? Raw Opium Statistics? published in the League of Nations document
0.D.C.i., Second Opium Conference, July 22nd, 1924, appears a note that Hungary had 946
chests of opium in transit (year not stated). On page 5 of the same report the statement
appears that ?no opium, morphine or alkaloids of opium were manufactured in Hungary in
1922-23. Attempts had been made to manufacture these products in the years preceding 1914,
but they had not been successful?.
Exports.
In an estimate of the annual traffic in Persian and Turkish opium, League of Nations
document O.C. 84, Geneva, January sth, 1922, it is stated that ?the combined Persian and
Turkish opium traffic cannot be less than 1,000,000 pounds per annum .
The figures taken in this estimate for the period 1914-19 are as follows :
Persian opium 4,097,187 pounds
Turkish opium 1,792,488 
Total 5,8 8 9, 6 75 pounds
To arrive at these totals, the imports into the United Kingdom and the United States were
taken plus the transhipments at Bombay. Imports into the United States were estimated
on the basis of 50 per cent Turkish and 50 per cent Persian opium.
To verify these and the Persian export figures, the foregoing statement was analysed
and compared with available data. According to the statement of the League of Nations,
the combined Persian and Turkish export trade would amount to 1,777,935 pounds per annum,
of which the Persian share would be 819,437 pounds. As the Persian year begins on March


21st, the statistics are not quite comparable, especially as at the beginning of the period the
cxpor s were heavy and unusually light at its end. The year 1292 (1913-14), with only
three months of 1914 has, therefore, been included, as has 1298 {1919-20) with three months
Tr *9 2o, h 5 S lves a seven-years period for comparison against the six-years period
1914-19, used by the League of Nations. 7 F
Annual export : League of Nations figures 1914-19 819,437 pounds
Persian Customs figures 1292 (1913-14) to 1298
(1919-20) . 785,270 
Excess League of Nations over Persian figures.. . 34,167 pounds
The total exports d?opium as indicated by the Persian Customs figures for the period
1292 (1913-14) - 1302 (1923-24) are given below :
Year: A.H. Solar A.D. Batmans Pounds Value: Krans
If I Ill 3 ' 1 * 118 '54i 770,516 37,714,494
If 3 1 4- I 5 134.641 875,166 41,446,256
" 2 94 1915-16 122,922 798,993 41,732,238
If A 11:8,109 767,708 41,597.275
Ift "917-18 H5,305 749,482 44,783,249
Ifl 1918-19 56,201 365,306 28,'595,885
" 2 98 1919-20 49,903 324,396 24^166, ? 116
"J99 1920-21 56,193 365,254 22:178,390
l 3  n  T "?f? 22 39,338 255,697
" 4 " 1922-23 101,638 660,647 40,908,128
"B CU 1 9 2 3"24 106,282 690,833 60,219,715
Distribution.
The following table shows the distribution of the opium exports during the last two years
It-il, 1301 (1922-23.)
Declared Destination Batmans Pounds Value: Krans
Chum 44,637 290,141 18,099,420
Russia;;.;::;;;;:::::;; aw.?
British India J ? 4B *43,312 8,372,440
T ana n 6,672 36,868 2,092,000
Mesopotamia 3 1,180,000
Egypt. .. 70 ? 44 88,000
Germany " y " 1,:r "5 70,000
France 4 o 2 R 1,100
__ 1 ? 8 .8 168
?? ? 101,637 660,640 40,908,128
1302 (1923-24)
69,427 451,276 40,994,810
21,106 137,189 11,604,700
5,479 35,614 3,067,600
7,102 46,163 2,920,000
i ,sB 9,802 841,920
1>212 I > 212 7,878 600,000
Totals.
Tanguz-il
Russia.
China. ,
Japan.,
Arabia.
England
United States.
British India..
Mesopotamia..
Oman
2,398
147,605
42,580
Totals io6 -280 690,823 60,219,715
To the 1302 figures should be added the transhipments, which will probably be credited
to Persia m statistics of importing country, if not entered as contraband : y creaited
Batmans Pounds
Si 1,000 6,500 Value not stated
France u ' uu vame not stat
Hunearv 2 43 U579   
g y 9T96 59,774 
1 Q,439 67,853
Total exports and transhipments 116,719 758 673
The very large increase in the declarations for Russia in the last two years is worthv of
attention. To enable comparison, the figures for the last seven years are given beTow 7
Vear: Solar A.D Batmans Pounds Value: Krans
297::;;;;;;;: Zlll'--' 3 6?tl 252 T 6 16,069,534
191019 6,557 42,620 2,464805
12 9 8 1919-20.... 5,693 37,004 1744811
12 99 1920-21.... 5,058 32,877
I 3 1921-22.... 3,814 24,79! 1286867
uoi 1922-23.... 22,048 I4 jq 2 IvA/o
1302 1923-24.... 69,427 451,275 40994,8x0


Exports via the northern frontier to Russia during the last three years are as follows :
Year Solar A.D. Batmans Pounds Value : Krans
1300 1921-22.... 3.785 24,602 1,276,147
1301 1Q22-23 ? ? ? ? 4> ooo 26,000 999,940
1302 1923-24.... 2,890 18,785 1,122,490
It will be noted that the exportations via the northern frontier have declined and that the
entire increase in the export is through Bushire. It is therefore clear that the large increase in the
declarations for Russia do not represent shipments to Russia proper. If shipped to Siberia,
it is impossible to state with the information at hand whether the opium ever reaches the port
for which declared and, if so, its ultimate destination. The only information available in
connection with the Siberian opium traffic is contained in a ?Documentary Study, October
1923, of the International Convention? by the Swiss industries interested in opium, in which
appears the statement that ?China also receives opium from Siberia, where the Republic of
Soviets of the Extreme Orient encourages the cultivation of the poppy and has granted a
concession, with headquarters in Vladivostock, to a society known as the Bureau of the
Opium Monopoly of Siberia. Before February 1923 this enterprise attempted to purchase
from the Anglo-Indian Regie not less than 180,000 pounds of opium (League of Nations docu-
ment C. 171 (1). M. 88 (1). 1922, XI, page n). Japanese morphine is also sent through
Vladivostock (Report of the Commission on Opium, June 6th, 1923. League of Nations document
O.C. 114)?.
Effect of Opium Export on Trade Balance.
In view of the adverse trade balance, any further reduction in exports is of serious conse-
quence. The following tabulation of opium exports through Customs-houses as compared
with the total exports of Persia, exclusive of oil, is therefore presented. Oil is excluded from
all such tabulations of Persian exports as, while actually the largest item of export, the only
return to the country lies in such funds as it may be necessary to import to cover the pay-
roll and local expenditures of the exporting company and the royalties paid the Government.
Comparative Statement Opium and Total Exports.
Year Total Value Percentage of opium
export trade exclusive of opium exported ; exports to all exports
A.D. of oil in Krans Krans exclusive of oil
A. H. Solar A.D.
1297 1918-I9 115,564,195 28,595,885 24.7
1298 1919-20 187,113,313 24,166,116 12.9
1299 1920-21 137,441,315 22,178,390 16.1
1300 1921-22 179.548,5 1 ? i 5.449 .6 63 8.6
1301 1922-23.... 305,656,123 40,908,128 13.3
1302 1923-24.... 384,000,000 60,219,715 15-0 W
(a) Year 1302 totals approximate.
It will be noted that, in 1302 (1923-24), the opium exports represented 15.6 per cent of
the declared value of all exports exclusive of oil. The export taxes on opium are on a specific
basis and there is every inducement to the exporters to under-value theii shipments and thus
conceal their true profits from the producers. The average declared value per batman of
six and a-half pounds in 1301 was 402 krans and 567 krans in 1302. Both valuations aie
much too low. If due allowance is made for under-valuation and for the contraband export
of opium, it may be safely taken that the opium exports represent from 20 to 25 per cent
of the entire exports of Persia exclusive of oil.
As another proof, were it needed, of the danger of further reducing Persia s export trade,
there is given below a statement of the total imports and exports of Persia, exclusive of
exports of oil :
Year Importations : Exports exclusive
A. H. Solar A.D. Krans of oil: Krans
Chou-il 1298 1919-20 629,792,696 187,113,000
Pitch-il 1299 1920-21 482,351,633 137,441,000
Takhaghou-il 1300 1921-22 609,775,368 179,548,000
X UlVllUtllV U il ?. y/ / / ly/vy S' /?
It-il 1301 1922-23 619,201,046 305,656,000
il l! AJVA * - y > / ? _ . .
Tangouz-il 1302 1923-24 694,179,723 384,000,000 ( a )
{a) Year 1302 totals approximate.
It will be noted that the export trade is but now beginning to show signs of recovery
and that only in the last two years have the exports approximated 50 per cent of the imports.
It would be suicidal to undertake any programme involving further reduction in exports
until such time as other exportable products have been developed to replace opium
Appendix 111.
Expenditures required to enable Curtailment of Opium Production to Medicinal
and Scientific Purposes.
It is impossible, with the available data, to work out any comprehensive scheme for the
substitution of other crops and other industries for opium.
Certain points, however, stand out clearly.


the nrovkL, h f ' Utl . on T lves , not merely the substitution of other crops for opium but
P *? 'T t .f ?-"gallon for such crops and of facilities for their transport and marketing ?
the loss nf mmm Cr  PS ? not for years P roduce Government revenue to compensate'for
fully? exploited? new revenue sources must be developed, or existing sources more
stitufkXf Xu cXXdXeTrXnue 6 XXXXmXs"?
MS
skill^?^
for the loss of opium revenues are those connected with the XeIoXnTXL
ss saw* ?
U ..SS^SftSS!ir? m w-.. b... p,.p... a ?d
(A) Preliminary Agricultural, Transportation, and Economic Survey.
Party should include experts in wheat rice roffnn ciiu +O-. r
and beetroot-growing and sugar manufacture r V n 1 * v ? i c ? obacco, fiuit, nuts, cane
draught animals and beef cattle S twool-growing and the breeding of
and Market requTrXenX and?  f XX
experts, especially experienced in "mountain road raih-oXX i p m u' Transportation
construction, and with knowledge of comnarative rJXrt bght railway location and
Irrigation engineer, preferably wfth expeTen" alioin theX P? systems-
salt marshlands. Banking expert with snXl kr 'I a XX tlon  f marsh ? Particularly
to settlers and colonists, a'ndXlXuLXblnXgtysfeml. l0a " S > lo ? S
Estimated cost = 100,000 tomans.
(B) Preliminary Survey of Mineral Resources.
X 1 resources of Persia include coal.
Estimated cost = 100,000 tomans. 1
ber 3 B olh h tho SUrV6yS menti  ned ab  Ve can be made at an y time between April Ist and Decern-
(C) Transportation.
sSHSia*
e ? WOU,d reSUlt in an
justified 3 P  SSlDie at a lgllt iailwa Y connection between Kerman and Dozdab would be
for any commodity which is not relatively hXXXeXTtfX'StXdXujk XXf
sk
Estimated cost 3> oo< fiooo tomans.
(D) Partial List of Irrigation Projects under Consideration.
1. Irrigation system of Guilau
2 . Construction Karganroud Dam, Astarabad. tomans
3. Construction Meankangi Dam, Bushire. 25,000. 
4. Addition of 60 sangs water to Kami River 25,000. 
J 25,000. ? 


5- Raising Shahroud water for irrigation of Kazvin lands 300,000. ? tomans
6. Kanin Dam of Khuzestan (practicability requires study) 1,500,000. ? 
7. Amir Dike Pars 15,000. ? 
8. Construction Ramjerd Dam Pars 175,000. ? 
g. Construction Shile and Hirman Dikes of Seistan 150,000. ? 
10. Kooh Rengh diversion project, Isfahan 300,000. ? 
Total 2,565,000. ? tomans
(E) Partial List of Measures under Consideration in Connection with Crop Substitution and
Improvement of Agriculture.
1. Purchase of machinery for public domains and demonstration
purposes 100,000. ? tomans
2. Development of silkworm, cotton, flax, and importation of seeds
for Public Domains and privately owned villages 300,000. ? 
3. Inoculation of animals against cattle plague and anthrax (50,000
tomans per annum for five years) 250,000. ? 
4. Destruction of Sen and locusts (100,000 tomans per year for five
years) 500,000. ? 
Total 1,150,000. ? tomans
(F) Partial List of Reproductive Public Works under Consideration.
1. Dizful Bridge (repair), Khuzestan 20,000. ? tomans
2. Construction Varamin Road, Teheran 100,000. ? 
3. Drainage Kamalabad pastures, Teheran 60,000. ? 
4. Reclamation Moghan land, Azerbaidjan 80,000. ? 
5 . Reclamation Khar lands of Teheran 90,000. ? 
6. Reclamation of Miankaleh lands of Mazanderan 200,000. ? 
7. Creation sugar factory Savoj-bolagh, Teheran (includes develop-
ment of plantations) 300,000. ? 
8. Drainage Kavir lands, Varamin, Teheran 50,000. ? 
9. Reclamation Dashti Dashtestan lands, Pars 40,000. ? 
10. Construction Enzeli Pier, Guilan 120,000. ? 
11. Construction, repair, and dredging of ports 1,500,000. ? 
Total 2,560,000. ? tomans
(G) Public Domains Development Programme.
Repairs
Kanats
Tomans
Provinces
Aragh
Estarabad 7,000 5,000
Azerbaidjan 5,000 25,000 75,000
Borujerd 5,000
Pars 5,000 10,000 10,000
Golpayegan
Guilan 4,000 1,000
Hamadan.
Isfahan 5,000 1,000
Kashan 3,000 8,000 11,000 5,000
Kazvin 1,000 19,000 8,000 3,000
Kerman 7,000
Kermanshah 5,000 6,000 10,000
Khamseh 10,000 2,000
Khorassan 16,000 5,000
Khouzestan.
Koum.
Kordestan 5,000
Mazanderan 5,000 40,000 8,000
Nahavand 2,000 1,000
Semnan and Damghan..
Shanroud 15,000
Seistan 6,000 4,000 8,000
Teheran 40,000 110,000 10,000 5,000
Yezd 5,000
Construction Ne n w , Seed and cash Construction of
Kanats and ?3 advances dikes and irn-
T <? Tomans Romans
15,000
15,000
15,000
8,000
10,000
Total 65,000 147,000 183,000 146,000 63,000
Grand Total 604,000 tomans.
Note : Additional to annual credits now provided.


(H) Loans to Proprietors.
The substitution of other crops for opium will necessitate additional land being brought
under cultivation to produce corresponding returns to the proprietors. This will require a
large capital outlay and the making of arrangements whereby the proprietors can obtain t e
funds they will require at a reasonable rate of interest. It is not possible for them to develop
their properties on borrowed money at the present time. Interest rates m the bazaars lun
up to 24 per cent per annum. To finance the needed improvements, an agricultural bank
with an initial capital of 2,000,000 tomans should be established. Special legislation won t
be needed, but could unquestionably be passed to ensure the safety of the loans.
(I) Technicians, Model Farms and Experiment Stations.
Persian agricultural methods and implements remain practically unchanged since primi-
tive times. Other than hand tools and the wooden plough in use for centuries, there is
practically no agricultural equipment in use. Fertilisation is little practised and any form
of scientific seed selection and crop rotation practically unknown. Land is generally allowed
to lie fallow for one or two years after a wheat crop. A very small percentage of the agn-
cultural population are literate. . , ,
For these reasons, any programme for the replacement of opium by other crops demands
skilled technical instruction and direction, as otherwise the wasteful methods now employed
would not permit such crops being raised at a cost which would enable a profitable sale for
export. Such instruction and direction must be oral and by demonstration, as the general
illiteracy precludes the substitution of printed instructions and directions. This necessitates
the establishment of more model farms and the employment of a greater number of instructors
than would be required in a country where there is a higher percentage of literacy.
Model farms and experiment stations can be established and equipped at an average
cost of 25,000 tomans by taking existing Government-owned villages for this purpose.
Ten model farms and experiment stations 25,000 tomans 250,000. tomans
Two model stock farms, breeding stations and experiment stations
for cattle - breeding and forage-growing (37>5 tomans) 75,000.
Personnel
1 director of agriculture,
1 wheat expert,!
2 silkworm experts,
2 cotton experts,
1 tobacco expert,
1 sugar beet expert,
1 tea expert,
1 forester, > ,
1 irrigation engineer experienced in the construction of small dikes, dams, and
irrigation systems, and in the reclamation of marsh, particularly salt marsh lands.
1 sanitary engineer with special experience in drainage and malaria control in agri-
cultural districts, preferably one who has worked on small projects with limited
funds where sanitary work has to pay for itself as far as possible.
2 veterinarians, one with special experience in wool-growing and one in breeding
beef cattle, horses and mules.
6 agricultural engineers with practical experience in farming and in the operation
of model farms.
Including salaries, transportation, and allowances for quarters and travelling
expenses in Persia, an average of 7,500 tomans per annum would be required.
At least twenty men would be needed at first. The number could be reduced, or
their expenses met from current revenues after three years.
Tomans
10 experts 7,500 tomans per annum for three years 225,000
10 experts 7,500 tomans per annum for five years 375. 000
Extensions to agricultural school 25,000 tomans per annum for
five years 125,000
Employment of foreign-trained Persians and graduates of agricultural
school as field inspectors and demonstrators 40,000 tomans per
annum for five years 200,000
Total 1,250,000
(J) Prevention of Smuggling
Tomans
To prevent smuggling opium into and out of Persia, the frontier patrols would have
to be reinforced at an approximate additional cost of 100,000 tomans per
annum for five years ; ;
Xo prevent contraband movement within the Empire, the inspection service
would have to be reinforced at an approximate additional cost of 100,000
500,000
tomans per annum for five years
500,000
1,000,000


Summary.
Total cost of project under Proposed
Item consideration expenditure
(A) Preliminary, agricultural transportation, and
Tomans Tomans
economic survey 100,000 100,000
(B) Preliminary survey of mineral resources 100,000 100,000
(C) Transportation 3,000,000 3,000,000
(D) Irrigation 2,565,000 1,000,000
(E) Crop substitution 1,150,000 800,000
(F) Reproductive public works 2,560,000 725,000
(G) Improvement of public domains 604,000 525,000
(H) Loans to proprietors 2,000,000 2,000,000
(I) Model farms and technicians 1,250,000 1,250,000
(J) Prevention of smuggling 1,000,000 500,000
Total 14,329,000 10,000,000
Note : An arbitrary figure has been set for each item of expenditure to bring the total
within the minimum estimate of funds required.
Appendix IV.
Taxes on Opium.
Land Tax.
Opium cultivated in Persia is subject to the Government?s tithe or 10 per cent of the
net share of the proprietor, as is the case with all other farm products.
The proprietor?s net share on opium cultivation is usually one-third of the total.
The opium crop amounting to approximately 300,000 batmans at 35 tomans per batman,
the total value thereof is 10,500,000 tomans, the proprietor?s share 3,500,000 tomans, and the
Government?s tax due 350,000 tomans.
Banderoles for Local Consumption.
All opium for smoking must be banderolled under the law, for which a tax amounting
to 21 shahis per miscal (672 krans per batman) is collected on 9,400,000 miscals annually.
Total per annum, 987,000 tomans.
The amount on which tax is paid is approximately one-sixth of the total local consumption
Manipulation Fees.
Opium for local consumption :
Two miscal sticks 18 krans per batman.
Four   16   
Export opium 4   
Total per annum, including reaping charges, 14,000 tomans
Warehouse Charges.
There is a charge of one shahi per batman per day for opium stored in Government ware-
houses (not yet collected in all provinces).
Annual revenue, 19,999 tomans.
Transport Charges.
Opium sap and manipulated opium must be transported under permit, for which there
is a charge of 75 dinars per batman per ?farsakk?.
Total per annum, 200.000 tomans.
Customs Tariffs.
Tomans
Import per batman, 6 tomans 22,000. ?
Export   2  220,000. ?
Miscellaneous charges 5,000. ?
Total per annum 247,000. ?
Remark. Figures based on returns of 1302.
Shir eh of Soukhteh.
Sold at 1.35 krans per miscal.
Annual revenue 200,000 tomans.
Fines. The provisions of laws and regulations relative to fines and penalties are as
follows :
Adulterated opiunr sap is confiscated and destroyed and a fine of one kran per miscal
imposed.
Concealed opium bearing no banderoles confiscated and two krans per miscal collected
as fine.


Tomans
430,000
fnofnmc 247,000
200,000
30,000
2,047,000
Total revenue 23,000,000 tomans.
Adulterated manipulated opium is liable to confiscation and destruction and payment
of a fine of three krans per miscal. . , r ? ,
Printers, users or possessors of forged or re-used banderoles subject to confiscation and
payment of from 500 to 1,000 tomans fine. f , . , ,
J Banderolled opium transported without permit liable to a fine of ten krans pei batman
Contraband soukhteh and adulterated shireh are subject to confiscation, destruction, and
payment of a fine of one kran per miscal. . , ? ,
Contraband morphine to be destroyed and possessor liable to a fine of 50 krans per miscal.
Insolvent offenders undergo imprisonment for periods varying according to the importance
of the offence.
Total revenue from fines and penalties, 30,000 tomans per annum.
Summary.
Percentage of opium revenues to total revenues = 8.9.
Appendix V.
Persian Opium Laws.
Article I. From the date of promulgation of the present law, a tax of six shahis will
be collected on each miscal of manipulated opium.
Article 11. With a view to preventing the dangerous use of the shireh derived from
the soukhteh (residue of the smoked opium) .
fa) The soukhteh obtained from opium smoked throughout the country must be
delivered to the officials of the Finance Ministry who have to collect same against payment
of a commission of three shahis per miscal payable to persons delivering the soukhteh
to the Finance officials. Should any person refuse to deliver the soukhteh or conceal
it, the soukhteh will be confiscated and destroyed in his own presence.
{b) The officials are held to register the names of addicts to the habit of smoking
the shireh and the quantity of shireh smoked in each locality.
Out of the soukhteh collected, shireh, just enough to meet the requirements of the loca-
lity will be prepared and distributed among the addicts against a commission of 12 shahis
a miscal. All excess of soukhteh will be destroyed at the end of each year with the knowledge
of the Ministry of Finance.
Article 111 In localities where the collection of the soukhteh has been in practice
before the law was passed, the provisions of the Article II will be effective from date of
enactment of this law ; in places where the collection has not been in practice, this law will take
effect three months after the promulgation.
Article IV. From the beginning of the third year up to the end of the seventh year
of the promulgation of this law, the tax on the manipulated opium must be enhanced by three
shahis per annum and the tax on the shireh enhanced by three shahis per miscal per annum.
From the beginning of the eighth year, the use of the shireh will be totally stopped and the
use of opium confined only to medicinal purposes.
Article V. Commercial opium exported from the country is free from the above
Article VI Rules regulating the executing of this law, prevention of smuggling,
inspection and administrative routine will be framed jointly by the Ministries of Finance
and j aw comprising six articles was passed in the sitting of the 12th Rabiol Aval
1329 with a majority of 52 votes out of 72 members present.
President of the National Assembly
Motamen-el-Molk.
This opium law is seen and signed by virtue of Articles 17 and 33 of the Fundamental
Law.
12th Rabiol Aval Tangoux-il 1329
(A.H. Solar 1298, A.D. 1910).
Nasserol Molk Regent.


Law Amending Article II of the Opium Law.
Supplementary Article.
From date of the 15th Mizan Taveshghan-il 1333, the three shahis remuneration which
according to Article 11, of the Tahdid Law, ratified on the 12th Rabiol Aval 1329, is given t
the persons who deliver the soukhteh to the Finance officials will be reduced to one shaln.
The law amending the Tahdid Law was approved by the majority vote on the session
of Saturday 21 Zighadeh-el-Haram, (9th Mixan 1333) (A.H. Solar 1293, A.D. 1914)-
(Signed ) Motamen-el-Molk,
President of the National
Consultative Assembly.
Annex 8.
MEMORANDUM ON POPPY-GROWING AND THE PRODUCTION OF RAW OPIUM
IN THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY.
It is not necessary to emphasise the importance to Turkey of poppy-growing and the
opium trade The immense fields of Asia Minor and the climatic condition*,there_ are very
favourable for the cultivation of the poppy. The above remarks are confirmed by the reports
and statistics compiled and published in the Minutes of the Fdth Session of the Advisory
Committee on the Traffic in Opium and other Dangerous Drugs 4*B. Second
1923. XI). The fact that the Turkish Government has sent repiesentatives to the Seco
Opium Conference shows how closely the question affects it. . , ( vari i, n f +v, P
P The quality and quantity of her opium output place Turkey m he front. raniofT
producing 4 countries. The annual production vanes from 350 to 450 tons. The proportion
of mmphie contained in this opium is from 9to 14 per cent. A large number of fore.gn
factories are dependent on opium imported from Turkey. ? ? i, T?rV? fcr
There have been no restrictions on poppy-growing and trading in opium in lui y
centuries past ; notwithstanding this fact, the use of opium by the inhabitants lam ppy
to say, is quite unknown. It is produced only for purposes of export. In Asia M.noi t
return on a poppy field is far higher than that on a field of tobaccc. lt
should be noted that the tobacco cultivated in poppy-growmg districts is often very poor.
The climate and geological formation of these districts are very favourable to PPPy-g?
Another very important point is that the transport of opium is easy and this constiti I
veTy great advantage in a country like Turkey, which is not well supplied withi means.of com
munication. Edible oil is also extracted from poppy seeds. In certain regions tins sc
lagan? oil takes the place of butter, while the oil-cakes made from the resid- Qe
domestic animals. The above remarks will show the vital importance, of g g
It is natural, therefore, that the Turkish Government does not see the way in which so
important a crop can be limited. The fact that the question is being
national Conference has given rise to great anxiety in Turkey, where, for * P f
peasants DODDV-CTOwing is the only means of livelihood. I have come to the Opium Lor
rence to?exphdn to the delegates of other countries what the agricultural P o^ n
is and to show them the great difficulties connected with the question of the limitation of the
production of raw opium and to the disastrous results which any such limitation would ent
f  r Should 1 the Conference adopt measures for the restriction of poppy-growing, the Turkish
Government requests : ,
(1) That such measures should only be applied progressively and that nr ey
should be allowed to cultivate an area under poppy sufficient to meet the requneme t
of the agricultural situation ;
(2) That all producing countries should accept the measures proposed ;
(3) That measures should be taken for the suppression of smuggling ,
(4) That agricultural experts should undertake scientific research in the Poncing
countries with a view to introducing improvements in agriculture and to substituting
other suitable crops in place of the poppy. Cttol7VA
( Signed) Mehmed Sureya.
Geneva, December 9th, 1924.
Annex 9.
MEMORANDUM ON THE CULTIVATION OF THE POPPY AND THE PRODUCTION
OF RAW OPIUM IN THE KINGDOM OF THE SERBS, CROATS AND SLOVENES.
In considering the cultivation of the poppy and the production of raw opium in the Kingdom
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, from the point of view of national economy, four distinct
elements may be noted :


1 . The immediate reasons for the cultivation of the poppy and the production
of raw opium ;
11. The economic and social consequences of the above ;
111. Their social and commercial importance as regards producers and the State; and
IV. The problem of substituting other crops for the poppy and raw opium.
The poppy and raw opium in Southern Serbia are of foreign origin. They appeared for
the first time in the second half of the 19th century. They were introduced from Asia Minor
and spread quickly through Macedonia and the southern part of Old .Serbia. Their spread
was due to favourable climatic conditions and to the existence of large feudal properties.
Before the' Balkan wars of 1912-1918, agriculture in the district where the poppy was grown
was organised chiefly on the system of large properties. The owners were nearly always
Mohammedan landlords, while the Christians were simply their serfs and were entirely depen-
dent upon them. Owing to the climate and the fertility of the soil, the raw opium obtained
was of excellent quality and contained more than 15 per cent of morphine, so that in less than
ten years the cultivation of the poppy extended over tens of thousands of acres.
Thus the owners of the soil, who had the climate in their favour and exploited their
labourers, quickly succeeded in making huge profits. The cost of production was far lower
than the cost of foreign production.
The profit to be derived from the cultivation of the poppy led to its being grown not only
on the large properties but also on the smaller ones. Owners replaced other crops by the
poppy, which became to them synonymous with gold.
In time the peasants devoted themselves so exclusively to the cultivation of the poppy
that they gave up other crops and became entirely dependent on the production of opium, a
fact which is greatly to be regretted from the point of view of national economy.
After the wars of 1912-1918, when the social conditions of the peasants were improved
and the great properties were abolished as the result of agrarian reforms, the system of agri-
culture was changed, but not its substance. Experience was stronger than the desire for
change. The peasants, although they had become independent, were not capable of adapting
a fresh system of agriculture at once to fresh political and social conditions. They were natu-
rally conservative and remained faithful to their traditions, being disinclined to abandon
what they had learned from their forefathers. Circumstances were in their favour. The price
of raw opium was rising every year, the difference between the prices for the years 1921 to
1924 amounting to thousands of dinars. As compared with 60 dinars (about 1 sterling at
the present rate) per kilogramme of ?black gold", which was the price in 1921, they got 7
sterling in 1924.
Conservatism, however, was not the only reason for continuing the tradition of poppy-
growing handed down from before 1912. In the course of the many generations during
which it had been produced, the by-products of the poppy had come to occupy an important
place in the social life of poppy-growers. The people in the towns began to make from the
seed of the poppy, from which the raw opium had already been extracted, a kind of cooking oil
which, owing to its cheapness, soon became popular in the different towns and villages. Even
at Salonika ?sharlagan" oil was much in demand. The Jewish inhabitants preferred it to
olive oil and cotton-seed oil.
More than thirty oil factories, large and small, have been built for the manufacture of
poppy-seed oil.
The dry plant is used as fuel, after the opium and seed have been utilised.
The position as regards the cultivation of the poppy for opium in Southern Serbia may
therefore be stated as follows :
(1) It yields raw opium, which is employed simply for commercial purposes?sale
and export;
(2) It furnishes raw materials for local industry, in which several million of dinars
are invested ;
(3) It supplies the poorer inhabitants with a cheap oil for cooking purposes ;
(4) It takes the place of wood for purposes of fuel for the forests were almost
completely destroyed more than a century ago.
The social and economic importance of the cultivation of the opium poppy is partly
explained in the foregoing section of this note. That, however, is not the entire explanation.
The fundamental reason is to be found elsewhere. In order that it may be fully understood,
it is necessary to show the relation between the retail price and profits on opium production
and the cost of labour.
Taking the hectare as the unit, the social and commercial importance of poppy-growing
may be shown by the following table :


One hectare produces on an average 20 kilogrammes of raw opium, 600 kilogrammes
of poppy seed and 1,000 kilogrammes of fuel. . -,,
P According to the present value, expressed in dinars, the price obtained is as follows.
Price of 20 kilogrammes of raw opium (at 7 per
kilogramme) 8 *4O sterling or 42,000 dinars
Price of 600 kilogrammes of seed at 15 dinars per
kilogramme.
51,000 dinars
Total.
The average number of labourers required per hectare per season is 120 and the aveiage
wage amounts to 10,000 or 12,000 dinars. , o( ,, ro
The net profits are therefore from 39,000 to 41,000 dinars (or 135) pei hectare
Between the years 1920 and 1924, the total production of raw opium has varied from 30,000
As the present production of raw opium 30,000 kilogrammes represents only one-
fifth of the maximum quantity which can be produced (and which was actually produced
before 1912), the cultivation of the poppy and the production of raw opium represents a
possible 1 000,000 on the credit side of the State trade returns. ,
P Raw opium is not yet used in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes for the manu-
facture of products for medical and scientific purposes, although there are several . &
branches of the chemical industry. The whole amount  carted abroad not directly
but indirectly by Salonica firms. All efforts of exporters of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes to sell their raw opium to manufacturers in the East have proved unsuccessful.
Their failure is explained by the fact that they are unknown to the chief manufacturers m
England! 'America and Germany ; moreover 4 opium exported rations
and lastly the Salonica firms owing to the circumstances referred to and to their relations
with foreign countries, their intimate knowledge of the world markets and their ample financia
means and credit can quickly cope with fresh competition. Thus the commercial pai
played by the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, as regards raw opium, stops at tl e
frontier.
The information which has been given with regard to opium cultivation in the Kingdom
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes previous to 1918 and in the period rg 2 r-r 924 shows th t
production is falling, but in an irregular manner. This is due to factors which affect opium
cultivation, and ovfr which the cultivator has no control : frost, floods, drought and diseases
The cultivators of raw opium in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes are never
certain as to the quantity which they will obtain in any one year. As the seed is sown in
the autumn, the harvest depends mainly upon the rigour of the winter. As a rule, during
the last five years, only one-fifth to one-sixth of the acreage under cultivation furnished the
desired results. Floods, drought and disease have reduced production to a level unknown
in the history of opium cultivation in Southern Serbia. R ,
These facts began to cause anxiety among cultivators and, in consequence, t y
Government and vfrious economic and social institutions, such as the Chamber of Commerce
and Industry of Skoplje, undertook to examine the problem from every point of view, and
in particular 7 from the economic and social standpoint. In the course of this task their
attention was first directed to the question whether opium cultivation could be replaced by
the cultivation of other products. A most careful investigation showed that this was very
uncertain. In the meanwhile, the problem of opium cultivation is constantiy becoming
more critical. The crisis has naturally caused great anxiety among producers and the pu
geno lf l^ the l state'ofaffairs is to be properly understood, it is essential to explain the difficulties
with which the producers and the Royal Government have to contend.
Tobacco cotton, silk and grapes are the products which may, m vie w f the
conditions, be regarded as the best substitutes for opium, and the problem of their cultivation
raises two questions ;
(1) Are opium producers capable of turning immediately to the cultivation of a
new product ? . f
(2) Can the cultivation of such new products ensure the economic prosperity o
producers and the State ?
The cultivation of tobacco has increased considerably during the last two years, but
this increase is merely a consequence of the damage caused to the poppy by frost for, at
the beginning of spring, when the cultivator is sure that the poppy will not furnish the desired
Jesuhf he! having no choice in the matter, sows tobacco. The cost of tobacco production
per hectare is however, so much greater than that of opium production that cultivators
Frequently lose not merely the balance of their previous profits but even their means of
SUbSI From the cultivator's point of view, therefore, as well as from the point of view of national
wplfarp tobacco is not a satisfactory substitute for opium.
The production of cotton, which is the second possible substitute for the poppy, involves
many difficulties of a practical and technical nature. In the first place, most poppy-growers


do not know how to grow cotton. Further, the severe droughts which are common in the
region where the poppy is cultivated would necessitate extensive irrigation schemes which
the Royal Government is not able to carry out at present. Finally, practical proof has already
been obtained that cotton-growing is not profitable to agriculture in general, as the costs,
in proportion to the profit per hectare, are much higher in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes than elsewhere. In spite, therefore, of the efforts of the State and of private
persons, cotton-growing cannot be rendered a lucrative undertaking.
The cultivation of silkworms is better calculated to compensate the cultivators of opium
for their losses, and to save them from the ruin with which they are threatened, but its intro-
duction will require time. A great number of mulberry-tree nurseries were devastated during
the recent war. Ihe creation of new nurseries will require more patience and care than can
be bestowed on this task at the moment.
Vines were very flourishing in the present opium-cultivation zone before 1912, but they
were completely destroyed by an epidemic of phylloxera. To replant them in existing cir-
cumstances would present a double risk for the Government, which is already struggling with
the over-production of wine in the northern parts of the country, and for the producers, to whom
the new vines would bring no profit.
In view of all the facts to which we have drawn attention, the conclusion of the present
memorandum may be stated as follows ; the object of the Second Opium Conference, viz. :
the direct limitation of the production of raw opium, is not incapable of realisation in the
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. But in carrying out this limitation it is necessary,
\ n J iew crisis through which the country is passing, not to lose sight of the following
difficulties :
(1) It is hardly possible to give an exact estimate of the quantities of raw opium
necessary for medical and scientific needs in the Kingdom, seeing that there are various
circumstances impossible to foresee (epidemics, etc.) which would make such an estimate
illusory, and that the new scientific and medical institutions which have been established
are making increased demands for prepared opium.
(2) The complications which will arise in connection with the first efforts to be
made by the national chemical industry to prepare the raw opium of the country.
(3) The almost complete impossibility of estimating the acreage which would
have to be sown in order to obtain the quantity of raw opium as limited. This is due
to the frosts, floods and droughts which have to be taken into account in the present
poppy-growing zone. In order to obtain a given quantity of opium, it is necessary
the 1 isles being as they are to-day to sow an acreage five or six times as large as that
which is taken as the basis according to the estimate of average requirements.
(4). The system of impoit certificates would place our producers and exporters in
a position of complete dependence upon foreign manufacturers or importers in posses-
sion of import permits. Extortion on the part of importers would not be impossible.
(5) The renewal of cocoon production to replace poppy-growing would involve consi-
deiable expenditure. Time would also be necessary for replacing the cultivation of one
product by that of another, and it could only be done gradually.
For these reasons the cultivation of the poppy and the production of raw opium are not
for the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes merely the problem of a definite inter-
national evil the abuse of narcotics ; they also contain the germs of a grave social, economic
and possibly political crisis in the near future.
Annex 10.
THE QUANTITIES OF NARCOTIC DRUGS PRODUCED OR CONSUMED IN EGYPT*
Memorandum hy Dr. A. H. Mahfooz Bey, Delegate of Egypt.
Population. The population of Egypt in 1923 was 13,551,000.
Medical Service. At the end of 1923 there were 1,808 doctors, 120 veteran surgeons
and 323 dentists practising and residing in different parts of the country. There are also
23 general Government hospitals, 22 ophthalmic hospitals (3 of which are travelling) 2 lunatic
asylums, 8 fever hospitals run by the Public Health Departments and distributed all over
j.^ ave J- 0 also that there are many voluntary general hospitals, either run
y different bodies or by Wakfs? administrations and also many other provincial general
hospitals, ophthalmic hospitals (travelling), children?s dispensaries, maternity homes belonging
to the provincial councils and scattered all over Egypt, of which I am at present unable to
give their exact number. Also the number of hospitals attached to prisons are not available
at present.
Opium. From an historical point of view, it is interesting to state that Egypt in the
days of the Pharaohs did not know Papaver somniferum and is not mentioned in the medical


1912
388
1,746,000 kilos
I 9 I 3
457
2,056,000

I 9 I 4
346
I >557> 000

I 9 I 5
849
3,820,000

1916
927
4,171,000

1917
1,379
6,135,000

(from 1918 to
1920 cultivation was prohibited by law)
Syria
.... ?
55,385
3,817,480
5,368,210
318,120
Persia
305T90
1,573,450
5,644,292
?
Turkey
7,300
1,221,685
1,736,120
2,750
Great Britain
20,859
96,454
64,000
23,350
66,284
India
?
300,000
?
?
papyrus. However, Papaver rheas flowers (a wild poppy) were found on the royal mummies
and its seeds were discovered in the tombs of Fayoum during the Greek period. The plant
itself is found in the palace of Hawata (18th dynasty).
Plinius in his Histoire naturelle livres XIX et XX, said ; ? Opium was known to the
ancient Egyptians?, but unfortunately did not fix the period.
Some Latin authors mentioned that opium existed in the Nile valley before Christ.
Undoubtedly, during the periods of the Greco-Egyptian and thenceforward, opium was espe-
cially cultivated in Egypt for procuring Extr. opii and was principally cultivated near
Thebes (now called Luxor).
In 1833 it is reported in L?histoire de VEgypte , by Marcel, that 4,830 acres were culti-
vated for opium poppy in that year and the production was 14,500 okes {i.e. 17,705 kilos).
Until 1887 our knowledge about the area cultivated for opium poppy is limited.
Since 1912 Egypt has accurate statistics of this crop.
It may interest the Advisory Committee or any other Committee or Sub-Committee to
know the number of acres of land cultivated for opium poppy during the last ten yeais in
Egypt. They are as follows :
Table
Year Number of acres Quantity of raw opium produced.
1921 i,599 7,3:95, 000 
1922 (not available.) (not available.)
1923 do. do.
1924 2,480 11,160,000 kilos
The above list shows that cultivation of opium poppy is increasing to meet the internal
requirements of the people.
The ordinary yield of raw opium varies from 3.6 to 5.4 kilos per acre or an average of
4.5 kilos. On many different occasions, Egyptian opium was analysed in the laboratoiy of
the Public Health Department ; at Cairo from 1905 until 1924 and the average amount of
morphine found was 9.8 per cent. The highest percentage of morphine found was in 19*7
from opium poppy cultivated in Alchmim (Guirga) and this contained 15 per cent of anhyd.
morphine. _ .
Egypt, more than the amount produced from cultivated opium poppy in its territories,
imported the following quantities of raw opium from the different countries mentioned in the
same list (Table II) during the last five years, i.e. from 1919 to 1923 ;
Table 11.
Raw Opium imported into Egypt from 1919-1923.
Country 1919 1920 1921 1922 *9 2 3
France 0,225 5.825 7.7 10,220
Palestine ? 23,550 45. 000
Greece ? ? 51.760
4,000
Italy ? ?
Germany ? ? 0,250 1,000
Switzerland
0,250 1,000
Crete.
5,000
Total 112,550 499,954 7,082,965 12,868,692 387,!54
Opium Derivatives Morphine, Heroin and Cocaine.
Egypt now is a consuming country and hardly could be regarded as manufacturing.
As has been already stated above, it is a producing country in regard to raw opium. 1 believe
that, in the near future, Egypt will become also a manufacturing country of other drugs.
The following table (III) gives the quantities of narcotic drugs imported into Egypt
during the last five years (from 1919 to 1923) :


Table 111.
Article 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923
Coca leaves 66,500
Cocaine and its salts 30,800 63,589 80,838 i 55. 4 23 14,560
Morphine 22,935 19,943 33,714 22,340 11,901
Heroin 2,810 4,231 9,248 29,286 5,108
Opium 112,550 499,954 7. 082,965 9.555,000 68,703
Cannabis indica 65,000 23,000 15,000 33,000 2,615
It is understood that ampules of any sort containing any drug mentioned above are not
included.
Great quantities of narcotic drugs have been smuggled into Egypt, the greater part
of which was illicitly used. The following table shows quantities confiscated by the Egyptian
Customs Houses and coastguards during the last five years.
Table IV.
Hashish or
Raw Opium Morphine Heroin Coca leaves Cocaine Cannahis Indica
1919 Custom Houses 22,767
2,709.539
not availa
not availa-
Coastguards ble
1920 Custom Houses 288,529
1920 Custom Houses 288,529 ?? 1,869,199
Coastguards 909,631 16,759 3,697,648
1921 Customs Houses 110,923 0,728 621,822
Coastguards 740,846 55,685 1,775,235
1922 Custom Houses 162,861 - 6,595 173,468
Coastguards 186,794 68,435 1,235,862
1923 Custom Houses 224,888 4,165 81,260 2,128,864
Coastguards 452,548 149,903 2,708,169
149,903 2,708,169
*
* *
In conclusion, I have to point out that our Medical Service is rapidly increasing in these
days, e.g., we have established several special Hospitals for ankylostoma and bilharzia, special
anti-venereal clinics, and we are about to establish special hospitals for leprosy, tuberculosis
(which are rare in our country), etc.
In view that Egypt can request revision of her legitimate requirements at any time in
future, I have prepared the following Table (V) showing the quantities of narcotic drugs
required for legitimate use in Egypt for one year, calculated from the average of the last two
and a half years, taking the import figures as the basis.
Table
Article Legitimate annual requirement
Kilos.
Op. Powder 101,232
Extr. fluid 5,491
? mon 2,775
brut 4,896
Teinture 14,422
Extr. sec 1,429
? Aqueron 6,939
Morphine 14,569
Coca leaves . 31,297
? Extr. fluid 118,453
? Teinture 22,000
H eroin , 17,553
Cocaine 66,223
Cannabis Indica Extr. mon 11,165
J luid i,33i
? Teinture 12,375
To the amount of raw opium indicated
quantity taken from the Egyptian product
imported in ampules and this is not included
above, 90,000 kilos should be added as the
for the legitimate use. Much morphine is


Annexe 11.
NOTES FURNISHED BY THE BRITISH DELEGATION ON THE PRODUCTION OF
OPIUM IN AFGHANISTAN, TURKESTAN, AND THE MARITIME PROVINCES
(IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF VLADIVOSTOCK), BASED UPON
INFORMATION RECEIVED BY HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY?S
GOVERNMENT.
i. Afghanistan.
The chief centres of cultivation are in the provinces of Herat, Badakshan and Jallabad.
Opium has ceased to be a Government monopoly and any person may deal in it. There
is a 5 per cent export duty levied upon opium under the latest Afghan Customs tariff.
Nearly all the opium produced in Afghanistan is regularly transported into Chinese
Turkestan, not across the short frontier between the two which is a very difficult road
but via the great and little Pamirs across the territory of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.
2. Semiryechensk.
Opium also reaches Chinese Turkestan from Semiryechensk (that part of Russian
Turkestan wffiich runs alongside and to the north-west of the Chinese province of Hsing Kiang).
The opium grown in the Karakoll Valley, south of Lake Issik Kull, reaches Hsing Kiang by
means of caravans passing between Przhevalsk (Semiryechensk) and Uch Turf an (Hsing
Kiang) by various passes over the Tian Shan, none of which are less than fourteen thousand
feet high. Most of the trade is in the hands of the Russian Kirghiz and Tungans of the Kara-
koll district, who exchange the opium in Uch Turfan for Kashgar cotton cloth, boots and shoes,
fleeces, English muslin and thread. The trade is so profitable that it is estimated that not
less than two thousand traders are now engaged in the traffic. Such statistics as are avail-
able show that the weight of opium imported into Uch Turfan and district in 1921 was esti-
mated at one thousand five hundred characks (30,000 pounds) ; in 1922, the figures rose to
two thousand charaks, whilst in 1923 two thousand five hundred charaks (50,000 pounds)
had been imported by November.
Opium is also grown in Semiryechensk in the district round Djrkent. Every year the
Chinese authorities of Hi (Dzungaria) openly permit hundreds of persons to go over the border
into Fjarkent, cultivate opium there and bring the produce back into Chinese territory.
In 1920, two thousand eight hundred crossed the border for this purpose.
Semiryechian opium is inferior to that of Afghanistan but is able to compete as the diffi-
culties of transport make the price of Afghan opium almost prohibitive except to the very
wealthy.
3. The Maritime Provinces.
According to the reports at the disposal of the Government Statistical Bureau (the Soviet
Government at Vladivostock), seventy dessyatins (189 acres) were under cultivation of poppy
in 1923. Figures for the year 1924 are not yet available, but the census of 19*7 showed one
hundred and eighty dessyatins (486 acres) growing poppy. All these statistics must be taken
as being considerably under the real figure, as, in consequence of the prohibition of poppy
culture, the actual measurements of the opium areas were carefully concealed by the popula-
tion and the raw opium found its way into China as contraband. One may judge of the extent
of opium smuggling by the results of experiments in 1922 when cultivation, storage and sale
of opium were freely permitted upon payment of a tax of fifty roubles by the grower and of
excise duty by the purchaser. These taxes naturally acted as a means of discovering the
real extent of the ground under cultivation, but, nevertheless, in 1923 some eight hundred and
eighty-one poods (roughly fourteen tons) of opium were legally exported. Taking into con-
sideration that one dessyatin yields fifty pounds of raw opium, the amount exported must have
been gathered from at least seven hundred dessyatins (1,890 acres). Adding thereto the
quantity smuggled out, the actual area under cultivation must be considerably larger.
The August crop of opium in the Maritime Provinces for 1922 was estimated by a Russian,
who was endeavouring to obtain an opium monopoly in Vladivostock in that year, to be two
hundred thousand funts (Russian pounds). Each of the three hundred opium dens which
were licensed in Vladivostock and the Primorsky Province were estimated by the same autho-
rity each to consume not less than twelve hundred poods per annum.


India
Yes.
Turkey
Yes.
America
No.
Persia
Annex 12.
REPORT OF THE SUB-SUB-COMMITTEE
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd, (Australia).
The Committee proceeded to a discussion on Article iof the American proposals. Each
delegation was asked to express its views on this article, the result being as follows .
America accepted.
India could not accept.
Persia accepted with a general reservation already made by that delegation, namely,
that it could only accept on the conditions laid down in the Persian memorandum.
Turkey could not accept without further investigation by a Committee on the lines suggested
by the American delegation and in accordance with the principles set out in a memorandum
prepared by the Turkish delegation.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes could only accept on the conditions as set
out in the memorandum submitted by that delegation.
Egypt could only accept with a general reservation that the conditions stipulated in their
memorandum were accepted, but were agreeable to a Committee of Investigation.
The result of this vote clearly demonstrated that no State, except America, could accept
unconditionally or without further investigation.
The American delegate then submitted a motion in the following terms ;
?That a Committee of Enquiry be appointed to fully investigate every phase of this
question after an examination of the memoranda submitted by the various delegations
and visiting producing countries, and particularly on the following points :
3 . . . (To be set out by the American delegation.)
4
5
This was on general lines and was subject to redrafting and elaboration.
Mr. Clayton (India) moved an amendment on this proposal in the following terms ;
?That Sub-Sub-Committee B is of opinion that no modification of the existing wording
of Article 1 of the Hague Convention is possible until further information is available as
to the conditions prevailing in the producing countries.?
On this amendment being put to the vote, the result was as follows
Egypt 
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes . 
The three abstentions, therefore, practically rendered this proposition abortive.
Mrs. Hamilton Wright then moved the following motion :
?In order that no confusion may exist, I move that Sub-Sub-Committee B report
to Sub-Committee B that the producing nations here represented are prepared to accept
in principle Article i of the Suggestions of the United States, but owing to economic
considerations they are not prepared to accept Article i without reservations as to
the time when, and the conditions under which, they will be prepared to give Article i
complete and effective application in their territories.?
The result of the voting on this motion was as follows ;
Persia accepted in principle, with the reservation as set out in their memorandum
in other words, certain economic conditions would have to be complied with before
putting Article i into operation.
India was not prepared to accept the article in view of the interpretation placed by
the American delegation on the term ?strictly medical and scientific purposes?.
The delegate of Turkey had definite instructions from his Government not to accept
Article i of the American proposal as printed, but, as the American delegation had approved
of the suggestions contained in the Turkish memorandum as to sending out a scientific
mission to producing countries, he would ask his Government for further instructions.
Egypt accepted the American proposals as printed.
1 he delegate of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes would ask his Government
for instructions to accept the proposal in principle, but he could give no definite acceptance
of approval.
The result of this vote, therefore, was inconclusive, and indicated that certain delegations
required further instructions.


Further consideration was then given to the question of the appointment of a Sub-
Committee of Investigation. The Committee was unable to expiess a definite opinion on this
point until it knew exactly what the proposal of the American delegation was. The Amencan
delegate was therefore asked to. submit a definite proposal to the next meeting of the Sub-
Committee setting out clearly the complete scheme for the investigation :
The authority to appoint the Commission ; of whom it should be composed ;
how it should be financed ; time to be taken in its investigation, and the particulai
points on which the investigation was to be made.
Australian, Austrian and Cuban Proposals.
The remaining items on the agenda were the A ustralian, Austrian and Cuban proposals.
As the Australian proposal was the most definite and comprehensive, it was taken as t e
basis for discussion. It recommends that the production of the growth of the raw materials
in all countries which did not at present produce poppy or coca leaf should be prohibited.
It was explained by the Vice-Chairman that Sub-Committee D had passed the follow-
ing resolution :
?The Committee realises that this proposition imposes a very heavy obligation on
non-producing countries, but, as restriction of production is the only practical method
of combating the evil, agrees to the Australian proposal in principle but on the following
conditions :
?i. That the producing countries agree to reduce their production ;
?2. That the interests of the consuming countries are fully protected in the
matter of their obtaining adequate supplies to meet their reasonable requirements
for medical and scientific purposes.?
After discussion, the voting on this proposal was as follows ;
Egypt did not grow opium for export but only produced to partially meet home require-
ments ?could not accept to reduce production. If they exported, they would agree
to reduce for export only.
Persia could not discuss proposal before knowing what would happen to their
proposals.
India was prepared to reduce for export in accordance with the wishes of importing
countries and that no opium should leave India for illicit traffic and none should be
exported except under certificates of responsible Governments.
Turkey could not give a decision until knew what happened to the American
proposal.
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes would have to ask his Government for
instructions.
United States could not accept proposal without consulting Government. At a
subsequent meeting, the United States delegate intimated that America could accept the
proposal in principle but only on certain conditions to be stated later.
All producing countries present fully concurred in the Australian proposal that non-
producing countries should give up their right to production ; but, as will be seen rom
the above result of the voting, the producing countries were not prepared to accept t
condition laid down by Sub-Committee D that they should reduce production - except
without certain conditions being first fulfilled.
Persian Proposal.
The discussion on this proposal was postponed until after the receipt of the memorandum
to be drawn up by the American delegation on the constitution of the proposed Committe
of Enquiry.
The position may therefore be briefly summarised as loliows .
Article 20-A of the American proposal amended to read ;
?(a) For all purposes
?1, For domestic consumption.
?2. For export.?
Article 1 of the American Proposals.
As the foregoing votes indicated, no definite decision was obtainable in the Sub-
Sub-Committee for or against Article 1. There was general agreement that the American
delegation should submit a concrete proposition for the appointment of a Commissioi
Investigation to visit producing countries.
Australian and Cuban Proposals.
Accepted by producing countries, but the conditions laid down by Sub-Committee D
not acceptable to producing countries nor by America without further instructions from its
Government. The American delegate subsequently explained that America could accept in
principle, but only on certain conditions to be stated later.


Document O.D.C. 20
Documents O.D.C. 20 and 20a.
Document O.D.C. 20
(relating to the limitation
and prohibition of the growth of the poppy
and coca leaf).
Document O.D.C. 24
Annex 13
ARTICLE i OF THE AMERICAN PROPOSALS.
Note by Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
The Sub-Committee discussed at considerable length the American suggestion for amend-
ment of Article i.
Only two delegates (those of China and Egypt) were able to accept the American proposals
unconditionally.
An amendment in the following terms made by the Indian delegation was also considered ;
?The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations for the control of
the production and distribution of raw opium and the suppression of its abusive use.
In particular, they shall undertake effective measures to prevent any export of raw opium,
either licit or illicit, not specifically permitted by the provisions of this Convention.?
This was accepted unconditionally by three delegates (India, Grece and the Kingdom
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes). Turkey and Persia made reservations, whilst Egypt
desired an amendment to insert ?for other than medical and scientific purposes?.
The American delegate was unable to accept any amendment of his original proposal
and, as no compromise was possible, the Committee regrets to report that it was unable to
arrive at any agreement.
Annex 14.
SUPPLEMENTARY DRAFT REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE B.
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia)
Geneva, February 3rd, 1925.
The Sub-Committee considered the following questions
Article 1 and the American suggestions thereon ;
The appointment of a Commission of Enquiry and Investigation (submitted by the
American delegate).
Proposals submitted by
Article 1,
The Sub-Committee discussed this article at considerable length, and, on the American
proposals being submitted to a vote, it was clearly demonstrated that no State, except America,
could accept them unconditionally or without reservations or further investigation, unless
it was clearly stated that the provisions applied only to export trade.
The American delegate then submitted a motion for the appointment of a Committee of
Enquiry in the following terms :
?Having noted with interest the reports submitted by Persia, Turkey, the Kingdom
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt, setting forth the economic and
political difficulties with which their Governments are confronted in their efforts to obtain
an effective control over the production of opium ; and
Recognising that in some cases the situation as described may require international
co-operation ;
Sub-Committee B recommends to the Conference that careful consideration be
given to the question of the appointment of a Commission to visit the countries mentioned
above for the purpose of making a careful study of all the problems connected with the
production of, traffic in and use of opium in those countries, and especially with reference
th^ e possibility of substituting therefor the cultivation of other agricultural products,
the development of mineral resources, the improvement of transportation facilities, and
SUC c . er meas ures as ma y be deemed necessary to the end that the production of and
traffic in raw and prepared opium within the countries mentioned and the exportation of
such pioducts therefrom shall be limited to strictly medicinal and scientific purposes.


"The Commission shall be appointed in a manner to be determined by the Conference,
with the approval of the producing countries concerned, and it shall consider carefully
the reports which have been submitted to the Conference by the Governments of Persia,
Turkey, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt. To the
Conference shall also be referred the questions of the number and qualifications of the
members of the Commission and of the steps to be taken to obtain the funds necessary
to meet the expenses of the Commission for the purpose as described above.
"The Commission shall be instructed to make its report in a manner to be determined
by the Conference. The report, together with the recommendations of the Commission,
shall be communicated to the Powers signatory to the Convention. The signatory
Powers especially the Governments of Persia, Turkey, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes, Greece and Egypt agree to give due consideration to the report and re-
commendations of the Commission."
The Sub-Committee accepted this proposal on the understanding that the Committee should
be appointed under the auspices of the League of Nations, which should pay the expenses
of the Commission.
The American delegate reserved this point for further discussion.
The American delegate urged that Article i of the American suggestions be accepted in
principle first and the Commission of Enquiry to follow, but the article was not to be held
in abeyance pending the report of the Commission of Enquiry. That it should be included in
the Convention, not the Preamble. Countries which were not in a position to accept the pro-
posal immediately could make reservations as to the time when, and the conditions under which,
they would be prepared to give it complete and effective application in their territories.
At subsequent meetings the whole of the suggested amendments of Article i were recon-
sidered. As the result of this discussion, the following motion was adopted (the delegate for
the United States of America abstained from voting) ;
"The Sub-Committee discussed at considerable length the suggestion of the United
States of America for amendment of Article i.
"Only two delegates (those of China and Egypt) were able to accept the United States
proposals unconditionally.
?An amendment in the following terms, made by the Indian delegation, was also
considered :
??The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations for the control
of the production and distribution of raw opium and the suppression of its abusive
use. In particular, they shall undertake effective measures to prevent any export
of raw opium, either licit or illicit, not specifically permitted by the provisions of
this Convention.?
"This was accepted unconditionally by three delegates (India, Greece and the King-
dom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes). Turkey and Persia made reservations, whilst
Egypt desired an amendment to insert ?for other than medical and scientific purposes.?
?The United States delegate was unable to accept any amendment of its original
proposal. As no compromise was possible, the Committee regrets to report that it was
unable to arrive at any agreement.
"Non-producing countries were not consulted.?
Australian, Austrian and Cuban Proposals.
As the Australian proposal was the most definite and comprehensive, it was taken as the
basis for discussion. It recommends that the production or the growth of the raw materials
in all countries which did not at present produce poppy or coca leaf should be prohibited.
It was explained by the Vice-Chairman that Sub-Committee D had passed the following
resolution ;
"The Committee realises that this proposition imposes a very heavy obligation on
non-producing countries, but as restriction of production is the only practical method
of combating the evil, agrees to the Australian proposal in principle but on the following
conditions :
?I. That the producing countries agree to reduce their production.
?2. That the interests of the consuming countries are fully protected in the
matter of their obtaining adequate supplies to meet their reasonable require-
ments for medical and scientific purposes."
This resolution was accepted by the producing countries, but the conditions laid down
by Sub-Committee D were not acceptable to the producing countries nor by the United States
of America without further instructions from its Government. The American delegate sub-
sequently explained that America could accept it in principle, but only on certain conditions
to be stated later.
Persian Memorandum (Document O.D.C. 24).
The Sub-Committee agreed to the following resolution :
"The Sub-Committee, having given consideration to the Persian memorandum
(Document O.D.C. 24), particularly those clauses relating to : Revenues, Persian policy,
General policy, Unconditional assurances, Source of funds, Moratorium, Customs,


?Fully appreciates the difficulties confronting Persia in immediately carrying out the
desire to reduce the production of opium in Persia to amounts needed for medical and
scientific purposes in Persia and for export for the same purposes.
?It therefore recommends to the Conference the following resolution :
?The Conference has had presented for its consideration a very complete and
valuable memorandum prepared by the Government of Persia, setting forth in
a clear and comprehensive manner the existing situation in Persia with regard to
the production and trade in opium, and the numerous measures agricultural,
economic and financial which in the opinion of the Persian Goveynment must
necessarily be carried out before any effective scheme for the reduction and
control of production can be introduced in that country. The memorandum
points out that these measures require for their initiation the obtaining by the Persian
Government of financial assistance from the Powers which this Conference is not
in a position to secure. The Conference considers that a case for enquiry has been
made out and therefore recommends to the Council of the League of Nations that
a Committee of Experts, with the necessary qualifications, be sent under the auspices
of the League to make a full enquiry into the facts as stated in the memorandum as
well as into the practicability of the proposed measures and their suitability for the
attainment of the end in view, namely, the effective control and limitation of the
production of opium in Persia, in accordance with the terms of the Convention to he
adopted by this Conference, in the hope that, in the event of the case of the Persian
Government being established, the report of the said Committee may demonstrate
that adequate guarantees as to the probable success of the proposed measures are
obtainable to justify the taking of the measures proposed by the Government of
Persia, and, if necessary, the issue of a loan in the money markets of the world for
the purpose of providing the Government of Persia with the financial assistance
required, or such assistance as the Committee may find to he required.?


MINUTES
OF 1
SUB-COMMITTEE C.
Geneva, November 2 sth, 1924, to January Both, 192 5.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Members 22 7
First Meeting, November 29th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
1. Limitation of the Production of Coca Leaves for Export. . 227
Second Meeting, December nth, 1924, at 6 p.m.
2. Limitation of the Production of Coca Leaves for Export (Continuation of the
Discussion) * 227
Third Meeting, December 17th, 1924, at 5.30 p.m.
3. Preliminary Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Committee 231
Fourth Meeting, January 30th, 1925, at 3 p.m.
4. Final Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Committee 231
5. Close of the Sub-Committee?s Work 231
Annex.
Draft Report of Sub-Committee 232


SUB-COMMITTEE C-
LIST OF MEMBERS
Chairman : M. von Eckardt (Germany)
The following countries were represented on the Sub-Committee :
Bolivia Japan
Germany Netherlands
The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee
and adopted by the First Committee at its second meeting, held on November 25th, 1924.
FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday, November 29 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. von Eckardt (Germany).
1. Limitation of the Production of Coca Leaves for Export.
After a short exchange of views, the Sub-Committee decided that each of its members,
after a careful examination of the suggestions of the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in
Opium, should draw up a memorandum stating the views of his delegation, to be presented
and discussed at the next meeting.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December nth, 1924, at 6 p.m.
Chairman : M. von Eckardt (Germany).
2. Limitation of the Production of Coca Leaves for Export (continuation of the Discussion).
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) made a general statement regarding the limitation of export
and production, and submitted a report to Sub-Committee C. This report was a summary of
the various memoranda which he had drawn up in the Advisory Committee and at one of
the plenary meetings of the Conference C
He summed up the point of view of his Government. Coca leaves were neither dangerous
nor injurious to the population which consumed them. It would not therefore be prepared
to accept restrictions, since the exportation of coca leaves from Bolivia only took place to the
Argentine and Chile for the same harmless use. His Government therefore desired that the
production of coca leaf should not be limited in Bolivia, and that, as regards exportation to
the Argentine and Chile for the same use as it was put to in Bolivia, it should be indirectly
limited by the application of the import certificate system.
1 See verbatim record of the ninth meeting of the plenary Conference.


M. van Wettum (Netherlands) said that the Netherlands would be ready to accept the
limitation of exports provided that all the other countries producing coca leaf also limited
their exports and that the other Powers accepted the proposals which had been made in regard
to the control of the trade in coca leaves. He understood the impossibility of limiting produc-
tion in Bolivia. His Government would be prepared to submit the exportation of coca leaves
from Java to the control of the system of import and export certificates.
M. Sugimura (Japan) read the following memorandum on ?Coca Leaves?
I. Limitation of production with a view to exportation.
{a) Present situation
1. Bolivia does not export coca leaves to foreign manufacturing countries.
2. Java only exports when a certificate of importation is produced, or at
least is ready to do so, although this clause is not yet in the Convention.
3. Peru exports to foreign manufacturing countries, but the conditions under
which this exportation takes place are not known.
(Such, at least, is my personal view of the situation.)
( b) Limitation
In order to limit production for purposes of exportation, the following condi-
tions must be successively fulfilled. It is necessary to fix :
i. The medical and scientific needs of each foreign consuming country and the
medical and scientific needs of the whole world.
2. The figures of world manufacture.
3. The quantity manufactured in each country (on the basis of the present
situation or of other criteria).
4. The quantity to be exported by all the producing countries. (In this
case the quantities to be exported by each manufacturing country must
be fixed.)
These conditions are clearly difficult to fulfil in view of the freedom of trading
in this domain, the fluctuations in prices and, in many cases, the manoeuvres of specu-
lators. It may also be noted that cocaine can be manufactured by chemical
synthesis. (In my view limitation even as regards exportation is very difficult.)
11. General limitation of production.
This question can be and must necessarily be considered in the event of the
problem of the limitation of production for purposes of exportation being settled.
The Netherlands delegate has pointed out that this question submitted by the
American delegation is outside the scope of our programme. The Bolivian delegate,
moreover, maintains that the use of coca leaves does not produce any of the injurious
effects of the other narcotics dealt with by the Conference. The Netherlands
delegate also states that the coca bushes in Java are used by the natives to make
hedges.
The Chairman asked the members of the Committee to give their opinion on the state-
ment which had just been read.
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) asked M. van Wettum what he meant by the limitation of
exports. Bolivia had no exports to manufacturing countries; the quantities of coca leaves which
had been exported to Europe in the last ten years were very small ; 4,000 kilos exported to
England, and 1,800 kilos to Germany in the last four years, which meant that Bolivian coca
leaf was not employed for the manufacture of cocaine. He asked how M. van Wettum proposed
that the export of coca leaf should be limited in the case of countries exporting coca leaves,
such as Peru and Java, whose coca was used for the manufacture of cocaine.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) replied that it would be possible to limit their exports.
Control would be practicable, since exports were only sent through certain ports. It would,
however, be necessary to know what quantities were required, since coca leaves varied in their
content of cocaine, some of them containing 1 per cent and others 2 per cent. The fact
that this content varied according to the leaves rendered it difficult to fix figures. In the
event of limitation to medical and scientific needs, the best system of control would seem to
be that of import and export certificates.
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) recognised that this was the only suitable system.
M Sugimura (Japan) did not wish the question of certificates of importation to be
brought into the discussion as this question concerned the control and not the limitation
of production. The case of Bolivia was a very delicate one, since her exports were sent
to non-manufacturing countries which were the same kind of consumers as herself ? Bolivia
only exported 7 per cent to Chile and the Argentine, which was very little.


He thought that theoretically all types of export should be considered, but practically
only export for the manufacture of cocaine need be taken into account.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) did not understand why a difference was made between
the limitation of exports in general and the limitation of exports sent to manufacturing
countries.
M. Sugimura (Japan) would have liked the system of import certificates to be adopted
in respect of all exports, as it was a system of control to enforce limitation. The chief
question was to know whether exports were sent to a manufacturing country in which
cocaine was made.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that perhaps this was not the chief question
With the coca leaves of Bolivia, cocaine could be made without complicated machinery such
as was required to extract cocaine from Java coca leaves ; the question, therefore, did not
only affect manufacturing countries, but also other countries. When coca leaves were
exported to Chile, how could it be known whether they were going to be used for chewing or
for manufacturing cocaine ?
M. Sugimura (Japan) admitted that it might be possible to fix the requirements of the
whole world as regards cocaine, but that was not a question for Sub-Committee C, but lor
Sub-Committee A. Moreover, the quantities manufactured might be limited to what was
required for legitimate purposes, but if medical and scientific needs were still difficult to
ascertain, how could manufacture be limited ? The production for export to manufacturing
countries which had not yet themselves limited the quantity to be manufactured would be
even more difficult to limit. Personally, he thought that, as long as these requirements
were not fixed, the question of the limitation of production for the purposes of export could
not be settled.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) agreed, and emphasised the fact that the limitation of
manufacture would indirectly involve a limitation of the production of raw materials.
M. Sugimura (Japan) agreed to an indirect limitation, because from the moment that
the manufacture of harmful drugs or the production of raw opium could not be strictly limited,
it was impossible to limit strictly the production of coca leaves. All these questions were
the same and it was in this sense that he accepted the limitation of production for export.
Sub-Committee C must take as a guide the work of Sub-Committees A and B.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) asked whether an indirect limitation of manufacture
would not result from an indirect limitation of the production of coca leaves, the Nether-
lands were prepared to limit the exports of Java if the other countries, such as Indo-C ma,
which did not export at present, agreed not to grow coca leaves. The Netherlands Govern-
ment were prepared to accept restrictions on condition that Indo-Chma and t e o er cou
tries did not export. Java would then, however, have a virtual monopoly and this pnvi ege
position would not be acceptable to the other countries.
M. Sugimura (Japan) said that if the manufacturing countries carried out limitation on
an important scale, their action would have a direct influence on countries producing with a
view to export. The key to the whole question was in the hands of the manufacturing coun-
tries. They must refrain from buying raw material. In addition, limitation of production
was still difficult to effect. There were good and bad years. How was limitation possible
in these circumstances ?
The Chairman did not believe that there was any reason to limit production, since the
limitation of production must and could only result from the other limitations to be effected.
None of the countries concerned was in a position at that moment to agree to limitation ,
they would have to await the results of the measures which were to be taken in regard to
manufacture, etc.
M. Sugimura (Japan) thought that what had been said regarding opium also applied
to coca leaves, i.e., the raw material presented fewer dangers. It was only after manufacture
that it became harmful and should be subjected to strict control.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) stated that Java coca leaf could not be chewed, since in
most cases it contained no cocaine, or, if it did, the content was only something like a tenth
of one per cent. The danger always existed that Bolivia would export large quantities of
coca leaf and it was a very easy matter for a contraband trader to make cocaine out of it.
There was no such danger in the case of Java leaf, as very elaborate machinery was necessary
to extract cocaine from it. There was no difficulty in making cocaine from the leaves grown
in other countries.
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) said that, as Chile and the Argentine intended to adopt
the import certificate system, exports to the Argentine and Chile would be brought under
control. It was therefore for the Governments of these countries to ascertain the destination
of the coca leaves imported into their territory.


M Sugimura (Japan) said that Chile and the Argentine were still in the position ?* ?
contracting States which did not accept the import certificate system and were inTJ '
position as Russia in the case of Vladivostok If countries discovered that tw Same
weie being put to a bad use, their Governments were morally bound to limit them. exports
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) stated that, according to official documents there
oVchiltltGi n nev r a)! n (D ~ * *2 M
Is either the Argentine nor Chile exported coca leaf Thp rasp n-f , .
in o7 reservation stit t
 was : "
should? be G aUowe A d (J to P S focalelv^liflhe'f 5 WOUW made ? * Were decided tba ? Bolivia
eating.  Ca leaVes 111 the same wa T as ne or two countries used opium for
madeVregarf toTe Kng'of tlTea/ ?xb * deSired a nervation to be
that the limitation tlie^hri T va " fettum foresaw was
inevitably affect Java coca l?af i i , t h mport certlftc ate system would
for the purpose of beKnwrt ?iSo cocaine ? P  rte ? into other countries
certain persons engaged in the effindesrine troffie * ! f hat the result would be to compel
raw material. Thus the nuantitv of e?eom? m C tU , rn to countries like Bolivia for their
for medical and scientific purposes and also bv comrab h H W  rld b  th by lawful dealers
or perhaps would even be increased. conti aband dealers would remain unchanged,
and rerttfleate intern! n  W P  Ssible to conclude that both Bolivia
it were unhiereaUy U a do^ted herlandS) * hat h ? S Governm ?t would accept the system if
would accept it. ALIER (Bolivia) stated that, if similar conditions prevailed, his Government
rous ? hat be bad ?ly called attention to the nume-
A form of crude cocaine, c?fr?S 1 G" 1 S ? tb ?America was already on sale,
market. It gave a yield of cocaine which wi n ~(" J 'x' coldd be obtained in the Hamburg
development of this branch ofthe Hade JZZ J* C  n f tant ' The onl y obstacle to thS
however, that it was increasing considerably. uncertain return. He feared,
cocaine. During years WaS 6  nly countr y manufacturing crude
and 84 kilos to Great Britain 4 Y IlV ? a had eXported g8 39 kilos of coca leaves to Germany
as soon * ?al
Of being used for illicit purposes to anv rmS ? m?? e s port enormou s quantities, capable
should act as they diedn fhe ofVdTostock ? ? t the SyStem ' They
were adopted^^e??^^!^ l^^^!*?/ 6 ! I* 6 G? that ? even if restrictive measures
the whole of South America, along the grit?ivers d i( ndesti . n , el y exported from
m a way which would enable it to be properly limited ra  C  oUld not be ??trolled
only two Customs offices^hrm^h^wffich 4 'coca'ka^wa 56  f / rom Bolivia, there were
always the danger of contraband traffic exported, but obviously there was
M. van WETTUM (Netherlands) asked what happened to the coca leaf at Iqu.que.
lation in chewed. A la ,rge part of the working popu-
aCq?e,dhtlToS 00 t d he opS W  rkerS had
not the use .of coca leac as^actbeTintohi 4^?^ tbe 3 uestion whether or
bf 1 V ' nfCr ' :nC c had been challenged in connection with tl-ie'A as . llb cit. The competence
m Article i; that question had been raised bvthAffil J A < me ? ca ! 1 Proposals contained


oreoared to have an enquiry held in Bolivia. That idea had been suggested by his Government
If the enquiry showed that the use of coca leaf was injurious, the Bolivian Government would
forbid it.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) stated that he had read a book by Dr. Mortimer contain-
ing valuable information as to the manner in which coca leaf was used in Bolivia and Peru,
and that after reading this book he was convinced that the practice was not injurious.
M Sugimura (Japan) said he was apprehensive that ill-informed persons might think
that Bolivia was raising the same question as that connected with' P lU ?JCommittee!:
the use of the coca leaf in Bolivia was not injurious. He thought that bub
ctate that an investigation would be of great interest, and, if the view of the Bolivian
legate were sound, Sly tad only to test it, the Advisory Committee, or some other body
of the same kind might continue the investigation.
He added that as the general limitation of production was a somewhat remote contin-
gency, Sub-Committee C had confined itself to the examination of production for export.
M van Wettum (Netherlands) said that if the Sub-Committee approved of the limitation
of export it should*state its views on that subject. If it decided to recommend the limi-
tation for export it would nevertheless be compelled to consider general limitation Limi-
tation for export purposes was, however, not so difficult as general limitation of production.
M Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) stated that in Bolivia the limitation of the production of
coca leaf would serve no useful purpose. The application of the import and export certifi
cate svstem would lead naturally to the control of exports. This system would provide ample
guarantees I forthe control of the manufacture of cocaine. The production of coca leaf would
be indirectly limited as a result of the limitation of the manufacture of cocaine.
It was decided that M. van Wettum and M. Pinto-Escalier should submit proposals at a
later meeting.
THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December lyth, 1924, at 5.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. von Eckardt (Germany).
3. Preliminary Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Committee.
The Secretary read the draft report prepared by M van Wettum J^nex)
After a short discussion, in which M. Sugimura (Japan) and M. Pmto-Escaher ( , J
took part, the report was provisionally adopted, with certain formal amendments, and the
Chairman was instructed to transmit it to the President of the Conference.
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva, on Friday, January 30th, 1925, at 3 p.m.
Chairman : M. von Eckardt (Germany).
4. Final Consideration of the Report of the Sub-Committee.
Tup Ph airman nrooosed the adoption of the Sub-Committees report.
Jhe reoort* was rmanimouslyadopted, with an amendment by the Netherlands delegation,
present will abstain from coca growing in the future . ? . , t Dar agraph
At the request of the Bolivian delegate the word impracticable m the p g P
was substituted for the word ?impossible .
The report as amended was adopted.
5. Close of the Work of the Sub-Committee
The Chairman thanked the members of the Sub-Committee for their useful collaboration.


Annex.
Draft Report of Sub-Committee C.
For final text , see Record of the Plenary Meetings , annex 22.
The Sub-Committee C, having considered the information of the delegate of Bolivia
regarding the innocuous use of coca leaves by the Bolivian people, came to the conclusion that
t ie limitation of the production of coca leaves to the amount necessary for medical and scien
tific purposes is impossible as it would imply the absolute prohibition of the harmless
consumption of coca leaves in several South American States. In Java this limitation of the
production of coca leaves would also be inadvisable, as it would imply the extirpation of all
exported^ 3 natlV6S aS llVing hedg6S ' the leaves  f are never consumed or
T he Sul ?' Committee proceeded then to examine the limitation of the production of
ex P ort Purposes, which also proved not to be feasible in the P coca-growing
h American countries, as no distinction exists between the production for domestic
dhlp Umptl  n f  r ! P  rt P ur Poses. In Java such limitation was declared to be quite pos-
sible, as, apart from the coca shrubs used as living hedges, coca leaves are solely produced
tToned e rfo ary Prod r  n plan T tations T for exp ort purposes / domestic men
ed before, is unknown m Java. If all coca-producing countries would agree to do thp
same, the Government of the Netherlands Indies would be willing and abfe to limit the
production of coca leaves for export purposes. As such an agreement d? not aroe ?to be
possible at this time, the Sub-Committee finally agreed upon the method of indirect limita
underlie
? S he en( ? ar rived at by the Conference may satisfactorily be accomplished It therefore
(I) leaves 6 ; 2   th 6 HagU6 Convention oi x 912 shall be extended to apply to coca
<2) tI h appty te to co f c 1 a m ieaves CertifiCateS ? d 6XP  rt authorisations extended


MINUTES
SUB-COMMITTEE .
Geneva , November 29th, 1924, to December isth, 1924.


CONTENTS
T Page
List of Representatives
235
First Meeting, November 29th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
1. Procedure of the Sub-Committee
Second Meeting, December 4th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
2. Election of the Vice-Chairman ?
3 ? Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Appointment of Rapporteurs 236
4- Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Limitation of Imports : General
Discussion r
Ihird Meeting, December 6th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
5. Representation of Belgium on the Sub-Committee 2 0 7
6. Preliminary Report of the Sub-Committee : General Discussion.' !.' .' 2 v?
7. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 4 and Article 20 Id) of
the American Proposals : General Discussion 238
8. Proposals of the Advisory Committee ! Article 5 238
Fourth Meeting, December Bth, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
9- Proposals of the Advisory Committee: Article 5 and the Last Paragraph
Discus si mi) 2  * Umted States Suggestions (Continuation of the
10. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 6 230
11* Pro P sals of the Advisory Committee : Article 7 (paragraph XIII). . ' 239
Fifth Meeting, December 10th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m
12. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 6 270
13. Statement by the Portuguese Delegation
14. Report of Sub-Committee F
Sixth Meeting, December 15th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
15 ? Report of the Sub-Committee 241
16. Representation of the Sub-Committee on the Co-ordination Committee. . . 241
Annexes. . . .
242


SUB-COMMITTEE D-
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES
Chairman : M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia).
Vice-Chairman : M. Peltzer (Belgium).
The following countries were represented on the Sub-Committee :
Australia IJ-'dly
Belgium Luxemburg
Bulgaria Portugal
Cuba Roumama
Czechoslovakia Siam
Finland Uruguay
Hungary Venezuela
Irish Free State
The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee
and adopted by the First Committee at its meeting held on November 25th, 1924.
FIRST MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday, November 29 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia).
1. Procedure of the Sub-Committee.
The Chairman invited suggestions as to procedure.
M Buero (Uruguay) proposed that the Sub-Committee should postpone its work until
Sub-Committee Ahad decided its main lines of procedure. If the present Sub-Committee
proceeded independently, there would be a danger of its A!";-fL submit to it
Committee should adjourn for two or three days and ask the Secretariat to submit
the results of the work of the other Sub-Committees.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought the Sub-Committee should proceed independently
with the examination of the questions within its terms of reference. It was for this P U FP';
Chat the Sub Committee badVen appointed. Other Sub-Committees _ know
what the consuming countries wanted and what conditions they would like included in J
agreement which might be reached.
M. Aguero yethancourt (Cuba) said there was a danger-of the
to do the same work twice over. Sub-Committee D need not wait until the other Si*
Committees had reached definite decisions, but it must know c irKS romnetence
proceeding. It would also be advisable not to proceed until the question of compet
under discussion in the plenary Conference, had been settled.
M. Rodrigues (Portugal) considered the Sub-Committee should investigate the questions
referred to it from the point of view of consuming countries. Rapporteurs should be appoi
to make a preliminary study of these questions and report to the Committee.


The Chairman proposed that the Sub-Committee should adjourn until the main ques-
tion of competence under discussion in the plenary Conference should be settled, and then
eventually appoint Rapporteurs to study all suggestions received from whatever source.
This proposal was adopted.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December \th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Veverka (Czechoslovakia).
2. Election of the Vice-Chairman.
The Chairman said he would be leaving shortly for Rome, and proposed the appointment
of a Vice-Chairman.
M. Buero (Uruguay) proposed that M. Peltzer (Belgium) should be appointed.
This proposal was adopted.
3. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Appointment of Rapporteurs.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed that the Sub-Committee should proceed with the
examination of the measures suggested by the Advisory Committee.
This proposal was adopted.
Th o Chairman proposed the appointment of two Rapporteurs, one to examine the subject-
matter with regard to raw materials, the other with regard to manufactured drugs.
A third might be appointed later, if necessary. He suggested Mr. M. L. Shepherd (Aus-
tralia) as Rapporteur for the questions as far as they concerned manufactured drugs, and
M. Buero (Uruguay) as Rapporteur for the subjects in connection with raw material.
This proposal was adopted.
4. Proposals of the Advisory Committee ; Limitation of Imports : General Discussion.
wEA+if Buero (Uruguay) suggested that delegates should make a definite statement as to
r hey We J? p r pa^ ed t0 ac( ? pt in P rinci P le the strict limitation of imports to the amount
required for medical and scientific use.
M. Toivola (Finland) said his Government accepted the principle in question.
+e  UE . R  (Uruguay) also accepted the principle. His Government had already sent to
tne Secretariat estimates of the amount they would require in the following year.
M. Hoontrakool (Siam) agreed. His country was in favour of the limitation of the
production of raw materials so as to confine the use of narcotic drugs to strictly medical
and scientific purposes. It was with this end in view that, at the suggestion of the Advisory
Committee, the Secretariat had sent out a request to the Governments that they should send
m the estimates of their annual requirements. The Government of Siam had responded to this
request and had furnished that estimate for the last two years.
mini^ [ ,?ir? ODRI^ U 5 S #^ PortU f- was J n . favour of the limitation of importation to the strict
minimum required for medical and scientific use.
statiscs V ?restTmates X6mbUrg) ****** t0 prindple of Nation. He would prefer annual
R agre^m^nT^ 3^ * M ? VEVERKA ( Czech oslovakia), and Mr. Shepherd (Australia)
that estimates were furnished, it was the intention
?s'Tfhe P  Sltl  n t0 refUS6 or llm ? into *
The Sub-Committee adopted Artiele x. (See records of the Plenary Meetings, Annex 2.)


M BUERO (Uruguay) considered Article 2 somewhat rigid. He thought that a figure
which a period of several and pro
tect importing countries against price manipulation. The article should be read in ngnt
of Annex 11, paragraph 6, of the report of the Advisory Committee.
On the nroDosal of Mr. Shepherd (Australia), the Sub-Committee decided to include in its
report a note fo the effect that consuming countries agreed to Article 2in the light of Annex , para-
graph 6, of the Advisory Committees report.
M Rodrigues (Portugal) pointed out that there was nothing in paragraph 6, Annex II
aboufepidems The Rapporteur should note this in his consideration of the subject.
M. Buero (Uruguay) thought it would be advisable to mention the practical question of
price, etc., in the report.
The Sub-Committee agreed to this proposal.
Article 2 was accepted in principle.
M. Toivola (Finland) thought the Central Board should include equal numbers of repre-
sentatives of consuming and producing countries.
The Sub-Committee accepted this suggestion in principle.
THIRD MEETING
Held at Geneva on Saturday, December 6th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
M. Peltzer (Belgium), Vice-Chairman, in the Chair.
5. Representation of Belgium on the Sub-Committee.
view as substitute delegate to the Sub-Committee.
This proposal was adopted.
M. de Myttenaere took his place on the Sub-Committee.
6. Preliminary Report of the Sub-Committee : General Discussion.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia), Rapporteur submitted his report
Article 20 (a) of the American proposals and Article 4 {b) of the Ad\ y 1 Boar( j
he suggested that statistics should be sent in quarterly, as otherwise the Central Board
would not know whether any country was exceeding its 1 equipments.
M Buero (Uruguay) said Sub-Committee A had agreed to yearly statistics, thought
it would be suitable if Sub-Committee D agreed to the same period. The Central Board could
work as well on yearly as on quarterly statistics.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) pointed out that the article referred to imports, stocks and
? n twTagreed to recommend that States should be invited by the Conference to provide all of
these statistics annually.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) said the American proposals asked for specification of origin
and place of destination and asked whether this could be supplied.
The Sub-Committee decided in the affirmative. ,
The Sub-Committee then agreed, after the discussion, to A
report as the basis of discussion, and to take any points and sugg
connection with it as they occurred.
With reference to the phrase ?stocks in the hands of the wholesale dealers , it was agreed
that figures for stocks could be supplied annually.


7. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 4 and Article 20 ( d ) (2) of the American
Proposals : General Discussion.
Certain members suggested that Article 20 (d) (2) of the United States suggestions only
concerned producing countries. y
M. Buero (Uruguay) thought that, as representing consuming countries, the Sub-Com-
mittee had an interest in the appearance of this paragraph in the convention.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought the last paragraph of Article 4 did not concern consuming
countries. Alterations of wording would naturally have to be made because of the decisions
already taken.
The Sub-Committee agreed with this point of view.
M. Rodrigues (Portugal) desired to place on record the fact that his Government was
not piepared to accept such control by the Central Board as was suggested in the last paragraph
of Article 4 of the Advisory Committee?s suggestions.
With reference to the American draft, he thought it was not necessary that the Board
should draw a country?s attention to the fact that its imports had reached the amount of the
estimates submitted. Such a step would imply casting a reflection on the country concerned.
M. Toivola (Finland) said that in Article XIII of the Versailles Treaty the States signa-
tory had submitted to some measure of control by the other signatories, as was inevitable
m all international agreements. He thought the Board should be given power to institute
enquiries and make a report.
M Rodrigues (Portugal) did not think the cases were identical. His instructions would
not allow him to accept such control.
M. Buero (Uruguay) agreed with the American plan as it stood. He did not think there
was any infringement of sovereignty, as the obligation would be freely undertaken,
. t M - Rodrigues (Portugal) thought the mere publication by the Central Board of statistics
without comment should be quite sufficient.
Mr. Mac White (Irish Free State) pointed out that the signatories to Article 10 of the
Covenant had agreed to a certain control. Portugal had not, up to the present, made any
reservations to this article. y
, Mr. Shepherd (Australia) thought that, if the attention of a country were drawn to the fact
that its imports were high, it would give it an opportunity to explain the reason.
M. Toivola (Finland) suggested that the text of the article should be altered in such
a way as to provide for the publication of statistics, ?classified in such a manner that each
mates 1 LbmitWd? t0 866 m What degree lts im P orts approached the figure of the esti-
Rodihgues (Portugal) still thought a reflection would be cast on the country concerned
accept the^proposal hIS mann6r ' He WOuld make a reserva tion on this subject, but would
M. Buero (Uruguay) said that, according to the position which she was now taking
Poitugal ought to refuse to consent to the establishment of a Central Board. He could not
 f Toivola?s proposal. He would prefer the adoption of one of
would-be unless  d ' n  tmg of the Portu g uese reservation. Otherwise, the Board
been 1 considered ost^one f urther consideration of this question until Article 5 should have
8. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 5.
M. Toivola (Finland) considered the powers given to the Central Board in Article s
somewhat large. Ihe Board should be able to open an enquiry, but not to fix quantities s
m cases where a country had supplied statistics. He agreed with these provisions of the
article concerning cases where countries did not supply statistics.
Board' (Annex G 2) ES (P  rtUgal) made a statem ?? ? the constitution and powers of the Centra!
FOURTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, December Bth, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
M. Peltzer (Belgium), Vice- Chairman, in the Chair.
9. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 5 and the Last Paragraph of Article 20 of
the United States Suggestions [Continuation of the Discussion).
nara^a^ofAH^^^f oll^* T, 088 ? where Powers did provide a statement, the
paragraph of Article 5 was founded on a false basis, and imputed in a sense that they might


be guilty of bad faith. In these circumstances, he could not agree to the proposal that
the Central Board should fix figures, or to its corollary that other countries should undertake
not to supply more than the amount fixed.
M. Toivola (Finland) thought the Sub-Committee should be empowered to institute
enquiries, as was the case in Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles.
M. Buero (Uruguay) suggested that the words ?and likely to be used in part for the illicit
traffic? should be deleted. He would accept the rest of the paragraph.
The Chairman proposed the addition after ?the Board shall fix? of ?after enquiry and
after the publication of the results of this enquiry?.
M. Rodrigues (Portugal) could not admit that it was likely that any country would
submit figures in excess of its requirements, or that they would not submit figures at all.
The Sub-Committee accepted Article 5 in principle, after noting the remarks of the
Portuguese delegate.
10. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 6.
M. Buero (Uruguay), M. Toivola (Finland) and Dr. Duarte (Venezuela) objected to
Article 6 of the Advisory Committee?s proposals, which they considered gave producing
countries an advantage over consumers.
There being some doubt as to the precise meaning of the article, the Sub-Committee asked
Mr. Shepherd to consult Sir Malcolm Delevingne on the point.
11. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 7 (paragraph XIII).
M. Buero (Uruguay) suggested that the Sub-Committee should take the necessary steps
to see that the provisions contained in this article were applied both to signatories and non-
signatories,
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed that the Sub-Committee should record the fact that it
considered this a central clause of the agreement. He recommended the addition of the last
sentence of the American text ;
?The Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the parties to this Conven-
tion the amount fixed in respect of each geographical area and the situation as regards
the exports and re-exports thereto.?
This proposal was adopted.
With reference to the Austrian, Australian and Cuban proposals, Mr. Shepherd
(Australia) proposed that the Sub-Committee should consider the Australian text :
?The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia approves the proposal that,
in order to protect countries undertaking to reduce their production, it shall be forbidden
to countries not producing opium at present to cultivate opium poppies and coca lea\es.
He asked whether other countries would also accept this proposal.
M. Buero (Uruguay) said there was no cultivation of opium poppies 01 coca lea\ es in his
country, but the Australian proposal suggested the establishment of a monopoly. In that case,
countries establishing monopolies should give an undertaking to decrease their production.
M. Rodrigues (Portugal) pointed out that this provision would prevent countries fiom
growing within their borders amounts in excess of those assigned to them by the Central
Board or by its estimates. He thought it was difficult for a country depii\c itself of tre
possibility of growing opium at some future date if it should think it desirable.
This view was supported by the delegate for Czechoslovakia.
The Chairman remarked that any convention that might be established would not neces-
sarily be permanent and, if it were found that this clause did not work well in practice, it could
be altered.
The Sub-Committee accepted the Australian proposal in principle, subject to the addition
of the clause engaging countries to diminish actual production and subject to the agreement of
other non-producing countries not represented on the Sub-Committee.
FIFTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 10 th, 1924) 3-3 P-W-
M. Peltzer (Belgium), Vice-Chairman, in the Chair.
12. Proposals of the Advisory Committee : Article 6.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) attended the meeting of the Sub Committee
to explain the purport of Article 6of the Advisory Committee?s suggestions. These had been


drawn up to meet cases where a small Power might be put into an embarrassing position
Conwntion t0 P  Wer owing to tbe obli g a tions which it had assumed under the
~ It! r6p y - to a question by M. Toivola (Finland), Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Emnirei
said the action of this paragraph was not confined to this particular case and would annlv
equahy to a great Power in respect of another great Power. The Conference mentioned
in the article would not meet to alter the decisions of the Central Board but to decide what
steps were to be taken. dI
M Toivola (Finland) pointed out that the phrase ?to examine whether such limitation
should be put into force should, in his view, be differently drafted.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said that the amount to be limited would be
thmftfKf 6 a eases. The question would be whether the limitation should be enforced. He
ught it would not be possible to bring a question of this kind before the Council of the
Subcommittees. qU ' te P  SS,ble that the article would be deleted owing to the attitude of other
Sir Malcolm Delevingne withdrew.
M. Bueso (Uruguay) could not imagine that any country should hold another count?
be ng iheted POnSlble f  r the aCti  nS  f the Central B  ard He Proposed that the article should
of (AUS ? ralia) ? h  Ught S  me daUSe  f this kind necessar y for the protection
Subcommittee bVoM MU*"**
13. Statement by the Portuguese Delegation (Annex 2).
decide the Board  UtSlde the P rovmce of the Sub-Committee to
the Sub-Committee had already made sugges-
CommJee! V the A meS diSP  Sal  f
general authority t hf t UshoulV'h ollol nece^ sar T to insert some clause giving
Convention werJ carried out He be empowered to see that all conditions of the
Central Board should have the right to them!* P  rtuguese P ro P osals - The
After further discussion, the Sub-Committee adopted the following resolution :
gation with reference to the composUi^^d^he 11 ? 1 pr6 f ared by the Portuguese dele-
Committee of Experts. h com P etence of the Permanent Central
note, the Sub-Committee brings it to the attention ofTh?V' 3 f the co ? dusions of this
being eventually submitted tn thp phovc * be Conference, with a view to its
be set up.? y Submitted t0 the above-mentioned Committee, if this Committee should
14. Report of Sub-Committee F.
tics ??^th e rel7d?o E d E eiL Bel 4r ) fi^? ar o k f ed a t so at C  UntrieS had ?* Prided
States with developed medical services and ll * l S ram ?j :s was an average covering all
not, however, a maximum for any one country a maximum. It was
determining the amount of production. y ? * b d been declded upon as a means of
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) submitted the following proposal :
The Sub-Committee has considered the rpnnri o r -a r- .
objection to its adoption, in view of the fact that J Sld>Co mmittee F and sees no
fully safeguarded as it is left tr poo), , tbat tb f m terests of consuming countries are
g ' 11 18 l6ft t0 each country to determine its own requirements/'
1 his proposal was adopted.


SIXTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, December 15 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
M. Peltzer (Belgium), Vice-Chairman, in the Chair.
15. Report of the Sub-Committee.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia), Rapporteur, submitted his draft report (Annex 3).
[a) Article I. On the Chairman?s proposal, it was agreed to substitute ?provisions
for ?requirements?.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed the inclusion of the following text :
?The understanding was that the consuming countries were prepared to supply
the particulars in such form as might be agreed to by the producing countries.
This text was adopted.
The Committee decided to delete the words ?or the main Committee? at the end of the article
since it had been decided not to appoint these commissions.
Article I was adopted.
{b) Article 2.
Article 2 was adopted without discussion.
(c) Article 3. The Sub-Committee agreed to substitute the term ? members ? for ?personnel?
in the third line.
M. Rodrigues (Portugal) thought that no decision had been reached with regard to the
detailed provisions mentioned in the last sentence.
It was agreed to delete this sentence.
Article 3 was adopted.
id) Article 4. In view of the decision taken by Sub-Committee B, Sub-Committee D
decided to insert a provision in the first paragraph of this article to the effect that the yearly statistics
mentioned should be supplied within six months.
Article 4 was adopted.
{e) Article 5. The word ?indicate? was substituted for ?fix? in the passage in Article 5
regarding the American proposals.
Article 5 was adopted.
(/) Article 6. On the suggestion of M. Rodrigues (Portugal), the second sentence of
this article was redrafted so as to read as follows ;
?Several delegates raised strong objections against this clause and, in the absence
of a clear interpretation, Sir Malcolm Delevingne was invited to attend a latei meeting
of the Sub-Committee and explain the reasons for its insertion.?
Instead of ?and its application to particular cases?, the end of the article was altered to
read ?and to determine the special cases in which it would be applicable?.
Article 6 was adopted.
(a) Article 13. M. Rodrigues (Portugal) suggested that some other term should be
substituted ?for geographical zone,? which did not imply the existence of a Government.
After discussion, the Sub-Committee decided to substitute the phrase ?each country or
territory?.
[h) Proposals of the Australian, Austrian and Cuban Delegations.
Mr. Shepherd (Australia) proposed to add the following sentence at the beginning of
the article ;
?It being the general desire of the consuming countries strictly to limit production
to their actual requirements, the discussion on the three proposals was taken more con-
currently, but as the Australian proposal was more precise . . .
The Sub-Committee agreed to this proposal.
Paragraph I of the suggested conditions was redrafted as follows :
?That producing countries undertake, on their part, to reduce their production.
16. Representation of the Sub-Committee on the Co-ordination Committee.
The Chairman announced that the Committee was asked to designate two members to
act in association with him in representing Sub-Committee D on the Co-ordination CommitU e.
It was agreed that Mr. Shepherd ( Australia) and M. Buero {Uruguay) , the Sub-Committee s
Rapporteurs, should perform this office.


ANNEXES
Page
i. Preliminary Report of Sub-Committee D 2^2
2. Note by the Portuguese Delegation concerning the Composition and Powers of the
Central Board
, -Ho
3. Draft Report of Sub-Committee D
Annex 1.
PRELIMINARY REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE D, PREPARED BY MR. SHEPHERD
(AUSTRALIA), RAPPORTEUR.
1. Article 4 section ( b ). Article 20-D of American proposals. The question raised
in this article of the period for which statistics shall be supplied requires determination.
In a discussion of this matter in Sub-Committee B, it was clearly demonstrated that the
producing countries, with the exception of India, were only able to supply statistics
yearly three months after the close of the year.
Is it necessary for the consuming countries to supply quarterly statistics of their imports
in view of this fact, or should they be limited to yearly statistics as in the case of producing
countries ? r b
It will be noted that the Norwegian Government definitely states its inability to submit
quarterly statistics, as they consider it quite unnecessary. Special attention is invited to the
Norwegian memorandum on this point.
It must be noted also that the Austrian memorandum also deals with this question and
considers that the estimated requirements should be drawn up with due regard to the statis-
tics of the requirements of the various countries over a period of several years.
. K 2 a k Artlc l e 4- regard to the provision in the article for an undertaking to be fur-
ls ed by each Government not to export further consignments during the same year unless
revised estimates had been furnished, this is a matter on which it would be advisable to have
the opinion of the consuming countries present.
Article 5. Empowers the Central Board in certain circumstances to fix the amounts
of the reasonable requirements of a country and raises the question as to whether the
countries are prepared to accept this limitation. 
Rnii/'S f 1fr  m the AdvisoI T Committee?s recommendations by
on complaint of any of the
The other point raised in this article relates to producing countries.
4- Article 13. The American proposal differs only by the addition of these words :
The Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the parties to this Conven-
t?he n expand* rGo. ?? aCh ? he situaf^^s
11 10 question, therefore, for decision is whether this proposal could be accepted.
fP i Th6 f Austnan / Australia n and Cuban proposals are aimed at the same objective that is
the Imitation of the production to actual medical and scientific requirements ? *
Ihe Australian proposal provides for the prohibition of the growth of the raw materiak
m all countries which do not at present produce poppy or coca leaf.
Austria, however, does not agree to this proposition, as, in its view such restriction
would confer an unfair advantage on certain producing countries which would thus obtain
whde the industry of other countries would be injured. Each country should
be left to determine its own requirements in its own territory. Y snould
Both these questions raise an important matter for non-broducina couvivi?* nu tj
he advisable to get the views of the delegates on this point. P ? countries, and it would
further proposals by the Norwegian Government do not seem to come within thn
scope of this Sub-Committee. One relates to the deletion of the last sentence in Ardcle 10
and the other part relates to the inclusion of ecgonine. ?
The remaining part of the Austrian proposal relates also to the definition of the mih
stances f alhng under the Convention - this hardly comes within the scope of th? Sub-Committee:


Annex 2.
NOTE BY THE PORTUGUESE DELEGATION CONCERNING THE COMPOSITION
AND POWERS OF THE CENTRAL BOARD.
I was glad to note that the proposals of the Advisory Committee and the United States
delegation, and proposals from other quarters as well, which may serve as a basis for the work
of this Conference, included the ideal of a Ceutvcd Bocivd of Expevts, an idea which I myself
advocated at the First Conference. .
I think that the creation of a technical board is the positive basis upon which we may effec-
tively build up national and international measures to protect society against an evil which
is spreading and growing in intensity every day to a most alarming extent.
This terrible problem first aroused the feelings of philanthropists and humanitarians, and
in our confeiences it has often been stated that the question was in icality mainly a numani-
I do not entirely agree with that point of view. I readily acknowledge, indeed, that humani-
tarian sentiments gave the first impulse to this campaign, but, if wepersist in rcgaiding the
problem solely from a humanitarian point of view, we may never discover the remedy that
we seek. , ? . ... ,
If without disdaining the powerful aid afforded by humanitario,n feeling, we base our
action'on science, which learns from experience and observation, we shall accomplish more
useful and practical work. ........ , .
The abuse of certain drugs, such as opium and its alkaloids, coca and its alkaloids, canaois
indica, etc., is regarded as a moral degradation. There is not the slightest doubt that any
vice which undermines the physical constitution must by that yery fact affect the basis of
human morality. But that would not be a sufficient reason to induce States to take inter-
national steps to combat a vice. A united effort should only be made if there is a dangei
to the entire community. If public health is not threatened, the pioblcm loses much of its
lm Pif an g er t k e S p r ead and the evil example of the vice were non-existent, the ruin
of a few individuals would certainly not lead to a great movement of public opinion. It
is therefore the endemo-epidemic aspect of an evil which in the hist instance must determine
international effort, and that is the light in which the present Conference should view the serious
problem of narcotics. _ . . , . x . ~
In looking at the question from this point of view, I think that any useful action must be
based on exact and detailed knowledge on the lines of what is done by the health services
in the case of endemo-epidemic infections of all the circumstances which are favourable
to the appearance of the evil and to its development.
In considering the question of narcotics, I tliink it is un established fnct thcit the e\il
arising therefrom alarms us because of its extent and the strength of the hold it has obtained.
Every day the vice claims new victims of every nationality in spite of all that has been done
up to the present to prevent its extension, and its baneful influence is intensified as it spreads
from naturally less resistant communities to communities which, by reason of their cul-
ture should offer greater resistance to its incursions. The methods used to spread the evil
are daily being improved ; the swallowing and smoking of the drugs are giving place to the
direct employment of the active principles they contain. The drugs are now 7 being adminis-
tered by injection. . . ~ , ... uv
There is no doubt, then, that the danger arising from the use of narcotics is a public
health question and it must consequently be attacked from this standpoint. Any other action
would merely retard the application of those prudent measures of defence which sooner or
later individual countries or all countries will be forced to adopt for their own safety. While,
therefore we should not disdain the assistance which humanitarian sentiment may afford.
w 7 e must'determine to look at the problem which we are attempting to solve in its true
aspect the scientific aspect. For the moment has come when we must pass from senti-
mental considerations to the stage of scientific research. i i ,
What has been done up to the present is very human. All suffering evokes sympathy, but
sympathy alone does not provide the necessary remedy. When confronted with these
svmptoms we must act as we should in any other case of poisoning. The diseases appealing
in a living?organism give the necessary warning to those who are acquainted with it, and who
fear the evil to go and seek a specialist who will combat and eradicate the malady by applying
suitable measures It is natural that the action of sympathy should piecede that of the mtcl
lect, but in the end it must give way to the latter ; otherwise the evil may be aggravated
and be attended with still more pernicious results. T -u , ? i ?
It has been said that this vice is increasing to an alarming extent. I have special reasons
to believe that this statement is correct, for my attention was directed to the question a long
time ago. But what definite evidence do we possess ? Have we any precise data on the
Take, for instance, the regions in which plants containing dangerous poisons are culti-
vated. Has the area under cultivation been increased ? .
Where are the plants transformed and prepared ? In what chemical form are they em-
ployed ? What are the effects of each particular substance according to its application and
the race which employs it ?


What is the channel and what are the present means by which contagion spreads among
the various social classes, and what may be the relationship between the evil of narcotics and
other social evils, such as prostitution, warfare, etc. ?
And are there other considerations of an economic nature in addition to health factors
to which we should give our attention ?
What, for instance, is the extent of, and what are the reciprocal relations between, the
legitimate?and illegitimate trade in these drugs ? What are the channels usually employed
by the legitimate trade ? What procedure is followed in order to circumvent control ? How
much scattered information there exists on this important subject of science, all carefully
collected, yet lacking, as a whole, the value of properly co-ordinated knowledge ! But it
is such knowledge that we must first of all obtain before we can decide upon measures of prac-
tical utility ; otherwise, any work done will be of very little effect.
I may be told that this is a familiar question ; that it is merely necessary to collect the
various scattered elements. I do not agree. To collect, check and systematise, and then
rapidly prepare a statement comprehensible to the juridical mind of these assemblies is not
enough. We must assist in solving certain problems inextricably bound up with the defen-
sive measures we are to adopt. There are some points in the drug question which have not
by any means been finally elucidated. For example, is there not still disagreement as to the
effects of opium and coca, these drugs being considered harmful to a greater or lesser degree
according to the manner in which they are absorbed ? Some say that the use of ingested
opium is not harmful, or at any rate less harmful than smoked opium. Has science reached
a stage at which it can settle this and other points ? There is certainly no lack of figures con-
cerning drugs, but what faith can we place in them ? They are produced and contested by
each of us, according to his requirements.
This uncertainty is not merely unfavourable to the aim we have in view ; it is positively
harmful. If we lack the basis for taking effective measures in the interests of health, how
can we have faith in the efficacy of the measures adopted ? This lack of confidence tends to
vitiate measures which might in some cases be useful. The conclusion to be drawn from these
remarks is the following :
We need an official and technical organisation, side by side with the Advisory Committee.
This body will in no way prove a hindrance to the measures which we may here and now
adopt as necessary. On the contrary, it will be able to perfect them in the future. Such
a body would alone be able to supply and collect the necessary statistical and other data,
since it alone would possess the knowledge required to estimate their value.
But it is not enough to approve the idea of a technical and official organisation. Its
composition must be set out in detail and its programme of work must at least be outlined,
somewhat after the manner of the United States? proposals.
In order that such an organisation may be equal to the task that we think ought to be
assigned to it, it should, in our opinion, be subdivided into two groups :
The first group composed of experts on health questions ;
The second group composed of economic and legal experts.
The Permanent Health Committee of the League of Nations might, by its nature, perform
the health work of this Committee, either by elaborating schemes of its own or by entering
into communication and co-operation with the health services of the different countries,
and by establishing regular liaison with such institutions as the Academies of Medicine, the
Rockefeller Institute, etc.
I think that the second group might be composed of persons very carefully chosen from
the members of the Legal and Economic Committees of the League of Nations.
The programme of work for the first group of this Committee should comprise ;
(a) The organisation and keeping up to date of the map showing the production
of dangerous drugs ;
( b ) The organisation of the map showing the number of victims of each drug,
with mention of the form in which the drug was taken and the extent of its diffusion ;
(c) The definition of the harmful effect of each drug upon human health ;
(? d) The study of the possible connection between endemic toxemia arising Irom
the use of drugs and other social phenomena (contagion) ;
(e) Scientific measures for combating the evil.
The particular work of the second group should be ;
[a) The preparation and keeping up to date of a map showing the production and
consumption of drugs ;
(6) The preparation of a map showing the routes followed by the trade and a
map showing the areas of production ;
(c) The collection of information concerning illicit traffic (smuggling, etc.) ;
[d) The preparation of legislative measures.
The results of the work of this Commission or Committee should be collected in a perio-
dical bulletin, which would be sent to countries taking part in this conference.
From the information in this publication, which would be official, the different countries
could extract the necessary material for enacting laws with a view to safeguarding public
health, and the same information would also assist in examining questions for discussion at


international meetings like: tins or at mom
a 4?SS the nature o  international
control or supervision. result from the creation of some
The co-ordination of effort which would ?^ iraX i ng and standar-
such organisation would, in our opinion, a , s Cattere d and contradictory. If
dising measures of protection which have hithe ie agents of illicit trading will
we do not render such measures continuous and consistent, t g
undoubtedly profit by our negligence.
Appendix.
With a view to supplementing the memorandumJ which we
active control to be exercised by this Boaid.
In this connection, I would make the following suggestions .
Contractim? Parties should undertake to assume direct responsibility for, and
1. The Contracting Fart.es snoui preparation of the products mentioned
exercise strict supervision over, the , emol o Ve d except with the authorisation of
in Article... Such products never be
the various Governments, the quantities would undertake to give information
medical and scientific requirements. Ac r Zr ar d to the areas under cultivation, the
ssars&s: *- ??
and the stocks available.
2. The sale and transport of the drugs referred to, as the^ount^y.^it^the
Ki A ?hkKi' 1 ..!?.!. ,o *nd d.I.U. cl ih operations y.arly to
the Permanent Central Board.
3 . Each country should lay down rules concerning the consumptmn
a  Report to the Perma-
nent Central Board with regard to the execution thereof. ...
the eUc^up^on^T&iSSW
drugs and should communicate them to the Permanent Central Board.
5 - The contracting Government!i should
venting the illicit use of dangerous drugs PP Y . ... . medical relief and police
the intermediary of knowldge
a *ew to the protection 3 society and the complete suppression of this
scourge. , ~
considerations :
(I ) That supervision should be exercised over the
is dealing, from the time when the plant ' s cu dj | al and scientific purposes, the various
Governments for these operations and always exercising super-
preference s o orcommercey as this
be created and that there should be no n/uroduction and different forms
at the cheapest *
(3) That instead of Interference 0, ofTsuper-State, which might
against dangerous drugs, would be bab fl ded as coming under the domestic admi-
possibly interfere with matters wind g f ? sinde active army, each respon-
also to the entire community of States. , h
(41 That th. task at C ?'"?
co-operation.


(5) Finally, this procedure, which would not be attended with the danger of inter-
ference in the domestic affairs of any State, would in no way diminish the force of those
sanctions derived from facts and figures which are driven home by the public opinion of
the world, the best judge in these matters, nor would it do away with the baneful effects
of the drugs against which proper precautions had not been taken.
These principles appear to us to be more in keeping with the spirit of the Conference.
Annex
DRAFT REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE D.
Rapporteur : Mr. Shepherd (Australia).
The Sub-Committee decided to proceed with its work independently of the other Sub-
Committees and that the Rapporteurs should endeavour to ascertain what was being done
by the other Sub-Committees.
The Advisory Committee?s suggestions were taken as the basis for discussion.
Part I of the Advisory Committee?s Proposals.
Article i.
The Committee accepted in principle the Advisory Committee?s recommendations. The
American proposals were examined, particularly the absence of any reference to heroin and
the requirements for the supply of the estimates under the various headings as set out in
those proposals.
The opinion of the Sub-Committee was that these propositions related more particularly
to other Sub-Committees or the main Committee.
Article 2.
The Advisory Committee?s proposals were agreed to in principle on the understanding
that the article would be interpreted in the light of the provisions as set out in Annex 2, para-
graph 6, of the Advisory Committee?s report.
It was further stipulated that the interests of the consuming countries must be fully
protected in the event of short supplies or through combinations of producers or manufac-
turers, so that the non-consuming countries should not be penalised in the matter of prices
or adequate supplies for medical or scientific purposes. In connection with Article 2, the Sub-
Committee could not accept the American proposal which provided for the fixing of Quantities
by the Central Board.
Article 3.
This was agreed to in principle, with the reservation that a suggestion should be made
to the Confeience that half the personnel of the Central Board should consist of representatives
of consuming countries, who are neither producers nor manufacturers. The Sub-Committee
did not considei it advisable to deal with the other detailed suggestions for the constitution
01 the Board as suggested by the American proposals.
Article 4.
The Sub-Committee was unable to accept the obligation of supplying quarterly statistics
as stipulated in the Advisory Committee?s recommendations and the proposals in Article 20 id)
ot the American proposals, for the reasons that it was impossible in some countries to supply
these statistics every three months, especially in regard to manufacture and wholesale stocks.
Moreover, it was understood that producing countries were only able to supply their statistics
frequently WaS th  Ught necessar y for producing countries to supply them more
, Sub-Committee agreed to incorporate the suggestion in Section (a) of paragraph 1
ot the American proposal that the source and destination of imports should be specified, but
statistics should only be supplied yearly.
( b ) The question of wholesale stocks ?in Government or in private hands?? was considered
to be a question really for the producing countries, but there was no objection to the proposal.
2. American proposals related to Sub-Committee A.
3 ? American proposals related to producing countries only.
Remaining proposals postponed until after consideration of Article s and of the corres-
ponding American proposals. _ 3 b
Considerable discussion took place on the proposals contained in Article 4 and Article 5
on the question of the power conferred on the Central Board to ?fix the amount of the


reasonable requirements? of a country and to prohibit the export of further stocks in cases
Whe Th?g? eral opSon* ofThe'Sub-Committee was that it could not agree to any such limi-
tatiol of the soveTign powers of a State and that it should be left to each country to control
US 'ifwas that, in view of the alteration made in the previous paragraph
regarding statistics annually instead of quarterly, this PWk -
ssawsaW
after the close of the year.
Article 5.
Further discussion took place on this article on the question of the powers of the Board ;
it was therefore taken in sections ;
r. The action to be taken in cases of countries which furnished no estimates for their
requirements consider ed that the Board should be empowered 1  f e fbZ\d
ties to be supplied and that the whole of the remaining portion of the article should
apply to those countries.
2 . With regard to and
objectionable, Isftey were really a charge of bad faith on the part of the country.
s c c=r e rsaSTAiMSs:
words after ?shall? in the sixth
*?? ttSfZ WS*
Portugal made a reservation and submitted a memorandum explaining the teasons 01
the reservation.
Article 6.
The wording of this article
unable to arrive at any decision as to the mean g , delegates strongly objected to the
:srs t0 con..
defa sir? Malcolm da meeting of the Sub-Committee and explained the
to for
redraft P ed S to mo? its intention and application to particular cases.
Article 13.
the exports and re-exports thereto.
Australian, Austrian and Cuban Proposals.
All these proposals have the same objective, namely, the limitation of the production to
actual medical and scientific requirements. , comDre hensive, it was taken as the
As the Australian proposal was the most ?growth of the raw materials
basis for discussion. It recommends that the c0c a leaf should be prohibited.
1. That the producing countries agreed to reduce their production ,
2. That the interests of the consuming countries were fully P rot ?kdin the matte
of their obtaining adequate supplies to meet their reasonable requirements
and scientific purposes.


Portuguese Memorandum.
The Sub-Committee took note of the memorandum submitted by the Portuguese dele-
gation relating to the composition and competence of the Central Board. Without pro-
nouncing on this memorandum, the Sub-Committee draws the attention of the Conference
to the memorandum and suggests that it should be submitted for the consideration of the
Central Board if the latter be constituted.
Report of Sub-Committee F.
Ihe Sub-Committee has considered the report and sees no objection to its adoption, in
view of the fact that the interests of consuming countries appear to be fully safeguarded,
as it is left to each country to determine its own requirements.
[Signed) M. L. Shepherd.


MINUTES
OF 1
SUB-COMMITTEE E.
Geneva, November 2gth, 1924, February 6th, ig2S.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Members 251
First Meeting, Saturday, November 29th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
1. Opening Speech by the Chairman 251
2. Speech by M. Ferreira 251
3. Method of Work : Constitution of the Committee of Five 251
4. Part II of the Measures suggested by the Advisory Committee : General
Discussion 252
Second Meeting, Monday, December 15th, 1924, at 3.50 p.m.
5. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five. . 252
6. Appointment of the Rapporteur of the Sub-Committee 254
7. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five. . . 254
8. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five. . 255
Third Meeting, Wednesday, December 17th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
9. Examination of the Provisional Report of the Sub-Committee 256
10. Penalties and the Exchange of Information 256
Fourth Meeting, Tuesday, January 27th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
11. Co-ordination Committee : Election of Representatives 256
12. Provisional Report ; Draft Recommendations of Sub-Committee E. . . . 257
Fifth Meeting, Wednesday, January 28th, 1925, at 10.30 a.m.
13. Provisional Report : Draft Recommendations of Sub-Committee E
{continuation of the discussion ) 259
Sixth Meeting, Thursday, January 29th, 1925, at 11 a.m.
14. Adoption of the Sub-Committee?s Report 263
15. Consultation with the Economic Section and Transit Section of the Secre-
tariat 264
16.' Statement by the Persian Delegation 264
17. Statement by the Swiss Delegation 265
18. Vote of Thanks to the Chairman and to the Committee of Five 265
Seventh Meeting, Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 5.30 p.m.
19. Letters from the Directors of the Communications and Transit Section and
of the Economic Section of the Secretariat 265
Annexes 266


SUB-COMMITTEE E
LIST OF MEMBERS.
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
The following countries were represented on the Sub-Committee :
United States of America India
Brazil Italy
British Empire Japan
China Netherlands
Danzig Persia
Denmark Kingdom of the Serbs,
France Croats and Slovenes
Germany Switzerland.
The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee
and adopted by the Second Committee at its second meeting, held on November 25th, 1924.
FIRST MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Saturday, November 29 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
1. Opening Speech by the Chairman.
The Chairman thanked his colleagues for the honour they had confeired upon him by
appointing him as their Chairman. He was certain that the Sub-Committee would bring
its work to a rapid and successful issue and that it could soon be transformed into a drafting
committee.
2. Speech by M. Ferreira.
M. Ferreira (Portugal) thanked his colleagues for having appointed him a member of
their Sub-Committee. He recalled the fact that Portugal had collaborated in all the con-
ferences and all work connected with the campaign against drugs, and added that he took
the keenest interest in this campaign, which primarily pursued humaniianan aims.
3. Method of Work : Constitution of the Committee of Five.
The Chairman proposed to examine seriatim each of the measures, together with the
corresponding articles in the draft of the United States delegation, proposed by the Advisory
Committee 1 . The question of import certificates should, however, be the subject ot a
separate examination.
M. Fabris (Italy) and Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) supported this proposal.
M. Sugimura (Japan) proposed that the former members of the Preparatoiy Committee
for the Opium Conferences should meet as a limited committee with a view to drafting a
text regarding the questions on the agenda which would reconcile the views of the A visoiy
Committee, the United States delegation and the French delegation.
1 See Records of Plenary Meetings, Annex 2.


The Chairman approved the procedure suggested by the Japanese delegate. He
proposed that the other members of the Sub-Committee should first make known their opi-
nion, either orally or in writing, with regard to import certificates ; a meeting of the Sub-
Committee might, moreover, be summoned at any time.
M. Pequignot (Switzerland), M. Ferreira (Portugal) and M. Fabris (Italy) supported
M. Sugimura?s proposal.
M. Sugimura (Japan) proposed to divide the work of the limited Committee into sec-
tions ; as soon as the first section of the work was finished, it would be brought before the
Sub-Committee, which would meet to consider it.
M. Ferreira (Portugal) proposed that M. Sugimura should be a member of this Committee.
Mr. Neville (United States) was in favour of adding new members to those already on
the Preparatory Committee (namely, M. Bourgois, Sir Malcolm Delevingne, M. van Wettum
and himself).
M. Sze (China) supported M. Ferreira?s proposal. He would like to take part in the
meetings of the limited Committee when the question of smuggling was under discussion.
The Sub-Committee decided to set up the limited Committee ; this Committee would consist
of former members of the Preparatory Committee (M. Bourgois, Sir Malcolm Delevingne, Mr.
Neville, M. van Wettum) and of M. Sugimura, while M. Sze would sit on the limited Committee
when the question of smuggling was under discussion. Every member would have the right
to sit on the limited Committee in order to support his proposal. Whenever the limited
Committee should have arrived at an agreement upon any point, the matter would be put
before the Sub-Committee.
4. Part il of the Measures suggested by the Advisory Committee : General Discussion.
Mr. Campbell (India) declared his acceptance of the measures in question.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) also accepted these measures, subject to the reserva-
tions made at the Plenary Conference by the Persian delegation.
M. Sugimura (Japan) also accepted the principles of these measures, to which he gave
ms As regarded paragraph XI, it was important to define the meaning of
t e worn tianshipment . There was transhipment when goods were passed from one vessel
to another without a change of destination.
SECOND MEETING
Held at Geneva on Monday, December 15 th, 1924, at 3.50 p.m.
Chairman: M. Bourgois (France).
5. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five (Annex 1).
? S i r . M f l lCOl e m .  ELEVINGNE (British Empire), Rapporteur of the Committee of Five,
reminded the Sub-Committee that the Conference had referred to the Committee of Five the
greater portion of Part II of the Advisory Committee?s proposals and the corresponding part
of the American Suggestions, together with various other proposals submitted by a number
of Governments. J
The question of the import certificate system, which was found in Part 11, had been satis-
factorily solved, the system proposed having been unanimously adopted by the Committee.
... TW Rapporteur explained the various changes in the new text (Annex 1) as compared
with the text of the Advisory Committee. F
in Article 2, the words referring to the quantity imported and the names and addresses
ot the importers were new, as well as the time allowed for importation.
In Article 3 (V), the phrases concerning the expiration of the period fixed for the impor-
tation and concerning tne endorsement were new. Paragraph VI was also new. The sentence:
in such a case the export authorisation , etc., in (VII) was new.
Articles 10 and n had been recast, but substantially the effect was the same. The pro-
cedure suggested was quite simple, though the wording might be improved. The first sentence
 s.?*i de ? w ;? se f ted , at th . e re J uest of the Netherlands delegation, which had
p 1 ted out that the Netherlands authorities could not require a declaration in the case of
goods in transit on the Scheldt for Antwerp.
r A^ rt ! d  I^ W ? S T 1 r nte Ji^ d t prevent illicit branding of the consignments. Paragraph VI
JW* 16 Advis J or y Committee?s draft, had been slightly modified The
e eilands delegate had requested that the sentence in the Hague Convention which the
Advisory Committee had proposed to omit should be retained. The Committee of Five had
finally adopted the proposal of the Advisory Committee.


Article 20 (F) was intended to prevent the illicit dealings of traffickers operating between
countries in which they did not reside, and to have them punished under the laws of the country
? which they did reside, as was provided under British legislation. They had proposed
tU he corresponding article of the Convention drawn up by the First Opium Conference
should L Inserted ; the delegation of the United States of Amenca had made a reservation
 n *No finafdecision had been taken concerning Article 4of the Hague Convention.
M. Pequignot (Switzerland) read the following declaration .
?With a view to preventing and dispelling misunderstandings. I desire to make the
following statement : . . , .
?At a meeting of Sub-Committee A held on December 2nd 1924, the Swiss delegate
explained t?reasons for which his Government found itself unable to agree to the system
described in Part I of the ? measures suggested as a basis for the dehbeiations of the Conffi
rence '-a system designed to limit the manufacture of narcotics and to fix the quantities
wffich may be manufactured. Deeply attached though she is to the ideal of international
solidarity Switzerland does not feel able to assume obligations imposed by virtue of an
uncertain and variable system which constitutes, as the French has said
0 most dangerous incitement to speculation and illicit traffic. But, this bung said, acs
to declare thS my Government, which is firmly resolved to co-opera e effectively in strengthen-
M the racasurS employed for the national and international control of the traffic in narcotics,
adheres unheshatingly to the principle contained in the proposals which have been laid before
our sTb-Commit ee by the Committee of Five. It will perhaps propose certain amendments
n particulars regards the declaration to be made to the authorities of the country through
wlmse territory a consignment of any of the substances mentioned in the Convention (Article
1, heading X Section i) is sent. But the Swiss Government considers that, as a whole, the
proposals submitted to Sub-Committee E are reasonable and practicable, and it is prepared,
for its part to f interest to point out that, on October 2nd, 1924, the
Swiss passed a lav concerning narcotics. Under the constitutional system of
?y, any L passed etcT^hi^da^e^o^cS
promulgation ofthelaw. IZ Ts the Swiss law on rcason^o
supp^^^h^tlmreferendum wifibe exerdsl It is not within our knowledge that
5 ?3 zk ..i 4 >--?? r r? y ? t ;
national treSy until the provisions for ensuring its execution have definitely become part of
thC ?TheV^ssTaw'on narcotics, a copy of which has been transmitted to all delegations by
the Secretariat ofthe Conference, makes provision for the strict and loyal application of the
Hague Convention It makes the manufacture, importation, exportation arm wholesale an
rotlil sale of the products mentioned in the Convention dependent upon the obtention of a
retail sale oi me piuuuu _ mntrnl which it institutes also applies to coca
licence. It goes fur . (l) within the country, by the Cantons, under the super-
vSffin of *e Confederation ; (2) on the frontiers of the country (importation and exportation)
and ?Thiriaw o make n s d it7ossiMTto tfaci?any^uantity?whatever of a narcotic drug from the
momeffi that iUeaves the factory or enters Switzerland until the moment that it reaches the
?!? r-.
-^^s?d g 1n n the Hagu? Convention are inscribed, together with the quantities of these
produces which^they hive P =
The places of sale and warehouse ? mustbe open to can take place only if the
ronsfnee his?obtained the authorisation or licence provided for in the laws and regulations
 f ?falls'prescribed by the law are very severe. Any person who not being authorised
' j s V to
the described entries in the register of stocks and of quantities received and issued is liable
lo triame penalries. Any pefson who prevents the measures of con rol from b-ng earned
out is liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to a hue not exceeding
Tooo francs In the event of the wilful violation of the aw by a person officially responsible
5,000 iranch. mme u ? fhev are also doubled if the offence is repeated,
for its application, the penalties are doubled , they are aimoouu authorises the
The attempt to commit these offences is likewise punishable and the law also authorises the
sequestration my country scrupulously to enforce the law.
Switzerland, faithful to its traditions, will see to it that the aw concerning
observed In the international sphere she has assumed all the undertakings \\ Inch appear
to iler to be susceptible of execution, and she has kept these undertakings. Her name, her


nature and her very soul are surely, as has been said, a confirmation of international solidarity.
You may rest assured, therefore, that Switzerland will faithfully fulfil the obligations imposed
on her by the Hague Convention as well as any further obligations which she may contract as
a result of this Conference.?
The Chairman thought that the Convention should draw the attention of Governments
to the desirability of inflicting very heavy penalties for the offence of trafficking in opium.
He thought it would also be advisable to ask officials to send information concerning this traffic
direct through consuls, etc.
6. Appointment of the Rapporteur of the Sub-Committee.
On the proposal of M. Sugimura (Japan), Sir Malcolm Delevingne British Empire was
appointed Rapporteur of the Sub-Committee to the Plenary Conference.
7. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five.
(a) Part 11, Paragraph (II).
M. Sugimura (Japan) asked Sir Malcolm Delevingne to define the difference between
licences and import certificates.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) replied that the import certificate was a docu-
ment certifying, for the information of the Government of the exporting country, that impor-
tation had been authorised.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) pointed out that in the Netherlands the same document
was used for the certificate and for the authorisation to import.
The Chairman said he thought it would be advisable to employ the expression ?import
authorisation certificate?.
It was decided that the question of the expression to be employed should he left to the Drafting
Committee.
Part 11, Paragraph (II), was adopted.
Part 11, Paragraph (III), Sub-paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii), were adopted.
(b) Part 11, Paragraph (III), Sub-paragraph (iv).
M. Oldenberg (Denmark) said he thought that, in view of the slowness of diplomatic
procedure, it would be desirable for the communications referred to in this paragraph to take
place directly and rapidly.
It was decided that this point should he mentioned by Sir Malcolm Delevingne in his report.
Sub-Paragraph (iv) was adopted.
Part 11, Paragraph (III), Sub-paragraphs (v), (vi) and (vii), were adopted.
Part 11, Paragraphs (VII) and (VIII), were adopted.
(c) Part 11, Paragraph (IX).
M. Fabris (Italy) made the following statement :
As regards the application of the laws and regulations concerning narcotics in free ports,
venture to state that in Italy goods which are introduced into free ports are not subjected
to aiiy control on the part of the revenue authorities. There are, however, certain kinds of
goods the introduction of which into free ports is forbidden.
? r the revenue officials to prevent these goods (the importation of which
is forbidden by law, and which are : raw and manufactured tobacco, explosives, inflammable
substances, phosphorus and petroleum) from being introduced into free ports.
Tneie is no other control over goods either when imported or exported through free
The Italian Government would encounter great difficulty in establishing effective
control m free ports in the form suggested in the Committee?s report.
However, the Italian Government, being fully aware of the gravity of the question
fu  u nee d to prevent the fraud which might easily occur in free ports, is prepared to
ta e the necessaiy steps to place opium, morphine, cocaine and other narcotics on the list
ot goods the introduction of which into free ports is absolutely forbidden.
A measure of this nature would certainly not be contrary to the Committee?s proposal ;
it would be even more severe than that proposal.?
It was decided that Sir Malcolm Delevingne should mention in his report the point raised
y * l6 Dalian delegate and that the Drafting Committee should take it into consideration.
Paragraph (IX) was adopted.
(d) Part 11, Paragraph (X).
M. Sugimura (Japan) referred to the case of transport by aeroplanes. If an aeroplane
flew over a territory, could it be said that this was a case of transit ?
It was decided that the point should be mentioned by Sir Malcolm Delevingne in his report.


(e) Part 11, Paragraph (X), Sub-paragraph (i).
M. Aschmann (Germany) said that it should be sufficient for the country of transit to
be obliged to supervise the goods in transit as such. Such supervision (Zoilverschluss) was
very strict and effective in Germany. It was forbidden to deliver goods in transit to any
person or to change the contents and packing a matter to which reference was also made
in the * draft of the new Convention. Moreover, an examination of the declaration to see
that it was full and accurate would be very difficult, would take too long and would require
a great many officials. Germany, as a country of transit, would prefer that the expression
?unless a full and accurate declaration? down to the words ?copy of the export authorisation
should be omitted.
This proposal was adopted.
Sub-paragraph (i) was adopted, with the amendment proposed by the German delegate.
Sub-paragraph (ii) was adopted.
It was decided to omit Sub-paragraph (hi). . . , ,
It was decided that Sir Malcolm Delevingne should refer to this point in his report and that
the Drafting Committee should insert a clause on ?misrouting? in the article of the Convention
referring to penalties.
Paragraphs (XI) and (XII) were adopted.
8. Consideration of the Draft Articles submitted by the Committee of Five Part 111.
It was agreed that the measures provided for in No. 2 should not apply in cases where the
exporting country was not a party to the Convention, but that there would be a moral obligation
to exercise any control that was practicable in such cases.
It was agreed that Contracting Parties should not authorise excessive exportation to non-
contracting countries. ? , , ~7 ,
It was agreed that Sir Malcolm Delevingne should refer to these points in his report and that
it should be t left to the Drafting Committee to find a wording which would meet the case.
As the proposal to add the words ?and derivatives? to the text of Articles 9, 10, 11,
12 13 and paragraph 1 of Article 14 of the United States Suggestions had been submitted to
Sub-Committee F, Sub-Committee E decided not to examine it for the moment.
As regarded Article 10 of the Hague Convention, Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) said he thought
that the authors of the 1912 Convention had inserted the last sentence of Article 10 m ordei
that the registration of narcotics by chemists and doctors might be left to legislatois to decide
according to conditions prevailing in their respective countiits. ,
For instance, in the Netherlands the control of consumption was adequately regualted
bv a law on the practice of pharmacy in such a way that chemists and doctors were required
to keep for twenty years all medical prescriptions and written requests for the delivery o
poisons. His four years? experience had convinced him that it was not necessary to oblige
chemists and doctors to keep special registers for narcotics. , , ,
Moreover persons who had had experience in the keeping of registers by doctors would
agree that too much faith could not be placed in such records. Very wide control therefore,
would have to be exercised if any good results were to be obtained, and he thought that even
such control would not attain the object they had in view.
He therefore thought that it would be preferable to adhere to the standpoint adopted by
the authors of the, 1912 Convention, as the Norwegian Government had proposed. 1 ey
might if necessary, add to the article in question that the rule did not apply m the case of
chemists in countries which had satisfactorily regulated the keeping of records concerning
narcotics.
M Sugimura (Japan) said that he could not accept the interpretation of the Netherlands
delegation that the Hague Convention had left the settlement of this question to the discretion
of each country.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) proposed the following text :
?This rule will not necessarily apply to quantities supplied to patients by then-
doctors, nor to sales made on medical prescriptions by duly authorised chemists, if these
prescriptions are duly preserved by the doctor or the chemist.
This text was adopted. _ .
The Sub-Committee agreed to the recommendation of the Committee of Five, leaving the
United States delegate to formulate his reservations.
Norwegian Proposal (Annex 1, Appendix 1).
As the previous proposal concerning Article 10 of the Hague Convention, submitted
by Sir Malcolm Delevingne after Dr. Coebergh?s statement, had been accepted, the text of the
paragraph in question was modified as follows :
?Part 11, Point VI, paragraph 2 of the Norwegian proposals is covered by the amend-
ment to Article 10 of the Hague Convention proposed above. The Sub-Committee decides
provisionally to omit this article.?
Mr. Neville (United States of America) stated that he was not able to accept this deci-
5100 As regards the question of including coca leaves in the Convention, it was decided that
the Rapporteur should get into touch with the Bolivian delegate on this subject, and that the
delegate should be heard at the meeting at which the report would be communicated to the
Sub-Committee.


THIRD MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December iyth, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
9. Examination of the Provisional Report of the Sub-Committee (Annex 2).
M. Sugimura (Japan) thanked Sir Malcolm Delevingne for his valuable report. He did
not think it necessary to discuss it now. He hoped that the text would be adopted as it stood.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) agreed to accept the report provisionally.
The Sub-Committee then discussed the report.
Paragraph 17.
M. Fabris (Italy) suggested, as an amendment, in the second line of paragraph 2, that
instead of ?the Italian Government is disposed to prohibit entirely?, they should say ?the
Italian Government has prohibited entirely?.
Paragraph 18.
The Chairman directed attention to paragraph 18, relating to the transport of goods by
air. He hoped that the delegates would consult their Governments on this question, as
smuggling by air had become very common.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) stated that he would ascertain what agreements
had been concluded by Great Britain in the matter.
Paragraph 21.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) emphasised the importance of the que*stion dealt
with in paragraph 21 and hoped that delegates would consult their experts on the matter.
Paragraph 24.
M. Pinto-Escalier (Bolivia) stated that, as regards paragraph 24, he had no objection
to the inclusion of coca leaves in the Convention, and that he had informed Sub-Committee B
of the fact.
Paragraph 29.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) declared that he could not agree then to the
omission of the article relating to the marking of packets (paragraph 29), but that he reserved the
right to raise the question again.
The report was provisionally adopted, with the amendments proposed.
10. Penalties and the Exchange of Information.
The Chairman insisted on the importance of penalties and the desirability of exchanging
information.
Mi. Neville (United States of America) thought that information might also be exchanged
in regard to confiscation.
The Chairman agreed with him.
. As regarded penalties, M. Pequignot (Switzerland) stated that, for reasons of a consti-
tutional and legislative nature, it would be difficult for Switzerland to carry out this recom-
mendation.
It was decided that the proposal by the German delegation regarding penal measures
should he dealt with at a later meeting. Delegations agreed to consult their Governments on
the proposal, which was as follows :
Ihe Contracting Powers undertake to adopt measures for the punishment of any
pei son, irrespective of nationality, who in a foreign country shall contravene the regu-
lations regarding the manufacture, sale, use, importation and exportation of, or regarding
the control of the production of and traffic in, the narcotics mentioned in the Opium
Convention of January 23rd, 1912, provided, however, that these acts are also punishable
according to the laws of the country where the offence was committed.?
FOURTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, January 2 yth, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
11. Co-ordination Committee : Election of Representatives.
The Chairman reminded the members that the Sub-Committee was to be represented
on the Co-ordination Committee by its Chairman and two elected delegates. Several


Tanan
votes
Rray.il

Tfal v

- LLCtA J
India

China
i
vote
United States

Sub-Committees had decided to elect as delegates members representing opposite points of view.
This aspect of the question did not arise in the case of Sub-Committee E, which was more in the
nature of a drafting Committee. The members already elected by the other Sub-Committees
to sit on the Co-ordination Committee were representatives of the following countries :
British Empire, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland, Tnited States.
The countries represented on Sub-Committee E which had not as yet any representatives on
the Co-ordination Committee were the following : Brazil, China, Denmark, India, Italy,
Japan, Persia, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) proposed that a ballot should be held and that
members obtaining a majority, irrespective of the number of votes cast, should be considered
elected.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) thought that it would be better if the names of candi-
dates were submitted first.
The Sub-Committee decided to vote immediately by ballot.
Eleven members voted.
The result was as follows :
The Chairman declared the Japanese representative elected, and added that a fresh
ballot would be taken for the second representative. According to the usual procedure, the
only candidates were the Brazilian and Italian representatives, who were second in the first vote.
Dr. Pernambuco (Brazil) declared his readiness to withdraw in favour of the Italian
delegate.
M. Fabris (Italy) thanked the Brazilian delegate, but thought that it would be better
if a vote were taken by the Sub-Committee.
A ballot was taken, n members voting. The result was as follows
Italy 7 votes
Brazil 4 ?
The Chairman declared the Italian representative elected.
12. Provisional Report : Draft Recommendations of the Sub-Committee (Annex 3).
The Chairman reminded the Sub-Committee that one of the items on its agenda was the
examination of the provisional report. Certain members of the Sub-Committee had asked
that the examination might be postponed, as they were detained elsewhere studying the icpor s
of the various Sub-Committees and consulting their colleagues. There appeared to be no
objection to the adjournment, as the Sub-Committee?s resolutions had almost always been
unanimous and discussion had been confined chiefly to questions of drafting. It was desi-
rable, however, as the Secretariat had to prepare a summary of the various reports in order
to facilitate the work of the Co-ordination Committee, that Sub-Committee E should at op
its final report as soon as possible. He proposed, therefore, that they should hold a meeting
for this purpose the following morning.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) agreed to the postponement of the adoption
of the report until the following morning, but thought it desirable that the different members
of the Sub-Committee should submit there and then any observations which they might ha
to make on the report.
(a) Air Traffic.
He reminded the Sub-Committee that it had held over certain points relating to article (X)
(Annex 4) of the scheme. The first part of that Article followed the provisions of the
agreements regarding traffic on navigable waterways of international concern (Danube,
Rhine Scheldt Panama Canal, Suez Canal, etc.). It would only require a slight addition
to the text of the scheme to bring Article (X) into line with the provisions of Articles 2 and
15 of the Convention of October 13th, 1919, relating to International Air Navigation As
regards postal packets, enquiries which he had made of the British Postmaster-General had
convinced him that it would be impossible to exercise supervision over postal packets intransit.
The drafting of the first paragraph of Article (X) was, therefore, not sufficiently accurate,
but required the addition of the words : "except in the case of postal packets .
Mr. Neville (United States of America) supported this suggestion. Even if the autho-
rities of the countries through which postal packets passed in tiansit nau ihc. ng u  tx ~,
supervision, it would in practice be impossible for them to do so, owing to c aige
of postal packets sent through certain countries.


M. Sugimura (Japan) wished to make two observations
(i) The question of Customs control had not been settled and was being investigated
by an international committee in Paris. It had been discussed two years previously at the
Conference on Customs Formalities and the delegates had all agreed that it could not be
settled then.
(2) The 1919 Convention relating to International Air Traffic only concerned some
twenty States, and, strictly speaking, therefore, was not a General Convention. It did not
include certain countries represented on Sub-Committee E, as, for example, the United States,
the Netherlands, Brazil, China, etc. He thought, therefore, that the question of air traffic
should be regarded as a matter of domestic jurisdiction and should not be dealt with in the
report ; otherwise, the States parties to the 1919 Convention would be bound by provisions
which did not apply to States non-parties to the Convention, and this would be most unfair.
When a State had grounds for suspecting a case of smuggling by air, it should not be prevented
under the terms of a Convention from ordering the aircraft to land, as otherwise the existence
of international agreements of this nature would have the effect of benefiting smugglers. The
general principle to be adopted should be that States should adhere to all agreements which
promoted international communications, but that their sovereign rights should not be
diminished as regards the measures to be taken against offenders.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that there had been a slight mis-
understanding. They were not considering the Japanese Government?s right, for example, to
order aircraft to land if it suspected a case of illicit traffic. The 1919 Convention applied
to all kinds of traffic and primarily to lawful traffic. In such cases, aircraft should be given
free passage over countries of transit.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) pointed out that, as regards the United States,
the question was one which settled itself automatically ; no aircraft could fly across the
United States without landing. In Japan, too, aircraft would have to land, as otherwise
they would be obliged to fly straight across the Pacific.
The Chairman emphasised the importance of the question under discussion and suggested
that the British and Japanese delegates should consult together with a view to submitting
a joint proposal at the next meeting. Other delegates might also wish to join in the discussion.
M. Sugimura (Japan) stated that the question which he had raised was of purely
academic interest to Japan, but that it was of great importance to certain European countries,
such as Switzerland and the Netherlands, over which the air traffic was very considerable.
On the proposal of Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), the words ?the import
and export" (Annex 3, paragraph 17) were replaced by the word ?introduction?.
(b) Standardisation of Import and Export Permits.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) wondered whether it would not be desirable to
recommend the standardisation of import and export certificates.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) replied that the point had already been discussed, but
that the suggestion had been found impracticable.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) stated that his recollection of the matter was
somewhat different, but he did not press the matter at the moment.
(c) Organisation for settling Disputes arising out of the proposed Convention.
The Chairman pointed out that the Contracting Powers would have to introduce certain
measures into their national legislation for the purpose of providing the guarantees laid
down in the Convention. He suggested that it might be desirable to provide for the creation
of an organisation which, in case of dispute, should give a decision as to whether these measures
were in conformity with the undertakings entered into under the Convention. This point
might be discussed at the next meeting.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that the Permanent Court of International Justice
might act in this capacity.
M. Sugimura (Japan) thought it undesirable to lay down that all such cases should be
brought before the Permanent Court. He reminded members that in the matter of transit
the Committee for Communications and Transit of the League of Nations had been
appointed as the body to which cases were referred in the first instance, a happy innovation
which might be taken as a precedent in the present case. He enquired whether the Chair-
man?s suggestion involved an extension of the competence of the Central Board.
(d) Penalties.
Ihe Chairman reminded members that he had also raised the question of penalties and
the relations to be established between the authorities in the various countries.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) observed that the Sub-Committee had asked
the Drafting Committee to submit a general clause on penalties.


Mr. Neville (United States of America) thought it would be desirable to pass a recom-
mendation on the subject.
The Chairman agreed. The recommendation should be a general one, as the paiticular
application of the penalties was a matter for each State to decide.
M Sugimura (Japan) stated that he had no objection to the adoption of a recommenda-
tion. A question such as this was one for national legislation and could only be dealt with
by means of a recommendation.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) stated that at the next meeting he proposed to
submit a draft addition to the report on the question of the advisability of including in the
Convention a general clause on penalties.
FIFTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, January 28 th, 1925, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
13. Provisional Report and Draft Recommendations of the Sub-Committee [continuation 0
the discussion). (Annexes 2 and 3)
(a) Air Traffic.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, informed the Committee that
he had conferred with the delegates of Japan, the Netherlands andthfrelort ?
been agreed that the following passage relating to Article X should be inserted in the report .
?The Sub-Committee has also had to consider the question of transport by ai r.
?Where the aircraft is permitted, by international agreement to fly over the terri-
tory of an intervening country without landing, it would be impossible as well as unneces-
Sary ?iV^ses by the law of the mtervenmg country to
land in its territory, or does in fact land in the territory, there will be no difficulty m
applying the stipulations of Article X when the landing takes place at an authored
landing-place at which the Customs officials or other authorised representat es
Stat ?On t ?he rl other a hand!if the landing is effected at some place which is not an authorised
landing-place, it may not be possible in all cases for the authorities of the intervening
coun f subcommittee?has inserted a provision in the foregoing sense
to regulate the application of Article X to transport by air of the substances covered
by the Convention/? . .
The Rapporteur added that a passage would accordingly be inserted in Article X (Annex 3)
to thleffe/That whme the transport w b as being effected by air. the
veiling country should apply the provisions of the Convention so far as the circumst
permitted.
M Sugimura (Japan) agreed with the Rapporteur, and considered the wording suffi-
ciently elastic* t/iake jt ol possible future developments : aviation -g
gross, and it might be possible for measures which had not hitherto been applied
introduced in the more or less distant future.
M Peouignot (Switzerland) also supported the conclusions of the Rapporteur. He
added thaHn Switzerland, under the Federal domestic legislation, the local police authorities
had to be called in in case of voluntary or involuntary landings at places other than t
authorised landing-places.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, proposed that, in order to ffiyo
effect to?he co?chslons which they had adopted in regard to transport by air, they should
add the following paragraph to Article X :
?In cases where the transport is being effected by air, the provisions of this article
shall not be applicable if the aircraft passes over the territory of the third country without
landing) If thfahcraft lands in the P territory of the said country, the provisions of this
article shall be applied so far as the circumstances permit.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) asked whether it was to be obligatory for Customs officials
to be always in attendance at authorised landing-grounds.


Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) thought that such an arrangement must
already exist for general Customs purposes.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) observed that the question under discussion
had only an academic interest for the United States, seeing that their neighbours Canada
and Mexico were situated at an immense distance apart. Nevertheless, he felt compelled
to make a reservation in the same sense as the remark of the Netherlands delegate.
The passage regarding transport by air was adopted, subject po the reservations of the
Netherlands and United States delegations.
(b) Import Certificates.
M. Aschmann (Germany) moved that the draft certificate which was recommended two
years ago by the Advisory Committee should be annexed to the Convention, together with
a recommendation that it should be taken into use by the States which adhered to the
Convention.
Moreover, as experience had shown, it sometimes happened that Customs officials could
not understand a certificate worded in a foreign language, and it should therefore be laid
down that certificates must be worded: (i) in the language of the exporting country; and
(2) in one of the four principal languages, i.e., in German, English, French or Spanish.
M. Sugimura (Japan) questioned whether it would be possible to insist upon certificates
being drawn up in any particular language. In practice, certificates were so drafted as to
be undesrtood both by the authorities of the exporting country and by those of the importing
country. It was a matter of common-sense, and the countries concerned should be allowed
to act as they themselves thought best. Moreover, when dealing with Conventions, they should
avoid entering into minute details.
M. Aschmann (Germany) replied that the certificate might be drafted in the language
of the exporting country and in another language with which the importing authorities might
be assumed to be familiar.
The Chairman suggested that they should follow some precedent, such as the decisions
of the Transit Conference or of the Conference on Customs Formalities.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) understood the German proposal to be that
a specimen certificate should be attached to the Convention as a guide for the drafting of
certificates, while the actual wording of the certificate would be left to the individual
Governments themselves.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) agreed with the Japanese delegate. It had been shown
by practical experience that, as was only natural, certificates were always so drafted as to
be understood by the authorities of both countries.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that the certificate to be attached to the Conven-
tion should be merely regarded as a model and that they could not insist upon its adoption by
the different States. They would also have to consider the wording of the specimen to be
recommended.
The Chairman invited the Sub-Committee to give its opinion on the first question, namely,
whether they were in favour of attaching a specimen certificate to the Convention as a guide
to the States in drawing up import certificates.
The Sub-Committee decided in the affirmative.
The Chairman invited the Sub-Committee to take a decision on the second question,
namely, in what language the certificate should be drafted. He asked the German delegate
whether he wished to press his proposal.
M. Aschmann (Germany) did not wish to do so if the Sub-Committee took an opposite
view. He was afraid, however, that a certificate would be merely an absurdity if it were
drafted in a language which the Customs officials could not understand.
M. Sze (China) agreed with the Japanese delegate?s view that countries should as far
as possible be left to act as they thought best. In many cases a single language was suffi-
cient, e.g., in traffic between England and the United States or even between China and the
United States or England.
M. Militchevitch (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) proposed that each
country should issue two specimen certificates, one in its own language and in French and
the other in its own language and in English, as French and English were the most widely
known languages.
The Chairman was afraid that this proposal, if adopted, might create an awkward
precedent.
M. Pequignot (Switzerland) thought that the Sub-Committee might take a decision based
on the Convention on Customs Formalities, Article 11, paragraph 7, regarding certificates of
origin.
Piince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) pointed out that they could not insist upon the adop-
tion of a language such as French, German or English for certificates which, for example, only
affected Persia and Afghanistan. The country concerned should therefore be allowed to
draft its certificate in whatever language it thought best.


M van Wettum (Netherlands) did not see any reason for following a precedent such as
the Convention on Customs Formalities. It was obviously in a country s own mtei est to
have its certificates clearly worded.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, stated that, so far as Great
Britain was concerned no difficulty had been experienced in actual practice If it happened
fhat L certificate were?in a language of which the authorities were ignorant, they arranged to
have it translated. If no member of the Sub-Committee were aware of any difficulties having
the various States might be left complete liberty in the matter.
The Chairman proposed to close the discussion on the question He understood that
Subcommittee thought it best not to enter into unnecessary details. As regards the
langnage whichthe Certificates were to be drawn up, this should be left to the discretion of
the States Seemed. ? opinion on the third question the wording
of to - and proposed that the model
recommended by the League of Nations should be used as a basis.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) proposed that this model should be taken as it
was and attached to the Convention.
The Chairman pointed out that the Conference could only recommend the adoption
of the model to be annexed.
for domestic jurisdiction in each State.
M. dated that he^agreed^m^ however, acts
into consideration, t. for example, the different characters in which the various languages
were written.
The Sub-Committee decided to instruct a small Sub-Committee, consisting of acom
iESSSHSS;
which would be annexed to the report.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, proposed to make the following
addition ?Vmoddfom of import certificate has been recommended
sidem th P aUt This
This text was adopted.
(c) Settlement of Disputes.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, reminded members that at the
ft was thought that the g |ub-Committee, before expressing an opinion, ought to con-
side, the procedure already adopted in other Conventions, for example, m transit matters.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) pointed out that Article 24 of the Hague Convention dealt
with the question of disputes.
T , r ? ATBM ., aftpr referring to Article 22 of the Statute of 1923 on the International
court of appeal. ,
"? T .< .. *!-" - ? -
first instance presented serious difficulties , . , Q r^f ? rP nrp must
(2) The fact that the United States were taking part in the work o e
be taken into account.
In view of these considerations, it might perhaps be desirable not to discuss the question
at that stage.


The Chairman agreed with the Japanese delegate as to the difficulties presented by the
question. It might perhaps be referred to a Sub-Committee for examination. They might
nevertheless discuss the matter with advantage there and then.
In reply to a remark by the Netherlands delegate, he pointed out that the paragraph
of Article 24 referred to stated that the Netherlands Government should invite the Con-
tracting Powers to appoint delegates to meet at The Hague to settle disputes which might arise
?if these questions cannot be settled by other means?. There was therefore the possibility
of other means of settling disputes.
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) replied that the means were not specified in the Conven-
tion, and that they might take the form of private arrangements, arbitration, etc.
Mr. Neville (United States of America), like the Chairman, thought that it would be
wise to provide a clause for the settlement of disputes. He enquired whether any actual
cases of disputes had arisen as yet.
The Chairman replied in the negative. He asked whether the Sub-Committee wished
to leave the Plenary Conference to give an opinion on the matter or whether it desired to
refer it immediately to a Sub-Committee.
M. Sugimura (Japan) thought it better to confine the work of the Sub-Committee to the
task entrusted to it. The question under consideration might also be of interest to the other
Sub-Committees. It would be better, therefore, to leave the Plenary Conference to decide
this point and to study the question with reference to precedents. He proposed that the
Chairman of the Sub-Committee or the Rapporteur should explain to the Plenary Conference
how important the question was.
The Chairman, in order to bring the discussion to a close, stated that he would lay the
mattei befoie the Presioent of the Conference, who could refer it to the Committee of Business.
(d) Penalties Exchange of Information.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, referred to the points arising
out of these two questions and proposed the addition of the following passage to the report:
?The attention of the Sub-Committee has been called to two other matters : (1) The
importance of adequate penalties being attached to infractions of the national laws which
are adopted to give effect to the provisions of the new Convention ; (2) the desirability
of the adoption by all States of the direct exchange of information between the competent
authorities of the States in regard to the illicit traffic and the persons engaged in it. The
b '^ ommitte . e is impressed with the importance of these matters, and it recommends :
(1) The insertion in the new Convention of an article providing for the punishment of
infractions of the law by adequate penalties, and (where appropriate) the confiscation of
the substances in respect of which the infraction has been committed ; (2) the adoption
of a voeu recommending that all States should co-operate as closely as possible with one
another m the suppression of the illicit traffic and that they should authorise the compe-
tent authority charged with the administration of the law on the subject to communicate
directly with the corresponding authorities in other countries.?
Mr. Neville (United States of America) thought that it would be possible to recommend
the adoption of uniform measures in regard to the disposal of goods confiscated (destruction
utilisation or sale). v ?
M. Sze (China) stated that in China such goods were destroyed. He thought, moreover*
that the whole purpose of the system the establishment of the Central Board and?the system
of import and export certificates would be defeated if opium which had been confiscated
could be utilised. He suggested that the Conference might appoint a Committee of jurists
to examine the question.
Dr. Goxuzzo (Brazil) stated that in Brazil, according to law, all drugs confiscated must
be destroyed.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, thought that it would be difficult
to adopt uniform measures in regard to such goods. In Great Britain the drugs were distri-
buted to the hospitals or sold to the authorised trade. Systematic destruction of goods con-
fiscated would simply serve the interests of the manufacturers ; on the other hand, if they
were sold to the lawful trade, it would tend to diminish the requirements of that trade. The
British delegate thought that only the Government concerned could decide on the measures
to be taken.
The Chairman agreed with the British delegate?s remarks. Confiscation was sufficient
punishment for smugglers and the destruction of the goods served no further purpose.
As regaidcd Chino., theie was no doubt that the destruction of the drugs in question had
? a^ a kencfichd moral effect. Moreover, as the trade in and use of opium were prohibited
m China, the Chinese Government could not act otherwise.


M. Sugimura (Japan) declared that the discussion had brought out the following two
P  m (i) Statistics and a report concerning all drugs confiscated would be sent to the Central
BOar (l) The Governments would be free to deal as they thought fit with goods confis-
He thought that it might be advisable, notwithstanding, to deal more fully with the second
point.
The Chairman was of opinion that general statistics should be compiled of goods confis-
cated, but that nothing more could be demanded.
Mr Neville (United States of America) explained that all he suggested was that, when
Wwordimr l atStics the Governments should state how they had disposed of the goods
confiscated and that they should submit a report on the matter to the Central Board.
The Chairman pointed out that this procedure was already implied in the article which
had been drafted.
M Sugimura (Japan) declared that if. in the opinion of Sub-Committee A, this pro-
cedure'was already implied in Article IV?, he would be quite satisfied.
The Chairman agreed that quesdon was one Sub C members
of Sub-Committee E who also belonged to Sub-Committee a m b
of their colleagues to this point.
report rttMS
The addition to the report proposed by the British delegate was adopted.
(e) Postal Consignments (Annex 3, Article X).
" * -??* p.?
;ss ;ssjr? ??
Sir Malcolm Delevtngne (British Empire), Rapporteur, agreed with this view.
The addition to Article X was adopted.
M. Sugimura (Japan) stated that the Japanese delegation
the adoption of the report as it stood.
Mr. Neville (United States of America) pointed out that the report and the annex went
together. .
M. van Wettum (Netherlands) thought that it would be necessary to hold another meeting
for Sub-Committee decided to meet again the follomng morning
for the purpose of the final adoption of the report.
SIXTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Thursday, January 1925, at n
Chairman : M. Bourgois (France).
14. Adoption of the Report of the Sub-Committee.
The Chairman submitted to the members the final text of the report of the
Committee 2 . ,- , ..
M-Pilya (Kingdom offthe Serb.
clauses might be at variance with the provisions
. Article IV of the Report of Sub-Committee A (see Records of Plenary Meetings, Annex 19).
2 See Records of Plenary Meetings, Annex 24.


recommended by Sub-Committee E. It might perhaps be advisable to add to the text adopted
the previous day a clause to the effect that the provisions in question would apply in so far
as they were not at variance with the existing provisions contained in the commercial treaties
concluded by the various countries.
Sir Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, stated in reply that the text
laid down that ?the provisions of this article shall be applied so far as the circumstances
permit??.
, The Chairman pointed out that in that case the word ?circumstances? must be inter-
preted in the sense of ?agreements?, which might involve some discussion.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire), Rapporteur, directed M. Filya?s attention
to the opening words of the article in question, which were as follows : ?Subject to the pro-
visions of any international agreement or treaty,? etc. F
M. Filya (Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) declared that if this text covered
ms objection he was prepared to accept it.
On the proposal of M. van Wettum (Netherlands), the word ?importation? in paragraph 7
of the French text of Article 13 was replaced by the word ?introduction?. 8 F
The report was unanimously adopted.
carP f,?,Tnnrt l q fr T ? e T erS - tanked the Rapporteur for his clear and
and tT wholfntlh * Sub Cf^?' l f tee haddealt Wlth a ver y important and complex question,
rf d the Rapp'orteur P  f Conventlon would be due > ve T Iwgely, to the personal efforts
mems M oHhlTu D b E Co E Zute E e KbKJIT'"' the Chairma " a " d
15. Consultation with the Economic and Transit Sections of the Secretariat.
mended S b U v Gl tr R Q A ,l J r Pan) * ha ? th f Ja P anese delegation, after examining the text recom-
wHK rn r S b ' C . tt6e ? i Wa t S  f P mion that this text contained nothing at variance
with the other Conventions concluded at Geneva in the matter of Customs Formalities and
Tiansit. Before, however, the scheme was finally adopted they should take all precautions
It would be expedient to consult the competent sections of the Secretariat namelv the
anyTZpZntrat a vZ h n e ?V? as whether the teSTqZtioncTnJaZd
any legal points at variance with existing Conventions. The opinions of these organisations
Zfng e the m fiZr C text ? Dnlfting Coramittee - which would take note of them when
regarded 2*'admte/w 'b panesede:le g ata , whether in hia opinion the report might be
tw b o SectmL 1o P Ce d con y suffed ZZ'SatZ ? any modifications *Wed by the
~ c M , Sugimura (Japan) agreed that the report might be regarded as finallv adonted bv
cated by ? W  SeCti " S sh  uld be
to
thesebouldTe foZaTded f  rWard ? y impWtant
by
observations were submitted to him by either f ?S
them to the Co-ordination Committee. He would not call another^meetinf?f sTfcZ
unless the Co-ordination Committee had any important matter to bring to its notice. ?
16. Statement by the Persian Delegation.
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) read the following statement ?
ExrTni r Z ? \ th iesolutions of the Conference, will depend on the arrentanre
w y hi COnfo ? n ?  f tn 7 6 very le S ltimate demands clearly set out m its memorandum of
which the contents are already known to the members of the Conference ? memorandum ? of
The Chairman took due note of the Persian delegate?s statement tg ? , , ?
was not one for the Sub-Committee but for the Plenary Conference P  mt a ? ISSUe


17. Statement by the Swiss Delegation.
M. Pequignot (Switzerland) read the following statement :
?The Swiss Government adheres unhesitatingly to the principle of the proposals
which Sir Malcolm Delevingne sets out in his admirable report. As I stated at our
meeting on December 15th, 1924, my country, which is deeply attached to the ideal
of international solidarity and is determined to co-operate in the campaign against
the improper use of drugs, is prepared loyally to enforce all measures of control directed
towards this end, provided they are reasonable, practicable and just. The pioposals
advocated by Sub-Committee E appear to me to fulfil these requirements and we there-
fore give them our wholehearted support, without any reservations.
?Moreover, the Swiss Law on Drugs of which I gave a summary on December
isth and which, in many respects, goes much further than the Hague Convention
has fortunately issued victorious from the referendum ; it has been in force since January
6th of this year. This law, which my country, in accordance with its tradition will
enforce as strictly as its other laws, will permit of the application by Switzerland of the
provisions which we have drawn up. ... ?
"May I in conclusion, express the hope that the other Sub-Committees will arrive
at results acceptable to all parties, so that our work on Sub-Committee E may not be
in vain? It would be a thousand pities if the valuable measures drawn up by Sub-Lom-
mittee E could not be put into effect owing to failure to arrive at an agreement on other
questions which are perhaps of less importance than the provisions designed to strengthen
the control over drug manufacture and the drug traffic. Whatever may be said to the
contrary close and systematic control is the best means of preventing illicit operations.
In the of control, you may count upon Switzerland?s wholehearted and loyal
co-operation.?
The Chairman thanked the Swiss delegate for his statement. All the members of the
Sub-Committee shared his views as to the importance of the Sub-Committee.work and hoped
that their own Governments and all the Governments represented at the Conference would
agree to the proposals put forward.
18. Vote of Thanks to the Chairman and to the Committee of Five.
M. Sugimura (Japan) desired on behalf of his colleagues to congratulate the Chairman
on the able manner in which he had presided over the work of the Sub-Committee.
The Chairman thanked the Japanese delegate. He added that Sub-Committee E s
work should not be regarded as at an end. They might still have to discuss a number of
questions if the other Sub-Committees were not in agreement with their views.
M. Pequignot (Switzerland) said that, having been privileged to follow and observe
a large part of the work accomplished by the Committee of Five, he thought that it was Is
duty to congratulate and thank that Committee for the diligence with which it had performed
its task. He was sure that all his colleagues on Sub-Committee E would join with him
offering their thanks and congratulations. , n ...
The proposals which the Committee of Five had put before the Sub-Committee seemed
to him to be the product of British constancy, Japanese perspicacity Dutch common-sense
American idealism and that French genius of which M. Bourgois, the distinguished Chair
of the Sub-Committee, was the living embodiment.
SEVENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Friday, February 6th, 1925, at 5.30 p.m.
Chairman: Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia).
Prince Arfa-ed-Dovleh (Persia) took the chair in the absence of M. Bourgois, who was
indisposed.
19. Letters from the Directors of the Communications and Transit Section ana of the
Economic Section of the Secretariat.
The Chairman reminded the Committee that questions had been addressed to t
of the Communications and Transit Section and to the Director of the Economic Section of the
Secretariat of the League of Nations, inquiring whether any provisions
articles drafted by the Sub-Committee were incompatible with the International Irans
Convention and with the International Convention on Customs Formalities.
The Directors of the Sections concerned had replied to the question put by the o
Committee in letters dated February stb, I9 2 5 (Annexes 4 and 5).
The Sub-Committee noted the letters and decided that they should be forwarded to the Drafting
Committee, and circulated in the usual way.


ANNEXES.
Page
I. Recommendations submitted by the Committee of Five to Sub-Committee E. . . . 266
2. Provisional Report of Sub-Committee E _ 270
3. Draft Recommendations by Sub-Committee E?- Measures submitted by the
Advisory Committee _ 2 73
4. Letter from the Director of the Communications and Transit Section to the Chair-
man of Sub-Committee E 276
5. Letter from the Economic Section of the Secretariat of the League of Nations to the
Chairman of Sub-Committee E ? 278
6. Statements by Dr. Stade, Member of the Danzig Delegation, to the Chairman of .Sub-
committee 278
Annex 1.
RECOMMENDATIONS SUBMITTED BY THE COMMITTEE OF FIVE
TO SUB-COMMITTEE E.
Measures submitted by the Advisory Committee.
Part 11.
(II) The following article (numbered 2 bis) shall be added to the Convention :
?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate import authorisation, stating
the quantity to be imported and the name and address of the importer and the name and
address of the exporter, must be obtained for each importation of raw opium or coca
leaves. The import authorisation shall specify the period within which the importation
shall be effected and may allow the importation in more than one consignment.??
(Ill) Article 3 shall be replaced by the following article :
(1) ?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate export authorisation
must be obtained for each exportation of raw opium or coca leaves, stating the quantity
to be exported and the name and address of the exporter and the name and address of
the importer.
(2) ?The Contracting Power, before issuing such export authorisation, shall require
an import certificate, issued by the Government of the importing country and certifying
that the importation is approved, to be produced by the person applying for the export
authorisation.?
(3) ?The export authorisation shall specify the period within which the exportation
must be effected.?
(4) ?A copy of the export authorisation shall accompany the consignment, and the
Government issuing the export authorisation shall send a copy to the Government of the
importing country.?
(5) ?The Government of the importing country, when the importation has been
effected, or when the period fixed for the importation has expired, shall return the export
authorisation with an endorsement to that effect to the Government of the exporting
country. The endorsement shall specify the amount actually received.?
(6) ?If a less quantity than that specified in the export authorisation is actually
exported, the quantity actually exported shall be noted on the export authorisation and
on any official copy thereof.?
(7) ?In the case of an application to export a consignment to any country for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that country, the production of a
special certificate from the Government of that country, certifying that it has approved
the introduction of the consignment for the said purpose, may be admitted by the Govern-
ment of the exporting country in place of the import certificate provided for above.
In such a case the export authorisation shall specify that the consignment is exported
for the purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse.?
(VII) Article 12 shall be replaced by the following article ;
?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate import authorisation, stating
the quantity to be imported, the name and address of the importer and the name and
address of the exporter must be obtained for each importation of any of the substances
to which Chapter 111 applies. The authorisation shall specify the period within which
the importation shall be effected and may allow the importation in more than one
consignment.?


(VIII) Article 13 shall be replaced by the following article :
(1) ?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate export authorisation
must be obtained for each exportation of any of the substances to which Chapter 111
applies, stating the quantity to be exported and the name and address of the exporter
and the name and address of the importer.?
(2) ?The Contracting Power, before issuing such export authorisation, shall require
an import certificate issued by the Government of the importing country and certifying
that the importation is approved, to be produced by the person applying for the expoi t
authorisation.?
(3) ?The export authorisation shall specify the period within which the exportation
must be effected.?
(4) ?A copy of the export authorisation shall accompany the consignment, and the
Government issuing the export authorisation shall send a copy to the ioveinmen o
the importing country.?
(5) ?The Government of the importing country, when the importation has been
effected, or when the period fixed for the importation has expired, shall return the ex P Ol
authorisation, with an endorsement to that effect, to the Government of the expoitmg
country. The endorsement shall specify the amount actually received.
(6) ?If a less quantity than that specified in the export authorisation is actually
exported, the quantity actually exported shall be noted on the export authorisation an.
on any official copy thereof.?
(7) ?In the case of an application to export a consignment to any country for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that country, the production o a specia
certificate from the Government of that country, certifying that it has approved the in 1 -
auction of the consignment for the said purpose, may be admitted by the ovemm
of the exporting country in place of the import certificate provided for above, in sucn
a case the export authorisation shall specify that the consignment is expoi cec or
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse.
(IX) For the purpose of ensuring the full application and enforcement of the provisions
of the Hague Convention, as amended by this Agreement, in free poits and ice zones.
Governments undertake to apply in free ports and free zones situated within eir 6111 * -
the same laws and regulations, and to exercise the same supervision and contro m
the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by this Agieemcnt, as in o ei pc
of their territories.
(X) Subject to the provisions of any international Postal Convention or other inter-
national agreement or treaty limiting the control which may be exercised by any o e
Contracting Powers over the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by t
Agreement, when in direct transit :
(1) ?No consignment of any of the substances covered by this Convention, as amended
by this Agreement, which is exported from one country to another country s a e
permitted to pass through the territory of a third country, whether or not it is removed
from the ship or conveyance in which it is being conveyed, unless a full anc accura
declaration of the contents of the consignment is made to the competent authorities ot
that country and the copy of the export authorisation (or the diversion certificate it
such a certificate has been issued in pursuance of the following paragraph) which acco
panics the consignment is produced to them.?
(z) ??The competent authorities of any country through whose territory a consign-
ment of any of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by.this Ag.reeme it
is permitted to pass shall take all due measures to prevent the diversion of the K?
to a destination other than that named in the copy of the export authorisation or the
diversion certificate which accompanies it, unless the Government of that count y .
authorised that diversion by means of a special diversion certificate. A diversion certi-
ficate shall only be issued after the receipt of an import certificate in accordance wit
Article 3 or Article 13 from the Government of the country to which it is proposed to divert
the consignment and shall contain the same particulars as are required by Article 3 0,
Article 13 to be stated in an export authorisation, together with the name o f th(: co , y
from which the consignment was originally exported ; and all the provisions of Artie 1c 3
or Article 13 which are applicable to an export authorisation shall be applicable eqe- hy
to Ure diversion cert.fica?e. Further, the Government of the country authorising he
diversion of the consignment shall detain the copy of the original export authorisation
or diversion certificate which accompanied the consignment on arrival in y
and shall return it to the Government which issued it, at the same time notifying the
name of the country to which the diversion has been authorised.
(3) ?Any person who fails to make the declaration above mentioned, or who makes
a false declaration, or who fails to produce any documents required to be producer, r


who diverts or attempts to divert any consignment to a destination other than that named
in the export authorisation or in the diversion certificate, shall be guilty of an offence,
and the consignment shall be liable to confiscation, whoever may be the owner of it.?
(XI) A consignment of any of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended
by this Agreement, which is landed in any country and placed in a bonded warehouse, shall
not be allowed by the Government of that country to be withdrawn from the bonded warehouse
unless an import certificate, issued by the Government of the country of destination and cer-
tifying that the importation is approved, is produced to the authorities having jurisdiction
over the bonded warehouse. A special authorisation shall be issued by the Government
in respect of each consignment so withdrawn and shall take the place of the export authori-
sation for the purpose of the preceding provisions of this Agreement.
(XII) Any consignment of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by
this Agreement, while passing in transit through the territories of a country or whilst being
stored there in a bonded warehouse, may not be subjected to any process which would alter
the nature of the substances in question, or, without the permission of the competent autho-
rities, the packing.
Part 111.
Accepted as a Recommendation
2. That each Government should forbid the conveyance in any ship sailing under its
flag of any consignment of the substances covered by the Convention as amended by this
Agreement :
(i) Unless an export authorisation has been issued in respect of such consign-
ment in accordance with the provisions of the Convention so amended and the consignment
is accompanied by an official copy of such authorisation or of any diversion certificate
which may be issued ;
(ii) To any destination other than the destination mentioned in the export autho-
risation or diversion certificate.
Article 7 (VI) of the Advisory Committee?s proposals and Articles 10 and 11 of the pro-
posals submitted by the United States of America are approved (subject to redaction of the
wording of the Committee of redaction), with the exception of the proposal to add the v/ords
"and derivatives?, on which the Sub-Committee makes no recommendation. The delegation
of the Netherlands makes a recommendation as to the omission of the words "this shall not
necessarily apply to?, etc.
It is not possible to settle the text of Article 20 as proposed to be amended by the United
States of America until it is known what decisions have been taken by the Conference in regard
to the production of raw opium or coca leaves.
A recommendation to be submitted that Part 111 (1) of the proposals of the Opium Advi-
sory Committee and Article 20 (/) of the proposals submitted by the United States of America
be replaced by Article 9 of the First Opium Conference Agreement. The delegate of the
United States of America makes a reservation in favour of the original proposal.
The Norwegian proposals, Part 11, paragraph 2 (Appendix 1), are not accepted. The
delegate of the Netherlands makes a reservation to the contrary.
The Austrian proposals (Appendix 2) are covered by the decisions taken on Part II of
the Opium Advisory Committee?s proposals.
The Egyptian proposal was withdrawn.
(O.D.C. 44,  3) C
Appendix 1.
THE NORWEGIAN PROPOSALS.
Part 11. Point VI, 2 paragraphs
VI ( Conclusion ). The Norwegian Government cannot accede to the proposal for the
deletion of the last sentence in Article 10 of the Hague Convention, if that is to be taken to
mean that chemists would have to enter in their books, together with the name of the purchaser,
each consignment of opium, etc., or of drugs containing the foregoing substances, and to
notify the authorities of the facts. Such a provision would be too drastic and is not essential
for the purposes of control. It would, moreover, appear to be impracticable.
While dealing with this subject, we desire to state that pharmacies in Norway are regu-
larly inspected by the authorities and that the licence system at present governing the opening
of pharmacies in that country is, from the standpoint of control, equivalent to a State
monopoly.
1 See Appendix 3.


Appendix 2.
PROPOSALS OF THE AUSTRIAN GOVERNMENT.
The Austrian Government is in agreement with the United States representative s pro-
posal that the cultivation of the poppy and of the coca leaf should be reduced to the quantity
sufficient for the requirements of medicine and science, i.e., to the strict minimum required
for legitimate purposes, since the object of the International Opium Convention, wlnci is to
prevent the abuse of opiates, cocaine, etc., can only be attained by a measure of this me..
The cultivation of these plants, or their use for the production of opium, should not, however,
be confined to a restricted number of countries or confined to countries in which opium tia
hitherto been produced. Such a restriction would, in the opinion of the Austrian Government,
confer an unfair advantage on certain producing countries, which would thus obtain a mono-
polv, while the industry of other countries would be injured.
In the opinion of the Austrian Government, each country should be left to determi e
the quantity of narcotics required for medical and scientific purposes m its own tern ory.
As regards the calculation of a total for world consumption, the Austrian Government sees
no objection to the proposal, on condition that this figure should be drawn up with due r g
to the statistics for the requirements of the various countries over a period of several years
As regards the uniform definition of all the substances falling under the Opium Conven-
tion, the Austrian Government agrees to abide by that adopted at the Hague Convention o
The Federal^ Government is unable to agree to the proposal contained in Nos. 11l and VIII
of Section IX to the effect that when a copy of the export licence does not accompany the
consignment the Government issuing the export licence shall send a copy to the Government
of the importing country. The Federal Government thinks that a measuic of this kind
would merely give excessive work to the authorities concerned without appreciably contri-
buting to the suppression of illicit traffic. As the Federal Government has a ready ventured
to pofnt out when submitting its report for the year 1923, it is, m principle, prepared to
issue licences in quadruplicate. In its opinion, it would be well to render this ruie urnveisa
and to lay down that one of these copies should accompany each consignment. Should the
Government of an exporting country so request, it might further be laid down that the copy of
the export licence accompanying the goods should be returned to the G o^ 6l '^ Station
with an affidavit by the Government of the importing country to the effect that importation
has the P question ra i S ed in No. V, i.e., whether eegomne should be included in
the list of controlled articles in conformity with the Hague Convention the Federal Govern-
ment is not in a position to make a proposal, as it has not been observed m Austria that t
preparation has ever been put to such abusive use as to call for stnctei conti o . _ f
As regards the proposal contained in No. X, namely, that, in the case of a consignment o
narcotics passing in transit through the territory of a third country without being removed
from the ship or conveyance in which it is being conveyed, a declaration should be made to
the authorities of the country of transit of the contents of the consignment and the country
for which it is destined, the Federal Government feels that it should point out that the autho-
rities of the country through which the goods pass are not in a position to apply the provisions
concerning the control of the traffic in narcotics to goods transported in closed receptacles wind 1
are not removed from the means of transport, which, in other words, remain during transit
under Customs seal. The control of such consignments by the authorities of the countries
through which they pass would be going too far and would not, moreover, P ro^ c  res "
unless part at least of some of the packages chosen at random were to be examined. The
authorities of a country of transit are not, however, entitled unless they have serious
misnicions concerning the contents ?to open these packages. It should, moreover, be borne
in mind that, according to the Convention for the Simplification of Customs Formalities
concluded on November 3rd, 1923, all excessive or useless formalities should be avoided. n
the opinion of the Federal Government, the copy of the export certificate accompanying the
goods should be sufficient to warrant the consignment.
(O. D. C. 44)
Appendix 3.
PROPOSAL BY THE EGYPTIAN DELEGATION.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen ;
1 have the honour to communicate to the Second Opium Conference the three recommen-
dations which the Egyptian Government desires to see embodied in the Convention which we
are to draw up. They are as follows ;
1. That hashish be included in the list of dangerous drugs with which we are to
deal.


2. That the Powers signatories of the Convention impose uniform penalties
for offences against the provisions of the Convention to be concluded by this Conference,
or at least that they should mention in the Convention that the penalty will not be less
than that provided for misdemeanours.
3. That it is desirable that the import and export permits referred to in the Conven-
tion should be alike in all countries and that they should be drawn up in such a way as
to make it difficult for contraband dealers to forge them.
Dr. Md. Abdel Salam El Guindy,
Egyptian Delegate.
Annex 2.
PROVISIONAL REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE E.
1. Sub-Committee E was charged by the Conference with the examination of a number
of proposals for strengthening the provisions of the Hague Convention in regard to the national
and international control over the substances to which that Convention applies. The most
important of these proposals were those contained in Part II of the measures suggested
by the Opium Advisory Committee of the League of Nations and the corresponding provisions,
which follow in the main the proposals of the Advisory Committee, submitted by the dele-
gation of the United States.
2. The Sub-Committee is glad to be able to report that it has arrived at a unanimous
conclusion, subject only to one reservation, on the important matters which it has had to
consider.
3. The proposals submitted to it referred in the main to the control to be exercised
over the international traffic, and the Sub-Committee had the advantage of the assistance of
expert advisers attached to several of the delegations.
4. The general object of the proposals in Part II of the Advisory Committee's scheme
is explained in the latter part of the explanatory note contained in Annex 2 of the report of
the work of the Sixth Session of that Committee (A. 32. 1924. XI).
5. It is there pointed out that ?experience during the three years which have elapsed
since the Convention came into force has shown that there are loopholes in the existing
provisions by which persons engaged in illicit traffic can evade the control over the national
and international trade?? ; and the proposals of the Advisory Committee aim in particular
at establishing a much closer control over the international movement of the substances to
which the Convention applies. The principal provisions for the control of the interna-
tional traffic in the existing Convention are contained in Articles 111, IV, V (which relate to
raw opium) and Articles X [h], XII and XIII (which relate to the manufactured drugs).
The object of these provisions is to confine to authorised persons the right to export and import
the substances covered by the Convention, and to prevent the export of the substances from
one country to any unauthorised persons in another country ; but no adequate machinery
is provided for securing this object effectively. The proposals of the Advisory Committee
would expand those provisions and lay down in detail the methods by which the control of
the international trade is to be carried out.
6. These proposals have been thoroughly examined by Sub-Committee E and have
been adopted by it in the main. Certain modifications have been introduced, which relate
chiefly to points of detail. A text of the provisions as proposed by the Sub-Committee for
inclusion in the Convention to be adopted by the Conference is appended to this report, and,
for the convenience of the Conference, the modifications introduced by the Sub-Committee
are indicated by italics.
7. Articles II and 111 lay down two principles which are essential to the effective control
of the international traffic: the first of these is that a separate import authorisation or export
authorisation from the Government shall be required in the case of each consignment imported
or exported. This secures that every international transaction in the substances covered by
the Convention comes under the consideration of the Government before it is carried out.
The second is that an export authorisation shall only be issued by the Government of the
exporting country on the production of a certificate from the Government of the importing
country that the import into the latter country of the consignment proposed to be exported
has been approved. The production of such a certificate is a guarantee to the Government
of the exporting country that its exports are destined for persons duly authorised by their
Government to receive the drugs and for purposes which are legitimate. The manner in
which the import certificate system operates has been fully explained in the memorandum
circulated by the Secretary-General of the League on the advice of the Opium Advisory
Committee, which will be found in CL.15.1g22. These two principles have already been
adopted by many Governments. It is hoped that one result of the present Conference will
be to secure their general adoption by all countries. Until that is done, the control over the
international traffic will not be completely effective.


8. It is recognised that the requirement of an import certificate can be applied only
in the case of exports to countries which are parties to the Convention or, at least, accept the
import certificate system.
9. The Government of an exporting country will not be compelled to require the pro-
duction of an import certificate in respect of exports to a country which is outside the Conven-
tion and does not agree to furnish such certificates. It is to be understood that in these cases
the principle above mentioned will not apply, but at the same time a moral obligation will
rest on the Government of the exporting country not to allow the export of the substances
in excessive quantities to countries which decline to furnish import certificates and to
co-operate in the system of international control, and which in some cases are known to be
centres of the illicit traffic.
10. It will not perhaps be necessary to refer in detail to the minor modifications intro-
duced by Sub-Committee E in the proposals of the Advisory Committee, but one or two points
may be noted.
11. It will be noticed, on a comparison of Article II with Article 111 (3) that, while an
import authorisation may allow a supply of the substances to be imported in more than one
consignment, a similar latitude is not allowed in the case of exportation. The reason for this
will be apparent on an examination of the proposals as a whole. In the case of an impor-
tation it will not be possible for the importer to know beforehand whether the person in the
other country from whom he is obtaining the supply will be able to send it in a single consign-
ment or not/and, as the import authorisation has to be issued before he can order the goods,
provision must be made to allow the importation to be. effected in more tnan one consignment.
12. The case is different in regard to exports. The general scheme requires that a
copy of the export authorisation must accompany the goods, and it would lead to great
confusion if the export authorisation allowed the despatch of the goods in more than one con-
signment and there was a difference between the amount specified in the export authorisation
and the quantity of goods in the consignment. It is proposed therefore that, where the goods
have to be sent in separate consignments, a separate export authorisation should be obtained
in respect of each consignment. This should lead to no difficulty in practice.
13. Article 111 (4) and (5) will enable the authorities to follow up the export and pro-
vides a safeguard against its diversion to illicit purposes. In the first place, it is provided
that a copy of the export authorisation must accompany the consignment. It is understood
that the usual procedure would be, in the case of consignments sent by sea, that the copy
should be handed to the captain or other responsible officer of the ship, and, in the case of
goods sent overland by train, to the responsible railway official in charge of the goods, and
so on.
14. In the second place, it is required that the Government issuing the export authorisation
shall send a copy to the Government of the importing country, and that the latter Government
shall return the copy to the Government of the importing country when the importation has
been effected, with a notification of the amount received. The Sub-Committee considers that
the copy should be sent direct from the competent authorities in the one country to the compe-
tent authorities in the other, and not through the diplomatic channels.
15. Articles VII and VIII (relating to the manufactured drugs) correspond to Articles II
and 111 (relating to raw opium). It is unnecessary therefore to say anything in regard to the
provisions in Articles VII and VIII. Special provisions are inserted in Articles 111 (7),
VIII (7) and XI to adapt the system of control to the case of ?bonded warehouses?.
16. Article IX is a provision of great importance. Free ports not being subject to
the ordinary control of the Customs authorities of the territory in which they are situated,
the illicit traffickers have been able in the past to evade control by making use of the free
ports. Attention has been called by the Opium Advisory Committee to this means of evasion,
and the question has been reported upon by the Transit Committee of the League (see Annex 7
to Minutes of the Fourth Session of the Advisory Committee, C. 155. M. 75. 1923. In con-
sequence of the attention so called, a number of Governments have already adopted, and are
enforcing, measures of control over imports and exports of the diugs in tneir fiec poits.
17. On the consideration of this article, the Italian representative pointed out that the
Italian Government is disposed to prohibit entirely the use of the free ports in Italy for the
import or export of the substances covered by the Convention. It is not suggested by the
Sub-Committee that countries which have already more drastic provisions in force than those
suggested in Article IX should weaken their provisions, and it recommends that the Drafting
Committee, when settling the wording of this article, should insert a provision to meet such
cases.
18 Article Xis a redraft of Article VII (10) and (n) of the Advisory Committee?s proposals,
which has been prepared by the expert advisers who have assisted the Committee. In the
opinion of the Sub-Committee, the redraft both simplifies and renders more effective the pro-
cedure for exercising control over consignments in transit, whether there is a change of con-
veyance (e.g., transhipment) or not during transit. The drafting at present is somewhat
lengthy, but this could be left to the Drafting Committee to improve.


19- Attention may specially be called to the opening lines of the article, which are
designed in particular to meet the case of goods in transit along international waterways.
There are a number of cases in which, under treaty, goods pass along international waterways
without interference from the authorities of the countries through which the waterways pass.
For instance, goods going by sea to Antwerp along the waters of the Scheldt are exempt
from interference by the Dutch authorities. Other cases which may be mentioned are inter-
national canals, such as the Suez Canal, and the Great Lakes of North America, which are situated
partly in the territories of the United States and partly in the territories of Canada.
20. The Sub-Committee has not been able to ascertain, in the time at its disposal,
what is the position at present with regard to the transport of goods by air from one country to
another over the territories of an intervening country, but if such transport is, or may hereafter
be, permitted without the aircraft being required to land in the territory of the intervening
country, the provision in the opening lines of Article X will be applicable.
21. A proposal was submitted to the Sub-Committee that if any person fails to produce
any document as required by paragraph i of Article X, or diverts, or attempts to divert,
without an authorisation as required by paragraph 2 any consignment to a destination other
than that named in the export authorisation or diversion certificate, he shall be guilty of an
offence, and the consignment shall be liable to confiscation, whoever may be the owner of it.
The Sub-Committee agrees with this proposal, but it considers that any provisions as to
penalties or confiscation should appear in an article in the Convention applying generally
to the provisions of the Convention, and that the drafting of such an article should be referred
to the Drafting Committee.
22. Article Xlf is new. Any interference with the drugs while in transit will make
it easy for the illicit traffickers to evade control. Many cases have come to light in which the
drugs had been abstracted from the packages while in transit and replaced by other goods.
Part 111.
23. Article 2. - The Sub-Committee endorses this recommendation of the Advisory
Committee and suggests that it might be appended to the Convention adopted by the Second
Conference in a protocol. The reasons for the recommendation are the following : A ship of
country A may be engaged in smuggling opium from country B to country C, without
touching at any port in country A and without therefore coming under the control of the
authorities of country A. A large amount of the illicit traffic in opium is carried on in this
w T ay. The Sub-Committee recognises that some Governments may find difficulty in applying
such a provision and will require to examine it carefully before they can adopt it. It is for
this reason that it has not proposed that it should be inserted as a definite provision in the
Convention itself.
24. The Sub-Committee also recognises that the provision will not be applicable if
country Bis not a party to the Convention and does not issue export authorisations. The
Drafting Committee should be asked, in settling the terms of the recommendation, to provide
for such cases.
25. In Article VII (6) the Advisory Committee recommends the omission, at the end
of Article X of the Hague Convention, of the words, ?This rule shall not necessarily apply
to medical prescriptions and to sales by duly authorised chemists?. The effect of this proposal
would have been to require that all sales on medical prescriptions and by duly authorised
chemists should be registered. It was pointed out in the Sub-Committee that this would
not fit in with the systems of control over such sales in certain countries, and it was unani-
mously agreed, in place of omitting the words altogether, to substitute for them the words,
?This requirement shall not necessarily apply either to supplies by medical practitioners
to their patients or to sales by duly authorised chemists on medical prescriptions if the medical
prescriptions are duly filed and preserved by the medical practitioner or chemist?.
26. As regards Article 20 in the United States draft, it was pointed out that it would
not be possible to make the possession of coca leaves illegal in countries where the coca plant
grows wild, and the Committee has, in view of this and of other objections, not felt able to
make any recommendation at the present stage.
27. The Sub-Committee discussed at length the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee in Part 111 (1) that each Government ?should forbid any person within its juris-
diction from procuring or assisting the commission in any place outside its jurisdiction of
any offence against the laws in force in such place? relating to the control, etc., of the drugs.
The Sub-Committee entirely approves the principle of this proposal, but attention was called
to the fact that there may be constitutional difficulties in the way of its acceptance by certain
countries. The First Opium Conference, which had a similar proposal before it, and had to
take account of the same difficulties, adopted a text as follows ;
?The Contracting Powers will examine in the most favourable spirit the possibility
of taking legislative measures to render punishable illegitimate transactions which
are carried out in another country by a person residing within their territories?.


28. The Sub-Committee felt that it would be difficult to recommend a different text
for adoption by the Second Conference, and accordingly suggests that an article on the same
lines as Article IX of the First Conference Agreement should be adopted by the Second Conference
The delegate of the United States made a reservation in favour of the adoption of the original
proposal of the Advisory Committee, to which effect is given in Article 20 (F) of the United
States Draft.
2Q. The Sub-Committee approves the proposal in Article 7 (1) of the Advisory
Committee?s proposals and Article 2 of the United States proposals that Article 2 of the
Hague Convention should be extended to coca leaves.
so. A new proposal has been submitted to the Sub-Committee that Article IV of the
Hague Convention, which provides that ?every package containing raw opium intended tor
export shall be marked in such a way as to indicate its contents, provided that the consignment
exceeds five kilogrammes,? should be suppressed. It has been found that marks indicating
that a particular packet contains raw opium are a help to opium thieves, and are of no rea
value for the purpose of the control over the traffic. The proposed requirement that a copy
of the export authorisation must in future accompany the goods will provide a much more
effective safeguard. The Sub-Committee therefore approves the proposal and recommends
its adoption by the Conference.
Annex 3.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATIONS BY SUB-COMMITTEE E.
Measures submitted by the Advisory Committee.
Part 11.
(II) The following article (numbered 2 bis) shall be added to the Convention .
?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate import authorisation, stating
the quantity to be imported and the name and address of the importer and the? name and
ot the exporter must be obtained for each importation of raw opium or coca leaves. Ihe
import authorisation shall specify the period within which the importation must be effected
and may allow the importation in more than one consignment.
(Ill) Article 3 shall be replaced by the following article ;
1 ?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate export authorisation must
be obtained for each exportation of raw opium or coca leaves, stating the W antlt y
exported and the name and address of the exporter and the name and address of the importer.
2 ?The Contracting Power, before issuing such export authorisation, shall require
an import certificate issufd by the Government of the importing country, and certifying
tLtTe importation is approved, to be produced by the person applying for the export
authorisation."
3. " The export authorisation shall specify the period within which the exportation must
he effected."
"A cotv ot the extort authorisation shall accompany the consignment and the
Government fling the export authorisation shall also send a copy to the Government
of the importing country.?
5. ?The Government of the importing country, when
effected, or when the period fixed for of tL exposing
authorisation with an endorsement to that effect t . 7
country. The endorsement shall specify the amount actually received.
c ?7 in auantitv than that specified in the export authorisation is actually exported t
the quantifylclZlTllpolfdMlieLed by the competent authorities on the export authoi
risation and on any official copy thereof.
n ?In fhp rase of an application to export a consignment to any country for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that
certificate from the Government of that country, cer 1 yi g Government of
auction of the consignment for the sa d purpo:se may be admitted by #
fpLptL ** i* *-***>
of being placed in a bonded warehouse.


VII. Article 12 shall be replaced by the following article
?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate import authorisation, stating
the quantity to he imported, the name and address of the importer and the name and address of
the exporter, must be obtained for each importation of any of the substances to which
Chapter 111 applies. The import authorisation shall specify the period within which the
importation must he effected and may allow the importation in more than one consignment.
VIII. Article 13 shall be replaced by the following article :
1. ?Each Contracting Power shall require that a separate export authorisation must
be obtained for each exportation of any of the substances to which C hapter 111 applies,
stating the quantity to he exported and the name and address of the exporter and the name and
address of the importer.?
2. ?The Contracting Power, before issuing such export authorisation, shall require
an import certificate issued by the Government of the importing country, and certifying
that the importation is approved, to be produced by the person applying for the export
authorisation .?
3. " The export authorisation shall specify the period within which the exportation
must he effected.?
4. ?A copy of the export authorisation shall accompany the consignment, and the
Government issuing the export authorisation shall send a copy to the Government of the
importing country.?
5. ?The Government of the importing country, when the importation has been
effected, or when the period fixed for the importation has expired, shall return the export
authorisation, with an endorsement to that effect, to the Government of the exporting
country. The endorsement shall specify the amount actually received.?
6. "If a less quantity than that specified in the export authorisation is actually exported,
the quantity actually exported shall he noted on the export authorisation and on any official
copy thereof.?
7. ?In the case of an application to export a consignment to any country for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that country, the production of a special
certificate from the Government of that country, certifying that it has approved the intro-
duction of the consignment for the said purpose, may be admitted by the Government
of the exporting country in place of the import certificate provided for above. In such
a case, the export authorisation shall specify that the consignment is exported for the purpose
of being placed in a bonded warehouse.?
IX. For the purpose of ensuring the full application and enforcement of the provisions
of the Convention, as amended by this Agreement, in free ports and free zones, the Governments
undertake to apply in free ports and free zones situated within their territories the same laws
and regulations, and to exercise the same supervision and control in respect of the substances
covered by the Convention, as amended by this Agreement, as in other parts of their territories.
X. Subject to the provisions of any international Postal Convention or other international
agreement or treaty limiting the control which may he exercised by any of the Contracting Powers
over the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by this Agreement, when in direct transit:
1. ??No consignment of any of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended
by this A grcement, which is exported from one country to another country shall he permitted
to pass through the territory of a third country, whether or not it is removed from the ship
or conveyance in which it is being conveyed, unless the copy of the export authorisation (or the
diversion certificate, if such a certificate has been issued in pursuance of the following para-
graph) which accompanies the consignment is produced to the competent authorities of that
country.?
2. ??The competent authorities of any country through whose territory a consignment
of any of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by this Agreement, is permitted
to pass shall take all due measures to prevent the diversion of the consignment to a destination
other than that named in the copy of the export authorisation or the diversion certificate which
accompanies it, unless the Government of that country has authorised that diversion by means
of a special diversion certificate. A diversion certificate shall only be issued after the receipt
of an import certificate in accordance with Article 3 or Article 13 from the Government of
the country to which it is proposed to divert the consignment and shall contain the same
particulars as are required by Article 3 or Article 13 to be stated in an export authorisation,
together with the name of the country from which the consignment was originally exported ;
and all the provisions of Article 3 or Article 13 which are applicable to an export authori-
sation shall be applicable equally to the diversion certificate. Further, the Government of
the country authorising the diversion of the consignment shall detain the copy of the original
export authorisation or diversion certificate which accompanied the consignment on arrival
in its territory and shall return it to the Government which issued it, at the same time noti-
fying the name of the country to which the diversion has been authorised.?


XI ? A consignment of any of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended
by this Agreement, which is landed in any country and placed in a bonded warehouse, shall
not be allowed by the Government of that country to be withdrawn from the bonded ware-
house unless an import certificate, issued by the Government of the country of destination
and certifying that the importation is approved, is produced to the authorities having juris-
diction over the bonded warehouse. A special authorisation shall be issued by the Govern-
ment in respect of each consignment so withdrawn and shall take the place of the export
authorisation for the purpose of the preceding provisions of this agreement.
XII. Any consignment of the substances covered by the Convention, as amended by this
Agreement, while passing in transit through the territories of a country or whilst being stored there
in a bonded warehouse, may not be subjected to any process which would alter the nature of the
substances in question, or, without the permission of the competent authorities, the packing.
Part 111
Accepted as a Recommendation.
2. That each Government should forbid the conveyance in any ship sailing under
its flag of any consignment of the substances covered by the Convention as amended by
this Agreement :
(i) Unless an export authorisation has been issued in respect of such consignment
in accordance with the provisions of the Convention as so amended and the consignment
is accompanied by an official copy of such authorisation, or of any diversion certificate
which may be issued.
(ii) To any destination other than the destination mentioned in the export autho-
risation or diversion certificate.
Article 7 (VI) of the Advisory Committee?s proposals :
?In Article 10 the words ?The Contracting Powers shall control?shall be substituted
for ?The Contracting Powers shall use their best endeavours to control or to cause to be
controlled?, and the words ?The Contracting Parties shall adopt ? shall be substituted for
?The Contracting Powers shall use their best endeavours to adopt or cause to be adopted?.
?The words ?or shall make to the competent authorities an official declaration that
they are so engaged? shall be omitted. .
?The words ?This rule shall not necessarily apply to medical prescriptions and to
sales by duly authorised chemists ? shall be omitted? ;
and Articles 10 and 11 of the proposals submitted by the United States of America :
Article 10. ?The Contracting Parties shall control all persons manufacturing,
importing, selling, distributing or exporting morphine, cocaine or their respective salts
or derivatives, as well as the buildings in which these persons carry on such industry or
trade.?
?With this object, the Contracting Parties shall:
?(a) Confine the manufacture of morphine, cocaine and their respective salts
and derivatives to those establishments and premises alone which have been licensed
for the purpose, or obtain information respecting the establishments and piemiscs
in which these drugs are manufactured and keep a register of them ;
?(b) Require that all persons engaged in the manufacture, import, sale, distri-
bution, or export of morphine, cocaine or their respective salts or derivatives shall obtain
a licence or permit to engage in these operations ;
* < ( c ) Require that such persons shall enter in their books the quantities manufac-
tured, imports, sales and all other distribution and exports of morphine, cocaine
and their respective salts and derivatives.?
Article 11. ?The Contracting Parties shall take measures to prohibit, as regards
their internal trade, the delivery of morphine, cocaine and their respective salts and
derivatives to any unauthorised persons ;
are approved (subject to redaction of the wording of the Committee of Redaction), with the
following exceptions :
(1) No recommendation is made on the proposal to add the words and derivatives
which had been referred to Sub-Committee F ;
(2) Instead of the omission of the words, ?This rule shall not necessarily apply?,
etc., at the end of Article 10 of the Hague Convention, it is proposed that these words
should be replaced by the following :
?This requirement shall not necessarily apply either to supplies of medical
practitioners to their patients or to sales by duly authorised chemists on medica
prescriptions if the medical prescriptions are duly filed and preserved by the medical
practitioner or chemist.?
It is not possible to settle the text of Article 20 as proposed to be amended by the United
States of America until it is known what decisions have been taken by the Conference in
regard to the production of raw opium or coca leaves.


A recommendation to be submitted that Part 111 (i) of the proposals of the Opium
sory Committee and Article 20 Fof the proposals submitted by the United States of Am ca
be replaced by Article IX of the First Opium Conference Agreement The delegate of the
United States of America makes a reservation in favour of the original proposal.
The Norwegian proposals, Part 11, paragraph 2 (Appendix I to Annex I):
?The Norwegian Government cannot accede to the proposal for the deletion of the
last sentence in Article 10 of the Hague Convention if that is to be taken to mean t eat
chemists would have to enter in their books, together with the name of the pure laser,
each consignment of opium, etc., or of drugs containing the foregoing substances, and to
notify the authorities of the facts. ~ . - t ,
?Such a provision would be too drastic and is not essential for the purposes of control.
It would, moreover, appear to be impracticable. While dealing with this subject, we
desire to state that pharmacies in Norway are regularly inspected by the authorities and
that the licence system at present governing the opening of pharmacies in that countiy
is, from the standpoint of control, equivalent to a State Monopoly ;
are covered by the amendment to Article 10 of the Hague Convention proposed above.
The Austrian proposals (Appendix II to Annex I)
?Xhe Federal Government is unable to agree to the proposal contained in Nos. 11l
and VIII of Part II to the effect that, when a copy of the export licence does not accom-
pany the consignment, the Government issuing the export licence shall send a copy to
the Government of the importing country. The Federal Government thinks taat a
measure of this kind would merely give excessive work to the authorities concerned
without appreciably contributing to the suppression of illicit traffic. As the hederal
Government has already ventured to point out when submitting its report for the year
1023 it is in principle prepared to issue licences in quadruplicate. In its opinion, it
would be well to render this rule universal and to lay down that one of these copies
should accompany each consignment. Should the Government of an exporting country
so request, it might further be laid down that the copy of the export licence accompanying
the goods? should be returned to the Government in question with an affidavit by the
Government of the importing country to the effect that the importation has actually
taken place. , . . ,
?As regards the proposal contained in No. X, namely, that, in the case of a consign
ment of narcotics passing in transit through the territory of a third country without being
removed from the ship or conveyance in which it is being conveyed, a declaration should
be made to the authorities of the country of transit of the contents of the consignment
and the country for which it is destined, the Federal Government feels that it should
point out that the authorities of the country through which the goods pass are not in
a position to apply the provisions concerning the control in traffic in narcotics to goods
transported in closed receptacles which are not removed from the means of transport,
which in other words remain during transit under Customs seal. The control of such
consignments by the authorities of the countries through which they pass would be going
too far, and would not, moreover, produce any results unless part at least of some of
the packages chosen at random were to be examined. The authorities of a country of
transit are not, however, entitled unless they have serious suspicions concerning the
contents ?to open these packages. It should, moreover, be borne in mind that, according
to the Convention for the Simplification of Customs Formalities, concluded on November
3rd, 1923, all excessive or useless formalities should be avoided. In the opinion of the
Federal Government, a copy of the export certificate accompanying the goods should be
sufficient to warrant the consignment" ;
are covered by the decisions taken on Part II of the Opium Advisory Committee?s proposals.
The Egyptian proposal (O.D.C. 44, paragraph 3) was withdrawn. 1
It is provisionally recommended that Article 4 of the Hague Opium Convention should
be suppressed. Mr. Neville reserved the right to bring the matter up at a later date.
The extension of Article 2 of the Hague Convention to include coca leaves, as suggested
in the proposals of the Opium Advisory Committee and the United States of America, was
accepted provisionally, note being taken of the fact that the Bolivian delegate had not been
consulted.
Annex 4.
LETTER FROM THE DIRECTOR OF THE COMMUNICATIONS AND TRANSIT
SECTION TO THE CHAIRMAN OF SUB-COMMITTEE E.
Geneva, February sth, 1925.
In reply to your letter of January 31st, 1925, I have the honour to submit to you the
following observations :
1 See Appendix 3 to Annex I.


i I have the honour to draw your attention to the opinion given on August 29th, 1923,
bv the Advisory and Technical Committee for Communications and Transit m response
to the request of the Advisory Committee on Opium in regard to the question of the control
of the opium traffic in free ports. The text of this opinion will be found on page 22 of Docu-
ment C .667. M. 267. 1923. VIII. It contains in particular the following passage .
?Legally the regime of a free port allows the sovereign State of the port, by its
ordinary policing and supervisory powers to enact any ?u c ationofthe Inter-
opium traffic in the free port which it considers necessary for the application ot the int
national Opmm measures which cou ld be taken would no doubt be fully
adeaitateto controlthe traffic of opium which has been declared On the other hand
in view of the small bulk of these goods, there is no doubt that the measures to prevent
contraband in opium in free ports, as well as in any other ports, will often prove mett
tive "XhTmost pracdcaf means of surmounting these difficulties would therefore appear
to be to perfect Ore control in the free port itself by the following general measures .
?Opium should not be despatched from the country of origin to a free port except
in the two following cases :
"la\ If the consignment is sent with a through bill of lading made out to a final
iassss:
Convention.
" (h \ if according to the bill of lading, the free port is the final destination of the
the same footing as any other part of the territory of that St ?
.. t <. - ?.
(.m. ?
special clause was therefore necessary o ex. P in accordance with which the
**? to
and Report
na^^?r^& t perhaps
be possffik to make the wording of the article more explicit on this point.
League of Nations explicitly provide for PP T ran sit Conventions to the exportation
sss
tlTsTpeffl?
 i n -? ~ , t
Subject to the of f j= in tbe
present Sntton the Stat P e through which transit takes place, no consignment by
any, etc.
3. The Transit Section presumes that the purpose IU of drafUs to
any operation modifying the nature o subst ? ances in cases when they have been
by the competent authorities, o  of trans it when their final destination is already
placed in a bonded warehouse or are in P extend this prohibition to the case of goods
known ; but that this article does Ft this interpretation is correct,
remaining in a free port ini the course ft:l Wording of the article, as the term ?in transit ,
Lrdlng^Smorglve y n mV General Convention of Transit, certainly
applies to a large number of cases when goods g g


Accordingly, the Sub-Committee might see fit to word the article as follows if it wishes
to exclude the case of free ports or free zones :
?The substances referred to in the Convention as amended by the present agreement,
when they pass in transit through the Customs territory of a country with or without
being placed in a bonded warehouse, may not be subjected to any operation liable to
modify either the nature of the substances in question or, except when permission is
given by the competent authorities, the packing of such substances.?
For the Director of the Communications
and Transit Section.
{Signed) R. Haas.
Annex 5
LETTER FROM THE ECONOMIC SECTION OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE LEAGUE
OF NATIONS TO THE CHAIRMAN OF SUB-COMMITTEE E.
Extent to which the Application of the Measures contained in the Report of Sub-
Committee E MIGHT BE CONTRARY TO THE UNDERTAKINGS CONTRACTED IN VIRTUE OF THE
Convention on Customs Formalities.
Geneva, February 6th, 1925.
In a letter dated January 31st, you were good enough to ask the opinion of the Economic
Section on the question whether the Report of Sub-Committee E of the Second Opium Con-
ference contains any clauses whose application would raise any difficulties in consequence
of undertakings in the Convention on Customs Formalities.
fPty f 0 f^ s Question, I cannot do better than call your attention to the second part
of Article 17, which expressly stipulates that the Convention on Customs Formalities shall
in no case ?prejudice the measures which Contracting States may take to ensure the health
of human beings, animals or plants?.
In addition, Article 1 of the Protocol, which forms an integral part of the Convention,
after con filming the stipulation contained in Article 17 quoted above, expressly mentions
m this connection the International Opium Convention and all other obligations incurred
by the Contracting States with regard to international security.
In view of these two articles, the question whether the Convention which you propose
to conclude is in opposition to the undertakings contracted in virtue of the Convention on
Customs Formalities does not arise.
For the Director of the Economic and
Financial Section,
{Signed) Stoppani,
Annex 6
STATEMENTS BY DR. STADE, MEMBER OF THE DANZIG DELEGATION,
TO THE CHAIRMAN OF SUB-COMMITTEE E.
I beg to make a statement concerning the situation of the trade in narcotics in the Free
f P anz ig which I would request you to be good enough to submit to the members
of Sub-Committee E.
In the Matin of November 29th, there appeared an article concerning the arrest of a
Latvian manufacturer in Riga who was accused of having introduced into France, under
the protection of a bogus diplomatic bag, large quantities of German cocaine. In this article
Danzig is referred to as a centre of the illicit traffic in German cocaine.
As the article in question may, if not refuted, harm the international reputation of the
f, re  Lli J of Danzi ffi I feel bound to give some information concerning the situation as regards
the traffic in narcotics in the Free City of Danzig.
I do not know from what source the information given by the author of this article was
derived, bat Ido not see how illicit traffic could be possible at any rate during 1 the last
eighteen months. ? b
The Free City of Danzig had been a signatory of the Hague Convention of 1912 since
May 2nd, 1923, and the Senate of the Free City is undoubtedly most anxious to collaborate
loyally in this important international work.


Tf is oossible that, immediately after the constitution of the Free City, when the newly
established administration was not fully organised, a certain amount of illicit traffic developed
After the application of our very definite and drastic laws of June 20th, 1923, and October
rth 1024 against the abusive use of narcoties, the control exercised over the traffic in nar-
mtirs ? 4 a control which extends to the Free Port ?is so strict that it is impossible t > m P ort
nr exnort narcotics without a special licence issued by the Health Administration of the Free
Hfv of Danzig 1 Naturally, in Danzig, as elsewhere.it is not possible entirety to prevent all
traffic carried on under cover of fraud. I repeat that in the Free City of Danzig the legis-
lation against the abusive use of narcotics extends to the Free Port and the supervision 01
; atl  .f, , .Jation exercised by the Danzig Customs officials is very strict.
imP ' on tehToTthe Government of the Free City of Danzig, protest ener-
geticLty alal? e suggeson that Danzig is a centre of illicit traffic in narcotics, until proof
is forthcoming of the statements on which such an assertion is based.
(Signed) Dr. Stade,
Member of the Danzig Delegation to
Sub-Committee E.
srjsKSSSSSsSiS
[Signed] Dr. Stade,
Member of the Danzig Delegation to
Sub-Committee E.


,
?
.
v


MINUTES
SUB-COMMITTEE F.
Geneva, November 2 8th, 1924- t0 January 28th, 1925.


CONTENTS.
Page
List of Members 283
First Meeting, Friday, November 28th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
1. Election of the Vice-Chairman 283
2. Appointment of a Rapporteur 283
3. Adoption of the Agenda ? 283
4. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives : Report of the
Health Organisation. . . 283
Second Meeting, Saturday, November 29th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
5. Publicity of the Meetings of the Committee 284
6. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives : Report of the
Health Organisation ( Continuation of the Discussion) 284
Third Meeting, Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
7. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives ; Report of the
Health Organisation ( Continuation of the Discussion) ? ? ? 285
8. Legitimate Requirements of Cocaine : Report of the Health Organisation 286
Fourth Meeting, Wednesday, December 3rd, 1924, at 9.45 a.m.
9. Enquiries concerning the Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Deri-
vatives : Draft Report of the Sub-Committee 286
Fifth Meeting, Thursday, December 4th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
10. Enquiries into the Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives :
Draft Report of the Sub-Committee ( Continuation of the Discussion) . . 286
11. Definition of Coca Leaves and Cocaine 287
Sixth Meeting, Friday, December sth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
12. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and Cocaine and their Derivatives. . 287
13. Definition of Coca Leaves and Cocaine : Report of the Committee of Experts 288
14. Amendments to Article 14 proposed by the Belgian and United States Delegates 288
15. Addition to Membership of Sub-Committee F 288
Seventh Meeting, Saturday, December 6th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
16. Examination of Article 14 289
Eighth Meeting, Tuesday, December 9th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
17. Examination of Article 14 ( Continuation) 289
Ninth Meeting, Tuesday, December 9th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
18. Examination of Article 14 ( Continuation) 291
Tenth Meeting, Wednesday, December 10th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
19. Adjournment of the Conference 292
20. Questions arising out of the Memorandum submitted by the Polish Dele-
gation 293
21. Norwegian Proposal regarding Ecgonine 294
Eleventh Meeting, Monday, December 15th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
22. Question of Hashish 294
23. Examination of the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee prepared by
Professor Perrot 294
Twelfth Meeting, Monday, December 15th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
24. Examination of the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee prepared by Pro-
fessor Perrot ( Continuation) 295
25 . Question of Hashish : Appointment of a Sub-sub-Committee * 296
Thirteenth Meeting, Tuesday, December 16th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
26. Question of Hashish ( Continuation) 297
Fourteenth Meeting, Wednesday, December 17th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
27. Question of Hashish ( Continuation) 297
28. Adjournment of the Sub-Committee 298
Fifteenth Meeting, Friday, January 23rd, 1925, at 3 p.m.
29. Legitimate Requirements as regards Opium and Coca Leaves and their
Alkaloids : Report of the Chairman 299
30. Report of the Sub-Committee 299
31. Question of Indian Hemp (Hashish) : Report by the Sub-Committee . . 302
32. Representation of Sub-Committee Fon the Committee of Co-ordination 302
Sixteenth Meeting, Wednesday, January 28th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
33. Legitimate Requirements in Narcotic Drugs 303
34. Report on the Work of the Sub-Committee 303
35 . Question of Hashish : Report of the Sub-Committee 306
36. Statement by the Belgian Delegation 306
"5 1 . Dpplnrn + irm Vru + Vip UrpripE TtplpD-alirm onG
37. Declaration by the French Delegation 306
38. Close of the Sub-Committee?s Work 306
Annexes 307


SUB-COMMITTEE F. ianda
LIST OF MEMBERS
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
Vice-Chairman : Dr. Anselmino (Germany).
The Sub-Committee was constituted as follows :
Dr. J. A. Amyot (Canada).
Dr. Anselmino (Germany).
Dr. L. N. Betances (Dominican Republic).
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America).
Dr. Francisco Bustamante (Spain).
Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
Dr. W. Chodzko (Poland).
Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands).
Professor Em. J. Emmanuel (Greece).
Dr. Humberto Gotuzzo (Brazil).
Mr. J. D. Kirwan (British Empire).
Dr. A. H. Mahfooz Bey (Egypt).
Dr. Tsurumi (Japan).
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium).
Professor Comm. Pietro Spica (Italy).
FIRST MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Friday, November 28 th, iQ 2 4> I O-3
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
1. Election of the Vice-Chairman.
On the proposal of the Chairman, Dr. Anselmino (Germany) was unanimously elected
Vice-Chairman.
2. Appointment of a Rapporteur.
On the proposal of Dr. Tsurumi (Japan), seconded by Dr. Amyot (Canada) and Surgeon-
General Blue (United States of America), Dr. Carriere was unanimously appointee
Rapporteur of the Sub-Committee.
On the proposal of Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic), Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium),
Professor Spica (Italy) and Dr. Chodzko (Poland) were appointed supplementary Rappor-
teurs who, together with Dr. Anselmino (Germany), should assist the Rapporteur to raw
up his report.
3. Adoption of the Agenda.
On the proposal of the Chairman, the Sub-Committee decided to discuss :
[a) The report of the Health Organisation on the investigations into the legitimate
requirements of opium and its derivatives , 3
(, b ) Other questions, such as a proposal to prohibit the use of heroin and the definition
of coca leaves and of cocaine.
The Sub-Committee decided to reserve the questions arising out of the
Convention proposed by the delegation of the United States of America until the Conference had
taken a decision.
i. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives : Report of the Health Organisation.
The Chairman made a statement describing the investigations which had already been
carried out in regard to this question.
1 The above constitution of the Sub-Committee was proposed by the Business Committee and
adopted by the First Committee at its second meeting held on November 25 >9-4- PSSOr Perrot
* On December Ist, 1924. on the proposal of M. van Wettum, the name of Professor 1. error
(France) was added to the list of members of Sub-Committee F.
3 League of Nations document No. C.H. 264.


The Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and other Dangerous Drugs had considered
the question of the legitimate requirements of opium and other narcotics in connection with
the general problem of limiting the production and manufacture of these substances. The
investigation had been carried out by a joint Committee, composed of two members of the
Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and two members of the Health Committee, under
the chairmanship of Dr. Carriere. This Mixed Sub-Committee had examined the replies
of Governments to a questionnaire, but had found that the requirements of the various
States in opium and other drugs differed so greatly that no final figure for the total world
requirements could be reached. Researches had accordingly been carried out by Dr. Knaffl-
Lenz, on behalf of the Health Organisation. He had examined the statistics of hospitals
and of health insurance societies in Switzerland, Germany and Austria, and the figures he
had obtained had been surprisingly alike for all three countries.
Ity combining the figures obtained by Dr. Knaffl-Lenz and the answers to the question-
naire, the Mixed Sub-Committee had finally submitted a report stating that 600 milligrammes
of raw opium per head of the population might be taken as an approximate of the total
annual legitimate requirements of the world. For the purpose of this calculation, the Mixed
Sub-Committee had defined legitimate requirements as meaning requirements solely for
medical and scientific purposes. One of its members had expressed reservations regarding
this definition.
The report of the Mixed Sub-Committee had been examined by the Health Committee,
which had, after further investigation, reduced the figure 600 milligrammes to 450 milligrammes.
This figure had been further safeguarded by three reservations :
(1) The figure 450 milligrammes of raw opium per head per annum was to be
considered as the maximum requirement ;
(2) It should apply only to countries which possessed a highly developed medical
organisation ;
(3) It should not be taken as a basis for restricting the amount of opium and other
drugs used in any particular country, but merely as a basis for calculating the general
world requirements.
Dr. Knaffl-Lenz had pursued his investigations, the revised results of which gave a figure
closely corresponding to that of 450 milligrammes established by the Health Committee.
The Health Committee had finally adopted this figure and transmitted it to the Advisory
Committee on Traffic in Opium. That Committee had further desired to know what pro-
portion of the 450 miligrammes per head covered raw opium only and what proportion its
alkaloids.
The Sub-Committee was therefore now called upon to consider the question once more
and to determine whether or not this figure or any other figure should be recommended to
the Conference.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) made a short statement, giving the views of the British
Government.
Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) made a declaration (Annex 1).
SECOND MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Saturday, November 29 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carrie re (Switzerland).
5. Publicity of the Meetings of the Sub-Committee.
The Sub-Committee decided that its meetings should be held in public.
6. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives : Report of the Health Organisation
[Continuation of the Discussion ).
Dr. Stade (Free City of Danzig) made a statement regarding the manufacture, sale,
distribution and use of drugs in the Free City of Danzig.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) criticised the figures given for Germany appearing in the report
of the Health Organisation, and also the basis on which certain calculations had been made.
Professor Emmanuel (Greece) made a statement regarding the manufacture of drugs in
Greece (Annex 2).
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) thought that, in any proposal for limiting produc-
tion and manufacture, provision should be made for a surplus of drugs to be used for scien-
tific purposes.
Professor Spica (Italy) made a statement regarding the position of drugs in Italy and
gave his views on the figure of 450 milligrammes suggested in the report.


The Chairman explained the views of the authors of the report in regard to the figure
of 450 milligrammes, which was intended to be used solely as a basis for calculating t e
scale of limitation. . ,
Dr de Myttenaere (Belgium) said that, since an adequate enquiry into the con-
sumption of cocaine had not been made, he was unable to calculate accurately the opium
figure for Belgium. .. . 
nr GOTUZZO (Brazil) agreed with the Chairman's explanations regarding the figure 450
milligrammes He pointed out the dangers of codeine, eucodal and dicodid as habit-forming
drug! ?odeine should not be forgotten in any calculation made by the Sub-Committee.
1 Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) desired that an opportunity of raising
the question of codeine should be given. . . .
On the proposal of the Chairman, the Sub-Committee decided to finish the general discus
sionani then to take ub the question of codeine together with that 0/ cocaine ana other drug .
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) made a statement regarding e
n? thought it possible to estimate the medical and scientific
needs of drugs in each country and ?h^louldTcidl'whether it could arrive
The Chairman proposed t S  The fi arrived at would be approxi-
at a general figure and , r , e Prt to the hirst: as that * forward by the Health Orga-
Ssldom Thfsuhcommbee could either fix this figure or declare it to be impossible to do
h T 1 bh ( me n Sub-Site'wer^succes'Su 5 ! info'doing, hloTnotbe forgXn
tLTI shpirto be used for sciendfic requirements was absolutely necessary.
Canada TerJ
Canada would prefer 350 milligrammes.
He gave details of the control of drugs in Canada. ,
 -n of
ihi' proposal of Dr. Betances regarding a surplus.
suppressing any illegitimate r a iri li n tions on the figures in Table V of the Health
t, a a. 1.....
52SltS5S ?i-
--1 izr,c:r;rc? .a jl -
ci?Si- A... 1..J b... k.n a in .a ~?
the mSS de r clared P SrgLera 1 l t discussion to be at an end.
THIRD MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December 2nd, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. CARRIERS (Switzerland).
!? Derivatives : Report of the Health Organisation
7. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives  p
[Continuation of the Discussion).
"AT ifr .vesssrsA jsjwsk &&
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) and t e >


The Sub-Committee decided, by 13 votes to 1 (Dr. Coebergh, Netherlands), that it would
reply in the affirmative to the question referred to it by the First Committee, namely : "Is it possible
to fix a per capita per annum figure, expressed in terms of raw opium, for the world legitimate
requirements of opium and its derivatives.?
After a further exchange of views on the actual figure to be recommended and the reser-
vations with which it was to be accepted, the Sub-Committee adopted the figure of 450 milli-
grammes per capita per annum, and requested the Chairman to draft a resolution, with the
assistance of the Secretary, for submission to the Sub-Committee at its next meeting. Thi-
resolution should take account of the various reservations considered necessary by the Subs
Committee in adopting this figure.
8. Legitimate Requirements of Cocaine : Report of the Health Organisation.
After an exchange of views and on the proposal of the Chairman, the Sub-Committee
adopted the figure of seven milligrammes for cocaine per capita per annum, on the understand-
ing that the same reservations should be applied to this figure as were to be applied to the figure
adopted for opium and its derivatives.
FOURTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December yrd, 1924, at 9.45 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
9. Enquiries concerning the Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives : Draft
Report of the Sub-Committee.
Dr. Carriere, Chairman and Rapporteur, submitted a draft report on the enquiries
concerning the legitimate requirements of opium and its derivatives carried out by the Health
Committee at the request of the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium (Annex 3).
In view of the shortness of the time at the disposal of the Sub-Committee, the discussion
on the report was adjourned until the next meeting.
FIFTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Thursday, December yth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr, Carriere (Switzerland).
10, Enquiries into the Legitimate Requirements of Opium and its Derivatives: Draft Report
of the Sub-Committee (Continuation of the Discussion).
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) made a general statement on the estimate of the legitimate
requirements of opium and its derivatives, accepting with certain reservations the figure
450 milligrammes.
The Chairman submitted the recommendations contained in the draft report for the
approval of the Sub-Committee.
The Sub-Committee adopted the recommendations in question in the following form
?The Sub-Committee of the International Opium Conference set up to examine the
report of the Health Committee of the League of Nations regarding the legitimate needs
of opium and its derivatives :
?Considers that these requirements might be fixed at the round figure of 450 milli-
grammes of raw opium at 10 per cent of morphine per head per annum :
?It being understood, however :
?That this figure represents a maximum, and as it was established solely on the basis
of estimates furnished by countries possessing a highly developed system of medical
assistance, it can only be applied to countries where similar conditions obtain ;
?That, since this figure is primarily intended to serve as a basis for the reduction of
the world production of opium and the manufacture of its derivatives, it must be con-
sidered solely from this point of view and not from the point of view of the consumption
in each individual country.


information with regard to it ; . , , . . , ,
?That the figure of 450 milligrammes must be considered as applying only to the
normal legitimate requirements and not to certain exceptional circumstances, such as
wars, epidemics or new scientific uses which may considerably increase the sum-total of
these requirements?.
?The Sub-Committee would, moreover, point out :
?That the figure of 450 milligrammes only very incompletely takes account of the
Quantities of morphine consumed in the form of codeine, as the requirements of this
alkaloid vary widely in different countries and only a few States have supplied accuiate
On the proposal of Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands), who was unable to accept the conclusions
of the report, the following paragraphs were added by the Sub-Committee .
?One of the members considers it desirable that the proposal for an estimate of world
requirements in narcotics should be definitely given up, since such an estimate would be
based on data relating only to a certain locality and a certain countiy.
?In addition, any such limitation of narcotics would, in consequence of the rise in
prices, be a serious matter for patients, while at the same time part of these indispensable
drues would find their way into the contraband traffic. ,
drugs won member in e / tion was 0 f opinion that the control by a Central Board of the
statistics referred to in Article 4 of the Agreement would supply an adequate and mor
reliable basis for energetic action against the abuse of dangerous drugs.
Dr Coebergh?s proposal to add this paragraph to the report was supported by the Dele-
gates of France and the Dominican Republic, who, though voting for the recommendatio
of the Sub-Committee, shared his views to a considerable extent.
The Sub-Committee adopted the following recommendation regarding the legitimate require-
ments of cocaine :
?The Health Committee?s report also contains data regarding the legitimate lequn -
?The information collected justified the Sub-Committee in laying down as the legi-
timate requ?ts of cocaine a round figure of seven milligrammes per head per annum
?After having examined this question, the Sub-Committee considered that it could
agree to the figure of seven milligrammes, but qualified its agreement by the reservations
formulated above regarding opium and its derivatives.
Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) was unable to accept the figure seven milligrammes.
The report, as amended, was adopted. Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) and Dr. Anselmmo
(Germany) voting against it.
The Sub-Committee deeided to insert the views of the delegates for the Netherlands and Germany
in the form of a minority report.
11. Definition of Coca Leaves and Cocaine.
tLp Dfiecates of Belgium British Empire, United States of America, Ital\,
Japan Germany and Brazil recognised that eegonine. being the raw material of cocaine,
should be covered by the terms of the Convention.
On the proposal of the Chairman, a Sub-Committee, composed of
Professor Perrot (France),
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium),
Dr. Spica (Italy), x
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of Amenca;,
Dr. Anselmino (Germany),
Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands),
was appointed to define coca leaves, eegonine and cocaine.
SIXTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Friday, December sth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
12. Legitimate Requirements of Opium and Cocaine and their Derivatives.
The Chairman explained that the report adopted the Sub-Committee at the preceding
meeting in no way concerned the question of the limitation of production
of States.


These questions were outside the competence of the Sub-Committee. The figures in the
report for opium and cocaine were only intended to serve as a guide should the C onference
decide on any system of limitation or rationing.
The Sub-Committee took note of the Chairman?s explanation.
13. Definition of Coca Leaves and Cocaine : Report of the Committee of Experts.
Professor Perrot (France) submitted the report of the Committee of Experts on the
definition of coca leaves and cocaine (Annex 4).
Definition of Coca Leaves.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) submitted the definition given by British Government
experts.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) proposed the following addition alter
the word ?cocaine? in the first paragraph : ?or any other habit-forming substances?.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) made a formal reservation regarding the definition proposed.
He was unable to say whether the British delegation would be able to accept it.
After an explanation furnished by the Chairman, Surgeon-General Blue (United States of
America) withdrew his amendment, on the understanding that account would be taken of
it when the later articles of the Convention were discussed.
The definition of coca leaves was adopted in the following form, the delegate for the British
Empire abstaining from the vote :
?The term ?coca leaves? shall be understood to mean the leaves of the Erythroxylon
novogranatense (Morris) Hieronymus of the family of the Erythroxylacese, and possibly
also the leaves of other vegetable species of the same nature out of which cocaine might
be extracted, either directly or by chemical transformations.
Any other vegetable raw material which might serve for the preparation of cocaine
would be subjected to the same control as coca leaf.?
Definition of Cocaine.
It was decided to deal with the question of ?isomeres? of cocaine under Article 14.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) accepted the proposed definition on
the understanding that the definitions should be inserted in later articles concerning synthetic
cocaine and similar products.
The Sub-Committee agreed with the delegate of the United States.
The definition of cocaine was adopted in the following form :
?The term ?cocaine shall be understood to mean : methylated ether of the ben-
zoylecgonine laevogyre (D 20 0 i64, of which the formula is C l 7 H 2l NO*).?
Definition of Ecgonine.
Professor Perrot (France) submitted the views of the Committee of Experts, which consi-
dered that the definition of ecgonine should be placed in Article 14.
The definition of ecgonine was unanimously adopted in the following form, it being under-
stood that explanations of the ?rotary powers? and the chemical formula of ecgonine would
be included ;
?Raw cocaine, ecgonine laevogyre, considered as raw material, and to all the other pro-
ducts derived therefrom which might serve industrially for the recovery of such ecgonine
laevogyre.?
The definition should be added to the Convention in the appropriate article.
It was understood that the English text of all three definitions was provisional.
14. Amendments to Article 14 proposed by the Belgian and United States Delegates.
The amendments were submitted for examination to the Committee of Experts appointed
at the preceding meeting.
Dr. Emmanuel (Greece) and Dr. Tsurumi (Japan) were added to the Committee of Experts.
15. Addition to Membership of Sub-Committee F.
The Chairman welcomed Dr. Suarez (Chile).


SEVENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Saturday, December 6th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
16. Examination of Article 14.
Professor (France) thought it would be best to proceed to a definition of the chugs
coming within the provisions of this article and to consider what exceptions if any should be
made. The Committee would probably consider that the article was applicable to all pr
parations not destined for medical or scientific use.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) pointed out that even medical drugs> could
be used by addicts. He thought preparations of a medical nature should not be exclu
Professor Perrot (France) wished to make an arrangement by which should
be available for medical use when necessary without necessitating the product f P
Qrrintion In France there was a system by which quantities sold by druggists to
censed bv chemists were verified and compared. Article 14 had similar conditions in view.
It was desirable that the regulations should be uniform in all countries represented.
Discussion then took place as to whether Governments should be allowed to make regu-
lations the Eternal traffic in drugs rather than fix general international regu-
lations which would be applicable by all.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) thought the Governments might be
regulations within the restrictions laid down by the Convention, but that this should not
apply to the importation and exportation of drugs.
It was decided to proceed with the examination of Article 14, by paragraph, and
to deal afterwards with the definition of drugs concerned.
Paragraph (a) was accepted.
Paragraph (b).
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) proposed the adoption of the American
amendment to paragraph (b).
Professor Perrot (France) submitted an amendment excluding preparations for medical
US6 ' It was agreed to accept paragraph (b) in principle, as far as ?or percent of cocaine?. This
applied only to internal traffic. Paragraph (b) as a whole was not adopted
With reference to the American proposal to add to paragraph (b) the words or then
. ?derivatives? Professor Perrot (France) thought the addition of the term their salts
useless from a chemht'f poffit of view, as the percentage was always determined in terms of
the alkaloid and not of their salts.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) said his amendment was aimed _ at
?liable to become habit-forming .
This suggestion appeared to meet with general approval.
Professor Perrot (France) thought it would be necessary to define the term derivatives
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (British Empire) said new drugs were covered by the st^m e nt
at the end of Article 14 All that was necessary was an improved drafting of the words
fs to fix the body whmh would pronounce as to whether new drugs were or were not habit-
forming. .
The Chairman remarked that the two drugs, eucodal and dicodid, were not c
codeine! were very little known and their manufacture was limited, owing to he lack of ft tame
It was a "reed that the Committee should proceed with the discussion 0/ * ,ibk
attempt to reafh.T.definition of "derivatives" at its next meeting. Delegates were asked, if possible,
to submit proposals in writing.
EIGHTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December gth, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
17. Examination of Article 14 ( Continuation ).
Professsor Perrot, Rapporteur, read his report on the work of the Sub Committee
Experts.


The Chairman announced that he had received a memorandum from the Polish delega-
tion. This would be communicated to the members in due course (Annex 5)-
Professor Perrot (France), with reference to the word ?derivatives , said there were
many derivatives of morphine, etc., which could not be classed as narcotics. The Sub-Com-
mittee had therefore proposed to change the word in the Preamble of the American Sugges-
tions to ?certain derivatives?.
This proposal was accepted.
In Articles 9 to 14, the Sub-Committee proposed that the word should be deleted
wherever it occurred, as it was covered by the addition which the Sub-Committee proposed
to make to Article 14.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America), on behalf of the American delegation,
reserved the right to submit a minority report.
The proposal was accepted, the reserve of the American delegate being noted.
Article 14 ; Preamble.
Professor Perrot (France) said the Sub-Committee had agreed with the American pro-
posal to add ?delivery? after the words ?respecting the manufacture, import, sale?, but did
not recommend the adoption of the proposal to add and their derivatives at the end ot
the paragraph.
This proposal was adopted.
Article 14 (a).
The Sub-Committee proposed to accept this paragraph without alteration.
This proposal was adopted.
Article 14 (b).
The Sub-Committee thought it was not desirable to accept the alteration proposed by
the American delegation, as the percentages were so small that they would not give rise to
any danger. Any change would also interfere with the established usage in the matter.
The Rapporteur proposed the adoption of the 1912 text without change.
This paragraph was adopted.
Article 14 (c).
The Sub-Committee proposed the omission of the words ?containing more than 0.1 per
cent of heroin?, which appeared in the text of the Hague Convention. Members would,
however, ask for time to consult their Governments on this question. The Sub-Committee
had been unanimous in thinking it desirable that the use of heroin should be eventually
completely suppressed.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) could not accept this paragraph, as there was no abuse
in Great Britain of any preparation of this nature.
Article 14 (c) was accepted, note being taken of the reserve made by the American
delegate.
Mr. Kirwan (Great Britain) voted against acceptance of this paragraph, and the delegates
of Brazil and Japan abstained from voting.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, further proposed that the paragraph beginning
?The methylbenzoyl derivatives of eegonine?, should be included in Article 14.
The Sub-Committee agreed with this suggestion.
The paragraphs of the article would then be rearranged so as to deal with the following
subjects :
{a) Medicinal opium ;
\b) Eegonine (transferred from page 7 of the United States Proposals) ;
(c) Officinal preparations (paragraph {b) of the Hague text) ;
[d) Heroin (paragraph (c) of the Hague text).
He would propose the addition of a paragraph [e) containing the lollowing proposal :
?To every other derivative of morphine, of cocaine, or to every other alkaloid of
opium or of coca leaf and to every narcotic the immoderate use of which might give rise
to similar abuse and be productive of like ill-effects, recognised as such by the official
medical bodies of the various countries or by any other competent medical body.?
Reservations had been made with regard to articles for commercial use. These dealt
with ointments, etc., all of which were galenic preparations, and it was provided that they
should be so prepared that the drug could not be extracted for consumption. As it was not
desirable to allow States to decide for themselves which preparations would come under this
heading, the words ?official body? would be substituted for ?organ? in this proposal.


Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) read a statement explaining his objection to para-
graph {d).
This was noted by the Sub-Committee.
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) read a proposed draft of Article 14.
It was agreed, after discussion, that this draft differed from the Sub-Committee?s draft
chiefly in that it contained a detailed list.
The Sub-Committee decided to confine itself to general proposals as embodied in the texts
of the Hague Convention and the American proposals.
It was agreed that M. Bustamante?s document and, eventually, the report presented by
Professor Perrot should be circulated to the members of the Sub-Committee.
The British amendment to paragraph (e) was then read, as follows :
?To any new derivative of morphine or cocaine, and any other alkaloid of opium or
the coca leaf, and any other narcotic drug which may be declared in the manner following
to be liable to similar abuse and productive of like ill-effects; the existence of these ill-
effects and abuses shall be declared by the Health Committee of the League of Nations,
after consultation with the International Health Office. In the event of such a decla-
ration, the decision of the International Health Office shall be communicated by the
Health Committee of the League of Nations to the Council of the League, which shall
inform the Governments accordingly and recommend their acceptance of it.?
NINTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December gth, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
18. Examination of Article 14 ( Continuation ).
The Chairman read a statement presented at the previous meeting by the delegate of the
Dominican Republic. In this statement. Dr. Betances pointed out Jhat, although aware
of the necessity for suppressing the abuse of drugs by all possible means, it was necessaxy to
beware of too hasty measures, which might do more harm than good. Heroin and morphine,
for example, although dangerous in inexpert hands, rendered good service against certain
diseases. He could not, therefore, consider them entirely useless.
The Committee proceeded to consider the British amendment to paragraph 14 [e] (see
previous meeting).
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) said it was an attempt to simplify and make more exact
the procedure by which new drugs could in future be brought within the scope of the Com en-
tion. The International Health Office of Paris was suggested because it included represen-
tatives of Governments not in the League of Nations.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America), while agreeing with the tenor of the
proposal thought it unnecessary to leave the final decision in the hands of the Council.
Professor Perrot (France) thought the proposal contained better guarantees than those
in the French motion, but agreed with Surgeon-General Blue that the medical authorities
alone should be sufficient to take a decision.
It was pointed out, during the subsequent discussion, that the Council was the only
body possessing sufficient executive authority to give effect to a decision of this kind.
As everyone seemed to agree to the principle of fixing the procedure by which the decisions o
the medical bodies should be communicated to the nations concerned, the Chairman askec
Mr. Kirwan, Surgeon-General Blue, Dr. de Myttenaere and Professor Perrot to agree on a
text.
After consultation, Professor Perrot (France) submitted the following text .
?To any new derivative of morphine or cocaine, and any other alkaloid of opium
or the coca leaf, and any other narcotic drug which may be declared in the manner
following to be liable to similar abuse and productive of like ill-effects, the existence
of these ill-effects and abuses shall be declared by the Health Committee of the League
of Nations, after consultation with the International Health Office. In the event o
such a declaration, the decision of the International Health Office shall be communi-
cated by the Health Committee of the League of Nations to the Council of the League,
which shall inform the Governments accordingly and recommend their acceptance of it.
This was accepted as far as the words ?like ill-effects , the representatives of Japan and
the Netherlands abstaining.


Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) made a reservation with regard to
the word ?new? (in the first line of the proposal) and with regard to the Council of the League,
as the United States was not a member of the League of Nations.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) associated himself with this latter reserve.
The second part of the text was adopted, the representatives of Germany, the United States
and Switzerland abstaining.
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) made a reservation with regard to this proposal.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium), with reference to the exception to Article 14 proposed
by Dr. Anselmino and himself, said their object was to avoid inconveniencing the legitimate
commerce of druggists and pharmacists.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) thought it essential, from the administrative point of
view, to decide by name the substances which would fall under the Convention.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) agreed that a list might be drawn up by the Health
Office, after consultation with Governments.
In reply to the Chairman, Professor Perrot (France) said that any list would be submitted
to numerous bodies, and there would, therefore, be ample guarantee against the unjustifiable
inclusion of any substance. No proposal in this sense would be accepted until the Council
of the League decided, after consultation with the medical experts, that it should be adopted.
The proposal of Dr. de Myttenaere {Belgium) and Dr. Anselmino ( Germany) was adopted
in the following form :
?The Council of the League may, on the recommendation of the Health Committee
of the League, after consultation with the International Health Office, in the same manner
as is provided in paragraph (e) above, communicate to the Contracting Powers a list
or lists of preparations containing morphine or cocaine which (such as those solely for
external use) cannot give rise to the drug habit on account of the medicaments with which
these narcotics are compounded and which preclude the recovery of the narcotics, and
these preparations may then be regarded as exempted from this article.?
The delegates of Great Britain, the United States and Greece abstained from voting.
The addition to Article 14 proposed by Professor Perrot (France) was then considered.
Professor Perrot (France) said the object of this addition was to enable the public to
obtain certain medicines in urgent cases.
Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) thought the proposal superfluous as far as it concerned
internal affairs, and liable to cause difficulties in international traffic. The situation in diffe-
rent countries varied in such a way as to prevent the making of any definite statement on
this point.
Professor Emmanuel (Greece) and Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) agreed with Dr. Coebergh.
Professor Perrot (France) said that in France the revision of the law dealing with this
matter was at present under consideration, as it was found to be too severe. It would be
found inappropriate in the present case also.
Professor Spica (Italy) proposed that laudanum should also be excepted
Professor Perrot and Dr. de Myttenaere withdrew the proposal.
This proposal was, however, taken up by Professor Spica.
The proposal was accepted by the casting vote of the Chairman, the representatives of
Germany, Belgium, Italy, France and Spain voting in favour the last-named with reservations.
The delegates of the British Empire, Greece, the Dominican Republic, the Netherlands and
Japan voted against the acceptance of the motion. Surgeon-General Blue (United States)
abstained, as well as the representatives of Brazil, Egypt and Switzerland.
It was agreed that the Sub-Committee should attempt to find a more suitable text.
TENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 10 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman: Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
19. Adjournment of the Conference.
The President of the Conference, M. Zahle, made a statement to the members of the Sub-
Committee concerning the possible adjournment of the Opium Conference for the Christmas
holidays.


20. Questions arising out of the Memorandum submitted by the Polish Delegation.
The Chairman read a few passages from the memorandum addressed to the Sub-Committee
by the Polish delegation (Annex 5). , . T
In this memorandum, the Polish delegation gave its views on Parts I and I I of Annex 1
of the Opium Advisory Committee?s Report (Document A. 32.1924. XI). The delegation dealt
more especially with the question of codeine, of which no mention had been made by the
Advisory Committee; the suppression of the manufacture and distribution of heroin. and
with the reference to heroin in Section 1. .
The Chairman once more pointed out that the figure of 450 milligrammes only included
part of the requirements of the public as regards codeine. The question of the suppression ot
heroin would be dealt with in Professor Perrot?s report.
The Sub-Committee had still to consider the addition of a clause to Article 14, permitting
certain drugs to be distributed in cases of emergency. The proposal had been adopted with
the Chairman?s casting vote, and the Sub-Committee had decided to try to draft a text
combining and reconciling all the different formulae proposed. cur
As regarded Articles 10, 11, 20 and 20-F, which had been referred to the Sub-Committee
bv the plenary Conference in order that their wording should be considered, he pointed out
that complete as regards Articles 10 and 11. The discussion turned entirely on
the presence of the word "derivatives? in those articles.
Professor Perrot (France) stated that he had explained this term in the report, which
was about to be circulated. The word might be deleted, as all the derivatives of morphine
and within the competence of Sub-Committee F.
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) stated that, when naming the pharmaceutical preparations which
might be supplied in all countries without a medical prescription, it had not been his mtentio
:SZ all; he simply wished to mention the chief
not attempted to give the exact names in every country, he had differentiated between
nrenarations for internal use for which the maximum amounts of the drugs to be dealt
with bv the Conference had been fixed and preparations for external use not containing
in which, logically, he had allowed a larger percentage of opiates, as the system di
not absorb the drugs so readily in that case.
Professor Perrot (France) thought that pharmaceutical chemists should be given more
liberty, in order that they might be able to deal with cases of emergency.
Dr Chodzko (Poland) was of opinion that there could be no question of cases of emer-
eencv so far as cocaine was concerned, as its place could easily be taken by noyocame. He
a creed with Professor Perrot that pharmaceutical chemists should be given fuller liberty n
dealing with officinal preparations ;he proposed that the system in use in his cou ntiy sh  ul
be adopted, where registers were kept showing the sales of cocaine and the date of delivery.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) proposed the following amendment .
' "The public may purchase without a medical prescription any quantity whatsoever of
preparations of the nature specified in Annex 7 , and limited quantities of other narcotic
drugs mentioned in the amendment, which may or may not be liable to abuse.
The British Delegation was unable to support the amendment proposed by Professor
Perrot.
M Betances (Dominican Republic) thought that Professor Perrot?s proposal was a dan-
gerous one, as the pharmacist would be given the rights of the doctor and vice versa.
The Chairman reminded the members that any drugs sold would be entered in a special
register.
Professor Emmanuel (Greece) submitted the following proposal which he and Professor
Perrot had drafted ; , r ~
"The following opiated officinal preparations may be delivered to the public, on the
responsibility of the chemist, without a medical prescription and as medicines for urgent
usc P but only in maximum doses corresponding to 50 centigrammes of officinal opium and
subject to the book-keeping regulations with regard to narcotics : tincture of op urn,
Dover powder and Sydenham laudanum.
Dr. Tsurumi (Japan) pointed out that it was very difficult to define cases of emergency.
Sir Malcolm Hofthe Hagu"
Convention)the rise to great difficulties in England; the
reopening of the question might cause all sorts of dissatisfaction and frau ..
The Chairman thought that cases of fraud must he very infrequent, and put Professor
Perrot?s proposal to the vote.
Six delegates voted in favour of the proposal and four against it, two abstaining.
The proposal was adopted.


21. Norwegian Proposal regarding Ecgonine.
The Chairman informed the members that the part of the Norwegian proposal concerning
ecgonine which referred to import certificates was not within the competence of Sub-
Committee F.
ELEVENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Monday, December 15 th, 1924, at 10.30 a.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
22. Question of Hashish.
The Chairman announced that the plenary Conference had referred the discussion of the
question of hashish to the Sub-Committee. He proposed that a Sub-sub-Committee
should be appointed at the following meeting to deal with it.
23. Examination of the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee prepared by Professor Perrot.
Ihe Sub-Committee examined the draft report prepared by Professor Perrot (Annex 6).
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) pointed out that he had proposed the
inclusion of codein for the purpose of statistics. He wished to be free to raise the subject
in a plenary session.
It was agreed to introduce a sentence into the report pointing out the purpose of the proposed
vrity oaucuon.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire), with reference to the paragraph beginning ?The leaves of
Erythroxylon coca , proposed the addition of the words ?and their varieties? after" Hiero-
nymus . He also suggested the deletion of the word ?vegetable? in the third line of this
paragraph.
Both these suggestions were adopted.
It was pointed out that the addition proposed by the American delegate to Article 14
conceimng statistics of codeine had also been suggested by the Advisory Committee, and
the Sub-Committee agreed to add words to this effect in their draft report.
The report was adopted with these alterations, as jar as ?Article 14?.
Dr. Mahfooz Bey (Egypt) proposed that mention should be made of ?re-export?. It was
necessary to provide for statistics in cases where drugs of which the admission was refused
or which having been imported were subsequently re-exported. He pointed out that the
term export might not be considered in all countries as including ?re-exports?.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America), Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) and
the Chairman agreed with this proposal. 1 8
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) and Professor Perrot (France) thought the addition
unnecessary.
Ihe Sub-Committee agreed to add a proviso to the effect that the article covered re-exportation
in such cases. 1
The report was adopted as far as the paragraph ending ?which might serve industrially for
its recovery?, J
. Suigeon Geneial Blue (United States of America) thought the percentages allowed in
Article 14 [c) should be reduced in order to prevent recovery of drugs from preparations.
The Chairman pointed out that this view could be stated in the minority report which
Surgeon-General Blue had announced he would present.
? + ? r h d " Myttenaere (Belgium) proposed the deletion of the words ?sufficient guarantee?
in the following paragraph. 0
It was agreed to delete them and to redraft the paragraph accordingly.
Professor Perrot (France), dealing with paragraph [d), said he had been informed by his
o\eminent that as far as France was concerned there was apparently no occasion for a
special treatment for heroin.


Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) agreed with this view and asked that the following tex
should be inserted in the report ; . . .
?The British representative stated that he was unable to agree toithemc uslo 
the Convention of preparations containing less than o.i per cent of ero >
was no evidence of any harm being caused in Great Britain by t ese P P effect on
because their inclusion could, in the view of his Government, have very little effect o
the illicit international traffic in drugs.?
The article was accepted with this reservation, and the Sub-Committee agreed to incorporate
Mr. Kirwan?s 'statement in the report.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) proposed that the word ?heroin should be replaced throughout
the report by its chemical name "diacetyl-morphine (diamorphme, heroin) .
This suggestion was adopted.
"Of the International Health Office? appearing in the text of the new paragrap ()?
The Chairman said in practice the two bodies would probably agree in any steps to e
tcikcn.
Mr Kirwan (British Empire) called attention to the proposal that-the Advisory Committe
on Opium should be consulted as well as the oplsed tCaddl
was made in the note from the British delega ion ( j tten y on t0 the last para-
p?rfoCde d ciding the action to be taken with
regard to new drugs.
Mr. Kirwan's proposal was rejected, the delegates of the British Empire and Germany
voting in favour of it and the remaining delegates against it.
TWELFTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Monday, December 15 th, 1924. at 3-3 P- m -
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
24. Examination of the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee prepared by Professor Perrot
(? Continuation ).
Thp revised text of paragraph {e) of Article 14 was read.
Surgeon-General Blue ,Hinted
had raised at the previous meeting. c  nemiblique which represented forty States,
matters, and that if the Office international d Hygienef^uWique ; arrived at a
and the Health Committee, which represented the whole League 01
decision, that decision should be regarded as fina .
and theT
the Health Committee. w uh
Surgeon-Generali.LF. (United States of America) said [thatffie hadmo
Committee asking the advice of the Office Internationa ?ten States for
must be needlessly delayed and complicated if it was necessary to suom
b^entwsf
automatically become part of the Convention. .
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) declared that if ? nduded rcOTeLntatives oHorty States,
it Wat to confirm the opinions of their represen-
included K'rfSSrt <TecisTonwretccepffid hyl certlin number
of States. He agreed with Dr. de Myttenaere.


Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) did not agree with Mr. Kirwan, but
thought that, instead of the execution of the decision taken by the two organisations in
question being delayed by long and unnecessary procedure, it should come into force upon
notification by the Council of the League of Nations to the Governments.
The Chairman put the following text to the vote
?Any Contracting Party accepting the decision shall notify its acceptance to the
Secretary-General of the League and, as soon as ten Powers have done so, the product
in question shall be regarded as included in the Convention, so far as such Contracting
Parties are concerned.?
The text of paragraph (e) of Article 14, as amended, was adopted by six votes to three.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) proposed the deletion of the words ?preparations intended
for external use.?
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) expressed a fear that, as the report referred only to medicinal
opium, morphine, heroin and cocaine, it might be thought that there were no other products
which could give rise to abuse.- He suggested drawing up a list of exceptions for cases not
covered by the Convention.
Professor Perrot (France) stated that the last paragraph would be discussed at the
plenary Conference, which would decide as it thought fit.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) thought that a quarter of the quantities
mentioned in that paragraph would be sufficient, that was to say, 12 or 15 centigrammes.
He pointed out that opium was only a palliative.
Dr. Mahfooz Bey (Egypt) thought it advisable to exempt Dover powder, which was only
emetic and would never be taken in large quantities by the patient.
Professor Perrot (France) proposed to refer the matter to the Conference for decision.
Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) asked that, in the last paragraph of Professor Perrot?s
report, the name of the British delegation might be mentioned after that of Dr. Betances
as opposing the motion.
He proposed the addition of the following words :
?And of the British delegate, who directed attention to the opportunity which would
be given to addicts of obtaining from pharmacies a considerable number of products
which might give rise to abuse.?
Professor Perrot (France) proposed that the following paragraph should be added con-
cerning the necessity of employing the same terms in the various articles :
?The Sub-Committee directs the attention of the Drafting Committee of the
Convention to the desirability of defining certain terms and of using identical terms,
especially in the case of words which are repeated, sale, distribution, delivery in the
drafting of Articles 9, 10, 10 ( b), 10 (c), 11 and 14.?
The Chairman enquired the opinion of the Sub-Committee as to the desirability of adding
a clause to Article 14, requesting States to communicate any fresh discoveries concerning
harmful drugs to the League. The suggestion originated in the Polish memorandum.
Professor Perrot (France) thought that provision was already made for this in the para-
graph, but Suigeon-General Blue (United States of America) advocated the insertion of a
special recommendation, and Mr. Kirwan (British Empire) was of the same opinion and
suggested that a recommendation might be passed.
Professor Perrot (France) said, in response to the Chairman?s request, that he would add
a paragraph to this effect in his report.
25. Question of Hashish : Appointment of a Sub-sub-Committee.
The Chairman reminded the members that the Conference had referred the question of
hashish to the Sub-Committee. Before opening the general discussion on the matter it
would be best to appoint a Sub-sub-Committee to deal with it. He asked the delegates of
the British Empire, Chile, Egypt, France, Greece, Japan, Turkey and the United States to
meet under the Chairmanship of Professor Perrot, the French delegate.
The proposal was adopted.


FOURTEENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, December 17 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
27. Question of Hashish ( Continuation ).
The Chairman recalled that a paragraph had been included in the: Protoco1 ?it
Convention relating to the examination of the problem of hashish and its regulation
should prove to be necessary.
? 297 ?
THIRTEENTH MEETING
Held at Geneva on Tuesday, December 16 th, 1924, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriere (Switzerland).
26. Question of Hashish ( Continuation ).
Professor Emmanuel (Greece) read a statement emphasising the importance of the question
of hashish, which, in his opinion, was as grave as that of opium. He urged the adoption ot
measures which should attack the loot of the pioblem.
? Dr. Pernambuco (Brazil) also thought that hashish should be dealt with by the Con-
ference. It was more dangerous than opium.
Professor Perrot (France) explained the problem. Hashish was obtained from the
flowering tops of the female plant of Cannabis sativa and its different varieties. He described
the method of preparation and the extent to which the plant was cultivated. The dang
was not great in Europe, but concerned mainly Central Africa and Egypt.
He described the position adopted by various countries with regard .0 the cultivatio
of the drug, and pointed out that the Sub-Committee had to state whether in its opim
Cannabis sativa and its preparations should be included in the Convention.
The Chairman pointed out that only the technical aspect s of: the question were *o he
dealt with by the Sub-Committee ; other aspects, particularly the question of comp. W ;
which would probably arise, ought to be discussed by the plenary Conference. The P
of the Sub-Committee^would not commit delegations on the question of competence but wo
only be of a technical and scientific character.
Dr Ft Guindy (Egypt) said that the American proposals had been sent to a Committee
after a dedsi"lmplt y ence had been taken, and thought this was the case with all questions.
The Chairman asked whether the Sub-Committee thought it desirable that hashish
should be included in the Convention.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) agreed to its inclusion, pointing out that the question
only arose for his country in the Congo.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) also desired the inclusion of hashish.
Dr. Tsurumi (Japan) and Dr, Bustamante (Spain) agreed, the latter making a reserva-
tion as regarded medical and scientific use.
Dr. Noureddin Bey (Turkey) asked what regulations would be made with regard to the
cultivation of hemp for textile purposes.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) asked for an exact definition of the .term hashish.
Professor Perrot (France) thought it desirable to control Cannabis indica . which only differed
from Cannabis sativa, of which it was a variety in its activity. e e a {
as ?by Indian hemp (hashish) is understood the dried tops of the Aowenng I female Plant
Cannabis sativa and its varieties, whatever their names . The
dangerous product of this plant, could not be extracted without first drying the pi ?
The Chairman suggested that the Sub-Committee might perhaps consent to a limited
control at present ; complete suppression could be discussed later.
It was agreed that Professor Perrot {France), in consultation with the representatives of
India, Turkey and Egypt, should present a text at the next meeting.


Professor Perrot (France) read a note prepared to serve as a basis for discussion
(Annex 8).
Dealing with paragraph ( a ) of his conclusions, he said that the British delegate had
asked that the definition should not be made so absolute.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) stated that he had made the objection from an admini-
strative point of view. Male and female plants were intermixed in the manufacture of bhang ;
the male plant had no effect, but its omission from the definition would raise difficulties if
it were desired to prosecute people dealing in the drug. He thought the phrase ?rich in resin??,
which had been suggested to replace ?resinous?, too vague, and recommended the adoption
of the definition of the English Pharmacopoeia.
Professor Perrot (France) said the object of the definition was to cover all many
varieties of Cannabis sativa. He would agree with the British proposal if the w T ords ?under
whatever name they may be designated in commerce? were added.
The article was then adopted as follows
?By Indian hemp is understood the dried flowering or fruiting tops of the pistillate
plant of Cannabis sativa , from which the resin has not been extracted, under whatever
name they may be designated in commerce.?
The Sub-Committee then considered paragraph ( b).
Professor Perrot (France) pointed out that this was a most serious question, as the
resin was not put to any medical use. The British delegate had observed that medical and
scientific use still remained possible, while the delegate for India had not been able to take
a decision, preferring to await the result of an investigation to be conducted by the League
of Nations. In the meantime, the Indian delegate was not prepared to accept so severe a
text.
Dr. Noureddin Bey (Turkey) proposed the addition among the denominations of the
name ?Essra?, as this was the name under which the drug was known in his country.
Dr. Pernambuco (Brazil) proposed the addition of ?diamba? for similar reasons.
It was agreed to include these two names.
The Chairman asked whether members were in favour of the absolute prohibition of
the use of resin.
All members present voted in favour of prohibition, with the exception of Mr. Perrins
(British Empire), Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) and Mr. Walton (India), who abstained.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) asked that the following text should be inserted in the
report :
?The British delegation, whilst it is anxious that all drugs of addiction shall be placed
under the strictest national and international control, is not in a position without further
enquiry to accept the conclusions contained in paragraph (&).?
Mr. Walton (India) associated himself with this reservation.
The Chairman remarked that the decision taken by the Sub-Committee was purely
technical and would have only that character when presented to the Conference.
With reference to paragraph (c), which was then considered, the Chairman said it should
be understood that raw resin was excluded. He suggested that paragraph (c) should be
put in front of [b) and that the two should form one paragraph; [b] would thus become an
exception to (c).
The new Article (b) was adopted by the Sub-Committee, with the same abstentions and
reservations as before.
Professor Perrot (France) was asked to prepare a report embodying the alterations and
reserves formulated in the course of the meeting.
28. Adjournment of the Committee.
The Chairman thanked the members for their collaboration in the work of the Sub-
Committee.
Dr. El Guindy (Egypt) proposed a vote of thanks to the Chairman.
This was carried unanimously.


FIFTEENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Friday, January 23 rd, i9 2 5> a t 3 p- m -
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
29. Legitimate Requirements as regards Opium and Coca Leaves and their Alkaloids : Report
of the Chairman.
The Chairman referred to the circumstances in which the question of the legitimate
requirements of the various countries as regards narcotic drugs had been To t -
Committee. No figure would be named in the Convention. The amount of 450 mi hgrammw
was simply a suggestion for the time when rationing might be possible. This rel the vie
of the Swiss Government, which regarded the figure simply as a basis for future calculate .
30. Report of the Sub-Committee.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, submitted his draft report
(a) Codeine; Proposal by the French Delegation.
Professor Perrot (France) Rapporteur, stated that he had devoted the closest attention
to the American delegation's remarks on codeine. The French Government's view of the matter
was different from that of the Sub-Committee. There was no?Aowe/erofrelin-
u qt of nroducts covered by the Convention. There would be a risk however, or reui
quishing control over a large quantity of raw materials if the quantities :
tured were not known. The French delegation, therefore, proposed the following resolutio .
?In order to exercise as strict a control as pogible over the
cotic alkaloids of opium and the coca leaf, the High Contracting. Part 1?
adopt all possible measures enabling them to ascertain the quantity of these alkalo
transformed into non-narcotic derivatives.?
This proposal might be embodied in a recommendation.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) thought that the French proposal did not go farmiouigh.
Very few countries manufactured the alkaloids m question. He wondered what wouU
the position of a country like Belgium if it had to enforce this It would b
possible to import large quantities of codeine into Belgium, and tew *1 mean *hal hei
figures would be wrong. They must have accurate figures if production was to De nmiteu.
It might be advisable to extend the proposal as follows . , ,
?In the case of international traffic, such substances shall be subject to impoi an
export licences.?
The Chairman wished to correct a misunderstanding. The French proposal refened
to thlinformation to be furnished later to the Central Board concerning requirements m regard
to narcotic drugs. There was no question of the import or export trade.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, confirmed the
proposal was intended, on the one hand, to make it possible to estab sh used
the other, to prevent false statements by factories as to'the quaintit had P before . It
What was wanted was a fresh guarantee, a guaiantee wic , . de w a r e
was to be feared that the extension of the proposal, as suggested by the Belgian delega ,
would place unnecessary difficulties in the way of commerce.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) asked whether it would not be possilble at themid oHhe
French nrooosal to add the words ?and the international distnbutio . ,
must ha P ve some means of checking exports if the international movement of goods was to
be controlled.
exercise a right of supervision over non-narcotic derivatives.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) stated that the Belgian Ration providted aU
sary guarantees, as persons in possession of drugs were obliged to state the quant
transformed as well as the quantities sold.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, explained that what was wanted was the general
introduction of this system.


The Chairman, in summing up the question, declared that the French proposal was
designed simply to facilitate the establishment of statistics and to prevent evasion. Manu-
facturers? returns for manufactured products must correspond with the quantities of raw
materials, but codeine would not be subject to any control. The proposal could only be
embodied in a recommendation; otherwise it would have the effect of bringing codeine under
the terms of the Convention, and this must be avoided.
The Sub-Committee adopted, the French delegations proposal, Dr. Tsurumi (Japan) reserv-
ing the right to express an opinion on the matter at a later date.
(b) Question regarding the scope of the word ?derivative?.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, referred to Surgeon-General Blue?s remarks
on the word ?derivative?. The representatives of Sub-Committee b on the Co-ordination
Committee would discuss with the representatives of the other Sub-Committees the question
as to whether the word ?derivative? was to be retained in the Convention.
(c) Suppression of Heroin : Proposal by the American Delegation.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, reminded members that the Sub-Committee had
not adopted the American proposal for the suppression of heroin. It had, however, dealt
with this product separately, and agreed that it should be made subject to even stricter regu-
lations than were provided for in the 1912 Convention. The question would be brought before
the plenary Conference.
(d) Definition of the Coca Leaf, Cocaine and Synthetic Cocaine.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, referred to the fact that the Sub-Committee had
agreed to the inclusion of synthetic cocaine in the scientific definition of cocaine.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) pointed out that this definition included natural, synthetic
and semi-synthetic cocaine.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, submitted the following proposal ;
?Add to Article 14 the following words :
?To crude cocaine ;
?To synthetic Isevo-cocaine ;
?To racemic cocaine ;
?To racemic ecgonine and to left-turning ecgonine derived from natural or synthetic
products, considered as raw materials, and to all other substances drawn from these
eegonins which might serve industrially for the recovery of cocaine.? [Synthesis of
Cocaine?, by Willstatter, O. Wolfsohn, Hirst Max, Annalen d. Chemie, 1923, Vol. 434.]
He stated that it was the result of representations made by French chemists who had
emphasised the necessity of mentioning synthetic laevo-cocaine. The synthetic production
of cocaine was new and had not yet been industrialised. It would be advisable, however,
with a view to the future, and in order not to have to revise Article 14 later, to mention
racemic drugs in the Convention, as they might contain narcotics.
This passage in the report had been criticised by Sir Malcolm Delevingne, who had sent
him the following letter on the subject :
London, January 6th, 1925.
?I have consulted our Government chemist on the subject of the definitions proposed
by Sub-Committee F.
?With regard to the definition of intermediate products, he writes to me as follows :
?In crude cocaine there are derivatives of laevo-eegonine which contain acid
radicals (such as cinnamyl) other than benzoyl, which is characteristic of cocaine.
It is true that these bodies containing other acid radicals can be produced synthe-
tically from laevo-eegonine in the laboratory. It might be argued, however, that,
as these occur naturally in the plant, there is no direct proof that they have been
obtained from laevo-eegonine. It would seem that the sense would be covered more
nearly by the use of the term ?derivable? instead of ?derived? from laevo-eegonine,
so that if one of these bodies mentioned, which contain an acid radical other than
benzoyl, were used, it could be maintained without controversy that it was capable
of being derived from the laevo-eegonine, it being unnecessary to say whether this
transformation was a natural one in the plant or a synthetic one as in the laboratory.?
?I should be very glad if you would consider this criticism before the Conference
reassembles next Monday and will let me have your views on the point.
[Signed] Malcolm DelevinCxNE.?


Dr Anselmino (Germany) stated that he had proposed to Sir Malcolm Delevmgne that
the words or other products?? should be deleted. This was also the opinion expressed by
Dr. Coebergh in the following letter to Sir Malcolm Delevmgne :
?Geneva, January 17th, 1925.
?In reply to your letter of January s th, concerning the proposals that
Committee F may I say that the French text is not quite clear. 1 think, however, that
the last part of this definition is not intended to imply that derivatives or possible do -
vnfives of leevo-ecgonine are or may be manufactured from this substance, but that '
oSc if rinciude all substances used in conjunction with hevo-ecgommg whether
natural or synthetic, by means of which the drug can *
I should prefer to delete the woids autres produits ?
all the derivatives which you wish to cover would be included.
Dr de Myttenaere (Belgium) stated that the effect of such deletion would be to exclude
racemic drugs from the definition, which was contrary to the French proposal.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, asked members whether they did not think
it was advisable to add racemic cocaine obtained, the
not^s^d! Ilikelihood 1 likelihood of its bhng discovered.
of tlm Con??hfna
Dr. El Guindy (Egypt) asked what objection there was to this.
The Chairman replied that a Convention must be based on existing facts.
Professor Perrot (France). Rapporteur said that he would
as he felt that what he wanted was covend by ? discussion had not been without
as he felt that wnat ne wdiucu vvas j Up nrp?pnt
nroducts which might be recognised as harmful, ihe piesenl
value as it had elucidated certain pointo.
The Chairman was also of opinion that the art ' dc i'lffhGlinutTTf
Z =r; n oduct f it would automatically come under the
tne raceuuc puiuuot v-wx
decided to delete the words ? products" in the passage the report
to which reference had been made.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) asked that the figure 44 might be changed to 45.6, as the
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) ashed tnat tne ngu
latter corresponded to the most recent experiments.
(e) Exclusion of Certain Preparations from the Convention : Proposal by the French
Delegation (Article 14).
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, submitted the following proposal :
Healtlf^mmitkf^^he?feagueff NaffM^f^^l^Y^dedafftlm^^^ldi^fre^^ations
a
Parties the names of these preparations, in Older that y
as exempted from the provisions of the present Convention. _
He stated that the drafting authorities at the French thicThe proposed
out that the text as it stood was not clear. Th in' Addition, in the* new
th WMdS
hxmtainingthe narcotic alkaloid S P referred to in the present Convention
At the suggestion of Mr. Pebeins the^e: xt
Cm 'the new drugs to be covered by the Convention,
(f) Medicines for Urgent Use : Exemption for Medical
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, stated that without
lT^U*on V h? lofedTce'tK which might be delivered by the chemist from
<0 centigrammes to 12 centigrammes.
&&2S/S3S. ,5 - ?- ?? ? %-??
would, no doubt, be accepted by the American delegation.


Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, emphasised the fact that this figure was only
intended as a guide for the Governments, which were still free to prohibit entirely the delivery
of opium for medical purposes without prescription.
The Sub-Committee decided to substitute 25 centigrammes for 50 centigrammes.
31. Question of Indian Hemp (Hashish) ; Report by the Sub-Committee.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, submitted his report (Annex 8) and stated that,
as regards definitions, the British delegation?s suggestions had been followed. The defi-
nitions had been taken from the British Pharmacopoeia.
After discussion between various members of the Sub-Committee, the Sub-Committee
decided to substitute the following text for the definition of Indian hemp in the report :
?The dried flowering tops or fruit of the female plant of Cannabis sativa, L., from
which the resin has not been extracted, under whatever denomination it may be employed
in commerce."
The omission of the word ?dried? might have had an adverse effect on the production of
hemp fibre.
In reply to a question by Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, Mr. Perrins (British
Empire) stated that he did not intend to insist on the British reservation in the last paragraph,
but that he was unable to speak for the Indian delegation.
32. Representation of Sub-Committee Fon the Committee of Co-ordination.
The Chairman reminded members that the object of the Co-ordination Committee was
to weld together the various proposals of the different Sub-Committees into a homogeneous
whole and that its work would be quite distinct from that of the Drafting Committee. He
understood, from what had been said at the last meeting of the' plenary Conference, that each
of the Sub-Committees would be represented by its Chairman and two other delegates. He
thought that the members of the Sub-Committee best fitted to represent it were those who
had taken the most active part in its work, namely, the Belgian delegate and the French
delegate, the Rapporteur.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) referred to the observations made at the Conference on the
question of nationality : it might happen that one country would have several representa-
tives on the Committee of Co-ordination, while other countries would have none at all. He
enquired whether the Secretary of the Sub-Committee could inform them what delegates had
already been chosen by the other Sub-Committees.
The Chairman pointed out that, when the question of nationality had been brought up,
it had been stated that the members of the Committee of Co-ordination would not represent
any particular State but their respective Sub-Committees.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) said that the question had been discussed at length in
Sub-Committee A, which had decided that the representatives of the six Sub-Committees
could discuss not only questions which concerned their own Sub-Committees but also questions
submitted by all the other Sub-Committees. It was desirable, therefore, as far as possible,
to take nationality into account.
The Chairman thought that, if this were the case, they should know exactly what the
work of the Committee of Co-ordination would be. His personal view was that its task was
simply to eliminate any inconsistencies between the different proposals. If it were also to
have power to settle certain disputable questions, it would constitute a ?super-committee?,
and this would mean that all the discussions which had taken place in the various Sub-Com-
mittees would be brought up again before it.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) agreed with the Chairman?s view : the members of the
Co-ordination Committee were simply mandatories from their respective Sub-Committees and
were not competent to make any fundamental changes in the decisions taken by the latter.
Only the plenary Conference could make such changes.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, agreed with the Belgian delegate.
M. Blanco, Rapporteur (Secretary of the Sub-Committee), mentioned that the British
delegation had submitted a proposal to the Conference concerning the composition of the
Committee of Co-ordination and that an amendment to this proposal had also been submitted.
Dr. Noureddin Bey (Turkey) thought that it had been decided that each of the Sub-
Committees should submit the names of its representatives to the President of the Conference.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) had no objection to raise to the two names suggested by the
Chairman, but pointed out that in Sub-Committee A the election had been by secret ballot.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) also advocated a secret ballot in the case of elections.
Dr. Gotuzzo (Brazil) and Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, thought that there
was no need for a secret ballot, as no objection had been raised to the names suggested by
the Chairman.


The Chairman thought that it would be better, notwithstanding, that the ballot should
be taken in order that the voting might be quite unprejudiced.
Twelve members of the Sub-Committee, including the Chairman, recorded their votes,
the voting being by secret ballot. The result was as follows .
Dr. de Myttenaere ( Belgium ) 11 votes
Professor Perrot ( France) 7 
Dr. Anselmino ( Germany ) 4 
Dr. Bustamante {Spain) 1 votc
Dr. Noureddin Bey ( Turkey) 1
The Chairman stated that he would submit the names of Dr de My^ re P ?;
lessor Perrot to the President of the Conference as representatives of Sub-Committee
Committee of Co-ordination.
SIXTEENTH MEETING.
Held at Geneva on Wednesday, January 28 th, 1925, at 3.30 p.m.
Chairman : Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
33. Legitimate Requirements in Narcotic Drugs.
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) pointed out that the Spanish delegation had only accepted the
figure of 450 milligrammes of raw opium subject to reseivations.
The Chairman observed that the figure of 450 milligrammes was intended merely as
a basis of comparison for future statistics and was not by any means bmdi g.
The report was unanimously adopted.
34. Report on the Work of the Sub-Committee.
(a) Codeine.
Professor Perrot (France). Rapporteur in^bmfitin U h |jeP^^^ e e h ? d
which had been discussed at its last m S?. - American delegation and which
text which, it was thought, would meet the a record of
provided for the adoption of a system of registeis rende-mg it l
the quantities of morphine transformed into non-narcotic de ?
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) it would -t bear vi-
able to keep statistics of all derivatives of opium and morphme.
insertion of the new provision in Article 14 sufficie ?
Dr. Noureddin Bey (Turkey) thought it would be desirable to mention the quan . .eso
codeine exported, as in the case of morphine. ,
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, ^erved would be
?0? bTL C p U t Of the production of these drugs by factories,
and not of their international circulation.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) thought that who did not agree
points which had already been settled Members Committees
with the Rapporteur?s conclusions could always uphold their views
or at the plenary meeting. , , ,
Dr. Tsurumi (Japan) said that he withdrew the reservation he hac ma e a
meeting and agreed with the French delegation s proposal.
The Chairman supported the observations of : the proposal that codeine
It had not been thought possible to adopt, m its ent A Nevertheless, in order
should be included in the Convention, since 1 d decided to propose the above measure,
to meet the wishes of the American delegation t > P f kilogramme of opium
which would make it possible in welbgoyerned B^.^
from its entry into the country until it reached its final stage
Mr. Perrins (British Empire) said that he did not wish the
thought it would be a pity, to leave the American ddegat by the Ameri-
question had not been sufficiently discussed. In t h/included in order that the system
?an delegation, it was requested that in Professor Perrot's
of registration might be complete. If tn e P A new provision adopted would
report were carefully examined, it would be found new W k e thought
enable opium to be traced until it was transformed mt
that this provision ought to meet the wishes of the American delegate


Dr. Noureddin Bey (Turkey) pointed out that it was possible to retransform codeine into
morphine either by saponification or by means of ether. He thought, therefore, that it would
be desirable to make provision for limiting the quantities of codeine.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) replied that such retransformation was not possible from an
industrial point of view. It was merely a laboratory experiment.
The Chairman said that he did not think it would be possible to lay down that the quan-
tities of codeine should be limited. Codeine was not a narcotic drug and therefore did not come
within the scope of the Convention. If the Turkish delegate had any reservations to make,
they might be annexed to the report.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) said that he wished once more to
draw attention to the opinion given by the Health Committee of the League of Nations, which
recommended ?that this alkaloid (codeine), and, in general, all derivatives of opium employed
in therapeutics, should be brought within the scope of the enquiry?. He wished this statement
of his to be included in the Minutes and reserved the right to uphold his views at the plenary
meeting.
The Chairman noted the statement of the United States delegate.
The chapter concerning codeine in the report was adopted.
(b) Definition of Coca Leaf and Cocaine.
Adopted.
(c) Definition of Crude Cocaine and Ecgonin.
Adopted.
(d) Article 14, paragraph (c).
A dopted.
(e) Article 14, paragraph (d).
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, pointed out that the British and French dele
gations had made reservations in respect of this passage.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) stated that the American delegation
was prepared to accept the decision of Sub-Committee F regarding heroin if a clause for the
suppression of heroin were opened for signature by such States as desired to effect its suppres-
sion either now or later.
The Chairman said that this motion could be discussed at the plenary meeting of the
Conference.
Paragraph (d) was adopted.
(f) Article 14, paragraph (e).
With regard to the first sub-section of paragraph ( e ), the Chairman, in his capacity of
Swiss delegate, informed the Sub-Committee that, after examining the text, his Government?s
experts had expressed a fear lest the scope of this sub-section should be unduly extended.
Certain products which were not regarded as habit-forming drugs, such as sulphonal, veronal,
etc. in short, products which were regarded as ?narcotics? in the strictest sense of the term
might be included by a State among habit-forming drugs. These experts, therefore, suggested
that the following words should be added to the sub-section in question : ?Any habit-form-
ing drug {stupefiant) of no proved therapeutic value?. Personally, he did not think that
these fears were founded, since the procedure laid down for the inclusion of new products
in the Convention was complicated, would involve much careful investigation and afforded
every possible guarantee.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) thought that any addition to the text would only com-
plicate it still further and might even compromise its effectiveness. Moreover, the decisions
taken would only be valid for the Contracting Powers which accepted them.
Dr. Bustamante (Spain) pointed out that he would have liked the products recognised
as habit-producing to be mentioned by name. This would naturally necessitate an agreement
regarding the appellations.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, supported the Belgian delegate?s observations.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) proposed that the word ?new?
in the first paragraph of Article ( e) should be omitted.
On this point, a discussion arose between several members of the Sub-Committee.
In reply to a question by M. Blanco, (Secretary of the Sub-Committee), Surgeon-
General Blue explained his point of view as follows : He believed that there were at the
present time a number of habit-forming drugs other than those enumerated in Article 14
\e). The expression ?any new derivatives? did not take into account alkaloids which had
already been discovered but whose habit-forming properties had not yet been recognised,
though they might be recognised in the future.


The Chairman said he thought that the expression which occurred a little further on, ?all
other narcotic drugs {stupe fiants)?, provided a sufficient guarantee against the dangers foreseen
by the American delegate. The text, as it stood, made it possible to include all other deri-
vatives of morphine and cocaine which might later be recognised as narcotic drugs, even if
they were already in existence.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States) said that in these circumstances he did not see
why it was necessary to retain the word ?new?.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, supported the opinion expressed by the Chair-
man and drew the American delegate?s attention to the third paragraph.
The United States delegate s proposal was put to the vote, and was rejected.
The Chairman stated that the United States delegate would be able to make a reservation
in this connection if he thought it necessary. .
He added that he would not insist upon his own motion. On behalt of the bwiss deie-
iie aaaea mat ne wouia nut mbibi upuu m=. uwn nwuwu.
gation, however, he reserved the right to raise the question at a plenary meeting.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) proposed that the respective roles
of the Office international d?Hygiene publique and the Health Committee of the League of
Nations should be reversed. However qualified the members of the Office international mig t
be in other directions, many of them were not doctors, and the main task ought to be assignee
to the Health Committee/ Incidentally, this would make for greater rapidity m reaching
decisions.
Dr. Anselmino (Germany) supported the American delegate?s proposal and reminded the
Sub-Committee that he had already made a similar reservation.
The Chairman observed that the'question had already been discussed. Jhe text as it
stood took into account the arrangement between the League of Nations and the Office inter-
national d?Hygiene publique that the Paris Office should act as an advisory body of the Health
Committee. Indeed, it was impossible to ignore this arrangement. It was, moreover, clear
that the Office international would refer any questions which might arise in this connection
to a competent technical committee, whose opinion would be submitted to the Health Com-
mittee The Health Committee would be free to adopt this opinion or not, as it chose. And
lastly, the text referred to the Office international in the first instance probably because it
included States non-Members of the League.
Mr Perrins (British Empire) observed that it would possibly be easier for the respective
States non-Members of the League to ratify the text if it remained drafted as at present.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) said he did not wish that all reference to
to the Office international d?Hygffine publique should be omitted, as it was the only inter-
national medical body to which his country, not being a Member of the League of Nations
belonged.
The Chairman said that the observations of Surgeon-General Blue and Dr. Anselmino
would be included in the Minutes and that the delegates in question would be free to submit
any reservations they might judge necessary to the plenary Confeience.
Article 14 (e) was adopted.
(g) Medicines for Urgent Use exempted from a Compulsory Medical Prescription
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, pointed out that the Sub-Committee had decided
to adopt the figure of 25 centigrammes of officinal opium instead of 50 centigrammes.
Dr. Betances (Dominican Republic) renewed the reservation which he had made in this
connection and stated that he reserved the right to raise this question in the plenary Con e-
rence.
The paragraph was adopted.
Adoption of the Sub-Committee?s Report.
Mr Perrins (British Empire) pointed out certain discrepancies between the French
text and the English translation. In the provision concerning codeine the French text read
?les Parties Contractantes s?engagent a prendre mcsures_ . ? whereas tho English
text first distributed read ?all possible measures . He thought it would be advisable to
use some s?/h expression as ?adopt measures allowing...? The present text seemed to
constitute a formal undertaking to obtain information as to the quantity of the alkaloid m
question, and he thought it would be difficult to enter into such an undertaking in advance.
The Chairman pointed out that it was impossible to foresee the results of these measures.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, added that the provision as submitted to the
French delegation certainly implied a formal obligation to obtain information concerning the
quantities of codeine.


On the proposal of Mr. Perrins (British Empire), it was agreed that the expression* toutes
mesures" should be rendered by the words ?any measures .
After various formal amendments to the English text, the report was unanimously adopted
and the Sub-Committee took note of the various reservations made.
35. Question of Hashish : Report of the Sub-Committee.
Mr. Walton (India) stated that the Indian delegation would be satisfied if the report were
transmitted to the Co-ordination Committee with the Indian memorandum in the form of an
annex.
He did not wish to make any reservation for the present.
The report was unanimously adopted.
36. Statement by the Belgian Delegation.
Dr. de Myttenaere (Belgium) read a note (Annex 9) concerning
(1) The Belgian proposal that Article 14 should fix the limit of narcotic drugs in
terms of absolute weight, a proposal which had not been adopted ;
(2) The addition proposed by the Belgian delegation of a clause concerning codeine,
to the effect that enquiries should also be conducted into the international distribution
of non-narcotic derivatives ;
(3) The supply of hypodermic syringes.
With regard to the last point, Mr. Perrins (British Empire) pointed out that heroin is
taken like snuff and is not injected.
Surgeon-General Blue (United States of America) added that certain apparatus with
needles attached could not be termed ?syringes?'.
The Chairman stated that the Belgian proposal seemed to refer to the ?ampoules-
aiguille" (needle ampullas) to which allusion had already been made.
The Belgian delegate?s statement was noted.
37. Declaration by the French Delegation.
Professor Perrot (France), Rapporteur, read the following note
?Diacetyl-morphine (heroin), in the manufacture of which morphine constitutes the
basic product, is generally regarded as the alkaloid whose habitual consumption pioduces
the most serious disorders, and its illicit use constitutes in certain countries a deadly evil.
?But it is also, from a therapeutical point of view, a most beneficial drug when employed
by doctors, many of whom hold it to be considerably superior to morphine.
?The Hague Convention (paragraph (c), Article 14) therefore made an exception, as in
the case of cocaine, in favour of medical preparations not containing more than 0.10 percent
of this alkaloid. , .
?Sub-Committee F, notwithstanding the observations made by some of its members,
had abolished this provision, but the French delegation, on the basis of various expert opinions,
in particular that of the Pharmacopoeia Commission (Codex) of March nth, 1924) pioposes
that no change should be made in the text of paragraph (c), Article 14, of the Hague Convention
and that consequently preparations containing not more than 0.10 per cent should continue
to be permitted.
?It would point out, moreover, that the danger to society from the misuse of heroin, as
of other narcotic alkaloids, cannot be ascribed to pharmaceutical preparations.
?In this campaign the only international measures which can be effective are those which
aim, on the one hand, at the suppression of smuggling and, on the other, at establishing
control over the manufacture of and international traffic in these alkaloids.?
The Sub-Committee noted the French delegate s statement.
38. Close of the Sub-Committee?s Work.
Mr. Perrins (British Empire), on behalf of the British delegation, thanked the Chairman
for the skilful manner in which he had presided over the discussions of the Sub-Committee.
He also wished to congratulate the Rapporteur and the Secretariat.
The Chairman thanked the British delegate on behalf of the Rapporteur and on his own
behalf and congratulated the Sub-Committee on the zeal it had displayed in these discussions,
which had led to such satisfactory results.


ANNEXES.
Page
I. Legitimate Requirements in respect of Opium and its Derivatives : Statement
by Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands) 37
2. Memorandum of the Greek Delegation to the Second Opium Conference 309
3. Draft Report by Sub-Committee Fon the Enquiries concerning the Legitimate
Requirements in Opium and its Derivatives carried out by the Health
Committee at the Request of the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in
Opium, presented by Dr. Carriere (Switzerland) 310
4. Definitions of Coca Leaves and Cocaine : Proposals submitted to Sub-Committee
F by the Committee of Experts appointed for this Purpose 312
5. Proposals by the Polish Delegation concerning Parts I and II of Annex Ito the
Report of the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium 312
6. Draft Report of Sub-Committee F 3 1 4
7. Note from the British Delegation regarding Certain Proposed Additions to Article 14 317
8. Draft Report concerning Indian Hemp 3*B
9. Note by the Belgian Delegation 3!9
10 ? Memorandum of the British Delegation as to Consumption of Dangerous Drugs
in the United Kingdom 3 2 
11. Letter from the International Pharmaceutical Federation 33 2
Annex 1.
LEGITIMATE REQUIREMENTS IN RESPECT OF OPIUM AND ITS DERIVATIVES.
Statement by Dr. Coebergh (Netherlands).
Mr. Chairman,
I have prepared a short memorandum on Document C.H.264 and the question which
you spoke to us about, and I should like to read it to you in order to explain my point of view
in this matter. . ....
Attempts have been made to fix an approximate average figure tor opium and its deri-
vatives, including the quantities of morphine transformed into codeine, and other products
corresponding to medical and scientific requirements, in order to ascertain the total needs of
the whole world. .
At the beginning, the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium estimated this figure
at 600 milligrammes per head per annum, a figure based on the statistics then in its possession.
The Health Committee considered that this figure was too high in view of the results of
the very careful enquiry carried out in Denmark, Sweden and Belgium (C.io M.7 1924.
111, page 24).
The Health Committee notes that it is impossible, from available data, to determine
with any precision the amount needed for legitimate requirements. It states that the figure
of 600 milligrammes of raw opium per head per annum, adopted by the Mixed Sub-
Committee, is considerably in excess of the quantity required for these purposes. It is of
opinion that the figure should be reduced to 450 milligrammes, it being understood that this
constitutes a maximum which can only be applied to countries possessing a well-organised
system of medical relief.
According to Professor Knaffl-Lenz?s calculations, 400 milligrammes of raw opium per
person per annum would be a fair average, although this figure could only be used to estimate
Jl A A W W V ?' # _ a , I 1
the requirements of countries possessing highly organised medical institutions.
Before discussing whether one of these figures might serve our purpose, I venture to draw
your attention to the fact that the data given in Document O.D.C.i, which have probably
been used as the basis for these various calculations, are not quite accurate and cannot be
employed without reserve. The figures given on page 50, indicating the quantity of morphine
*? - . . it 1 1 C Jl * _ J n TTrt t-iTrnn + YMAvrvninA n r*A n avo/'I
which mav theoretically be transformed into various derivatives of morphine, are not exact,
J . V , j'j r : Ik.
and the figures indicating the average quantity of raw opium required for the manufacture
of these drugs do not appear to me to be reliable.
The errors, however, are not likely to influence to any considerable extent the data cal-
culated on the ?basis of the above-mentioned figures, in view of the doubtful value of such
statistical data in general.
To what figure may we then refer ?
In order to obtain an answer to this question, I studied Document C.H.264, containing
the report on the work of the Opium Committee and the annexes thereto, in which Professor
Knaffl-Lenz gives an estimate of the requirements of various countries, together with his views
on the question.


As might be expected, it is shown that the use of opiates is affected by a variety of
circumstances.
For instance, we see that, at the Sickness Insurance Institute for the Austrian Federal
employees, 50 per cent more morphine and 115 per cent more codeine was used in the second
half of 1923 than in the first half of that year.
The same document proves the influence of local circumstances. Whereas, at the above-
mentioned institute, the consumption of codeine was four times as great as that of morphine,
the consumption at a similar institute in Basle was only twice as great, while at three sickness
insurance institutes in Germany the amount of codeine used was only half as much as the amount
of morphine.
These differences in the proportions of the consumption of codeine and morphine are
met with elsewhere. In the Minutes of the Fourth Session of the Advisory Committee (C.155.
M.75.1923.X1), we find, on page 130, in a report submitted by Dr. Anselmino, that in Canada
the proportion of the consumption of morphine to that of codeine is 1 to 0.7 and in the United
States Ito 2. I venture to draw your attention to the fact that these divergencies are mani-
fest in countries which may be regarded as possessing a well-organised service of medical relief.
In these countries a similar difference is to be found between the total quantities of opiates
which, according to available data, are consumed per head per annum.
In one of the annexes to Document C.H.264, the consumption of opiates per head per
annum, including codeine, is estimated for six countries at 336 milligrammes. We are parti-
cularly struck by the fact that, of these countries, three (Albania, Bulgaria and Roumania)
consume a very small amount of opiates not including codeine namely, less than one-
third (and in the case of Roumania less than one-tenth) of the average figure of 290 milli-
grammes, calculated according to the data for sixteen different countries. It might be pre-
sumed that in these three countries the consumption of codeine is also very low and could
not be used as a basis for forming an estimate of consumption, and, as a matter of fact, the
figures confirm this supposition.
It should also be noted that six countries (Denmark, Great Britain, Hungary, Luxem-
burg, Poland, Sweden), of the sixteen already mentioned, which have been estimated as
having an average consumption of 290 milligrammes of opiates not including codeine
per head per annum, but whose consumption of codeine has not been indicated, show a much
greater consumption of opiates not including codeine and in the case of Sweden even
double the amount.
It will be seen from Document O.D.C.i, page 59, that the consumption of codeine in Poland
has been estimated at about 55 milligrammes per head per annum, which is equal to about
550 milligrammes of opium.
If the consumption of codeine in the other countries referred to above (Denmark, Great
Britain, Hungary, Luxemburg and Sweden) were equally great, the result would be a much
higher average figure than the 336 milligrammes already mentioned.
I might quote other examples, but I think the foregoing will suffice to demonstrate the
fact that such figures are of small value.
I think that the great differences in the figures of consumption in the different countries
are not solely due to the development of medical relief, but to a still greater extent to the
character of the diseases most frequently met with a factor depending upon climate and
other circumstances and to the medical treatment usually prescribed in the countries in
question. These considerations, however, are liable to modification.
I am therefore of opinion that the average figures quoted above are only applicable to
a limited extent to the countries to which they refer, and that they are in no way applicable
to other countries the consumption of which has not been taken into account.
Moreover, from a statistical point of view, it would be unfair to establish an average
figure based on the consumption of certain medicaments only during a restricted period
and under very varying conditions.
It would also be quite illogical to estimate the consumption in a given country in a par-
ticular part of the world, or perhaps in the whole world, by multiplying the figures in question,
which refer to little-known and very varying circumstances. This would certainly lead to
results which would be unreliable and consequently useless.
I venture to quote, in this connection, the statement made by Dr. Carriere at the first
session of the Health Committee (C. 10.M.7.1924. 111, page 24) :
?The Mixed Sub-Committee had reached the conclusion which, in point of fact,
was not unforeseen that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to give figures, even
if they were only approximate, which would represent the legitimate requirements of
countries in regard to narcotics. The enormous discrepancies shown in the returns made
by certain countries gave ample evidence of this?' ;
and by Professor Leon Bernard at the same meeting (page 29 of the same report) :
?It could but be regretted that, after so much good endeavour to find a figure, the
only figure which had been found possessed no scientific character and might lead to
dangerous results. It would be better for them to say to the Opium Committee : ?We
can give no reply to the question before us, for it is not possible scientifically to fix the
figure for legitimate consumption. It is not by this means that you will attain the desired
goal?.?
I fully share Professor Bernard?s opinion when he states that no figure cam ever be used
as a basis for estimating the world consumption of narcotics.


Shall we then never be able to estimate the total requirements of the world in drugs for
medical and scientific purposes ? Yes, we shall, but by other methods, and certainly not
by which, in the terms of Article 4 of the Compromise, were submitted by the
Advisory Committee to this Conference, and were accepted as the basis for our discussions
will serve later on, after careful enquiry, as bases for the estimation of these requirements if
thev are expanded so as to include all data concerning the manufacture of products which do
no/come within the provisions of the Convention (codeine, etc.) from the drugs mentioned in
Arti ln order to approach the solution of the problem of the limitation of opium and coca cul-
tivation from the point of view of the total requirements of the whole world for medical and
scientific purposes, we must wait until the results of the examination of these statistics art
known.
1 therefore propose :
1 That we should definitely renounce any attempt to estimate all world require-
ments in narcotics on the basis of data which refer solely to certain localities or certain
countries.
2 That the scope of the statistics referred to in Article 4of the Compromise should
be so enlarged as to include all data concerning the manufacture of products which do
not come within the provisions of the Convention (codeine, etc.) from the drugs mentione
in Article 1.
Annex 2.
MEMORANDUM OF THE GREEK DELEGATION TO THE SECOND OPIUM
CONFERENCE.
The Hellenic delegation to the Opium Conference has the honour to inform the= other
heroin, cocaine, their salts, derivati\es, etc.
The following is a short summary of its provisions ;
?The cultivation of the Papaver somniferum as well as the traffic in the above-mentioned
(Article 15)- exportation of opium are designated by a decree (Article y).
Tt is forlhden to export opium in which the importation of opium is prohi-
SiirrSSSfESSSBSis
tent authorities (Article 11). av v> e imoorted without special
?>.
<Art ?'The 2 sale and use by pharmacists of opium, morphine, cocaine and their salts is regulated
by Opium 1 heroin P ?d' not be used for any purposes
for 1 !! these (Article x 7). Persons engaged in
such .!^^^g^^^ o^^po^Cmori^ine S and their salts on jiro-
laws of the country
to take delivery of these goods (Article 19). an nlicable- (1) to opium for pharmaceu-
?The provisions of Articles 16, 17, 18 and 19 are appl cable ter f hano . 2p er
tical purposes ; (2) to all preparations co^ f ttanl ? n , g o L!J oin T P e r cent ? (4) to all new preparations
center of cocaine greater than o.ipercen ,(3) 1 other narcot i c which may
having as their basis morphine, cocaine or their salts (5J y
subsequently be designated in a decree. (Article 20.)


Opium
. 1,200
kilos.
Salts of morphine
40

Heroin
12

Dionine
8

Pantopon
6

Salts of cocaine
65

Ext. Cannabis indica . .
10

"Persons contravening the provisions of this law are liable to imprisonment for terms
varying from one month to a year and fines varying from 500 to 5,000 drachmas.
"If the offence is repeated, these penalties may be doubled (Article 22).?
Opium is practically no longer cultivated in Greece, its place having been taken by tobacco,
which is more remunerative. According to official statistics, the official production does
not exceed 260 kilogrammes. But a large quantity of opium produced in the Kingdom of
the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes passes in transit through the Greek port of Salonika for export
abroad, principally to America, France and Germany.
According to the statistics drawn up by the Pan-Hellenic Pharmaceutical Society of
Greece which is an officially recognised body the quantities of narcotic medicaments
employed annually in Greece for therapeutical purposes by the 1,276 pharmacists in Greece,
in conformity with doctors? prescriptions, for a population of about 5,000,000 inhabitants,
are as follows ;
To these quantities 50 per cent must be added for the requirements of the increased
population due to the influx of refugees, and for hospital purposes.
The Hellenic Government, being desirous of assisting in the suppression of the traffic
in dangerous drugs, has submitted to the Standing Committee of the National Assembly
a draft law the effect of which would be to make all narcotics a monopoly.
We give below the full text of this draft law.
Article 1. The importation into Greece of opium, opium derivatives (morphine and mor-
phine salts, dionine, heroin, pantopon, etc.), cocaine, cocaine salts and extract of Indian hemp
is prohibited, as is the transit of such narcotics. Medical preparations of opium and coca
leaves (extracts, tinctures) must be made up by Greek pharmacists.
Article 2. The Ministry of Finance shall be responsible for the purchase of the said
products according to the requirements of the State, after their purity has been tested in
accordance with the Greek Pharmacopoeia 11.
Article 3. The total annual production of Greek opium shall be notified by the inspectors
to the Ministry of Finance, which, after having tested the drug in accordance with the provi-
sions of the Greek Pharmacopoeia, shall purchase it, if the price is a fair one. Otherwise the
Ministry shall hold a public auction for the sale of the opium. If the percentage of morphine
is in excess of that laid down in the Greek Pharmacopoeia, the price of the opium shall be
fixed with due reference to such excess amount. All things being equal, the State shall
give preference to Greek opium and Greek products of opium and coca leaves.
Article 4. Greek pharmacists shall alone be entitled to obtain the said products from the
chemical laboratories of the Ministry of Finance. The annual quantity required by each
pharmacist shall be fixed by the Supreme Health Council and shall be retailed as required.
Every pharmacist shall be provided with a special book in which the amounts shall be entered
as they are purchased.
Article 5. The balance of any native opium may be exported abroad by permission ot
the Ministry of Health, which shall be informed of the factory or firm to which it is to be
consigned. Export details will be fixed by Presidential decree.
Annex 3.
DRAFT REPORT BY SUB-COMMITTEE F
on the Enquiries concerning the Legitimate Requirements in Opium
and its Derivatives carried out by the Health Committee at the Request
of the Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium.
Presented by Dr. Carriers (Switzerland).
The Conference set up a special Sub-Committee, composed of medical, pharmaceutical
and statistical experts, "to consider the report of the Health Committee of the League of
Nations regarding the medical requirements in narcotics, and all other information or docu-
ments which have been collected by the Preparatory Committee, or may be placed at the
disposal of the Sub-Committee?.
This Committee carefully considered the report submitted to it, and has instructed
me to report on the matter to the First Committee. But, before doing so, it seems to me that
it would be useful to give a brief account of the problem.


The Advisory Committee on the Traffic in Opium was of opinion that in order to provide
a reliable basis for the study of the limitation of the production of narcotics, it was essential,
first of all to know what were the amounts of these products necessary to satisfy the legiti-
mate needs of the worid A Mixed Commission, composed of members of this Committee and
of the Health Committee of the League of Nations, was instructed to examine this problem,
as a LrisX data in the possession of the Opium Section of the League of Nations
Having first of all established what the term "medical and scientificJ??"SHhese?Tequire-
understood to mean, the Mixed Sub-Committee thought it was just fled in fixing^?e s e require
ments calculated in terms of raw opium at 10 per cent of morphine, at the round figure of
600 The'MbSd Sub-Committee?s report having been submitted to the Health Committee the
considered that the figure of 600 milligrammes was too high and reduced it to 450 m
- *???
information. ? . deference to this desire, endeavoured to complete the documen-
tatan
hospitals and by sicknessinsurance funds. The pro _
examination by an expert in this , studied these data show a remarkable con-
fessor Knaffl-Lenz was able to form a " , milligrammes of raw opium per head
cordance and very nearly of on the
dpt vear. This concoidanc6 tenets to -iio * p tv, p TTpalfli Coirirnittcc
data furnished by the various .^y rn explained Its point of view in a report
therefore, believed it was justified in an p g?, Committee This report was submitted
srssrsis amfaa *"??? - ??* -
the following recommendations .
T . ? CuTo.rnmmittee of the International Opium set up to examine t c
report of the Health Committee of the League of Nations regarding the legitima e nee s
 f might be fixed at the round figure of 45 milli-
grammes of raw opium at 10 per cent of morphine per head per year .
assistance, it can only be applied to reduction of
tSjafESwass
in each individual country.
The Sub-Committee would, moreover, point out :
That the figure of 45 milligrammes only' very Ae
ITS BBSSSSSSS '&>.<?
u ?" a zi&i. m -B-.-s ssssk
sss, as? -mj - ? ?? "?
The Health Committee?s report also contains the>
in cocaine. It should be pointed out ta , sine ori +n an on that of opium and opiates.
justifies down as the legitimate requirements-in
to the figure of 7 milligrammes but qualified its agreement by tne
above regarding opium and its derivatives. (sig ? rf) C areieE,
Chairman and Rapporteur .


Annex 4
DEFINITIONS OF COCA LEAVES AND COCAINE.
Proposals submitted to Sub-Committee F by the Committee of Experts appointed
for this Purpose.
Chapter I. Definitions.
coca leaves is understood :
The leaves of Erythroxylon coca, Lamarck, and the Erythroxylon novogranatense (Morris)
Hieronymus, of the family of Erythroxylaceee, and the leaves of other vegetable species of this
genus from which it may be found possible to extract cocaine either directly or by chemical
transformation.
Any other vegetable raw material which may serve for the preparation of cocaine will
be put in the same position as coca leaves.
cocaine is understood :
Methyl-benzoyl lasvo-ecgonine (alpha D 20 i ?l6 4) of which the formula is
C l 7 H 21 N0 4 .
The Sub-Committee proposes that the following new paragraph be added to Article 14,
Chapter III:
To crude cocaine, to laevo-ecgonine considered as raw material, and to all the
other products derived from laevo-ecgonine which might serve industrially for its recovery.
The Sub-Committee proposes to consider later the other paragraphs of Article 14.
Annex
PROPOSALS BY THE POLISH DELEGATION CONCERNING PARTS I AND II OF
ANNEX I TO THE REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE
TRAFFIC IN OPIUM.
Geneva, December Bth, 1024.
Sir,
In conformity with instructions received from my Government, I have the honour to
transmit to you, on behalf of the Polish delegation, the following proposals concerning Parts I
and II of Annex 1 to the report of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium (Document
A.32.1924.X1).
 1 (a). The Polish Government draws the attention of the Conference to the fact
that an estimate, as regards manufacture, of the quantities of raw opium to be imported annually
for medical and scientific purposes which does not take into consideration the quantities
required for the manufacture of all other derivatives of opium used in medical practice in
addition to those enumerated in  1 would be very incomplete and quite insufficient ; in
the first place, there is the question of the manufacture of codeine, which might be effectively
employed to combat the use of morphine and to prevent morphinomania. It is to be regretted
that the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium has omitted to consider the question of
codeine in its enquiries, in spite of the request made by the Mixed Sub-Committee of the Health
Committee and the Advisory Committee (Annex 5, Resolution 1, page 23). I should point
out that the Polish Ministry of Public Health has communicated its views on this subject
in its letter of March 27th, 1923, No. 2725/23, which was sent to the Secretary-General of
the League of Nations through the Polish delegation accredited to the League of Nations.
If, in estimating the quantities of raw opium to be imported annually, we neglect the
quantities required for the manufacture of codeine, the consumption of which in Poland is
thrice (and in the Sickness Insurance Office at Warsaw even ten times) as great as that of
morphine, we shall be obliged to limit the consumption of codeine. This would result in an
increase of the consumption of morphine, a contingency which we desire to avoid at any cost.
The Polish Government therefore requests that codeine and its salts should be included
in the text of  1 of Part I among the products enumerated.
( b ). Being of opinion that heroin is an extremely dangerous drug and that, according
to the opinion of the medical faculties of the Polish universities and the whole medical pro-
fession in Poland, represented by the Supreme Medical Council of Poland, this drug may
without difficulty be replaced in therapeutics by other and less harmful derivatives of opium,
The Polish Government requests the immediate suppression of the manufacture and
distribution of heroin and proposes that the words, ?(d) heroin, its salts and preparations
containing heroin?, should be omitted from  1.
3- Being of opinion that the legitimate interests of the consuming countries, which
have to bear the entire burden of the abusive use of narcotics, should be duly represented and
defended in the Permanent Central Board of Experts, the Polish Government is unable to
agree to the creation of this new organ unless the experts representing the consuming


countries and the producing countries are equally represented thereon, in conformity
with the preliminary agreement reached by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and
the Health Committee of the League of Nations,
And proposes that the text of  3 should be amended to this effect.
Sc States which are parties to the Convention should not, particularly after the
introduction of a complete and universal system of import certificates in conformity witn tne
modifications proposed in Part II of Annex 1, be placed under any restrictions as regards
their right to issue import licences for raw materials and manufactured products destmec
for medical and scientific use for the needs of their population and for exportation, provided
of course, that they strictly fulfil the duties which the introduction of the system of import
certificates imposes on them. It would therefore be superfluous to endow the Peimanem
Central Board with the powers provided for in  5. .
However, the Polish Government will not raise any objection provided its proposal regard-
ing the composition of the Permanent Central Board mentioned in  3 is accepted, and the
Central Board does not begin to take the steps provided for in  5 until three years af.ei . r
enters on its duties, for the Polish Government feels that only at the end of three yeais could
the statistical data to be furnished to the Central Board under the provisions of  4 of Part
be regarded as sufficiently stable to serve as a basis for an accurate estimate.
Nor would the Polish Government be able to agree to the introduction of a new term,
?reasonable needs?, in the text of the new agreement or the new convention unless its true
signification was strictly defined, particularly in view of the fact that in 0 7, Xii ,
Part II (Annex 1) this same term is employed along with the words medical and scie t -
On comparing the texts of 5 of Part 1 ana 7, XIII, of Part 11, 2P lc fand
?reasonable requirements? would seem to mean any requirements apart from medical
scientific requirements in narcotics in other words, the abusive use of narco ics. ?
The Polish Government therefore requests that the words ?reasonable requiremen s ,
in the text of this paragraph be replaced by the words ?medical and
The Polish Government also thinks that it would be desirable, in older to avoid all nv
understandings, to omit in the text of 5 the following words '?climatic
and all other factors which appear to the Board to be relevant as well as any other specia
circumstances which the said country will be at liberty to submit to the Boaic .
 6. The Polish Government is unable to agree to the provisions ini ,
as it'does not see why exporting countries should be given the right, onAheu ?
to take up the question of increasing the quantities of narcotics to be exported to y g
country in excess of the amounts estimated by the Permanent Central Board of Expeits.
? g 7 (in) _ The Polish Government proposes the following amendment :
?Instead of;
? ? Unless a copy of the export licence accompanies the consignment, the Govern-
ment . . .? read:
??A copy of the export licence must accompany the consignment, and the Government ...
 7 (V). The Polish Government is of opinion that ecgonine should be included in
the definition.
 7 (VIII). The Polish Government proposes an amendment similar to that pro-
posed for  7 (HI).
s 7 (X) The Polish Government is unable to accept the provisions of  7 (X) as it
is of opinion that one country cannot exercise control over the external trade of ano c.
country without infringing the principle of the sovereignty and of 1 n
control in question could only be exercised, in case of necessity, by an international organ,
U " The MS? Government is of opinion that, if the amendments which it has proposed to the
text if | 7 (III) and  7 (Lll) are adopted, the provisions of  7 (X) will become unnecessary.
s 7 (XIII) With reference to the proposal to amend  5 (I), and for the reasons
set ou/above, the Polish Government requests that the word ?reasonable may be omitted
from the text of  7 (XIII).
The Polish Government is in favour of all the proposals c ont aine d 1 n lut i o nS ; 1 ?
111, IV, V and VI, adopted by the Mixed Sub-Committee of the Health Committee t
Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium (Annex 5).
The Polish Government proposes that the text of Resolution VI should be amplified as
follows : .
?The Secretariat of the League of Nations shall periodically communicate these
lists to all States parties to the present Convention.
I am authorised to state that the Senate of the Free City of Danzig is in agreement with
the above suggestions. Dr . w. Chodzko,
Delegate of Poland and Danzig.


DRAFT REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE F. 1
Rapporteur : Professor Perrot.
Sub-Committee F received instructions from the plenary meeting of the Second Opium
Conference to examine a number of points mainly bearing upon the definitions contained more
particularly in Chapters I and 111 of the Suggestions submitted by the United States of America
and upon the questions raised by the application of the provisions of the Convention to the
various toxic substances under discussion, including both those already known and those
which science might discover possessing similar properties.
The Sub-Committee took as a basis of its investigations the text of the International
Hague Convention, examining in respect of each article submitted to its consideration the
modifications or additions proposed by the various delegations.
i. Legitimate Requirements as regards Opium, Coca Leaves and their Alkaloids.
This question was the subject of a special report by the Chairman of the Sub-Committee,
which has already been distributed to Sub-Committees A, B, C and D, and to which there
is no reason to revert here. 2
2. Codeine.
Since codeine was considered capable of being used in the manufacture of dangerous drugs,
and in order more particularly to facilitate the preparation of statistics of the manufactuie
and utilisation of opium for medical and scientific purposes, the delegate of the United States
asked that this alkaloid should be included among the substances covered by the laws and
regulations of the Convention. It was agreed, after a discussion, that codeine was a derivative
of morphine and that its properties prohibited it from being either medically or scientifically
reckoned among narcotics, but that, as dangerous substances with trade names similar to
codeine (eucodil, dicodide) were, like codeine products obtained from morphine, it was desirable
to define what was to be understood by derivatives and to draft paragraph {e) of Article 14
in such form that no new product possessing habit-forming narcotic properties might either
now or in the future be excluded from the provisions of the Convention.
3. Definitions.
Discussion on this point was confined to the technical import of the terms employed. No
alterations were made which weakened the definitions of the International Hague Convention
(Chapter III), but it was decided to make the addition proposed by the American delegation
to Article 14. Ecgonine, which is, so to speak, a secondary raw material in the manufacture
of cocaine, cannot possibly be confused with any substance under this name, but it seemed
to all the delegates that this substance must necessarily come under the provisions adopted
for the manufacture and traffic in noxious drugs.
The Committee finally adopted the following definitions, which it had been asked to
give by the plenary meeting :
coca leaves is understood :
The leaves of Erythroxylon coca, Lamarck, and the Erythroxylon novo gran atense
(Morris) Hieronymus, and their varieties of the family of Erythroxylaceas and the
leaves of other species of this genus from which it may be found possible to extract
cocaine either directly or by chemical transformation.
Any other vegetable raw material which may serve for the preparation of cocaine
will be put in the same position as coca leaves.
By cocaine is understood ;
Methyl-benzoyl lawo-ecgonine (D.20 0 i64 in 20 per cent solution of
chloroform) of which the formula is C l 7 H 21 N0 4 .
The Sub-Committee observes that the scientific definition accompanied by formula the
and the rotatory power quite certainly equally applies to synthetic cocaine.
4. Article 14.
As regards the examination of this extremely important article, in respect of which Sub-
Committee F had been furnished with numerous documents, the Sub-Committee decided
1 For final text of his report sec the verbatim record of the plenary meetings of the Second
Conference (Annex 26). .
2 For text of his report see the verbatim record of the plenary meetings of the Second Conference
(Annex 25).


to entrust the prepa.ra.tory work to a. small Committee of specially appointed experts,
specifying, of course, that all the delegates of Sub-Committee F might be present at its
qq ie Rapporteur of this Expert Committee was requested to submit to Sub-Committee F,
as soon as he could, as clear a statement as possible of the views of the different delegates,
showing the solutions favoured more or less unanimously by the members entrustec. vit tus
mlSS efore starting the actual discussion of Article 14, Sub-Committee F reverting to the
word ?derivatives?' which the American delegation had added to most of the articles [e.g.,
Articles Q 10 11, 12, 13 and paragraph 1 of Article 14), decided to reject the insertion of uis
word in the articles of the Convention, since, if the expression were not limited exclusively
to the dangerous derivatives aimed at by the Convention whicn are already known 01 may
be discovered, this expression would constitute in the case of some of these derivatives c
serious technical error. By allowing this word to stand, we should end by J*
the scope of these provisions of the Convention products which have a totally different me .
cinal effect, or which are in any case not dangerous in the sense of those diugs we aic
the Sub-Committee also asks those responsible for drafting the
American plan to add the word ?certain? in the third line of paragraph 1, supposing the Preamble
became an official document of the Convention, and to say ?that the use of opium and certain
opmm paragraph of Article 14, the Sub-Committee accepts the addition proposed
in the American draft of the words : distribution, delivery .
This paragraph will therefore run as follows :
?The Contracting Parties shall apply the laws and regulations respecting the> manu-
facture, import, sale, distribution, delivery or export of morphine, cocaine and tic
respective salts.?
The Sub-Committee draws the Drafting Committee's attention t0 , this .^evervkind
asks whether the word ?re-exportation" could not be introduced m kmd
of transaction, including return to the country of origin, in case of non-acceptance, foi ,
may S b ub P paragmph (), referring to medicinal opium, is unchanged, but the Committee inserts
in (b) the definition of crude cocaine and eegomne as follows :
?To crude cocaine, to Uvo-ecgonine (Alpha) D.20 = 44 in 5 P er cent
of water of which the formula is C,H?O s NH.O, considered as raw material, and
to all the other products derived from lievo-ecgonine which might serve industrially
for its recovery?. . , , , rA
The Sub-Committee then proceeded to consider the other paragiaphs of Anew 4-
The old paragraph {b), which now becomes (c). and which deals with offiemail
gave rise to a lively discussion and numerous proposals. Some countries P^ulaxly ' ra ,
observed that, while they associated themselves unreservedly with the of se -
measures with a view to overcoming the drug habit and ds mischev ous an.Practice
it was at the same time necessary not to hamper the perfectly hones p ? "
of pharmacy, both for domestic purposes within the country and in t o , e-;P r a ial
From the very beginning of the discussion, many delegates suggested that a special
paragraph relating to should be added at the end of this article, and this
P  in Wthtlls Sw y atTon!l e e d adoption of the text of the Hague Convention was decided on
without modification.
The text is as follows :
?(c) To all preparations (officinal and non-officinal including the so-called an i-
opium remedies) containing more than 0.2 per cent of morphine or moie than . p -
of cocaine?.
The Sub-Committee considered that the Hague Convention having served since 1912 to
establish the present practice, which is already consecrated by use, no new fact could justify the
alteration of this wording. . . ,
Paragraph (d). which was formerly Ic), refers to heroin, and the SdpCommitteedecided
unanimously with the abstention of the United States of America, not compeltent
to suppress this alkaloid. Only on the recommendation of a medical ejiqmry throng tth
whole world could its entire suppression be decided upon Nevertheless, impressed by ?
terrible ravages of the heroin habit, especially in the United States the Sub-
Committee, in contrast to the stipulations of the previous article as regards morphine and coc ,
adopted the suppression of the percentage, which means, in practice, that it is
sell to the public any preparation containing even the smallest quantity of heroin without
a me Fo? thifreasom n some of the delegates found it necessary to observe that they were not
empowered to accept this modification and that, although they associated themselves per
sonally with the high motives which inspired the change, they made a res ?'? t ?"4 4 r ?cotic
their Governments? acceptance of this suppression of the tolerance extended to other narcotic
At the same time, many of the delegates considered that it would be well to
to the reduction, and then, no doubt, to the removal of heroin from therapeutics r 8
the world.


With regard to the wording of the paragraph, the German delegate justly obseived that
the word ?heroin? could not stand by itself in the text of the Convention since it was the
property of a commercial firm and had not come into public use ; it was therefore desirable
to refer to this product by its chemical name of diacetylmorphine, putting m brackets the
names [diamorphine, heroin] by which it is still known in commerce.
The following is the text of paragraph (c), now paragraph [d) :
?To diacetyl morphine, [ diamorphine , heroin ], its salts and preparations .
Sub-Committee F drew the attention of the Drafting Committee to the need of substi-
tuting ?diacetylmorphine? for heroin in all the articles in which the term is used. .
Article {e) formerly [d), the final aim of which is to bring within the Convention all deri-
vatives other than those already mentioned and, indeed, all products which might, m the
future, be classed among narcotics of the nature of morphine, cocaine and their salts, was only
discussed in order to establish in what way the noxious effects of this possible new derivative
would be officially ascertained, and finally Sub-Committee F adopted a method which it
submits for the approval of the plenary Conference ;
?To any new derivative of morphine or cocaine, any other alkaloid of opium or
the coca leaf, and any other narcotic drug, which may be declared in the manner following
to be liable to similar abuse and productive of like ill-effects :
?The existence of these ill-effects and abuses shall be declared by the International
Health Office, after consultation with the Health Committee of the League of Nations.
In the event of such a declaration, the Health Committee of the League of Nations shall
communicate it to the Council of the League, which shall inform the Governments and
recommend their acceptance of it.
?Any Contracting Party accepting the decision shall notify its acceptance to the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations and, as soon as ten Powers have done so, the
product in question shall be regarded as included in the Convention, so far as such Con-
tracting Parties are concerned.?
The Sub-Committee then proceeded to examine the various draft texts of exemption
proposed by different members. _ .
Objections were raised in particular by the delegate for Spain, who wished to introduce
by name the exempted preparations and even, if possible, to have lists drawn up showing the
products which would or would not be affected by the Convention, \arious notes weic,
furthermore, referred to the Sub-Committee, but it would take too long to enumerate them
in this report.
Summarising, the Committee thought that the text of the Convention should not be
overburdened and that, as usage differed in the various countries, it would be extremely
difficult to establish limitative lists.
Lastly, the initial proposal of the Belgian delegate allowing for the exemption of prepa-
rations from which, by reason of their medicinal and complex composition, the narcotic
alkaloids in question could not be industrially recovered, and which could not lead to the
formation of dangerous habits.
The following is the text of this proposal ;
?The Council of the League may, in accordance with the procedure provided in
paragraph (c) above, communicate to the Contracting Powers a list or lists of preparations
containing morphine or cocaine which cannot give rise to the drug habit on account of
the medicaments with which these narcotics are compounded and which preclude the
recovery of the narcotics, and those preparations will then be regarded as exempted from
this article.?
Finally, the delegates for France and Belgium, supporting a wish expressed in the note
from the International Pharmaceutical Federation, proposed to exempt from a compulsory
medical prescription certain medicines for urgent use (Dover powder, Sydenham laudanum,
tincture of opium) irrespective of their strength, provided that the quantity supplied on a
single occasion does not exceed 50 centigrammes of officinal opium.
Both delegates, who claim more than twenty years? experience as Inspectors of Pharma-
cies, urged the adoption of their proposal, which, moreover, does not represent any real danger
to public health. On the contrary, it is a question of enabling a sick person cruelly attacked
by a painful affection to obtain immediate relief before the arrival of a doctor.
In spite of the opposition of some of the members, particularly the delegates for the Domi-
nican Republic and the British Empire, the Sub-Committee adopted the following text by
seven votes to four, with three abstentions :
?The following opiated officinal preparations may be delivered to the_ public, on the
responsibility of the chemist, without a medical prescription and as medicines for urgent
use, but only in maximum doses corresponding to 50 centigrammes of officinal opium
and subject to the book-keeping regulations with regard to narcotics ; tincture of opium,
Dover powder and Sydenham laudanum.?
Lastly, in consequence of remarks made by its members during the reading of the various
articles of the Convention, the Sub-Committee wishes to draw the attention of the Drafting
Committee of the future Convention to the advisability of defining and employing identical
terms, particularly in the repetition of the words ?sale, distribution, cession, delivery?, employed
in various articles, such as Articles 9, 10, 10 b, 11 and 14.
The Sub-Committee will next proceed to consider the question of Indian hemp and of its
preparation and will submit a special report on this subject.


NOTE FROM THE BRITISH DELEGATION REGARDING CERTAIN PROPOSED
ADDITIONS TO ARTICLE 14.
(I ) The British delegation submits the attached revised text in substitution for the
new draft of paragraph {e) of Article 14.
?j.a st itr'si ioiasst
ssstiasssr. war5c?......... - -
tllC The^BritEh^ ?g?~
it clear whether acceptance of the decisioi derivative alkaloid or drug is regarded as
tory Powers is to be necessary e  rc ~, regarded as included when a certain number
sksms stsstasssa ssx ...
suggests that the latter course should be adopted.
with of the s<mpe
of the Convention (see Meeting)? t d above and are made for the same
The alterations are in confoimity witn tnose suggcbicu
reasons.
New Draft of Paragraph (e) to Article 14.
(This draft shows the alterations from the original text ; words to be omitted are
composed in small type, words to be added are in italics.)
coca Teah n Ld
be liable to similar abuse and productive oi like dl-enects . derivative, alkaloid or
The existence of such ill-effects and abus r -o<me of Nations, after consul tation with
drug shall may be declared by the Health Commiue. c, 6 ? 1 c Opium Advisory Committee
the International Health Office a,ter that may be submitted to them.
fnl"
ssl as: cswsasSas - -i-.-
Secretary-General of the League, and as * (/, , ? Convention as between the Con-
derivative, alkaloid or drug shall be deemec o " acce pt ance may be made conditional
tractins Powers which have notified their acceptance lhe acceptance ?ay
TtZ acceptance of the declaration by any other Contrading Power or Powers.
Amended Text of Paragraph concerning the Office international d'Hygilne
[see Minutes of Ninth Meeting).
(The alterations from the present text are shown in all cases : words to be omitted are
composed in small type, words to be added are in italics).
The Council oi the League may, on the ?? *
after consultation with the international ractin ffi p ower f? a list or lists of after consideration
in paragraph {e) above, communicate to g u P alth Committee of the League and any
of the views of the Opium Advisory dle that a specified preparation containing
other representations that may be submitted the drug habit on account of the medica-
morphine or cocaine is one which or cocaine is compounded
ments with which these narcotics are on tig .^ at com p os ition is such as to preclude
with substances which make abuse *mposstb Contracting Power shall then be at liberty to regard
the * recovery of the narcotics and any this article,
the preparation may then be regarded as exemp


DRAFT REPORT CONCERNING INDIAN HEMP.
Rapporteur : Professor Perrot (France).
Sub-Committee F, to which the full Conference had submitted the question of Indian
hemp and various preparations derived from it, known under the names of hashish, chira,
char as, etc., has considered the reports of the delegates for Egypt and Turkey.
The abuse of these preparations (which are chewed or eaten) and the smoking of the
drug are specially dangerous, since their immoderate use due to addiction leads to troubles
at least as serious as those caused in similar conditions by the use of opium and its derivatives.
Moreover, certain preparations now frequently contain opium and highly toxic substances,
such as nux vomica, datura, cantharides, etc.
A number of Governments have already brought Indian hemp and preparations of Indian
hemp under the regulations for dangerous drugs, and have in this way restricted traffic in
these substances exclusively to medical and scientific requirements. The quantity required
for these latter purposes would appear to represent only a very small part of the total output.
The actual proportion can only be accurately determined by statistics.
Sub-Committee F is of the opinion that the campaign against these narcotic products
must be organised on international lines.
It should, however, be remembered that all derivatives of hemp are capable of providing,
in addition to products injurious to public health, fibres which can be used in industry (cloth,
cordage, matting, etc.), and that the oil-seeds may also be employed for domestic purposes.
That being the case, it would not appear to be an easy matter to limit the amount grown.
An effort, should, however, be made to adopt drastic measures, with a view to prohibiting
the growing of specially poisonous species and completely abolishing the traffic in the resin.
While effective practical measures could apparently be taken fairly easily in highly
developed countries, this is not the case as regards Central Africa and Central Asia.
The growing of Indian hemp is prohibited by the Ottoman Government and the Govern-
ments of Egypt, Greece and a few other countries, while the protecting Powers have issued
severe measures in Africa to achieve the same result, measures the enforcement of which
will serve as a test of their administrative capacity and their influence on the natives in the
centre and south of the continent.
The Sub-Committee appointed a Committee of Experts to examine the question and to
submit proposals. The latter thought that it was necessary to distinguish three points of
view :
1. The establishment of a definition of Indian hemp;
2. The establishment of a distinction between the raw material and the resin
extracted by various processes, the latter constituting the more dangerous drug ;
3. The question of restricting its use to medical and scientific needs.
After discussion and after consideration of the observations of the delegates of Great
Britain and India, the following definition, which is in conformity with the terms used in the
British Pharmacopoeia, was adopted, together with an addition concerning various appella-
tions in use in the different countries.
"Indian hemp? is understood to mean
"The flowering or fecundated tops of the female plant of Cannabis saliva, L., from
which the resin has not been extracted, under whatever denomination it is employed in
commerce.?
The question of the raw resin ( charas) gave rise to a long discussion, and the Sub-Com-
mittee, on being consulted, decided in principle that it would be well to recommend that all traffic
in it should be prohibited as well as traffic in all preparations of which it forms the basis. The
Sub-Committee considered that it was impossible to designate them all by reason of the
numerous and varied names by which they are known in the different countries, and
decided merely to designate them as a whole, mentioning some of the best known among
them : hashish (Arabian and Egyptian), esrar (Turkish), chira (Tunisian) and diamba
(Brazilian).
The Rapporteur observed that, as this raw resin and the preparations derived therefrom
were not susceptible of any medical usage, there was no reason why the proposal should not
be adopted. The Sub-Committee, however, desired to reserve the question of possible medical
utilisation and in the end adopted the following text ;
?6. The use of Indian hemp and the preparations derived therefrom may only be
authorised for medical and scientific purposes. The raw resin (charas), however, which
is extracted from the female tops of the Cannabis saliva, L., together with the various
preparations (hashish, chira, esrar, diamba, &c.) of which it forms the basis, not being
at present utilised for medical purposes and only being susceptible of utilisation for
harmful purposes, in the same manner as other narcotics, may not be produced, sold,
traded in, &c., under any circumstances whatsoever.?


This resolution was adopted unanimously, three delegates abstaining from voting. The
British delegation, although anxious that all drugs susceptible of being drugs of addiction
should be subiected to the strictest measures of national and international control, was unable
without giving the matter more careful consideration, to accept the conclusions contained
in paragraph 6.
Appendix.
INDIAN HEMP.
Note by the Indian Delegation.
The Government of India are in full sympathy with the proposal to bring the interna-
fional traffic in the drug Indian hemp under international control. Even before the matter
was in' the recent questionnaire on the subject circulated by the Advisory Commdtee,
the Government of India had already taken various steps with a view to examining and strength
pnine where necessary, the strict control of this traffic which already exists m India. Iney
had asked the maritime Provincial Governments, within whose competence the matter part y
lies to ensure a very dose scrutiny of all applications for export permits, and had subsequently
in March 1924, addressed all the Provincial Governments m the matter of bringing the drugs
? n 1 of delegation had been added by the Conference to its
agenda and had been considered by Sub-Committee F, the Indian delegation, after the adjourn-
ment telegraphed to X Government of India to ascertain to what extent they are likely
to find it possible in practice to accept the methods of control suggested by that Sub-Commit|eu
The reolv of the Government of India has now been received. They state that they
would be able to co-operate by controlling export on the import certificate system > m 1115
Tayl export would be P confinel to cases covered by import certificates issued by the Govern-
mCn The Government?)! lndia have not yet had time to consult Provincial Governments and the
Governments of the Indian States on the further question of controlling, m the manner sug-
bv Sub-Committee F, the production and sale and use oy these drugs within the holders
of India itself The control already exercised by the Provincial Governments over tle pro-
of India itselt | is of a ver y stringent nature. Charas is not prepared
irOndia ; import is controlled by licence The production
ot eania is prohibited, except in small areas the product of which is controlled by the excise
authorities Government of India, however, at the present stage of their examination
o? the subiect point out various serious difficulties of an administrative order in confining
the use tf hemp drugs to medical and scientific purposes ; for example there are social and
religious customs which naturally have to be considered, and there is the doubt whether the
total prohibition of drugs easily prepared from a wild-growing plant could m practice be ma .
effective. th ese reasons , the Indian delegation is glacl to be able tc [ Motion
of its Government in limiting the export of Indian hemp to the needs of the importing countries
as cerdfed by their Governments by means of the import certificate system ; but would
be unable in existing circumstances, to accept a proposal that the articles of the Convention
u u ? \ full pvfent of the suggestions put forward by Sub-Committee F, mso fax
January 23rd, 1925.
Annex 9.
NOTE BY THE BELGIAN DELEGATION
Before Committee F finally breaks up, I should like to make a statement. Thy whole
Conference, "rSub-ComnLee of Experts in particular. restncted m their
work by the question of competence. Permission must, however, be given to a yiegatio
to express in the interests of future discussion those points an acceptance of which it would
like to obtain, and which it was only prevented from upholding by the desire to a
unnecessary discussion.
1. In the draft which it submitted to the Conference, the Belgian delegation formulated
the provisions of Article 14 regarding the supply of officinal preparations .
?The provisions of Article 14 shall apply to all preparations containing more than 0.05
gramme of morphine or more than 0.025 gramme of cocaine.


By this means, as it has, moreover, explained, the Belgian delegation desired to serve
the interests of pharmacy and to forbid the supply of narcotics without a medical prescription
in quantities varying according to the quantity or weight of the preparation.
The Belgian delegation was unable to uphold its proposal in face of the opposition of its
colleagues, who maintained that :
"The provisions of 1912 have not given rise to abuse and, furthermore, it is difficult
to depart from figures which have served as the basis of important commercial customs.?'
It nevertheless remains, in our opinion, desirable that Article 14 should fix the limit of
narcotics in terms of absolute weight.
2. The Fixing of the Opium Figure.
During the discussion of this first point on our agenda, the Sub-Committee established
the difficulty of determining this figure owing to insufficient information concerning the con-
sumption of codeine. At our last meeting we adopted the following recommendation, on the
proposal of the French delegation :
"In order to exercise as strict a control as possible over the manufacture of the nar-
cotic alkaloids of opium and the coca leaf, the Contracting Parties undertake to adopt
all possible measures enabling them to ascertain the quantity of these alkaloids trans-
formed into non-narcotic derivatives.?
The Belgian delegation sought in vain to obtain the addition of: "and their international
distribution.?
this was designed to meet the case of narcotics transformed into products not included
in the Convention.
the Belgian delegation considers that information as to the international distribution
of these products, while it would constitute no considerable burden upon either manufacturers
or the agents of internal control, would undoubtedly be useful for purposes of statistics in
each country and for the international control of the traffic in drugs.
3. One last point involves the question of competence. It is none the less of interest.
It refers to the supply of hypodermic syringes.
It is unnecessary to develop this proposal. Without syringes, -there can be no injections
and no addicts to morphine or heroin.
As M. Daladier (France) emphasised in his speech on January 21st: "The hypodermic
syringe is a much greater danger than the opium smoker?s pipe?.
It would be expedient to consider whether the supply of hypodermic syringes should not,
like the injected medicament, be made conditional upon a medical prescription.
Annex 10.
THE CONSUMPTION OF DANGEROUS DRUGS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
Memorandum submitted by the British Delegation
Part I. RESULTS OF AN INVESTIGATION INTO USE OF DANGEROUS DRUGS
IN MEDICAL PRACTICE IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
I. Consumption of Dangerous Drugs in General Medical Practice.
A. Consumption under National Health Insurance Scheme.
The organisation of the National Health Insurance Acts has been utilised to undertake
an investigation into the amounts of dangerous drugs consumed by persons insured under the
Acts in Great Britain. The persons who receive medical treatment under the National Health
Insurance Scheme may be roughly described as all manual workers, male and female, of the
age of 16 and over, and other employees of that age whose salary is less than 250 a year ;
they number about one-half of the whole population over sixteen. The insurance doctors
are general practitioners who have entered into an agreement with the local Insurance Com-
mittee to treat insured persons. Every insured person is entitled to obtain medical treatment
from some insurance doctor whom he has selected within the area within which he resides,
but he may not obtain treatment concurrently from more than one doctor.


Opium
In grains.
Codeine 1
0.0160
Morphine
O.1377
Cocaine
0.0070
Heroin
0-0549
0.7227
?
O.H34
O.OIOO
0.0061
O.OIoD
0.08ll
1.1308
0.0062
0.1315
68.77
In milligrammes
1.04
8.94
0-45
0.65
3-56
?
7-36
1.21
5-27
Wales
0.40
8-54
0.40
The treatment provided consists of the ordinary sickness and accident treatment which
might be expected from a general medical practitioner together with the provision of
medicines and certain appliances ; it does not include treatment in respect of confinements
or treatment requiring the services of a specialist, or dental treatment, or hospital treatment.
For the most part, the medicines are provided by means of prescriptions obtained by the
insured person from his own insurance doctor and dispensed by an authorised insurance
chemist. These prescriptions are examined and priced by special bureaux, one in each of tire
fifteen administrative areas into which the country is divided for this purpose, and payment
for the medicine dispensed is subsequently made to the chemist by the local Insurance Com-
mittee. The medicines dispensed are of course supplemented, to a certain extent, by mugs
personally administered by the doctors.
(a) Investigations of dangerous drugs prescribed by insurance doctors.
With a view to estimating the total amounts of dangerous drugs prescribed by insurance
doctors, a careful analysis has been made of 1,215,834 prescriptions dispensed in England
and Wales during the months of June 1923 and January 1924, being one-sixth of the whole
number of prescriptions dispensed in each of those months. These prescriptions weie ta en
from each of the fifteen administrative areas into which the country is divided, in proportion
to the total number of prescriptions dispensed in each of these areas ; and they may be re-
garded as statistically representative of the whole number of prescriptions gi\ en during the two
months concerned. The two months of June and January were selected as being typical of
the summer and winter incidence of sickness, so as to eliminate, as far as possible, any special
factors of area or time of year. The number of prescriptions examined represents about 3 per
rent of the total number dispensed during the year.
The total amounts of dangerous drugs dispensed on these prescriptions have been care-
fullv extracted and from the figures so obtained there have been calculated the amounts
of each drug prescribed in a yelr per head of the insured population The amounts have
been calculated for each of the fifteen areas separately but ?hey
f w, -
f betwte P n therefore be attributed merely to local differences
" y 1 beeTmade in Scotland, in which the whole of
the prescriptions dispfnsed during the months of May 1922 and March 1923 were examined.
These two months were perhaps not so typical of the seasonal incidence of sickness but t t
kno reason to suppose that'an estimate of the year?s consumption based upon them will
he seriously inaccurate. The Scottish investigation includes drugs administered by doctors
as well as drugs prescribed by them, but no attempt was made to ascertain the use of codeine
or othef aMoids of o P ium y to which the Opium Convention does not apply. The totals
Se A wWcffollows shows the amounts of each of the drugs prescribed in a year per
insured person in England, Scotland and Wales (the Scottish figures, as noted above, including
also drugs personally administered by doctors).
Table A. Amounts prescribed per Insured Person.
(b) Drugs personally administered by doctors to insured persons.
With a view to completing the estimate of the drugs consu? \he
England and Wales, a further investigation was carried out of the amou employed
drugs personally administered to such persons by insurance docto . iceg tQ note P do y wn
during [he months oT April
SrstT
; h Ration,
1 The use of any other alkaloid or derivative of opium (dionine, cotarnine, etc.) wa. negligab


For this investigation, it was necessary (owing to the shortness of the time available) to choose
four spring and summer months, and, in order to allow for possible increase in the adminis-
tration of the drugs during the winter months, as well as for possible omissions by the
doctors who made the returns, the figures derived from the 191 returns received were
increased, on the advice of the Ministry of Health, by 50 per cent before being multiplied
by 3 to represent the whole year?s use of the drugs.
The total amounts of the drugs administered by the 191 doctors or partnerships of doctors
during the four months concerned were 734 grains of opium, 35 grains of codeine, 298 grains
of morphine, 143 grains of cocaine, and 11 grains of heroin. There was considerable divergence
between districts in the extent to which the drugs were administered, but throughout the
figures were very small. The figures for Wales (see Table B) were considerably greater than
for any one of the fourteen administrative areas in England.
Table B shows the estimated amount of each of the drugs administered per head of insured
persons in a year (as noted above, the Scottish figures of drugs administered are included in
Table A).
Table B. Amounts administered per Insured Person.
In grains.
Opium Codeine Morphine Cocaine Heroin
England 0.0048 0.0001 0.0020 0.0008 0.0001
Wales 0.0268 0.0025 0.0090 0.0065 0.0006
In milligrammes.
England 0.31 0.01 0.13 0.05 0.01
Wales 1.74 0.16 0.58 0.42 0.04
(c) Combined figures of drugs prescribed and administered to insured persons.
Table C, being the sum of Tables A and B, gives the total amount of each of the drugs
administered and prescribed per insured person in a year.
Table C. Amounts prescribed and administered per Insured Person.
In grains.
Opium Codeine Morphine Cocaine Heroin
England 1.0638 0.0161 0.1397 0.0078 0.0550
Scotland 0.7227
1 0.1134 0.0100 0.0186
Wales 1.1578 0.0087 0.1405
0.0126 0.0817
In milligrammes.
England 69.08 1.05 9.07 0.51 3.57
Scotland 46.93 1 7.36 0.65 1.21
Wales 75-17 0.56 9.12 0.82 5.31
B. Estimate of the Consumption of Dangerous Drugs in general medical practice in the whole
of Great Britain.
The total number of insured persons is about half the total population over the age of 16,
and the Ministry of Health has advised that it would be quite proper to assume that the amounts
of dangerous drugs used by general medical practitioners for the whole population are the
same per head as the amounts used for the insured population. The figures in Table C may
therefore be taken as representative of the whole population of the country of 16 years of
age and over ; the consumption of codeine per head in Scotland being assumed (in the absence
of ascertained figures) to be the same as in England.
The position of the population under 16 is on a different footing. The drugs are used
much less in the treatment of children and, though no direct data for forming an estimate of
the amounts so used are available, it would appear, from information furnished by general
medical practitioners of wide experience, that the following percentages of the drugs used
for the adult population may be regarded as a very rough estimate of the corresponding use
of the drugs for the population under sixteen years of age :
Opium 7 per cent. Cocaine 15 per cent.
Codeine 5 per cent. Heroin 2 per cent.
Morphine 3 per cent.
If these percentages are applied to the figures given in Table C, the use of the drugs per
head in the treatment of the population under 16 in general medical practice will be as shown
in Table D, which follows :
1 As mentioned above, no codeine figure was obtained for Scotland.


Table D. Amounts required per Person under 16.
In grains.
Opium Codeine Morphine Cocaine Heroin
Percentage of adult figure 7/o 5% 3/o I sl 0 2 U
England 0-0745 0.0008 0.0042 0.0012 0,0011
Scotland 0.0506 0.0008 0.0034 0.0015 0.0004
\y a j es 0.0810 0.0004 0.0042 0.0019 0.0016
In milligrammes
England 4-4 o-5 0.27 0.07 0.07
Scotland 3-20 0.05 0.22 0.10 0.03
Wales 5-26 0.03 0.27 0.12 0.10
On the basis of the percentages in Tables C and D, the following estimate may be made
of the total use of dangerous drugs in Great Britain in general medical practice.
Table E. Total Amounts required in Great Britain for purposes of Doctors?
Prescriptions and Administration.
Population Opium Codeine Morphine Cocaine Heroin
lbs. ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs.
England 24,883,000 3,782 916 7,945 444 B*l2B
over 16
1:0,347,200 no 19 99 28
under 16
Total 35,230,200 3*892 935 8,044 472 3T54
Scotland 3*344*500 345 12 3 86 7 76 142
over 16
r,538,000 11 3 12 5 1
under 16
Total 4,882,500 356 126 879 81 143
Wales 1,784,600 295 35 573 5* 333
over 16
871,900 10 1 8 4 3
under 16
Total 2,656,500 305 36 58i 55 336
Great Britain 42,769,200 4*553 I *97 9*5Q4 608 3*633
Requirements per head for
Great Britain as a whole,
all ages :
In grains 0.7452 0.0112 0.0972 0.0062 0.0372
In milligrammes 48-39 -73 6.31 0.40 2.42
It should be understood that these figures, besides excluding hospital and dental treat-
ment, do not include the medical treatment of confinement cases or treatment by specialists
when called in. Nor do they include the amounts of the drugs contained in preparations to
which the Regulations do not apply when bought direct from a chemist without a doctor?s
prescription ; the total volume of these is probably considerable.
11. Consumption of Dangerous Drugs in Hospitals.
A. Voluntary Hospitals.
The Home Office has obtained figures of the consumption of dangerous drugs by a number
of hospitals for the years 1922 and 1923* with a view to arriving at an estimate of the total
hospital consumption of the drugs. . . . , ~ ~
For the purpose of obtaining a unit of attendance on which to calculate the pioportion
T * . . - 1 1 3 rvollAYvi- no \ T&
of drugs used, one in-patient day has been selected, and two out-patient attendances have
been taken as the equivalent of one in-patient day. The latter assumption is purely arbi-
trary, but will not introduce any serious error into the calculations.
(i) London Hospitals.
The figures for 1922 cover nine general hospitals with medical schools and two general
hospitals without medical schools, and those for 1923 s * x general hospitals with medical
schools and one general hospital without


Table F. London General Hospitals.
Out- Units of Consumption of drugs per unit (in grains)
1022 In-patient patient atten- r . .
days attendances dance Opium Morphine Cocaine Heroin
Nine hospitals with , 0
medical schools. .. i,34> 02 4 2,571,698 2,625,873 0.11465 0.01840 0.02124 0.00313
Two hospitals with-
out medical schools 109,858 IQ3TH 161,414 0-00862 0.00732 Q-QISL3 gi oo 39_
Total 1922 1,449,882 2,674,809 2,787,287 0.10851 0-01775 0.02088 0.00313
1923
Six hospitals with A
medical schools.. . 907,463 1,680,244 1,747,585 0.13560 0.01540 0.03170 0.00236
One hospital with-
out medical school 40,002 62,073 7U3 8 o 0.00502 0.01870 0 ; 002 3 0
Total 1923 947,465 1,742,317 1,818,623 o.i 33 I 0.Q15 00 0.03120 0.00235
The table shows that a distinction between hospitals with and without medical schools
is of some importance. Apparently, where there is a medical school, the work done is generally
of a more serious nature, which results in a considerably larger expenditure per patient on
all items, including surgery and dispensary. Seeing that the large majority of the London
hospitals are without medical schools, the totals in the above table, if applied to all the general
hospitals in London, may result in an over-estimate. It is, however, perhaps as well to err
on this side. , , ,
Figures are also available for a few special hospitals. These include for 1922, one cancer
hospital, one throat and ear hospital, one consumption hospital and one heart disease hospital.
For 1923, only the cancer hospital and the consumption hospital have given figures.
Table G. London Special Hospitals.
Out-patient Units Consumption of drugs per unit
In-patient atten- of atten- (ingrains).
1922 days. dances. dance. Opium. Morphine. Cocaine. Heroin.
Four hospitals. ... 152,875 115.156 210,453 0.24793 0.04124 0.14540 0.00457
1923
Two hospitals 125,224 37-57 i44-9 - 1 54 8 9 0.03417 0.01617 0.00742
It would appear from the table that the use of the drugs in these hospitals is larger than
From the available statistics of attendance at the London hospitals, it may be estimated
very roughly that the general hospitals account for 3,526,000 in-patient days and 6,372,000
out-patient attendances, i.e., 6,712,000 units of attendance; and the special hospitals for
500 000 in-patient days and 400,000 out-patient attendances, i.e., 700,000 units of attendance
a total of 4,026,000 in-patient days and 6,772,000 out-patient attendances, i.e., 7,412,000 units
of attendance. , ... ni . j n
Applying to those figures the amounts used per unit in Tables F and G, the total consump-
tion of dangerous drugs in the hospitals of London during 1922 and 1923 wdl he as follows :
Table H. Amounts used London Hospitals.
Units of Opium. Morphine Cocaine Heroin,
attendance 1922 1923 1922 1923 1923 1922 1923
lbs. lbs. ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs.
General hospitals. 6,712,000 104 125 272 230 320 479 48 36
Special hospitals. ? 700,000 25 16 66 55 233 7
Xotal 7,412,000 129 141 338 285 553 55 55 48
kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos.
General hospitals. 6,712,000 47.3 5 6 -8 7-7 6 -5 9-* x 3-6 *-4
Special hospitals.. 700,000 11.4 7-3 I -9 T - 6 6 - 6
Total 7,412,000 58.7 64.1 9-6 8.1 15.7 14-3 T - 6 T -3
(ii) Provincial Hospitals.
Figures have been obtained from 18 provincial hospitals in 1922 and 12 in 1923, which
may be divided into three groups Southern, Northern and Scottish. The groups differ
considerably amongst themselves, but within broad limits there is a general similarity between
the individual hospitals composing each group. The summary of the figures available lor
these hospitals is given in Table J ;


No of
hos-
pit-
als
In-
patient
days
Out-
patient
atten-
dances
Units
of
atten-
dance
Consumption of drugs per
(in grains)
Mor-
Opium phine Cocaine
Unit
Heroin
1922
Southern
Northern... ?
Scottish
Total 1922.
. 10
. 6
2
610,628
87T535
441,740
555.374
1,167,804
336.867
888,315
1,455,437
610,173
0.03108
0.01824
O.OOllS
O.OIO48
O.OI224
0.00840
O.OI244
O.03709
0.06132
O.OOO92
0.00063
O.OOOII
. . l8
1,923,903
2,060,043
2,953,9 2 5
0.01858
O.OIO92
0.03468
0.00061
I 9 2 3
Southern
Northern
Scottish
Total 1923.
3
7
2
221,219
1,326,808
466,185
2,014,212
267,365
884,951
369,518
354>9 01
1,769*283
650,944
0.01620
0.01358
0.00084
0.00848
0.00996
0.01189
0.01626
0.02309
0.04471
0.00046
0.00018
0.00006
12
1,521,834
2,777,128
0.01092
0.01022
0.02729
0.00018
In-patient
days
Out-
patient
attendances
Units
of
attendance
Opium
1922 iq 2 3
lbs. lbs.
Morphine
1922 1923
ozs. ozs.
Cocaine
1922 1923
ozs. ozs.
Heroin
1922 1923
OZS. ozs.
12,783,000
12,723,000
19,144,500
5i
kilos
30
kilos
Si
00 0
?r)- 24
447
kilos
1518
kilos
1194
kilos
27
kilos
8
kilos
23.2
13.6
13.6
12.7
43- 1
33-9
0.8
0.2
B. Poor Law
Institutions.
Table J. Provincial Hospitals Recorded Use of Drugs.
The statistics available of the work
m tfen't ?3ZlutUentTtend^ei!
assess ?-
in provincial hospitals works out as shown in lable K.
Table K. Amounts used Provincial Hospitals.
No figures have been collected of *6 e b^?o b ?)linpatients such institutions,
institution, but, as there are estimate ? u e assum ed that this use (particularly
oVc^t^^^
require if we assume the same rate of consumption
asV provincial hospitals the estimated consumption will be as follows .
Table L. Amounts used Poor Law Institutions
in-patient Opium. Morphine
dayS - IS lbs r  ozs. OZS OZS. ozs.
21,000,000 58 34 547 5? *'736 3i 9
kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos.
(No out-patients). 26.4 15-5 r 5-5 *4-5 49-3
C. Total Consumption in Hospitals under Review.
The figures given above do not touch certain classes of Irospitals?
sanatoria (wherein the use of opium will be important) 9 infectious
wards attached to prisons and lunatic asylums , ? c j p ?; ve the following total
Subject to these reservations, the figures in Tables H, K, and u give 8
consumption of dangerous drugs in hospitals :


Table M. Total Consumption.
Amount used.
Units Opium, Morphine. Cocaine. Heroin.
of attendance. 1922 1923 1922 1923 1922 1923 1922 1923
lbs. lbs. ozs.
Voluntary hospitals
London 7,412,000 129 141 338
Provincial 19,144,500 51 30 478
Poor Lawhospitals 21,900,000 58 34 547
ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs. ozs.
285 553 505 55 48
447 1,5*8 i,i94 27 8
5i2 1,736 1,366 3* 9
Total 48,456,500 238 205 1,363 1,244 3,807 3,065 113 65
Voluntary hospitals kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos.
London 7,412,000 58.7 64.1 9.6 8.1 15.7 14.3 1.6 1.3
Provincial 19,144,500 23.2 13.6 13.6 12.7 43.1 33.9 0.8 0.2
- y, II > -kJ?- ~ J y w w * ~
Poor Lawhospitals 21,900,000 26.4 15.5 15.5 14.5 49.3 38.8 0.9 0.3
Total 48,456,500 108.3 93-2 38-7 35-3 108.1 87.0 3.3 1.8
Taking for each drug the average of the estimated figures in Table M for the two years
1922 and 1923, and on the basis of the population of Great Britain being 42.77 millions, the
figures in Table N give the hospital consumption per head.
Table N . Hospital Consumption per Head.
Opium Morphine Cocaine Heroin
In grains 0.0363 0.0133 0.0351 0.0009
In milligrammes 2.36 0,86 2.28 0.06
111. Estimated Medical Consumption of Dangerous Drugs.
By using the estimates of consumption in general medical practice in I and of hospitals
in 11, an estimate can be formed for the whole population of 44.2 million in Great Britain
and Northern Ireland (including the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands). It must be repeated
that I does not include specialist treatment, treatment in confinement cases, or ?home doc-
toring? of persons who buy preparations outside the Acts direct from chemists without a doctor?s
prescription (the volume of which is probably considerable) ; and that II does not include
tuberculosis or infectious disease hospitals or hospitals attached to prisons, lunatic asylums,
or military, etc., services. Nor do the figures include dental or veterinary treatment.
Table O. Total Medical Consumption of Dangerous Drugs.
(subject to the reservations above)
In lbs. and ozs. Opium
Codeine
Morphine Cocaine
Heroin
ozs.
General medical practice 1
9,820 626
4,705
1,132
3,758
Hospitals 2 229
i,344 3,546
Total 4,934 1,132 3 11,164 4H72 3,849
In kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos. kilos.
General medical practice 1 . 2,138.6
General medical practice 1 . 2,138.6 32.2 279.2 17.8 106.8
Hospitals 2 104.1 3 38.2 100.7 2.6
Total 2,242.7 32.2 317.2 118.5 109.4
The total consumption given in Table O may be expressed in terms of amount per head
of a population of 44.2 millions by combining Tables E and N.
Table P. Total Medical Consumption of Dangerous Drugs.
(subject to the reservations above expressed in amounts per head).
Opium Codeine Morphine Cocaine Heroin
In grains 0.7815 0.0112 4 0.1105 0.0413 0.0381
In milligrammes 50.75 0.73 4 7.18 2.68 2.47
1 The figures per head at the end of Table E used for a population of 44.2 millions.
2 The figures per head in Table N used for a population of 44.2 millions.
3 No figures available for the use of codeine in hospitals.
4 Exclusive of hospital use of codeine.


Appendix 1.
Investigation of 1,215,834 Prescriptions dispensed under the National Health
Insurance Acts in England And Wales during June 1923 and January 1924
for the Purpose of Ascertaining the Quantities of Dangerous
Drugs and Derivatives of Opium other than Dangerous
Drugs used in Insurance Prescriptions.
Table A. Summary of results
1. Opium and preparations containing Opium.
Equivalent to
Medicinal
Grains Opium contain-
Ounces Drachms or ing lO %Anhy-
Number of
Drug or times
Preparation. ordered
Minims drous Morphine
(in grains)
Ext. opii Liq L 399
414 4 r 3.566
4 32 544
Ext opii Sicc 33
347 7.57 1
23 30i
104 4-53$
1 20 15
Lin. Opii 1 97
Lin. Opii Amm. 8.P.C... 10
T ? D I) r 40^7
Liq. Opii Sed. B.P.C 437
Liq. Opii Sed. ?Battley? ? ? 1
q2 7 3.44
(42 tablets and 18 grs. powder) 125
Nephento ?Ferris? 248
Omnopon ?La Roche?... 13
6 5 49 *49
Pil. Ipecac-Scill 54
3 33 21 3
Pil. Opii I 7
5 6 42 3H
2 7 2 59
5 2 30 58
lq 6 6,555
Pil. Plumbi Opio 9
Pil. Saponis Co. ? 24
Pulv. Cret Arom. c. Opio 17
Pulv. Ipecac. Co 2,806
149 O u Ojj
1 12 30
Supposit. Plumbi Co 3
I 12
91 2 66
Syr. Camph. Co. 8.P.C.... m
Tinct. Camph. Co 117.205
Tinct. Opii n.338
Opium (pulv.) 74 1
Tinct. Opii B.P. 1898 14
68,796 is. 100
2,659 116,029
16 2 7> 12 o
102 3.338
Tinct. Opii Ammon 17 1
127 004
2 7 12 5
1,857 60,933
Tinct. Opii Aquos 5
Ung. Gall. c. Opio L 437
2 66
Ung. Myrobal. c. Opio.. . 1
1 155
Yin. Opii B.P. 1885 23
4 1 OD
30
Other preparations 4
Total. 24.43 kilos - 37 6 ,i55 grains.
2. Codeine, salts of codeine and preparations containing codeine or its salts
Equivalent
Grains to Codeine
or Alkaloid
Minims (in grains)
Number of
times
ordered
Ounces Drachms
Drug or Preparation
40 1,910
Codeine 231
Codeine Phosph 388
(210 pills)
105
2,589
Pil. Codeine 8
1,621
Syr. Codeine Phosph 1,129
36 kilos = 5.508 grains.
Total
2(a). Alkaloids and derivatives of opium other than codeine, diamorphine and morphine
and their salts :
Apomorph. hydrochl *2 grains.
Cotarnin. hydrochl 34 ?
Dionin 73 )}


3. Morphine, salts of morphine and preparations containing morphine or its salts :
Number of
times
Drug or Preparation ordered Ounces Drachms
Chlorodyn. B.P.C 10,287 2,491
Chlorodyn. Rub ?Woolley? 341 50 5
Liq. Bism. Rub. 6 Pepsin.
?Corbyn? 93 68 7
Liq. Morph. Acet 1,522 308 3
Liq. Morph. Hyd 26,651 6,326 5
Liq. Bism. et Pepsin, ?Op-
penheimer? 20 12
Mist. Chlorof. Co. 8.P.C.. .27 40
Mist. Tussi. Rub. Cone.
?Woolley? 74 213
Morphine (Alkaloid) 62 3
Equivalent
Grains to anhydrous
or morphine
Minims (in grains)
4> 12 5
20,953
5
7
Morph. Acet 2,374 4 1 11 L3 OO
Morph. Hydrochl 2,704 12 2 44 4A09
Morph. Sulph 138 1 1 42 405
Supposit. Morph 6 1 3 12 8
Tab. Morph, et Atrop.... 14 (60 tablets)
Tinct. Chlorof. et Morph.
B.P. 1885 52,101 n,i75 7 7-4 02
Tinct. Chlorof et Morph. Co. 11,763 2,682 3 8,884
Troch. Morph 6 (67 lozenges)
Troch. Morph et Ipecac. . . 149 (1,910 lozenges) 47
Other preparations 22
Total, 3.16 kilos = 48,635 grains.
4. Cocaine salts of cocaine and preparations containing cocaine or its salts
n Number of Grains Eqmv^o nt
Dru  or times Ounces Drachms or Alkaloid
Preparation ordered Minims
Alkaloid
Minims q n grains)
Cocaine (Alkaloid) 75 7 20 44
Cocain. Hydrochl 480 4 19 I 5^o
Tab. Naso-Pharyg. C 0.... 78 (1,248 tablets) 186
Troch. Kramer et Cocain.. 26 (240 lozenges) 11
Ung. Cocaine 14 12 4
Other preparations 46 3
Total, .16 kilos = 2,467 grains.
5. Diamorphine, salts of diamorphine and preparations containing diamorphine or its salts
. Equivalent to
Dnip or ?' of ? T-. n Grain Diamorphine
Uru g . r times Ounces Drachms or ? AiUainiri
Preparation ordered Minims (ingrains)
Hydrochl.-Diamorph 1 3,57 1 47 1 36 *7> 993
Elix. Diamorph. et Pini Co.
B.P.C 38 67 5 *3
Elix. Diamorph. et Terpin
B.P.C 2,146 4,108 7 1,562
Glyc. Diamorph. 8.P.C... 263 537 102
Glyco-Heroin 22 36 4
Tinct. Diamorph. 8.P.C.. . 270 553 6 211
Other preparations 19
Total 1.29 kilos = 19,911 grains.
Appendix 11.
Summary of all the National Health Insurance Prescriptions issued throughout
Scotland during the Months of May 1922 and March 1923.
May 1922
Number of prescriptions. . . . 184,152
Number of orders for use by
practitioners 871
Opium, and preparations con-
taining opium, expressed 79,431.54 grains
in terms of opium powder (= 5.16 kilos)
Totals
March 1923
234,868
419,020
991 1,862
98,895.178 grains 178,326.718 grains
( = 6.42 kilos) (= 11.58 kilos)


Totals
March 1923
May 1922
Morphine, and preparations
containing morphine, ex- 108.153 grains 27,962.653 grains
aikS 8 . ? r : (kilos) (- 1.24 kilos) (- 1.82 kilos)
Cocaine, and preparations
?X a #
containing cocaine, ex- , grains 2,459.996 grains
Srllkaloid?. 5 ? kTos) (- 0.09 kilos) (- 0.16 kilos)
Diamorphine and prepara-
tions containing diamor-
chloride... ( = 0.11 kilos) (= 0.19 kilos) f
ctaTTSTTCS OF THE AMOUNTS OF DANGEROUS DRUGS AVAILABLE
P IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AS SHOWN BY THE
ANNUAL RETURNS MADE BY MANUFACTURERS AND I RADERS.
An attempt has been made to estimateYhe
used in manufacture of preparations, etc., and stocks.
Two methods have been employed.
Method A. ?
The returns show the sales by licensees to retaU chemists ?djto
are mainly composed of the doctors, dent ; CO nstant I we may regard their purchases as
stocks held by these purchasers are gen.a ally ? f a ( he | rugs . The only means,
giving a fairly accurate of the act 1 b | the licensees can pass into consumers?
not accounted form these sales by which the d o Regulations 2 . The licensees sales of
?.*?
? a ,l "
use of the drugs for preparations outside the , nt o{ imports of preparations
(In one point Method Ais incomplete -? it tlakes no a.setmi? ,| owever _ fos country
outside the Acts (of which no figures are avadab T k ions outside the Acts is
manufactures its own preparations, and the import p F
probably negligible.)
Method B.
The returns give the stocks of each the^nmng
Tears are also accurately known from the Home Office Records.
the Regulations have tended to.make, retailers hold less
i If anything, the restrictions imposed altered much since 1922.
stocks than they did before 1921 : but probably tl ? t ions containing less than 0.2 per cent
of PrCParatlonS arC alS  eXemPtCd fr  m
Dangerous Drugs Regulations made in pursuance of - ?
Schedule 11.
Cereoli lodoformi et Morphinae, B.P.C
Emp. Opii, 8.P., 1898.
Lin. Opii . B.P.
? Opii Ammon., B.P.u
Pasta Arsenicalis, B.P.C.
Pil. Hydrarg. c. Opio, B.P.C.
? Ipecac, c. Scilla, B.P.
? Plumbi c. Opio, B.P.
? Digitalis et Opii Co BA .c.
? Hydrarg. c. Cret. et Opii, B.PT-
Pulv Cretae Aromar, c. Opio, B.P.
? Ipecac. Co. B.P. (Poudre de Dover).
? Kino Co., B.P.
Suppos. Plumbi Co., B.P.
BV(Onguent de noix de gahe et d?opinm).
? Gallae Co., B.P.C.
Sales of these exempted preparations are not included in the licensees? returns.


It is possible, therefore, to calculate from these figures the amounts which (not being otherwise
accounted for) were presumably absorbed by the retail dealers and actual users. This method
has been followed out for the year 1923 : it is not considered that the figures of stocks at the
beginning of 1922 are sufficiently reliable to permit of a calculation being made for that year.
The results obtained may be summarised as follows :
Table I. Total Consumption of Drugs Methods A and B.
(a) In pounds and ounces
Method A.
Method B.
1923
Opium (lbs) 12,516
9ffi94
19,662
3,800
13,020
17,068
3.723
Morphine (ozs) 19,458
Heroin (ozs) 4,631
Coca leaves (lbs) 1,412
927
8,148
Cocaine (ozs) 8,609
7,584
(6) In kilos.
Method A, Method B.
1922 1923 1923
Opium 5,689 4,542 5,918
Morphine 553 559 485
Heroin 132 108 106
Coca leaves 641 422
Cocaine 245 231 215
Comparing the results obtained for 1923 by the two methods of computation, it will be
seen that Method A shows a less use of opium and a greater use of morphine than Method B.
On the basis of opium producing 10 per cent of its weight of morphine, 19,662 ozs. of morphine
would be equivalent to 12,289 Ihs. of opium, and the totals of opium and morphine given by
Method A may be reckoned as equivalent to 22,283 lbs. (10,128 kilos) of opium ; similarly,
17,068 ozs. of morphine would be equivalent to 10,667 lbs. of opium and the totals of opium
and morphine given by Method B may be reckoned as 23,687 lbs. (10,766 kilos) of opium ;
the difference is therefore reduced to 1,404 lbs. (638 kilos) of opium, by which amount the esti-
mate under Method B exceeds that under Method A.
(i) Gross amount of Raw Opium consumed.
The totals of opium, morphine and heroin in Table I may be added together to ascertain
the amount of raw opium required to provide the various drugs consumed.
In estimating the raw opium required in the manufacture of morphine, it is assumed that
the opium produces 10 per cent of its weight of morphine. This will result in an over-estimate
of the amount of opium required since (a) the opium would produce considerably more than
10 per cent of morphine salts, which form the bulk of the morphine actually used, and (b) the
opium used is generally of a higher morphine content than 10 per cent.
For the morphine required in the manufacture of heroin, the figures given in Part II
of the League of Nations document O.D.C. 1 of July 22nd, 1924, are used viz., that 83 kilos
of morphine produce 100 kilos of heroin.
The use of these conversion factors gives the following results :
Table 11. Total Consumption of Opium.
[a) In pounds and ounces
Method A.
Method B.
1923
ozs.
Heroin consumed 4,631
3,800
3,723
Morphine required in the
manufacture of heroin.... 3,844
3T54
3,090
Morphine consumed as mor-
phine 19,458
19,662
17,068
Total morphine consumed 23,302
22,816
20,158
Opium required in the manu-
facture of morphine and
heroin 14,564
14,260
9.994
12,599
13,020
Opium consumed as opium... 12,516
Total opium consumed? 27,080
24.254
25,619


(6) In kilos.
Method B
1923
Method A
Heroin consumed T 3 2
Morphine required in the ma-
nufacture of heroin 109
Morphine consumed as mor-
phine 553
Total morphine consumed.
Opium required in the manu-
facture of morphine and
heroin 6,620
rtium consumed as opium... 5,089
Opium consumed as opium...
Total opium consumed.. . . 12 ,39
6,620 6,482 5,727
5,689 4,542 5,9*8
12,309 11,024 ti ,645
(This calculation takes no account of consumption of codeine and other alkaloids not
m Taking^ ofthe British Isles, excluding the Irish Free State, as 44.2 millions,
these figures give the following results :
Table 111. Consumption of Opium, etc., per Head.
Raw opium required to
The drug itself manufacture the drug
Method A Method B Method A Method B
ivietnou. A mtuiuu
In grains 1922 1923 1923 1922 1923 1923
Raw opium (as opium) 1.9822 1.5827 2.0620 1.9822 1.5827
Morphine (as such) 0.1926 0.1946 0.1689 1.9260 1.9460 x.689
Heroin (as such) 0.0458 0.0376 0-0369 0-38oi 2
Heroin (as such)
/W
4.2883 -3.8408 4-57 2
Total raw opium.
In grammes
Raw opium (as opium) 0.1284 0.1026 0.1339 0.1284 0.1026 0.1339
Morphine (as such) 0.0125 0.0126 o.ono 0.1250 0.1260 0.110
Heroin (as such) 0.0030 0.0024 0.0024 0.0248 OMO2 0.02
Total raw opium ' 2 7 82 . a2 iE 22^
These last figures may be compared with the 0.450 gramme per head suggested as a maxi-
mum by the Health Committee of the League of Nations.
(ii) Total Consumption of Cocaine.
On the same basis of a population of 44.2 millions, the consumption of cocaine per head
is as given below (coca leaves are estimated to contain 0.5 / 0 of cocaine) .
Table IV. ?? Consumption of cocaine per head (in terms of cocaine).
In grains I n grammes
Method A Method B Method A Method B
1922 1923 1923 i 922 1923 J 9 2
As coca leaves o.oon 0.0007 ? ? '?* ?
1923
As cocaine ... .'.'.'.?.'.'.'.'.'.'.'. 0.0852 0.0806 0.0751 -.052 00049
Total 0.0863 0.0813 0.076 1 00 56 0-Q053 Q-0049


I !I5 _ 332 _
L_ J
Annex 11.
LETTER FROM THE INTERNATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL FEDERATION.
(Central Committee).
g. The Hague, November 19th, 1924.
T7 a Th . C traftc m narc .P cs was discussed by the Office of the International Pharmaceutical
federation at its meeting at Paris on November 18th, 1924. We have the honour to submit
to you the recommendations which it made and to draw your favourable attention to them
In the first place, our Office would pay its tribute to the high moral principles, which
have induced the Governments to regulate the traffic in narcotics by international Conventions
and considers that it is the duty of pharmacists throughout the world to collaborate as far as
possible in the campaign against the morphine and cocaine habits, and to practise their craft
in confoimity with the aims of the International Opium Convention.
1 ? Although these principles are admitted, it will nevertheless be necessary that the
av regulating the traffic in narcotics in the different countries shall not impose upon phar-
macists administrative provisions which might prove a source of worry and* annoyance and
under them in the conduct of their business, while not proving effective to prevent drug-
a ers from obtaining these substances by fraud or from persons less conscientious than the
pharmacists. There are some laws which are too rigorous in this respect, and the observance
of which is difficult by reason of their complexity. It will be necessary that the national laws
regulating traffic in narcotics should be in accordance with the national laws regulating the
piactice of pharmacy and the sale of poisons in pharmacies in general.
Narcotics are poisonous substances and their sale in pharmacies may be regulated in a
manner similar to the sale of other poisons, except that the latter may lawfully be supplied
on a written and signed request by the customer, whereas narcotics may only be supplied on
a medical prescription. J
The sale of products containing narcotics to persons other than pharmacists should be
generally prohibited and the retail sale of these products to legally qualified persons should
e icseived exclusively to pharmacists with an established business, who shall only supply
them upon a written and signed request. J
The prohibition to supply these medicaments to customers without a medical prescrip-
tion should not however, prevent the sale of medicaments containing so small a quantity
that theie can be no question of abuse. It is not necessary to demand more than is laid
down in Article 14 (b) and (c) of the Opium Convention.
2. It will be necessary to draw up international lists of pharmaceutical preparations
containing narcotics, and these lists will have to show the amount of narcotic contained in
these preparations.
Provisions regulating the sale of narcotics in pharmacies, and any registers and lists
at may be prescribed should be as simple as possible and drawn up in agreement with
the pharmaceutical profession before being enforced.
3- Medical prescriptions containing narcotics should be made up in such manner as
to guarantee their authenticity.
The Secretary of the Federation
Chairman of the Federation
{Signed ) J. J. Hofman.
{Signed) Dr. L. van Itallie.
To the President of the International Conference on the Traffic in Opium.


OPIUM DOCUMENTS
issued by the
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
( Continuation)
First Opium Conference ;
Part I. Summary of the Information received from Governments
with regard to Prepared Opium in the European Possessions and
Countries of the Far East.
Part 11. Quantities of Prepared Opium considered necessary for
Annual Consumption (C.O.P.X) ... * .... . 4d,
$O.lO
Agreement, Protocol and Final Act signed at Geneva, February 11th,
1925 (C.82.M,41.1925.X1)/(C.0.P.57(1)), (English and French texts) 9d,
$0.20
Reports of the Fifth Committee to the Assembly ;
Second Assembly (A.143(a).1921) 4d. $O,lO
Third Assembly (A.69.1922) 4d. $O.lO
Fourth Assembly (A.101.1923.1V) 2d. 10.05
Fifth Assembly (A.67.1924.X1) 2d. 10.05
Traffic in Opium ;
Summary of Answers to the Opium Questionnaire, 1921, supple-
mented by other relevant information at the disposal of the
Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium during its Second
Session, April 19th-29th, 1922 (0.171(1),M.88(1).1922.XI) ... 2/-
$0,40
Supplement to Summary of Answers to the Opium Questionnaire
of 1921 (0.52,M.20.1923.X1) 6d
$O.lO
International Opium Convention, signed at The Hague, January 23rd,
1912 ; Protocols of Cloture signed at The Hague on January 23rd,
1912; July 9th, 1913; and June 25th, 1914 (O.C.l(l)) .... 2/6
$0.60
Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium :
Rules of Procedure (as amended by the Advisory Committee at its
Fifth Session, May - June 1923) (0.0.123(1)).
$0.02
Joint Sub-Committee of the Health Committee and the Advisory
Committee on Traffic in Opium :
Minutes of the First Session, held at Geneva, January 4th-'6th, 1923
(C.79.M.33.1923.X1) 9d
$0.20
Minutes of the Second Session : First Meeting, held at Geneva on
Wednesday, September sth, 1923, at 2.30 p.m. (0.746.M.308.
1923.X1) 6d
$0.15


j&SB
Ferdinand Pfeifer (Zeidler Bros.)* Kossuth Lajos
Utca 7 SZ, Budapest IV, Ker.
TALY
Libreria Fratelli Booca, Via Marco-Minghetti,
26-29, Rome.
JAPAN
Maruzen Co., Ltd. (Maruzen-Kabushiki-Kaisha),
11-16, Nihonbasbi Tori-Sanchome, Tokio.
LATVIA
Latvijas Telegrafa Agentura, Kr. Barona lela, 4,
Riga,
MEXICO
Pedro Robredo, Avenidas de Argentina y Guate-
mala, Mexico,
NETHERLANDS
Mariinus Nijhoff, Boekhandelaar-Uitgever, Lange
Voorhout, 9, The Hague,
NICARAGUA
Libreria Viuda de Lines, San Jose de Costa
Rica,
NORWAY
Olaf Norli, Universitetsgaten, 24, Oslo.
PANAMA
Libreria I. Preciado y Cia,, Lda? Apartado de
peru 22Ati
Alberto Ulloa, Apartado de
POLAND
Gebethner & Wolff, ulica Si enkiewfcafeJk
(Zgoda 12), Warsaw.
ROUMANIA
?Cartea Romaneasca.??, 3-5, Boul. Academiei,
Bucharest,
SAAR BASIN
Librairie Parisienne, Maison Marguet, M, Golbert,
Buoer,, 4, Friederich Wilhelmstrasse, Saarbruck,
SALVADOR
Libreria Mata y Centell, San Salvador,
SPAIN
Centro Editorial ?Minerva?, Tudesoos 39-41,
Madrid, E.12.
SWEDEN
C. E. Fritze, Hofbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2,
SWITZERLAND
Geneva, Lausanne,
Boston 9, Mass.
Libreria Maximino Garcia, Calle Sarandi 461,
Montevideo.
VENEZUELA
Luis Nieves, Oeste 8, No. 17, Caracas.
AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE PUBLICATU
OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
i^7
ARGENTINE
Libreria ?El Atones?, calk Florida, 371, Buenos
Ames,
AUSTRIA AND GERMANY
Bikola Vcrlag A.-G., 111, Radetzkyplatz 6,\ iesna>
BELGIUM
Agence Decheane, Messageries de la Presse, S. A. f
18-20, rue du Persil, Brussels.
BOLIVIA
Flores, Ban Rom4n y Cia, Libreria ?Renaci-
miento?, La Paz.
BRAZIL
Livraria F. Briguiet & Cia., 23, rua Sachet, Rio
de Janeiro.
BULGARIA
Librairie et &trangere, S. & J. Carasso,
Bd. "Tsar Osvoboditel?% No. 4a, Sofia.
CANADA
League of Nations Society in Canada, 279,
Wellington Street, Ottawa.
CHILE
Alexander R. Walker, Ahum ad a 357, Santiago
de Chile.
COSTA RICA
Libreria Viuda de Lines, San Jose de Costa
Rica.
CUBA
Rambla Bouza y Cia, Havana
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Librairie F, Topic, 11, Narodni, Prague.
DENMARK
V. Pios Boghandol?Povl Branner, 13,Norregade,
Copenhagen.
DUTCH EAST INDIES
Algemeen Boekhandel G, Kolff & Co,, Batavia-
Weltevreden.
ECUADOR
Victor Janer, Guayaquil.
FINLAND
Akademiska Bokhandeln, 7, Alexandersgatan,
Helsingfors.
FRANCE
Imprimerie et Librairie Berger-Levrault, 136,
Boulevard Saint-Germain, Paris (Vl).
GREAT BRITAIN, NORTHERN IRELAND
AND CROWN COLONIES
Constable & Co,, Ltd., 10 & 12, Orange Street,
London, W.C.2.
GREECE
Librairie Payot & Cie, Geneva, Lau
Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and Be
UNITED STATES
World Peace Foundation, 40, Mt. Vernon
Eleftheroudakis & Barth, International Library,
Place de la Constitution, Athens.
GUATEMALA
J. Humberto Ayestas, Libreria Cervantes, 10a,
Calle Oriente, No. 6, Guatemala.
URUGUAY
HAWAII
Pan-Paoifio Union, Honolulu.
HONDURAS
Libreria Viuda de Lines, San Jose de Costa
Rica.
For other countries apply :
Publications Sales Department of the League of Nations,
GENEVA (Switzerland).
(Catalogue sent on application.)
IMPRIMBRIE DU ?JOURNAL DE GENEVE?


AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE PUBLICATIO
OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
HUNGARY
ARGENTINE
Libreria EI Atenes?, calle Florida, 371, Buenos
Airbs.
AUSTRIA AND GERMANY
Rikola Verlag A.-G., 111, Radetzkyplatz s,Yienna,
BELGIUM
Agence Dechenn, Messagerks de la Presse, S. A.,
18-20, rue du Persil, Brussels.
BOLIVIA
Flores, San Rom&n y Cia, Libreria ?Renaci-
miento?. La Paz.
BRAZIL
Livraria F. Briguiet & Cia., 23, rua Sachet, Rio
de Janeiro.
BULGARIA
Librairie et trangere, S. & J. Catasso,
Bd. ?Tsar Osvoboditel?% No. 4a, Sofia.
CANADA
League of Nations Society in Canada, 279,
Wellington Street, Ottawa.
CHILE
Alexander R. Walker, Ahumada 857, Santiago
de Chile.
COSTA RICA
Libreria Yiuda de Lines, San Jose de Costa
Rica.
CUBA
Bambla Bouza y Cia, Havana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Librairie F, Topic, 11, Narodni, Prague.
DENMARK
V. Pios Bogbandel?-Povl Branner, 13,Norregade,
Copenhagen.
DUTCH EAST INDIES
Algemeen Boekhandel G. Kolff & Co., Batavia-
Weltevbeden.
ECUADOR
Yictor Janet, Guayaquil.
FINLAND
Akademiska Bokhandeln, 7, Alexandersgatan,
Helsingfors.
FRANCE
Imprimerie et Librairie Berger-Levrault, 136,
Boulevard Saint-Germain, Paris (VI e ).
GREAT BRITAIN, NORTHERN IRELAND
AND GROWN COLONIES
Constable & Co., Ltd., 10 & 12, Orange Street,
London, W.C.2,
GREECE
Eleftheroudakis & Barth, International Library,
Place de la Constitution, Athens.
GUATEMALA
J. Humberto Ayestas, Libreria Cervantds, 10a,
Calle Oriente, No. 6, Guatemala.
HAWAII
Pan-Paolfio Union, Honolulu.
HONDURAS
Libreria Yiuda de Lines, San Jose de Costa
Rica.
Ferdinand Pfeifer (Zeidler Bros.), Kossuth Laj
Utca 7 SZ, Budapest IY, Ker.
ITALY
Libreria Fratelli Bocca, Via Marco-Minghet
26-29, Rome.
JAPAN
Maruzen Co., Ltd. (Maruzen-Kabushiki-Kaii
11-16, Nihonbashi Tori-Sanchome, Tokio.
LATVIA
Latvijas Telegrafa Agentura, Kr, Barona !
Riga.
MEXICO
Pedro Robredo, Avenidas de Argentina y
mala, Mexico,
NETHERLANDS
Martinos Nijhoff, Boekhandelaar-Uitgever,
Voorhout, 9, The Hague.
NICARAGUA
Libreria Yiuda de Lines, San Jose de
Rica.
NORWAY
Olaf Norli, Uni versi tetsgaten, 24,
PANAMA
Libreria I. Preciado y Cia., Lda., Ap
Correo 71, Panama.
PERU PJ
Alberto Ulloa, Apartado de Corret
POLAND
Gebethner & Wolff, ulica Sienkiewl
(Zgoda 12), Warsaw.
ROUMANIA
?Cartea Romaneasca?, 3-5, Boul. Acad*
Bucharest.
SAAR BASIN
Librairie Parisienne, Maison Marguet,
sneer., 4, Friederieh Wilhelmstrasee, S
SALVADOR
Libreria Mata y Centell, San Salvador.
SPAIN
Centro Editorial ?Minerva?, Tudescoa
Madrid, E. 12.
SWEDEN
C. E. Fritze, Hofbokhandel, Fred
Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND
Librairie Payot & Cie, Geneva, La
Vevbt, Montreux, Neuchatel and B
UNITED STATES
Uilll S-kJ w* ri I
World Peace Foundation, 40, Mt. Vernoa Stre<
Boston 9, Mass.
URUGUAY
Libreria Maximum Garcia, Calle Sarandi 4f
Montevideo.
VENEZUELA
Luis Nieves, Oeste 8, No. 17, Caracas.
For other countries apply :
Publications Sales Department of the League erf Nations,
GENEVA (Switzerland).
(Catalogue sent on application.)
iipii i
? nm-i
IMPRIMERIE DU ?JOURNAL DE GENEVE?
