

For Personal Use.]
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
RECRUITING CAMPAIGN
No. 2
Organizer's Companion
VICTORIA
Issued by
THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF RECRUITING,
Victoria Barracks, Melbourne.
1917




Foreword.
ORGANIZERS and all others
engaged in the work of Recruit-
ing require to exercise tact and
courtesy in order to insure success.
In the course of their efforts they are
bound to encounter many "snags" who
will raise arguments and put questions.
Answers to some of these are given in
the following pages. They are neces-
sarily not complete, but should prove a
good guide as to the points upon which
an Organizer should be primed.
Be persuasive, conciliatory, and
practical. Demonstrate the realities of
the war; Australia’s responsibility; and
that our united interests demand that the
people should all pull together.
{Signed) DONALD MACKINNON,
Director-General oi Recruiting.


Organizer’s Companion.
INDEX.
Foreword ... ... ... ... ... Front Cover
Recruiting Scheme ... ... ... ... 3
Victoria Recruiting Committee ... ... ... 10
Advice to Organizers ... ... ... ... 11
Arguments for Organizers ... • ... ... ... 13
Answers to Objections ... ... ... ... 15
1. “Australia has Done Enough.”
2. “ The last Man and the last Shilling.”
3. “We cannot Spare more Men.”
4. “ National Industries Threatened.”
5. “Another Woman’s Son ”
6. “ Eligibles in Government Employ.”
7. ‘‘Thousands in England Idle.”
8. “ Russia has Men to Spare.”
9. “Australian Troops Cost Most.”
. 10. “ Men are Badly Treated.”
Hints to Organizers (Meetings, &c.) ... ... ... 23
Uniform Resolutions ... , ... ... ... 25
Women’s Work in the War ... .. ... ... 25
How to Help ... ... ... .. ... 28
Citizen’s Letter to a Soldier... ... ... ... 30
“ Win the War ” League ... ... ... ... 31
Suitable Classes ... ... ... ... Back Cover
Important... ... ... ... ... Back Cover
C. 2694.


“ England expects that every Man this day will
do ms Duty.”
Nelson.
ORGANIZER’S COMPANION.
RECRUITING SCHEME.
ORGANIZATION AND STAFF.
Federal —
Director-General of Recruiting: The Honorable
Donald Mackinnon, M.L.A.
Secretary: Captain W. A. Robinson.
States —
State Recruiting Committees.
State Organizing Secretaries.
Federal Electorate Executive Committees.
Local Recruiting Committees.
Recruiting Officers,
Organizers.


STATE RECRUITING COMMITTEES.
A State Recruiting Committee in each State will be
nominated by the Director-General of Recruiting.
The Director-General of Recruiting will correspond
direct with them, and they with him, on general matters
affecting the civil organization.
These Committees will exercise authority and super-
vision over all Electorate and Local Committees, and
will guide and direct the general pphcy to be adopted
in this organization of each particular State,, subject to
the direction of the Director-General of Recruiting.
STATE ORGANIZING SECRETARIES.
The State Organizing Secretaries will act as secretaries
to State Committees, and will be vested with the
authority to carry out the directions of the State Coni'
mittee. They will co-ordinate the military and civil
organizations.
They will be given a free hand in all matters, other
than financial, pertaining to general organizing methods,
subject to the direction of the Director-General of Re-
cruiting and of the State Committee,
Recruiting Officers in Federal electorates will be
under the immediate control of the State Organizing
Secretaries.
Organizers attached to the staff of Recruiting Officers
will b© subject to the immediate control of such officers.


and will form part of the staff of the State Recruiting
Committees, and will be appointed by such Committees.'
State Committees will, in a general way, advise and
direct Electorate Committees in matters of policy and
procedure.
State Organizing Secretaries will certify, where neces-
sary, to the payment of salaries, allowances, and ex-
penses of Recruiting Officers, Staffs, and Local Com-
mittees.
They will furnish progress reports at stated times to
the Director-General of Recruiting.
FEDERAL ELECTORATE COMMITTEES.
The Federal Electorate Committee in each Federal
electorate shall consist of seven members. The members
of these committees will be appointed at a duly con-
vened conference of three delegates from each Local
War Service or Recruiting Committee.
The Federal member for the electorate will be ex-
officio chairman of this committee. Members of the
Senate for each State shall be ex-officio members of any
committee or group of committees that may suit their
convenience, as indicated by them to the State Orga-
nizing Secretary. All State members, whose electorates
are altogether or mainly within the Federal electorate,
will be ex-officio members of this committee. A vice-
chairman will be appointed in every instance.


LOCAL RECRUITING COMMITTEES.
Local Recruiting Committees shall be formed in each
local government area, and, if considered desirable, as
in the case of shires, in towns within the shires, which
are centres of population, or in the case of metropolitan
municipalities in the different wards or subdivisions.
The existing War Service Committees and Local Re-
cruiting Committees will be the basis of local organi-
zation, provided that such committees agree to immedi-
ately call public meetings in conjunction with mayors
and presidents, with a view to increasing their member-
ship. The committees should be increased to the
greatest extent with power to add to their numbers.
They might aim at embracing all men and women in
their districts who are prepared to assist in endeavouring
to win the war.
An Executive Committee of seven should be appointed
by each Local Committee.
RECRUITING OFFICERS.
One or more Recruiting Officers, not necessarily hold-
ing military rank, will be stationed in a central town or
towns in each Federal electorate.
One of such officers shall be the secretary and orga-
nizer to the Federal Electorate Committee in each
electorate.


When a civilian is appointed a recruiting officer he
shall receive a salary at the rate of £250 per annum,
with travelling expenses when absent from his head
station at the rate of 10s. per day.
Recruiting Officers are to exclusively devote their
attention to recruiting organization, and must not en-
gage in any occupation whilst holding this position.
The Area Officer in each training area will carry out
his area duties independently of the Recruiting Officer,
who may be stationed in the same locality. He must, how-
ever, be always prepared to assist the Recruiting Officer
when required, and should lose no opportunity of en-
rolling recruits, notifying the Recruiting Officer of the
action taken, and making the necessary arrangements as
to medical examination and transit through sucli Re-
cruiting Officer.
ORGANIZERS.
Organizers may be appointed in each Federal elec-
torate, and those men should be suitable discharged
returned soldiers appointed as civilians—civilians not
eligible for active service, or civilians who, having volun-
teered for active service have been rejected.
They must be men of recognised organizing ability.
All Recruiting Sergeants shall be immediately with-
drawn, and their appointments terminated.
Organizers will be paid <£4 per week, and 10s. per day
travelling expenses when absent from their head station.


FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
The salaries, allowances, and expenses of the Federal
Secretary and State Secretaries, Recruiting Officers,
Organizers, and Staffs shall be paid by the District Pay-
master of each military district.
Each State Recruiting Committee shall be provided
with a fund to meet emergency and minor expenses of
the campaign. The indorsement of the State Recruit-
ing Committee, certified by the chairman or vice-chair-
man and secretary, will be a sufficient authority for the
payment of all expenses.
A general financial instruction thereon will be issued
by the finance member of the Military Board.
ENROLMENT AND MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF
RECRUITS.
Recruits may enlist at any time, and at time of en-
listment may specify any definite subsequent date to
meet their convenience on which they will go into camp.
All recruits should be medically examined Australian
Imperial Force standard, and such examination will be
deemed to be final.
In cases where an Army Medical Corps doctor is not
available, the Recruiting Officer will make the necessary
arrangements for the recruit to be examined by the


nearest Government Medical Officer, and if passed by
him as fit, the recruit will be provided with a rail,
coach, or boat warrant to the nearest centre where an
Army Medical Corps doctor is stationed.
Recruits passed as fit will be sworn in, after which
leave will be granted until the date specified at the time
when the recruit is prepared to enter camp.
A leave pass will be issued to the recruit. Such pass
to show date of enlistment, and the date when recruit is
to report for the purpose of entering camp.
The State Committee in each military district must
be notified of every enlistment. A notice of enlistment
card must be prepared in duplicate in respect to each
recruit in accordance with pro forma issued herewith.
One copy shall be filed in the office of each Recruiting
Officer, and the other forwarded to the Organizing Sec-
retary of the State Recruiting Committee.
In addition thereto, notice of each enlistment will be
forwarded to each Local Committee concerned.
Director-General of Recruiting.
Melbourne,
6th December, 1916.


MEMBERS OF STATE RECRUITING
COMMITTEE, VICTORIA.
Chairman:
G. H. Wise, Esq., M.H.R.
Vice-Chairmen:
R. O. Blackwood, Esq.
Henry Noyes, Esq.
Members:
Dr. Maloney, M.H.R.
Honorable W. Plain, M.L.A.
Sydney Sampson, Esq., M.H.R.
M. Mornane, Esq.
Organizing Secretary:
A. L. Baird, Captain.
Offices:
Universal Chambers, 325 Collins-sireet, Melbourne


ADVICE TO ORGANIZERS.
1. You are subject to the immediate control of the
Recruiting Officer of your district, and are responsible
for the area in your charge.
2. Your duties are to organize so that recruits may
be induced to enlist.
3. Study the instructions issued on 6th December,
1916.
4. Carry out your work in co-operation with the
Local Recruiting Committee or Committees which are
in the area assigned to you.
5. Report regularly to the Recruiting Officer for the
district—
(a) As to the results you are obtaining;
( h ) the difficulties you- are meeting with;
(c) making any suggestions for furthering the
work which result from your experience.
6. See that the honorary canvassers do their work
eifectively, A great deal depends upon the way in
which this work is done.
7. See that the canvassers are able to answer any
arguments against recruiting. Answers for the most
familiar of these arguments are separately provided in
this “ Companion.” Use also the Speaker’s and the
Recruit’s Companion both issued uniformly with this.


8. In your work avoid all reference to recent con-
troversy. Use all your powers of persuasion. Make
yourself familiar with the advantages of the A.I.F. as
to pay, allowances, and pensions. Also the benefits
available to discharged men through repatriation and
various patriotic funds. These have improved since
the war began. Pamphlets on the operation of War
Councils and other bodies are provided.
9. It will he worth your while to give discharged
soldiers or their dependants who may he in your area
accurate information, and the help given to them by
the War Council and various Fund Committees. People
assisted in this way may become recruiting agents.
10. Avoid all offensive reference of a personal tone.
11. This being a purely voluntary appeal, and per-
suasion being your medium, you must ingratiate your-
self with the possible recruit. If you can get two or
three together induce them to state their arguments,
then, if you can, demolish them in a good-tempered
way.
12. Do not be aggressive. Ascertain the leading
young man in the locality, and then use all your
powers of persuasion on him. If you succeed with him
others will follow automatically. In country districts
it is always easy to ascertain either by observation or
inquiry who are the leaders among young men.


13. Reflect upon any apparently unanswerable argu-
ment, and postpone reply until you can answer eftec-
Never lose your temper. Patience is a valuable
asset in connexion with your work. If a canvasser
fails, try the possible recruit yourself.
15. The seven preceding rules should be brought
under the notice of the voluntary canvassers.
16. Get all women’s associations in your area to
help the cause. . ,
17. Pind out all the friends and dependants ot sol-
diers at the front and enlist their sympathy in youi
18. See that you are well supplied with literature
bearing upon recruiting. This can always be obtained
through the Recruiting Officer for district.
19 Secretaries to Local Recruiting Committees,
especially those who have had prei ious experience, and
chairmen and members of confidential committees can
give you much valuable advice and assistance.
ARGUMENTS FOR ORGANIZERS.
Recruiting has become a practical unemotional neces-
sity. In the first period of the war, when sensation
and excitement prevailed, when all were confident that
the horror would soon be over, and all were eager to
take part in the preformance of Australia’s duty, there
was a veritable rush to the front, and an all-round
eagerness to help in some way.


But the hope of an early end to hostilities faded
away. The prospect that the Allies would sweep the
enemy aside in a vast wave of enthusiasm disappeared,
and, instead of the best, the worst had to be faced.
Facts had to be measured. Men had to be mobilized;
munitions had to be made without limit; money had
to be counted; and the commissariat had to be calcu-
lated.
Where, at first, the war was reckoned to remain one
of only hundreds of thousands on each side, it grew into
the enormous dimensions of millions, and all accessories
had to be increased in proportion. It was no longer a
situation in which the spontaneous free-lances were
sufficient to cope with it. The serious solid fact arose
that the Empire was in danger. It became necessary
to appeal to every Briton, in whatever part of the world,
to come forward. Patriotism became a real practical
element. It was transformed from demonstrations to
deeds.
Never in history has there been an instance when
DO or DIE was such a substantial pair of alternatives.
There is no patriot to-day, except he who dares to do
or die
How, it may be asked, does all this concern Aus-
tralia ? It concerns Australia in the same way as an
attack on one member of a family concerns the whole
family. When we are fighting for the Empire we are
fighting for the family. For the Empire is a family of
nations, just as the nation is a united group of families.


There is no man who would not protect his own, and
we are just as much part of the Empire as the salt is
part of the sea. Let Australians prove themselves salt
of the earth.
ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS.
1. Australia has Done Enough.
Agreeing with this, there are still those who say:
1. Australia has done ' enough.
Australia cannot be said to have done enough if she
leaves the job half done.
Duty is never done unless it is fully done.
Australia has not done enough, because those who
know best, ask her to do more.
A fight is no fight unless it is fought to a finish. As
Macbeth exclaimed, “ Damned be he who first cries
‘ Hold, enough !’ ”
The true spirit of fellow-fcombatants, such as are the
Australians and Allies, is to sacrifice all rather than be
cravenly annihilated. This is what Prime Minister
Fisher meant, when, on behalf of Australia, he pro-
mised “ the last man and the last shilling.”
On the other hand, in regard to Australia, it might
be claimed that Great Britain has done too much, be-
cause she has spent her millions to maintain sea-
supremacy, not only for ber own safety, but for the
safety of her Dominions beyond the seas. Also, too, she
has made treaties with first-class powers in which Aus-
tralia’s interests have been specially safeguarded.


It is a breach of Australia's honour.
It is a menace to our compatriots at the front.
It is illogical and immoral. Right is Might.
It is a repudiation of the Allies’ unanimous agreement
to fight to the bitter end at whatever cost.
Finally, it is the cry, not of those who have done
enough, but of those who have done nothing.
2. “ The last Man and the last Shilling.”
2. In relation to Mr. Fisher’s promise, “ The last
man and the last shilling,” we are told: —
“ We are not bound by our ruler’s foolish and reck-
less promise.”
On the other hand, it at first was received with
unanimous approval, and even acclamation.
In short, it was indorsed, and became a sacred bond.
In any case the promise only meant that we would
exert all our forces to avert defeat in an enterprise upon
which we had embarked.
War always means that.
There is a widespread wrong impression that because
the last man and the last shilling ” are offered, that
“ the last man and the last shilling ” will be lost.
Most of the men who will go to the front will return
better men than when they went.
The casualties are comparatively a small percentage of
the troops engaged.
Then in respect to “the last shilling,” most of the
money is spent upon our own soldiers, and locally,
amongst our own workers. This money remains with us
as before, only it is circulated for different purposes.


The 6s. per day paid to soldiers upon embarkation is
distributed as under:
4s. to wife and family.
Is. to self.
Is. deferred pay.
lids deferred pay in the case of many men comes to
a large sum.
It alone equals <£lB ss. per annum, which is a solid
saving for a young man.
In many instances the 4s. a day is being banked by a
mother or a sister in a Savings Bank, and means, per-
haps, after two years’ service, £l5O.
3. Another objection is:—
*
“We cannot Spare more Men.”
. a man saw his brothers drowning he would not say
m the middle of trying to save them, «I cannot spare
more strength! lie would rather persevere to the
point of exhaustion or death.
If an enemy came to Australia we should be re-
quired to spare ALL our men, if necessary, to protect
our women and children and save our country.
4. National Industries Threatened.
4; “A further draft will destroy or imperil our
national industries,” is another cry.


Even if this were true, it would have to be if circum-
stances demanded it.
But, serious as the outlook is, there is no reason to
believe that we are near, or likely to be near, the point
when the withdrawal of more men will bring about in-
dustrial disaster.
There is still a wide margin of men to prevent such a
wreck of industries.
But, if the situation arose, we would have to face the
extremity of requiring women to do men’s work.
In a degree this has already taken place, and logic in
relation to war puts no limit to its extension.
5. “ Another Woman’s Son.”
5. People asked to encourage recruiting sometimes
answer: —“I cannot send another woman’s son.’
No eligible is asked to do that; he is simply asked to
go himself.
Mothers and fathers who make this reply can be
told ;
If another woman’s son does not go, it means that
your daughter’s sons and your sons’ sons may all go
twenty or thirty years hence. That is the obvious result
of an inconclusive peace based on lack of perseverance
and premature stoppage of reinforcements.
We are only responsible for the performance of our
own duty, and not any other’s.


6. “Eligibles in Government Employ.”
6. Again, it is objected that, “Men of fighting age
are employed in the Defence Department .”
The answer is that an Army must be backed up bv
an efficient organization.
For this purpose picked men, specially adapted for
particular work, must be employed, 'whether they are
eligible for active service or not.
The employment of eligibles has not been indiscrimi-
nate, and the question is receiving still further con-
sideration.
Anyhow, because another man has not gone is no
good reason why you should not go yourself.
7. “ Thousands in England Idle.”
7. Then sometimes it will be advanced that, “ There
are thousands of men idle in England now.”
There always will be so far as civilians are concerned.
There always must be so far as soldiers are concerned,
apart from training, which is not idleness.
They are necessary for reinforcements, which might
at any moment be required in unexpectedly large num-
bers.
They are necessary for defence, because the enemy is
on Britain’s threshold.
If it were not necessary and possible to prevent the
enemy from overseas invasion, it would not be necessary
for Australia to send men.
It would, in that case, be imperative to keep them in
Australia for home defence.


8. “Russia has Men to Spare.”
8. Similarly it is said: —“ Russia has men to spare.
If true, which is doubtful, Russia has never stopped
her flow of reinforcements. ,
Russia has her work cut out to do her share in the
task of the Allies. , .
It is impossible to foresee how far that share may yet
be increased. , ,
She has borne the brunt of the war on the eastern
In resisting the Germans in Poland at the beginning
she engaged immense enemy forces, which otherwise
would have been free to overwhelm the Allies in the
W6 She has harassed Austria with a similar result.
She has kept Turkey in check by overshadowing her
with the dread of destruction. ,
She has gone to the rescue, of Roumania, and is still
employed in that work.
9. “ Australian Troops Cost Most.”
9. It is further urged that “ Australian troops cost
more than English or French soldiers
The answer is:
(а) Australia is farther away from the seat of
war;
(б) The standard of living is higher, and must
be maintained;


( c) If Australia were invaded, cost of British
transport of troops would be relatively as
large as that of Australia to-day, and
actually larger, because she would send
more.
Any superiority in the conditions of Australian troops
should only be a further inducement to Australians to
g°-
10. “ Men are Badly Treated.”
10. A protest will sometimes be heard that —“ The
men are, badly treated . ”
In reply to this, reference may be made to the Re-
cruit’s Companion.
Statements made by some soldiers must be received
with great caution.
Investigation has shown that 95 per cent, of the com-
plaints are wholly groundless.
If any specific complaint is made, the name of the
complainant and substance of same should be obtained
and submitted at once through the Recruiting Officer for
the district to the Director-General of Recruiting.
Statements made in the press are also not always re-
liable, and should not be accepted unless they are un-
doubtedly from an authoritative and official source or
editorially indorsed.
As to complaints generally, it is obvious that a big
military organization, suddenly and unexpectedly
sprung upon the community, was at first bound to possess
defects. But nearly two and a half years’ experience
has minimized these almost to the vanishing point.


—
United Kingdom.
Australia.
Men —Army
from 5,000,000 to
300 000
6,000,000
Navy
500,000 ...
3,000
Money
£6,000,000 a day ...
£200,000 a day
Munitions ..
£4,000,000
Nil
Naval material (ships,
£52,261,703
&c )
Great Britain’s primary responsibility and liability
in the war must not be lost sight of:
She must maintain supremacy on the sea.
She must replace merchantmen submarined.
These are but two items, but they involve enormous
expenditure.
Fortunately, Great Britain can build faster than the
enemy can sink, but only at stupendous cost.
Supremacy of the sea is maintained at a cost of
£52,261,703 a year.
This was for the financial year ending 31st March.
1915.
Great Britain must find vast sums to support her
credit abroad, and to pay for necessary goods brought
oversea for herself and her Allies.
Here is a comparison between Great Britain’s md
Australia’s responsibility in respect to a few leading
divisions of expenditure:


To call Australia’s share one-tenth is to be extremely
favorable to Australia. It is a simple proportion
sum :
1. Population—United Kingdom, 47,000,000.
Australia, 5,000,000.
2. There are 1,000,000 more women than men
in the United Kingdom.
3. There is a much greater proportion of unfit
owing to poverty in the United Kingdom.
HINTS TO ORGANIZERS.
MEETINGS, ETC.
Care should be taken to interview the chairman of a
meeting prior to it being held, and advise him of the
object of the meeting, learn his views on the subject-
matter, and endeavour to have them in full accord with
the policy of the State Committee. This also applies to
each speaker.
Peruse a copy of all resolutions to be submitted to
the meeting. Should any of them be of a contentious
nature, consult the local chairman, and discuss the
matter with him so as to prevent any resolution being
submitted which may cause adverse action.
In all cases endeavour to carry out the wishes of the
local chairman and committee, and, as far as possible,
let them have their own way. Although certain


methods are laid down for you to follow, if the same
result can be gained by different ones, then there is
no objection to their use. You will find different locali-
ties have different ways of doing the same thing; there-
fore, consult the local leaders and learn their way of
doing what you want, and follow it.
Don’t regard any individual as unimportant; each
has a value.
Should any heated difference of opinion arise, intervene
amicably with some soothing suggestion, humorous or
otherwise, in order to allay temper and prevent any
unpleasant misunderstanding.
With individuals use persuasion and not comparison.
Because one man has gone may not be a complete reason
why another should go. But because one man has not
gone is no reason why another should not go.
The object of a meeting is to interest the people in
the recruiting campaign. Therefore, always keep it in
mind that a speaker may create a desire in the audience
to enter into the work in an enthusiastic and spon-
taneous manner. This will be your opportunity to
capture co-operators, and perhaps recruits.
If the item following on the programme is apt to
divert this desire, do not put it on, but get to the prac-
tical business of enlistment.
At all meetings ask people for their names and ad-
dresses as members of the Recruiting Committee. These
can be obtained on plain cards or in a book passed
around to each.


UNIFORM RESOLUTIONS.
In order to insure a uniform expression of public
opinion it is desired that the following wording of re-
solutions be adopted:—
1. That this meeting of the resident of
realizes the present situation of the war as being seri-
ous, and that the number of recruits is far below what
is required. The splendid efforts and response put for-
ward previously are fully realized, but it is urged that
every eligible man should volunteer, and thus prove to
the brave lads who are now risking their lives for the
welfare of the Empire that we will do our utmost to
supply the necessary reinforcements until peace is pro-
claimed.
2. That all persons who are willing should subscribe
their names to a general recruiting committee for the
City ) • .
Town > of
Township )
WOMEN’S WORK IN THE WAR.
Primarily, of course, women’s work in the war lies
in the practical and noble profession of nursing. It }s
quite unnecessary to expatiate upon the thoroughness
with which the duties of nurses have been performed.
Many men have added, too, that they have been tended
with such sympathy and kindness that “ it was a plea-
sure to be sick.”


But, apart from this particular sphere of women’s
war work, there is a wide outside range, almost un-
limited, for women’s energy.
There are the various funds to be maintained: —Red
Cross, Belgian Relief, Repatriation, Returned Soldiers,
and other organizations to make more comfortable the
men in the camp at home, on transport, in the trenches,
in hospital or convalescent home, on reception when re-
turning to Australia, and during the necessary delay in
finding them employment. In all these directions the
women of Australia have done splendid work; are doing
it, and will continue to do it.
And now has opened up still another field where
women can do effective work. That is, in the work of
recruiting. Women’s influence in this people’s move-
ment is vital. True, it demands sacrifice. The softer
feelings of womanhood have to be suppressed, and only
the single aim kept in sight—that men are necessary to
win the war. Hearts must be steeled so that every
woman can say firmly to any eligible man, no matter
in what relation he stands to her, “You ought to go.
GO!”
It is not necessary to use the weapons of scorn or
contempt towards men who may appear slow to realize
and perform their duty. One slight pressure of firm
feminine persuasion is worth a battering ram of raillery
or indignation. Let women display the Spartan spirit,
and speak like men if they cannot so act.
When all else fails, then may arrive the moment when
true women will have “ no time ” for faltering hang-
backs. It is not necessary to instruct women in the


most effective method of showing their feelings. Men
who have deserved it all know how a woman can in abso-
lute silence condemn, “ cut,” and eliminate any man
who has incurred her displeasure.
What women can do to sway men in the work of re-
cruiting they can do among themselves. They can
educate and persuade the indifferent or the misguided,
so that women will form a united front in this people’s
movement.
In respect to their shopping, too, women can discri-
minate between tradespeople who are apathetic or an-
tagonistic and those who are earnest and enthusiastic.
Some firms discourage the enlistment of their employees;
some will not guarantee to keep positions vacant for, or
give preference to, returned soldiers. In any instance,
such as this, where unpatriotic feeling is manifest and
positive, it is entirely proper to enter protest and pro-
nounce practical disapproval. ,
This is quite a different proposition from any attempt
to compel enlistment by threat or penalty. It is simply
combating the action of those who discourage or place
difficulties in the way of those willing to go.
Similarly, women can hold aloof from social functions,
sports meetings, amusements, &c., which are not de-
signed for recrlifting purposes, or which are attended or
carried on by eligible men in any large numbers. If
men will be selfish, and place their personal pleasure
before their national duty, let them have their so-called
enjoyment “ on their own.”


Often in history has the fine feminine spirit of a race
stirred the manhood of the people to virile deeds. The
women may weep their inward tears —“ men must work
though women may weep”—but there is none who
would intrude upon the sacred solitude of their secret
sorrows. Without such intrusion the expression of
those sorrows is never known; the dry-eyed women,
brave as the bravest men, send their sons, their brothers,
and their lovers to fight for them, cheer them on their
way, watch their every movement with their units in
the field, and pray and prepare for'their safe return.
HOW TO HELP.
Here is a bull’s-eye set of recruiting shots fired by the
journalistic rifle of practical business men;
There are many ways in which Commercial Travellers’
Association members, travelling through the length and
breadth of the continent, can lend a helping hand in
the campaign. Every one should offer his services forth-
with, either through his secretary or direct to a central
or local Recruiting Committee, so that these may be
availed of to the best advantage. Men who can speak,
sing a patriotic song, give a patriotic recitation, help to
form an audience in city or country, will all be welcome
to the organization which is now at work throughout
the Commonwealth. Who can “ talk a line ” better
than a commercial traveller? Well, you are asked to
just talk recruiting all the time wherever you go during
the next few weeks. There is an immense fund of texts


to draw upon, of which the following are only a few
samples;
1. Relief for the boys at the front.
2. Making good our national “ promissory note.”
3. Helping to prevent the submersion of the smaller
nations, and securing reparation for the cruelty and
injustice already inflicted upon them.
4. Providing against a recurrence of the present world
agony.
5. Blocking Germany’s path to the Persian Gulf,
which would bring her within easy striking distance of
Australia, imperilling our (cherished national hopes and
aspirations.
6. Pride of race as Britishers, and shame at the
thought of taking refuge behind the skirts of the Mother
Country and her Navy.
7. The sporting instinct of Australians, which should
urge them to take a hand in the greatest game of all.
8. The common-sense theory that it is better to fight
an avowed enemy in or near his own territory than in
one’s own.
9. The certainty that if we don’t put Germany out
of the war business this time we shall regret it as long
as we live.
10. Australia must keep up her man-power in the
field if she wishes to establish her claim to full considera-
tion of her interests in the peace settlement.
—From the Australasian Traveller, organ of the
Commercial Travellers’ Association.


ANY CITIZEN'S LETTER TO ANY
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIER AT THE FRONT.
(This draft is a suggestion for a letter, which could be
written by any citizen who may invito to his house a
departing soldier, by whom it could be delivered to
an old or new-found comrade at the front.)
Dear Fellow-Australian,
We in Australia have you boys at the front always
in mind, and we follow your fortunes with the keenest
interest. There is a strong feeling throughout the
Commonwealth that reinforcements should be strongly
maintained, and a big effort is now being made to
establish a widespread organization which will accom-
plish this object.
The Recruiting Campaign is under the control of
the Director-General of Recruiting, the Honorable
Donald Mackinnou, M.L.A., and he has been touring
all over Australia and Tasmania in fulfilment of his
task. It is a real people’s awakening, and men, women,
and children have been started talking and encouraging
recruiting everywhere.
Of course, everybody cannot enlist. Some are too
old, others physically unfit, and so on. But everybody
can help in some way, and great willingness is dis-
played.
We want recruits to form reinforcements to bring
you boys home, to help finish your job. It will he a


great pride to them if they can meet you as a guard
of honour to accompany you back to dear Old
Australia. „
“ As you went out with tight-shut teeth,
To find high Fame’s immortal wreath
Upon an' alien soil, beneath
An alien dome —
“ As you went out through shot and shell.
You, whom we loved and trusted well,
So, back from death and back from hell,
Come in; come home.”
This is the spirit in which the recruiting campaign
is being inspired, and results are already showing that
the call has not been in vain.
Hoping to see you soon at home or at the front, and
wishing yon every good thing in the way of luck and
health,
I am,
Yours sincerely,
“WIN THE WAR” LEAGUE.
It is inconceivable that any Australian should exist
who does not want to win the war. The aspirations of
each and all of us must be towards a satisfactory vic-
tory which will insure retribution, reparation, and an
honorable peace. That is what “ Winning the War”
means. Germany, like a big brutal bully, has shaken
the mailed fist in the face of the nations. She has


dared with her militarism to crush not only the smaller
nations of Europe, but to threaten also the greatest
powers, such as Great Britain, France, Russia and
Italy. Acting like a bully, she should be treated like
one, and receive that sound thrashing which all bullies
deserve. We must win the war to accomplish this
righteous task ? Win the war, not by crushing Germany,
not by humiliating Germany, but by reducing her to
such a level of contrition that the Allies can dictate
their terms, and give Germany and her people a per-
manent historical reminder of the breach of Belgian
neutrality; the atrocious treatment of non-combatants;
the destruction of historical cities with their irreplace-
able buildings; the submarining of the Lusitania ; the
murder of Nurse Cavell and Captain Fryatt; the en-
slavement of women and children, and innumerable
minor crimes.
We must win the war in order that the great powers
will be in a position to place a barbed-wire fence of
diplomacy around Germany’s legitimate boundaries, and
keep her inside it; make scrap iron of her navy, and
honest workers of her soldiers. Nothing but the indis-
putable supremacy of the Allies can achieve these
essential terms, and nothing but Winning the War can
gain that supremacy. Therefore, must win the
war. In the spirit of Christianity; in the cause of
civilization, of liberty, and humanity; in the name of
mankind and the sight of God, now and for ever “ WE
MOST WIN THE WAR! ”
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.


SUITABLE CLASSES
( r^~=<3. )
As an indication of the suitability of various
classes for definite reinforcement units the follow-
ing classification is put forward for the guidance
of intending recruits and enrolling officers :
LIGHT HORSE AND CAMEL CORPS
Stockmen, farmers, and station hands.
ENGINEERS
Artisans, builders, and saw-millers.
PIONEERS
Builders, labourers, roadmakers, and permanent waymen.
INFANTRY
Warehousemen, sportsmen, rifle club members, bankers,
accountants, clerks, university and high school men, and
all others not specially qualified for the above corps.
IMPORTANT
Organizer! should make themselves familiar and keep up-to-date
on all matters relating to soldiers and their welfare.
The “Three Companions" and “German Atrocities." uniform
with the "Organizer’s Companion,” should be studied in conjunction,
and used to the best advantage.


THREE COMPANIONS
Uniform Series issued by
the DireSlor-General
of Recruiting
r
/. Speaker's Companion
2. Organizer's Companion
3. 'Uhe Recruit's Companion
ALSO
GERMAN ATROCITIES
Germany and Inhumanity
versus
Humanity and Christianity
