

. . *
> : _ ' 7 * Z V


Red Gum Bend
W. L. WILLIAMS




by W.L. Williams




RED GUM BEND




Red Gum
Stories of the River Murray
W. L. WILLIAMS
With the publisher's, compliments.
Retail Price '•'Jg
Illustrated by
R. A. OVENDEN
CONSOLIDATED PRESS LIMITED
SYDNEY


REGISTERED AT THE G.P.0., SYDNEY. FOR TRANSMISSION
BY POST AS A BOOK
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
CONSOLIDATED PRESS LI MUTED
168-174 CmSTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


Cl 8923
21 FFB 1946
Page
9
19
29
39
50
61
71
CONTENTS
1. —Where the Waters Begin 9
2. —Old Soldier 19
3. —The Earliest 29
4. —Can You Keep a Secret? - - ' ' ' 39
5. —Paddles Chunking - ' ' - - ' 50
6. —Currant Topics —Including Sultanas ' - - 61
7. —River in Bondage ' ' ' ' ' ' 71
8. —Coming to a Bad End - ' ' - ' 81


.


THE PLACE TO BEGIN
Of course, if you want a story, you may go to the library
and get a book, no matter whether you are eight or eighty—
that is, if you don’t mind sitting within doors to read it.
You simply can’t do it outside.
If the weather is cold, the most exciting book ever written
is no guarantee against pneumonia; if it is hot, it’s the most
difficult thing in the world to keep the sunlight off the page,
the flies off your face, and your mind off lemonade; while, if
it is just right, there are so many better things to look at
that somehow lines of print don't seem important for very
long.
However, you needn’t despair, even out of doors. Stories
may fall upon you out of the blue. Have you ever, for
example, heard an old Red Gum tree arguing the point with
the grandest river in Australia?
Choose a day when the tree is shady, and when shade is
good—a day when the river is using every art to put you to
sleep. Forget about the difference between pounds avoir'
dupois and pounds sterling—there’s no difference really;
they are both units of burden. Forget about cyclones and
anticyclones, and direct and indirect speech, and why things
fall up instead of down—or is it the other way round? Be
as lazy as you can; and maybe, when your eyes are more
than half shut, and when you’ve forgotten nearly every one
of the things that don’t matter, the murmur of the river and
the rustle of the leaves will cease to be mere sounds.
You’ll find perhaps that they have become voices, dropping
tales that you can understand quite easily. You may find it
hard to separate the true bits from the make-believe; but you
shouldn’t worry too much about that, for many of the wisest


men are constantly in the same difficulty. And if, after
all, you don't hear any tales, or the tales are not something
like those that follow—well, all I can say is that someone I
know must have been dreaming.
On the other hand, if you should hear the tree and the
river talking together, you may notice that they have fallen
into the disappointing habit of playing upon words —as when
the river tells the tree that his “bark” is worse than his
“skite”, or the tree the river that his “current” is out of
“date”. Forgive them, won’t you? They are simple fellows
who have no more wit than to believe that a laugh is a laugh,
and that one of the reasons they have lived so long is because
they have laughed so much. Besides, it is probable that no
one has told them that punning is the lowest form of humour.
And they certainly have never heard that history and
geography are dead things in whose presence it is necessary
to remove the hat and speak solemnly. You see, history to
them is merely the story of their own lives, and geography
is something to do with the place where they live. They are
very wrong, I know; but, as I said before, they are only a
pair of very simple fellows. Now, will you risk meeting
them?
—The Fellow with the Hat over His Eyes.


CHAPTER I
WHERE THE WATERS BEGIN
“Whew!" 1 said the Murray, with a little swirl, as he glided
into the shade of the Red Gum. “It’s hot.”
The sky was as blue overhead as the dish into which the
collars go on washing day; but the blue faded toward the
horizon on every side, until it became almost white. The
sun laid a blinding sheet of light upon the water, in a way
that made the Murray squirm and quiver. Along the banks
the trees, having strained every branchlet to dip their leaves
in the river, had given it up as a bad job, and now allowed
them to hang in the breathless air as though they had lost
interest in them. It was one of those days.
“Whew!” repeated the Murray, giving a gentle tug to the
Red Gum’s toes. “It’s hot.”


Don tdo that! said the Red Gum, curling his roots and
uncurling them again. “It tickles!”
“Tickles, my foot!” said the Murray, rudely.
“No,” said the Red Gum, “tickles my foot.”
The river and the tree were always having little mis-
understandings of this kind; for, though they had lived cheek-
by-root for over a century, and though the Murray’s blood,
so to speak, had flowed all that time in the Red Gum’s veins,
they usually saw things from a different angle. But, though
they argued a good deal, they never really quarrelled, and
even the worst argument had a way of ending in agreement.
“Whew, it’s hot!” said the Murray, for the third time.
“My gum, it is!” replied the Red Gum.
“I beg your pardon,” said the Murray.
“I said 'My gum, it is’,” replied the Red Gum.
“But it doesn’t make sense. Your gum, it is—what?’
“My gum, it’s hot!”
“Well, if that’s what you mean, why can’t you just say,
'My gum is hot’?” queried the Murray.
The Red Gum tried to execute a rustle of impatience; but,
since there wasn’t a breath of wind, he finished by doing
exactly nothing. This didn’t matter in the least, for the
Murray asked plenty of questions that were never meant to
be answered.
“I wish you’d stir yourself a bit and make a breeze,” went
on the Murray, after a pause, taking a peep out into the
sunlight, and hastily drawing back.
“I don’t make breezes when I stir,” said the Red Gum,
peevishly. “It’s the breezes that make me stir when I—•
when they—l mean —”


The Murray gurgled with delight upon a little patch of
pebbles. “I can tangle your mind just as easily as I can
tangle your roots,” he said.
“Don’t you dare! I’ve been all morning spreading them
out where they’ll do me most good.”
“All right! All right!” said the Murray. “It’s too hot
to get upset.”
The tree continued to droop, while the Murray amused
himself by inching the mud out from under the hind foot of
the Tortoise, who had crept out on the bank for a sleep.
The Tortoise felt himself slipping, and scrambled frantically
out of reach of the water. The Murray chuckled, and
looked up at the Red Gum with a twinkle—a twinkle caused
by the sun’s reflection on a tiny ripple as a piece of mud fell
into the river with a splash.
“I’ve often wondered about you,” said the Red Gum,
thoughtfully. “There must be more in you than meets the
eye.
“There is,” replied the Murray. “This, for example.”
And he raised an old boot to the surface for a moment and
let it sink again.
“No, I don’t mean things like that,” said the Red Gum,
with a shade of impatience. “I mean—l can see where you
come round the bend up there, and I can see where you
appear round the next bend below. But there's more to you
than that, isn’t there?”
“Oh, that!” said the Murray. “Yes, of course. About
sixteen hundred miles more.”
My gum! said the Red Gum, opening his pores in
prise.


“I beg your pardon?" said the Murray. It sounded like a
question.
"Let it pass," said the Red Gum, hastily. "Tell me what
they look like —those sixteen million—"
"Hundred," said the Murray.
" —hundred miles," finished the Red Gum.
"From my head to my mouth?" queried the Murray.
“Aren't your head and your mouth in the same place?"
asked the Red Gum. "Most people’s are."
"Not a river's," replied the Murray. “My head’s away
to the east there, under Mount Kosciusko of the Snows.
My mouth is on the South Australian coast, at Lake Alex-
andrina."
"Tell me,” said the Red Gum again.
“If you don't interrupt," said the Murray, as one who
grants a favour. He was really most anxious to get on with
the tale, for those who know him will tell you that he is a
great gossip. Even a brook, as Tennyson says, goes on for
ever; and the Murray is a lot more important than a brook.
He smoothed out a ripple or two, and began. "Away up
in the highlands of south-eastern New South Wales and
north-eastern Victoria, a myriad small streams start from the
peaty soaks and the dripping rocks and the winter snow-line,
and tumble helter-skelter over pebbly beds into the deep
gorges.
"There are none of the sounds there that you know so
well —no chugging of motor-launches, no shouts of children
along the bank, no snoring of water-pumps, no ring of axes,
no purring and whirring of motor-cars in top or low gear.
There is only the wind in the trees, the odd crash of a falling
limb echoing and re-echoing, the tinkle of falling water, or
the harsh screech of parrot or cockatoo.


“For these places, except for the damage caused by
periodical bushfires that start in more settled country, are
as they were in the beginning. Few people visit them, and
those who do usually stay only for a short time, as I shall tell
you in a moment.
“In summertime the tops of the great mountains —
Kosciusko, Bogong, Feathertop, and the rest —stand out blue
and cool against the clear sky; in winter they wear caps of
white snow, and cloaks of cloud, from both of which comes
the lifeblood that keeps me flowing and keeps you, my friend,
from becoming an old, dried, dead log.
“Before long, all the myriad mountain streams have come
together to form those two headwaters of mine, the Swampy
Plains River, which brings me old Kosciusko’s unwanted
rain and snow, and the Indi, which bears the same offerings
from Victoria’s giants. Where the two rivers meet at
Bringenbrong, I really begin; at least, that's what men will
tell you. But don’t you believe it! lam the Swampy Plains
and the Indi; they and I are one. It is really I who steal down
from the snows and the high soaks. I’ve been doing it for
more centuries than men can remember—before ever there
was a Bringenbrong; before I or any other stream had a
name; before those old hills were broken down from towering
monarchs to peaks of a few miserable thousand feet. But
there! I’m maundering. I mustn’t forget that I’m telling a
story.
“Among the high peaks, there do occasionally come men.
Hardy souls these—for the most part, hikers who cannot be
daunted by the wildest places, or cattlemen who drive their
herds there to feed in the summertime.
“When the snow melts from the mountain plateaux, leaw
ing the wet soil exposed to the warm sun of late spring, the


grass and the alpine shrubs sprout green and strong. Then
the cattlemen bring their beasts up by the steep trails, and
camp in the little huts that are scattered over the rich sum'
mer pastures. So the cattle eat the grasses and drink from
my little streams, and grow sleek and fat; and life for man
and beast is comfortable, and summery, and as fresh and
openair as anyone could wish—until the first cold breath
from the south.
“One morning there is a powdering of white on the high'
est rocks. Autumn is in the mountains, and winter is close
behind. All at once, along all my streams there’s a cracking
of stock-whips, the cattle are mustered from their scattered
ranges, and the downward journey begins. And so, while
the cattlemen and their charges seek the safety of the low'
lands, my tall mountains are left to their winter sleep, and
their raging blizzards, and their blankets of snow.”
The Red Gum shifted his lowest bough a little, and a leaf
or two fell lightly on the face of the Murray, where they
spun slowly end for end, and drifted away.
“There’s one thing I don’t quite understand," said the
Red Gum. “This snow you speak of—what is it, exactly?
I’ve never seen it.’’
“No,” said the Murray, “there’s never snow where it’s as
hot as this. Do you remember the ice' Cream the youngster
dropped at your foot yesterday, during the picnic?"
“I do," answered the Red Gum. “It was worse than a
sweet bursaria bush. It brought somewhere about a million
flies.’’
“Well," went on the Murray, “snow is something like
that.’’
“Flies and all?" queried the Red Gum.


“Minus the flies,” said the Murray. “Snow is white and
frozen; and when it melts streams flow from it.
“H’m,” said the Red Gum, doubtfully. “You had got as
far as Bringenbrong, I think. ’
“Ah, yes,” said the Murray, toying again with the old boot.
“Relic of Bringenbrong, if I remember rightly,” he remarked.
“However —” He dropped the boot, and took up the story.
“When I have safely got away from the mountains, I find
that I can spread myself a little. You’ve no idea how narrow
a mountain bed can be. A river simply can't turn over with'
out shattering himself to foam on the rocks and the ledges.
Lower down, I don’t need to rush so frantically. I believe
in taking my time —I've been called the ‘stately Murray’,
you know—not like those asses the Snowy and the Tambo,
who seem to think of nothing but getting to the sea.
“I like to spread out into billabongs, and lose myself for a
while among the trees —friends of yours, by the way.”
“I know,” said the Red Gum. “I was born in a billabong.
You wouldn’t remember bringing me here; but you did.
During one of your floods, you carried half an island with
you—logs and sticks and earth, and a young seedling Red
Gum. That was me. You dropped us all just here.”
“Oh, well,” said the Murray, “I had forgotten. No doctor
can remember all the babies he has helped to bring into the
world.”
“I suppose not,” admitted the Red Gum. “You were
talking about billabongs.”
“Of all the things along my course, I like the billabongs
best. They’re so calm and lazy, and so filled with fish and
throbbing with bird life. I can forget the changes I’ve had to


put up with, when I get among my billabongs. Which reminds
roe—roen have built me a new and tremendous billabong, by
making a concrete wall right across my path. They call it
the Hume Dam.'”
“Oo!” said the Red Gum, drawing his roots back a frac-*
tion from the water.
“I said 'dam’,” said the Murray.
“I heard you,” said the Red Gum.
“D'A'M,” explained the Murray.
“Oh!” said the Red Gum. ‘’l beg your pardon,”
‘Til tell you the story of the Hume Dam one of these
days, when it’s not quite so hot. The thought of it makes
me angry; and anger isn’t good for a steady old fellow like
me, on a hot day.
“From there to the bend that you mentioned I’m very
much as you see me now. Here and there, there’s a town on
my banks. Here and there, too, there are bridges across me.
I don’t like the bridges much. Fd wash them away if I got
half a chance—all except the railway bridge at Albury. It
has rails running across it; and when the trains are coming
from Sydney or Melbourne the rails start to sing, and their
song is made up of words that tell me all that is happening
in the world beyond the hills. I like the rails. Then, too,
from the trains the people look down on me —they who are
tearing from one place to another; I who go steadily on my
way —and they sigh, and fall in love with me, and dream of
floating in a boat for ever, at just my pace.”
“Well,” said the Red Gum, “they wouldn’t have floated
far this afternoon. You’ve lingered here for a long time.
Why, those two leaves I dropped are not out of sight yet.”
“It’s rather nice in your shade,” confessed the Murray,
with another twinkle. “And besides, there’s more of my
story yet. There’s still all the way from here to the sea.”


Where The Waters Begin
“Some other time, 11 said the Red Gum. Here comes a
breeze. 1 shall be dreadfully busy turning all my leaves over
for an airing. 11
“H’m,” said the Murray, as a puff of air carved rows and
rows of wrinkles on his face, “it is getting cooler. Perhaps
I shall manage to work up the energy to get on a little way.
“Before you go, 11 said the Red Gum, as he began to shake
out his leaves, “there's one thing you might tell me. You
said your mountains were once much higher than they are
now. That means that a part of them has disappeared.
Where did it go to? 11
“You’re standing on it,” said the Murray. No, he
added hastily, “don’t move your feet! You 11 come an awful
cropper if you’re not careful —and that would be bad for
me, too. The fact is, I’ve brought a good deal of the high
country down here, and spread it over the land. There s
more of it lower down. It’s quite a nuisance to me some'
times; it gets in my way.”
“Tell me about it another time,” said the Red Gum, as
his leaves threatened to become unruly in the breeze. “I’m
going to have my hands full here, I can see that.”
“All right,” said the Murray, pushing off from the bank
with a force that almost drove the Red Gum’s roots into the
earth again. “I’ll be on my way.”
“Hi!” called the Red Gum. “Wait a minute! What
about him?” He dipped a branch toward the sleeping Tor'
toise.
“I nearly forgot him,” the Murray acknowledged. “I’m
always leaving him somewhere. Where’s that breeze? Oh,
here it is.”
With the help of the breeze, the river sent a ripple washing
up the bank. “Come on, you!” he said, as the ripple came


swishing back, carrying a yard of mud and the surprised
Tortoise, who waved his legs wildly in the air before flopping
over on his stomach and sinking like a stone. “Time to be
going.”
“See you to-morrow!” shouted the Murray, as he made a
sharp sweep at the curve lower down.
And the Red Gum acknowledged the shout with wildly
waving branches, for the breeze had suddenly strengthened
to wind force.


CHAPTER 11.
OLD SOLDIER
“SpelL'OH, I think,” said the Murray, as he swung, with a
gentle lapping, into the little bay below the Red Gum.
“Shouldn’t think you'd need a spell,” replied the Red
Gum, nastily. “The way you’ve been mooning along for the
past few months is a positive disgrace. Can't you do any
better than that?”
“My dear fellow,” said the Murray, “do have a little
patience! Wait till the snows come down. When that
happens, I’ll show you something in the way of speed. Not
that I care for speed much; this life suits me.”
“You’re like your friend the Tortoise,” snorted the Red
Gum. “Where is he, by the way? Have you left him
somewhere again?”


The Murray’s face broke into a crinkle of fun, as the
sunlight dodged among the leaves overhead and performed a
little dance upon the water.
No, ’ he said, “he’s here somewhere.”
Come on, Sweet Slumber, show yourself!” he grunted, as
the Tortoise, pushed along by a small wave, rose to the
surface and came half-floating, half-swimming to the bank.
Crawling ashore at the rate of one mile a year, he settled
down in the warm mud, drew in his legs and his neck, and at
once applied himself to the business of going to sleep.
“I'd like to drop a decent swarm of bees on you,” said
the Red Gum, severely. “Never saw such a person for doing
nothing.”
“On me?” asked the Murray.
“I was speaking to the Tortoise,” said the Red Gum.
“Waste of time,” sighed the Murray. “I do it only out
of habit; it has no effect really. You could try that swarm
of bees, though,” he added, with another sunny smile —“so
long as you don’t drop them into the water.”
“I haven’t any bees just now,” said the Red Gum. “All
the bonnets are sitting down tight on my flowers. I can’t
have bees under my bonnets until the bonnets are not there,
if you see what I mean.”
“Vaguely,” replied the Murray. “If you haven't any
bees, what about something else?”
“Might manage to shake a dry branch loose in a high wind.
Nothing doing in a light air like this.”
“Nothing at all?”
“Not unless you count a piece or two of bark.” The Red
Gum peeled off a flake of dry brown bark and let it fall, eye-
drop fashion, toward the motionless back of the Tortoise.
The breeze, however, turning playful at the moment, flipped
the bark over the river, where it touched the water as lightly
as a dragonfly’s wing.


“Great shot you are!” jeered the Murray. “Your bark
is worse than your skite. Just as well—”
“My woodenness!” broke in the Red Gum. “Look at
that!”
There was a quick swirl in the water, as a great cod rose
at the piece of bark, discovered it was no food for a hungry
fish, and, with an angry splash, went down again out of sight.
The Murray wrinkled his surface in surprise. “That was
Old Soldier,” he said. “Fancy his rising at a piece of bark!
Must be getting careless again.” The Murray shook his
reeds thoughtfully. “Very careless!” he added. “He'll be
getting himself hooked again.”
“Hooked?” queried the Red Gum, with a lift of his high
boughs. “What do you mean—hooked?”
“Did I never tell you,” asked the Murray, between puffs,
as he settled himself more comfortably in his bed, “the story
of the angler and Old Soldier?”
“I don't think so,” said the Red Gum,
“Then here goes!” the Murray went on quickly; and,
before the Red Gum could find the smallest chance to stop
it, the story was under way.
“You must know that, of all the creatures that live beside
my waters or that in them are, the one of which I am proud'
est is the famous cod that is named after me. Old Soldier
is the most ancient and at the same time the toughest and
most cunning cod that navigates my stream tO'day.
“He was hatched on a bed of drift sand, behind an old log
that had lain for fifty years half in and half out of the water
many miles upstream from here. His mother had chosen the
place carefully. The bank was steep, and well overhung with
undergrowth, while the sand had piled up against the log until
my water was just of the right depth for her. And there, in


a spot well hidden from eye of beast or bird, she had drawn
a furrow in the sand with her fin and had laid her eggs.
I shan t tell you about Old Soldier's boyhood,” said the
Murray. It was remarkable only for its entire freedom
from the fortuitous and very nearly catastrophic eventualities
that became his daily lot during adolescence.” The Murray’s
voice had taken on that self-satisfied, honking note that
you will always notice in people who are trying, by using
long words, to show you how much they know.
The Red Gum stirred a branch, and absently tried to eye'
drop a tiny twig upon the Tortoise. He was losing interest
in the story.
The Murray saw his mistake at once, and quickly got back
to simpler words. He went on, “His mother had somehow
given him the sense to keep out of reach of the shags that
are for ever plunging head-first below my surface in search
of small fry. It was not until he had grown big enough to
be continually hungry that his troubles really began.”
“Continually hungry?” queried the Red Gum. “Am Ito
understand that you don’t give your lodgers enough to eat?”
“I do the best I can,” answered the Murray, considerably
nettled; “but, really, you’ve no idea of the appetite of a
growing cod. You only have to find a little honey for the
bees and honey-eaters, and a few insects for the brown tree-
creepers; but, if it were not for the occasional rabbit or
possum that comes to a wet end because he fancies he can
swim, I don’t know what I should do with all those gaping
mouths to feed. Anyway, if you interrupt again, I shan’t go
on with the story.”
“No, no, don’t stop!” pleaded the Red Gum. “Your
voice is very soothing, you know. I don’t know when I felt
so comfortable.”


The Murray eyed him sourly. “I don’t know that I like
that remark,” he said. “You sound a bit sleepy to me.
However—” He flung a cold splash at the Tortoise to try
to make him shiver; then, having failed, went back to his
story.
“By the time Old Soldier was about twenty pounds in
weight (he’s over ninety pounds now —did I tell you?) I
simply couldn’t find enough small fry and yabbies to satisfy
him. He hunted on the bottom and among the reeds, swam
upstream and down, lay head to the current with eyes on the
alert and fins gently moving; and little creatures by the
million seemed to go into his jaws. He never stopped eat-
ing. Up went his weight—thirty pounds, forty pounds,
fifty pounds, seventy pounds. And the more he grew, the
more he wanted.
“But during the whole of this time there was one thing he
would not do. He would not snap at anything on the sur-
face without taking a good look at it first. Many a fat grub
he lost to his more daring brothers and cousins, because of
this extraordinary caution. But, on the other hand, many a
brother and cousin had he seen hauled out of the water
in a shameful manner on the end of a line, and all be-
cause they had not looked before they snapped.”
The Red Gum stirred as though he would ask a ques-
tion, but a glance at the Murray’s swift ruffle of annoy-
ance made him change his mind. The Murray cleared his
channel slightly, and went on:
“You see, there are plenty of men on my banks, and in
boats upon my surface too, whose chief ambition in life is
to lift a nice fat cod out of me on the end of a line. I’m
told that fillet of cod (whatever that may be) is a meal
fit for a king (whatever that may be). Anyhow it seems
to me to have something to do with being eaten —a sad


end for one who spends his own life doing little else but
catching food. I’ve watched these men at work. They
drop a nice little bunch of grubs, or a mussel, or the breast
of a parrot, or even a young rabbit into the water. Ah,
but wait! None of these things is exactly what it seems.
Each conceals a barbed hook which is fastened to a strong
line or a thin piece of wire. You can imagine the fate of
the unwary fish who takes a mouthful of sharp hook.
“Old Soldier came very close to being caught once. He
had watched a wriggling mass of white grubs, one day, for
nearly a quarter of an hour. They had drifted down
quite naturally with the current, and in the muddy water
(I had an extra load of silt on that day) he had not seen
the line that led from the grubs to the surface. With
great care he had nosed at them, until the closeness of so
much good food had almost driven him mad. Satisfied at last,
he turned up to pass downstream above them, intending to
reverse and swallow them as they drifted into his mouth.
Then, as he swam, he felt the line.
“Fear took hold of him, and he did a foolish thing; he
flipped up his tail and dived, the line running along his
side as he made for the bottom. He had not taken the
bait, but his body tightened the line, and a quick jerk from
above drove the hook into him. There was quite a flurry
before he was free again, with a nice little tear about two
inches long among his scales.
“That experience made him more careful than ever; in
fact, he was so careful that for two or three days he ate
positively nothing at all. I was sorry for him, and more
than a little ashamed; for, if I had been as clear as I ought
to have been, he’d never have missed seeing the line in the
first place. But what’s a river to do? When he’s got his
hands full of silt, he can’t drop it just anywhere. He’d
be all bed and no stream in no time, at that rate.


“I kept an eye on Old Soldier after that; for I felt I
had to make it up to him somehow, for helping to deceive
him. Wherever I found a drum net lurking in my cur'
rent, I hurried Old Soldier across to the other bank. He
must have wondered sometimes why I buffeted him so,
but I wasn’t going to have him swimming into any low*
down trap.
“Yet, in spite of all his cunning and all my care, Old
Soldier got himself fairly hooked one day.
“I was very low at the time, and the great cod was
lying in a deep pool behind a sunken log, watching as usual
for any morsel that I might be bringing down on my slow
stream.
“All at once, there was a skitter and a churring on the
surface that brought him round with all fins quivering.
Over his head passed a thin line of foaming white.
Dragonfly or spinner? He had met spinners before —
cunning little propellerdike contrivances, that can be cast
on the end of a line and drawn through the water for all
the world like a frantic dragonfly that has been driven on
to the stream by a bird. But no, reasoned Old Soldier, no
one would be foolish enough to cast a spinner among all
those snags.
“There it went again, with a white flash of foam, and
a glint of buff and green. Old Soldier rose to it like a
streak of lightning.
“ ‘Got him!’ shouted a voice from an old overgrown
sandbar, and the cod felt a sharp pain in his jaw, and a
jerk that turned him over just as he was making back to
the log, causing him to rush, without thinking, a dozen
yards in the wrong direction—clear of the snags and into
midstream.
“For a moment he was in a panic. It had happened at
last. He had allowed himself to be fooled, because he


thought he knew the ways of anglers. Then his senses
cleared, and he took a rapid glance at the line. Picture-
wire cast, eh? The worst of the lot. It would be a
battle now, for he recognized that the man who could
draw a spinner among those logs was no ordinary fisher-
man.
“But first he needed more line. With a sudden rush,
he was off down my channel. I could see the man's face
clearly. He grinned slightly as he let the straining line
run steadily from the reel.
“ 'Sixty pounds if he’s an ounce,' I heard him mutter.
Where's he off to? I was sure he'd make for the logs.’
“As he spoke, Old Soldier suddenly turned and made
upstream, racing back along the slackened line for the
snags. He meant to dive, and turn the line about a
broken branch or two. Then he could snap it almost at
his leisure. But, as he had guessed, it was no ordinary
fisherman that had hooked him. Reeling in frantically
but surely, he had the line tight again in a moment. Long
before the cod was level with him, the strain was bringing
his rush to a standstill.
“The old chap hung a moment in the water. This
would never do. He could not get the line taut enough
to break it; it followed him everywhere, with just enough
strain to wear him out.
“He determined on a bold move. Straining away steadily,
he fought for another foot or two of line; then, with a swift
dash straight toward the angler, he came to the surface,
trying with something like a leap to get rid of the hook.
The man had begun reeling, but as the fish appeared he
snapped back the point of the rod so that the line slackened
never an inch. Down went Old Soldier again, with the
hook still fast in his jaw; and the rod came down, too.


“The cod ran again, more from habit than with any plan—
and the line followed him, still frighteningly tight. He
would fight on till the last, of course, but there seemed little
he could do. For more than half an hour, he ran and rose
and plunged.
“At last he came to a stop —this time not because he meant
to, but because he was tired. The line turned him, and he
felt himself drawn slowly forward—a foot —a few inches —a
foot more. Now and then, with a flurry, he gained a little,
but on the whole he was losing. The water was shoaling,
too. Surely he was not so near the sandbar as that!
“He slipped over a bank, and the water was deep again.
And then he saw it —not a snag, but an ancient punt with
broken timbers halTsunk in my muddy bed.
“His will to fight came back with a rush, and he was off,
with the last remaining ounces of his strength. The man
felt him go, and reeled out grudgingly. It would be silly to
risk a snap now, after having played the fish for so long.
The extra few feet were all that Old Soldier needed. With
a short, quick sweep he was round the punt, almost breaking
his own neck as the line snagged on the broken timbers.
“I have seen men hold a stearmboat with a halThitch of
rope thrown over a bollard on a jetty. That sudden jerk
helped the cod to complete a perfect half'hitch round the
end of the punt; and, now that he had something unyielding
to pull against, he tore the hook out of his jaw in a flash.
“I don’t know what the angler said or did. I was watch'
ing Old Soldier, as he swam wearily back to his hole beneath
the log. And I continued to watch him for almost a week,
while he lost a good ten pounds in weight and his mangled
mouth slowly mended.”
The Murray balanced backward and forward in a gentle
wash —partly due to a passing boat. “It was a great battle,”
he said.


The Red Gum stretched his roots and, with the aid of a
gusty breeze, fetched a great sigh. “It must have been,” he
admitted; “but it beats me why you didn’t warn Old Soldier
about the spinner, or drown the angler or something.”
“Can’t interfere too much, you know, in the affairs of men
and such lesser creatures,” the Murray drawled.
“Huh!” snorted the Red Gum. “A bit too godlike—that’s
what’s the matter with you. Mount Kosciusko’s your home,
not Mount Olympus.”
“Rot!” said the Murray.
“Not I!” said the Red Gum. “That’s one thing a Red
Gum will never do.”
“Don't you be too sure!” the Murray flashed, as he seized
the Tortoise and swung out in a blaze of sunlight. “Wait
till your time comes to fall in here.”


CHAPTER 111.
THE EARLIEST RIVER'MEN
“There’s something I’ve always wanted to ask you,” said
the Murray to the Red Gum, as he tugged at the old tree’s
roots to wake him up. “But it’s a personal matter, and I’ve
rather shrunk— ’’
“Not at all like you if you mean that a sense of delicacy
stopped you,’’ remarked the Red Gum, brushing a cobweb
from his face, and yawning to the fullest extent of his hollow
limb. “But if you mean quite literally that you’ve shrunk,
there’s no denying it. I’ve remarked on it before.’’
“It’s the dry weather,’’ complained the Murray.
And, indeed, there was some excuse for his peevishness.
There had been no rain in the mountains for more months
than he liked to think, and the season of snow-waters had
long since passed.


“If this goes on,” he added, ‘Til have to think about
rationing your supply of water.”
“Rationing?” queried the Red Gum.
“Yes, rationing. It’s a trick the rails at Albury told me
about—a very popular trick on dry land just now. When
there’s not enough for everybody, you take some away from
those who want it in order to give it to those who don’t —or
something like that.”
“That wasn’t what you woke me up to tell me," said the
Red Gum. “I could dream things like that.”
“No,” replied the Murray, after a moment’s gentle rock'
ing, “it wasn’t. I wanted to ask you about that long scar
on your side. Appendicitis?”
“Appendi—which?”
“Appendicitis. That’s something else I learned from the
rails. One night the train had a man on board who was
very sick. It was rushing him to hospital, so that he might
have his appendix removed.”
“From his inside?”
“From his inside.”
“No,” said the Red um, “no one but the borers has ever
removed anything from my inside. That scar was made by a
dark man many years ago. It’s healed now.”
“Seems funny,” said the Murray, wrinkling his surface
thoughtfully. “Why should a dark man want to make a cut
like that?”
“You ought to know,” returned the Red Gum. “It was
to make one of the earliest of the boats that have sailed over
your waters.”
“Do you mean a bark canoe?” asked the Murray.
“What else?”
“Of course,” said the Murray, uttering under his breath
a kind of “tut'tut” (which may or may not have come from
the exhaust of a somewhat weary motorToat). “I had for'


The Earliest RiveR'MEN
gotten the bark canoes; it’s so long since I’ve seen one. But
now I come to think of it, there are scores of your relatives
along my banks, marked in exactly the same way.’
“I know," replied the Red Gum, leaning confidentially
toward the river, and emphasising his words by tapping a
couple of branches together. “The dark people usually
chose our family to provide their bark canoes. Our work'
manship and our materials were always the very best. Satis'
faction guaranteed, you know. It's the same with our wood.
The white people prefer it to all others for fencing posts,
railway sleepers, house blocks, and so on. That’s us! Best
bark, best wood—"
“And loudest voice," finished the Murray.
Indeed, the wind had risen to such a degree that the Red
Gum’s voice was almost a scream. But as the wind dropped
—it was a north wind, of course —the tree spoke in a much
lower key.
“I’ll tell you about my operation, if you like," he voh
unteered.
“Well," began the Murray, “I really ought to be getting
along. I only came in for a moment —"
“Oh, it's early yet," said the Red Gum, quickly. “Besides,
you needn't tell me that you're so dreadfully busy—not with
that little drop of water!"
“I suppose I could wait a while," admitted the Murray.
“I’m not in any condition to go rushing about. To tell you
the truth, I’m not feeling at all up to the mark." He let
his eye run wistfully over the higlvwater mark on the river'
gauge on the opposite bank.
“Well then," said the Red Gum, drawing a deep breath,
and settling his boughs comfortably, “here goes!" And,
in the timeTonoured manner, he began as follows:
“Once upon a time, when the dark men roamed the banks
of your stream, there were many more of my family here'


abouts than there are now. Some of them were here when
you brought me down from the billabong as a tiny seedling—
old trees and young trees, they were. Others sprang out of
the earth from season to season, as we parents dropped our
seeds into our own leafy mould.
‘Tut there are not many of us left now. Look about you,
and see for yourself! What with the of the
settler and the axe of the logger, and your own unsports'
manlike habit of toppling one of us over occasionally, we’ve
had a very hard struggle to keep ends from meeting. I’ll
say this for the dark people: they were as kind to the trees
as the most dyed-in-the'wood Red Gum could wish.”
“I know,” said the Murray. “I miss the dark men, too.
I remember—”
“The trouble is,” broke in the Red Gum, hastily, “that, if
you once start remembering, you’ll just go babbling on for
the rest of the day. Who’s telling this story, may I ask?”
“You will be, if you ever come to the point,” replied the
Murray. “Get on with it!”
“Well,” continued the Red Gum, “as I was saying, it
happened when the dark people were about here in their
hundreds, moving here and there along your banks. One
day, when they were camped over by that grassy hollow, a
messenger from the north came to visit them. He was a
young fellow and, like many another young fellow (young
Red Gums included), he thought he could tell other people
just how wrong they had always been in everything, and just
how much better he was used to arranging matters.
“In the north, he told my dark people, where his own tribe
lived, spears were twice as smooth and twice as tough as the
ones he saw about him in this camp. Lily bulbs, too, grew
twice as big as those he had seen in the women’s baskets,
and so did the kangaroos and the possums. In fact, he thought
it would be a good idea if his hosts would send two or three


men north with him when he returned, so that they might
learn how superior dark people were accustomed to live.
“Now, perhaps you’ve had to put up with that kind of
thing from some of your less polite tributaries. If you have,
you’ll know how my dark people felt. They said very little,
for their laws obliged them to welcome messengers, and to
grant them every privilege. That this young seedling clearly
knew no better than to abuse his privileges by boasting was
not enough to make them forget their dignity; but it was
enough to make one of the elders lean over and whisper to a
young buck, who quietly went and stationed himself on our
bank, watching your surface keenly.”
“Of course,” said the Murray. “I see it all. The tribe
was going to show the boaster the finest river in all the land.”
“They might have shown him as big a boaster as himself,”
retorted the Red Gum. “But, in any case, you’re wrong.
The young buck was merely watching for one of the tribe,
due home from fishing at any moment, with his canoe. And,
sure enough, within a minute or two the fisherman hove in
sight, driving his lonely bark across the waste of water —”
“Who was wasting the water?” asked the Murray. “That
was a punishable offence, surely.”
“No, no,” said the Red Gum. “I merely used a figure of
speech to describe your extraordinary breadth and depth.
No one was wasting the water.”
“I see,” said the Murray, who didn’t see at all, but who
rather liked the reference to his size. “Go on.”
“Well,” continued the Red Gum, “the fisherman came
ashore (I believe I am using the term that ought to be
employed in describing the act of one who reaches dry land
after a voyage), and at once the tribe brought their visitor
down to see the canoe. It was far better than any he had
seen in the north, but he didn’t allow the slightest sign of
surprise to escape him. In fact, he mentioned in quite an


off-hand manner that his people could knock up a better boat
than that inside three or four days. And this was just
what the shrewd old dark man who had done the whispering
had been waiting for. He knew very well that the boaster’s
people made their canoes from stringy bark, for few of my
family grew in their territory; and, that being so, they had to
spend at least a couple of days in steaming the bark, and
turning it inside out, and allowing it to set in its new posi-
tion.
“So, when he offered to show the visitor how to make a
canoe in a few hours, the latter walked right into the trap by
loudly proclaiming that it couldn’t be done. I chuckled, I
can tell you, for I knew that the old fellow would be every
bit as good as his word. But, as it turned out, I chuckled
too soon; the next moment he had marched up to me, laid a
hand on my trunk, and announced that in the morning he
would take a canoe from my coat, and have it in the water
before noon.
“Now, an operation—even a minor one—is not a comfort-
able thing to think about. It was foolish of me, I know, but
I shivered all night, so that I set every one of my gum-
caps chattering on the rim of its cup; and, in the morning,
there wasn’t a flake of dry bark left anywhere on my trunk
or branches—the ground at my foot was littered with it. I’m
afraid the birds in their nests had a very disturbed sleep—if
any at all.
“The few things I had to do in preparation were quickly
done. You will notice that the wound extends over the
great bend in my trunk. I knew that would be so, because the
dark people always tried to take a piece of bark that was al-
ready hollowed in the centre, to save themselves some of the
shaping of the canoe. So I set to work to change the course of
my main sap-channels, so that my branchlets and leaves would
not go hungry while the cuts were healing. After that, I
waited as patiently as I could until the morning.


The Earliest Riveß'Men
“With the first streak of dawn the tribe was astir, and the
work began. First of all, the old man built a kind of scaffold'
ing against my side, by cutting one or two notches with
his stone axe, and leaning saplings against them. Then, be'
ginning from a point a few feet from the ground, he marked
out a long, pointed oval, with my bump in the very centre of
it. To do this he used a sharp piece of stone, which was
just as useful to him as the penknife was to the small boy
who, at the picnic a few days ago, cut some letters in the
bark of my friend next door.
“Then the operation really began. Starting again at the
bottom, the old man and a friend cut a deep groove with
their stone axes, following the shape that had already been
marked out. As their work took them higher and higher,
they climbed upon the leaning poles, and clung to my trunk
almost as easily as the brown tree'creeper does. Peck, peck,
peck went the axes —like the beaks of brown tree'creepers,
too.”
“Didn’t it hurt—this ‘peck, peck, peck’ business?” asked
the Murray.
“Can’t say it did,” replied the Red Gum. “It’d take more
than a cut or two to make me wince—especially cuts that
only just go through my skin.”
“Yet you made a noise the other day when I tugged your
roots,” commented the Murray.
“That’s different,” said the Red Gum. “You were just
making a nuisance of yourself, and that’s a thing I detest.
However, to get on with what I was saying—at last the
chopping was finished, and the two men climbed down and
stood back to look at their work. They looked at their visitor,
too, who was still grinning confidently. He had seen a
canoe cut out just as quickly in the north, and didn’t fail to
say so.


"‘Without a word the dark men set about the next step.
One of them carefully worked a sharp stone under the lower
tip of the bark, easing it gently away from my wood, while his
companion brought up two long, tough poles, sharpened and
slightly flattened at one end. They were about to lift off my
bark—the hardest task of all; for, of all the dingers in this
world, a Red Gum and his bark are perhaps the best.”
"‘You hate to part with anything of yours, don't you?”
sneered the Murray. ""You could quite well be called the
Scotch Fir, except that you’re far too awkward and too flinty
to be mistaken for a fir.”
‘"You take a jaundiced view of everything,” said the Red
Gum. ‘"lt must be the yellow mud that’s at the bottom of
your flow of ilhnature. Or rather,” he added, with a hearty
chuckle, ""the mud’s at the bottom no longer; that’s the
trouble.”
"‘You wait till your water’s rationed!” snapped the
Murray.
"‘I am used to waiting,” replied the Red Gum. "‘I waited
that day, while the dark men edged their poles gently beneath
my bark. They worked slowly and carefully, levering up'
ward steadily, so that little by little my sheet of bark came
loose. At last it hung only by its top. Then two men
climbed on the leaning poles and, while another finished the
levering, lowered it to the ground.
""The old man took no notice of the visitor, who was still
telling all within hearing that nothing remarkable in the way
of speed had been seen so far. Instead, he dragged the green
canoe out into the hot sun where, within ten minutes, the
edges of the bark had begun to curl inward. But, before the
curling could go too far, he was busy placing three or four
short sticks across from side to side; and in next to no time
the rising sides had gripped the ends of the sticks, and could
close no farther.


“The visitor had been chattering for some time, explaining
that the canoe was not being made properly —that the bark
hadn’t been turned inside^out —that the game was not fair.
But the old fellow went on with his work, moulding a few
pieces of clay to make combings for’ard and aft, to keep the
water out.’’
“Combings?’’ queried the Murray, wrinkling his surface.
“Anything to do with hair?”
“Nothing,” replied the Red Gum. “A combing, in the
language of those who trust themselves upon the waters, is a
raised ridge or plank at the edge of a hold or in a doorway,
to keep meddlesome and prying wavelets from straying where
they’re not wanted.”
“Oh,” said the Murray, looking round hastily to see that
none of his own were getting out of hand.
“Well,” said the Red Gum, “the old fellow gave the clay
a bare halThour to dry and then, with the aid of a friend,
launched his new canoe upon your stream, and poled it up to
the bend and back. He didn’t tell the boaster that, as a
master craftsman, he liked his boats to dry and mature for a
week or two before use in the water, so that they might
grow more set and lighter and tougher. He had done exactly
as he had said he would do—made a canoe and launched it
within a few hours; and he had done what he had hoped to
do—upset the boaster so badly that he remembered urgent
business demanding his immediate return to the north.
“As for the wound,” went on the Red Gum, after a pause,
“it didn’t bother me in the least, and as the months passed
it closed up to a certain degree. The edges of my bark crept
a little way over the bare wood, and then they healed
with a kind of rolled finish—quite attractive, don’t you
think?”


"H’m," said the Murray, “it’s a matter of taste; though I
must admit I like curves and ripples and rolls myself. Rivers
wear them as often as they can. But, tell me, what became
of the canoe?"
"For all I know," said the Red Gum, “it’s buried in the
mud of your bed at this very moment. It won’t have rotted,
anyhow; there was good stuff in that canoe."
"Excuse me a moment," said the Murray, as a little ripple
rushed breathlessly round the upper bend. "I fancy this is a
message for me."
There was a whispering and a chuckling in the water for
a few minutes, and then the Murray turned to the Red Gum
with a new sparkle on his surface.
"Good news," he said. "There’s been heavy rain in the
eastern highlands. The Hume Dam is rising. I don’t think
there’ll be any rationing after all."
"Oh, well," replied the Red Gum, "I wasn’t greatly wor-
ried about that. Things generally come right if you don’t
get into a panic. The Tortoise never does. Where is he,
by the way?"
“He’s sulking," said the Murray. "I took him up into a
channel, and stranded him there for two days. He had to
crawl back under his own steam over dry land, and hated it
like poison. He’ll get over it, though."
“Exercise’ll have done him good," commented the Red
Gum,
"And now," said the Murray, gathering up his sticks, and
his veil of weeds and scum, "I must be off. I think I’ll slip
down to the pumping station, to see that things are in order
for the expected rise. I’ll put in for a chat again as soon as
I can find time."
"Don’t go overdoing things!" called the Red Gum, as the
Murray got under way. "A flood would be an awful bore
just now."


CHAPTER IV
CAN YOU KEEP A SECRET?
It was a grey day on the banks of the Murray. Taken all
round, they don’t come so often; but, when they do, there are
no half about them: they are properly grey. A
misty rain drifted across the stream, hiding it every few
minutes like a curtain or a cold smoke; and, whenever the
mist grew thicker, tiny pock-marks speckled the Murray’s
face, where droplets of water hastened to bury themselves
beneath the surface that checked their fall.
“Well,” said the Red Gum, trying to shake the drops from
his leaves, for all the world like a kitten with wet paws,
“rain’s a good thing, but it can be very depressing.”
“Oh,” said the Murray, thrusting the mist aside with his
ripples, and curving in from the grey nowhere, “it’s you, is
it? I declare you’re almost the same colour as the rain. I
didn’t see you for the moment.”


"Here, ta\e your water!" cried the Red Gum. With the
aid of a fitful breeze, he flung a drop from every leaf—
splash!—into the Murray’s face. “Take it, and feed it to
me in the right place— at the roots.”
“Well, I'm dashed!" exclaimed the Murray
“Splashed," amended the Red Gum.
“Well, I'm splashed!” agreed the Murray. “Fancy fling'
ing a fellow's gifts in his face like that!”
“I say!" broke in the Red Gum, suddenly pointing with
a dead branch. “What’s that you're bringing here? Not
more flotsam!”
“Oh, that,” said the Murray, as he sucked a boat in out
of the mist, and pushed it ashore. “That won’t hurt you.
It's only a boat I found a bit higher up.”
“Found?” queried the Red Gum, with the usual lift of
the high boughs. “I’ll bet you found it! Oh, I'll bet you
did! If I know anything about your ways, you filched it
from the bank, where someone had deposited it for the time
being.”
The Murray’s face wrinkled in a grin. “Oh, well,” he
said, “when a fellow makes a deposit at a bank, he expects
some interest. The owner of the boat will have the interest
of working out where his deposit has gone to.”
“And of walking for miles in the rain till he finds it,”
added the Red Gum. “You may be only water, but wine
can’t hold a candle to you as a mocker.”
“I’m afraid I wasn’t thinking of the boat’s owner,” con'
fessed the Murray; “but it’s too late to do much about it now.
I can’t very well carry the thing upstream, now can I? This
boat, you know, set me thinking.”
“A marvellous invention, the boat!” murmured the Red
Gum.


“Quite,” said the Murray, who, because of the mist, had
missed nearly every point during the day, and now added
another to the tally. “It reminded me of a secret that ceased
to be a secret.”
“Woman in the case somewhere, I fancy,” guessed the
Red Gum.
“No,” said the Murray, innocently, “they were all men,
and they discovered the secret —my secret.”
“Fire away!” invited the Red Gum, who had begun to
think that listening to a story might be as good a way as
any of spending a wet afternoon. Conversation was definitely
off: to have two jokes in succession fall flat was enough
to damp the eucalyptus of the toughest Red Gum.
“Well,” said the Murray, without waiting for a second
invitation, “you must know that, though by the middle
eighteemtwenties white men had been in Australia between
thirty and forty years, they had still not discovered where
all the inland rivers went to. They’d seen some of them —
the Murrumbidgee, the Lachlan, the Castlereagh, the Bogan,
the Tumut, and even the Darling, but they’d never followed
them right to the end. So all they had been able to do was
guess.
“Their guess, I may tell you, wasn't a bad one either. They
guessed that all of the rivers flowed into an inland sea. Now,
as you know —or do you?—thousands and thousands of years
ago there was a sea over the whole of my valley. I was a
deep sea gulf; the Darling was another; and so was the
Murrumbidgee. On our beds lay layers of ocean slime,
and —”
“Now, wait a minute!” exclaimed the Red Gum. “That's
a bit too thick. Where was I?”
“You simply weren’t,” said the Murray, sweetly. “There
were no trees hereabouts, nor was there any grass—unless


you count seaweed. However, that, as I said, was ages and
ages ago. The white men were quite right in a way, except
that they were thousands of years too late. You see, the
land had lifted, and the sea had drained back, and only I
and my tributaries remained in a liquid state. By the way,
if you still don’t believe me, wiggle your toes a bit, and per'
haps those that are deep enough may come upon some lime'
stone, or some fossil sea'shells. Oh, it’s true, all right.
“Well, it was 1824 before I saw my first white men,
though I knew from listening to my tributaries just what they
looked like.
“I remember the Murrumbidgee calling me up one morning
to tell me a particularly fresh piece of gossip. I hastened
down to the junction to meet her, and there I heard the
strangest tale that any river ever babbled out. It appeared
that, that very morning, a party of white men, with horses
and bullocks and drays—a dray is a kind of boat that rolls
over dry land—had suddenly come out of the bush on to her
banks. They had seemed surprised, and not very pleased, to
see her. The trouble was that she was in their road, for they
wanted to keep going south, ancf they had all kinds of things
that they didn’t want the Murrumbidgee to touch. Now, we
rivers like to look into everything that we come across, or
that comes across us. Of course, when we do that, we leave
things a little damp. I can’t see any objection to that my'
self, but evidently white men can, because they build boats
(like this fellow) for that very purpose: to keep us out of
their affairs.
“These white men, then, who reached the banks of the
Murrumbidgee, were greatly concerned to know how to get
across while at the same time keeping their stores dry; but
it wasn’t long before one of them hit on a plan. They had
no boat, so they built one.”
“A bark canoe?’’ asked the Red Gum.


"It wasn't a bark canoe,” said the Murray. “I'm not at
all sure that they could have done that. No, they took the
wheels off their dray, stretched a kind of sail round it, and
punted it across my youngster.”
“Your what?”
“My seedling,” explained the Murray. My tributary,
the Murrumbidgee.”
“Oh,” said the Red Gum. “Then why didn't you say
so? And did they take the horses and bullocks in the dray
I mean boat?”
“They did not,” replied the Murray. “The animals had
to swim for it. Anyway, when all were safely across, the
men put the wheels on the dray again; and the Murrunv
bidgee watched them set off into the bush before she rushed
down to tell me all about it. She told me, too, that they
were heading in my direction.
“The news threw me into a whirlpool for a moment, and
then I crept up into a backwater to do some quiet thinking.
It seemed to me that the party ought to reach my banks
somewhere about Albury—not that there was any Albury
then—so I made all haste to be on the spot to welcome them.
“Sure enough, in a few days there was a great crashing of
twigs and branches, followed by a good deal of shouting, after
which several men burst out of the trees and came to a halt on
the edge of my lagoons.”
“I suppose they set to work on the dray again,” offered
the Red Gum.
“No,” said the Murray. “They had had to leave the dray
behind in the bush. But they certainly wanted to get across
my stream. They tramped along downstream first, trying to
find a crossing through my lagoons and over my waters, then
they turned upstream. They seemed so eager about it that
at last I led them to a spot that was fairly clear. They made
a kind of boat out of branches and saihcloth, and got their


goods over without my getting more than the very briefest
peep at them.
“There’s something I’ve never understood about them,”
went on the Murray. “They didn’t seem to be altogether
without sense. They were delighted at the beauty of my
lagoons and my birds and my fish and my trees —’’
“T our trees!" exclaimed the Red Gum, setting the Kooka-
burra laughing in his branches. “I like that!’’
“And yet,’’ continued the Murray, without taking any
notice of either the Red Gum or the Kookaburra, “they did
the silliest thing I’d ever heard of. They wanted to get to
the sea—l heard them say so —-and they marched off into the
mountains. Into the mountains! Uphill! Why, the merest
brook knows that that’s no way to get to the sea. I could
have shown them the way, but no —they had to choose their
own.’’
“They had to give up, of course?" suggested the Red Gum.
“Well, no," admitted the Murray, “they didn't. They
had to turn out of their course sometimes, but they kept on;
and I had news of them occasionally from my southern seed-
lings—the Mitta Mitta, the Ovens, the Goulburn, and the
rest of the family. They came to the sea all right."
The Murray went into a kind of trance, rocking himself
backwards and forwards, and thinking. This was very
awkward for the Tortoise, who was crawling ashore at the
moment, and who found himself rocking with the river. The'
mischief of it was that the stolen boat was rocking, too; and
everyone knows that a boat is a very uncomfortable thing to
be rocked against. If the Tortoise didn't know it before, he
discovered it now; and, after a few attempts to get out of the
water, he solemnly put himself into reverse, and sank again
beneath the surface. The misty rain swept the last sign of
his movement from the river’s face.


“And that’s the end of the story; and they all lived happily
ever after,” said the Red Gum, at last.
“It gives me great pleasure to inform you that you re
wrong,” said the Murray. “It is not the end of the story,
and they didn't live happily ever after. I saw them again,
for they came back from the sea, crossed over me once more,
and went north. I learned a few things from them —eaves-
dropping, you know —”
“Oh, where?” cried the Red Gum. “Really, I can't afford
to lose any more just now. I’ve dropped all I can spare this
season.”
“Eavesdropping!” explained the Murray. “I said ‘eaves-
dropping’, not ‘leaves dropping’.”
“Oh,” said the Red Gum, with a sigh of relief, “you mean
listening on the quiet.”
“Precisely,” said the Murray. “Well, I heard them talk-
ing over what they called ‘the secret of the rivers’ —my secret,
you know. And they really were, as I have already said,
not without intelligence. They guessed that all the rest of
the rivers they had crossed flowed into me —the Hume, as
they called me.”
“Why?” inquired the Red Gum.
“Didn't I tell you?” said the Murray. “The names of
the two leaders were Hume and Hovell, but Hume was
rather more the leader than Hovell was, so they gave the
leader’s name to me. Jolly decent of them, I thought.”
“This Hume —” said the Red Gum, after a pause—“was
he always babbling?”
“Not that I remember,” said the Murray. “Why?”
“Oh, no reason,” replied the Red Gum. “I just wondered
why Hovell was so willing to have you named after Hume,
that’s all.”


I once heard a man speak of your rude old trunk,”
marked the Murray. ‘He was not without intelligence,
either. But I may tell you that Hume and Hovell were quite
friendly when I saw them last; though later, I believe, they
fell out. No, not into the Murrumbidgee. Much later.
They called each other a whole lot of names because, so
far as I have been able to gather, one of them said they'd
been to Western Port, whereas they’d really been to Corio
Bay, and the other said he d known where they had been all
along, and the first said they’d both been wrong, and the
other—”
That 11 be enough,” said the Red Gum. “You’re about
as clear as the HwangTo.”
“The which?” queried the Murray.
HwangTo, repeated the Red Gum. “Chinese river
with a lot of mud in it, I understand.”
“Oh,” said the Murray, who was already letting his
thoughts run far ahead. “Well, anyway, I haven’t finished
the story yet.
“About five years later, the Murrumbidgee happened to
mention to me that there were more of these white explorers
in sight. In fact, she had been doing her best to annoy them.
I heard something about her having sunk one of their boats
and having thrown a maze of reeds in their way, and then
it dawned on me that these were thoroughly intelligent men.
They were not crossing rivers and running uphill looking for
the sea. They were using a boat and trusting the Murrunv
bidgee to lead them to it.
“I give her a good talking to,” continued the Murray,
“and sent her back to bring them along as fast as she could.
Throwing reedbeds in their way indeed! I can tell you, she
made it plain sailing for them after that; and, in less than no
time, out they shot from the Murrumbidgee into me.
“How they cheered, and fired off their guns, and laughed,


and praised my broad waters! 'A broad and noble river ,
their leader called me.”
“Eye'wash!” murmured the Red Gum.
“Oh, no,” said the Murray, “not particularly high. It
was just an ordinary wash, such as any curious river with a
fair head of water might make when it sees a strange boat.
I'll admit at once that I put up the best show I could —smart
current, polished surface, sun dimples, and the rest; for this
leader—this Sturt—was a soldier, and he looked me over as
though I were a recruit on parade.
“He seemed just as pleased with me as I was with him, and
away we went downstream together. I don’t think I’ve told
you much about that part of my sixteen hundred miles that
lies to the west, have I? No, I thought not. Well, you’ll
hear a little now, as I go on with the story.
“Sturt and his men rowed and drifted during the day, and
camped at night, either in the boat or on a sandbar. They
didn’t feel very safe among the dark people, you see, so they
couldn’t take too many risks. But I’ll say this much for
them: they did their best to remain friendly with my natives.
Sturt would never let his men break the natives’ fish traps, or
row over their duck snares; and, wherever he could, he gave
the dark people presents.
“This kindness, I was glad to see, had its reward when,
one day, the party ran into a tribe of natives who had so far
had no dealings with Sturt. I was quite narrow at this
place, on account of a sandbar that I had built during a pre'
vious floods; it reached almost from one bank to the other.
The tribe quickly gathered on the bar, and began to shake
their spears and shout threats at the white men, who were
getting their guns ready to fire, when—splash!
“I turned just in time to receive the body of another
native —a man who lived farther up my stream, and who


Gum Bend
had followed us down along the other bank. He had dived
in, and now he swam like a cod across to the sandbar, and set
up a great old argument with the spear'shakers. He soon
persuaded them to put down their spears and get back off
the bar; and the boat slipped past in safety. You see, Sturt
had made friends with him a few days before, and the dark
man wasn t going to have his friend hurt.
Well, Sturt discovered the whole of my secret. He found
the mouth of my great tributary, the Darling, who remem'
bered him at once. The Darling had met him before, much
higher up, and had never said a word about it to me—the
mussel! Then he rowed on and on till he came to the lake at
my mouth—Lake Alexandrina. There, of course, he found
the water salt, and knew he was at the end of his journey—
or almost.
He had planned to get out to sea, and to try to find a ship
at Encounter Bay. I tried to tell him that it couldn’t be
done, but he wouldn’t listen, and kept on rowing this way
and that. You see, I had been dropping silt down there at
my mouth for ages. It helped to keep the sea out, but it
was a dreadful nuisance in other ways; I could scarcely find
my own way through it, and I couldn’t raise enough current
to show him any of the passages.
“So at last he had to turn upstream, and he and his men
had a long hard row back to the camp on the Murrumbidgee.”
“I must say,” said the Red Gum, “you have a queer way
of showing your liking for a person. Didn’t you nearly
starve him?”
“Now, look here!” objected the Murray. “How was Ito
know he couldn’t live like the dark people? My fish were
here for him, and there were kangaroos on shore, and—”
“And I suppose he hadn’t enough powder and shot, and
would have found it dangerous to land in order to use it,
anyway,” finished the Red Gum.


“Well,” said the Murray, “all’s well that ends well. He
did get home, and he had discovered my secret: he knew
that all the inland rivers joined me, so that we all reached the
sea together at Lake Alexandrina. And, best of all, he gave
me my present name.”
“Huh!” said the Red Gum. “Murray! Rhymes with
'hurry' and ‘skurry’ and ‘flurry’—things you never do if you
can get out of them.”
“True,” said the Murray, unabashed. “I hate tearing
about. Nevertheless, I must move on now, I think. Hullo,
the rain’s stopping.”
“Fine!” said the Red Gum, waving a branch before his
face to whisk away the last breath of mist. “Now, per'
haps, we’ll have some sunshine.”
“Good'bye,” said the Murray, as he wheeled gracefully
away from the shore.
“Here, what are you going to do with this?” called the
Red Gum,
“The boat? Oh, you keep it. If the owner doesn’t call
for it, wrap it over your scar,” suggested the Murray.
“Go jump in the lake!” retorted the Red Gum.
“Sooner or later,” promised the Murray, as he set out on
the long trip to Lake Alexandrina.


35s*
CHAPTER V.
PADDLES CHUNKING
"One of the nicest things about you,” said the Murray, as
he washed into the Red Gum’s bay with more resolution than
he had shown for a long time, "is the marked leaning you
have toward me. It’s most encouraging.”
"Don’t let it encourage you too much!” replied the Red
Gum, waking slowly from his midday doze. “I lean as far
as I want to now; any farther might be fatal. If you’ll take
my advice, you’ll drop a load or two of silt under my roots
on your side, and pack it well in—for both our sakes.”
"There’ll be plenty of silt directly,” said the Murray.
"It’ll be quite a change to be blessed for dropping a little,
instead of cursed. Which reminds me —what is the bank
like, up above you?”


The Red Gum twisted a top branch into a more impossible
shape than usual, to have a look.
“It's all right," he said, slowly recovering. “Why do you
ask?"
“Oh, it's just that I've been in my bed too long. A river
can have too much of this lying in bed. I m thinking of
rising," replied the Murray, bending himself a little more
sharply, and then stretching toward the bank.
“Now, w r ait a minute!" exclaimed the Red Gum, hastily.
“You can’t come up here. I’ve got all my seedlings coming
along nicely. What do you think they’ll look like, after
you’ve been swirling among them and piling your rubbish all
over the place? No, sir! You just stay in your bed until
they're big enough to put up with you!"
“Oh, well," said the Murray, “there’s no great hurry. But
there’s a sort of rushing in my head, that tells me I’ll have to
be up and doing directly. When I make up my mind, neither
you nor anyone else will stop me."
The Red Gum was very worried. Somehow, floods always
took away more earth from about him than they left behind —
at least, so it seemed to him. “It’s a long time since I've
heard that old cry, ‘The river is up!’ " he said.
Neither spoke for a while. The Red Gum worried, and
occasionally stirred uneasily; the Murray hummed softly to
himself, and now and then, when his thoughts pleased him
particularly—chuckled outright.
“I was thinking," he said, presently, “about some of my
fine rampages of the old days—when I’d break loose properly,
and make out over the country for miles. Those were the
days of the steanvboats," he added.
“Huh! The steaimboats!" grunted the Red Gum.
“Murderous wretches! Woodturners!"


"‘The steam-boats are history," said the Murray, severely;
and, as such, I cherish them. Besides, they provided me
with some of the best sport I've ever had. We were always
out to take a rise out of each other, the steam-boats and I.
Friendly combats—armed neutralities—stealing marches —
may the best man win! That kind of thing, you know."
He chuckled again; and his song, going on and on, found
words; and this is the story the Red Gum heard:
“It is over ninety years since the first steam-boat began its
thrashing and twirling and whistling on my waters. Her
name was Mary Ann , and her captain was William Randell.
I have a soft spot in my heart for Captain Randell, because
he was one of the first white men to be full of enthusiasm
about me. He was sensible enough to know that there could
he no finer life in all the world than a life on my waters, and
many were the kind words he had to say for me."
“I've heard steam-boat captains with a very different
opinion of you," put in the Red Gum.
“Their bark, like yours, never hurt any one yet," returned
the Murray. “In their hearts they were all very fond of me.
I played tricks on them; but, bless you, that’s a privilege
surely allowed to a river when he's being continually cut up
with paddles, and whistled at every time he wanders a little
from the path of rectitude!
“But my steam-boat days really began in 1853," went on
the Murray, getting back to his story, “when Captain Francis
Cadell sailed the good ship Lady Augusta in through my
mouth, and tied her up at Goolwa jetty. You see, the
Governor of South Australia, Sir Henry Fox Young, had got
that State’s council to offer a prize of £2OOO for the first two
steam-boats to sail from Goolwa up to my junction with my
chief tributary the Darling (an.d a good daughter she's been


to me!). The boats had to have at least forty horsepower,
and to be able to float in two feet of water.
“Well, as I said, the Lady Augusta came to Goolwa in
1853, with Captain Cadell on board. He was an old river
man, for he had known steam-boat life on the greatest rivers
in North and South America —the Mississippi and the
Amazon —and was, at the time of which I speak, living in
South Australia. We were not by any means strangers, for
the captain had already sailed down my stream in a small
canvas boat, and had made what he called ‘charts' of my
bed and course.
“I may tell you that I didn't much care about this chart-
making. I'm an independent fellow, and charts seem to me
like a set of rules that are meant to be followed. To have
your description set down on paper is the next thing to
having concrete walls along your banks."
“A fellow once put me down on paper," said the Red
Gum. “He was an artist; and, though he swore a good deal
when I wouldn't keep still for him, I must say the picture was
quite a success."
The Red Gum glanced down his blue-grey trunk com-
placently, and flicked away a cobweb with a smart swish of
a branchlet.
“That's different," said the Murray. “I've been painted,
too; but being charted is quite another thing. However, as
you'll hear before I've done, I found ways to give the chart-
makers a headache or two. It was no trouble to me to be
different from the charts. A sand-bank or a snag, moved a
few yards in a night, was all that was really necessary.
“Still, I do confess that I felt a little flattered that Captain
Cadell should have gone to the trouble. And I felt flattered,
too, when who should walk on board the Lady Augusta but


the Governor of South Australia, his lady (after whom the
boat was named), and other notable people! I refrained
from playing too many tricks during that trip, and the little
ship made her first voyage to Swan Hill and back without
trouble. On the way downstream, she took with her 444
bales of wool, 1000 sheepskins, and a quantity of tallow.
“My, how the years slipped past —faster and leaving fewer
wrinkles on my face than the steam-boats themselves! Within
less than thirty years there were more than a hundred steam-
boats puffing up and down my broad stream, towing hundreds
of barges. Wool—bales and bales of it—went downstream,
either to Goolwa or to Morgan, so that it might be carried
by rail to South Australia’s harbours; and freight for the
inland towns and stations went upstream —building materials,
machinery, food, boots, clothing, and many more items than
I can remember now.
“It was a pleasant change,” went on the Murray, “to be so
busy. Gone were the days of peace and quiet. The steam-
ers sailed up the Darling and the Murrumbidgee, too; and
along their channels and shores, as well as mine, it was
nothing but the chug of paddles and the screech of whistles
and the ring of axes.”
“Axes!” exclaimed the Red Gum. “Yes, I know. Never
liked the steam-boats myself. Always wanting wood, wood,
wood to keep them going. No self-respecting Red Gum
would enjoy the prospect of ending his days in the fire-box of
a puffing, snorting, screeching, floating boiler.”
“You're getting heated,” said the Murray, mildly.
“Not at all! But I should have got thoroughly heated if
the steam-boats had got me—heated to a cinder,” returned
the Red Gum. “Anyway, they’ve gone now —or most of
them.”


Paddles Chunking
‘“’Yes,” said the Murray, “they’ve gone. The railways put
them out of business. You see, South Australia, with their
help, was taking all the trade of my valley, that might other-
wise have gone to Victoria and New South Wales. So those
two States built railway lines to my very banks —and over
me! Then, of course, goods that would have taken a fort-
night to reach the sea by way of my course, were able to get
to Melbourne or Sydney in a day or two. That finished the
steam-boats.
“Much as I like a yarn with the rails at Albury, I miss
the boats. Such fun we had together, and such battles! I
remember one boat that had twinkling windows in her
deckhouse, and the cheekiest rake on her funnel that you
could imagine. She seemed always to be grinning away to
herself as though she were having a joke at my expense.
And, indeed, she often was.
“One night, as I was taking it easy down at Wentworth,
playing a bit of a game with the moon —catching her beams
and throwing them back to her on the first bounce —I over-
heard a conversation between that boat and another moored
alongside.
“ ‘Been here long?’ asked Twinkle-windows.
“ ‘A fortnight,’ said the other; ‘and likely to stay here for
three, or four months. They say the river’s in a frightful
mess downstream, with the channel all out of line, sandbars
popping up everywhere, and snags as common as Murray
perch.’
“ ‘You want to know your way about,’ admitted Twinkle-
windows. ‘Still, I've just come up, and, since my Old Man
made a careful study of the whole lay-out, I guess I’ll get
down again all right. He and I work together wheel-in-glove,
you know; it’ll take more than a river’s cussedness to catch
us.’


“Well,” went on the Murray, “as you can imagine, I
wasn’t going to let a vaunt like that go unpunished. As
luck would have it, a cloud shut off the moonbeams for a few
minutes, and I was able to creep away without the boats’
being any the wiser.
“By morning, I had several nice traps arranged for
Twinkle^windows and her Old Man—they all seemed to call
their captains the ‘old man’. When she hauled away from
her moorings at daybreak, I gave her a taste of what was
coming by concocting a nice back-eddy with the Darling, and
catching her stern in it, and almost washing her ashore. I
missed by a hair’s breadth; her captain was not so sleepy as
I had a right to expect at five o’clock in the morning. But at
least I had a laugh at the frantic racing of her paddles and
the smother of foam she thrashed up before she got herself
headed safely downstream. That was just playfulness on my
part; hardly a serious attempt to make her burn her words of
the night before. She steamed on to the next big bend.
“There, I set about her in earnest. I couldn’t help a
gleam of satisfaction—the sun was up by this time—when I
saw her hugging the inside bank. That was where the chan-
nel had been on her run upstream, but you may be sure it
wasn’t there now. Mind you, I had been careful down to
this point to leave the channel alone. The trick with a
steamer was always to let her think she knew all about every-
thing—steamers are not called ‘she’ for nothing—and then,
at the moment when she was feeling surest of herself, to
spring a surprise.
“I sprang one now. I had been at work all night, swing-
ing wide at the bend, and sweeping the gravel and mud across
to the inside of the curve. Twinkle-windows had her nose
in the mud before she could even whistle; and, as I had
expected, her stern swung a little. My current did the rest,


and there she was—nose in the mud and stern practically on
shore.
“It took twenty Tour hours, a team of horses, and a good
deal of profanity from her Old Man to get her afloat again.
Mind you, if I had cared to go down at the moment, I could
have left her there for months; but I had a good deal of
water upstream, and, what with that, and both the Darling
and the Murrumbidgee in pushing mood, I had to let her off.
But I did think that some of the twinkle had gone out of her
windows, and, as for her funnel—well, the top joint had
come slightly adrift with the shock, and it leaned forward
instead of back.
“Since my first trap had worked so well I softened a bit,
and went off downstream to expose a few of the others that
I had got ready just in case. I built up a carefully hidden
and completely new sandbar until it was almost on the sur'
face, so that I couldn’t pass it without rippling. Any
steamer, no matter how foolish, could see that; and of course
avoided it easily. Then I let go two or
three cunningly planted snags—whole trees they were —so
that their branches showed above the surface. They were
big enough to rip the bottom out of a steamer; but, since
Twinkle^windows had learnt her lesson, there was no need
for drastic measures. I punished only extreme cases of in'
science in that way, at all events. A river can’t take too
much notice of a few thoughtless words, because steamers get
led into bragging without meaning it. A friendly tussle,
just to keep them in their places, was more in my line than
out'and'out war to the death.
“I have always been glad I spared her,” went on the
Murray, “for another reason. I don’t think I’ve ever told you
of the two greatest hoaxes I used to reserve for steamers that


had become too cock-sure of themselves. No? I thought
not. One was to entice them far upstream on a full river,
and then drop suddenly, leaving them sitting high and dry
on the mud until the following season. Generally, a steamer
caught in that way took it all in good part; but the Old Man
used to be properly put out, sometimes dancing on the deck
in his rage. I'm used to seeing leaTshadows and sunbeams
leaping and twirling, but it wasn’t that kind of dancing at
all. I can’t very well describe it to you.
‘The second hoax was to get out of my bed one fine morn'
ing and wander for miles over the country, so that the whole
landscape became one vast sheet of water. When that hap'
pened, the less knowing steamers would get out of the
channel altogether, and get lost, and go steaming away over
the paddocks, and strand themselves among trees, and bump
into fences, and cause no end of amusement to everyone but
their captains—a humourless lot on the whole, though ex'
cellent engineers, and brave, resourceful navigators. It was
all on account of their birthplace, I’ve been told. But I
mustn’t lose the thread of my story.
“There came a day when I carried the wandering business
a bit too far; in fact, I spread myself over more square miles
than I like to remember. And, in doing so, I cut off every
homestead on its little hillock, so that no supplies could get
to many of them. The cattle and sheep took to the high
ground, and stood about in bunches on little islands; the
people stayed in their houses, and everyone was thoroughly
miserable.
“The worst of it was that, having begun the flood, I
couldn’t stop it —not all at once, that is. I had far too much
in the way of liquid assets to be contained in two banks.
Nevertheless, I hated to see people worried and unhappy;
and it was worse still to find that they were running out of


food, and that their stock were practically starving. There s
a lesson there, that I think might apply to others besides
rivers—never to begin a thing unless the end can be forseen
with some certainty.
“Anyway, it was at this point that Twinkle"windows
began to heap coals of fire on my head. She and her Old
Man had never lacked pluck, and do you know what they did
now? They fetched food for humans and fodder for stock
from farther down my course, and set out gaily over the
flooded country. With lookouts in the bows during the
day, and her searchlight going at night, the little steamer
paddled from homestead to homestead and from island to
island, threading her way among trees and logs, and distribut'
ing flour and meat to the people, and hay and grain to the
animals. And so, in the end, everybody was saved, and I was
able to take back my waters without uncovering any horrid
scenes; and, though Twinkle"windows and I had many a
contest in the days to come, they were always conducted with
the best of good humour on both sides.”
“Well,” said the Red Gum, when the Murray had been
silent for some time, “I hope you’ll think twice about going
in for large"scale floods this year. There aren’t any steam"
boats now to speak of.”
“No,” sighed the Murray, “there aren’t. But it would be
nice to feel the old strength in me again, and to take a look
at the horizon over there behind you.”
“Let the parrots and the wild duck and the herons tell you
all about it!”
“Perhaps you’re right,” said the Murray. “Anyway, we’ll
“Bless my heart'wood!” exclaimed the Red Gum, suddenly.
'lf that isn’t the Tortoise crawling out on the bank!”


“Come back, Sweet Slumber,” growled the Murray, turn'
ing him over on his back, and sucking him under. “You’re
too late. We’re about to move on. You’ve cheated your'
self out of a sleep, this time, by being too sleepy.”
And, as the Tortoise indignantly righted himself, the river
carried him off in a kind of walt£, so that the last thing the
Red Gum saw of them was a lasy splash or two where the
Murray wheeled his charge solemnly round the lower bend.


CHAPTER VI.
CURRANT TOPICS—INCLUDING
SULTANAS
It was a cold, clear morning, with the day not yet more than
grey in the east. The stars were paling overhead; they had
gone altogether from the horizon. All night they had glittered
sharply down upon the Murray and the Red Gum, leaping
like little splinters of ice upon the river’s face, and touching
with an occasional dull flash the topmost leaves of the tree.
The Red Gum had just sent the Owl and the Possum home to
bed, and was watching for the Kookaburra, who might be
expected at any moment to take up his station on the old dead
limb. From there, it was his custom every morning to shout
a welcome to the sun —not that the sun was due for a few
hours yet.
It was as cold as the Red Gum had ever known it to be.
He would have been glad to shiver, if only there had been a


dawn breeze to help him. As it was, he could do nothing
but stare in surprise at the grass on the flat beyond the bank.
Surely there was something wrong with the light: the grass
was white instead of green.
“I say!” he called in a brittle voice to the Murray, who
had settled well down in his bed. “I say, I can see snow or
ice'cream, or something of the sort.”
“Rubbish!” said the Murray, making a dry, icy tinkle
among the reeds. “That’s not snow. It’s a good hard frost,
I’ll be bound. That’s what makes it so cold.”
“It’s enough to freeze the sap in a fellow’s veins,” said the
Red Gum. “I wish the wind would rise; everything should
rise at daybreak. I’d like to thrash my arms about, and get
my circulation going a bit. If I have to stand here much
longer doing nothing, my eucalyptus will turn to grease; it’s
stiffer than engine-oil now.”
“Oil!” said the Murray. “My stars! I’d forgotten my
irrigation areas. Take a look away down to the west —there’s
a good fellow —over the bank at the bend! Can you see
anything in the sky?”
The Red Gum forced his numb toes hard against the earth,
and hoisted himself an inch or two higher, causing the
Kookaburra, who was coming in at the moment, to make a
very bad landing on the dead limb.
“Who'who'who-who'” spluttered the Kookaburra, angrily,
as he rubbed his bruised shin.
“Sorry,” said the Red Gum. “I was stretching, to do the
Murray a favour. I didn’t mean to hurt you. Laugh and
forget it! Here, I’ll tell you a joke. What’s the difference
between you and the Possum?”
“HeTeTeTeTeaps of difference. Kuh'kuh'kulvkulvcan’t
see any resemblance,” said the Kookaburra. “Ghgi'gi'gLgive
up, though!”


“Well,” said the Red Gum. “You bark the shin, and the
Possum shins the bark.”
“Ha! Ha! Ha!” laughed the Kookaburra, slowly and
nastily. He settled his chin in his feathers, and stared mood'
ily toward the east.
“Never mind him,” said the Murray to the Red Gum.
“Do take a look at the sky to the west.”
“Oh, yes, of course,” apologised the Red Gum, rising on
his toes again. “Why,” he said, a moment later, “there’s a
great dark cloud over there.”
“That’s all right, then,” said the Murray, while a wave of
relief passed over him. “They’ve remembered to light the
frost'pots.”
“What are ‘frost'pots’? And who are ‘they’?” asked the
Red Gum.
“Frost'pots,” replied the Murray, “are pots containing
little fires; and ‘they’ are the fruitgrowers who place the
pots among their vines to keep the frost from nipping them.”
“Nobody does that for me,” complained the Red Gum.
“I suppose the pots that protect those pampered vines are
kept alight, like the stearmboats, with good Red Gum sticks,”
he added, bitterly.
“Your mistake!” said the Murray. “The pots are filled
with crude oil. It was your remark about engine'oil that
reminded me of them.”
“What’s your interest in fruitgrowing?” asked the Red
Gum.
“Why, the fruit areas are my babies,” replied the Murray,
“Bless my bole!” exclaimed the Red Gum. “Is that so?”
“I don’t think I’ve ever told you,” began the Murray,
taking advantage at once of the Red Gum’s question, “about
irrigation, have I?”
“No,” admitted the Red Gum, “and I don’t see how I’m
going to —I mean, go ahead.”


“Well," said the Murray, “until about the year 1887, I had
seen few white men except those engaged in raising sheep,
those engaged in running steam-boats, and those who lived
in the towns that were meant chiefly to take care of the
sheep-men. A great deal of the land along my banks be-
tween you and the great South Australian bend was as still
and deserted as it was when Captain Sturt sailed his boat to
the sea—more so, in fact, for even the dark people had
become few and far between.
“Then, in the year I have mentioned, a great stir began.
There were men pacing my banks, measuring, examining the
soil, testing my depth, and making plans at the top of their
voices. I noticed all these doings at two separate places,
Mildura and Renmark, though at the time I didn’t know
what it was all about. However, to make the story perfectly
plain, I think I had better tell it as though I did.
“There was, at this time, a young man who had a vision.
He belonged to the same brotherhood as Hume and Sturt;
they were men with vision, too. This young man saw that
acres and acres of rich soil along my course could be made
to grow almost anything, if only my waters could be lifted
from my bed to give constant drinks to the thirsty land. He
talked about his idea so much that someone with less vision
than himself called him ‘a young man with water on the
brain’. But he didn’t mind being called names —not he. You
see, he had a seat in a place called Parliament, where that
kind of thing is quite customary; he also became Prime Min-
ister of Australia, later on. His name was Alfred Deakin,
and it is said of him that his voice was as pleasant to hear as
the voice of the most beautiful river in a thirsty land."
The Murray paused, and looked at the Red Gum to see
how he had taken the last remark. The Red Gum opened
his mouth to speak, changed his mind, and merely thrust his


toes deeper into the earth to warm them. In a moment or
two, the river’s murmur began again.
“Alfred Deakin,’’ he went on, “sailed across the ocean to
America, and there he learned and saw how men were using
other rivers to water bare land and turn it into a garden.
There, too, he met two Canadians who were afterwards to
become very great friends of mine. They were brothers,
George and W. B. Chaffey; and already they had established
two very beautiful fruit-growing settlements in Californian
country that had once been waste land. At Etiwanda, on
the old Santa Fe Trail, they had led water through cement
pipes from streams four miles away in the hills; at Ontario
(California) they had tunnelled through a mountain to bring
water from a torrent to their orchard land twenty-six miles
away. That’s the kind of men those Chaffeys were.’’
“H’m,” said the Red Gum. “They must have been like
the Platypus or the Crayfish, with their tunnelling.’’
“They didn’t have to tunnel to get my waters,’’ replied the
Murray. “But they had a great deal of trouble before they
could get any water at all. You see, I was willing enough to
water the land for them. To be allowed out over the fields,
even in a straightjacket, is something like being in flood. But
some of those who looked upon Alfred Deakin as ‘a young
man with water on the brain’ didn’t want me to help at all.
But there! I’m getting ahead of myself.
“George Chaffey came over to Australia, and he was one
of those men I had seen walking, and measuring, and soil-
testing. You wouldn’t know, of course; but once upon a
time there was a sheep station called Mildura, on which
rabbits and drought and wild dogs had played such havoc
with the stock and their feed that the owner had given it up
as a thoroughly bad job. And that, believe me or not, was


one of the places that George Chaffey chose for a fruit dis-
trict.
“Now, although it was his first choice, it wasn't the first
settlement to start. The Government of Victoria made
everything so difficult for him that he chose more land at
Renmark in South Australia, and, since that Government
was much more anxious to help him, Renmark was really the
first irrigation settlement to be established. However, Mib
dura was a close second, and in a very few years both were
well under way. My new twins, I always called them.’’
The Red Gum coughed gently. “Ahem!” he said. “I’ve
heard a great deal about what those men did to start Mildura
and Renmark. I haven’t yet heard a word about your part,
if any.”
“No,’’ said the Murray; “I’m coming to that. Without
me, the whole plan would have been useless. Oranges and
lemons and grapes and currants need plenty of water, as well
as good warm ripening weather. And, for those fruits that
are to be dried, there must be a good hot drying summer as
w r ell. You see, my climate is ideal.”
“We certainly get plenty of ripening and drying weather,”
commented the Red Gum. “I could do with a little of it
now.”
“It’ll be here in a month or two,” replied the Murray.
“Just have a little patience! And, in the meantime, don't
interrupt again if you can help it. It spoils the current of
my story.”
“I hardly think that a few words of mine could be as
effective as all that,” said the Red Gum, with a chuckle.
“However —go on.”
“Well,” said the Murray, “the Chaffey brothers (they
were both here by this time) set to work to make gardens in
the wilderness. They laid out towns, and divided up the


land into orchard blocks, which they sold to the men who
were going to grow the fruit. And then they called me in
to do my part.
“Just above Mildura, for example, I had made a beautiful
billabong, about six miles long; and, during the year before
they came, I had had quite a pleasant little flood, and filled
it right to the brim. So, what did the fruit-men do but
block the lower end of the billabong, and put in a pump at
the upper end to keep it full.
“Then they got some more pumps to lift my water out of
the billabong, so that it might run over the land.”
“In a flood?” asked the Red Gum, forgetting about not
interrupting.
“In a kind of flood,” said the Murray. “Anyhow, I was
able to wander about over land that I had never seen before
—too far above my banks.”
“I don’t follow,” said the Red Gum, who had been pulling
over it until he had developed a new and lasting wrinkle in
his grey bark.
“You could hardly be expected to,” said the Murray.
“No one could follow me there, unless he could crawl up
an iron pipe, run through irrigation channels, and scamper
about among the orange-trees and the vines. I can’t see you
doing any of those things. However, I’ll try to explain what
an irrigation system is like to-day; then perhaps you won’t
feel quite so sick about having to stand in the one place all
your life—”
“I once made a journey,” said the Red Gum, dreamily.
“When I was a seedling—”
“I know, I know,” put in the Murray, quickly. “You’ve
told that story. As I was saying, I ought to tell you about
irrigation.


“Often, when I leave you, I slip down to Mildura and
take a turn out over the blocks—there are 30,000 acres of
them about there now, to say nothing of a large and beauti-
ful city. First of all I drift up to the mouths of the pumps,
and then—whoosh! I’m lifted into the dark of the big pipes.
The pumps are powerful, I can tell you; not like some of the
first old wheelers —those dear old fellows who chugged away,
year after year, and helped me to get the fruit areas going.
I don’t have to flow; I’m carried. It’s quite a change for me,
who have carried things all my life, to take a ride instead of
giving one.
“Then out of the pipes I rush into a wide channel —not
so wide as my own bed, of course, but still wide enough for
me to go romping along at a great old rate between concrete
banks. And so I go on, out of main channels into lesser
channels, a whole network of them —until I find myself run-
ning along between the fruit blocks, waiting for someone to
open the gate.”
This was too much for the Red Gum. “What would you
be wanting with a gate?” he scoffed. “You’re not livestock.”
“I’m life itself to those vines and bushes and trees,” re-
turned the Murray. “When they need a drink, a gate is
opened to allow me to run out of the channel into the head
ditch of the block that is to be watered, passing on the way
among the blades of a water-meter, which measures the
amount of water I carry through. And, from the head chan-
nel, I make my way through little gutters in among the
rows of vines or orange-trees.
“You should see the roots come feeling out for a drink!”
exclaimed the Murray. “Those plants are even thirstier than
you are; though at least they have something to show for it —
plump golden oranges, or fat dark currants, or green and


purple grapes, all filled to bursting point with juice, on ac'
count of my waters,”
“H’m,” said the Red Gum. “In spite of all your vices, I
thought you were at least faithful to old friends. But I see
you prefer these new customers —these vines and bushes —
to your old Red Gums.
“It’s not that,” said the Murray, quickly. “I wouldn’t
change my lagoons for all the channels and ditches in the
world. And there’s no shade for me to equal the green
and brown gloom in here against your roots. Besides, I can
never take the Tortoise or the Platypus or Old Soldier up
there. I’d miss them terribly if I had to stay among the
blocks for ever. But I’m proud of the fruit acres, all the
same. Why, the oldest block among them all is less than sixty
years old, and to-day they stretch for hundreds of miles along
my stream. Alone I did it! And alone I keep them alive!
It s a great responsibility for an old river. Murrumbidgee’s
at work, too; she has irrigation areas that grow all the rice
Australia needs.”
“You’ve got a swollen head, that’s what’s the matter with
you, said the Red Gum. But, at the same time, he was
wearing a broad grin all over. That bit about the green
and brown gloom had pleased him no end.
“If I have,” said the Murray, “the Hume Weir will take
care of it for me. Swollen heads don’t worry me now. You
look after your own head, and see that it doesn’t come a
splash one of these days!”
It was at this moment that the Kookaburra went off like
an alarm clock, waking the whole riverside, and causing the
Owl and the Possum to turn over and pull the feathers and
the wool more firmly about their respective heads.
“Sun’s up!” said the Red Gum.


“Drat that bird!” exclaimed the Murray. “Can’t you
make him hold that infernal noise?’’
“Ha-ha'ha'ha, hoo'hoo'hoo'hoo'hoo!’’ blared the Kooka'
burra. “Stir yourself, Red Gum! On your way, Murray!
It’s going to be a perfect day.’’
“I’ll be on my way, all right,’’ said the Murray, letting the
sun’s rays run rippling down to the bend. “There must be a
quieter spot than this somewhere. I think I’ll get up among
the vines, and see if the pots have kept them safe from the
frost.’’
“Current for the currants!’’ shouted the Red Gum, as the
Murray gathered pace for his swirl round the bend.


CHAPTER VII
RIVER IN BONDAGE
“Speaking of dams and weirs and locks— ’’ said the Murray
one blistering day, as he swung into the Red Gum’s shade and
took a grip of the tree’s roots to hold himself at his moorings.
It was almost noon, and the sun had for some time been
turning on his full power, so that gaspings came from every
living thing along the river. Only the Tortoise in the
mud, and the Platypus in his cool burrow, and Old Soldier
in his deep pool dared defy him. The Red Gum was as
still as though the artist who had once painted him had
created not only the picture, but the original as well. For all
that, he wasn’t asleep. Not he.
“Speaking of dams and weirs and locks— ’’ said the
Murray.


‘‘l don't remember that we were doing anything of the
kind," said the Red Gum.
"We soon shall be," replied the Murray.
"You are far too sweeping—as usual," objected the Red
Gum. "That’s how you make your curves so sharp. In
this case it is you who will be speaking; I shall be listening —■
also as usual."
"Oh, well," said the Murray, peaceably, "it was only my
way of bringing up the subject."
"That’s another thing," continued the Red Gum. "You're
always bringing up something." Here he eyed the old shirt
that the river, believing him to be half asleep, was quietly
thrusting toward the bank. "Take that thing away at once!"
The Murray hastily drew back the shirt, swallowed it
quickly, and substituted the Tortoise, who crawled forward
and lay half in and half out of the water.
"Speaking of—" he began again.
“Yes, yes," broke in the Red Gum, testily. "Get on with
it!"
And the Murray, having gained his point and a listener,
burbled along sleepily, while the shadows rocked and
slumbered on his kind old face.
"You have often twitted me," he said to the Red Gum,
"with being either too high or too low—usually too low.
Like all young creatures —rivers included—you were, I sup'
pose, too giddy long ago to notice that things were once
far worse in that way than they are now. You thought of
nothing but looking at yourself in my mirror. Such airs you
used to put on! It isn’t so long since you told me that your


River In Bondage
leaning toward me was because of my washing about your
roots. To that kind of foolishness, my old river skippers
would have replied ''Havers!” or “Hoots mon!” or some such
thing. That isn’t the reason at all. The reason is that much
bending over in your youth, to see your own image, has
caused you to develop a permanent crook. Curvature of the
spine, that’s what’s the matter with you —with vanity at the
root of it.”
“Well said!” put in the Red Gum. “Vanity is at the root
of my spine—and Vanity is only another name for Murray.”
“We were talking about floods and droughts,” said the
Murray, quickly. “There was a very great drought in the
year 1914, and in that year I failed altogether. Not a drop
of water could I get from the mountains, so not a drop of
water could I give to anyone else.
“Now, that made the white men think hard. It seemed to
them that I might some day become just as bad as the
Georgina or Cooper’s Creek—two scamps who flood every
now and then, and who afterwards may be as dry as a lime'
kiln for years on end. If I were to dry up, where, they
asked, would the steamers be, and the sheep, and the towns,
and the farms along my banks? The answer seemed to be
'Nowhere!’ So they began to build their locks and their
weirs and their dams.
“Weirs and dams are very much the same kind of thing.
You know how I make deep pools for Old Soldier—by
throwing a tree or two across my stream, and hollowing out
my bed behind them. Well, a weir is like a fallen tree,
except that it stretches all the way across from bank to bank.
Generally, it is made of a kind of rock far too hard for me to
wash away. I’ve heard men call it concrete.
“The State of South Australia got busy first, and quickly
ran nine weirs across my course. Very confining, I found


them. And the position grew steadily worse, as Victoria
and New South Wales put in five or six more. Poor fyfur'
rumbidgee suffered, too —”
“I suppose when you say ‘suffered’, you mean that she
couldn’t go about disturbing people with her whims,” said
the Red Gum.
“I’d much rather tell this story without arguments,” said
the Murray, mildly, “but that’s what I did mean. There are
people, you know, who would sooner have a broken crust
on the open road than a banquet in a gilded cage.”
“Gilded fiddlesticks!” said the Red Gum, who was in no
mood for philosophy.
“Very well,” said the Murray. “How would you like to
be growing in a botanic gardens, and have men lopping off
those of your branches that didn’t please them, and raking
up your sticks and leaves, and weeding your seedlings out of
the lawn at your feet? Of course,” he added, slyly “the soil
would be very good, and you’d be a lot healthier without that
old hollow limb of yours.”
“Yes, 1 ' said the Red Gum, slowly, “I see what you mean.”
“I’m glad you follow my drift,” said the Murray. “As I
was saying, the weirs went in one by one, and I must confess
that the material effect on me was excellent. I ceased, for
the most part, feeling below par; in fact, I found myself
being built up wonderfully. For fifty miles back above each
weir, I was able to carry a full head of water the year round,
except in odd bad seasons like the present one.”
“I should think you’d have flooded worse than ever in
the snow-water season,” observed the Red Gum. “I re'
member how a tangle of dead trees and sandbars backed you
up one year, and sent you miles out of your course.”


“Oh, you do remember something of the old days, said
the Murray. “Well, the weirs might have done that to me
had they been badly placed, or had they been too high; but,
you see, I was able to climb over them all right when I felt
like it. What the weirs really did was to compel me to go
down to the sea in a series of steps and stairs, instead of
sliding down the banisters.”
“Would you mind repeating that?” asked the Red Gum.
“Better not,” said the Murray, hastily. “I don’t really
know what it means myself. I heard an engineer say it;
and since he said it over three or four times, and laughed,
and seemed very pleased with himself, I thought it must be
rather good.”
“Perhaps,” said the Red Gum, doubtfully. “However, I
can’t see that your steps and stairs would help the steamboats
much.”
“Oh, that was all arranged for,” went on the Murray.
“My upper part was never quite cut off from my lower part.
They put in locks.”
“But neither locks nor bars shall keep me own above from
me,” murmured the Red Gum.
“It is a felony, I believe, to misquote the poets,” said the
Murray, severely. “A lock is a very clever trick to allow
steamers to pass quietly on their way without having to
engage in a kind of hurdle race.”
“They couldn’t do that,” objected the Red Gum.
“No, they couldn’t,” said the Murray. “So this is what
the engineers did. Either in a billabong beside the weir, or
in the weir itself, they made a kind of paddock, like a little
drafting yard, with gates at both ends. Let us suppose that a


steamer is passing downstream. The top gates of the lock
are opened, and she steams in. Then the top gates are shut,
and the water in the lock is allowed to run out until the
steamer is floating at the same level as the stream below the
weir. Of course, when the lower gates are opened she can
go on her way without any further trouble.”
“But suppose she wants to go up instead of down,” said
the Red Gum.
“Wait till the cool of the evening, and work it out for
yourself,” advised the Murray. “Your crown needs a little
exercise. I’ve been struck more than once, lately, by its
rusty appearance.”
“Are all weirs the same?” asked the Red Gum, passing
over the insult.
“No,” said the Murray. “There are movable weirs at
Mildura and Torrumbarry—great chains of steel trestles, each
about twenty-four feet long and weighing ten tons, which can
be drawn out on to the bank every now and then. To me,
they're more like snags than sandbars. Now they're there,
and now they’re not! Disappearing trick, and so forth!
“Then there’s the great weir at Yarrawonga—
“Yarra —huh?” queried the Red Gum.
“Yarrawonga,” said the Murray, very distinctly. “Some'
one wrote a song about it once. Said to be the nicest town
along my course —by those who live there,”
“What do you think yourself?”
“Haven’t any favourites,” replied the Murray. “Too
wise to say so, if I had. But the Yarrawonga Weir is cer-
tainly very fine. They say it backs up my waters so that
they can bring life to about a million and a half acres of
sheep- and wheat-land. The only thing is that steam-boats
can’t pass it. However, by the time it was built, steam-boats
were practically things of the past; so I suppose it doesn’t


River In Bondage
matter. It rankles a bit, though, purely as a matter of pride.
You see, I used to be navigable as far as Albury; now I m
not.”
“You once promised to tell me about the Hume Dam,
said the Red Gum. “That’s a sort of weir, too, isn't it?”
“It is,” replied the Murray, “and a very big weir. It’s the
chief reason that I can’t turn myself into a really good flood
any longer. You see, it’s built up above Albury, not far
from the spot where those hilhclimbing explorers Hume and
Hovell crossed me. That’s why it’s called the Hume Weir.
I can't give you any real idea of the great concrete dam that
stretches across me from one bank to the other. When I
look up at it from below, I wonder whatever I was doing
away up there in the air, so to speak.
“But it’s a wonderful leap over the spillway. Talk about
sliding down the banisters! Why, I just leap out into space,
and land with a roar and a smother of foam. I often feel
like climbing up and doing it again, just for the fun of it.
There are needle valves in the wall that I can crawl through
too. I don't like that so much; it’s more like hard work. In
fact, they tell me that one of these days the work I do in
crawling through those valves will be enough to light the
whole of my valley with electricity, and drive all the
machinery for hundreds of miles around.
“Anyhow, the Hume Weir holds back my flood'waters
now, and lets them go steadily when, otherwise, I’d be feeling
very low indeed.”
“If,” said the Red Gum, “the dam holds back your fiooo'
waters, what becomes of them while they’re being held?
Don’t you go in for a fine old flood above the dam?”
“Oh, yes,” admitted the Murray, “but it’s not the same
thing at all. I have to flood where I’m told, now. The


dam makes me back up and cover an area of about 52 square
miles with a flood that’s nine miles across, in places. My
seedling the Mitta Mitta is in it, too. She joins me just
above the weir, so together we flood her valley and mine.
That accounts for the strange shape of the Hume Basin —
something like a great horseshoe, with one shank running
back along my course, and the other running back along hers.
Already we’ve drowned out one town; and soon, I’m told,
when the weir is made bigger, we’ll drown out another. Of
course, the people and their belongings will be moved first.”
“That’s all very well,” put in the Red Gum, “but what
about the trees? Aren’t there any trees growing there'
abouts?”
“Now, see here!” said the Murray. “I’ve never changed
my plans on account of trees yet. If they’re in my way,
down they go.”
“One of these days,” suggested the Red Gum, “you’ll be
sorry for that.”
“I shouldn’t be surprised if you’re right,” said the Murray,
uneasily. “I must confess that the sight of all the dead gums
in the waters of the present Hume Basin gives a touch of blue
to my outlook that might not otherwise be there. Still, it’s
not all my fault, you know.”
“I suppose not,” said the Red Gum, thoughtfully. He
took a long drink of river water through his exposed rootlets.
“Is that the end of the story?” he asked, at last.
“No,” said the Murray, “I have another set of weirs—well,
practically weirs—at my mouth.”
“At your sea end?” asked the Red Gum.
“Exactly,” replied the Murray. “You see, one disadvant'
age of feeling low in the old days was that I couldn’t pour
enough water into Lake Alexandrina to keep the sea out. I
don’t mind meeting the sea on his own ground, but I do hate


to have to put up with an invasion. Year after year I found
Lake Alexandrina becoming more and more salty. There
came a time when Old Soldier and his family wouldn t go
down there any more; and there came a time when my
waters became too brackish at the lake to serve the farm'
people on shore; and there came a time when even the willow'
trees along the shores had nothing but salt water in their
veins.”
“There’d be some weeping done then, I should think,”
observed the Red Gum.
“They did worse than weep,” said the Murray. “They
died. I don’t think even a tough old warrior like you could
stand a continuous diet of salt.
“Things came to such a pass at last that the Government
of South Australia decided to help me to keep the sea out.
They built six big dams across the channels by which I cut
my way through my delta to the sea. They call them barrages
—one'way traffic devices, in which gates can be opened
when I’m full, to allow my waters to reach the sea, and
closed when I’m low, to keep the sea from reaching me. Of
course there are locks, too, by means of which fishing'boats
can leave the harbour of the lake for the open sea, and come
home again.”
“Well,” said the Red Gum, “the white men have certainly
taken you in hand.”
“They have,” said the Murray; “and, setting aside the loss
of freedom and the unpleasant feeling of butting up against
immovable concrete, I suppose I shouldn’t complain. Here I
am, just as good as ever.”
“Weired and wonderful!” murmured the Red Gum.
“Thank you very much,” said the Murray. “And, now,
I see it is a good deal cooler. I think I had better move
along.”


Don’t forget your flotsam—or is it jetsam?” said the Red
Gum.
My—? Oh, the Tortoise,” said the Murray, pausing
before casting off. He tugged at the hind foot of the Tor'
toise, who, you may remember, was lying half in and half out
of the water. “Come,” he said. “Life is real, life is earnest.
Be up and doing!”
The Tortoise slid below the surface, without even poking
out his head, and the river let go the Red Gum’s roots, and
crept quietly out into the sunlight.


CHAPTER VIII.
COMING TO A BAD END
Since early morning the Red Gum had been waiting
anxiously to hail the Murray, for he had something to ask him.
He found it hard to wait patiently; there was far more noise in
his branches than usual, and noise always made his old head
whirl. You see, the blossoms were out on his topmost
branches, so that crowds of parrots and chattered
and squabbled over the nectar that glistened and grew sticky
in the warm sun. From riverffiank to they sped
back and forth, like rush-hour traffic in FlinderS'Street,
evidently holding the belief that honey goes down best if it is
accompanied by liberal billfuls of Murray water. The whirr
of wings was almost as loud as the racket of the wild bees
creatures who can never work without telling the world
about it.


Ordinarily, the Red Gum would have found the bustle
very pleasant; no one enjoyed more than he the popularity
that comes to anyone who has sweets to give away. But
other people’s business can be irritating—very! The old
tree found it difficult to see others getting on famously with
their affairs while his own were at a standstill.
For two days, there had been drifting downstream on the
slow current a long procession of twigs and leaves and dry
bark, easily recognizable as fragments of Red Gum. To the
old Red Gum, they spoke of disaster somewhere higher up
the river.
“Anyone at home?” suddenly asked a liquid voice, close
in under the bank.
“Oh, there you are,” said the Red Gum, with relief. “It’s
a long time since you’ve been in here. What have you been
doing?”
“Turning cartwheels over the weirs,” replied the Murray,
“and irrigating, and carrying logs—”
“What kind of logs?” asked the Red Gum, quickly.
“Not very beautiful ones,” answered the Murray. “They
were red and large and very heavy.”
“Red Gum!” exclaimed the Red Gum. “I knew it!
That’s why all those twigs have been floating past.”
“Yes, Red Gum,” replied the Murray. “Last year the
timber-cutters were at work among the trees on my bank,
and this year they’ve been floating the logs down to one of
my raihheads, and cleaning up the dried branches that were
left on the ground. I got some of the rubbish as well as the
logs.”
“How long do you think that kind of thing can go on?”
asked the Red Gum.
“Couldn’t say, I’m sure,” replied the Murray. “Oh, I say,
do look at that Honey-eater standing on his head at the end
of your south-east branch! What’s he after?”


“Bother the Honey-eater!" exclaimed the Red Gum, as he
snapped off the branchlet, and watched the surprised bird
turn two somersaults before finding a footing on another
spray.
“Why do you put up with all those birds and bees?" asked
the Murray. “Your flowers are about as private as a river-
bank during the grape harvest."
“I don’t mind the beaks of birds," said the Red Gum.
“It’s the axes of men I object to. They’ve no respect for me
any longer—or for you, either. Birds and bees at least do a
little job of pollination in return for what I give them. And
look at you! You float their boats and water their land and
carry their logs —my logs, I mean; and what do they give
you in return? Maybe a rusty bird-cage, or a mildewed boot,
or an ancient shirt!"
“Oh, I don’t know," said the Murray, reasonably. “They’re
not all like that. There have been some who have remained
faithful to me from babyhood to the grave. They couldn’t
be happy away from me for two minutes. My voice called
to them across the width of the world, so that, having gone
away, they returned just as surely as the Honey-eater will go
back to his nest when he has had his fill of that sickly nectar
of yours."
“You’ve never tasted it," said the Red Gum.
“Oh, yes, I have," replied the Murray. “How many
gum-blossoms do you think have fallen on my stream in my
lifetime? It’s nearly as bad as your eucalyptus. Always
after a load of logs and twigs and leaves, I feel like a cure
for influenza. But let that pass—it always does, in a day or
two. I was about to tell you the story of a man who thought
more of me than of the rest of the world taken all in one
piece. His real name is one of my secrets. Let’s call him
Bob."


‘'Very well," said the Red Gum. “Let’s."
“Many years ago," said the Murray, warming up at once
—the pleasure of telling a story always raised his temperature
two or three degrees. “Many years ago, there was a young
man whose father owned a very big business in a city that is
not so very far from my stream. He, of course, was the Bob
of whom we are speaking.
“It was his job to supply building materials to the men of
the river who wanted to roof their houses or put up woob
sheds, and those materials, as I think I have told you, were
generally delivered by steanvboat. Very few loads, I may
add, went upstream without Bob in attendance. He said it
was necessary that someone in the business should keep in
touch with customers, to see that they received satisfaction,
and to learn to understand their needs. His father must have
agreed with him, for Bob and I were practically inseparable;
though, to be perfectly honest, I have often wondered
whether the old gentleman was not perhaps glad to see the
back of one who could not possibly have been of much use in
an office.
“At any rate, Bob was up and down my course, year in
and year out. I don’t know that he was very much attached
to the building material, though. He must have done his
work well enough, for the riveumen liked him and were
always glad to see him; but I noticed from the very first that
delays never succeeded in irritating him. Let a steamer be
stranded on one of my sandbars, or be held up for two
months waiting for the Darling to fill, and you would hear
the Old Man of the boat rant and roar and threaten to go up
to the mountains on foot for a bucket of water to fill my
miserable stream. Not so Bob. He would heave a great
sigh of happiness, and set off for a pool higher up or lower
down, where he would spend the time exploring, or fishing, or


swimming, or watching the sky, or sitting and thinking, or
just sitting.
“He was a lad after my own heart, content to move at my
pace and to drink in the sunlight all day long. His skin
had the colour of the Tortoise’s shell, and his eyes had the
stillness of the lagoons among which I love to linger. Not
that he was lazy—not at all! Eve known him do three men’s
work in unloading a cargo so that a steamer might push on
to help a settler higher up. He was really extremely active,
but with a steady kind of activity that had nothing to do with
hurry and everything to do with staying power.”
“Are you sure this fellow wasn't a tree?” asked the Red
Gum, shaking the Honey-eater off his north-east by north
branch, to make way for a small, shy, green parrot. “He
sounds like a Red Gum to me.”
“He was certainly not a Red Gum,” replied the Murray.
“There was nothing of the stick-in-the-mud about him. I
often heard him say that he was not the kind to put down
roots anywhere.”
“Not put down his roots!” said the Red Gum. “That sort
is too easily carried away—like the Golden Wattles in the
hills.”
“Well,” said the Murray, “he was carried away—at least
he went away. I heard a river skipper tell another that the
old gentleman had died—”
“Borers, I suppose,” offered the Red Gum.
“I don't know, I'm sure,” replied the Murray, “but the
lad had to go back to the city to carry on his father's work.”
“That's what is to be expected of a seedling,” said the Red
Gum. “When the old tree falls—”
“Look here,” said the Murray, beginning to lose patience,
“between you and those jabbering birds, you're putting me


right off my course. I can't tell a story with all these inter'
ruptions.”
Sorry,” said the Red Gum. “I’ll send the birds home.”
He raised his voice to a commanding roar. “Time, gentle-
men, please,” he shouted. “Closing up, now. All out,
please!”
He shut his blossoms one by one, and the birds, pulling out
their bills as the stamens folded together, wiped them on the
handiest leaf and departed, grumbling, to the honey-myrtle
lower down the stream. When the last wing-beat had died
away, the Murray continued.
“I heard of Bob from time to time,” he said, “from the
steam-boat skippers. He was making money at a breath-
taking rate, and his loads of building material kept coming
upstream without him. He wore a hard, round hat instead
of a soft one with a wide brim; and with the new hat went
striped grey trousers, a smooth black coat, a white collar, and
a spotted tie. That must have been a new Bob altogether—
a Bob whose face had lost its tan; whose eyes had lost their
stillness; who got into the city at nine and went home at five
—sometimes; and who now and then drove out to my banks,
looked longingly upstream, and turned resolutely about and
drove back to his office.
“If by this time,” continued the Murray, “he was com-
mencing to put down a root or two, something soon hap-
pened to check their growth. There came a curious event
called the War. Dozens of men from my valley went to it,
and Bob went, too. I remember it very well, because just at
that time I was having one of the lowest spells I have ever
had. I don’t think Bob could have taken a cargo upstream if
he had wanted to. I had scarcely enough water to float a
piece of bark. It went on for over four years.”
“What did—your low spell?” asked the Red Gum.


“No, 00,“ said the Murray, quite ruffled. “That was over
in a year or so. It was the War that went on for four years.
“Then,” he continued, “the men began to come back. To
my banks they came in hundreds, to extend the fruit settle-
ments and to make new ones. There was more clearing and
grubbing and ploughing and planting than I’ve ever seen
before or since. Some stayed only a short time; others
stuck to the job and made a success of it. To tell you the
truth, if it had not been for those soldiers, I should perhaps
never have had all the acres of green vines that I can wander
through to-day.
“And who do you think came with them? Yes, Bob.
The War had finished him as an office-worker. You see, four
years out of doors, even in climates far different from ours,
had reminded him of all he had lost; so he had sold his
business as quickly as he could. And there he was, on my
banks again, the old Bob—in a wide soft hat, an open shirt,
and a pair of tough working trousers that had never in their
lives seen a crease. His face was brown once more, and he
was steadily learning to laugh again.
“For three years I saw him almost every day, ploughing
among his vines, pruning them and tying them up, gathering
the grapes in the summer, and dipping them and drying them.
It was a hard battle he had; it isn’t easy to start a fruit block
from nothing. But towards the end of the three years his
block had become the best for miles around; and, if you had
asked any of his neighbours, I’m sure they would have told
you that he ought to have been contented.
“But I knew he wasn’t. Often in the evening, when work
was over for the day, he would come down to sit on my
bank and smoke a pipe, and throw little pieces of stick into
the water, and watch them—watch them—watch them, till I
had carried them round the next bend. Then he would get


up and sigh and turn his back on me, and march up to his
house, with the same look about his shoulders as when he
used to force them back toward the city before the war.
And when I was wandering about among his vines he would
stoop down and pick up some of my water and let it run
slowly from his hand. Then he would dry his hand quickly
and seise his shovel and do three hours’ work in one, just as
a kind of discipline.
“I knew it couldn’t last; and it didn’t. The blocks about
him were all taken up, and the two or three stores a few
hundred yards away were becoming quite a town. The
place was getting far too crowded for Bob.
“One day there was a notice on a board towering above
his vines. It read Tor Sale’. He carried the hammer that
he had used to put up the board straight down to my bank,
and there, out of a pile of timber that I had scarcely noticed,
he set to work to fashion a flat-bottomed boat—the sort of
thing that is called a punt.
“In a few weeks he was pulling upstream, with some fish-
ing lines, some tools, and a few stores, searching the banks
for a spot he had known in the old steam-boat days. It was
there all right, on an island formed by my stream and one of
my most beautiful lagoons.
“Bob landed, pulled up the boat, lit a camp-fire, and ran
up a small tent. He was there the next day, and the next,
and the next, walking all over his little island, stepping out
short distances this way and that, pausing to lay his hand
affectionately on the trunk of an old tree —’’
“Well, well,’’ said the Red Gum; “so that’s what had been
the matter with him. He had missed the Red Gums!’’
“No one could miss a Red Gum,’’ said the Murray; “not
from a hundred yards away. They fill up the whole land-
scape."


“Em beginning to like this Bob of yours," said the Red
Gum, taking no notice.
“Then," went on the Murray, also taking no notice, “Bob
began to make trips down and up the river, each time ferry'
ing up a small load of building material. It was quite like
his old occupation, except that he meant to use the stuff him'
self this time. In less than no time he had built a stout
little shack of two rooms, and had begun work upon a small
garden—just a few vines and a few flowers—nothing very
much; for, you see, he had had quite enough of putting down
roots."
“But —" began the Red Gum.
“But —nothing!" snapped the Murray. “He had more in
common with me than with you. He used the shack from
time to time for very short periods, but mostly he paddled
for days and weeks at a time up and down my course. He
worked a little, now and then, at a station or a fruit settle'
ment; he fished for his breakfast; and he listened to the trees
and me, and soaked up the sun, and took time to think.
“Of course, busy people looked down upon him—thought
he’d gone to the bad altogether. They never could under'
stand the person who didn't want to make money. They
called him a 'Murray whaler’, or simply a ‘hatter’."
“Hatter?" queried the Red Gum.
“There’s a story, I believe," explained the Murray, “that
men read to their seedlings. It’s all about a white rabbit,
and a March hare, and a mad hatter. Anyone whom they
fancy to be different from themselves they are likely to call
a ‘hatter’.’’
“I see," said the Red Gum. “What became of Bob?’’
“Nothing," said the Murray. “At least, nothing worth
mentioning. He is still living on his island—when he isn’t
living on my waters; and his bark is tanned, and his eyes are


filled with stillness again. The only difference is that his
face has a whole lot of ripples in it, and his foliage has a
silvery look. You must see him now and then, for he passes
up and down a good deal.”
“There are quite a number of people who might be your
Bob,” said the Red Gum.
“I know,” said the Murray. “For them I never change—
nor, I think, do you.”
“They are not like those woodcutters,” suggested the Red
Gum.
“Oh, I don’t know,” replied the Murray. “Any number
of people who work on my banks are just as fond of me as
Bob and his friends. Besides, your logs may as well be
turned to use as left to fall into my stream at last, and rot.”
“They don’t rot,” shouted the Red Gum.
“H'm,” said the Murray. “Everything rots in time. But
whatever happens to a Red Gum’s logs, there are always his
seedlings.”
“True,” said the Red Gum. “So long as men use their
axes with common sense I suppose there's little harm done.”
“Don’t you worry,” said the river. “There’ll always be a
Murray, and there’ll always be Red Gums, and there'll ah
ways be some men who’ll think more of us than of any other
things on earth.”
“Well, you’re older than I am,” admitted the Red Gum.
“Perhaps you know best.”
“Perhaps?” queried the Murray.
“I said ‘perhaps’, and I mean ‘perhaps’,” replied the Red
Gum. “And now, I think I’d better get busy for to-morrow.”
“How do you mean?” asked the Murray.
“Use your head,” said the Red Gum. “I have nectar to
make for the birds’ breakfast. No nectar, no birds and bees;


no birds and bees, no pollination; no pollination, no seeds; no
seeds, no seedlings; no seedlings, no Murray.”
“Oh, come now!” objected the Murray.
“Oh, go now!” amended the Red Gum. “You’ve been
idling here far too long.”
“What about that fellow, lying on the grass there, with
his hat pulled down over his eyes?” said the Murray. “He
idles far worse than I do. He’s been here every day Ive
called in.”
“Oh, don’t mind him!” said the Red Gum. “He’s asleep.
He’s as bad as the Tortoise.”
“Perhaps he’s been listening,” suggested the Murray. “I’d
hardly like what we’ve been saying to be repeated.”
“Not he!” replied the Red Gum. “He could neither hear
us nor understand us, if he were listening.”
Which only goes to prove, you see, that a Red Gum can
make mistakes as well as nectar; but even the Murray, who
was always on the look'out for the Red Gum’s mistakes,
missed this one. He thrust himself off and began to play
boats with the twigs and bark that were on their way down
to the bend.
“See you again!” called the Red Gum, after him.
“Of course you will,” replied the Murray, from a distance;
“again and again!”
And, come to think of it, the Murray was probably quite
right; though, at any meetings that may have taken place
since, the fellow with the hat over his eyes was not present.
Like the Red Gum, he has roots.


.


