

1. TRADE AND COMMERCE. 4. RAILWAY DISPUTES.
A PROPOSED LAW A PROPOSED LAW
To alter Paragraph (L) of Section Fifty one of the To alter the Constitution by empowering the Parliament
to make Laws with respect to Industrial Disputes in
B E^r?f ed EeXMvel\f m tfe relation to Employment in State Railway Services.
approval of the electors, as required by the Constitution, as follows: -pE it enacted by the King?s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the Preamble.
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration ( Trade and Commerce) 1912. Short title. the
2. Section fifty-one of the Constitution is altered? 1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration ( Railway Disputes) 1912. Short title.
(a) by omitting from paragraph (i.) the words ?with other countries I
and among the States^?; and 2. Section fifty-one of the Constitution is altered by inserting after para- Railway
( b) by adding at the end of paragraph (i.) the words ?but not including graph (xxxv.) the following paragraph:? dispute*.
trade and commerce upon railways the property of a State ? (xxxv.a.) Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and settlement
except so far as it is trade and commerce with other countries of industrial disputes in relation to employment in the railway
or among the States.? service of a State.?
?
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA, s
REFERENDUMS
5. Trusts.
1. Trade and Commerce.
2. Corporations.
3. Industrial Matters.
4. Railway Disputes.
6. Nationalization of Monopolies.
WRITS have been received from His Excellency the Governor-General of the Commonwealth requiring* that the following
Proposed Laws be submitted to the Electors on SATURDAY, the 31st of MAY, 1913.
The Poll for the Referendums will be taken on the same date and at the same places, and during the same hours, as the
Poll for the Senate Elections and the General Elections for the House of Representatives, 1913.
2. CORPORATIONS.
?' r*
A PROPOSED LAW
To alter Paragraph (xx.) of Section Fifty-one of the
Constitution.
BE it enacted by the King?s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the Preamble.
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, with the
approval of the electors, as required by the Constitution, as follows:
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration (Corporations ) 1912, Short title.
2. Section fifty-one of the Constitution is altered by omitting from para- Corporations,
graph (xx.) the words ?Foreign corporations, and trading or financial
corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth, ,r and inserting
in their stead the words ?
? Corporations, including?
(a) the creation, dissolution, regulation, and control of corporations;
( b ) corporations formed under the law of a State, including their
dissolution, regulation, and control; but not including municipal
or governmental corporations, or any corporation formed solely
for religious, charitable, scientific, or artistic purposes, and
not for the acquisition of gain oy the corporation or its
members; and
(c) foreign corporations, including their regulation and control?
5. TRUSTS.
A PROPOSED LAW
To alter the Constitution by empowering the Parliament to
make Laws with respect to Trusts, Combinations, and
Monopolies.
BE it enacted by the King?s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the Preamble.
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth or Australia, with the
approval of the electors, as required by the Constitution, as follows :
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration (Trusts ) 1912.
Short title.
2. Section fifty-one of the Constitution is altered by adding at the end Trusts,
thereof the following paragraph:? combin
combinations,
and monopolies.
?(xl.) Trusts, combinations, and monopolies in relation to the pro-
duction, manufacture, or supply of goods, or the supply of
services.?
3. INDUSTRIAL MATTERS.
A PROPOSED LAW
To alter Paragraph (xxxv.) of Section Fifty-one of the
Constitution.
BE it enacted by the King?s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the Preamble.
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, with the
approval of the electors, as required by the Constitution, as follows :
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration (Industrial Matters ) 1912. Short title.
2. Section fiftv-one of the Constitution is altered by omitting from para- Industrial
ah' (xxxv.) tKe words ?Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and matters,
ement of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one
State,? and inserting in their stead the words?
?Labour, and employment, and unemployment, including?
(a) the terms and conditions of labour and employment in any trade,
industry, occupation, or calling;
(b) the rights and obligations of employers and employees;
(c) strikes and lockouts;
(d) the maintenance of industrial peace; and
6. NATIONALIZATION OF
MONOPOLIES.
A PROPOSED LAW
To alter the Constitution by empowering the Parliament to
make Laws with respect to Industries and Businesses
declared to be the subject of a Monopoly.
BE it enacted by the King?s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the Preamble.
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, with the
approval of the electors, as required by the Constitution, as follows:
1. This Act- may be cited as Constitution Alteration {Nationalization iof Short title.
Monopolies ) 1912.
2. The Constitution is altered by inserting, after section fifty-one thereof; Nationalization
the following section:- ofmonOpoiie*.
? 51a ? (1.) When each House of the Parliament, in the same session, has by
Resolution, passed by an absolute majority of its members, declared that the
industry or business of producing, manufacturing, or supplying any specified
services, is the subject of a monopoly, the Parliament shall have power to make
laws for earrving on the industry, or business by or under the control oi the
Commonwealth, and acquiring for that purpose on just terms any property used
in connexion with the industry or business.
2. This section shall not apply to any industry or business conducted or
carried on by the Government of a State or any public authority constituted
j*' n
(e) the settlement of industrial disputes.? under a State.? '
R. O. OLDHAM,
? Electoral Office for the Commonwealth, Chief Electoral Officer for the Commonwealth.
MELBOURNE.
AUTHORITY: ALBERT J. MULLETT, ACT T VQ GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
4
\ ? r *
