

COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA.
REFERENDUM 1917
CERTAIN PERSONS
DISQUALIFIED FROM VOTING
UNDER the Provisions of the WAR PRECAUTIONS (Military Service
Referendum) REGULATIONS 1917, the following Persons are dis-
qualified from Voting at the Referendum to be held under the said
Regulations on Thursday, the 20th day of December, 1917, namely
I. Every Naturalized British Subject who was born in an Enemy Country within the
meaning of the War Precautions (Military Service Referendum) Regulations
1917; and
li. Every person whose Father was born in an Enemy Country* within the meaning of
the War Precautions (Military Service Referendum) Regulations 1917 ;
Provided that neither of these disqualifications shall prevent any of the persons
referred to in the following paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) from voting at the
Referendum, viz. :
(a) Any person who is or has been a member of the Forcest
who has returned from service outside Australia and who is
eligible to be enrolled as an elector of the Commonwealth but
is NOT SO ENROLLED who makes and signs the prescribed
declaration before the Presiding Officer;
(b) Any person who is or has been a member of the Forcest
WHO IS ENROLLED as an elector of the Commonwealth and
claims to vote as an ordinary voter or as an absent voter, if such
person, being a person who would otherwise be disqualified on the
grounds set forth in paragraph (i) or paragraph (ii), makes and
signs the prescribed declaration before the Presiding Officer;
( c ) Any person being enrolled as an elector of the Common-
wealth who produces to the Presiding Officer a certificate signed
by the District Commandant of a Military District, or an officer
thereto authorized by him, that that person has applied for
enlistment as a member of the Forcest and has been rejected as
medically unfit;
(d) Any person being enrolled as an elector of the Common-
wealth who produces to the Presiding Officer a statutory declara-
tion made by him or her that at least one-half of his or her sons
not under the age of 18 years, and under the age of 45 years,
are or have been members of the Forcest or have applied for
enlistment as members of the Forcest and have been rejected
as medically unfit;
( e ) Any person being enrolled as an elector of the Common-
wealth who produces to the Presiding Officer a certificate in the
prescribed form for which application may be made to the
Divisional Returning Officer for the Division in which the person
is enrolled, that he or she was a natural-born citizen or subject
of France, Italy, or Denmark, and arrived in Australia before the
date upon which the territory in which he or she was born became
part of Germany or Austria, as the case may be.
*An enemy country within the meaning of the War Precautions (Military Service Referendum) Regulations 1917 is a country which forms part of the territory of any country with
which the British Empire is now at war.
t“Member of the Forces” means a member of the Commonwealth Naval or Military Forces enlisted or appointed for active service outside Australia, or on a ship of war, and a person
engaged as a munition or other worker under agreement with the Commonwealth Government for service outside Australia, and a member of the Army Medical Corps Nursing Service
accepted or appointed by the Director-General of Medical Services for service outside Australia.
Any perons who, being disqualified from
OF AN OFFENCE.
voting, votes at the Referendum IS GUILTY
R. C. OLDHAM,
Chief Electoral Officer for the Commonwealth.
12th November, 1917.
879542
JOHN VAIL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA
