

REFLECTIONS
OCCASIONED BY
A LETTER
ADDRESSED BY SOME OF
THE MEMBERS
OF
THE FACULTY OF ADVOCATES
TO
THE DEAN OF THAT LEARNED BODY
IN THE FORM OF
LETTERS
ADDRESSED TO THE
PRINTER OF THE CALEDONIAN MERCURY t
EDINBURGH:
PRINTED FOR W. BERR[?] [?]KSELLER




TO THE
PRINTER
OF
THE CALEDONIAN MERCURY.
Sir,
In your paper of Thurfday
there is a Circular Letter, addreffed to the
feveral Members of the Faculty of Ad-
vocates* Relying on the impartiality
you profefs, I claim infertion of the fol-
lowing animadverfions upon that letter
in your next Mercury.
The friends of Adminiftration, or good
Government, as they are pleafed to call
themfelves, are continually acculing their
opponents, ot endeavouring to fow the
feeds of dilfention and difcontent amongft
all his Majefly’s Subjects. But, in my mind,
this circular letter to the Faculty of Ad-
vocates, is more calculated to raife ill will
A and


and flrife amongft brethren and friends,
than any paper I remember to have feen
in print. 1 have not the honour to be a
member of the learned body unto which
it is addreffed; confequently Ihould not
have troubled you with any remarks u-
pon it, if the caufe affigned for promul-
gating fuch malicious insinuations againft
the public character and principles of the
Dean of Faculty, was not of a general
nature, and equally calculated to throw
divilion and difeord amongft every clafs
of his Majefty’s Subjects, as amongft that
particular body unto which the letter is
addreffed.
The Queftion propofed for the confi-
deration of the Faculty of Advocates, is
NOT,
Whether the Lord Advocate is likely
to make a better Dean than the gen-
tleman whom the Faculty have cho-
fen for ten years fucceffively ?
NOR,


NOR,
Whether it is proper for the Faculty
to fignify their approbation or dis-
approbation of two Bills, yet pend-
ing in Parliament, by Addrefs or
Petition ?
I should have thought either of the
above queflions fair, and open to the dif-
cuffion and decifion of any Corporate Bo-
dy. But the learned writers of the circu-
lar Letter have thought proper to agitate
the Bufinefs in a very different Shape.
The Queflion they have taken upon them
to propound, IS,
Whether any one who maintains an
opinion on the Bills in Queflion,
different from that of Meffrs J. Prin-
gle, A. M‘Conochie, Neil Ferguffon,
Ro. Craigie, C. Hope, J. Ofwald, D.
Hume, and D. Boyle, fhould not be
deemed by the Faculty of Advocates,
iu


in the firf place, and, ultimately, by
the Public, An Enemy to the Laws and
Conjlitution of his Country P
The queftion coming in this fhape, e-
very man who difapproves of the Bills,
and has the misfortune to differ from the
learned propuunders, as to the neceflity of
them, is as much interefled in the deci-
fion of the queftion,'as the prefent or pro-
pofed Dean of f aculty. By the by, the
latter, from his general amoenity of cha-
racter, is not likely to feel much more o-
bilged to his learned Advocates, for putting
the comparifon between his Lordfhip and
Mr Erfkine on this footing, than the for-
mer.
Do MefTrs Pringle, M‘Conochie, &c.
really think themfelves of fuch confe-
quence in the State, or their knowledge
of the Law of Government fo confessed-
ly Superior to that of all their - brethren,
as


as to enable them to ftigmatize whoever
may differ from them in opinion, with
the foul names of Enemies to their Country ?
Is it poffible that thefe Gentlemen can
have worked themfelves up to fuch a
pitch of prefumption, as none but Fools
ever aimed at before them ? In one fenfc,
however, they may be in the right. Ihe
vanity of men, when canicd to a certain
height, fometimes drowns the indignation
we are apt to feel againft malevolent ca*
Jumny, in contempt.
It would be wife in Minifters to check
their dependents in the career of folly. —
The letter produced by the joint efforts of
Meffrs Pringle, M‘Conochie, &c. in fup-
port of the Bills, which have fo alarmed
the bulk of the Nation, in truth conveys
groffer fatire upon them, than any thing
which had before appeared on either fide
of the queftion,
Wise


Wise men, if humouroufiy inclined,
might think it was ncceflary, at this junc-
ture, to lull the Democratic part of the
Con hi tut ion to deep for three years. But
this circular letter of the Friends of Ad-
miniftration proves, beyond the polfibili-
ty of denial, that they deem all freedom
of thought, word, or aftion, dangerous to
themfelves ; and that, whoever fpeaks and
ads in thefe days, as all the friends of the
Houfe of Hanover have been in the cuf.
tom of doing fince the Acceffion, are,
irom this day forward, to be held un-
worthy the confidence of any body of
men.
Hence, the neutral and moderate will
infer, that the dole of .Laudanum prepar-
ed by the Phyficians of his Majefiy for
tiic Comatution, is meant to operate not
for three years only, but for ever.
■A.
The


The whole argument on the two bills
which the Dean of Faculty has oppofed,
by means acknowledged to be in the true
fpirit of the Conftitution, and ftridly le-
gal, turns on two points :
i/?, Whether any bills of the kind are
neceftary at this time ?
2 dly, Whether the remedy propofed
by the Minifters of the Crown, is not
more dangerous to the Conftitution,
than the difeafe by which it is
thought to be afflided ?
With refped to the firjl , —No one can
think, that the diftaffedion complained
of towards the prefent Government of this
country, is either fo great, or fo widely
extended, as it was in the reign of Charles
IL Or, that Seditious Meetings are now
fo frequent or fo alarming, as they were
in the time of that mifguided Prince.
The fubjeds of this realm had then (if
we


we may believe David Hume the hlfto-
rian,) but too much caufe given them to
refill the oppreftions of Government. Yet
the laws were found amply adequate to
the fuppreftion of Seditious Meetings, and
punilhment of delinquents. Can preju-
dice, party, or felf-intereft, fo far bias the
judgement of the learned writers of the
circular letter, as to lead them to think
Sedition more to be dreaded and guarded
againft, under the mild and parental Go-
vernment of George 111, than under the
defpotifm of Charles II ?
If they are of this opinion, they pay
as bad a compliment to our Gacious So-
vereign as to his Subjects. Or : Do thefe
gentlemen mean, and wifh that greater
feverity fhall be ufed in thefe days againft
political Enthufiafts, than was in thofe
againft religious Fanaticks ? If they do,
I would humbly advife them to read the
hiftory of Charles the Second’s reign over
again.


They would therein lee, that the
cruelties exercifed by the Duke of Laudei-
dale, for matters of opinion in Scotland,
were but little inferior to thofe lately exer-
cifed in France by Roberfpiere, &c. But I
am perfuaded the learned gentlemen are
better acquainted with thefe rafts than I
am; and if the above queftions were put to
them, by any member of the Faculty, they
would anfwer, —No: We were ever ol o-
pinion, and have always maintained, that
the feverity of adminiftration, during the
reign of Charles 11., difpofed the minds
of all men to refill the tyranny of his
Succeffor, and was one of the principal
caufes to which the Abdication, or For-
feiture of the houfe of Stuart, is to bt at-
tributed. To this, the gentlemen would
probably add ; The laws againil Sedi-
tion, Libels, and Seditious Meetings, arc
no logger the fame as during the reign
of Charles 11. They were abrogat-
ed foon after the Revolution, and Se-
B dition


dition has flept ever fince. But now the
Hydra begins to rear its head again. The
ipirit of Levelling, Anarchy, and Confu-
sion {talks abroad. Therefore, it is ne-
celTary to put more power into the hands
of the Crown, to hold in terrorem over
the heads of the difTaffc&ed, which will
only be ufed in mercy, moderation, and
diferetion.
lr I have miflated the fentiments of
thofe who confider any oppofition to the'
Bills in queftion as a heinous crime, it is
not intentionally I have done fo ; I with
to give their argument its full fcope and
weight, and to place it in the faired point
of view.
The laws- againft Sedition, and every
thing tending towards it, are not verba-
tim the fame as in the time of the Stuarts.
In the third year ot the laft Sovereign of
that race, the puniiliment of thefe crimes
\
was


was changed from Death to Bamfhment;
which word Bamfhment was lately con-
ftrued by the High Court of Judiciary
into Transportation for Fourteen Tears .
Xn every other refpeft, the laws againft
Sedition and Seditious Meetings remain
the fame as during the reign of Charles
the 11. And MefTrs Pringle, &c. will
hardly pretend, that Tranfportation to Bo-
tany Bay for 14 years, is not a pumfh-
ment more dreadful to mod men than
inflant death.
But fhould they be drove to hazard
fuch an affertion, experience has difpro-
Yed it before hand; not one Seditious
Meeting has been held in Scotland fmee
the judgments pronounced on Muir, Ge-
rald, &c. It is much to be lamented, that
the learned writers of the circular letter did
not look over the ads againft unlawful
Convocation of the Lieges, and anent lea-
ling-making, before they iffued their ane-
-2 thema


tliema againft fuch as think new laws, or
cxtenfion of the old, unneceffary.
On the other Point:
Whether the remedy propofed is not
more dangerous to the Conftitution
than the difeafe ?
Without pretending to decide on the
queftion, I beg leave to obferve, itisapoint
on which the beft and moft zealous fub~
jecls of his Majefty may very well differ;
and that no reafonable man of either way
of thinking, can pofhbly take offence at
the other.
That the Freedom of the Prefs, of fpeak-
ing as one thinks, and of petitioning King
and Parliament, have ever fmcc the Revo-
lution been deemed by men of all ranks
and parties, without exception, the Foun-
dation hones of our happy Conftitution,
is*


is a truth which no one can pretend to
deny. To the uninterrupted poffeffion
of thefe rights, fince the acceffion of the
Houfe of Hanover to the Throne of Great
Britain, all writers have attributed the ge-
neral love and affedion born by the peo-
ple to the Family of his Majefty, and the
fyftem of Government eflablifhed by the
laws of the land. No human being can
forefee the effect that may be produced
by infringement on thefe rights, or inno-
vation on the laws, by which the poffef-
lion of them has been hitherto infured to
the people of this Ifland. Some men may
hope that the effed will be good ; others
may fear it will be bad : But, fuppofing
all fincere in the different opinions they
they have formed, it is difficult to con-
ceive, why either fhould take offence at
the other, or endeavour to reprefent one
another as enemies to their Country ? In
one point all men mu ft agree, namely ;


That whether the Bills in queftion,
are likely to produce good or bad ef-
fects, they are Innovations on the Law,
and Checks or Infringements on the Li-
berty of the Prefs , of [peaking, and pe-
titioning as praliifed fince the Revolu-
tion, which fome men do, and others
pretend to venerate.
Whilst the friends of Adminiftration
charged only fuch of their opponents with
difaffedlion, as aimed at innovations on
the law, they had fome appearance of rea-
fon on their fide : But it is rather too
much, when minifiers themfelves actually
attempt the fame things as they abufed
their opponents for only defiring,—name-
ly, To make innovations on the laws and
nature of Government ; that their hirelings ?
fycophants, and dependants, fhould all be
let loofe on the fupporters of the old law
and Conftitution of the land, in order to
cry down any difculfion of the alterations
propofed


propofed by the Miniflers of the Crown.
Surely, Sir, fuch condudl tends no more to
prove them the Friends, than their opponents
the Enemies of the laws and Conjlitution of
their Cowitry . Their dodlrine and a&ions
feem derived from the fame chapel of def-
potifm, as the pamphlet which a Cabi-
net Minifter has lately taken upon him
to vindicate in Parliament.
High as Meffrs Pringle, IVPConochie,
&c. (land in the eftimation of their Coun-
try, as well as of their brethren at the
Bar, it is not poflible that any one fhould
fufpeCt them of having been actuated in
bringing forward this attack on the cha-
racter and principles of their private friend
the Dean of Faculty, by other motives
than the pureft and mod difinterefted pa-
triotism Luckily for their honour, the
late vacancy on the Bench is already fill-
ed up ; and all the learned Lords now up-
«n it, are yet in their meridian of health
and


and vigour , both of body and mind ; o-
therwife fome malicious imp or another
might infinuate, that the attack they have
made on a man they profefs efteem and
friendfhip for, did not proceed from zeal
for the honour of their corps, or for the
public weal; but from a mean and fervile
defire of currying favour with an imperi-
ous Minifler, who fees with envy and jea-
loufy, an office of dignity po defied by a
Gentlemen who i§ not one of his own
creatures.
To


TO THE
PRINTER
OF
THE CALEDONIAN MERCURY.
Sir,
"Every real friend of this conn-
try mult fee with great grief and tome
dread, the lengths to which party is now-
carried. In all mixed forms of Govern-
ment, tome men will feel more warmly
attached to one branch of it, and tome to
another; yet all may be mod zealous
friends to the general fyftem. It Items
ftrange and inconceivable to thole who
have not attended to the inconfiftencies
in human nature, that the partiality of
A. to one branch, Ihould be conflrued by
B. into dilfaffedllon towards the whole
form of Government. Why Ihould not
each follow the dilates of his own mind,
q provided


providing they are not prohibited by the
law of the land, without either taking of-
fence at the other ?
The Whig or Tory, mofl blinded and
wedded to the maxim of his party, mud;
be fenfible, that if the one accufes the o-
ther of didadTedlion to the aggregate form
ot Government, under which both are
ordained by the law to live, the charge
mud; necedarily be retorted ; drife and
difeord will be the confequence ; blowsr
will follow ; and it is much to be feared,
that the conteft will not end, until one
or the other branch of Government is
completely overthrown. It is to be wifli-
ed, that all the inhabitants of this idand
would recoiled! in time, that Liberty is
the avowed oljeff of our Conditution, and
that the Monarchical and Democratical
parts of our Government are deemed by
the law equally neceflary for the mainte-
nance and prefervation of liberty, the
* end


end and purpofe which all our laws of
Government aim at.
lam led to make thefe refleftions, by
the reply of feme Members of the Facul-
ty of Advocates, to the Dean of that re-
fpeclable body. lam no lawyer, but I
•will venture to affert, that part or the
charge laid againft the Dean of Faculty,
in this reply, is of a capital nature ; and
that laws do exlft, under which any cul-
prit fo offending, as the Dean is accufed
of having offended, may be punifhed un-
to death ; yet, after having brought for-
wards a charge of this magnitude m print,
thefe learned members of the Faculty ve-
ry gravely and ferioufly intimate to their
Dean, that he fhould make no public re-
ply to them.
The Dean of Faculty, I take for grant-
ed, is well able to defend himfelf, and
difprove the affertions of his friendly ac-
C 2 eufers.


cufers. But there are other gentlemen,
befides the Dean, who have followed the
example of the Duke of Bedford, Mr fox,
&c. in explaining the law jargon of the
Bills in quedion to the ignorant and giddy
multitude : How are thefe to defend them-
felves againd the charge of having “ che-
« riflied humours and dif petitions dire£i~
« ly tending to overturn the laws of the
« land ?” Will they be much to blame,
if, in vindicating themfelves, they fhould
prove, it is their accufers, and not they,
who have been guilty of fo foul a crime-
Messrs Pringle,M‘Conochie, have
publifhed to the world, that, “ The quef-
<c tion their brethren have to confider is,
Whetaer it be confident with their ho-
« nour and duty, that the Dean of the
« Faculty of Advocates, that body which
ought to be the firmed bulwark of the
“ Laws, fhould aft the part of a Dcma-
“ gogue, in agitating the ignorant and
“ giddy


<s giddy multitude, and cheriffiing fuck
« humours and difpofitions, as, in our o-
“ pinion, direaly tends to overturn them,
« [i, e. the laws.”)
Those who reflect on this paragraph s
having been gravely and deliberately
penned and publiffied under the autho-
rity of the firft Law Officer of the Crown,
can no longer have any doubt on the
conftruaion put by Minifters on the Bill
for preventing Seditious Meetings. c The
ignorant aud giddy multitude aye not to be
deprived of a right adjudged to them at the
Revolution ; —but they are to be de-
prived OF THE MEANS OF EXERCISING
JTi —I mean the right of petitioning the
King or Parliament for or againft any al-
teration of the Law,
If this Bill ffiould receive the Royal
Aflent, and that afterwards the ignorant
Qnd giddy multitude ffiould dare to affem-
blc


ble themfelvcs, with the purpofe and un-
der the reftridions of this odious and def~
potlc Bill y all candidates for Law, or other
offices at the difpofal of the Minister, will
be ordered to attend ; and if the Dean of
I acuity, or any other gentleman not a
Creature of the Minifters, jfhall, in fuch
Meeting, attempt to explain the nature
and tendency of any Bill then agitating
in Parliament, Mr M‘Conochie, or fome
fuch Member of the Bulwark of our
Laws, will hold up the Rod of Power,
and drag the Dean of Faculty through
the ftreets to Prifon, under pretence, that
the words odious and defpotic are of Sedi-
tious tendency. Thofe who have not
had the patience to read the Bill in quef-
tion, may poffibly alk, Who is to deter-
mine whether fuch Meeting be compofed
of an ignorant giddy multitude , or of inde-
\
pendent orderly Citizens, attending, as in
duty bound, at the command of their
Magiftrates ?—ln other words, Who is to
draw


draw the Minl/ier s Line of DifinShon be-'
tween the gentle and the fimple ? —Who ?
Why, who Ihould, but Mr M‘Conochie,
or fome other of the learned Gentlemen,
who have fo fokmnly declared themfelves to
be unactuated by Party , and unattached to
any ft of Men in or out of Place ?
I must be permitted to fay, that when
fuch appears to be the light in which the
Bill for preventing Seditious Meetings is
viewed by the firft Law Officer of the
Crown, and his Advocates, it is not very
wonderful that others, befides the ignorant
and giddy multitude , fhould confider this
Bill as the Death Warrant of that Confli-
tution which was eftablifhed at the Re-
volution.
Let me afk the gentlemen, who have
folemnly declared that their accufation
of the Dean of Faculty, does not origi-
nate in vulgar pohtiks, and that they
were


were not aftuated in framing it, by their
defire of obtaining favours or preferment
for themfelves, or, by attachment to any
fet of men in or out of office ; —Where
would now have been the Laws and Con-
flitution they profefs themfelves the hum-
ble champions of, whilft, in facd, they
are finking their daggers into the heart
of it, I hope unintentionally?—! fay, Where
would now have been the Laws and Con-
flitution of Britain, if no gentleman had
flood forth in the reign of James 11.
to explain unto the ignorant and giddy
multitude , that paffive obedience was not
ordained by the law, though preached
from the Pulpit, and proclaimed from the
Throne ? lam far from thinking, that
our prefent Gracious Sovereign will make
the fame ufe of the additional power put-
ting into his hands, by an overalarmed
Parliament, as James 11. would have
done, if the fame degree of power had
been put into his. But lam yet free to
think


and to fay, that if, before the Revo-
lution, the fame checks had been put
tm the deliberations of the people, as
Meffrs M‘Conochie, &c. feem difpofed to
put upon them, the Houfe of Hanover
would never have been called to the
Throne of Great Britain.
Let me likewifeobferve to thefe gentle-
men, —who, how learned foever they may
be in the laws, I hold to be no great poli-
ticians, —that the ignorant and giddy multi-
tude, are generally very harmlefs, as long
as they attend to the explanations and in-
ftructions of men of property and refpec-
table characters. But dangerous, indeed,
when trampled upon, and left to the gui-
dance of their own indignation.
Such are my fentiments, Sir, on thefe
matters. But Ido not pretend to more
infallibility than my neighbours. My
opinion of the good effects produced by
D the


the fubjedls of any ftate having a right
to petition Government, may be erro~
neons. To fay truth, I do not, in my
time, remember to have feen the prayers
of the multitude againlt any, brought in
by a minifter, much attended to by either
houfe of Parliament. Yet Hill I thought
their exercife of this right, without mo-
leflation, ferved to keep the people in
good humour. But if Minifters and the
Faculty of Advocates think otherwlfe, I
fliall not be the firft to throw a ftone of
reproach at them. I blame them only,
for not avowing their intention, and iur
hallooing their hungry hounds on thofe
who difagree with them, on the propriety
and neceflity of making the alteration they
have propofed , on the laws and Confitution
ef their Country. I will pray that this al-
teration may be for the better, if they
will but permit me to doubt it, until I fee
the elfeds which fuch an innovation pro-
duces.
The


The reply ofMeffrs M‘Conochie, &c.
did not give me near fo much concern,
as the poflfcript annexed to it. The Lord
Advocate had condudled himfelf with fo
much propriety, moderation, and can-
dour, towards men of all ranks and par-
ties, as had gained him, in return, the
molt refpedlful regard and affection of
every one who enjoyed the honour of his
acquaintance, whether they approved or
difapproved of the meafures of his Uncle’s
adminiflration. It is but juflice to acknow-
ledge, that, until drove by the impatient
temper of Meffrs M‘Gonochie, &c. no one
could perceive, that party made any differ-
ence on the conduct or amiable difpofition
of the prcfent Lord Advocate of Scotland.
Every man acquainted with him, was his
friend, no man his foe. Llis Lordfhip
will probably live to lament his having
deviated on this occafion, from his own
natural character, and having allowed
himfelf to be guided by wrong headed
and


and violent men, as much his inferiors
in abilities and judgment, as in manners
And difpofition.
With what dignity and luflre would
the charadler of Mr Dundas of Arnifton
have fhone, if, inftead of authorifing the
poftfeript which has appeared in the pa-
pers, he had fentMeflrs M'Conochie, &c.
a meffage to the following purpofe:
That though he lamented and difap-
proved the conduct of the Dean of Facul-
ty, he was convinced it proceeded from
error of judgment; and, knowing the in-
tegrity of his heart, as well as his attach-
ment to the laws and Conftitution of his
Country, he could not be aiding and a-
betting, in reprefenting a friend to the
world in a light which he, in his con-
fcience, believed to be a falfe one.
