



L '
c tr& .
REFLEXIONS ON THE BLACKS AND WHITES.
REMARKS.
UPON
A LETTER
ADDRESSED
BY M. MAZERES, A FRENCH EX-COLONIST, TO
J. C. Iy. SISMONDE DE SISMONDI,
CONTAINING-
OBSERVATIONS
ON THE
BLACKS AND WHITES, THE CIVILIZATION OP
AFRICA, THE KINGDOM OF HAYTI, &c.
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH
OF THE
BARON DE VASTEY,
Knight of the Royal and Military order of St. Henry, Secre-
tary to the King, Member of the Privy Council, &c.
BY W. H. M. B.
Eotrtrott,
Sold by J. Hatchard, 190 Piccadilly, Bookseller to the
African Institution: and may be had of the Booksellers
in general. ■ '
Printed by F. B. Wright, Castle Street, Liverpool.
—A///
PRICE EIGHTEEN FENCE.


TO THE PHILANTHROPISTS OF EVERY
COUNTRY.
THE FOLLOWING PAGES,
WHICH, IT IS HOPED, WILL NOT BE PERUSED
WITHOUT INTEREST,
ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY THE
TRANSLATOR.
Cape Henry, Hayti, )
itth March, 1817. J




ADVERTISEMENT,
BY THE PUBLISHER.
The following work, with the English
version,—was transmitted by the Transla-
tor to a friend in this Country, with direc-
tions to submit the same to the considera-
tion of a British public.
The Author is one of the Black Pro-
prietors in Hayti; of the number of those
whom Christophe, now dignified with the
title of King Henry, has raised to the
rank of his nobilitv. The Translator is
an Englishman, of a liberal profession, re-
sident in the Island ; who appears to have
engaged in the task solely with the view
of promoting a cause so dear to the inter-
ests of freedom and humanity.
A


The question respecting the diversity
of the human race, has for a long time
attracted the attention of Philosophers as
a subject only of curious speculation ; and
so it might still have remained, had it not
been for the use which has of late been
attempted to be made of it. Ever since
the commencement of the efforts for the
abolition of the Slave Trade, the abettors
of that Traffic have endeavoured to prove,
that the natives of Africa are a species of
the human race different from, and in-
ferior, both in body and mind, to the. white
Inhabitants of Europe. The result of
this enquiry would, however, have been
of little importance, had not the advocates
for the superiority of the latter, attempted
to deduce from it, an argument for the
right of Oppressing and enslaving those,
who,' as they contended, were evidently
stamped by nature with the mark of in-
feriority. ‘How such a consequence
would follow 7 , even from such premises, it
is hot'easy to perceive. Whatever may
he the difference between any two indivi-
duals of the human race, it surely cannot
be admitted, that the stronger lias thereby


acquired a, right.,to-depress,’injure, or de-
stroy the, weaker;.yet,this is the only
ground,upon .which, the decision of this
question , can in any way be made to
favour the pretensions of those, who con-
tend.for the continuance ofJNegro Slavery.
The Author of the following work is
not however satisfied' with denying the
inferences attempted to be drawn from
this argument. His object is to remove
the grounds of it altogether, and. to shew,'
that with equal advantages and opportuni-
ties, the blacks are in no- respect inferior
to the whites. This he has done with an
earnestness.which may be taken at least
as a proof hf his;sincerity ; and with a de~
gree of ability, which, it must be admit-
ted, furnishes no inadequate proof of the
point foi; which he contends. There is an
elevation in his sentiments which does
honour.no less to his cause than to him-
self. He appears to have entered into
this debate merely because he has not had
an opportunity of vindicating himself and
his-countrymen against the attack of his
opponent in a more effectual manner, —
“ -(/>” says he, “in the execution of my


task, a momentary pang invade my breast ,
it will arise from finding myself compelled
to icield my pen in place of some more
powerful tveapon, and in being unable to
use more convincing arguments than tvbrds
to satisfy him that our race is in no respect
inferior to his own”
With respect to the intellectual powers
of the natives of Africa, few opportunities
have occurred of forming an impartial
judgment. The state of slavery to which
they are for the most part subjected in
their own Country, and the still more de-
graded condition to which they are reduced-
by the Slave Trade, carried on for ages,
as well by the Moors as the Europeans,
the ramifications of which probably extend
to the remotest parts of the Country, are
alone sufficient to prevent the expansion
of those faculties which the bounty of na-
ture may have supplied. Still more un-
reasonable would it be to expect, that
those who are carried away from their
native soil, deprived of all the privileges
of society, and devoted to perpetual and
hopeless labour, should exhibit those
talents which favourable circumstances


can alone unfold. However bright the
gem, its incrustation must be removed
before it can be expected to shine. Yet
some instances have occurred, in which
even these disadvantages could not repress
the exertions of native intellect; and the
humane and enlightened sentiments of
Ignatius Sancho, and the elegant poems
of Phillis Wheatley, are alone sufficient
to shew, that neither good sense nor true
taste are irreconcileable strangers to the
African breast. .
The experiment may therefore be con-
sidered as hitherto untried. The little we
have seen of African genius has been ex-
hibited under the most unfavourable cir-
cumstances; as a specimen of curiosity
merely, to shew that the Negro is a rational
being. It yet remains to be seen what its
character will be in situations that afford
an opportunity for the fair exertion of the
human faculties. These situations can
only be produced by taking a part in the
more important and public concerns of
mankind ; in the struggles for liberty and
independance;- in the deliberations neces-
sary for civil government; in the cultiva-


tion of science and literature, and in the
exercise of the social and domestic affec-
tions, . unrestrained by those shackles
which have hitherto depressed the minds,
no less than the limbs, of the unfortunate
natives of Africa. In short, the following
'is perhaps the first work by a Negro, in
which the energies of the mind have been
powerfully excited and have found n pro-
per scope for action, where sentiments
favourable to freedom and independence
could be avowed without the immediate ter-
ror of the scourge, the axe, or the gibbet,
and where in fact this long oppressed race
have been suffered to say a word in their
own dejence.


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.
Aware of the lively interest which every specimen
of Haytian Litterature is calculated to excite in the
generous bosoms of British and American Philan-
thropists, yet equally aware of his own deficiencies,
it is not without the greatest diffidence that the
Translator presumes to offer the following pages in
an English dress to the public.
As a volunteer he perhaps merits the charge of
presumption in undertaking a task
— quod ferre recusant
(Non valent humeri.
But however inadmissible his own claims to indul-
gence, he trusts the candid reader will not allow
himself to form an unfavourable opinion of the merits
of the Author from the demerits of his Translator.
The pamphlet now offered to the public is the
production of a -Nobleman of Hayti, as distinguished
for the urbanity and polish of his manners, as for the
extent of his understanding and the brilliancy of his
wit. It is a reply to a scurrilous production of one
of the disappointed ex-colonists, replete with the
most idle reasonings, absurd sophisms, and gross
mistatements. If in some parts the language of
wounded feelings appear too strong, or too acrimo-
nious for English ears, let the reader cast his eye over
the latter pages, containing a few specimens of the
humanity of the ex-colonists, when power was on their
side, and he will there find an apology which no
feeling heart can hesitate to admit. Let him for a
moment imagine himself in the situation of a Haytian,
witnessing the barbarities exercised upon a Father,


Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife, or Friend torn to
pieces hy blood hounds, roasted. by. fire, thrown alive
in sacks into the sea, or smothered in the holds of ships
with the vapour of sulphur. Let him figure to his
imagination the bleeding form" of Manrepas, in re-
ward of his faithful services to the French, nailed
alive to the main-mast of the Hannibal, in the presence
of his wife and children, and after death, committed
along with them. j/et living, to the horrors of the deep.
Let him call to mind.these and ia . thousand other
greater barbarities which cannot be enumerated, and
the frpw;n of criticism : cannot but be relaxed into
a tear—the severity of reproof lost in the overflowing
of compassion. ::
The Translator cannot conclude this short address
without once more requesting such of his readers as
are unacquainted with the French language, not to
ascribe his defects to the Author, or form to them-
selves an unfair criterion of Hayfian intellect, from
the imperfections of ~its English version. But let
them continually hear in mind, that whatever they
find tq approve in the following pages belongs to the
Author, while the Translator alone is to be held ac-
countable for their blemishes.
Cape Henry, Hayti, )
20th March, 1317. )


REMARKS.
I should not know tlie name of Mazferes but for a
Sugar Plantation situated in the rich and flourishing
plain of Quartier Morin ; hut for the remembrance
of the crimes and atrocities committed against the
unfortunate Blacks by him and by his relatives du-
ring the frightful continuance of the colonial regime;
and the gift made to him of his life by the unhappy
Oge, at a time when he could have sacrificed it to
the manes of our wretched brethren whom he had
tortured to death. Under such recommendations
has his memory been handed down to the everlasting
hatred of the Haytian People. I had reason to be-
lieve that, loaded with guilt, he had, like the majori-
ty of his contemptible brethren, terminated his hate-
ful existence iu a foreign land, till the publication of
his letter to M. Sistnonde de Sismondi rectified my
error; acquainted me that this same Mazeres who
had so disgraced humanity by his crimes, still drag-
ged on an infamous existence, and convinced me that
the misfortunes experienced by the ex-colonists, in-
stead of teaching them a lesson of prudence and mo-
deialion, had only rendered them more infuriate and
vindictive, and that they still longed for the power of
torturing, at will, multitudes of their fellow crea-
tures.
Tormented with an insatiable lust of wealth, and
instigated by the most diabolical spirit of revenge,
into what an ocean of absurdities, of blasphemies, of
calumnies, and of falsehoods, have not these Apostles
of Satan precipitated themselves, in their wicked en-
deavours to justify the traffic and enormities of Sla-
B


very. What impieties have they not dared to utter
for the purpose of undervaluing and degrading the
human species. Some have even refused us the name
of man, and classed us with the Ourang Oulang;
while others, pushing their want of principle to the
utmost verge of moral turpitude, have not been
ashamed to declare, that we ought to be exterminated,
even to children of the sixth year, and our place sup-
plied by fresh importations of unhappy victims torn
from their natal soil! What! exterminate a whole
people!!! Gracious God! who does not shudder at
the thought] Exterminate a whole people ! because
they refuse to bow again beneath the slavish yoke,
and submit to be driven to their daily task by the
whip like the beasts of the field! Because they wish
to enjoy those rights which have been granted them
by their Maker, by Nature, and by Justice. But the
advocates of such measures are men regardless of all
laws human and divine; who brave the opinions of
their contemporaries, and disregard the execration
and contempt which will accompany their names to
the latest posterity. Is it in the 10th century, that
men, enlightened by the truths of Christianity, have
dared unblushingly to avow the horrid principle of
exterminating an entire people! Why is not the gene-
ral voice of their countrymen raised to silence suoh
impious wretches] How does it happen that in
Trance, so, boastful of the progress she lias made in
civilization, so proud of the enlightened Philoso-
phers she possesses, such unchristian doctrines are
suffered to be broached] How is it that, at the very
instant when the voice of the virtuous is raised in an
endeavour to prevent a great evil, and the comple-
tion of a horrible crime, this Mazercs, this ex-colo-
nist, already drenched in our blood, has dared to in-
sult the .virtuous and noble Sismonde, by addressing
such a letter to him] Is it on account of the facility
with which he commits to paper his extravagant and
shallow ideas, that this impious pedant Mazercs is
suffered to vociferate his atrocious and injurious.


falsehoods against the unfortunate race of Africans,
and the Haytians their descendants'?
The pen of the learned Sismonde stands indeed
little in need of my aid to refute the flimsy argu-
ments of Mazferes: but, as a party deeply interested
in the controversy, it neither accords with my duty
nor my inclination to remain a silent and inactive
spectator. It is my duty to exert ray utmost efforts
in conjunction with those who have undertaken the
defence of this great cause, to strain every nerve in
vindication of my brethren, —And as Mazfcres has
observed of. Archimedes, that he wanted only a sup-
port to raise the whole physical world, so do I hope
that the philanthropic sages of the present day, will
find in Hayti a support for their lever, by means of
which they n\py raise the whole moral world in oppo-
sition to the foes of Humanity and the Human Race.
I hope, I say, that these virtuous men, in reward ot
their studies and their labours, will find in the gra-
titude and acknowledgments of the Haytians, a sure
indemnity against the injustice of their fellow mortals.
Should these generous and benevolent men, perse-
cuted amongst their brethren, seek an asylum amongst
us, they will experience in the liberality of a Sove-
reign great and magnanimous, and a people good
and grateful, the recompense due to virtue in distress.
It is proper, before advancing further, to apprise
my readers, that I have not had those advantages of
study and education which are essential to the polish
and accuracy of expression ; they will therefore par-
don those defects of style and composition which
must unavoidably abound in the work of an islander,
.who has had no instruction but his books, no incen-
tive to writing but his hatred to tyrants. Mazeres
may perhaps exult in the detection, in my writings,
of some proof of that moral inferiority for which
he contends, in improper, hard, extravagant and un-
meaning expressions. But of what consequence arc
these, so long as I makemyselfunderstood? Though
furnished only with the simple gifts of nature, I do


Mot despair of showing that it is Mazeres who is ex-
travagant, and that he is a pedant who, with all his
pretensions to wit and learning, is miserably deficient
in common sense.
1 now proceed to point out, I will not say his er-
rors, for he is too great a criminal to have any, but
his moral turpitude, and his unparalleled mendacity.
I proceed to exercise the just right of reprisal to de-
feat this hateful foe ; and if, in the execution of my
task, a momentary pang invade my breast, it will
arise from finding myself compelled to wield my pen
in place of some more powerful weapon, in seeking
redress for the gross outrages be has committed
against us, and being unable to use more convincing
arguments than words to satisfy him that our species
is in no respect inferior to his own.
The system adopted by our detractors has been to
endeavour to materialize the Blacks, by showing a
primitive diversity of the human species ; to falsify-
the history of the creation, and from a supposed in-
feriority on our part to deduce their right to treat us
like the brute creation. In replying then to Maz&res,
I do not answer him alone, but the whole tribe of
French ex-colonists : and I will commence my task
by clearing away the trash with which our enemies
have endeavoured to block up the avenues of Truth.
1 will retrace tilings to their source, endeavour to
re-establish facts, and strengthen them by the most
respectable authorities. I will combat all their ob-
jections, and I trust 1 shall not fail to overthrow, by
victorious proofs and unanswerable arguments, the
whole of their idle sophisms. Previous to commen-
cing, however, it may not be amiss to transcribe Ma-
zeres’ confession of faith.
“ Consider,” says'he, “ the wide and manifest dif-
ference which subsists in external appearance between
the Blacks and the Whites. The difference is suffi-
ciently striking even in the hair and the skin, and
cannot fail to convince the eyes. With the same
senses, the same organs, and a configuration some


what allied, these traits, when examined in detail,
furnish nevertheless essential distinctions. A figure
without expression, limbs destitute of grace or har-
mony, hands skinny and callous, an eye crowded with
blood vessels, communicating a sanguine tinge;
all together serve to characterize the Negro as ma-
nifestly distinct, and belonging to a species altoge-
ther different from the White. There is, if you will,
a certain degree of affinity to be found between the
two species, but I challenge you to produce the re-
motest proof of identity.”
1, on the other hand, will proceed to show, upon
the most incontrovertible grounds, the unity of the
Human Race.
Maziires, to establish his impious position, imme-
diately has recourse to those absurdities which the
blindness of his passion, and bis contempt for the
Human Race have suggested to him. He accordingly
commences his foolish system, by asserting that the
Blacks are a species totally distinct from the Whites,
and to maintain this childish proposition, he has
dared to compare men with asses and with horses,
and to reason respecting them by analogies drawn
from the brute creation, Let Mazfcres and his ex-
colonist brethren degrade themselves if they please ;
let them compare and judge of one another by ana-
logies drawn from horses and from asses ; I will not
prevent them. For . myself and my countrymen,
however, I maintain that Man is the noblest work of
the Creator, endowed with intelligence, formed in the
very image of his Maker; ordained to rule over the
earth, and all its brute inhabitants : created a pecu-
liar, distinct, unique race, incapable of comparison
with any other, and not to be judged of by analogies
drawn from asses and from horses.
Mazeres and the ex-colonists cannot support their
position by any version, authority or evidence what-
ever. Here, however, are my proofs, let them over-
throw them if they can.
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after
B 2


tur likeness: and let them have dominion over theJlsh
of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the
cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth. (1)
But however disposed the generality of men may
be to admit the authority of this evidence, the ex-co-
lonists doubtless will reject it; proofs must therefore
be adduced from other sources than the Holy Scrip-
tures.—Hear then a distinguished Writer.
“ There is in nature,” says Button, “ a general
prototype for every species, on which each individual
is modelled, but from which he deviates more or less
according to circumstances ; so that with respect to
certain qualities there is a whimsical variation in a
succession of individuals ; while there is, at the same
time, a wonderful conformity throughout the species
generally. The.first animal, the first horse, for in-
stance, was the exterior model, or internal mould on
which all horses subsequently foaled, all which exist
at present, and all that may exist hereafter, have
been formed ; but this model admits of being altered,
and rendered more or less perfect, in proportion as
copies are made and multiplied from it. But how
many shades of difference are observable between
the individuals both in the human species, and the
vegetable kingdom : in a word, in every thing which
is capable of re-production.”
Now, if Buffon thus recognizes a prototype to
which each individual originally belonged, how came
different varieties of men, of asses, and of horses to
exist ? This answered, all. the violence, the sophistry
and absurdities of Mazeres fall of themselves. Let
him compare the moral and physical powers of the
African with those of his brethren of Europe, of
Asia, or America. Let him compare the Hottentot
with the Laplander, or the Calmuc with the Esqui-
maux, there is nothing more to the purpose. Let
him, if he please, compare the animals, the vegetables,
(1.) Gen. elk i. Terse 26.


and the minerals of America with other productions
of the Globe ; but, when he presumes to estimate
the human faculties, by analogies drawn from the
brute creation, he exposes himself to the keenest ri-
dicule, and, in place of blushing, he ought actually
to expire with shame, if indeed his gangrened soul
is susceptible of such an impression.
I will now give my readers a just idea of the can-
dour of Mazeres and the ex-colonists, to enable them
the better to appreciate the value of their assertions.
“The more we attend to the operations of nature,”
says Mazeres, “ the more we observe in her works
those, agreements and harmonies, which St. Pierre
has made the subject of his charming book. But
'when facts fail in establishing a correspondence
between the external form, and mental faculties of
the Negro, wd may perhaps infer it from analogy,”
Can he Hatter himself that, when he thus cites
St. Pierre, he can persuade the world that this vir-
tuous man has, in his charming book, confirmed Ids
own stupid and erroneous opinions?
Hear now the wise and generous St. Pierre himself,
and judge how fairly and appositely Mazeres has
cited him.
“While Philosophers assign a common origin to
all the various species of dogs, others ascribe differ-
ent origins to man. These last found their opinion
upon the varieties of nature and colour in the hu-
man species. But neither of these are admitted as
specific characteristics by naturalists, who regard the
one as an accident, and the other as merely a casual
developement of form. Difference of species arises
from a difference of proportions. Now this charac-
terizes those of dogs. But in the human subject,
the proportions are invariable; and the black colour
between the tropics is a simple effect of solar heat,
which darkens the complexion in proportion as we
approach the line. A circumstance this, which, as
we see, is one of the blessings of nijture.” (•>)
(S) Etudes de la Nature, tome 1, page 33.


Let.Mazeres torture his brain never so much, to
prove the affinity of men to beasts, and to show that
nature has been less kind to the Blacks than the
Whites, he will make few converts, except among
ex-colonists, who, like himself, have an interest in
believing and propagating his absurd prejudices,-for
the purpose of maintaining their horrid system of
Slavery, and the Slave Trade.
Surely nature has not created for the Blacks an
exception to her eternal laws; uniform in her bles-
sings, she has not violated her laws on our account,
but has treated us and the Whites with equal favour.
“Man,” says St. Pierre, “is the centre of all
grandeur, movements, and harmony, throughout the
world. His stature, his limbs and organs are formed
in such just proportions, that nothing is found in
nature to excel them; and they are invariaby per-
petuated after the original model. In a word, Man—
Man constitutes a genus in himself, undivided into
Class or species, and peculiarly deserving of the
appellation of the HUMAN RACE.”
• But why need I accumulate facts, upon a subject
decided long since 1 Were it necessary to cite and
report,here all the evidence of the virtuous and en-
lightened Europeans, who have attacked and defeated
the calumnies advanced by the ex-colonists, those
merchants and traders in human blood, for the pur-
pose of establishing our identity with the Whites, I
never should have done. Who, but the ex-colonists,
doubt at the present day, the fact of all men being
brethren, connected by their origin with the same
family? All the absurdities of Mazeres and the ex-
colonists, have already been refuted by men of the
first celebrity. The magnanimous sovereigns, nay,
all the nations of Europe, have paid the homage due
to God and to humanity by bursting the fetters of
Africa! The cause of man has been advocated by
the immortal philanthropists of Europe, with all the
zeal, the constancy, the ardor, and the talents which
the Blacks themselves, had they professed the same


advantages of education, could have displayed. I have
been influenced, not so much by my wish to refute the
idle sophisms of the foes of humanity, which have
been already so successfully combated by our illus-
trious defenders, as by an anxiety to express my gra-
titude for their noble and disinterested exertions.
I was desirous to contribute my feeble efforts in sup-
port of the statements of our friends. Theadvocate
of my own cause, and that of my brethren, I could
not resist the desire I felt to cut the Gordian knot,
and both morally and physically demonstrate to the
ex-colonists by my pen, no less than by my sword,
that our species is in no respect inferior to their own:
I return to Mazeres.
“ The Colonists,” says he, “ in claiming for their
European brethren that decided superiority which
nature has given them over the Negroes, by no
means refuse to these last the name of men, &c."
What impudence is it in the ex-colonists to claim for
their European -brethren a superiority which they do
not claim for themselves. What authority has Ma-
z&res received for constituting himself the organ of
270 Millions of Europeans, or even of a handful of
ex-colonists, disgraced in public estimation by the
crimes with which they are stained 1 What extrava-
gance to dare to assert a claim of superiority, at once
so absurd and so impious, and yet they still complain
of being unfortunate, not insane. Yet, I will ask,
has any one ever witnessed stronger marks of folly or
insanity than those exhibited in their ridiculous pre-
tensions ? How can they possibly maintain a posi-
tion so idle, and so absurd ! It was indeed with rea-
son that Rousseau observed, that when men began to
reason they ceased to think. Mazeres has fully de-
monstrated the truth of this axiom, by his nonsensi-
cal rhapsody. .
Ex-colonists 1 be as passionate and inhuman as you
please. Europe has totally disclaimed you, and 500
Millons of Black, Yellow, and Red Men, scattered
ever the Globe, claim from their great Creator those


rights and privileges, of which you would unjustly
rob them.
I have discovered such a multitude of absurdities,
of falsehoods, and of mis-statements in Mazeres’s pro-
duction, that I have been twenty times on the point
of throwing down my pen, and abandoning his non-
sense to the contempt it inspired. lam a man, I feel
it in the whole of ray being; I possess the faculties,
mental and corporeal, which mark my affinity to a
divine original, and I feel humbled at finding myself
compelled to enter into a serious refutation of such
puerilities, such idle sophisms, to convince men like
myself that lam their fellow. My soul, indignant
at this excess of irrationality and falsehood, compels
me, in my turn, to doubt the claims of those to the
appellation of men, who can dare to enter upon the
discussion of a question no less impious and immo-
ral than absurd. “ But," says Mazeres, “if the Bea-
vers are more intelligent than the Asses ; if there
are varieties of dogs, differing in sagacity ; it neces-
sarily follows, that there must be species of men
inferior to others.” “ How foolish!” Rousseau re-
plies, “ this argument, drawn from the brute crea-
tion, is neither conclusive nor true. Man is neither
a dog, nor yet an ass. He has only to establish in
his mind the first relationships of society to acquire
sentiments of morality unknown to brutes. Beasts
have indeed affections and passions ; but the heart
of Man alone is susceptible of the sacred impressions
of virtue and truth ; it is therefore the greatest of all
possible absurdities, to reason respecting man by
analogies drawn from the irrational part of the crea-
tion."
He will- undoubtedly find among Beavers some
possessing a larger portion of instinct than others,
and among Asses and Dogs instances of. superiority;
he will in the same way find among men some that
are good and others the reverse; some of superior
talents, and some that are dolts and liars. For in-
stance, does Mazeres think himself upon a par with


Buffon, in point of talent and wit; or with Acliillcs
in strength and valour 1 while he is nothing more
than a coxcomb swoln with pride and vanity, and
faint-hearted as Thersites. Mazeres may draw pa-
rallels between himself and asses and dogs, I will
not prevent him. Indeed it is not impossible that,
upon minute investigation, some analogy may be
found actually to subsist between him and these
quadrupeds ; the Dogs, for example, were the wor-
thy auxiliaries of the ex-colouists, in their endea-
vours to exterminate the Blacks; hence some degree
of sympathy may possibly subsist between them, —
But, with these exceptions, I still maintain that Man,
that intelligent being, unique as a species, is to be
estimated and compared only with his fellow Men ;
and brute animals with individuals of their own
species.
According to the absurd system of Mazeres and
the ex-colonists, as Sismonde justly observes, the
Parisians, building upon the superiority of their
knowledge, might suppose themselves a particular
species, distinct from, and superior to, the unfortu-
nate peasants of La Vendee. Yet this Mazeres and
the ex-colonists cannot comprehend how the most
savage Hottentot is, in the eyes of eternal wisdom,
upon a perfect footing of equality with the sage and
learned Buffon.
Mazeres observes that “ the animal which is best
formed, whose head is raised towards heaven, pos-
sesses in general the noblest disposition; (he most
energy and the most understanding.” Well! but
what does all this prove I That a horse of a good
figure, and elegant proportions might be supposed
better than another destitute of equal recommenda-
tions, This is a general rule, which experience show s
to be not without exceptions ; for there are small
and even inelegant looking horses, which are not-
withstanding excellent. Apply again, if you will,
this rule of harmonics and agreements to man; ami
it will by no means be found that Genius is the


inseparable concomitant of Beauty. Here experience
totally overthrows the rule; since men, the, most
homely in their appearance, have generally been
found tbe most ingenious. Esop the Phrygian, not-
withstanding his deformity, had wit. I wish this law
prevailed in Poetry as well as in Painting; it is es.
sential to the fine arts, but applies in no respect
either to Blacks, to Whites, or to Horses, all of whom
vary equally in the proportions and elegance of their
forms. How admirably does Virgil characterize a
Divinity when he says “ Vera incessu paiuit Dea,” her
very gait pointed her out to be a goddess. Granted,
yet neither does this prove any thing against the
Blacks. When the populace would describe a
rogue, they say, "he has the gallows in his face.” —
I am decidedly of this way of thinking ; and if it be
true that a certain conformity subsists between our
exterior features, and our internal faculties, our in-
clinations and propensities, our virtues and our vices,
what man ought to have a more forbidding aspect
than Mazeres]
But this is not, as it appears to me, the drift of
his puerile sophisms ; his real object seems to be to
demonstrate some fanciful superiority, which White
as a colour, possesses over Black. For this purpose
he should have commenced his demonstrations with
showing the superiority of white over black horses,
white over black dogs, and then of while over black
men. This would have been the most natural as
well as the most candid course. But then with
what embarrasiuenls and difficulties would he not
have to contend ? For example, a learned Professor
at the University of Gottingen observes, that in
Guinea, not only the men but the dogs and birds,
and above all the barn-door fowl are black, while
the bears and other animals in the vicinity of the
Frozen Ocean are white. Black being, according to
Knight, the characteristic of the primitive race in all
animals, he was inclined to regard the Negro, as the
prototype of the Human Species. (3) Hunter ro-
(3) Litterature des Negros, page 16.


barked tliat the circumstance of a race of animals
becoming white, was a proof of their degenerating ;
and Button wished the race of white footed horses
might be exterminated. Yet this, undoubtedly, is far
from proving any degeneracy on the part of the white
variety of the human species.
' Africa likewise produces animals far more formi-
dable than those of Europe; they do not even admit
of any degree of comparison. What animal, for in-
stance, can be compared with the Royal Tiger, • and
Lion of the torrid zone ? Is it the white Bear or the
Wolf of the arctic circle? Mazeres, who judges of
tnen by analogy with horses, had better enquire whe-
ther the horses of Europe can sustain a parallel with
those of Africa. Hear what Bruce says on this sub-
ject in his journey to Abyssinia.
“ It was at Halfaia and Agerri,” he, “ that we
first met that noble race of horses so justly celebrated
throughout the world. They appeared of a species
totally different from the Arabian breed which we
had seen in the plains of Arabia Pelrea. df beauty,
the most perfect symmetry of form, size, strength,
activity, suppleness of motion, capability of enduring
fatigue, docility, and attachment to their masters,
constitute the merits of horses, the Abyssinian breed
is without exception superior to all others. The
most beautiful I ever beheld,” says he,' “ was that
upon which the Sheik Adelan was mounted; this
horse was not quite four years old, yet he was sixteen
hands high ; he was accustomed to kneel down to
let his master mount or dismount in full armour.”
The ex-colonists say, we are inferior to the Whites,
because we have, according to them, features less
agreeable, a black skin and curly hair. I will observe
in answer that the same prejudice with respect to the
Whiles prevails among the Blacks, who think them-
selves infinitely handsomer, and far more favoured
by nature ; a prejudice this which is strengthened
by frequent instances which fall under their own ob-
servation. The Europeans who visit the Tropics, at
c


first display the vermeil glow of health and strength;
but in a few months the roses.wither in their cheeks,
and their place is supplied by the ghastly paleness
of disease. The complexion, so late their pride, be-
comes haggard, wan, and discoloured; their watery
and lender eyes are unable to bear the solar rays;
their bodies become feeble and emaciated, and their
moral and physical powers destroyed ; so that the
White man appears, in the eyes of the Black, a mere
walking skeleton, disgraced by nature, unable to re-
sist, either the influence of his climate, or inhabit
his happy land.
“ All those,” says the virtuous Gregoire, “ who
have endeavoured to disinherit the Negro of his
rights, have called in the aid of anatomy, and have
commenced with observations upon the disparity of
colour.” But if it appear that Black prevails within
the tropics, and that its shades vary with the grada-
tions of temperature ; if it be shown that the White is
as unable to bear the heat of the torrid, as the Black
is to sustain the cold of the frigid zone, what superior
advantage will be found to result from a black, yel-
low, or white complexion.
“ The women of Abyssinia,” says Bruce, “ on be-
holding the whiteness of my skin, uttered an excla-
mation of horror, and seemed to regard it as the ef-
fect of disease, rather than my natural colour.”
Other women laughed at the length and sharpness of
his nose. No people are without their prejudices.—
We esteem a black skin more beautiful than a white
one. Our Haytian Painters depict the Deity and
Angels black, while they represent the Devils white.
As to beauty, it consists in elegance of form, and re-
gularity of features, and in these respects, we think
ourselves as much favoured as the Whites. On this
subject their own testimony must be allowed some
weight, I shall therefore cite several.
Bosnian- extols the beauty of the Negresses of
Juida ; Ledyard and Lucas that of the Jalof Negioes;
Loho that of. the Abv ssinians. “Those of Senegal/'


says Adanson, “ are the handsomest men of Nigritia ;
their form is without blemish, and I never observed
an ill-made person among them.” Cossigny saw at
Goree, Negresses of great beauty, of imposing as-
pect, and with Roman features; Ligon speaks of a Ne-
gress of the island of St. Yago, in whom so much
beauty and dignity were combined that he never saw
any comparable to her. Chasle, author of a Journal
of Admiral Duguene’s Voyage, extends this eulogy to
the Negro and Mulatto Girls of the Cape Verd
Islands. Legual, Ulloa, and Isert give the same tes-
timony respecting the Negresses they saw, the first
in Batavia, the second in the West Indies, and the
third in Guinea. (4.)
Bruce, on seeing a young girl of Abyssinia, ex-
presses himself thus, “ I was struck with her extreme
beauty. Her whole dress consisted of a blue robe,
reaching to her feet. Although not more than fifteen,
her stature was little below the ordinary; and her
whole figure was such as a painter would have desired
for a model. The women (continues Bruce) soon
perceived how much 1 was taken with her ; and the
daughter of Adelan said to me, ‘ have you lived so
long in Abyssinia as to admire the Beauties of Atbara,
when they say that the Ladies of Europe are so fai*r as
to excel those of all the rest of the world.’ “ Never,”
replied Bruce, “ was I less of that opinion than at
the present moment.” He boasts likewise of the
beauty of the African princes ; “ Araba Yasous,” says
he, “ appeared to be from twenty-six to twenty-eight
years of age, tall and perfectly well made; his figure
was elegant, although his features were small; and
his manners were singularly captivating. When I
saw the prince with the king and Erigedan I think I
beheld three of the handsomest men I ever met with.”
“ The Yolofs,” says Park, “ are active, strong, and
warlike. Their noses are less flattened, and their lips
less thick than usual; their skin is of the deepest
(-1.) Littcrature dcs Negre*, page 29.


black, and the Whites who trade with them for slaves,
look upon them as the handsomest Negroes of this
part of the continent.”
“ The Foulahs are of a lighter hue, their hair is
silky, and their features agreeable ; they love a pas T
toral and agricultural life, and spread themselves over
the neighbouring kingdoms as shepherds and la-
bourers.” In this respect they are superior to the
Savoyards who swarm in France hi the despicable
occupations of pedlars and shoeblacks.
Paterson and Vaillant have found in the savage
Hottentots, virtues which they sought in vain among
civilized nations. “On the evening of the seventh of
February," says Paterson, “we discovered a fire oii
the side of a mountain; and about eight o’clock we
fell in with a party of. Cadres, who seemed greatly
surprised at our appearance, for we were certainly
the first white men they ever beheld. They fled in-
stantly and alarmed the village. Nevertheless, true
to the laws of hospitality, they came and offered us
milk and a fat ox as soon as we arrived.”
“The Caffres,” says the same traveller, “are in
general five feet ten inches high, and well propor-
tioned ; their manner of engaging the lion, and other
wild beasts, proves their courage. Their colour is
jet black, their teeth white as ivory, and their eyes
large.”
“Do you want authorities in support of my opi-
nion respecting the inferiority of the Negroes?" says
Mazferes, the ex-colonist, in his general Thesis, “ Fon-
tcnellc will tell you that the inhabitants of either
very hot or very cold countries, are incapable of
works of genius. The Abbe Dubos (says he) in his
remarks upon Poetry and Painting, will explain and
prove to you the truth of this assertion.”
Mazeres should explain upon his own principles,
how it happens that the Swedes, Norwegians, and
Russians, who inhabit the coldest, as well as the
people of Senegal who inhabit the hottest regions of
the globe, furnish examples of men uot only formed


with the most exact symmetry, but also capable'of
the most sublime works of genius. The Abbe
Dubos proves nothing, he has drawn his proof from
bad sources. Historians, Poets, and Orators. “It is
not,” observes Montesquieu, “upon works of osten-
tation that systems should be founded.” And I will
venture to add, after that great man, that it is not
from sophistical subtleties, or. the jingle of words,
that we should form our judgment of the Human
Race.
Mazeres calls in the evidence of Montesquieu to
justify his Theory of Slavery, and at the same time
calumniates the author of L’Esprit de Lois.
Montesquieu should not have maintained, in proof
of the position that heat enervates courage, that the
Negroes. constituted a distinct and inferior species
to the Whites; since experience, on the contrary,;
shows that it is the latter who are most affected by
warm climates, in which they lose that mental and.
bodily energy of which he speaks; while the Blacks
beneath the Torrid Zone, their native climate, are
fierce and full of courage, contrary to Montes-
quieu’s opinion. But w r e respect the aberrations of,
this great man. Hear his sentiments respecting the
horrid right of Slavery, . . , .
. “Slavery, properly so called, is the establishment
of a right which transfers one man wholly into the
power of another, who thereby becomes absolute
master of his life and property. It,is bad in, its
nature, and beneficial neither to. the master nor to
the slave; to the.latter, because he has no longer,
generous motives to prompt his exertions; to the
former, because he acquires, in the midst of his
slaves, every depraved habit; accustoms himself to
neglect all the moral virtues, and,becomes in the end
fierce, passionate, severe, choleric, voluptuous, and
cruel.” . , •/
The immortal Montesquieu must.haye had the ex-
colonists in view when he wrote these last words, in
which he has comprised their whole character.
C 2


He Continues; “ It. is not true that a free man can
sell himself, the sale implies a price, but in selling
Limself he makes over, not only his person, but like-
wise the whole of his goods and chattels to his
master ; (4) the master consequently will give, and
the slave will receive nothing ; he will have a pecu-
lium, it may be said; but this peculium is attached
to his person; if he be not permitted to defend his
person, because disrobed of his country, he cannot
be permitted to sell himself.”
On the slavery of the Negroes, Montesquieu
speaks thus, “ Were I to defend the right we assume
to enslave the Negroes, this is what 1 would say. The
people of Europe having exterminated those of
America, are bound to enslave those of Africa, for
the purpose of continuing the cultivation of the
lands.”
Were not the ex-colonists so blinded by their pas-
sions, they would have felt the full force of this irony.
How can they have the assurance to cite Montes-
quieu, in justification of their horrid theory! What!
because he has said that heat enervates courage, does
it follow that all who inhabit warm climates, must of
necessity be inferior to, and the slaves of those who
live in cold countries ? This I maintain to be both a
false and absurd theory, every man having received
from Nature the complexion adapted to the country
and climate of his birth. To convince us that the
nature of the Whites is superior to that of the Blacks,
it should be proved that the Whites are superior to
the influence of climate, and can inhabit the torrid
regions of the equator and the eteinal ices of the
poles without experiencing any other change than
complexion ; whereas irrefragable facts and authori-
ties show that they are unable to resist the influence
of warm climates for three months together without
degenerating.
Demanet and Imlay Lave remarked that the de-
(4) Litterature des Negres, page 29.


scendants of the Portuguese settled at Congo,'oh the
Coast of Sierra Leone, and other parts of Africa,
have become Negroes, which establishes, as the Abb6‘
Grcgoire observes, the influence of climate over the
complexion and figure.
Have the French so soon forgot the deadly effects
of the burning heat of the kingdom of Hayti, and of
the icy cold of the Russian empire, that they can-
talk with such levity P I have seen thousands of
French who, in their own country, might have been
brave and vigorous soldiers; I have seen them, I re-
peat, stretched in the dust, and exhibiting the most
humiliating picture of human feebleness and misery.
Where then is this pretended superiority of the
Whites over the blacks? Where this pretended theory
of Montesquieu which dooms us to inevitable bon-
dage 1
The ex-colonists fall into perpetual contradictions.
Where their interests are concerned they have lie
scruples. When they would prove the superiority
of the Whites over the blacks, they maintain that 1
the inhabitants of the torrid zone yield the palm of
energy and strength to those of the temperate zones.
They even have the effrontery to call the Blacks ef-
feminate, lazy, and voluptuous. “ See the Negro,”
says the brazen faced Mazferes, “ all his movements
are made with labour, and one European porter car-
ries with ease a load which two Blacks could hardly
lift from the ground.” But when he comes to con-
sider the abolition of the Slave Trade and Slavery in
the colonies, see how the tone is altered ! Hear
these wretches now exclaiming, No Slavery, No Co-
lony, The Antilles can only be ■ cultivated by Ne-
groes," they are already accustomed in Africa to bear
the solar heat; they alone can endure the fatigue of
labour, to which the European is altogether unequal,
and would soon sink beneath the combined influence
of climate and toil 1
Do they then remember our painful labours, and
the mass of wealth they used to extract from our


blood during tbe ten years of life and misery which
was the estimated term- of our existence ? Do they
call to mind the life we led, the three out of twenty-
four hours allotted us for rest, for tacking together a
few rags to hide our nakedness, and rearing for our
support a'few roots cultivated upon the most barren
spot of the estate? All is well remembered. On
the other hand the colonists calculate the labor which
a white man can do for them, the wages to be paid,-
the hours required for repose, the superior cost of
his clothing, the superior, quantity and quality of his.
food, and, what weighs more than all with the Plan-
ters, the necessity of treating him with a little more
humanity than a Negro, and the impossibility of tor-
turing him at pleasure. All these being equally ba-
lanced, and maturely weighed, the.result is they
must have Negroes as slaves, and to obtain them they;
will stick at no calumny, subterfuge, or falsehood
which has a tendency to obscure the truth, and en-
able them to continue their horrible colonial system.:
Thus it is that Mazeres, after exhausting all his-
ingenuity in endeavouring to disprove the identity of
the human species, tries to make out the natives,of
the northern, to be a different species from those of
the southern parts of Africa.
Hence, after establishing the identity of the Blacks
and Whites, I am next obliged to identify the Africans
with the Negroes ; and eventually, perhaps, even to
identify these with the Haytiansi As for myself, de-
scended from an African stock, I am, I imagine,:
sufficiently identified with the Africans. I will call
upon Mazeres to show, whether the inhabitants of
the south of Europe are a distinct species from those,
of the North? Whether the identity of the Ffench
and Japanese, the Spaniards and the Russians, is the
same ? What wretched sophistry! what childish
reasoning! Mazeres doubtless expects by his sub-
terfuges to escape the objections arising from the.
ancient civilization of Africa; or as there yet exist
nations in Europe, who carry on the odious traffic in


human flesh, and as they cannot make slaves of the
inhabitants of Egypt, or of Morocco, it is of little
detriment to the ex-colonists to allow these to possess
some faculties, and to make out the inhabitants of
Senegal, Monomotapa, and Zanguebar, to be a dis-
tinct species, which, according to them, are brutes,
fit only to be made slaves of.
The enemies of Africa wish to persuade the world
that for five, out of the six thousand years that the
world has existed, Africa has been always sunk in.
barbarism, and that ignorance is essential to the na-
ture of her inhabitants. Have they forgotten, that
Africa was the cradle of the arts and sciences? If
they pretend to forget this, it becomes our duty to
remind them of it.
I shall merely take a hasty glance at history, for
the purpose of collecting the proofs and arguments
necessary for the refutation of the ex-colonists; and
notwithstanding my not having had, like Mazferes, the
benefit of a university education, or even of sitting
on the sixth form, I believe that the history of man
is, with some few exceptions, the same in the eyes of
philosophy, throughout all ages and in all regions of
the world.
We observe that at the commencement, countries
nearest to the birth place of the human race, were
the first peopled and civilized : thence, as from %
centre, the rays of light progressively diverged. Al-
ready do we behold among the primitive nations the
meridian blaze of knowledge, whose dawn alone be-
gan to glimmer over the adjoining countries, while
the deepest night enveloped the rest of the globe,
where the very name even of man was unknown.. We
behold the day of knowledge progressively extending
over the face of the earth, rising upon some, and set-
ting to other nations. We see the most powerful
empires rising to notice and again sinking in oblivion;
nations subdued by nations, and furnishing the most
striking example of the instability of human affairs.
According to the Septuagiut, Europe was still'un


known 165 G years after part of Asia and Africa had
been peopled; nor was it till after the deluge that,
from the three children of Noah proceeded the several
nations who peopled the earth ; Shem and his pos-
terity, Asia; Ham, Africa; and Japhet, Europe;
according to the annals and traditions of all nations
Egypt was the country first civilized ; and served a$
the cradle of science and art in their infancy. “ Tills
w'as the primitive focus,” says Mods. Le Sage, whence
undoubtedly proceeded that original spark, whichl
kindling in the lapse of ages, has ultimately produced
the blaze of light which in the present day illumi-
nates Europe.”
Every body knows that the Greeks, so celebrated
for the polish of their manners, and tho refinement
of their taste, were in a state of the grossest igno-
rance and barbarity, living, like the beasts, upon
herbs and acorns, till civilized by colonies from
Egypt; while the rest of Europe was yet unknown,
and its inhabitants were certainly as barbarous, asig-
norant, and as brutal as those of Benin, of Zangue-
bar, and of Monomotapa can possibly be at the pre-
sent day.
But Inachus, Cecrops, and Lalex, instead of en-
slaving the Whites, and instructing the Greeks in
burning, pillaging and defrauding; instead of fur-
nishing them with arras and warlike stores, or strong
liquors to derange their intellects, and induce them
to sell one another ; instead, I say, of promoting an
inhuman traffic, introduced corn, and instructed them
in Egyptian agriculture and learning. Instead of
inquiring into the moral and physical inferiority of
these poor ignorant Greeks, they taught them to imi-
tate themselves in the arts of society, and, in no great
time, even to surpass their instructors. Athens,
Sparta, and Corinth flourished while all the rest of
Europe was sunk in barbarism.
Towards the close of the 9th century before Christ,
a Tyrian colony, led by Dido, built Carthage, and


ISB years after, Rome, that mistress of the world, was
founded by a handful of Robbers; The Romans
modelled themselves after the Greeks; the Decemvirs
borrowed the laws of the twelve tables, the foundar
lion of Roman jurisprudence, from those of the
Athenians. From Italy, learning spread slowly to the
Gauls whom Julius Caesar subdued in the COGth year
of Rome, and 58 years before Christ.
The Gauls, like other Europeans, were at that time
still idolaters, plunged in the deepest abyss of igno-
rance, following barbarous and superstitious customs •
yet the world was now nearly 4000 years old, and the
people of Europe had not been able to acquire a
single spark of knowledge; in vain did a narrow
border of civilization skirt its southern shores, the
light was unable to penetrate the dark forests of Gaul,
and the stupidity of the boorish inhabitants. The
Ethiopians, Egyptians, Carthaginians, Greeks, and
Romans filled the world with the fame of their wis-
dom, their laws, and their government; while the
Gauls lay yet buried in pristine ignorance. Immense
forests, lofty mountains, the interruption of lakes’
and rivers, the rigor of cold climates, and the barbar-
ity of the people, impeded the introduction of learn-
ing info the north of Europe, while different causes,
yet of a similar nature, prevented the civilization of
Southern Africa.
It W'ould have been difficult for the Egyptians or
Carthaginians to communicate with the nations of the
south of Africa, separated as they were by the vast
deserts of Zaara; tire difficulty of crossing the mov-
ing sands, which sometimes swallow up whole Cara-
vans, with tire want of food and water under a burn-
ing sun were obstacles they could not surmount. This
it was which induced (be Carthaginians to send colo-
nies by wafer to the sea coasts. Hanno, by order of
the serrate, distributed 30,000 Carthaginians between
the Straights of Gibraltar and Cerne, in the 25tlr de-
gree of North Latitude, that is to say, as far as Cape


fcadajor, the boundary of the navigation of the an-
cients in this part of Africa. (5)
“ There is, “ says Montesquieu, ** an interesting
relic of antiquity in the narrative of Hanno; the
style and facts correspond ; there is nothing of the
marvellous, all that he relates of the climate and soil,
the customs and manners of the inhabitants, corres-
ponds so exactly with what we find at this very day
on the coast of Africa, that his journal has all the
air of that of a. modern navigator.”
“ The Carthaginians,” continues Montesquieu,
were on the road to wealth, and had they penetrated
to the 4th degree of north latitude, and the 15th of
west longitude, they would have discovered the Gold
Coast and its neighbouring territories. There they
might have carried on a commerce of an importance
far different from that of the present day, when
America seems to have depreciated the wealth of
every oilier country: they would have found there
treasures which the. Romans could not have taken
away.”
1 The ex-colonists see the contempt in which Montes-
quieu held the slave trade, which has, as he observes,
*' depreciated the wealth of every other country.”
Mazeres who has so often appealed to his testimony,
cannot surely reject it in the present instance.
(5) Africa, according to Herodotus, was circumnavigated in
tlie time of Nechus, king of Egypt, wlio, having abandoned
his design of connecting the Nile and the Red Sen, by a canal,
sent Pbcnicians on a voyage of discovery with directions to
proceed down the Red Sea, and, traversing the Atlantic, re-
turn by the columns of Hercules and the Mediterranean to
Egypt. These men having descended the Red Sea, and en-
tered the Southern Ocean, landed on the coast of Africa about
the autumnal equinox, and having sowed the land, waited the
harvest, when, shipping the produce, they sailed again. After
spending two years in this voyage they entered the Mediter-
'ranean the third year by the pillars of Hercules and returned
to Egypt. On their arrival they related a fact, which Hero-
dotus seems to regard as incredible, “ that they bad the Sun on
their right hand as they sailed round the coast.” — Melpomene.
Translator.


The destruction of Carthage by the Romans, toge-
ther with the irruption of the Northern
tvas, I am convinced, principal impedi-
ments to the perfect civilization of Africa.
“ It was at the commencement of the sth century,”
says Le Sage in his learned work, “ that the Barba-
rian foot for the first trod upon. this land,
embellished'by ages of civilization. Genseric and
his Vandals, pursuing the Romans, fixed his throne
upon the very ruins of Carthage. But if the Vandals,
succeeded in dismembering Africa from the Western
Empire, they ih their turn were- despoiled of it by
that of the East, by those exploits which shed a
momentary lustre under the renowned but unfortu-
nate Belisarius. This last triumph was but of short
duration, and Africa relapsed from civilization be-
neath the yoke of Barbarians. She bent the first
time beneath the tempest of the North, and fell the
second time beneath that of the South, under the
terrible Saracens whose fanatic valour bore down every
obstacle and overpowered every foe.”
The establishment of Mahometanism, and the con-
flagration of the Alexandrian Library by order of
the Caliph Omar, completed the overthrow of ancient
civilization in Africa ; the affrighted muses fled;
literature disappeared ; monuments were decayed
and mutilated ; morality extinguished, and the intro-
duction of the Slave Trade, - that odious traffic of
crimes and blood, put a finishing stroke to the calami-
ties of this unhappy country.
‘ While ignorance spreads her sickly veil over this
ancient land of knowledge, Europe, more fortunate,
has torn the bandage froni her eyes., Aided by the
light of Christianity, Alfred the Great* and Charle-
magne began to polish their subjects. Need I speak
of the brilliant epochs of Leo the Great, and the
Medici, those immortal protectors of Literature?
Again, Peter-the Great in the 17th century added
Russia to the family of civilized Europe.
Notwithstanding the evidence of History, thef
D


calumniators of the Blacks affirm, in general terms,
that ignorance and barbarity are vices inherent in
the nature of Africans; they say, that this part of the
globe was always a land of Slaves, that this is the
indigenous scourge of this laud of malediction. These
unworthy descendants of Japhet, forgetful of their
own history, calumniate their brethren and reproach
them with that very state of ignorance and barbarity
in which they were themselves plunged upwards of
five thousand years.
From the remotest antiquity, say they, slaves existed
in Africa; but so have they in Europe from time
immemorial as well as at the present day; the Greeks,
Homans, Gauls, Germans, indeed all nations were
slaves. The miserable condition of the Helots in
ancient Greece, furnishes an apposite illustration of
our situation in this country, under the abominable
colonial system. Why do they reproach the Africans
with their barbarity and ignorance 1 Were not the
Europeans equally barbarous and ignorant before
their civilization ? Nevertheless the assertions of the
colonists should be received with great suspicion ;
those especially of one Pallissot de Beauvois, who
unblushiugly classes us'with the Ourang Outang, and
continually calumniates us. It is possible that barba-
rous and superstitious customs still exist among the
African nations. It is possible that the king of Benin
sacrifices human victims; and that other nations mur-
der their prisoners ; I am far from wishing to lessen
the abhorrence of such practices, and my heart grieves
for their existence; but these arc the result of pro-
found ignorance, and only to be progressively removed
by the introduction of civilization.
It is somewhat surprising that they should estimate
the African character, from a few traits of supersti-
tion and barbarity, when if they cast ever so cursory
a glance at history and themselves, they must feel
convinced that these are not the peculiar attributes
of' the Blacks, but belong equally to the Whites.
I have detected among the Europeans the very same


practices with which the ex-colonists upbraid the
Africans. Is not nearly the same kind of proof with
that of the red Water of the king of Sherbo, to be
found in the Salique law which admits of trial by
boiling water, and afterwards by judiciary combat 1 ?
Is it necessary for an unlettered islander, like
myself, perpetually to recal to their memory the
history of man 1
Offerings in the early ages were simple. “The
first men says (Porphyry) sacrificed nothing but herbs;
upon the introduction of agriculture these were ex-
changed for the first fruits of the harvest, and the
finest productions of the earth, which were offered
as tokens of gratitude to the Deity: in process of
time animals were sacrificed ; offerings of this nature
gradually multiplied, and in times of public calamity
the blood of beasts not being deemed of sufficient
value, that of men was substituted; and this horrid,
and almost universal practice may be traced to the
remotest depths of antiquity.”
The Gauls, as well as other European nations were
addicted to these superstitious and barbarous prac-
tices. The most solemn of all the Druidical cere-
monies, was the gathering the misletoe of the oak.
I will now relate some of the principal maxims of
the Druids on this subject, as preserved by tradition,
never having been committed to writing.
“The misletoe should be gathered with great so-
lemnity, and always if possible on the tenth day of
the moon ; a golden sickle should be kept for cut-
ting it.”
“ On extraordinary occasions it is proper to sacri-
fice a man. Future events may be predicted from
the falling of the body, the flowing of the blood, or
the opening of the wound.”
“ Prisoners of war are either to be sacrificed upon
the altars, or inclosed in wicker baskets, to be burned
in honour of the Gods.”
“ All fathers of families are kings in their own
houses, possessing power of life and death over their
wives, children, and slaves,”


Such were the horrid maxims of the Gallic priests;
they offered human sacrifices to Eaus and Teutates :
they slew and burned their prisoners of war in wick-
er baskets. Fathers of families possessed the dread-
ful power of life and death over their wives, their
children, and their slaves. This degradation into
which the Gauls were sunk, is attested by Caesar, by
Tacitus, by Lactantius, and by Lucan. It was under
the reign of Claudius, in the 50th year, of Christ,
that these horrible customs were first abolished ; nor
was it till Christianity had completely triumphed over
Gaulish superstition, that the order of Druids be-
came extinct.
The Northerns, being more slowly civilized, re-
tained these barbarous practices as late as the 9th
century, at which period they were yet unacquainted
with the arts, which had refined the manners of the
Greeks and Romans. They conceived the number
Three to be peculiarly acceptable to the Gods; and
every ninth month,'or three tiines three, they cele-
brated great festivals, which lasted nine days, when
nine victims, either men or beasts were sacrificed.
In time of war the victims were selected from the
prisoners; but during peace from among the. crimi-
nals. Nine persons were sacrificed ; the choice being
regulated partly by lot, and partly by the will of the
assistants. The unfortunate victims upon whom the
lot fell, were treated with the greatest respect by
those assembled, who were so lavish of their promises
for the life to come, that they sometimes even felici-
tated themselves upon their destiny. Nor did the
let always fall upon plebeian blood : for the more
valuable the victim, the more certain they thought
themselves of the Divine, favour. The history of the
north abounds in instances of kings and fathers, who
have outraged their teuderest feelings, in compliance
with this barbarous custom.
When a man was to be sacrificed, he was laid upon
a large stone, where he w’as either smothered or
crushed to death ; sometimes they were bled, and


the impetuosity of the stream was one of the most
important omens. The body was next opened to
consult the entrails, and to read in the heart the will
of the Gods, and the good or evil fortune impending.
The sad remains w ere then either burned, or hung up
in the sacred wood near the temple ; the blood was
sprinkled partly over the people and partly over the
sacred wood ; and the ceremony closed with washing
the images of the Gods, the altars, the benches, and
the walls of the temple within and without.
Close to the temple was a well or deep pit, into
which, occasionally, a victim, devoted to Frigga, the
Goddess of the earth, was precipitated ; and if he
reached the bottom quickly, the sacrifice w'as sup-
posed to be acceptable to the Goddess, and received
by her; if the reverse happened she was supposed
to have rejected it, and the victim was bung up in
the sacred grove. A grove of this description grew
near the temple of Upsal, every tree and fruit of
which was considered most holy; this, which was
called Odhi's Grove, was filled with the bodies of
men and animals that had been sacrificed ; these they
occasionally took to burn in honour of Thor or the
sun, and when the smoke rose perpendicularly to
heaven, they were satisfied of the burnt offering
being well received. When a victim was sacrificed
the priest said, “ 1 devote thee to Odin; I send thee
to Odin; or I devote thee to a good harvest; or for
the return of a good season.” The ceremony conclu-
ded with festivities exhibiting all the splendour of the
age. The kings and chief nobility first drank in
hbnonrof the Gods, after which each individualdrank,
making his own private supplications and vows.
Let the ex-colonists Mazeres and Palissot de Beau-
vois, study the history of their ancestors, whence the
foregoing facts have been gleaned, and they will no
longer have reason to wonder at the superstitious
and barbarous ignorance of the Africans ; they will
cease to wonder at Jabou, captain of the king of
Benin’s guards, sacrificing three men at a feast, at
v 2


which Palissot de Beauvois assisted. Is it not more
than probable, that Palissot himself contributed
somewhat to this dreadful sacrifice, by furnishing
Jabou with strong liquors to inebriate him, and'
while his reason was astray, to induce him to fur-
nish him with slaves ? I have the strongest grounds
for this suspicion from Palissot’s saying that Jabou
had a great number of slaves, and it could hardly
have been with any other intention than that of obtain-
ing some of them, that Palissot visited him. It would
at least have been humane to have purchased these
three victims, and thus have saved his host the com-
mission of so detestable a crime.
It is seemly in the ex-colonists and traders in hu-
man flesh to dwell with pleasure upon recitals of cru-
elties committed by the ignorant Africans upon their
unfortunate slaves, when they themselves who enjoy
the blessings of knowledge and civilization, have
practised the most unheard of cruelties upon the
trembling vassals o( their power. Let them only
glanceat the horrors of the Slave Trade, or the crimes
committed by themselves in the colonies and they
will see how doubly heinous their conduct appears in
criminating their unfortunate brethren in Africa !—■
These are the men of blood, —these are the ex-colo-
nists, bathed in iniquity, who dare to calumniate us.
These are they who, as the generous Sismonde ob-
serves, cast in the teeth of the Africans barbarities
originating with themselves, and condemn people for
crimes perpetrated at their instigation, and paid for
with their money.
Hear the language of the crafty Mazeres; “look
at Africa,” says he, “ look at her unalterable, 1 had
almost said, her indelible barbarity. What has she
attempted I What has she planned I What has she-
accomplished, while the light of Europe beamed in
brightest splendour upon her Mediterranean shores,
and after receiving innumerable rays, through such
various channels ? "
lias he the assurance to ask what she has done,


while the light of Europe beamed in brightest splen-
dour upon her shores ? Here is what she has done,
she has cirilized Europe; and it is to the negro race,
at this day enslaved, as Volney observes, that Eu-
ropeans owe the arts and sciences, even to the art of
speech! lin my turn ask what Europe has done to-
wards the civilization of Africa, since her own civi-
lization, and since her becoming the seat of arts and'
sciences, and illuminated by the doctrines of Christi-
anity, which inculcate charity and good will to our
neighbours;—what has she done to civilize Africa,,
that unhappy land, which Mazeres does not blush to
call the land of malediction? —Here is what Europe :
has done: she has established that inhuman traffic in
men which has corrupted the population of Africa.
Tiie progress of social life, of agriculture, of morals
and of literature, has been annihilated by this odious-
traffic ; it has occasioned desolation, barbarity, and
all the crimes and enonnit : es of which human nature
is susceptible. The tears, the blood, and the misery
of Africa cry aloud for vengeance, and demand jus-
tice from the whole of nature; vet the authors of
her misfortunes dare to say, that Africa has equally
resisted the instructions of nature, and of man ;
while the light of Europe beamed in brightest splen4
dour upon her Mediterranean shores, and after she
had received innumerable rays through such various
channels.
Gracious God! what a light! what a channel
of instruction and civilization was the SLAVE
TRADE!!!
This daring accumulation of falsehood has roused
the indignation of my soul: I check myself; I was
on the point of cursing Europe and the inventors of
this dreadful trade. Generous Sismonde, Wilherforce,
Clarkson, and all you sensible and virtuous Europeans,
be assured that the magnitude of our calamities has
not rendered us either unjust or ungrateful. I im-
pute our. misfortunes only to those ferocious and
barbarous men, who are the enemies of the whole


human race; against them only do I direct my pen ;
too long have they slandered, calumniated, and tor-
tured my brethren. Why then am I not permitted to
exercise the just right of reprisal in my endeavours
to repel their abominable slanders? Never, no never
shall we speak so injuriously of them, or afflict them
with the thousandth part of the calamities which
they have heaped upon us during ages.
Base calumniators of the Africans ! say, what pre-
vents your yielding to the instructions of nature and
of men ! if it be not your shameless avarice, and in-
satiable cupidity? Are not you the persons who
have overthrown the joys of pastoral and agricultural
life, substituting for them the most abominable of all
abominations ? Did nature ever instruct a parent to
sell his child, or a child to sell his parents ? Can
you still have the face to pretend that men can be
civilized by instructors who deal in human Jlesh and
miseries ; instructors who, instead of mural precepts,
instil into the minds of Africans, murder, burning,
and pillage; and, instead of books of education,
furnish them with strong liquors, arms, and warlike
stores to destroy one another? And yet you have the
effrontery to talk of European lights shining in bril-
liant splendour upon the African shores. It was not
in this way that your barbarous ancestors were civil-
izer', When Europeans, instead of adopting such
unworthy methods, shall have -introduced learning
into Africa, by means of sage professors and skilful
artists; when they shall have endeavoured to rouse
the dormant spirit of agriculture, of industry and
of knowledge, and have experimentally proved the
Africans to be incapable of profiting by their in-
structions, or entering into competition for the palm
of civilization, they may with some semblance of jus-
tice call us an inferior race of beings, destitute of the
same feelings, the same energy, and the same capa-
bilities with the Whites, and we will submit, without
a murmur, to the hardship of our lot. But no ! what
do I say ? The deathless glory of civilizing one of


the four quarters of the world; and restoring a hun-
dred millions of Africans to European society, this
great work which surpasses all the great and glorious
exploits of ancient or modern times, which eclipses
in splendour every other undertaking, belongs to the
magnanimity and generosity of ENGLAND. This
grand and truly sublime work has already commen-
ced. Vanish, thou vain glory of conquerors! Be
humbled ye destroyers of the human race! jour tri-
umphs are fled, and the laurels have faded on your
brows, for they were polluted with blood, with tears,
and with crimes, and are condemned by posterity;
while true glory, the glory of England is eternal,
and her benevolence will live in grateful recollection
to the remotest period of time.,
“The Portuguese,”says Mazferes,“endeavoured to
polish Congo by means of Christianity, yet Congo is
as barbarous at this day, as when the attempt was
first made. Abyssinia has indeed received Christi-
anity, but it has so degenerated as hardly to admit of
being recognised.”
. Amidst all the calumnies of the ex-colonists, none
exceeds this. As Christianity civilized Europe, her
effects ought to have been similar in Africa or Ame-
rica ; but have the Whites acted in conformity to the
precepts of that gospel, and. that Christianity, by
which themselves and Europe were civilized"? It was
the mildness, .the humanity, arid charity of religion
which softened the manners of barbarian Europe ;
while the avarice, cupidity, and above all the fanaticism
of the Europeans led them to regard us as beasts of
burden: and Christianity, the religion of a God of
peace and charity, was converted into a pretext for
exterminating the unfortunate Americans, while by
way of converting them to Christianity, the miserable
Africans have been plunged into the most cruel bond-
age. It is thus that, instead of promoting the pro-
gress, they bring the very name of Christianity into
discredit. ‘ ■
Since the ex-colonists pay such deference to Mon


tesquieu's authority, 1 will cite his opinion on this
subject.
“ It amuses me to hear that religion authorizes her
followers to reduce those who do not profess her to
bondage, for the purpose of facilitating her propaga-
tion. Such was the idea which encouraged the de-
stroyers of America to persevere in their crimes; such
the basis whereon they found their right of making
slaves; for those robbers felt the necessity of cloaking
their enormities beneath the garb of Piety.”
• “ Louis XIII. objected greatly to the law for making
slaves of the Negroes in the colonies ; but when they
had satisfied him that this was the most certain me-
thod of converting them to Christianity, he consented.”
Hence we may presume that similar motives at first
prevented Louis XVIII. in our own days, from abo-
lishing the SLAVE TRADE.
■ I will now submit to the ex-colonists facts which
they cannot deny, and show them how wicked and
perverse men have made religion subservient to their
unbridled passions, and cruel propensities-
In Hayti, for example, had we not under the hor-
rible colonial system. Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
priests in every parish, yet were we not as ignorant
as the Congos and Abyssinians can possibly be 1 —
Why then, notwithstanding our profession of Chris-
tianity, did we continue rude and unpolished? Be-
cause these priests were mere instruments employed
by the ex-colonists to retain us in subjection, Wild
prevent our throwing off the yoke of bondage; these
priests constantly inculcated in their sermons, that
the Whites were of a superior order: they preached
to us patience, submission, and humanity towards the
Whites: they consoled us under our sufferings, by
telling us it was necessary we should endure them in
this world, in order to obtain happiness in the next.
Thus they fashioned our necks to the yoke, and accus-
tomed us to submit without repining to all the hard-
ships of our condition. The ex-colonists did not
contradict the truth of these assertions, they well


knew the power of the priests, and the advantages
derived from it, for they have constantly proposed.in
their writings an infallible method of rivetting our
chains anew, to send priests to entice us again, beneath
the respectable cloak of religion into the abyss of
bondage; but let them know that we have burst the
fetters of Superstition along with those of Slavery,
and that our minds can no longer be made the instru-
ments of bodily subjection.
In countries in which the priests met opposition to
their claims of dominion, they became intolerant.
These fanatics, throwing aside the gospel morality
of our blessed Saviour, sowed dissention in families,
and created civil wars in kingdoms. To attain the
power they sought, the people were exterminated ;
while others, more fortunate, exhausted by the perse-
cution of these bigoted fanatics, have driven them
from their country. Ex-colonists! tin's is the manner
in which America, Congo, Abyssinia, China and Japan
have received the light of Christianity. All the afflic-
tions of humanity are the work of men who, not
content with creating them, have the impiety to
calumniate the author of nature by laying them to
his charge. ,
Christianity, then, must be introduced into Asia,
Africa, and America as it was into Europe, in the
same spirit of peace, of charity, and humanity, which
the gospel prescribed to men ; we should be regarded
as brethren, and not as beasts of burden condemned
to pine beneath a raylcss servitude worse than death.
Then Christianity, instead of disappearing, in coun-
tries in which she had taken deepest root, and in-
stead of degenerating in cithers so as to be no longer-
capable of being recognised, will spread over the
whole habitable globe, and become a blessing to the
human race.
“ Never could any one believe,” says Montesquieu,
“ that it was compassion which gave birth to slavery
in the days of paganism, and can any one suppose it
was for the purpose of converting them to christiani


ty; ■' that the Europeans massafcred and enslaved the
inli'abilants of America and Africa?”
In the present day it is no longer compassion for
pagans, nor the fanaticism of Christians which sanc-
tions the horrid right of slavery ; hut, according to
the ex-colonists, it is Prudence, Equity, and Hu-
manity. “ The sudden abolition of the trade,” says
Palissot de Beauvois, “ without modification or qua-
lification, is contrary to the social compact.” Such
are the horrid maxims which this perfidious man is
not ashamed to promulgate, and which his base flat-
terer Mazeres does not blush to cite as respectable
evidence. Thus compassion, religion, humanity, the
most amiable sentiments are made subservient to the
passions, the pride, the rapacity, and the villainy of
men.
To complete my refutation of the calumnies of
Mazeres, 1 shall now take a slight sketch of the situ-
ation of Africa; and I hope, from the evidence of
the very tiavellers he has cited, to make good ray
charge of misrepresentation.
Here I feel the deepest regret at not having studied
English, since the want of an acquaintance with that
language deprives me of the power of corroborating
my arguments by the respectable authority of such
distinguished men as VVilbcrforce, Clarkson, Stephen,
and in general of tiie host of virtuous philanthro-
pists of Britain, who have directed their talents, their
studies, and their labours to the happiness and im-
provement of their fellow creatures.
The statements of Sismonde are founded, not
merely on the universal testimony of travellers, but
likewise on bis profound knowledge of men and
things. Hence they merit more consideration than
those of most Europeans, whose knowledge of the
Africans, and the Haytians their descendants, is ex-
tremely imperfect.
Yes, I maintain with Sismonde, that, “ Africa is
inhabited by a numeious race of men, active, indus-
trious, and accustomed to commerce." .


Mazt'rcs is nmazed and cannot understand the rea-
son of the non-existence of flourishing .towns along
the coasts of Senegal and Guinea ; he also pretends
ignorance of the brazen wall, interposed between
this mysterious country and the curiosity of philoso*
pliers or cnpidityof traders; he is overwhelmed .with
astonishment, and fancies himself in a dream. '".But
what,” says he, “ is the brazen wall of which you
speak, but a degree of barbarity which resists all
example or instruction, and repels knowledge front
every opening by which she could possibly enter?” ■
Had Maz6res read the works of the travellers
whose names he cites, or had his mind been dess
warped by his passions, and more capable of reason-
ing and of reflection, be might have discerned with-
out difficulty the impediments to the existence of
flourishing towns on the coasts of -Senegal and Gui-
, nea, and have understood what the brazen wall is,
which separates the philosophers and traders from
this mysterious country, which holds out to the one
the promise,of gold-dust and ivory, and to the other
the secrets of antiquity.
Towns are prevented from existing along the coast
of Senegal and .Guinea by the spirit of avarice and
cupidity, which, while they tempt Europeans to tra-
verse the vast waste of waters, in search of new and
undiscovered lands, have fixed them upon the shores
of Africa, where they turn their attention to theacqui-
sition of gold-dustand ivory, and, above all, of un-
fortunate • slaves. There they think of obtaining
those miserable wretches at any price, regardless of
the crimes, and intent only upon the profit. They
•feel little interest in the proceedings of the interior,
which holds out but doubtful profits, with certain
danger and fatigue. Were they obliged personally
to go in quest of the wretched victims of, their cupi-
dity, no terrors could appal, no difficulties could re-
strain them. The crimes of the Slave Trade, the
usurpations and enormities of the Europeans, have
.compelled the natives to bury themselves in the in-
E


ferior of the country. Hence the coasts, once so
populous, have been deserted, and have relapsed into
barbarity , while civilization has retired into the in-
■ terior. The dread entertained by the Africans lest
the Europeans should penetrate the interior, and
'there spread the same desolation as upon the coasts,
has rendered them suspicious, and jealous of permit-
ting travellers to enter their country. Add to all
this, the profession of Mahometanism by the majo-
rity, and their abhorrence of the Christian name, and
you will see what the brazen wall is, which prevents
the exploring this mysterious country. Europeans,
instigated by curiosity, and,the glory of making new
■ discoveries, have traversed part of this extensive
continent. Brown penetrated to Darfour, Bruce to
Abyssinia, as far as the source of the Nile. Park
travelled three hundred leagues into the interior,
from the banks of the Gambia to those of the Niger.
Paterson and Vaillant visited the countries of the
Hottentots and Caffres. An infinite number of other
travellers have explored Africa. Can we, however,
fairly conclude that persons who merely passed
through the country, and were ignorant even of the
language of the natives, were competent to the intro-
duction of knowledge and civilization?
Is it just, because the unfortunate Houghton and
■Park fell victims to their curiosity, to condemn the
whole population of Africa, from these instances of
barbarity? Are travellers never murdered by banditti,
even in the polished countries of Europe? Did not
the Cartouches and the Mandrins exist in France ?
Have not the French of the present day shown them-
selves capable of rivalling in ferocity the most savage
tribes ? But are W'e justified in concluding from hence
that France is not civilized, or that barbarity is inhe-
rent in her soil and inseparable from the nature of
her inhabitants ?
Should we not rather w'onder that, among a people
like the Africans, filled with hatred and mistrust of
white persons, but two out of so many travellers


should have lost their lives 1 Should we not wonder.
I say, at their suffering their country to be traversed
by Europeans, of whom they had such just cause to
be suspicious, but towards whom on the contrary,
notwithstanding the calumnious assertions of the ex-
colonists, they behaved according to the strictest laws
of hospitality.
“ Were [,” says Rousseau, “ king of any of the na*.
tions of Nigritia, I declare I would erect upon ray
frontiers a gibbet, upon which I wonld hang every
European detected in entering, and every subject
who attempted to depart.”
Does Mazeres hope to introduce himself into Hayti,
like Dauxion, Lavaysse, and Medina, to obtain a
knowledge of our internal situation"? Should he en-
tertain such an idea, I here give him fair warning, if
he come, it will be at his peril.
Were the Africans as barbarous as this traducer
endeavours to represent them, could these travellers
have reached the interior of their country 1 Could
an unarmed individual travel with wares, considered,
from their variety, as of inestimable value, without
being robbed ? when we see travellers murdered by
robbers, for the sake of their property in the most
civilized parts of Europe—nay, even in the city of
Paris itself.
But it is time to strengthen my assertions by the
authority even of travellers; yes, I maintain, with
Sisraonde, “ that civilization has made a remarkable
progress in the centre of Africa, while the coasts have
relapsed into absolute barbarity. Great commercial
and manufacturing towns exist in the centre of the
African continent; they are the capitals of powerful
kingdoms, where the arts, manufactures, and com-
merce attest the progress of social life. Property is
secure, life safe, justice administered with wisdom,
and the government respected.”
“ I ask of all men,” says Mazferes, “ to declare
without prejudice whether it is not a total violation
of nature, and an exhibition of false colours, to draw


such'a picture of Africa? If you were speaking of
Paris, or London; of Lyons, or of Manchester; and
wished to characterise the effects of the British Consti-
tution, or French Charter, what more could you say?
Since you cite Park, I here adjure his numerous read-
ers to- tell me whether it is not pushing prejudice to’
the utmost verge of folly, to represent Africa under'
the same colors as those with which an Englishman
ora Frenchman would depict the blessings of his
happy and illustrious country ? ”
Well! oiit of this same Park will I answer Ma-
zeres, and by his evidence prove the malice and'
falsehood of my opponent. I therefore adjure Park's
numerous readers to decide upon the credibility of
Maz&res,
Arrived on the banks of the majestic Niger, as
broad as the Thames at Westminster, Park speaks
thus:—“Sego the capital of Bambarra consists of
four towns, of which the two on the north are called
Sego Koiro and Sego Sou ; the two on the south,
Sego-soukorro and Segosee-korro. They are sur-
rounded by large earthen walls ; the houses are
built of argil, square with flat roofs; some of two
stories; and many white washed. Besides private
dwellings, mosques built by the Moors occur in every
direction. The streets are narrow and wheel-car-*-
riages unknown. The population is estimated at
about thirty thousand. The king of Bambarra al-
ways resides at Sego see-korro, and employs a large
number of slaves in ferrying the inhabitants across
the river, the money thus collected forms a consider-
able revenue. The canoes employed in this service
are singularly constructed, being formed of the trunks
of two trees united by their ends, so that the joining
is precisely in the middle ; they have neither decks
nor masts, but are of ah ample size. I have seen
them cross the river with four horses and many
other passengers.”
“ On reaching the ferry, the crowd viewed me in
silence; I observed among them with regret, a num


bef of Moors. 1 seated myself on the bank to waft
my turn for crossing, and I contemplated this large
town, its numerous canoes, active population, and
well cultivated lands of great extent, bespeaking
wealth and civilization.”
“ 1 waited above two hours. King Mansong was
informed I had come to see him, and presently sent
me word that I could not be admitted into his pre«
sence till he was informed of my business in his coun-
try, forbidding my crossing the river. The bearer
of this order advised me to seek a lodging for the
night in a village, which he pointed out, promising
to bring me fresh instruction on the morning.”
Do not Park’s own words prove that Sismonde has
advanced nothing more than what this traveller has
seen and narrated 1 “I contemplated,” says he,
“ this large town, its numerous canoes, active popu-
lation, and well-cultivated lands of great extent, be-
speaking wealth and civilization."
Mansong’s prohibiting Park’s passing the river till
acquainted with the object of his visit, only proves
the just suspicions which the Africans have of Euro-
peans ; suspicions which will naturally last till they
have, nothing more to apprehend from European’in-
justice, robbery, and usurpation; and this is so true,
that next morning a messenger brought Park a bag
of live thousand cowries, as a present from the king,
who at the same time requested him to quitSego, the
messenger having orders to conduct him as far as
Sansanding, if it was his intention to proceed to
Jenne.” “ I could not,” says Park, “ divine the mo-
tives of this conduct." , Yet I cannot see any diffi-
culty in divining them. What could this stranger
want in Bambara, ought Mansong to say, what could
be his projects ? What could induce a White man to
travel so far, and amidst such dangers ? I cannot re-
ceive this Christian ; neither can 1 violate the laws
of hospitality with respect to him. I will therefore
send him back, and by making him a present, and
furnishing him with a guide, 1 shall at once secure
£ 2


the welfare of my people, and discharge the rights
of hospitality. Such, doubtless, were the motives
which regulated Mansong’s conduct; but, as the
majority of Whites always put the most unjust and
prejudiced construction upon our actions, they can-
not bring themselves to believe us susceptible of
generous sentiments: though, had Mansong designed
to treat Park ill, what was to prevent him?
With similar sentiments of hatred and prejudice,
does Maziires speak of those humane and charitable
old Negro women, who entertained Park so hospi-
tably when he wasiu dangerof perishing with hunger,
or being devoured with wild beasts. Listen to
Park’s own account, and' then judge for yourself
how far the malignity of an ex-colonist’s heart can
lead him.
"Towardsevening,”says the traveller, “I resolved
to cljrob a tree, in order to pass the night in safety
from the wild beasts; already had I turned my horse
loose to feed, when a woman, returning from the
fields, stopped to observe me. She made herself ac-
quainted with my situation, which I explained in a
few words; when, with an air of commiseration,
she took up my saddle and bridle, and made me a
sign to follow her; she then led me to her hut, where
she lighted a lamp, spread a mat upon the floor, and
told me I might pass the night there ; but observing
me to be hungry, she instantly went out to procure
jne food. She returned presently with a fine fish,
half of which she broiled on the coals, and gave me
for supper : then pointing to my mat, my kind bener
factress told me I might sleep without fear. The
domestics kept their eyes fixed upon me: she re-
called them to their work, which was spinning cotton.
As a diversion during their employment they began
to sing, and even made an impromptu respecting my-
self- Only one sung at first, the others repeating
the chorus. The air was soft and plaintive, and ths
words nearly these:
“ The winds roared, and the rains fell, the poor


wli!te man, weary and exhausted, came and sat be*
neath our tree. He has no mother to bring him milk*
nor wife to grind him corn."
Chorus, “ Let us pity the poor white man; he ha*
no mother, &c. &c. &c.”
“ These details, too minute perhaps for the reader,
will afford some idea of my cruel situation. Moved
by kindness so touching and unexpected, I could not
close my eyes. In the morning I gave my generous
hostess two out of the four brass buttons remaining
upon my coat, being the only remuneration I had to
offer.”
Sensible souls ! who have not yet resigned your-
selves to the dominion of unjust prejudices, do you
not feel an abhorrence for the calumniator of these
hospitable women 1
But let us proceed ; it is by the evidence of Park
himself that I mean to confute Mazercs,.
“ I left the village,” says our traveller, “ on the 24th
in company with my guide, and passed, after about
eight hours march, a large town called Kabba, si-
tuated in the midst of a beautiful and well-cultivated
country, more resembling the interior of England
than of Africa." I ask all men to tell me without
prejudice, in what other terras Park could have de-
scribed England, or any other civilized country of
Europel'
Park directed his route towardsTombuctoo, which
he ought to have gained, to crown the success of his
expedition; he passed Sansanding, Sibili, Nyara,
Nyamee, Mauzzan, and Silla, all towns more or less
considerable, well peopled, and much frequented by
Moors, who bring salt, glass-ware, and coral; these
they exchange for gold-dust and cotton cloth, which
they re-sell to advantage at Burou, in the country of
the Moors. Silla was the extremity of Park’s expe-
dition; sickness, fatigue, the rainy season, the inun-
dated marshes, and the danger of traversing a coun-
try under the influence of Moors, who abominated
Christians, all concurred to induce him to retrace his


steps, and return to the Gambia by the road lie had
already travelled.
Before his departure from Silla, he enquired about
the further course of the Niger, the situation and ex-
tent of the kingdoms it waters, together with sonic
account of Jenne, Tombuctoo, and Houssa, the larg-
est towns in Africa, but with which Europeans are to
this day wholly unacquainted.
Having again reached the environs of Sego, he
determined to reascend the Niger, with' a view of as-
certaining the extent to which it is navigable in that
direction.
He continued to reascend the Niger, passing
through a populous and well cultivated country. He
passed Kamalia, a walled town, without halting : he
next crossed Samee, a great mart for cattle, cloth, and
grain; he then came to Sai, a large town, which exci-
ted his curiosity; it was surrounded by two very
deep fosses, about 100 toises from the walls; along
the trenches were a multitude of square towers, ex-
hibiting all the appearance of a regular fortification.
At sun set, on the 20th, he entered Kouli Korro,
a large town, and a great market for salt. On the
21st of August, after passing the villages of Kayou
and Toulumbou, he reached Marrabou, a town fa-
mous for its salt trade. On the 23rd, he was at
Baramakou, a town of middle rank, with wealthy
inhabitants.
Near Sibidoulou, he was pillaged by robbers, of
which on reaching the town he made a complaint to
the Mansa or Governor. Hear Park’s own narrative
of the transaction.
“ 1 had hardly finished, when, taking his pipe from
his mouth, he shook with indignation the sleeve of
his garment. ‘Be seated,’ said he, ‘ every thing shall
be restored, I have-sworn it.’ Then addressing him-
self to his servant, ‘ Give,’ said he, ‘ that white man
a draught of water, at the first dawn of day go to
the mountains, and inform the Douty [Judge] of
Bommakow, that a poor white man, the king of Bam


barra’r stranger; has been robbed by the subjects of
the king of Fouladon.’ ”
The Mansa then invited Park to remain with him
till the return of the messenger. He had him con-
ducted to a lodging and sent him victuals : but the-
crowd collected to see him, compassionating his loss;
and cursing the Foulabs for robbing him, prevented
his sleeping before midnight. Park, unwilling to*
trespass on the generosity of the Mansa, asked per-
mission to depart. The Mansa persuaded him to go
to Wonda, where he promised him tidings of his
property.
“ Wonda, which I reached on the 30th,” sayr
Park, “is a small town with a mosque, close to a-
high mountain. The Mansa, who was a Mahometan,
filled the double' function of chief magistrate, and
schoolmaster. He kept school in an open building in
which I took up my lodging. 1 had been troubled-
with attacks of fever, which increased during my so-
journ at Wonda. My host, observing this, was much
troubled, being obliged from my state of indisposi-
tion, to watch me with the closest attention, till my-
doom for life or death was decided.”
On the 6th of September, two persons from Sibi->
doulou, brought Park back his horse, clothes, and*
compass, of which he had been robbed by the Fou-
lahs. On the Bth, as he was going away, the Mansa
gave him, as a token of remembrance, his lance, and
a leathern bag for his clothes. “ I converted," says
he, “ my boots into saudals, and I marched with more
ease.”
I ask Park’s numerous readers whether, in this re-
cital, they can discover any of that stupidity, ferocity,
and barbarity, with which Mazeres paints the Afri-
cans? In what part of Europe, where the police is
more experienced, could the lobbers have been com-
pelled to disgorge their plunder, or where could an
unfortunate traveller experience more hospitality,”
Is not Mazferes plainly convicted of falsehood and
•alumny, and is not Sisraonde fully justified in hi»,


statement of Africa being inhabited by a numerous'
race of men, active, industrious, and accustomed to'
trade? Is it not evident that in a country where
there are such large towns, so contiguous to each"
other, the population must be considerable? Isitnot>
proved, that in all countries in which the lands are'
in a high state of cultivation, industry, activity, and
commerce must necessarily exist?
- A few extracts more, and my refutation of Ma-
zeres’s falsehoods will be completed.
The Mandingoesare the most numerous inhabitants
of the districts Park traversed. Their language is
spoken, or at least understood, over all this part of
the continent.
“ They are supposed to be called Mandingoes in
consequence of their ancestors coming from Manding,
in the centre of Africa. But instead of imitating
the republican government of their paternal land,
they have formed nothing but monarchical establish-
ments, near the Gambia. Nevertheless, the royal
power is not unlimited : their kings being obliged, in
all affairs of importance, to call a meeting of the old
men to assist them with advice; nor can they, with-,
out the consent of this council, declare war, or con-
clude peace."
“ There is in all the large towns an Alcaide, whose
post is hereditary. He preserves order, collects the.
duties imposed upon travellers, and presides over the
administration of justice,”
“ The legislature is composed of old men of free
condition, whose meeting is called a palaver. Their
sittings are held in the open air, and with great
solemnity. In these assemblies causes are tried with
freedom, witnesses publicly examined, and the deci-
sions of the judges almost invariably received with
general approbation. The Negroes having no written
laws, trials are conducted according to ancient
usages : but with the progress of Islamism, many of
the civil, no less than the religious institutions of the
prophet have been introduced: and.when the Koran.


Is not sufficiently explicit,'they have recourse to a
commentary intitled al scharra, which contains a
complete and systematic exposition of the civil and
criminal laws of Islamism.”
Sismonde asserted then with truth, that property
was safe, life secure, justice administered with pru-
dence, and the government respected. And Maziires
uttered a base and unfounded falsehood, when he
declared the Africans stupid and ferocious, and pro-
nounced barbarity to be inherent in their country.
There is no doubt of the Africans being infinitely
more civilized than the Indians of America, or the
natives of the north and east of Europe.
The Mexicans calculate indeed by means of guipos,
a kind of hieroglyphics which serve to measure lime,
in the same way that the Homans were long accus-
tomed to mark their lustrums by nails; but the
•Mexicans neither understood writing, . cyphering,
nor even the use of iron, while the Africans are not
only masters of writing and cyphering, but also ma-
nufacture iron, cloths, tar, hides, and are, in a word,
far beyond the aborigines of America in knowledge
and civilization. (C)
" There is nothing in Africa,” says Mazeres, “ to
compare with the causeway constructed in the lake
of Mexico.” Granted ; neither is there any thing
among the Iroquois, and Esquimaux to match the
■large towns, police, and agriculture of Africa. And
as to the ruins of Mexico, I question their hearing
competition with those celebrated ones of Egypt, and
Carthage. Why does he draw his parallel between
the most intelligent people of America and the most
ignorant of Africa ? Why not compare the Mexicans
with the Egyptians, and the Iroquois and Esquimaux
with the people of Zanguehar and Monomolapa, who
are savages considerably resembling each oilier?—
Why docs he always compare objects perfectly des-
(6) The Africans employ the Arabic characters and figures,
. these figures are in use all over Europe.


■fitnte of resemblance "or affinity, i(i support of his
sophistical arguments ? Do not these attempts fur-
,nish the most.convincing proof of the perfidy of tire
ex-colonists ?
I will not speak of the people of the North, as the
Laponese and Samoyades ; or of the east, as the Min-
grelians, Moguls, and Tartars of Bessarabia. The
■whole world knows that their progress towards civil-
ization is not greater than that of the people of Zan-
guebar, of Congo, or of Nigritia. Yet the inhabitants
of the north and the east, of whom Mazeres is silent,
■ are white. The world is nearly six thousand years
old, and yet.they have continued stationary in their
.ignorance; do they therefore constitute an inferior
species, or is barbarism inseparable from their soil 1 •
Not only are the Africans actually more civilized
than the Mexicans were, when America was first
discovered, but even much more than the French in
the sixth century. “To conclude,” says M. de Cha-
teaubriand, in his Genius of Christianity, “are we
not a striking example of the rapidity with which a
whole nation can civilize itself? Little more than
twelve centuries have rolled by, since our ancestors
were as barbarous as the Hottentots ; yet .at the
present day we surpass, in all the refinements and
elegancies of taste, of luxury and of the arts,. even
Greece herself.” (7)
Is it not surprising that before the total subsidence
of that unparalleled revolution, which terrified the
world by its convulsions, and brought France to the
verge of ruin,—is it Hot astonishing, I say, that the
French should so uniformly treat with levity those
great calamities, which have in every age afflicted the
world?
Had the allied powers of Europe destroyed Paris,
as the Romans did Carthage ; had their invasion re-
sembled that of the cloud of Goths, Huns, and Van-
(7) Surely the ex-colonists will not rejecttlietc9limouyofM.de
Chateaubriand, Chamberlain,to the Ring of France. &c. &c.’


dais ; had the French found, instead of magnanimous
sovereigns, only ferocious conquerors, like Alaric,
Genseric, and Attila, they would, at the present day,
have been infinitely more circumspect, nor would
they have discoursed so lightly and so frivolously
respecting the human race.
Thebes, Memphis, Babylon, Athens, those cele-
brated towns are no more. Hardly do traces remain
to attest their existence, or the ruins of those monu-
ments upon which they prided themselves. These
proud and opulent cities have fallen beneath the as-
saults of barbarians, the revolutions of nations and
the decay of time. Paris ! presumptuous town, does
she flatter herself, that she alone is to enjoy exemp-
tion ? Yet the day may come in which the traveller
will in vain seek along the margin of the Seine some
vestiges of the spot on which she stood; when, in-
stead of monuments, he will only meet shattered
fragments of her architecture buried beneath the
briars. How far will these remains be from rivaling
the celebrated monuments of Egyptian grandeur;
and what an imperfect idea will they give the travel-
ler of the knowledge and power of France.
When Europe, exhausted by age, shall relapse from
knowledge and civilization into a state of nature,
barbarity, and ignorance, until time and a concur-
rence of circumstances have reunited to form new
elements for recalling her again to civilization ; it is
possible that Africa, animated and revived, after her
long slumber, will have sufficiently recovered her
strength and resources, to fill a scene in the great
drama of the world, darting forward anew, and with
perhaps still more vigour than before, in the career
of knowledge and improvement.
• The supreme arbiter of the Universe, has set
bounds to the duration of empires, no jess than men;
at their appointed time, in the fulnesss of their age,
and exhaustion of their strength, they shall fall, and,
like the productions of nature, be raised again to
existence and eminence.
F


It is not the same empires or men that revive, but
always the same succession of empires and men. This
truth will be rendered more manifest, by considering
the existence, duration, and succession of the nations,
who have in turn transmitted knowledge and power
as an inheritance, the possession of which was trans-
ferrable to others. The Greek empire lasted nearly
eleven centuries; the Roman, the most powerful that
ever existed, near five centuries; while that of Alex-
ander terminated with his life. Yet the French
monarchy has subsisted 1400 years. Already has
France passed the zenith of her glory and gradually
declines into the shades of ignorance: is it not time
then for her to resign to others the empire she in-
herited from the Romans.
I have, I think, sufficiently refuted the sophisms,
absurdities, and falsehoods of Mazeres, respecting the
Blacks and Whites, and the civilization of Africa.
I ask all impartial men what he deserves for his
foolish reasoning, his calumnies, his falsehoods, and
endeavours to vilify and degrade the human species ?
What, but everlasting reproach I But what cares
an ex-colonist for shame and infamy? What effect
can the contempt both of the present and future ages
have upon monsters who openly glory in not being
philanthropists, and are uninfluenced by any feelings
of general benevolence towards mankind ? What do
these pests of society value corrupting every source
of morality, by calumnies and the most atrocious
falsehoods, provided they can inslavc their brethren,
and can obtain Blacks, and extract gold from their
blood, in sufficient abundance to satiate their avarice
and cupidity ?
It rouses my indignation to see a presumptuous
upstart ex-colonist, like Mazeres, assume a tone of
insult, of irony, and of menace, towards philanthro-
pists. But what impression can the sarcasms and
vituperations of this unprincipled advocate of villainy
and slavery, make upon these virtuous men? Phi-
lanthropy and Philosophy have in all ages been in


separable companions, and have, in common with the
happiness and liberty of men, been the objects of
hatred and persecution to tyrants. I see Socrates
drinking hemlock as a reward for instructing the
Athenians in their moral duties. I see the veins of
Seneca and Thraseas opened, because they had the
hardihood to stem the torrent of corruption ; yet, not
withstandingall the efforts of tyrants, 1 behold tha sa-
cred spiritof Philosophyperennialandunsubdued; for
the love of useful knowledge, and that which is sub-
servient to the wants of our fellow creatures, is in-
nate in the heart of man.
Generous Sismonde! virtuous Philanthropist, be
consoled : you can, like the martyrs of Philosophy,
brave the menaces and insults of the ex-colonists ! Yes,
this is a noble catalogue, illustrious and worthy of
you who plead the cause of the whole human race.
With your pre-eminent talents and generous disposi-
tion you can powerfully promote the success of the
great cause of humanity.
Of what consequence is it what country you inha-
bit, or to what nation you belong] the chief thing is
that you are men, and as such belong to the human
species and to God.” Whoever,” says St. Pierre,
“ does not refer himself to his country, his country
to the human race, and the human race to God, knows
no more of political relations, than he, who making a
new system of Physics for himself, and separating his
personal relationship from the elements, the earth
and the sun, would know of the laws of nature.”
it was with similar sentiments, though with dissi-
milar abilities, that I commenced with defending the
cause of the Africans, from whom I am descended,
previous to discussing the rights of the Haytians, my
countrymen. I have dared to follow the steps of
benevolent and distinguished men, in support of the
great cause of humanity and of my brethren, so long
degraded and calumniated. Doubtless, unless the
human heart be steeled against every sentiment of
justice and humanity, feeble as my voice is, it will


be heard ; and my appeal to the humanity, the jus-
tice, and the benevolence of Europeans will not have
been in vain.
I now proceed to my own country ; to the consi-
deration of an unfortunate people, that groaned
above 150 years beneath the most barbarous bondage,
and have at length by their perseverance, their reso-
lution and their valour, accomplished their liberty
and independance. What subject more sublime,
more ample, more prolific, or more honourable, can
call forth the pen of the patriot 1
Hail to thee, happy land ! land of my choice 1 Hail
to thee, Hayti, ray country ! Sole asylum of liberty,
where the black man can lift his head to behold and
participate in the bounties dispensed by the universal
Father of Man.
Witness of what I am about to relate, I shall have
no occasion to borrow the testimony of others, or
ransack the narratives of travellers in support of my
statement, I shall reply in my characterof a Haytian,
and the descendant of an African, to the infamous
calumnies uttered by Mazeres against my august So-
vereign, compatriots, and country.
“ After speaking of Africa," says Mazeres, to Sis-
raonde, “ as you would of the most civilized and po-
lished parts of Europe, you proceed to notice St. Do-
mingo in a still higher strain of admiration. Ever
the sport of a credulity, which would be inexplicable
fin a man like you, unless totally blinded by prejudice,
you form from gazettes fabricated in London, by the
agenis of Christophe [the king,] the elements of a
theory, whose foundation is altogether hypothetical,,
if not false.”
Does not this passage betray the same spirit of ani-
mosity and prejudice, which, having first directed
the pen of Mazeres against the Africans, now inflames
it with yet greater violence against the Haytiaus?—
Does not this show the . greatest possible disregard
for truth, and furnish full proof of the villainy and
fyaseness of the ex cplonist’s disposition.


The opinion of Sismonde respecting Hayti, far
from being founded, as this impostor pretends, upon
hypothetical or false grounds, rests upon the most
certain facts, correct truth, and living examples. We
appeal to the testimony of the strangers who frequent
our parts, and visit the interior, to decide whether
we are not organised upon the model of the most
civilized nations of Europe ? Have we not a firm
monarchical government, constitutional charter, laws,
and regulations ? Is not justice impartially adminis-
tered ? Are not our troops numerous and orderly;
are they not in point of discipline equal to the first
in the world ? Have we not built impregnable cita-
dels, constituted according to the strictest rules of
art, in inaccessible places, where the greatest obsta-
cles were to be surmounted, in completing works
worthy of the Romans'! Have we not erected palaces
and public edifices, which are at once the glory of
our country and the admiration of strangers 1 Have
we not manufactures of saltpetre and gunpowder ?
Is not the mass of our population devoted to agricul-
ture and commerce ? Are not our sailors able to cross
the vast expanse of ocean, and do they not navigate
with ease the largest ships along our coasts ?
We write, we print; while yet in infancy, our na-
tion can already boast her writers and her poets, who
have defended her cause, and celebrated her glory.
There will not indeed be found . amongst them the
pen of a Voltaire, a Rousseau, or a De' Lille; but
then we have not, like their ’ nation, been civilized
upwards of a thousand years. Have we not, then,
every reason not to despair? We have also made
essays in the fine arts, and are convinced that proper
masters are alone wanting to enable us shortly to
produce our Lepoussins, our Mignards, our Rameaux,
and our Gretrys. In a word, experience has demon-
strated to the world, by the astonishing progress we
have made in learning and in civilization, that the
capacity ol Blacks and Whites for the, acquiring the
arts and sciences is equal. Read the history of man;
f 2


fiever was a similar prodigy seen in the world. Let
the enemies of the Blacks show a single instance of
a people situated as we found ourselves, who have
achieved greater things, and this in less than the
quarter of a century. Not only have the Haylians
acquired along with their immortal rights, the admi-
ration of the universe and of posterity; but they
have acquired still stronger claims to glory, by raising
themselves from ignorance and slavery to the height
of splendour and prosperity, which they have already
attained.
It is not, then, from a spirit of prejudice, neither
is it' from gazettes fabricated in London, as this
deceitful Maz&res pretends, that the virtuous Sis-
monde has derived the ground work of his opinion
Respecting the Haytians ; but from facts sufficiently
notorious ; from pieces written and printed at Hayti,
by Haytians: these are facts known to the whole
civilized world, and it is only the ex-colonists who
entertain a doubt; so completely do they yield sub-
mission to their unbridled passions and prejudices.
‘ I will not waste ray time upon the scurrilities
vented by Mazeres- in his rage against ray august
sovereign, my fellow-citizens and my country. I
Could easily repay him in his own coin; scurrility
for scurrility; the field is vast and fertile, his own
sovereign, and his own nation furnish sufficient food
for ridicule ; his burlesque phrenzy, and vulgar lan-
guage, manifest the baseness of his soul, and merit
from me the most profound contempt. I again declare,
that in defending the cause of my countrymen, so
long trampled upon and opressed by the enemies of
humanity, 1 shall abstain, as much as possible from
reviling, without the greatest provocation, any but
ex-colonists, overwhelmed, like Mazferes, with crimes
and infamy. Therefore I shall proceed, without
noticing his invective to the completion of my task.
“ After twenty years of errors and insurrection,”
says Mazeres, “ what a pretty exhibition do the affairs
of Hayti make!"


Yes, Mazeres, the most agreeable and the most
worthy of the regard and the consideration of Philo-
sophers. •’
The pride, the prejudices, and the avarice of the
planters, have made the Black man a peculiar and
distinct species from the White; our race reviled and
degraded by them, was made to rank with the Orang
Outang. Trying our strength and crushing us by
forced labours, they contended by the most absurd
and sophistical reasoning that we are inferior to them
in moral and physical faculties, and, upon this pre-
tended inferiority, founded the barbarous right of
reducing us to perpetual slavery, and treating us like
the vilest brutes. What event was ’more glorious ?
What more worthy of fixing the attention of the
world, than that which has overthrown, by facts and
by living examples, the whole of that superstructure
of crime and falsehood, which had been raised for
ages against the human species? Almighty God!
how great are thy works ! It was in the bosom of a
band of slaves, that thy power formed the materials
necessary for avenging thy slighted laws. Thou
kindlest in our hearts the sacred flame of liberty;
instantly our chains were broken; our opressors
vanished, and their pride and prejudice were over-
thrown for ever!
Ex-colonists, he proud and haughty if you will;
recognize, nevertheless, in the Revolution of Hayti,
the divine and omnipotent arm, which chastises your
crimes.. Humble yourselves, then, and bend your
knees in contrite submission to the decrees of that
universal Father, whom you have so long forgotten
and abused.
But no; their pride is lintameable 1 like the infer-
nal spirits in their horrible assemblies, such as the
immortal Milton has described them after their fall,
the ex-colonists, though vanquished, thunderstruck,
and precipitated into the abyss, still struggle by
every method their villainy can suggest to recover
the empire of which a just and retributive God has
for ever deprived them.


“ You are forward,” says Mazeres, the Beelzebub
colonist, *' to acknowledge as legitimate, a ridiculous
sovereign whom no European power has recog-
nized. You declare with the greatest gravity that
the colony of St. Domingo is as independent in right
as it is in fact; and you consecrate at once in favour
of a fortunate marauder the loss sustained by France,
the legitimate sovereign of the colony, and this maxim
so subversive of the repose of the world.”
Le premier qui fat Hoi fut un soldat lieureox ;
To which I will take the liberty of adding the se-
quel of the sentence omitted by Mazeres.
Qui sert bicn son pays n’a pas besoin d'ayeux.
In the first -place, I answer that, "that maxim so
subsersive to the repose of the world,” is neither
Sistnoude’s nor the Comte de Limonade’s, but that
of a greater man, whom Mazeres has cited in proof
of the Whites, the Blacks, the Albinoes, the Hot-
tentots, the Chinese, and the Americans, being all,
distinct species. Out of respect to Voltaire, 1 shall
not combat his error ; but it appears reasonable that
Mazeres after employing bis evidence against us,
should at least respect bis political maxims ; for if
he reject his testimony when in our favour I have an
equal right to do the same when it is against us ; but
this is only one specimen of want of just inference,
which I willingly pass over in this ex-colonist; it
will however be proper to recollect that Voltaire has
expressed elsewhere, and nobly, the same philosophic
opinions, and was not always in favour of pride.
Get insecte insensible ensevcli sous I'herbe;
Get aigle audacicnx qui pl&ne an bant du cict,
Rentrcnt dans le neantaux yens de leterncl;
Les raortels sont egaux; ce n’est pointla naissance,
G’est la scale vertu qui fait lour difference;
11 est de ees mnrtels favorises dcs cicux,
Qui sout tout par cux-mcmes, et rien par leurs ayeux.


Without either'adopting or rejecting these opin-
ions, I think that a sovereign, like his majesty
Henry I. King of Hayti, placed upon his throne by
the unanimous choice and love of his people, who
has constantly fought for their liberty and indepeud-
ance, who has vanquished his foes, and reigns with
wisdom and glory ; 1 think, I say, that such a monarch
is in no respect ridiculous, as thisMazeres pretends;
and I think him, at least; as legitimate and as illus-
trious as a sovereign who is destitute of all personal
merit, and whose claims to respect centre in the
tombs of his ancestors. If Mazeres means to make
merry at our expense by insulting our august sove-
reign, I can easily retort upon him by certain allu-
sions which certainly will not leave the laughers on
his side. I can tell him that King Henry is one of
the best men in the new world ; that he is a model
for soldiers, frank, generous, temperate, active, inde-
fatigable, and intrepid, uniting in himself the quali-
ties of the soldier, the wisdom of a legislator, and
all the virtues of a good and great monarch. Reli-
gious without bigotry, he.well knows that men can
adore God, each after his own manner, without ceas-
ing on that account to be good and faithful citizens.
Such is his patriotism, that his whole time and
thoughts are devoted to the welfare of his people and
kingdom; and king Henry the first bears no re-
semblance to ***** *****, hut I check myself, my
respect for crowned heads forbids my proceeding. _ ■
It will again perplex Mazferes to enter into a dis-
cussion with him to prove the fact of our independ*-
ance; yet, whatever his incredulity may be, not a
doubt exists with respect to this fatal truth; the
fact then being known in despite of them, it only re-
mains to settle the question of right; and if justice
and equity determine this, the decision cannot fail
to be in our favour. If injustice, perfidies, and
cruelties of every description bestow rights on those
against whom they have been practised, what people
ever possessed a stronger claim toindependauce than
the Havtians ?


1 might here draw a melancholy picture, of the
deplorable situation in which we were plunged under
the horrible colonial system, by a mere catalogue of
the innumerable crimes Of the ex-colonists ; but this
would lead me too far- I must therefore refer my
readers to “ The colonial system exposed,” in which
I have already treated this horrible subject. Alas',
with every desire of being faithful to the truth, and
useful to the cause of humanity, can I depict to ray
readers the horrors of slavery in their true colours 1
Shall I exhume the bodies of my unfortunate brethren,
who were buried alive, to question their shades, and
make humanity shudder at the horrible recitals of
the crimes of these monsters ? But where is the ne-
cessity of retracing these horrors ? Is Mazercs, him-
self an ex-colonist, ignorant of them?—Does he, who
himself practised them in his more advanced age;
he, who was accustomed from his very cradle to tor-
ture the little Blacks upon his plantation; he who
learned with his mother’s milk, to steel his heart
against every feeling of compassion; does he require
that I should describe the horrible punishments he
and his fellows were in the habit of inflicting on their
unfortunate slaves? Surely there is no need. He
understands these things far better than I do; and
his flinty heart, impervious to remorse, glories yet
in the recollection of these barbarities.
Often have 1 asked myself this question:— By
what right the ex colonists took upon themselves to
torture their unfortunate slaves? —What! is there in
this world as well as the next, a race of executioners
ordained to torture men ? Are the ex-colonists on
earth what the devils are in hell ? But I say to my-
self; is it not the wicked who should be condemned
to eternal flames? While on the contrary it is the
innocent who are doomed here below to endure
through life the most dreadful punishments. Yet
again, I say, is not this calumniating a God just,
good, and beneficent? Is it not the height of impiety
to ascribe our cruel misfortunes to the Father of all?


Slavery is the creation of wicked and corrupt men :
it is the greatest curse that ever afflicted humanity :
it is the usurpation of the stronger over the weaker,
the more crafty over the more simple.
But if one set of men arrogate to themselves the
right of reducing another to a state of slavery, have
not these last an equal right to burst their bonds'?
What! can you deprive me of liberty, the most
valuable earthly possession? Can you load me with
disgraceful fetters? and am not I, your brother ; and
fellow-creature, permitted to reclaim those rights
which 1 derive from God alone, and of which none
have a right to rob me; am 1 not to be allowed, I say,
to burst my fetters, and crush you beneath their
weight ? What abominable logic! What frightful
morality! that would endeavour to prove slavery a
blessing, and liberty a misfortune ; and would endea-
vour to persuade men, that one set of them have a
right to reduce the other to perpetual bondage, with-
out these last being allowed the right or power of
making an effort to throw off the yoke.
The ex-colonists never will make adepts among us
in the science of slavery. Whom do they hope to
persuade that slavery is a blessing ? Is it us who have
experienced all its horrors ? If their declarations be
sincere, why not put themselves in our place? their
example wdl have a far more powerful effect than
all the absurd reasoning they can employ.
, I will even, if it please him, give up the universal
right to liberty which men inherit from their birth.
The Haytians found themselves in a very peculiar
situation, which must for ever fix the justice, and
goodness of their cause.
All the world knows that Republican France pro-
claimed liberty in this Island. After having for ten
years enjoyed this blessing under the law's, after
having fought and bled for France, and given the
strongest proofs of zeal, fidelity, and gratitude for
the benefits wc had received, these vile republicans
without any visible motive, endeavoured to rob us


of that liberty which they had themselves granted ;
as if man, a mere butt for the caprice of his tyrants,
was to lay aside, and resume his bonds, at their plea-
sure. Not content with employing force to bring us
again under the yoke, they bad recourse to art and
chicanery : every engine was employed to seduce and
deceive us. They told us, we were all brethren, and
all equal in the sight of God, and the Republic, [7]
yet, while making this profession with their lips, they
meditated in their hearts the horrible design of either
reducing us to slavery, or, if that was found imprac-
ticable, totally exterminating us.
Confiding in their fair promises, the majority of
the inhabitants, having long considered themselves
as French, submitted without striking a blow or firing
a musket. But we were soon strangely undeceived.
No sooner did the French think themselves strongest,
than they commenced their system of proscription,
and openly proclaimed the revival of slavery.
Mazeres, who wishes the world to judge of the
Africans by the crimes they have committed, may
judge of his countrymen from the slight sketch I
shall give of the dreadful atrocities of which the
French have been guilty towards us. O ! horrible
recollection ! which fills our hearts with sorrow,
hatred and revenge.
We have seen our fellow citizens, friends, relatives,
brothers, men, women, children, aged ; without dis-
tinction of years or sex, dragged by these monsters
to the most cruel punishment; some burned to death,
others gibbeted, and left as food for birds of prey;
some thrown to dogs to be devoured, while others,
more fortunate, perished beneath the poignard and
the bayonet. In the places evacuated by the French,'
thousands of Haytians who had fought in their de-
fence, were so simple as to trust to their generosity;
unwilling to abandon the French in the hour of dis-
(7) Sec Bonaparte's proclamation, in the “ Haytian papers,”
and “ Memoirs pourservir A 1’ Histoire d’ Hayti.”


tresv'lfey followed them and embarked.on board
their vessels, with their wives, their children, and
such property as they had been able to preserve from
pillage; but hardly were these unfortunate wretches
arrived on board, before they were loaded with chains,
and put down into the hold of the vessel, to be re-
served for the most cruel punishments. Every evening
these barbarians made some hundreds of victims
mount upon the bridge, were they were bound and
put into large sacks, often along with children, as
though God.would in that state interfere for their
deliverance: they were then poignarded through the
sacks, and thrown into the sea as food for the sharks.
At other times they made republican marriages,
like those of La Vendee; a man and woman being
bound together, with a cannon ball fastened to their
necks, and then thrown into the sea, amidst the ac-
clamations of joy and exultation uttered by these
monsters! Hundreds of victims crammed into the
holds of the ships were suffocated by the fumes of
sulphur: day dawned upon the horrors of the night.
Our shores, covered with the murdered corpses of
our unfortunate countrymen, bore testimony to the
crimes of the French, and gave a fatal warning of
the melancholy lot which awaited us. Were Ito re-
count all the arts of cruelty and injustice committed
by the French, I should fill volumes : I shall there-
fore confine myself; to a few of the principal, to en-
able my readers to form some judgment of the bar-
barity with which we were treated.
Eye and ear witness of the facts I relate, who can
question their veracity 'I
Three men were burned alive in the Place
Royale, Cape Henry, (formerly Cape Franyais.) On
the morning of this event, the rumour circulated
through the town. An immense crowd repaired to
the spot, to view the preparations for this .horrible
auto da fe: some attracted by unfeeling curiosity,
others to convince themselves with their own eyes,
how far the barbarity and cruelty of our tyrants would
G


lead them. 1 followed among theseia'sCwith a.heart
mourning the dreadful proceeding about to take place.
On reaching the Place Royale, I saw two stakes fixed,
one of which had two iron rings, and the other one,
for receiving the necks of the three- victims. The
heaps of wood were artfully arranged about the
stakes, with the addition of pitch, tar, and shavings,
to render it more combustible. A vast crowd sur-
rounded the pile; of whom some hung their heads,
not daring to direct their eyes towards the fearful
preparations; while others, the ex-colonists and their
partizans, were unable to disguise their joy.
At three in the afternoon, the French General
Claparede, commander of the Cape, repaired with a
numerous staff fo the Place Royale. The three vie-
tims waited the hour of execution in an adjoining
guard house. Claparede ordered them to be led to
the pile; they arrived amidst the sound of martial
music, as though in a triumphal march. The infamous
Collet, captain of Gendarmerie, preceded them, with
joy and ferocity depicted in his countenance. Each
of the victims bore a sugar cane in his hand: they
were mounted upon the pile, and fastened to the
stakes by the iron rings. All was ready, the sacrifice
was about to commence. A death-like silence per-
vaded the spectators. Claparede ordered fire to the
pile; instantly the flames crackled, and began to
envelope the feet of the sufferers; already might one
fancy that he heard their cries, and saw them strug-
gling amidst these dreadful torments. But Oh! stoi-
cal courage! O ! brave intrepidity ! they did not stir
so much as a foot, but remained immoveable, and
with their attention fixed, set at defiance both their
executioners and the flames which devoured them :
they were quickly enveloped in flames; their bodies
burst; the fat ran upon the pile, and a dense smoke,
accompanied with a smell of roasted flesh, mounted
fo the sky. Terror seized the spectators; their hair
stood on end; a cold sweat bedewed their bodies ;
they fled singly or dispersed, filled with horror ;


hatred and vengeance rankling at their hearts. The
executioners alone remained; nor did they quit the
spot till their victims were completely reduced to
ashes.
Can I give my readers any adequate description of
the punishment of my countrymen, who were de-
voured by Dogs I Can my untutored pen describe
with any thing like accuracy so horrible a picture I
The imagination and understanding of ray reader*
must supply the deficiency of my narration.
The first who were devoured by Dogs were at the
Cape, at a convent of religious and in the house of
the French general Boyer, chief of Rocharabeau's
staff.
The theatre of these horrors was afterwards trans-
ferred to the Plantation Charrier at Haut-du-Cap,
whither the blood-hounds were conducted; and to
increase their thirst for human blood, they were fed
from time to time on human flesh. The day upon
which there were any of these victims to be devoured
was one of festivity to these butchers. Collet, Fo-
restier, Teissert, Laurent, and Darac, commissarie*
of the police of the Cape, (all French, all ex-colon-,
isls,) dressed themselves in full uniform, and put on
their principal scarves, for the purpose of attending
the execution, and accompanied by a crowd of biped
blood-hounds, eager to aid the dreadful carnage
made by their quadruped brethren, a thousand times
less savage than themselves. Many days in advance
they took the precaution of making the dogs fast,
and, to whet their appetite, a victim was occasionally
shown to them, and withdrawn just as they were
about to dart upon it. At last the fatal moment ar-
rived, when some unfortunate wretches were to be
definitely given up to them; the unhappy beings
were fastened to stakes in the presence of the com-
missaries, so as effectually to deprive them of the
power of saving or of defending themselves.
The dogs are loosed, and fly at their prey. In an
instant, their victims are stripped of their flesh, their


palpitating muscles hang down in ribbands, while the
blood gushes from every pore; nothing can be heard
but the screams of the sufferers. The victims, at
their last gasp implore the mercy of these monsters :
in vain do they solicit death as the last favour; —
prayers are superfluous;—nothingcan move the hearts
of these tigers, divested of every feeling of human-
ity; they answer only by a convulsive grin, while
they spirit on the dogs to their work of horror. At
length the voice of the victims fails, their groans are
no longer to be heard, while their mangled bodies
still continue to palpitate. The dogs panting, pause
to rest; they are surfeited with human flesh and
blood, in vain the executioners encourage them anew ;
they refuse to continue their horrible carnage, and
return to their kennels, leaving these monsters in
human shape to complete with the poignard the yet
unfinished work of death.
• Similar cruelties were perpetrated by the French
from one end of the island to the other.
Toussaint Louverture voluntarily resigned his au-
thority, and laid down his arms ; he retired to his
plantation divested of all his splendour; and, like
the illustrious Roman, cultivated with his hands the
fields he had defended with his arms. He engaged
us both by example and persuasion, to imitate his
conduct, labouring and living peaceably in the bosom
of our families. Contrary to the faith of treaties,
the French drew him into a snare, arrested and loaded
him with irons. His wife, his infant children, his
whole family, his officers, shared his cruel fate. —•
Embarked in French vessels they were carried to ter-
minate their wretched career, by poison, in prison,
and in irons.
Generals James Maurepas and Charles Belair, died
under their punishments. Maurepas was nailed alive
to the main-mast of the Hannibal, in the presence of
his wife and children , along with whom his corpse
was consigned to the deep. The unfortunate Belair
was shot along with his intrepid spouse ; this heroine


consoled him before her death, encouraging him to
follow her example and die like a man. Thomany,
Domage, Laraahotiere, and a whole crowd of officers
and citizens of rank, died the death of felons ; while
those who escaped the gibbet or the assassin, fell by
poison ; such was the fate of Generals Vilatte, Lfe-
veil!6, and Gaulard ; others were transported for
sale to the Spanish , main, or sent to France where
they finished their career in the Galleys.
Our forbearance being exhausted by a repetition
of such crimes and villainies, we flew to arms ; mea-
sured swords with our oppressors ; beat them corps
by corps, man for man, fighting with stones, and
sticks shod with iron, for the preservation of our
liberty, our existence, and that of our wives and
children; after beholding torrents of our blood min-
gled with that of our tyrants, we remained masters
of the field of battle.
Let Mazeres, this savage and perfidious ex-colonist,
who not only witnessed, but instigated the several
refinements of cruelty adopted by his countrymen,
recal these scenes to his imagination ; let him reflect,
how many victims he either sacrificed with his own
hands, or had slaughtered by his order ; and his
conscience will then remind him of our claims to
that independance which w r e have attained at the ex-
pense of so much blood, and so many sacrifices.
Without attempting to discuss the claims that
others have to independance, I do not hesitate to
assert, without fear of contradiction, that none ever
possessed one more unexceptionable than the Hayti-
ans.
In whatever point of view this grand and important
question is considered, the result must be always in
our favour. Whether the deplorable condition in
which we were, under the colonial system, be con-
sidered, or the chain of events which led us to liberty,
and from liberty to independance ; the cruelties and
injustice of every kind which we endured; our suffer-
ings and misfortunes; whether the.prudence of our
G 2


condtict since we became independant; in enacting
laws and establishing a firm monarchical government,
be taken into account; or our living continually on
good terms with our neighbours and all other powers;
our uniform demonstration, as well by our funda-
mental laws as our general conduct, of the sincerity
of our intention never to meddle, directly or indirectly
in matters foreign to our Island ; to maintain the
most perfect neutrality ; ahd occupy ourselves solely
in works of infernal improvement, in promoting agri-
culture; and protecting commerce ; in straining every
nerve to advance civilization, and introduce literature,
science, and arts; or whether the vast expanse of
ocean rolling between us and Our oppressors be con-
sidered : in fine, our moral, political, and geograpbi-
cal'situation, all concur in giving us the most incon-
tesfilile claim to independaiice ; to rob us of whiclr
inestimable blessing; setting aside the injustice and*
inhumanity, of the attempt, it will be necessary to
exterminate us to the last man.
' It is respecting men who have given such proofs of
wisdom, of virtue, of energy, and of courage, that
Mazeres lias dated to publish his most idle absurdi-
ties: it*is"lie wlio does not blush to affirm that “ the
negro is only a grown child, shallow, light, fickle,
thoughtless, neither keenly sensible of joy or of sor-
row, improvident without resources in his spirits, or l
liissoiil. Careless like other sluggards ; rest, singing,
bis women and his dress form the contracted limits of
bis taste. I say nothing of his affections, for affec-
tions, properly so called arc too strong for a soul so
soft, so inactive as his.” ...
Surely he must be a blockhead, or utterly blinded
by His passions, to have an assurance to publish such’
falsehoods. Had Mazeres the ability to reflect, he’
would liave seen that he had degraded himself and’
his ex-colbnist brethren to the lowest rank of hu-
manity since “ these grown children, shallow, light,
who have no resources irt their spirits or their soul/'
have defeated them in battle, execrate thera and vow*


implacable hatred to them and also have a- soul dif-
ferently tempered, and possessing a courage different
from that of the soul of these snivelling and pitiful
ex-colonists. These liars must invent more plausible
tales to impeach the,justice of our cause; they never
can get rid of what has existed, and do yet exist in
Hayti. Their falsehoods never will convince poste-
rity that vve have not vanquished them in battle, and
in spite of all their efforts, erected ourselves - into a
civilized, free, and-independant nation.
But still he has the boldness to maintain; that we
never can introduce public instruction into Hajti;
“ and this,” says he, “ for a most simple reason, be-
cause there cannot be found throughout-the dominions
of Christophe [King Henry] ten men who can read
fluently ; and there certainly cannot be found one
sufficiently learned to comprehend the meaning of
the words military ttidies, geography, mathematics,
fortification, S)'c.”
The gross impositions of Mazeres are refuted by
positive facts, by the actual situation of the kingdom
of Hayti, and by our own works: oar generals, our
engineers, our writers- will always be ready to dis-
prove by facts, Mazeres’ assertions. When the French-
feel disposed to try their strength with us, our gene-
rals will show them what tactitians they are; here they
‘will find Wellingtons, Bluchers, and Platows-; our
formidable redoubts and citadels will convince- them,
that our Haytian engineers are no strangers to the
art of fortification, and the science of mathematics;
while our historians and our'poets will prove them-
selves equally capable of defending their rights, and
celebrating the glories of their country, and of those
heroes who have fought and conquered in her cause.
The happy time is not yet come in which our men
of letters can call-themselves truly learned, for our
present pretensions are undoubtedly inferior to those
of even Mazeres; yet, even in this infancy of our
knowledge, after maintaining that we have ho re-
sources either in our spirit or our soul, aud affinniag


that we cannot even read fluently, he enters info a
literary dispute with the Corate de Liraonadc, and
detects in fourteen lines, three gross mistakes, two
improper expressions, one expression harsh, extravagant,
assuming, and a kind of pleonasm. What apity lam
not a critic like this ex-colonist, since in that sage 1
should have taken the trouble to dissect his style,
and have perhaps succeeded in showing the world the
faults of which he is guilty, at the very time that he
is quarrelling with us about words. But we arc re-
joiced to find the ex-colonists reduced to so cruel an
extremity. We despair of nothing ; they will shortly
enter, without a blush, into a discussion of the most
abstract questions with men to whom they deny the
possession of common understanding. How do pride
and prejudice blind men ! How is it possible for
Mazeres not to discover that his calumnies recoil
upon himself; and that, however pardonable trifling
defects of language may be, the want of good sense
is perfectly inexcusable.
Hurried away by the fury of his passion, Mazeres
falls into a terrible delirium, he raves, and becomes
irrational, he makes it a subject of grave reproach
to the Comte de Limonade, that he has used the fi-
gurative expression of idolize to denote his attach-
ment to the Royal Family, as though it was a crime
to idolize our kings ; surely we may idolize, without
being on that account idolaters. I grant, however,
that the idea of adoring one’s sovereign may be
strange to a Frenchman. The Comte de Limonade
may reply to Mazeres, as the Scythian Philosopher
did to the Athenian who insulted him: “ I honour
my country by. ray sentiments whilst thou dishonour-
est thine."
In proportion as Mazeres observes our progress in
civilization, his rage kindles: in the impatience of
his vengeance, and his ability to bathe himself anew
in our blood, he vents his passion in the most vulgar
abuse; the meanest and most tasteless expressions
fall from the pen of a man who boasts of his polite -


Hess; and he is not ashamed to employ the epithet*
of Jocrisse and Paillasse of Henry the Fourth, to in-
sult us, as if it were necessary for him to go back
as far as the days of Henry the Fourth, for Jocrisses
and Paillasses, when they are even now to be found
in Paris, and even in the bosom of his own family.
1 will explain to my readers the true cause of these
rhodomontade fits, and horrible convulsions into
which Mazeres falls: he has dared to publish and
affirm that “the Blacks are incapable of any great
works of genius, are inferior to the Whites, and arc
only grown children, light, fickle, thoughtless, and
destitute of mental resources."
Does he not, on the contrary, see these grown
children planning the construction of impregnable
fortresses, building palaces, calculating ’ almanacks,
possessing black writers, poets, and ministers of
state? How unfortunate I what a disappointment for
an ex-colonist! Here, then, behold the true cause of
his violence and his passion; and judge what degree
of credit is to be attached to his charges against
Messrs. De Sismondi and De Limonade.
Patience ! M. Mazeres, have patience pray ; mode-
rate your beat; leave us time to establish our na-
tional schools properly upon the Lancastrian sys-
tem; permit us to found colleges; give us time to
form men instructed in English principles, language,
and literature; for it is proper to acquaint you that
we wish to renounce the very language of France.
We will then, and the time is perhaps nearer than
you imagine, produce specimens of Haytian litera-
ture, which will convince you still better than the
Iloyal Almanack, that the Blacks are not destitute of
all mental resources. But what will become of you
then? These specimens will, I fear, have much the
same'cffect upon you as Medusa’s head ; for if the
sight of a simple almanack has produced such a ner-
vous attack, and thrown you into such convulsions,
I fear greatly, I say, that such a demoniac as you are,
will at first fall info an epilepsy, and afterwards close
your ignominious career with an apoplexy.


Mazeres employs our civil wars as an engine of
calumny against the government of King Henry, and
the Haytians ; to show that we cannot live in peace
among ourselves, and that we cut each other’s throats.
Here the ex-colonists reproach us with their own mis-
deeds; they and their abettors prayed that we might
slay one another, and have they now the assurance to
upbraid us with doing so? They act in this just as
they did with respect to the Slave Trade, when they
blamed the Africans for crimes instigated and re-
warded by themselves ; after having excited civil
wars among us, they now unblushingly cast them in
our teeth.
But what is their language in private conversations,
when they hear of a sanguinary battle among the
Haytians ? “ Leave them alone,” they say, “ let them
have their fill of fighting among themselves; let
them slaughter each other; we shall have sport in the
end; leave them to themselves till they have exter-
minated each other.”
Ex-colonists !. is not this your language, and favour-
ite plan ? We know it well, and should be the blind-
est and most stupid of mortals, were we to become
the instruments of your destructive projects. ■
Maziires and the ex-colonists have exerted their
utmost skill in detracting from the virtues and
splendid qualifications of king Henry, but they
never can succeed ; the more he is the object of
their hatred and abuse, the more we love him, and
the more noble does he appear in our eyes ; it is
always creditable to be calumniated by such people
as the ex-colonists, who are destitute both of faith
and law, and regulate themselves only by the rule of
interest, and those passions which overcome them ;
let them reserve their praises for Petion, he is worthy
the adoration of monsters like himself.
Wherefore should I extend my refutation of the
falsehoods of Mazcires? Have 1 not said enough to
convince the most incredulous? Have I not shown
satisfactorily, that the Blacks are in no respect infe


rior lo the Whites, but that under circumstances
equally favourable, their faculties are alike.
I now close these remarks, upon which I entered
with a zeal and ardour superior to ray talents and
education. Often have I felt my inability, (not how-
ever, of the kind which Mazeres imputes lo me) to do
justice to so noble a cause ; happy, should ray efforts
contribute to the overthrow of those prejudices which
have oppressed us for ages, and thus promote the
happiness and prosperity of my brethren.
Mazeres defends the cause of the ex-colonists,
that class of men whose dreadful system, and unheard
of crimes, made nature shudder. The cause which
I have advocated is that of Humanity at large. Whites,
Mulattoes and Blacks, we are all brethren, all chil-
dren of the same eternal Father; all interested in
this cause.
O Man! whatever be the colour of thy skin;
whatever thy nation or religion, thou art interested
in the triumph of the Haytians, unless thy heart be
steeled against those feelings of justice and humanity,
which the Deity has implanted in us all Unless thou
art dyed in the same guilt with the ex-colonists, thou
canst not put the interests of a race of men over-
whelmed witli crimes, in competition with the gene-
ral interests of the Human Species.
FINIS.
P. B. Wright, Printer, Liverpool]
