

REFLECTIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT.
SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
THE HON. SIR HENRY PARKES, K.C.M.G
IN THE
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
IN REPLY TO AN ATTACK BY MR. M c ELIIONE, M.P.
FOR THE UPPER HUNTER,
ON THE
13 OCTOBER, 1887.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
FHWi




REFLECTIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT.
<r Vr)
Sir HENRY PARKES ; Any one who
occupies personally the position which I
do to-day is open to be assailed by the
meanest person in the community ; and I
have found out very acutely that that is
my position. The hon. member who has
just sat down has made a wild, inconclu-
sive speech, saying at one time that he did
not believe I could be guilty of some
charges which he has reproduced here, and
at another that he did believe I had been
guilty of worse things; telling us at an-
other time that he would not give a vote
to displace me from office, whereas if I
had been guilty, or on fair and reasonable
grounds could be supposed capable of
being guilty of any one of these charges,
it would be his duty and the duty of
every other man to endeavour to displace
me from my position. If the hon. gentle-
man thinks he is a judge of honor, he has
sadly mistaken his own character. Does
honor consist even in paying 20s. in the
£ ? Are there not procuresses of innocent
women for the basest purposes who pay
20s. in the £ ? Are there not men who
are guilty of the vilest crimes under heaven
who pay 20s. in the £ ? If property is
sacred, is not truth sacred? If misfortune
comes upon a man, is that the time to
misrepresent his acts ? Not one single
statement has the hon. member made re-
lating to me which he has taken the
trouble to make correctly. Even the
amount of my indebtedness he continually
overstated by many thousands of pounds.
Then he said, as if his word proved any-
thing, that I was indebted to my hon.
friend, the Postmaster-General, £2,500,
and that 1 was guilty of concealing this in
the statement which I have made of my
affairs. I never owed Mr. Roberts £2,500;
I never owed Mr. Roberts £2,000; I
never owed Mr. Roberts £1,500 ; I never
owed Mr. Roberts £1,000; I never owed
him £5OO ; I never owed him a single
penny above the sum I have stated.
There he sits. He is a man of honor,
whose word will be accepted anywhere;
and he will say that I never was in his
debt to the extent of a penny beyond the
sum stated before the world.
Mr. C. J. Roberts : Hear, hear ; that
is perfectly correct!
Sir HENRY PARKES ; Then there
is the statement about my honored friend,
Mr. Sutherland. I have taken him into
this Government, forsooth, because he was
a judgment creditor of mine, because he
had the power to put me into the Insol-
vency Court; and, at the same time, the
hon. member for The Upper Hunter tells
the House that eight or ten years ago—l
do not think it is so far back ; about eight
years ago—l declined to take my hon.
friend into my Government. I was in the
same relation to him then when I declined,
and, if I acted from this base motive now,
how was it that I excluded him from my
Government before ? Unfortunately for
him and for me our transactions have been
going on for some twelve or fourteen
years, and we have been both heavy suf-.
ferers. It is not a case of money being,
advanced to me ; but it is a case of a
joint speculation in some mineral property
in this country by which we have botli
been sufferers, and the hon. member will
tell any one, if any one cares to know,
that at the very time when I took him
into the Government I had paid the-
greater part of this particular debt.
Mr. Sutherland : Hear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Only a small
balance was left, and I was endeavouring
to pay it to the utmost of my power. A
question arises in relation to this trans-
action which I shall face at once. Have
things come to this—that if I or any other
man have relations with another man; is
that circumstance to prevent me enlisting
his services in the service of the country ?
A pretty state of things that would be.
If, for example, I have a friend who is
eminently qualified, in my judgment, to :
serve the country, who happens to have
had transactions with me, to whom I may
be in debt, or who may possibly be in.
debt to me, is that to weigh with me, and
on that account alone am I to exclude him
from the honorable service of the country?
I repudiate such a cowardly, such an un-
worthy doctrine as that, which can spring
only from a disordered and dishonest mind.
The same applies to appointments to the.
Upper House. I think that in a con-
spicuous manner I have exercised my
power as adviser of the Crown in impar-


tial appointments to the Upper House. I
have times out of number advised the
appointment of men who were directly
opposed to me ; I have considered that
the Ministry stood to a large extent as the
constituency of the country in these ap-
pointments. I have never for a moment
considered that these appointments should
be made a party question, and in every
batch of appointments for which I am
responsible there have been men repre-
senting different shades of opinion; but
while I hold that doctrine, am I to
exclude the appointment of a worthy man
merely because he has had some monetary
transactions with me 1 If he is appointed,
is the infamous conclusion to be drawn
that he has been appointed for a mone-
tary consideration ? Why, this in a commu-
nity like ours would destroy all honorable
relations between men; we could not
exist, because there is scarcely any person
of conspicuous ability who would not be
excluded if such considerations as these
prevailed. There are obvious reasons why
I selected the gentlemen who form the
present Government. Everyone of them
had been sitting side by side with me in
the late Opposition to the Government
which had retired; others, too, had been
sitting side by side with them, but I
could not take all the persons who
appeared to me to be eligible. I took
those who I thought would fairly repre-
sent the country, and who I thought had
the fairest claim on my consideration.
With regard to my hon. friend, the Post-
master-General, I say here that, as far as
I am of any value as a judge of official
aptitude, I have never seen a more
industrious, a more painstaking, a more
upright administrator in my life than Mr.
Roberts. In his place here he is always
courteous, uniformly attentive to all that
is said, and if he has occasion to explain
anything he has the great and special
merit of saying it in the clearest possible
terms and the fewest words. Surely these
are great merits, and I think that the
appointment of my hon. friend to the
important office of Postmaster-General has
been fully and conclusively justified before
the country. With regard to ray hon.
•colleague, the Minister of Justice, what
man questions his ability ? There are
few men in Parliament who have stronger
natural ability than the hon. member who
fills the office of Minister of Justice, and
he has performed his duties in a manner
which I believe, upon the whole, has
given satisfaction to the House and the
country. His relations to me in my un-
fortunate pecuniary operations are very
trifling. He offered to give his assistance
to my endeavours to dispose of a very
valuable property—aproperty, which every-
body will admit, is a very valuable one,
and which, in my judgment, is one of the
most valuable properties within the same
distance of the thick of the city of Sydney.
He offered to give his assistance, and a
certain sum of money was raised ; he
contributed a sum of £2OO, other gentle-
men contributing £2OO each, in view of
the formation of a syndicate to purchase
the whole property. These amounts were
secured in the ordinary business way on
the property.
Mr. McElhone ; Untrue !
Sir HENRY PARKES : It is per-
fectly true. The amount of my liability
to him is what has been returned in the
statement which I submitted to my friends.
The hon. member for The Upper Hunter
says that I went to Orange and called him
an infamous person.
Mr. McElhone : The hon. member
said that I made infamous charges !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am not
going to shirk what I said. I think that
I declined to mention the hon. member’s
name. What I said was that if my hon.
colleague had done the things of which he
had been accused he was an infamous per-
son, but if it turned out that he had not
done them the person who made the base-
less charge was still more infamous. I say it
now. But the hon. member goes on to
say
Mr. Melville ; Sir, I should like to
ask you whether it is in order for an hon.
member to deliberately cross the floor of
the House and cheer from the Opposition
benches, to create the impression that the
hon. member addressing the House is
being cheered by the Opposition ?
Mr. Speaker : The Chair has no control
as to where hon. members may sit.
Sir HENRY PARKES: The hon.
member for The Upper Hunter says that
I must go to the courts of law to defend
myself against charges such as he has read
to the House.


Mr. McEliione : You did it in the
Webb case !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I decline to
try the thing again. Everybody knows
that truth and justice were on my side
then ; every one knows that the infamous
libel against me was entirely unfounded ;
but so long as one man in a jury of twelve
stands out in a case of that sort I have
discovered that it is impossible to obtain
justice. But what would be the use?
How can I suffer from such wild state-
ments as the hon. member has made?
What good could arise from trying to de-
fend myself against them ?
Destroy the flb, or sophistry—in vain,
The creature’s at his dirty work again.
Pope wrote this 100 years ago; and that
is what is ever at work throughout the
ages. I can stand even now in my
unfortunate position and decline the sym-
pathy of any opponent. I can stand even
now and say that under the pressure of the
circumstances in which I found myself I
took the only honest course open to me;
I gave up everything, to the last farthing.
I could do nothing more, and if I had
struggled on, I should have had less to
give up. I did the most honest thing I
possibly could under the circumstances in
which I was placed. I acted on the ad-
vice of men as upright, as independent,
and as well qualified to judge as any in
the entire length and breadth of New
South Wales. I expressed no opinions of
my own, but was guided entirely by them.
As to my reaping benefits from the
Opinions which I have held, I am now
standing before the world not worth a
a single shilling. I have been in this
great office more than ten years; I have
served the country a lifetime; I have
sacrificed my health more than once in
what I believed was the good of the
country ; and am I to be libelled by being
told by lawless men that I have sold my
services, when my conscience tells me
that I never derived the value of a single
farthing for anything I ever did ? But
there are, I admit, higher considerations
attached to my position. I should make
the matter very easy if I stood in an
ordinary situation. If I were a member
of the Administration simply, I should
resign ; but I cannot resign without doing
what I believe would be a great injustice
to the country ; I cannot resign without
throwing confusion upon the great and
influential party who have brought me
into power. If I consulted my own feel-
ings, a breadless home would be sweeter
to me than facing the evil passions of
people who give no quarter when they
have a paltry object to serve. I know all
that well; but come what will, I think
that the fairest thing to me is to submit
some motion by which it can be tested
whether or not it is the will of Parliament
that I should remain here. Gladly should
I retire, even if a respectable minority
were to approve of my retirement. I
have never clung to office; I value the
emoluments of office no more than I
value the despatch-box on the table. I
could give them up at this moment with
an easy conscience and an easy mind. But
I do value being able to carry out my
own opinions if I am placed in a position
of this kind ; and in justice to me, in jus-
tice to the House, in justice to the coun-
try, some definite decision should be
arrived at. Either say that lam entitled
to remain here, or say by the smallest
possible significant intimation of your will
that I ought to retire, and I shall obey
the will of Parliament gladly; obey it to-
day ; but do not make wretched motions
of this kind, and exaggerate my faults,
exaggerate the facts of my position
Mr. Speaker : It is my duty to call
attention to the fact that the hon. gentle-
man’s time has expired.
Hon. Members : Go on; go on !
Mr. McElhone : I hope the House
will give the Premier every latitude !
Mr. Speaker : I am simply performing
my duty.
Hon. Members : Go on !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have little
more to say ; but it enables me to state,
with greater calmness, that I am very sen-
sible of the assailable position in which I
stand. I do not complain of the hon.
member making his assaults upon me ;
but I think I have a right to complain of
his utterly evil suspicions against me,
which neither he, nor any man, nor all the
men in the world, can prove. I know that
I never took any man into office for any
such infamous considerations as are attri-
buted to me. There are men all round me
who know that I am the last man in this
community, whether I am in this position
or any other, who will be intimidated


from taking my course, or induced to take
it, for any considerations of that kind. I
believe that at the time of the formation
of this Government, taking the gentle-
men as a whole, that I formed the best
administration that was possible to me. I
might have found as good, I admit. I
might have left out one or two of these
gentlemen, and taken in one or two others,
who had equal claims upon me ; but I had
no better choice than the choice I made ;
and surely I ought not to be blamed by
any person who desires to conduct Govern-
ment on party lines for taking my col-
leagues from the ranks where I had been
sitting for many months past. With
regard to the other of my colleagues,
I have known my hon. friend the Treasurer
for a quarter of a century. I never had
any transactions with him in my life. I
never asked a favour of him, nor did he of
me, and the same may be said of several
other of my colleagues. And because
some others of them were connected with
me in the way I have truthfully described,
am I to have the vilest suspicions propa-
gated as to my honesty of purpose when
I have given time after time such abundant
evidence of my integrity in this respect?
One thing I am entitled to receive, I am
entitled to receive some definite opinion
from this House, or I am entitled to be
allowed to proceed and conduct the busi-
ness of the country in the ordinary way.
I want no favour; I want no special con-
sidei-ation; I want no sympathy. I do
not seek to ward off any man’s attacks. I
have told you plainly that I would not be
here if I were simply a minister of the
Crown. I have told you plainly that I
cannot reconcile it to my sense of duty to
take the rash step of breaking up the
present Administration which, in my judg-
ment, has the confidence of Parliament
still, has the confidence of the country still,
and is capable of rendering great services to
this country. As to me, it matters little.
I am poor ; I am old; I stand, as it were,
in the light of the grave. I use the words
advisedly, that I would rather die to-night
than live till to-morrow, if I could choose
such an event in my life. Nothing is
more attractive to me than the repose of
the grave, and it cannot be far off. Being
in this position, knowing how I stand,
how soon I must quit this active arena,
how can I particularly wish to remain
here to be the mere butt of calumny, mis-
representation, and abuse 1 I should pre-
fer quiet and peace ; but while I am here
I shall fight to the last. I shall allow no
consideration arising out of my personal
fortunes to temper my criticism or curb
my courage. If stung I shall strike; if I
am treated with forbearance I shall try to
study forbearance. lam anxious to do
my duty to the House and to the country,
I cannot forfeit my own respect, and I
know when I maintain that I shall main-
tain the respect of all good men of all
parties. To me what can it matter ? Let
me be as I am. Let my fortunes sink as
low as possible. Let my fate be amongst
the most obscure and the most wretched.
What does it matter to me ? But I re-
present here a great and living principle—
a principle which is making this colony
the leader of the Australian colonies. I
honestly believe I represent that principle.
I have a right to that belief. I shall act
in accordance with it to the best of my
ability, and the cause I have espoused I
will defend while I am here with my best
efforts, with my latest breath ; and I shall
not allow myself to be restrained by any
considerations of an inferior character. I
say put me out of office if you can. I will
give you great odds in doing so. Get a
minority of the House, get fifty members
out of the 124 to say that I am unworthy
of holding this office, and though all the
others vote for me I shall leave it at once.
Mr. See : You would not get ten to vote
for it!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I want no
favour. I must repeat that I want no
sympathy. No one can think of me in a
worse light than I think of myself, so far
as these transactions are concerned. But
I do want some clear decision, I want to
have either a clear intimation that I am
justified in retaining my office, or I want
a clear intimation that I ought to retire
from it—whichever you like. But as far
as I am concerned, do not consider me.
Do not for a single moment take my cir-
cumstances into account; but if you think
that the honor of the institutions of the
country, the honor of Parliament, the use-
fulness of this House in performing its
duties, as part of the Parliament of the
country, will be best secured by displacing
me, only give me a reasonable intimation


that that ought to be done, and I will
meet you a little more than half-way, and
make way for some one else. I think that
the attack made upon me has been a most
unfair one. Ido not think it was made
in such a spirit as I had a right to expect,
even from the hon. member for The Upper
Hunter. I cannot but think it cannot do
me any evil; it can do no one else any
good ; it cannot promote good government
or the good order of our proceedings.
But another course might have been taken
which would have attained those objects.
Some definite motion could have been made
expressing what are the opinions of those
opposed to me, and if that motion were made
I would give it the fullest consideration,
even if it were not carried. I have to
apologise for accepting the indulgence of
the House, and trespassing over the time
allotted to me. Ido not think lam justi-
fied in detaining the House any further.
I have nothing particular to reply to, ex-
cept to say again that I am not conscious
of having done any of the things attributed
to me. What is more, I know I have not
done them. I know I have not taken the
Minister of Justice as my colleague be-
cause I owed £2OO to him. I know I
have not taken the Secretary for Mines as
my colleague because I owed £2OO to him.
I know I have not taken the Secretary for
Public Works into this Government be-
cause of the old remnant of the debt aris-
ing out of our unfortunate mining specu-
lation.
Mr. McElhone : It was the verdict in
the Supreme Court that I referred to I
Sir HENRY PARKES : It does not
matter what the hon. member referred to.
If he had been at the trouble of ascertain-
ing the truth, he would have found that
the judgment had never been attempted to
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB7.
be put into force. I had paid the greater
part of the money, and a very small
balance was due at that time. I can state,
at all events, that 1 never thought of the
circumstance when forming the present
Government. I think if the hon. mem-
ber for The Upper Hunter had been good
enough, or mischievous enough, to contri-
bute towards my election expenses at St.
Leonards, he might have kept that to him-
self. I am perfectly sure I never asked him.
Mr. McElhone : I simply did so be-
cause I wished to see you back in power !
Sir HENRY PARKES ; I have only
to say that I certainly never asked the
hon. member.
Mr. McElhone ; Hear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I never knew
that he did so, except in the same way as
I know his good qualities at all times—•
because he tells us about them himself.
I have one word to say in conclusion :
that I am not in any way particularly
anxious to remain a member of the Go-
vernment or a member of the House,
except I can hold a seat in either place
with honor. If that cannot be so, I would
rather leave both places to-morrow; and
if any hon. gentlemen who are opposed to
me in this H ouse, or any other hon. gen-
tlemen who have been pleased to give me
their support so long—if, in the one case,
they think the time has come when, at ail
hazards, they should try to displace me,
and if, in the other case, they think the
time has come when they are not justified
in still reposing confidence in me—all I
can say is, let them testify that in some
way which is intelligible to me and the
country ; and never fear but that I Shall
know how to act upon it.
Throughout his speech the hon. member
was loudly cheered.


