

REFLECTIONS
ON
METHODISM
1 8 8 0.
BY AN OLD METHODIST.




REFLECTIONS
ON
METHODISM.
18 8 0.
BY AN OLD METHODIST.




REFLECTIONS ON METHODISM.
For man) r years some old Methodists have observed, with painful
apprehension, the changes which, in not a few instances, have
been almost imperceptibly taking place in Methodism. From
observing this, they feared a declension in the Divine life and
godliness, which would further result in a less number of con-
versions, and, consequently, there would not be the desired
increase to that section of the Christian Church. These appre-
hensions have been fully realized in the Australian colonies.
With a greatly increased number of ministers, and with frequent
special services for a week at a time in various places, in which
many have been added to the Church, still our numbers have
decreased from year to year. Notwithstanding the decrease in
the number of our Church members, it was emphatically said in
the Weekly Advocate of 19th March of this year (1879) that
“We are not declining-and the writer gives as a reason for his
opinion the multiplication of ministers and congregations. I
cannot entertain the opinion of that writer, as it appears to me
that the increase of ministers and congregations, without a
a corresponding increase in the number of Church members, only
aggravates the evil. With increased means we ought to have an
increased number of converts and members added to our Church,
for we have no other test to judge by as to whether souls are
being saved or not. An increased number of attendants on the
public ordinances is no proof of spiritual prosperity; for it is
manifest that by far the greater number of these are not the
regenerated children of God, as they do not “ bring forth fruit
unto holinessand our Lord said “ B} their fruit ye shall know
them.” Have not the most superstitious and the most idolatrous
people in the world, the greatest numbers who assemble together
for the purposes of sacred exercises, even if it be to worship idols?
What truly enlightened person believes that the bulk of the
Wesleyan congregations, or of any other Christian Church, are
“branches of the true Vine” and members of Christ’s mystical
body? Is it not far otherwise ? We are glad to see increased
numbers of ministers and congregations, as these bring the people
in the way of obtaining spiritual light, and thereby leading them


to the Saviour for salvation; but it grieves the sincere Christian
to see multitudes listening to Divine truths without showing any
earnestness to “ flee from the wrath to come.”
As there is no proof that the work of God is prospering among
us by the conversion of souls, it is the duty of those who “ love
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity ” to try to find out what the
causes are which prevent the progress of the work of God in the
salvation of souls. Doubtless, there has been more than one
cause which has contributed to produce this sad effect. The want
of increasing success has of late years produced painful feelings,
not only in these colonies, but in England also. The President
of the Conference deplored the absence of the “connecting link,”
which should connect the children of Methodist parents with the
Church of their fathers’ choice. There is certainly some defect
here, and the worthy President suggested confirmation by the
laying on of hands as a remedy for the evil. I cannot conceive
that this would mend the matter. In observing the conduct of
those who have been confirmed by a bishop of the Church of
the Church of England or of Rome, in England or in this country,
I have been unable to discover that it produced any visible good
effects on those on whose heads the hands of the bishops had been
ceremonially laid. I have observed that confirmation-day in
England was a day of frivolity with the young people who were
“bishoped;” though it was not always confined to pleasurable
amusement. I remember that on the day on which I was con-
firmed, I saw a lad driven out of the churchyard with his face
covered with blood, where he had been fighting with an antagonist
on that consecrated ground. It was evident that confirmation
had not a solemnizing effect on the minds of these youths.
Though there are not many such cases as this, it does not appear
that the ceremony has scarcely ever produced a solemnizing effect
or reform in the character, so that I cannot see any reason to
expect that this would form the “connecting link.” Nor have I
heard or read of anything proposed which I can believe would be
the means of realizing that so much desired end. There may be
several causes which may tend to prevent our young people from
attaching themselves to the Church of their fathers. I have no
doubt one cause, in many families, is a want of proper restraint
in childhood and youth. There are many parents who err in this
respect. There is too great laxity in the government of the
children, and they are so indulged in their caprices that they are
satisfied with nothing less than all the vain and fashionable
amusements and the gratifications of the unrenewed heart, which
they follow with avidity. This stifles the restraing influences of
the Spirit of God, so that they lose all desire for spiritual good,
and give full sway to uncontrolled human nature. Solomon said :
“The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself
bringeth his motaer to shame.” ( Frov . xxix., 15). “ Chasten thy
>/Nf* -/


son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.”
(Prov xix., 18). “He that spareth the rod hateth his son: hut
he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.” (Prov. xiii., 24).
“Withhold not correction from a child, for if thou beat him with
a rod he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with a rod and save
his soul from hell.” (Prov. xxiii., 13, 14). It appears from these
passages that the wisest of men saw the prevailing evil of laxity
and want of restraint of children by their parents in his day;
hence he reiterated these warnings and laid down right precepts
for the right government of children, confirming the whole by
saying-, “ Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he
is old he will not depart from it.” (Prov. xxii., 6). Doubtless,
Solomon spoke these precepts under Divine inspiration ; so that,
as a rule, if instructions given by him be followed, the end in
most instances will be accomplished. There is no rule without
an exception, so that there may be a few instances where proper
training does not produce the desired effect; but such cases will
be but few. It must be so, when affirmed by Divine inspiration.
I have never known children of godly parents spoiled through
over-restraint, but I have known many ruined by over-indulgence.
It is possible to err either way, so that through over-restraint
they may stand in such dread of their parents as to be almost
afraid to speak in their presence unless spoken to. I have heard
of such cases, but never saw oue. In every case where I have seen
children kept under what I have thought unnecessary restraint they
have been a credit to their parents in after life, if they have been
otherwise properly taught by precept and example. Not so where
they have been over-indulged ; for in many instances they have been
a grief to their parents and have ruined themselves. Of the two
evils, over-indulgence and over-restraint, the first is followed with
by far the worst consequences. I believe this is one cause which
prevents the children of Methodist parents from joining the
.Methodist Church. But while I see the importance of a just
restraint of children by the parents, and that the first thing to
teach a child is submission to the will of the parents, lam
confident severity is not necessary, nor should a harsh word be
uttered when “love will do the deed.” As soon as a child shows
a willingness to submit, no lasting- resentment should be shown by
the parent. Restraint is not the only means of training children
in the right way : they should also be taught by example and
affectionate advice. Precept should g-o with example; hence it
is said, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mig-ht; and these words
which 1 command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou
shalt teach them diligently to thy children, and thou shalt talk of
them by the way,” &c. (I)eut. vi., 5-9). The New Testament is
also explicit on this subject. The apostle said, “ A bishop must
be blameless; . . one that ruleth well his own house, having


his children in subjection with all gravity.” (1 Tim. iii., 2,4).
The bishop was to be an example to the members of his family
and the Church. Then again, the apostle said, “ And, ye fathers,
provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord.” Many other passages might
he quoted, both from the Old and New Testaments, to show the
duty of parents to their children, but let these suffice for the
present purpose. In these passages we see that the first part of the
precept has reference to the conduct of the parents: they must be
blameless , so that their example may teach their children the way of
righteousness. They should, like Zacharias and Elizabeth, “walk
in all the ordinances and commandments of the Lord blameless.”
No duty should be neglected. The family altar should be erected,
and the services should be reverently performed both morning
and evening. The ordinances of the public sanctuary should be
reglarly attended also, which should be done with humble fear
and reverence, that the children may see that the religion of their
parents is not merely a profession, but something of the utmost
importance. Had the children of Methodist parents generally
their duty set before them constantly by precept and example
there would not be so much cause to complain of the absence of
the “connecting linkbrat it is a lamentable fact that in many
instances the children of professors of religion have not such
examples to follow. Many duties are altogether neglected by
some parents, and those which are performed are too often done
in such a careless manner that the children are not impressed
with the importance of the religion which their parents profess;
hence, they grow up careless and neglectful of the highest ends
of life.
When the parents are remiss' in these duties their lack ought,
in some measure, to be supplied by the ministers of the Gospel,
who have a great responsibility resting upon them as to their
duty both to parents and children, which should be performed in
pastoral visitation; but lam sorry to say that I believe this part
of the minister’s duty is much neglected in our day. In the early
days of Methodism the circuits were so extensive that it took the
ministers some weeks to go the whole round of them, preaching
only once in each place 5 hence, the ministers in the country
circuits were called “round preachers.” Those ministers who
took the “ rounds ” had to lodge at the houses of the friends of
Methodism, where the families had the benefit of their godly
conversation and conduct. In the villages where these good men
lodged it was a rule with many of them to visit every family
where they would be admitted, and to have a little social con-
versation and prayer where it was agreeable to the residents.
Their visits would necessarily be short, but the best use would be
made of the time : there would be a little friendly talk, inter-
spersed with religion; then there would be a friendly shake of


the hand, particularly with the young-, a good-bye, and then to
the next house. This was a rule to a great extent from fifty to
sixty years ago; but by that time the circuits were being divided
into much narrower spheres of action than they had been during
the earlier days of Methodism. It was not so general that the
ministers stayed at the people’s houses as it had been, as some of
them were getting into the habit of always returning to their
homes, if possible, after preaching, instead of staying with the
families who composed their congregations. Some of the old
Methodists were then beginning to complain that both they and
their families were losing the benefit of the pastoral visitations of
the good old ministers who were passing away. From that time
to the present, the circuits have been narrowing down, so as to
make it convenient for the ministers to return to their homes
after preaching. With this style of things, there has been hut very
little pastoral visitation of late years. Many Methodist families
scarcely ever see their ministers in their houses from the beginning
to the end of the year; hence, there is no intercourse between
the ministers and many of the members of their Church and
congregations. This has been the means of a great loss to the
Church. In the first place, for the want of pastoral visitation, the
parents of families sustain a loss of spiritual life, which should be
stirred up by the visits of their pastors. As the heads of families
have generally, necessarily, to engage daily in worldly pursuits,
through which they often lose the spirituality of mind which they
first experienced after their conversion, so that they lose their
religious fervour and become languid, which causes the neglect
of both personal and family duties in religious matters. They
are hot so often found in communion with God as they were when
they first started for the kingdom, and they feel but little interest
in the salvation of their children; hence, they are neglected as it
regards the salvation of their souls, and instead of becoming
members of the Methodist Church, they unite themselves with no
Church, so that they are lost to the Methodists, and they are
lost to the Church of Christ. Here is the cause of the absence
of the u connecting link.” The direct cause of this is the want
of greater earnestness in the parents in first seeking their own
salvation, which leads to the neglect of the salvation of their
children, who have neither precept nor example to lead them to
Christ. I have no doubt this might be prevented to a great
extent by faithful pastoral visitation, by which the parents would
be stirred up to their duty as it regards their own souls’ salvation
and that of their children. I can but believe that of late years
our ministers generally have been very remiss in the discharge
of this duty; but that does not exonerate the parents from the
guilt which they incur in the neglect of their duty to their
children. It is their duty to train their children in the right
way whether the ministers fully discharge their duty or not.


The neglect of the duty of one party does not exonerate the other
from blame in the neglect of their duty.
Though I do not attempt to exonerate or extenuate the guilt
of parents in the neglect of their duty, I can hut believe that in
most instances the original cause of the absence of the “ con-
necting link” lies at the door of the ministers for the neglect of
their pastoral duty. Had they followed up the practice of our
early ministers, there Avould have been a far less number of back-
sliders and more conversions as the result of their pastoral visiting.
By regular visiting and suitable ministerial conduct on these
occasions they would have kept the Divine fire burning in the
hearts of those persons who have necessarily to engage in worldly
pursuits from day to day, through which they lose much of the
Divine life which might have been kept in vigour by pastoral
visitation. These visits should not be merely of a friendly
character, with nothing but friendly, social conversation in them,
but on every occasion a few words should be dropped, which
would lead to pious reflection. I have been told of one of our
ministers who, on his first visit, after the usual salutation, said,
“ My business with you, my brother, is not of a secular character,
but I want to know how your soul prospers.” These are the kind
of visits which are likely to build up tbe Church of Christ; but I
am sorry to say that in these days the belief forces itself upon me
that there is not much of this kind of visiting. lam persuaded that
pastoral visitation is neglected so that more time may be spent in the
preparation of sermons, in order that (as it has been said) “ they may
be better prepared to meet the advanced intelligence of the age.” I
do not condemn, but commend, those of our ministers who endeavour
so far to improve their minds by study as to become acceptable
preachers of the Gospel of Christ to the most intelligent, as far as it
can be done without neglecting the more important duty of pastoral
visiting. When our Lord was relating to the disciples of John the
Baptist the effects of His ministry, after speaking of the miracles
He had performed, even to the raising of the dead, He reached the
climax of his discourse by saying, u And the poor have tbe Gospel
preached to them;” intimating thereby that to preach the Gospel
to the poor was a greater work than preaching to the rich and
learned. He did not call the learned to be the leading- instru-
ments in the conversion of the world, but those who had not been
qualified by literary acquirements to meet the tastes of the
fastidious. This is seen by the expressed opinion of the public;
for it was said of two of the most active and prominent of the
apostles that they were “ ignorant and unlearned men!' No doubt
this was said in reference to the higher classes of the literary
attainments of the people of the age; and no doubt they spoke in
the homely dialect of their native country, for on another occasion
it was said of the apostles, “ Are not ali these which speak Gali-
leans ?” Doubtless, they were known to be so by their country


dialect. So were Peter and Jolin; hence they were said to be
‘ ‘ ignorant and unlearned ;” but they were wise and learned in matters
pertaining to the Gospel of Christ, and the kingdom of God, and
the salvation of men. With what Divine eloquence did the apostle
Peter address the great assembly on the day of Pentecost, and with
what wonderful effect! so that on the same day were added to the
Church “ about three thousand souls ! ” When our Lord sent His
followers to preach the Gospel, He did not first send them to an
academy to qualify them for the work ; He would not give one per-
mission to stay to “ bury his father,” he must go at once to “preach
the kingdom of God.” (Luke ix., GO). No excuse would be admitted
against a present Gospel call.. When the Holy Spirit calls He
qualifies, and immediate obedience is required.
Nor did Mr. Wesley chose the learned to be his ministers. He
gladly received all whom the Lord called and qualified by gifts and
graces, and he sent them forth to preach the Gospel in that state in
which the Lord raised them up. He did not send them to an
academy to qualify them to meet the refined tastes of the fastidious
and the learned. A few of us can remember some of the good men
whom Mr. Wesley sent to preach the Gospel, who were handicrafts-
men, and had to earn their bread by the labour of their hands.
Many of them became giants in the Church of Christ. In the early
days of Methodism there were John Ilaime, John Nelson, Henry
Longden. These, with many others, were joint companions with
Mr. Wesley. There were also “good old father Truscott,” John
Stephens, Thomas Martin, and others, whom some of us remember
that Mr. Wesley sent into the ministry: not one of whom was a
classical scholar; but, by their industry after they were fully engaged
in the ministry they became highly educated in theology, and some
of them made themselves masters of the dead languages in which
the Scriptures were first written. In the midst of their laborious
work as “round preachers,” when they had to travel from place to
place to preach the Gospel daily, they acquired such a knowledge of
theology that they could preach with credit and usefulness before any
unprejudiced Christian congregation; and not a few of these self-
taught men combatted successfully some of the learned of the day,
who attempted to bring into disrepute both Mr. Wesley and the
doctrines which he preached. When God selects men for great
works, He qualifies them for the service—whether he takes the herd-
man from his flocks (Amos vii., 14), or a ploughman from his work
(1 Kings , xix., 19), or the fishermen from their nets, or a mechanic
from the workshop, or a miner from the depths of the earth—and
sends them forth at once without any further training for the work
which he assigns them. Many such have stood in honorable positions
before kings (Prov. xxii., 29). I would be one of the last who would
object to send our young ministers to an academy to be trained for the
ministry, if it could be shown that those who have been trained in them
had been instrumental in the conversion of more souls and building


up believers than those of that class to which I have referred, who
had no such training; but it has not been the case. This is evident
in these colonies at least, where our ministers have been increasing
in numbers and the number of our Church members has been
decreasing year after year. Years of the best of the time of these
young men have been wasted in the academies where, report says,
some of them have lost their burning zeal for the salvation of souls
while they were training to please hearers who are too fastidious to
listen to such “unlearned and ignorant men ” as the fishermen of
Galilee. If we may judge from the subsequent conduct of such
hearers, but very few of that class are profited by the word. It is to
be feared that many such listen only as critics, with no desire to be
profited thereby.
The Rev. Henry Moore, who preached Dr. Adam Clarke’s funeral
sermon, said in his sermon that when Mr. Wesley sent Adam Clarke
out as one of his ministers, he appointed him to very laborious
circuits, and this he continued to do during his life; he further said
it was a rule with Mr. Wesley to appoint any young men who were
particularly studious to laborious circuits. It is evident that he
would guard against everything which would prevent their immediate
usefulness as preachers of the Gospel. This is no proof that he
would encourage an illiterate ministry to the exclusion of the educated,
as he gladly united his labours with the learned ministers of the
Gospel of the day, to carry on the work of God. This is seen in his
union with Dr. Coke, Mr. Burridge, Mr. Fletcher, Mr. Benson, and
others ;■ but I have never heard nor read that he ever rejected a pious
young man because he was deficient of a high literary qualification,
nor that he would waste years of the best of his time by sending him
to an academy, while he was imbued with the spirit of the Gospel
and had a burning zeal for the salvation of souls. The early Chris-
tian life is often the most fruitful in good works and the most useful
in the Gospel ministry. I fear many of our young men lose much
of their burning zeal to save souls while they are spending the best
of their time in academies, studying the higher branches of education.
I have been told by one of our ministers that some of our young men
have acknowledged this to be the case. Mr. Wesley required but
three qualifications in a young man to enter the ministry, and if my
memory is correct they are, gifts, graces, and fruit. Having these,
he would send them out at once to preach the Gospel. If they had
gifts with grace, but were in some respects deficient in literary
attainments, he knew that by industry and perseverance they would
improve their minds so as to qualify them to address any congre-
gation in a creditable manner; and while they were burning with
zeal they would put put forth all their energies to save souls.
The Lord has ever blessed the labours of such earnest preachers of
the Gospel, and under similar circumstances He would do it again.
The most elaborate and eloquently delivered sermons are not always
the most effectual for good ; of this we have had many proofs. Such


eloquence may please the ear without affecting the heart. This has
often been seen after an eloquent sermon has been delivered to a
learned congregation. I remember hearing of an instance of this long
since, which made a deep impression on my mind in reference to what
kind of preaching is attended with the most soul-saving power.
The late Rev. Oliver Henwood said that on one occasion, at the
Conference which he ai tended, a young minister preached before the
ministers and a public congregation a most elaborate sermon, with
great eloquence. The congregation, including the ministers, were
highly pleased ; but there was no appearance of hearts affected. The
people were pleased, but not profited. The next night good old John
Nelson preached. (He was a nephew of John Nelson, the stone-
mason, one of Mr. Wesley’s preachers and companions in travel).
He introduced his sermon in the most simple manner by relating
some touching anecdotes. Soon after he had commenced his sermon
the congregation was in tears. Old ministers wept like children,
and the hearts of all were affected. That which came from the head
pleased, without affecting the heart; that which came from the heart
went to the heart. I do not think lightly of eloquent preaching,
when the sole aim of the preacher is the salvation of souls ; but from
the little effects produced by many eloquent sermons, I fear not a few
Gospel ministers of the present day study more to please the ear
than to affect the heart. Such preaching may increase the number
of hearers, but will not convert souls, nor build up believers in the
faith of the Gospel; hence, with our increased number of ministers
and chapels, we have had a decrease in the number of our Church
members year after year. There is no affectation, no display of
learning or eloquence, in Mr. Wesley’s writings. They are so plain
and natural that the most unlearned can comprehend them. I have
read of a lady who went to hear Mr. Wesley preach because of his
great notoriety as a preacher. On leaving the chapel she said, “Is
this the great Mr. Wesley that I have heard so much about? The
most unlearned can understand him.” A gentleman replied, “In
that consists his greatness. While the most unlearned can under-
stand him, the most learned are instructed.” We can refer to a
higher source of divinity, and perceive the same simplicity. Our
Scriptures were translated by the most learned and devoted theologians
of the day, and yet the language is so plain and simple that “he
who runs may read.” There is a Divine simplicity in them.
I was once told by a good old local preacher, Avho was contemporary
with Mr. Wesley, an anecdote which bears on this subject. It was
said by this good man in reference to Mr. Wesley’s brevity, which
shows that he would encourage the improvement of the mind as far
as it could be done for the benefit of the Church, without preventing
the unlearned, who had gifts for preaching, from preaching the Gospel
as opportunity offered, and that at the same time he did not require
a high degree of literary knowledge for usefulness. It was said that
one of his preachers was very imperfect in the English Grammar 3


and in order that he might improve his language, Mr. Wesley wrote
the following laconic note :
“Dear Brother, —Please buy my English Grammar; price, one penny.
“Yours truly, John Wesley.”
There are some local preachers in our day who might improve their
speaking by the study of such a grammar, so as to make their
preaching acceptable to any congregation that is seeking after the
truth as it is in Christ. The greatest defect in the preaching of
some of our local preachers is the aspiration of the vowels, which, if
corrected, would leave but a very few inaccuracies in their language.
An amusing anecdote was given by the Dean of Westminster in his
work on “ The Queen’s English. He said that when the cholera
was prevailing in England, a barber said he thought the infection
went through the hair. A person present said, “ Then I would
advise you to be careful what razors you use.” The barber replied,
“I do not mean the air of the aid, but the hair of the hatmosphere .”
Though there are but few of our local preachers who are so ignorant
of the pronunciation of these words as the barber was, there are
some who fall into similar errors, Avhich, if corrected by a few verbal
alterations, would enable those local preachers to pass creditably in
any congregation of sincere seekers of salvation, without exciting
ridicule from any. I have long thought that some of our ministers
study more to get up sermons to please such as are seldom seen in
our sanctuaries unless some popular preacher is to be the minister.
They go only when they expect to hear an elaborate sermon eloquently
delivered. Such do not attend the ministry hoping to be profited
thereby, but to hear how the preacher acquits himself. They may
be pleased when this is the prompting motive, but they are seldom
profited by the eloquence. It is a mistake to attempt to satisfy such
people, and those ministers who study hardest for this purpose,
though they may satisfy their fastidious hearers, are seldom instru-
mental in the conversion of many souls. The people are pleased,
and “ verily they have their reward .” Those who have been most
honored of God in the conversion of souls have not been the most
eloquent speakers, coming out with elaborately-studied discourses :
they have been plain men in their preaching, so that the most
unlearned could understand both the language and the doctrine.
Such whs the preaching of the Rev. William Taylor and Mr. Moody.
There was no high-wrought eloquence in their discourses, but
thousands of sinners were brought to trust in Christ for salvation
through their instrumentality. God does “by the foolishness of
preaching save them that believe” (1 Cor., i., 21); and lie “hath
chosen the weak things of this world to confound the mighty.” (1
Cor., i., 27). From what has been said it will be observed that I
am persuaded that one great cause of the want of success in the
salvation of souls is the absence of pastoral visiting. When that is
regularly performed in a right spirit, it keeps the Divine fire burning
on the altar of the hearts of the children of God, and also increases


the number of attendants on the ordinances, which bring them under
the influence of the Gospel ministry.
In reference to much study in the preparation of sermons, it has
been said of great revivalists, such as the Rev. William Taylor and
Mr. Moody that they require but few sermons because they stay only
a short time in one place. Admit that; but even their few sermons
are of the most simple, evangelical character, which shows that these
eminently useful men do not study greatness , but usefulness.
Granting that they require but a few sermons because they often
remove from one locality to another, the same may be said to a
certain extent of all our ministers, as according to the rules of our
Church they must be removed frequently from one circuit to another.
This meets the case; for the same sermons which are preached in
one circuit may be equally as suitable to the wants of the people of
another, so that much time need not be spent in getting up new
sermons, so as to deprive the people of pastoral visiting.
With regard to this important subject, I know a minister of
another denomination who preachrd once a month at a village several
miles from his cure. The day before he held his monthly service,
his rule was to visit every house where he had a friendly reception,
whether they belonged to his own Church or not. He was much
respected in consequence of these friendly visits, so that at the
public services he had very large congregations of people holding
different opinions as to the non-essentials in religious matters. If
the practice were more general with the ministers of the Gospel of
Christ, lam persuaded that great good would result therefrom. This
practice would take studious ministers from their closet studies, but
without it the work of God will not prosper in the salvation of souls.
Ho not some of our ministers spend too much of their time in quali-
fying themselves for the pulpit, to satisfy fastidious people who are
seldom 'profited by their ministrations ? and do not some of them
devote too much of their time to philosophical and secular subjects ?
The ministers of Christ should “ give themselves continually to prayer,
and to the ministry of the word. It is not reason that they should
leave the word of God, and serve tables.” ( Acts vi., 2,4). I have
no doubt if the rule of pastoral visiting were returned to again as it
was practiced in Mr. Wesley’s days, and all his usages and rules
were followed and carried out as they were by him, and if conformity
to the world, which he condemned, were banished from our Church,
the “connecting link” would in a great measure be restored,
prosperity would again attend the ordinances of religion amongst us,
and many would be added to our Church such as would be eternally
saved.
On 24th of last May (1879) there appeared in the Weekly Advocate
an article under the heading of “ Notes on Preaching.” With much
of that article I fully agree, and think it is worthy of deep con-
sideration, as it contains suggestions worthy of being acted upon.
The editor says :


“ No previous age has furnished so large a crop of man-made preachers.
The demand for clergymen is great, and they must be forthcoming, and
therefore have to be manufactured by the score every year. As in all
things made in that way, a good deal of bad material is made up in the
newest fashion, and it is the ‘cut,’ not the quality,that sells the article. If
anyone doubt our word, let him listen to half-a-dozen men that have come
from the same seminary. There is one narrow circuit of subjects, the
same texts, the same doctrines, the same definitions and proofs; often the
same voice, gesture, and vocabulary. Our dislike to this is intense. We
complain, first of all, that so much really good material is utterly spoiled
thereby. Some men of very inferior grain are thus veneered and passed
off as mahogany or cedar, when, if used as nature designed, they would
have been good deal tables, packing-cases, or other humble but serviceable
things. The very best material suffers in this clerical factory business.
An attempt is made to beat iron into leaves, as gold can be beaten, or to
use a piece of lead as if it were a diamond. The result in every such case
is a waste and a failure. A great charge still may be made. It is this —the
setting up an artificial and therefore a false standard of preaching. Instead
of seeing so many individual youths, great and small of all orders and
varieties, we have a dead level of performance, always wanting in freshness
and power. Many a youth has been by this means tempted to think him-
self called to preach, and has gone to live and die in the ministry, but not a
preacher. One might reasonably complain also of the false modesty or
downright sham of some persons who begin and end little pieces of
■plagiarism with petitions that the God of preachers would be to His humble
servant, mouth, matter, and wisdom.”
Every discerning person who has observed the progress of Methodism
for many years must perceive that this is a true picture of our
ministry. Not that all of our ministers belong to this class; for
still, by far the greater number of them are worthy to fill the
position which they occupy; but no one of any discernment can but
be convinced that in many instances this is a true and sad picture.
Our institutions for training ministers were established with a view
of improving the ministry ; but have they done so? Have we a more
efficient ministry now than before they were formed ? Is the number
of conversions as great now as before our ministers had such training,
when they went direct from their secular employments into the
ministry ? Our statistics will give the reply. With a vastly
increased number of ministers, and tens of thousands of immigrants
added to our population, many of whom were members of our Church
before they left their native land, we have a decrease in the number
of our members year after year. What is the cause of it ? Is. it
not a clear proof that our training institutions have not answered, in
these colonies, the end designed ? For a considerable time after my
arrival in this country there were but two Wesleyan ministers in the
colony, and they were both old men ; neither of them were of high
literary acquirements. One of them, namely, the Rev. George
Erskine, was an invalid from India, and the other was the Rev.
Samuel Leigh. The Rev. B. Carvosso was in Tasmania. These
were the only ministers of our Church who were in these colonies;
yet, with only these, our cause prospered more than with the number
of about fourscore who now labour in New South Wales and Queens-
land, There can be no doubt the rev. editor of the article quoted


from tlie Weekly Advocate (tlie only Methodist organ in this colony)
referred to one of the causes of the want of prosperity in our Church
when he said, “ Ministers have been manufactured by the score every
year, We complain that so much good material has been spoiled,”
at the academies. Had these young men gone directly into the work
of the ministry, as many of them were qualified for it by gifts and
graces which they had received directly from God, and burning with
zeal for the salvation of souls, would not the work of God have
prospered among us as it did when Mr. Wesley sent young men into
the work directly from their secular callings ? Have not by far the
greater number of the most useful of our ministers and missionaries
been taken from their worldly avocations and sent into the ministry
without any academical training for the purpose? Many among
both the dead and the living might be named. Many of these men
have so cultivated their minds after entering the ministry that they
have been fit to “ stand before kings.” I would say with the rev.
editor referred to that I “would not say a word against mind culture
at our institutions,” Avere it not that from observation I can but come
to the conclusion that some of our ministers Avho have been sent from
our academies to preach the Gospel never ought to have been set
apart for the work, and in other instances “ so much good material
has been spoiled.” Mind culture is good, but a good thing may be
carried to excess. This is the case with the minister when it so
interferes with his labours as to be a hindrance to his pastoi’al visiting
the people of his charge. I fear that this has been the case of late
years, so that by endeavouring to “ cultivate the mind to meet the
requirements of the advanced intelligence of this literary age,” the
duty of pastoral visiting has been neglected. Had the work of God
prospered in our Church since such attempts have been made to
cultivate the minds of our young ministers in the academies as it did
in the early days of Methodism, Avhen they went into the work of
the ministry direct from their secular duties, I should never have
written a word against the modern method of training them for the
work. Very recently we have had a proof in this colony that
elaborately studied and eloquently delivered sermons are not necessary
to the prosperity of the work of God in the salvation of souls. In the
Weekly Advocate of the 14th of January, 1879, there is a description of
a most wonderful revival at Taree. The writer of the article said,
u The sermons and exhortations were simple, yet pointed for decision.”
This simplicity does not mean vulgarity , but such holy simplicity as
is observable in the Scriptures, and may also be seen in Mr. Wesley’s
Avritings and the writings of many other learned and holy men; and
the “ pointed appeals for decision ” Avere not insulting to the sensi-
bilities of any unprejudiced person ; but they were most effectual in
awakening, not only the uncultivated minds, but the educated also
and those Avho move in the higher walks of society, some of whom
were brought to the knowledge of God, and obtained a sense of the
forgiveness of their sins, in those services.


Aii article appeared in tlie Methodist Recorder (England) of 4tli
July, 1879, in which the author condemns receiving young men into
the theological institutions who have not previously had an ordinary
school training. From what he says one can only infer that he is
regardless of the only qualifications which Mr. Wesley named as
requisite for the ministry, viz., “gifts, graces, and fruit.” The
editor says:—
“ Too large a proportion of the candidates for our ministry have been too
scantily furnished with the elements of an ordinary school education. In
the future of Methodism this state of things ought peremptorily to cease.
Our institutions are too costly, and the time and labours of the tutors too
valuable, to do the work which a School Board might better do.”
When this is the case it may he said “ The glory is departed from
Methodism /” Not that I believe the glory of Methodism consists
in an illiterate ministry; for no one would rejoice over an educated
ministry more than I, if the ofher and more important qualifications
ancompanied it. But when all those whom God has furnished with
gifts and graces for the ministry are debarred from the work because
they have not had an early school training, it is this which will cause
the glory to depart. Had this been the rule from the commence-
ment of Methodism, many , it might be said most, of those ministers
who have been the instruments in God’s hand in the conversion of
the greatest number of souls would never have been put into the
ministry of the Gospel. I could name several of that class who
have laboured in the Methodist Church within the last fifty years,
and more in the earlier days of Methodism. To the honor of that
class of preachers, I will refer to that eminently talented and useful
missionary, John Hunt, who exhausted a vigorous constitution in
successful labours in the conversion of Fijians, whose latest breath
Avas breathed out for the salvation of Fiji, where his body hoav lies.
Was there ever a more successful missionary to the heathen ?
He Avas but an illiterate farmer’s boy, and because of his Avant of
sprightliness his companions called him “ Farmer Jack.” In
labouring as a local preacher, his “ gifts, graces, and fruit ” Avere
discovered, after Avhich he Avas sent to one of our theological insti-
tutions, and thence into the heathen mission field, where he
laboured with such success that the savor of his name will never be
lost. There was also good John Spinny, Avho Avas taken from the
same cfiass of illiterates, without even a training in a country
school. For the want of such training, he was put under the
tuition of a circuit minister for a short time to be trained for the
public i ainistry. He also went into the mission field at Tonga,
where h e laboured successfully and exhausted a strong constitution,
after wt dch he returned to Sydney, where he lingered for a few
months in sickness, suffered and died. I could name several others
of that class who have laboured successfully in the Wesleyan
Ministry, with whose acquaintance I have been privileged; but let
these suft'ce for the present. Though these men rose from an
unedupatet 1 class, they were highly respected by every class of society.


But, according to the opinion of the Methodist Recorder, none of
that class should he taken into the ministry; for it says, in the
interests of Methodism, such should b q peremptorily refused admission
into the theological institutions to be trained for the ministry; surely,
then, they are not fit to be taken into the ministiy without it. By
such a course of action, many young men whom God has qualified
with “ gifts and graces ” for the work, would be consigned to com-
parative privacy during their lives; so that the world would be
deprived of the labours for which God had designed them. I wish
to be understood that I do not think lightly of high literary qualifi-
cations for the ministry of the Gospel, and I think that a man whom
God has qualified with natural gifts for such work, who has not been
favored with an early literary training, and who would not endeavour
to improve his mind by prayerful study, is not worthy of such a high
position in the Church of God, and in the last great day he will be
condemned as a “iviclced and slothful servant .” (Matt, xxv., 26).
I think it desirable that all whom God has qualified with “ gifts and
grace” for the ministry should be put into the work, whether
they have a literary training or not. If they have gifts and
grace , though they may be without even a School Board training
before they have been moved by the Spirit of God to preach the
Gospel, there will be but little reason to fear that they will not
improve themselves in literature so as to become able ministers of the
New Testament—men of whom no Christian Church need be ashamed.
From observation during a long life I have been satisfied of the truth
of the statement of the apostle, who said, “ Not many wise men after
the flesh . . are called : but God hath chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the vise.” (1 Cor. i., 26, 27). We do
not hear or read of a large number of the classically educated who
have been instrumental in the hand of God in producing great
revivals in His Church ; but there have been a few in all ages when
the Church prospered. Such were the Revs. George Whitefield, the
Wesleys, John de la Fletcher, Mr. Borrige, and a few others of the
same class ; so that God works both by the learned and “ unlearned
and ignorant;” but there was no display of classic learning in the
preaching of those great and good men- Those who have been most
honoured of God as being the instruments in His hand in producing
the greatest revivals in His Church have generally been in the mediocre
class, both as to preaching talent and culture of mind. When there
are gifts and grace in those who are moved by the Holy Ghost to
preach the Gospel, and it so happens that they have no theological
nor School Board training, they will by their own industry so
cultivate their minds as to answer the end which God has designed
to be accomplished by them, without spending the best of their days
in theological institutions, while they are imbued with the Spirit of
Christ and burning with a desire for the salvation of sinners. There
are but few in our congregations who are not satisfied with any but
classical preachers. The multitude will generally receive good plain


preaching, such as is generally the means of awakening sinners to a
sense of their need of salvation. The fastidious may be pleased to
hear an eloquent, learned minister preach an elaborately got-up
sermon; but, if we may judge from their subsequent conduct, there
are but few of that class whose hearts are affected. They too often
listen to judge of the ability of the minister, but not with a desire
to get spiritual good. An eloquent sermon is to them “as a
very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well
on an instrument: for they hear the words, but they do them not.”
(Ezekiel xxxiii., 32). Such hearers cannot hear charitably such
homely sermons as were preached by the “unlearned and ignorant”
Galileans, though such sermons come from hearts imbued with the
spirit of Divine love, which often bring down Pentecostal showers of
grace. The work of God has not prospered in our Church of late
as it did before we had the theological institutions for training
ministers ; so that if a more learned ministry is not the cause of the
absence of prosperity, it is evident that it does not produce it.
The Methodist Recorder said : “ Our Theological Institutions are
too costly, and the time and labours of our tutors too valuable, to do
the work which a School Board might better do,” &c. It appears
from what is said in the Recorder that the cost of the institutions is
astounding, and I cannot conceive of any benefit to be derived from
them that will be adequate in any degree to counterbalance the cost
of erection, the yearly expense of supporting them, the withdrawing
of ministers from circuit work as tutors, the keeping young men for
years at the institutions from entering upon their labours as preachers
of the Gospel, with other considerations. I make the following
calculations from the Recorder , which says : “ On the recommendation
of the Committee of Review in the English Conference, £IO,OOO
were laid aside to be devoted to the special object of building a
Theological Institution at Birmingham, and the friends in Birming-
ham District have guaranteed a further sum of about £7,000 towards
the building ;” and that “two years must elapse before the building will
be fit for occupation.” The editor further adds that “ the annual cost
of the institution at Birmingham cannot be much less than £5,000.”
This institution is the fourth of the kind to be erected for the purpose.
Calculating upon the data of the cost of this institution the cost of
the four, we may consider that the cost of erecting each of the
buildings will be £17,000, making a total of £68,000 ; add to that
£5,000 a year to support each of these establishments, and the yearly
cost for this purpose will amount to £20,000. By adding the yearly
interest of the £68,000 to the £20,000, what a number of ministers
would this support on circuit duty! Then again, what a number of
the most talented and most highly educated of our ministers are
taken from circuit work, to be confined to the institutions as tutors!
What a loss this is to circuit ministrations! It is incalculable!
In addition to this, there will be the keeping young ministers from
the work of circuit duties from one to three years, while they are at


the institutions, during the most valuable part of their lives both
physically and'religiously. Then again, there is the injury which it
does some young men by making them pedants; and the “ manu-
facturing ” others without gifts for the work into ministers in these
institutions, as has been described in the Weekly Advocate , to which
I have already referred. What is there to counterbalance all this
enormous expenditure of money, the loss of ministerial labours of
the tutors in the circuits, and the loss of the circuit labours of the
young ministers while they are at the institutions ? I can conceive
of nothing which could not be better supplied by other means. A
more highly educated ministry may attract a more refined congrega-
tion ; but will there be more conversions from nature to grace ?
It has been said that by studying at our theological institutions
our young ministers are trained into good methods of thought, which
they would not acquire without it. Experience in the past has
proved that such methods can be acquired without going to these
institutions. There have been not a few young men of piety and
talent who have been put under the tuition of judicious ministers in
their circuits, where they have been efficiently trained to a regular
system of study, without preventing them from performing the duties
of a second minister of a circuit, while they have been acquiring the
necessary rules of study. The Eev. John Spinny was one. According
to report, not a few of our young ministers have been injured in their
souls while they have been at the theological institutions. This
opinion is borne out by an article in our Sydney Weekly Advocate,
which was published May 4th, 1879, and by other facts. There
is a danger of inflating not a few with vanity at their acquirements,
so that they come out pedants. It has been said by some who have
had opportunities of judging that some who have gone into these
institutions imbued with the mind of Christ, and burning with a
desire to save souls, have come out of them puffed up with vanity.
It appears also, from report, that not a few who have been sent to our
institutions have been such as should never enter the ministry, because
they were not endowed with gifts for the work. Those are they of
whom the Weekly Advocate says, they have been manufactured into
ministers by the score every year, but have not been made preachers.
A mechanic could as easily make a mahogany table out of a deal
board, as a man who has not natural gifts for preaching could be
made a Gospel minister; and where God has endowed men with
gifts for the ministry of the Gospel, if they have but a fair chance of
improving their minds, they will raise themselves to the position for
which Nature’s God has designed them, without academical training.
Man is like water which comes from a spring : the channel through
which it flows may be stopped, but it will rise to the level of its
source. There have been but a few of the thousands who have been
taught in the highest seminaries of the world who have been raised
to a very high standard among the learned. Most of those trained
in these high institutions have lived and died without ever having


raised themselves to any notoriety or particular usefulness through
their high classic training ; and those few who have raised themselves
from the colleges of learning would have raised themselves if they
had lived under less favourable circumstances. Numbers of both
ministers of the Gospel and laymen, who had no theological training,
hsve by their own studious industry so improved their minds as to
rank among the most learned of the nations of the earth. During
the first century of Methodism our ministers were sent into the work
in that state of mental acquirement in which they were found as soon
as it was impressed on their minds that it was their duty to “ preach
the kingdom of God.” (LuJce ix., 60). And while the work was
thus conducted it went on increasingly and prospered much more
than it has done since. Nor was there the leakage , that after tens
of thousands had been added to the Church there was a decrease in the
number of accredited members from the preceding year. Many of these
“ unlearned and ignorant men ” who were put into the ministry at
that time became great in the Church of God, where they held high
positions with credit to themselves and usefulness to others, and
were an honour to the Church of which they were members. Such
was the Rev. John Stephens, who was elected President of the
Methodist Conference about the year 1826. He went into the
ministry from one of the most uneducated classes in Cornwall, who
were derisively called by their neighbours, “ The Gossmore Streamers.”
Though brought up among that classs, he so improved his mind
without entering any seminary .of learning that he was elected to
an office which no illiterate man would be permitted to occupy. I
could name several others of our ministers in those days, whom God
raised up from the same class of men ; and though they were not raised
to the Presidency, they held honourable positions in the Church.
Not only as Gospel ministers will men who have not been favoured
with an early school training raise themselves to positions of honour
in the literary world, but numbers of laymen have done the same—l
think as many if not more in number than those who have been
taught in the highest institutions of literary learning. I will name
a few of them as examples : There was Dr. George Smith, of Cam-
borne, Cornwall, who was but a common mechanic. By his studious
industry he became the author of several most learned theological
works, which were highly commended by some of the greatest
reviewers, one of whom said that “he was the greatest theologian
of the day.” There was also Samuel Drew, the great mathematician,
who for several years after arriving at manhood obtained his living
by labouring with his hands as a shoemaker, but for many years after
that he was the editor of the Evangelical Magazine. When once
asked how he acquired so much literary knowledge, he replied, “ The
Lord gave it me on my cobbling stool.” There was Dr. Kitto, who
was the son of a drunken stonemason, at which trade young Kitto
laboured. In this occupation he remained uneducated until he lost
his hearing by an accident, after which he never heard a sound.


After this, by his own energy and industry, he became one of the
most learned writers on Scriptural subjects, so that as long as the
English language may be used as the language of a Christian people
his works,will be held in high estimation by the greatest Divines. I
could name others who rose to eminence as literary men by their
own industry and studious habits; but I need not do this to remind
those who feel an interest in literature and literary men, as they will
call to memory those worthies without my referring to them by name.
I have been told that those whom I have named, with some others,
are but a few of extraordinary talent out of the multitude. The same
may be said of those who have been famed for their literary acquire-
ments and labours from the various colleges of the world. I am
fully persuaded that there were more men of the last generation who
raised themselves to literary fame, without having been taught in a
high literary institution, than all who have become noted for their
literary acquirements and fame who have graduated in the highest
colleges of learning.
Though I write thus, let no one suppose that I am averse to
mental improvement in any way, if such a course of studies do not
interfere with labours of greater importance ; for I should like to see
every youth get at least a good School Board training, and a higher
literary acquirement where it does not interfere with labours of
greater importance to the person and the community. Even a com-
mon School Board training in many instances removes the debris
from the avenue of the sonl, so that what may be concealed under a
rough exterior may have free egress from the chambers of the mind.
A common School Board training capacitates the possessor to under-
take and manage a business establishment efficiently, which he could
not do without it. Such a training has opened a way for many into
comfortable situations, where they acquired respectability and wealth.
But lam not one of those who think that scholastic training will
make a community honest and honourable. Where evil propensities
are in the heart, it will take something greater than school training
to eradicate them out of human nature. A fifty years’ experience in
this colony, during a portion of which it was a penal settlement, has
convinced me that there are as bad among the educated classes as
there are among the most unlearned. A great number of convicts
were sufficiently educated to be thereby qualified to conduct any
ordinary business, and I could name some of the vilest murderers
who were hanged in this country for murder, one of whom had been
a captain of one of his Majesty’s ships of war; but I will not harrow
up the most painful feelings of the friends who may be still living, by
bringing their names conspicuously before the public again. Scott
(Moonlight), lately executed, was one of that class. With my know-
ledge of this, I will still say, Educate the young; otherwise, many
who have the capacity for rising may never be in a position to rise.
Of late years it has been very perceptible that our Church has
drifted into worldly conformity, by publicly presenting testimonials


to our ministers when they are about to leave the circuits in which
they have been labouring. I believe the practice in a Christian
Church is of comparatively recent date. I never heard nor read of
anything of the kind till about thirty years since. It appears that
it has been adopted from a worldly custom which is expressly for-
bidden in Scripture. There is not one passage in favour of it, and,
as far as inference goes, our Lord totally condemns giving special
honours where only a duty has been performed. (LuJce xvii., 7-10).
When God qualifies man by special gifts for special work, he does
but his duty if he performs it to the best of his ability; hence, there
are no works of supererogation which merit honour to the minister
more than to the chapel-keeper, if he perform his duty faithfully.
God, in His justice, will reward every man who labours according to
the ability which He has given Him. The same commendation was
awarded to the man of humble abilities, whose pound gained two
pounds, as to him who gained ten pounds. The “ Well done” was
pronounced on each alike. When special honours are conferred on
one who does but his duty, while others who have been equally faithful
in the performance of theirs have not the same honours conferred on
them, there is an injustice shown to both : to the one, because he did
but his duty, and to the other, after he had performed his duty,
because he had not the same honours conferred on him.
Such testimonials are no proof that a minister has been eminently
useful in the Church, nor that he is a favourite with the people
generally. The first testimonial which ever I knew to be presented
to a Christian minister was to one who had made himself particularly
offensive to a large and influential number of the members of the Church
in the circuit in which he laboured. He very nearly drove those mem-
bers out of the Church of their choice. Since then, those members have
shown their attachment to the Church by being its principal sup-
porters. Be it known that no charge morally or against the Church
rules could be brought against them; but that they desired to
conform to the rules which Mr. Wesley made binding as far as he
could by his Poll Deed on his followers to the end of time. The
minister had a small party, who presented him with a teapot as a
testimonial of their favour, at a meeting where speeches were delivered
in his praise, and, of course, censuring those who had (as perhaps)
they thought refused to receive his ministry after he had been in the
circuit three years. An opinion may be formed as to the small
number of his supporters from the circumstance that eight out of
eleven of the local preachers in the circuit were left off the plan
because they were offensive to the minister. Of course, a like pro-
portion of the other members shared the same fate. From this
unhallowed commencement of presenting testimonials to the Wesleyan
ministers has arisen an almost universal custom in our Church in
this colony. It often proceeds from the same cause in secular
communities. When a gentleman has made himself particularly
offensive to a large number of the people, there will be a party, which


may be but few, who will honour him with a testimonial; for, bad
as a public man may be, it is a very rare instance if there be not a
few who will zealously support him, while some who are more worthy
of recognition are permitted to leave the district without the honour
of a testimonial; so that as a rule, both in the Church and in the
secular world, a testimonial is no proof of merit. It proves but one
thing, and that is that the person has a party of supporters, whether
he is good or bad. Holding such views, I can but oppose the
presentation of testimonials to Christian ministers. lam not aware
that the practice is so generally followed by any Christian Church
as by the Wesleyans of these colonies. There may be isolated
instances, but I have never heard of them. Nor have I been able
to learn that it is done by Wesleyans in any other part of the
world. If Christian ministers were never presented with testimonials,
it would prevent a show of partiality and unpleasant feelings, in
which there is an apparent censure upon those who are not
honoured with such a recognition.
There is another custom in our Church, which is very common,
though not of so recent origin nor so much in accordance with
worldly courtesies as the presentation of testimonials, which is, the
inviting of ministers from one circuit to another, when, according to
our Church rules, there must be a change; and, though this is not
so objectionable as testimonials, I can but believe that the “ more
excellent way ” would be for the members of every circuit to commit
their cause to God by faithful prayer, and leave the appointment of
the ministers to the Stationing Committee “ as the ministers of God
for this purpose.” If this were done, I have no doubt God would
so influence His servants in the appointment of the ministers as
would tend most to His glory and the salvation of souls. I have
known some very unhappy appointments both in the choosing of
ministers and circuits. It has been said that this would be right if
every circuit would follow such a rule ; but if some circuits invited
ministers and others did not, the circuits which did not, would labour
under a disadvantage. I cannot think so; for, if the members of
any circuit were to faithfully commit their cause to God, He would
so influence the Stationing Committee as to counteract the influence
of those who take the cause into their own hands. Prom the custom,
it appears that in this our Church members have no faith in prayer,
and that they are afraid to trust their cause in God’s hands, lest He
would not do what is best without their interference in the matter.
It has been said that Mary, Queen of Scotland, said that she was
more afraid of John Knox’s prayers than she was of the
army of her enemies. This Queen had more faith in the prayers
of one good man than all the members of our Church who are afraid
to trust their cause in God’s hands. Though these invitations are
generally sent by the Quarterly Meetings, they are not always in
accordance with the wishes of the majority of the people. I remember
one instance when the Circuit Stewards took upon themselves to


write to the Conference, objecting to the appointment of a minister
who had been appointed by the Stationing Committee, whom, they
said, “ the circuit objected to when I believe they consulted no one
but each other. According to their view, they were “ the circuit .”
I have known some of our most earnest and useful ministers objected
to by circuits because their preaching talents were not of the highest
order and their sermons elaborately got up, because they spent much
of their time in visiting the people. These ministers were beloved
by the majority of the people and were instruments of much good
among them; but as a few of the fastidious wanted more flowery
preaching, they were rejected. I repeat, that if the people faithfully
committed their cause to God, without personal interference with the
Stationing Committee, I have no doubt God would so influence their
hearts that such appointments would be made as would tend most
to His glory in the salvation of souls, though they might not always
be in accordance with the wishes of a majority of the people.
Of late, not a few have been opposing the removal of our ministers
from one circuit to another, according to Mr. Wesley’s rule. From
observation, I have been led to the conclusion that nothing can be
more conducive to the prosperity of the work of God than that
arrangement. I see many reasons for this opinion: First, should
any unpleasantness arise between the minister and the people, if they
are reasonable, they will bear with each other’s supposed imper-
fections for the brief period till a change will be effected according
to rule; but if the minister be permanently appointed, it is very
likely to produce a rupture, or it will fester in the feelings till it
becomes an ineurable wound. I presume none will deny that “ there
are diversities of gifts ” possessed by our ministers. Some are great
preachers and have an attractive influence over a certain class of
hearers ; but they are not remarkable for awakening the unconverted,
nor are they systematic in their arrangements for Church govern-
ment ; hence, while they may be useful preachers, the Church suffers
for want of system if they are in positions for ruling in the Church.
If in their government they have no system and are without rule,
the cause cannot be carried on successfully. Others, though they are
not what critics would call great preachers, are particularly instru-
mental in awakening the unconverted and leading them to Christ;
but it may be that neither of these have any tact for Church
government, and unless some one succeeds them who -has the gift of
building up and establishing in the faith, their work is like a rope
of sand. This was the case to a great extent in reference to Messrs.
Wesley and Whitefield. Though Mr. Wesley was a great and useful
preacher, in awakening sinners, I am persuaded that no unprejudiced
person, who is acquainted with the history of these great and good
men, will deny that Mr. Whitefield’s preaching produced the greater
effect on the multitude than Mr. Wesley’s ; but through Mr. Wesley’s
systematical government, his societies have extended, and are still
extending throughout the world ; while Mr. Whitefield’s Church has


made little or no progress, so that his successors are rarely,
to be found. In the diversity of gifts, every gift is good —yea, very
good —in its place, and by a frequent change of the ministers every
circuit is benefitted by the gifts of each, "which is not the case when
a minister is permanently settled in one chapel or circuit.
The old Methodists will remember that from thirty to sixty years
ago it w r as a rule to settle the Chairman from year to year successively
for an indefinite period in the same District in these colonies. The
senior ministers generally held that post of honour for several years
without a change. This was felt, especially by some of the ministers,
to be a great evil in some cases, for want of a proper system in carrying
on the work, because not a man could be found who was in every
way qualified by nature and grace to rule the affairs of the Church
in all its departments in the most excellent way. Some excelled in
one thing and some in another, and so the reverse. Where one
failed another excelled, and so, by frequent changes, the Church
would have derived the benefits of the excelling gifts of all. As I
had opportunities of observing the ruling of several of them, who
were all but perpetual Chairmen, I presume no one can reasonably
charge me with unreasonable assumption if I name wherein each
excelled or was defective in superintendence. There was one whom
I highly esteemed for his energy and zeal in the cause of God, who
was a most awakening preacher and a comforter of the mourner also.
As a useful minister, he excelled in all points ; but he lacked system
in government, hence the cause suffered for want of rule. There was
another who was a good preacher, but whose ministrations were not
so effectual in awakening the unconverted; but he was systematic
in his arrangements and governed by rule. As such, he was very
useful to succeed such as the former, to conserve the good effects
which the other had produced by his preaching. Each excelled in
his own way; but neither of them could accomplish the work for
which the other was qualified by gifts and grace. There was another,
who was an even-going Christian minister, but did not excel in any
department of the work of the ministry ; and there was another, who
was a good preacher and generally acted with much energy, and in
most things he acted in his government by rule, but he was not firm
in carrying out discipline when anything unpleasant stood in his
■way. As I have not named the ministers whose talents I have
endeavoured to describe, I think no one can charge me with being
invidious, as no reasonable person will claim absolute perfection. I
see no harm in giving the names of the ministers whose government
I have had opportunities of observing. They are as follows ::—The
Revs. William White and N. Turner, in New Zealand; in this
colony, Revs. George Erskine, Joseph Orton, John McKenny, and
last, but not least, W. B. Boyce; all of whom but the last named
have gone to receive their reward. Each of these had some gifts
adapted for the work to which they were called, and I judge that
none excelled in every department. But by frequent changes the


talents of all would have been utilized to the full extent of their
qualifications for the work to which they were called.
I perceive by an article in the Weekly Advocate of 9th March,
1879, that the New Zealand Conference was led to the consideration
of, and an attempt to suppress, what many think has been, and still
is, an increasing evil in the Church, which is, tobacco smoking.
The author of this article called it “ a liliputian evil.” He said,
“ This is the first pronouncement of colonial Methodism against
tobacco,” and he hoped it would be the last. So says the Wesleyan
organ in New South Wales ! I wish that every Wesleyan Conference
would follow the example of New Zealand, as I can but think it a
gigantic evil. Though it is the first attempt to suppress the use of
tobacco in these colonies, it is not the first in Methodism. What
did Mr. Wesley mean when he made it a rule for ever for his followers
to ask every candidate for the ministry if he smoked tobacco ? Was
it not indirectly a prohibition of the practice ? and anyone who will
leave it off for a short time in order to answer the question in the
negative, with the intention of resuming it again after he has passed
his examination, is guilty of hypocrisy and perjury. Many and great
are the evils connected with the habit, and in but a very few instances
is any good to be derived from the practice. It is not necessary to
name all the evils which are connected with the habit to show that
it is not a liliputian but a gigantic evil. I will refer to a few of the
many evils which the practice is productive of. In the first place,
the breath of the smoker is very disagreeable to most people who do
not use it; and a smoker cannot enter a room without contaminating
the atmosphere and making it sickening and disagreeable to many.
Then again, many of the smokers are in the habit of ejecting their
saliva wherever they go, thus casting of what nature has designed
should go into the stomach in an uncorrupted state to assist in
carrying on the digestion of the food. As it is a stimulant, the use
of it first excites, and afterwards depresses, the spirits; so that the
smoker requires to have recourse again to the evil habit to bring his
mind into an even state before he can contemplate on any important
subject. In proof of this, I heard a Christian minister say that he
could not study well unless he first had a smoke. The reason is
plain : By the frequent use of the narcotic, the mind is brought into
a morbid state, so that the thinking faculty is so debilitated that it
could not act its proper function without being excited by the
stimulant. Smoking deranges the mind, so that the smoker cannot
reasonably and solemnly reflect on the most important subjects, after
he has been confirmed in the habit, without having recourse to the
pipe. I remember when a man was condemned to be hanged in
Sydney, who, after his condemnation, was, according to rule, deprived
of all the comforts and luxuries of life, complained that he could not
bring his mind into a devotional frame, so as to be able to perform
his religious duties, “ for want of a smoke.” He did not complain
of the want of anything else. This was a clear proof of a mental


derangement, brought on by smoking tobacco. It is also a
greater source of idleness among the working people in the
country parts of this colony than any other. The men are in the
habit of frequently stopping to “ cut up their tobacco and
light their pipes,” and then sit dowu “to get a smoke.” This is
an utter waste of time, and it is an injury to both the physical and
mental faculties of the smokers. There is an article in the Town
and Country Jouanal of April 10, 1879, in which it is said that
“ Physicians, both at home and abroad, have come to look upon
the habit of smoking as of serious injury to the human system.”
Smoking is an inducement to drink, to supply the juices to the
stomach of which it has been deprived by spitting in the use of
the pipe. This often leads to the use of intoxicating drinks and
to drunkenness. There are many smokers who are not drunkards,
but it is a rare sight to see a drunkard who does not use tobacco;
and if the adage is correct, that “ birds of a feather flock
together,” the figure may be carried out with drunkenness and
smoking-. Another great evil in smoking is, in multitudes of
cases, that it leads labouring men to spend much of their earnings
in tobacco and pipes, while their wives and children are in want
of the necessaries of life. Another, and not one of the least of
the evils connected with smoking, is, after the habit is contracted,
there are but very few who have resolution enough to break it
off, which perpetuates the evil for life. I know many who have
seen the evil of it and have made many attempts to break it off,
but very few have fully succeeded. I might go on indefinitely
naming the evils which are connected with smoking ; but I will name
only one more, and if the advocates of smoking be not convinced of
the evils of the habit, “ neither will they be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead.” The evil to which I refer is the effect of
example, by which people, especially the young, are led into the life-
long evils connected with the habit. I know not of anything else
which has led so many into a pernicious habit which it is so difficult
to break off. By the example of confirmed smokers, youths by the
thousand have been led into the habit, which, in not a few
instances, has led them into companionship which has proved
ruinous to both body and soul ; for most of the vilest of men are
tobacco smokers. I will repeat that there are some good men
who smoke, whom I esteem for their good qualities; but, with all
their goodness, I can but say to each of them, as our Lord said
to the young man whom He loved, “One thing thou lackest.”
Since I commenced writing the preceding articles, I have seen
more than one article in the public prints on the subject of
pastoral visitation, by persons who have had opportunities of
judging of its beneficial effects. I will refer especially to one
which appeared in the Cornwall Gazette , in England, published
on the 16th July, 1879. In that paper there is a letter
referring to an address delivered to the students of Headingly


College by the Rev. Joseph Bush. I consider the subject
of that lecture of great importance, and the advice given
worthy to be followed by the young ministers to whom it was
addressed ; but the rev. lecturer gave utterance to some expressions
which I am sorry should have fallen from the lips of a Christian
minister. The person who sent the letter to the Cornwall Gazette
for publication said that the lecturer said :
“ The decrease of Methodism is owing to ‘ clerical conspiracy,’ and the
hack-bone of clerical conspiracy is visitation : caring for the people in
health and in sickness, and looking after the children. I know that this is
supplemented by gifts, but the main point is visitation ; steady, persistent
visitation. The influence is not likely to wane. How can we best confound
their device ? Only by counter conspiracy. A Methodist preacher who
arrives in a village in time to have a late tea, and sits with a well-to-do
farmer until service hour, not stirring out to see the poor members, forgets
the condition under which Methodism can be maintained. In addition to
preaching, the clergyman visits, and we must ‘ go and do likewise.’ ”
Whilst lamenting the envious feeling which prompted the Rev. Joseph
Bush to urge his hearers only by a spirit of antagonism, I beg to solicit the
favor of the insertion of the above remarkable acknowledgement attending
the work of the clergy conspirators of the Church among the poor. The
Methodist parson does not blink the matter; he does not “ beat about the
bush ” whilst “ teaching the young idea how to shoot.” Yours, &c.,
Observer.
The more charitable view in this matter of the conduct of the
clergy of the Church of England would be, that they visited the
people with a hope of promoting the glory of God in the salvation
of souls thereby, and not from an antagonistic feeling towards
any Church, which I believe is the prompting motive of many of
the clergymen of the Church of England. It is hut following the
example of the Wesleyan ministers of earlier days. This" was
their custom from fifty to seventy years ago; and not a few of the
old Methodists lament over the change which has taken place in
respect to this, and now the dire effect is seen, as Mr. Bush said,
in “the decrease of Methodism.” I perfectly agree with what
he said, except about the “ clerical conspiracy and I can but
lament with “ Observer ” the apparently “envious feeling-” which
prompted the lecturer to urge his hearers to a duty “ only by a
spirit of antagonism.” He should rather have rejoiced that the
clergy of the old Church had been awakened to their duty, and
that they had adopted the means which are likely to conserve the
members of their Church and be conducive of conversions to God,
and retain the children of members of the Church of England in
the Church of their fathers’ choice. Everyone who desires the
salvation of souls ought to rejoice in the exercise of any means
used by any and every orthodox section of the Church of God for
the furtherance of the Gosbel. The words “ clerical conspiracy,”
when applied to such a subject is language expressive of a feeling
which is quite contrary to the spirit of charity. St. Paul said :
“ Some preach Christ even of envy and strife ; and some also of
good will: The one preach Christ of contention , not sincerely,


supposing’ to add affliction to my bonds. What then ? notwith-
standing’, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is
preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice .” ( Philp•
pians i., 15-18). The example of the clergy of the Church of
England, as referred to by the Rev. Mr. Bush, is worthy of being’
followed by all orthodox Christian ministers, which should not be
considered as a u counter conspiracy ,” but an alliance of all
Christian Churches, under the Captain of our Salvation, against
the powers of darkness. True, as the Rev. Mr. Bush, said, “The
main thing is steady, persistent visitation —caring for the people
in sickness and in health, and looking after the children. In
addition to preaching, clergymen [of the Church of England]
visit, and we must do likewise.” This is a renewal of impressing
on our ministers the duty of pastoral visitation, which, if not
grown into disfavor, has been sadly neglected of late years. Had
this practice of our good old ministers, who are now receiving
their rewards, been followed, neither the English nor the
colonial Conferences would have had to deplore the loss of “ the
connecting link ” nor the leakage which the Rev. Dr. Osborne
referred in the English Conference of 1879. The rev. Dr. said :
“We have added this year upon trial 61,000 people. Surely this
shows that there is a mighty work of God among us, notwith-
standing the talk about class-meetings and all the difficulties
that were made about it. Nearly 24,000 of that total number we
have received since March. You have received after probation
40,000 new members, and that shows a spiritual activity and
Divine influence vouchsafed through our body. What we have
to consider is the leakage : it is the leakage which ruins us.”
After referring to the accessions, the rev. Dr. said: “ There is a
decrease of about 4,000.” This is a lamentable state of things,
which is justly deplored ! After allowing a reasonable number
for deaths’, emigration, and backsliders, there ought to have been
an increase of many thousands. There must be some great defect
somewhere. One might suppose that the cause of such a lamentable
falling off could be easily discovered. It is the duty of every
member of our Church to try to find out the cause or causes which
are so destructive and to endeavour to supply a remedy. Dr.
Osborne said: “ I think there is room for great improvement in
regard to the practice of diligent and systematical catechising in
our families, and in our schools, both day and Sunday schools,
and in the boarding schools to which we have access. The people
will be unstable because their understandings are less under the
influence of Divine truth than their emotions. The only remedy
for that, is to increase religious knowledge, and no means are so
likely to be effectual as the practice of catechising.” I fully
believe that catechism is good for increasing theological know-
ledge—that it is a kind of instruction which should not be
neglected,—that it is absolutely necessary for the leading-


members of the Church, and that no one can be properly qualified
for preaching the Gospel or to be an efficient class-leader, whose
mind is not to some extent instructed in theology; but, while
holding that opinion, I cannot think that theological knowledge
will be the principal means of stopping the “ leakage ” or sup-
plying the “ connecting linkfor who has not known some of
the most consistent Christians, and most devoted to the service
of God during a long life, even to death, of those who had but
little theological training more than they had received directly
from God ? while there have been many critics in theology, who
have been anything but ornaments to Christian society or instru-
ments of good to others. Thi9 has been seen many times in our
father-land. Those who most simply trust in the atonement of
Christ are more likely to be faithful to grace, so as to be preserved
from the “ leakage,” than those of stronger and more cultivated
minds, many of whom dive into the learned disquisitions of
theology.
Doubtless, there are more causes than one which combine to
destroy the work of grace in the heart so as to produce the
“ leakage ” complained of by Dr. Osborne, and which militate
against the union of the children of Methodist parents with the
Church of their fathers’ choice, which would form the “connecting-
link.” From long and attentive observation, I have been convinced
that the two principal causes, which are the parents of many others,
are, the absence of pastoral visitation, and indulgence in amuse-
ments which produce such feelings in the heart as are antagonistic
to the sacred influence of the Spirit of Christ. The rev. Dr. said
also on this subject: “ While God gives me strength to attend
this Conference, I shall never cease to repeat the cry which I
have repeated for thirty years—When Methodist preachers will
take pattern by the Romish priests, and take as much care of the
next generation in the Methodist connection as the Church of
Rome takes all over the world; when we have as fast hold upon
the young and are as careful to train them in our principles, the
days of decrease will be over. The Romans are our patterns,
depend upon it, in this respect.” The language of these leading-
ministers shows that they believe that the almost totally neglected
practice of pastoral visitation is one of the most important duties
which the Christian minister has to perform. The most profitable
pastoral visits are generally short and never without some con-
versation of a religious nature, and prayer wherever it can be
made admissable. The time of long visits will generally be spent
in unprofitable chit-chat; hence, to be profitable, they must be
generally short.
The amusements in which the young members of our Church in
this colony engage, falsely called “ necessary recreations,” have
generally been of that character which is calculated to dissipate
the saving- influences of the Spirit of God. lam persuaded these


have been the principal cause of the want of increase in the
number of our Church members. Not a few, even of the
Methodists, contend for these amusements on the ground that
they are necessary to refresh and invigorate both body and mind.
Nothing of the kind should be had recourse to which cannot be
supported by the example of Christ. The apostle Paul has laid
down an unmistakable rule for all professors of Christianity. He
said: “Be ye followers of me, even as lam of Christ. Let this
mind be in you which was in Christ. If ye have not the Spirit
of Christ, ye are none of His.” These passages show clearly
what our conduct should be in all the actions of our lives. No
professed follower of Christ should join in any exercise which he
has reason to believe Christ, as a mortal man, would not enter
into. When seeking recreation to invigorate either body or
mind, it should be sought in such engagements as will not
exhaust the physical strength nor render the soul less capable of
entering at once into the ordinances of religion with pleasure and
delight, as much as if he had come from the ordinance of the
Lord’s Supper. But this is not the case when professors of
religion seek relaxation from study in such amusements as only
gratify the carnal appetites of human nature. When a person is
“ born again ” —born of the Spirit —“ old things are passed away,
and all things are become new.” The apostle was very emphatic
when he said a Behold, all things are become new! ” hence, the
regenerate soul has no pleasure in such exercises as are included
in the u old things ” in which the unregenerate take pleasure, not
for the purpose of invigorating both body and mind, so as to be
better qualified for,the service of God as the sole end. If a soul
which has experienced regenerating grace take a pleasure in these
things, he is “ fallen from grace for he who has the mind of
Christ cannot take pleasure in any amusement in which Christ
does not delight. When anyone is so far fallen from grace as to
take pleasure in unchristian, not to say sinful, amusements, he is
prepared to take the next step, to sin against God. Even amuse-
ments which are not sinful in themselves may have a tendency
to prepare the mind for a departure from God. The first
indication of falling from grace is a desire after carnal pleasui'es,
which should be checked before it gains strength. The first
falling drop of water from an embankment may be the commence-
ment of a torrent which all the strength and skill of man cannot
resist, if not stopped at an early stage. Hence, the first indica-
tion of a decline in spiritual life must be checked in the embryo.
For want of attention to this, and not checking it before it gains
strength, I believe thousands who have sought and obtained the
pardon of their sins and a sense of God’s favour, have lost all
spiritual life; many of whom have become openly wicked, and
others have retained only a formal profession of Christianity.
Soon after my arrival in this country I was told by Methodists


who were here before me, that the indulgence in these soul-
destroying amusements was followed by some of the leading-
members of our Church in this colony before I arrived here, over
fifty years ago. I never heard of the indulgence in such amuse-
ments by members of our Church in England before I left it;
but from what I have heard of the changes which have taken
place since, I fear that the Methodists there have fallen into the
same errors, which, I have but little doubt, have been the cause
of the leakage complained of, through which tens of thousands
have ceased to be members of our Church; so that, with 61,000
in one year admitted on trial, there was a decrease of nearly
4,000 in the number of Church members from the preceding-
year. While the doctrines of Christianity which are contained in
Mr. Wesley’s sermons are preached by our ministers, people will
be convinced of sin and join our Church, as they did last year;
but until those soul-destroying amusements which are practised
by our Church members be abandoned, it will be a vain hope to
expect prosperity, as from that cause we shall lose the additions—
through the leakage complained of—both in England and this
colony.
From what I have said in reference to conforming to Mr.
Wesley’s rules, some may suppose that I contend for a stereotyped
conformity to them as left by him, without any alteration or
addition thereto. That is not the case. Methodism has arisen,
from its commencement, out of circumstances, from time to time,
so that Mr. Wesley did not adopt all his rules at once; for he
was adding to them to near the end of his life. His prejudices
in favour of the Church of England were so strong that the
bulwark could not be destroyed at once; but one prejudice gave
way after another until he had formed his Church as he left it.
Had he lived longer, I have no doubt more of his prejudices would
have given way, so that he would have made alterations in his
Church rules by adding- to them as circumstances suggested,
which alterations he left for his successors to carry out. I believe
he was specially raised up by God to stir up His Church, which
had degenerated into a lifeless form, and that he was so influenced
and led by the Divine Spirit as to establish such rules as would
be conducive to the invigoration of the Church of God; but I
believe that, whatever additions he might have made to his rules,
he would not have undone or altered any of the rules which he
had established.
I perceive by the minutes of the last Wesleyan Conference in
Sydney (1880) that it was proposed to engage a person as an
evangelist, to visit the people in their homes, not as the preacher
of the Gospel, but for the purpose of religious conversation,
prayer, &c. From what 1 know of early Methodism, this is quite
a different office in our Church to what were employed by Mr.
Wesley and long after his day. I know that, from fifty to


seventy years ago, all our ministers were expected to perform
such evangelical duties. Any who have entered the Wesleyan
ministry, who do not feel such labours to be their bounden duty,
have missed their vocation. Some of our ministers have resided
in districts for years without calling on but a few members of
their charge. If all our ministers were to return to their duties
and perform the duty of visiting as it was done in the early days
of Methodism, I have no doubt it would tend in a great measure
to supply the “ connecting link” and to stop the “leakage ” which
the Rev. Dr. Osborne so justly complained of in the English
Conference.
I see that there was published in the Royal Cornwall Gazette
of 23rd January last (1880) an account of a very interesting
meeting in Truro (England) to inaugurate a middle class school
for boys in connection with Methodism. I have no doubt it will
supply a want which has been felt by many parents; but there
was one circumstance in connection with the meeting which
much surprised and grieved me. It was said that “ the chairman
gave the loyal toasts, also prosperity to the Churches, and the
health of the President of the Methodist Conference.” There
were several toasts given, and it was said that “they were drunk
with great applause and much enthusiasm.” This was indeed
joining the Church and the world—a strange coalition of adverse
principles, such as I never expected to hear or read of in connec-
tion with Methodism. To say the least of drinking toasts, it is a
silly custom which can be productive of no manner of good, and it is
in conformity to a worldly custom which often leads to the sin of
drunkenness, particularly at public meetings. In proof of this, I
will refer to one instance of many of the like. On an occasion of
a visit of our Governor to a provincial town a dinner was given
in honour of his Excellency. Of course, all the loyal toasts were
drunk, in doing which I was told that the chairman of the meeting
got so drunk that he fell on the floor and lay in an unconscious
state under the table for a considerable time. Though I have
been acquainted with that gentleman for over forty years, I have
never known nor heard of him getting into such a state at any
other time. This is a proof that the habit leads to drunkenness.
If it did not lead to such an evil, the custom is worldly and in
opposition to the religion of Christ. Such an evil should be most
strenuously guarded against by all professors of Christianity.
Conformity to the world was most peremptorily prohibited by the
apostle Paul; and, as if to make the command more imperative,
he gave it both negatively and positively in one sentence. He
said : “Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed.”
(Rom. xii., 2). St. James said: “Know ye not that the friend-
ship of the world is enmity with God ? Whosoever therefore will
be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” (James iv., 4).
As soon as professors of religion join with the world in such ungodly


practices, it may be said of them, “The g'lory is departed!” Before
Solomon joined affinity with Pharoah he loved the Lord. (1 Kings
iii., 3). This was the first step from rectitude, which culminated in
gross idolatory. Good Jehoshaphat joined affinity with Ahab,
which led him into evil that would have cost him his life had not
God specially interposed in his behalf; but though God interposed
to save his life, to show His displeasure at the union He sent His
prophet to reprove him for his error. (2 Chron., xviii. and xix.)
His affinity with Ahab led to the most disastrous consequences
in his family. The association with the wicked family led to the
marriage of his son and heir with Ahab’s daughter, where he
imbibed the murderous spirit of the family, so that after his
father’s death he murdered all his brethren but one, who was
hidden by his nurse and so escaped the murderous hand of his
wicked brother. All these evils resulted from the unnecessary
association with the wicked family. During my connection with
Methodism as a member of that Church, for over fifty-five years,
I have known many instances wherein both young and old have
“made shipwreck of faith,” occasioned by unnecessary association
with the unregenerate and joining in amusements with them,
persuading themselves that such amusements as they followed in
company with the ungodly were harmless; but they were
destructive to the sacred influences of the Holy Spirit. The
children of God should be the “ light of the world ” and the “ salt
of the eai’th,” and they should use their influence so as to enlighten
and save the unsaved. But human nature is so prone to. depart
from God, even after the soul has been converted, that not
unfrequeutly the influence of the unconverted leads the regenerate
back into the world again ; and where there is not much watch-
fulness and prayer this will invariably be the case. These worldly
associations, and following carnal amusements, have been an
increasing evil among Methodists ever since I have known any-
thing of Methodism. The changes have been so great since my
first connection with that Church, that if they go on in the same
ratio for a hundred years to come, Methodism will be no more
like what Mr. Wesley left it than Romanism is like the Christi-
anity which the apostles established.
I will name a few of the changes which I have seen in
Methodism. The first is conformity to the world in dress, and
wearing of gold as adornment of the person. There is also the
plaiting and curling of the hair. In these colonies, the calling
of our places of worship churches instead of chapels or preaching
houses, as Mr. Wesley called them, which evidently sprung from
a vain desire to be like the old Church , to which most of our
nobility belong. Then followed the reading the whole of each
verse of our hymns, instead of reading them in parts according
to Mr. Wesley’s rule. Then again, now most of our Church
members sit during the time of prayer in our chapels, instead of


kneeling-, as was the rule. Our Church members have also joined
hand in hand with the ungodly in their recreations and amuse-
ments, which is in opposition to the command of God. The
apostle said, “ Come out from among- the ungodly, and he ye
separate from them.” This was a rule which was carried out by
the early Methodists according to God’s command; but of late I
have even heard cricketing recommended from the pulpit. Another
recent change is the singing of a hymn after the first prayer
without any part of it having been read by the minister, which
they call a chant . The music maj be as charming to the ear as
the music of an Italian opera to an English audience, and have
]ust as hallowing an effect on the hearts of the hearers—and no
more; as hut few of those who are without hymn-hooks can
distinguish the words sung-. Ido not doubt that these chants are
the insertion of the small end of the wedge by some of our young
people to bring- about the rule of singing all our hymns in public
worship without reading part of them. This has been already
contended for by some of the young members of our Church. In
many of our chapels there is a jig played on the instrument at
the 'close of the service to “march” the people out of the
sanctuary. The last, though not the least, that I shall name as a
modern change in Methodism, is the drinking of toasts at their
public meetings. It appears that there was not one u Daniel ”
in the meeting at Truro referred to who “would not defile himself
with the wine,” nor protest against the practice. Some of the
old Methodists now alive can remember the first introduction of
all these practices, with other unnamed chang-es. Most of these
have been introduced by our young “ manufactured ” ministers
in the Australian and New Zealand colonies. If all these changes
have taken place within the recollection of men who are now
alive, what changes may he expected within the next hundred
years? The introduction of bad practices is like the rolling-
snowball —they increase rapidly as time moves on. I have no
doubt the changes to which I have referred have been the cause
of the “ missing link ” and the “ leakage,” justly lamented over
by Dr. Osborne in the English Conference.
I believe we shall never have prosperity in our Church, with
corresponding increase in Church members as of old, until the
evil of such changes and associations be more generally acknow-
ledged and strenuously opposed by the leading members of our
Church. Not that Christians are bound to stand aloof from the
ungodly so as to have no intercourse with them: for to do this,
as the apostle said, they “ must needs go out of the world;” but
while Christians have necessary business transactions with those
who know not God in His saving power, the professed followers
of Christ should not conform to worldly customs which will retard
the progress of the grace of God in the soul, and the Gospel of
Christ in the salvation of sinners. The apostle commanded the


followers of Christ: “ Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God.” In regard to the drinking'
question, I am happy to say, that, as far as I know there is not
a Wesleyan minister in this colony who is not a professed total
abstainer. They see the evils which result from the use of intoxi-
cating drink to sucb an alarming extent that they feel it to be their
duty to use their influence to suppress such a monstrous evil.
Was there not one in the meeting at Truro who had sufficient
resolution to dare to protest openly, and singlehanded if necessary,
against such a dangerous wmrldly conformity as drinking toasts ?
Some have said that there would be no harm in drinking toasts
with di’inks which w r ould not intoxicate. That would not alter
the case in reference to worldly conformity, which is as peremp-
torily prohibited as drunkenness; so that to conform to the custom
with water is an infringement of a command of God, by following
a silly and useless conformity to a worldly custom which has
been, and still is, destructive to souls for w r hom Christ died.”
(1 Cor. viii., 11).
THE END.




