

■ f W 2.
V/ , *
f,
Mi'ctions on tin pitl] of J. %. frina llkii.
■■ '
SEE M O N
PREACHED ON
SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 2, 1862,
ST. MARKS, PICTON,
ON THE DEATH OF|H.R.H.
PEINCE ALBERT,
BY THE
EEY. JAMES CARTER, S.A.C.,
INCUMBENT.
jptotto bi |rrmission to fis ferllMi Sir |o.(m joung.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY G. R. ADDISON, 411, GEORGE STREET.
* .o -


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY G. R. ADDISON,
411, George Street,


HIS EXCELLENCY
THE BIGHT HONORABLE SIR JOHN YOUNG,
BAKONET, K.C.8.,
(loternor-in-Cpef of po Sout| Males,
THIS SERMON IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY
THE AUTHOR.




S E II M O N.
Eccles. xii. 7.
“ Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was : and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it.”
What a severe shock have we been called to sustain
within the last two or three days, by the startling
intelligence of the death of Prince Albert. It is an
event so wholly unexpected. There was nothing to
break the shock, no previous intimation of illness,
nothing to prepare us for it. As presented to us, what
an abrupt transition from life to death—from a palace
to the tomb! We are overwhelmed with grief, and
struck dumb by the blow. It is something too over-
powering to realize all at once. It seems a dream.
And yet it is not the less true; Prince Albert,
the husband of our beloved Queen, is dead. His
earthly sun has disappeared in meridian strength and
splendour. Our gracious Sovereign is now a widow,
and her children are orphans. What a spectacle to the
British nation, moving and touching its inmost heart.
England weeps at the loss it has sustained, and mourns
with the truest sorrow over the bereavement —the heavy
bereavement —of the Queen and her family. She is
enshrined in the heart of the nation, and therefore,


what brings agony and distress to her, brings agony
and distress to the British people.—A deep and tender
sympathy for our afflicted Queen pervades her wide
dominions. The God of nations and of monarchs he
very gracious and compassionate to our desolate Queen
—may she have abundant comfort and consolation in
the glorious Gospel of the Prince of Peace. Christ is
of untold preciousness to royalty as well as to the hum-
bler ranks of life. May mercy, and grace, and love,
irradiate and beautify this dark dispensation of Provi-
dence, and may the sorrow of England’s Queen be
turned into the fulness of joy.
The illustrious Prince Consort is dead. The widowed
Queen and her children mourn, and the greatest nation
in the world is in the attitude of mourning. What a
significant fact is this when considered in all its
bearings, at such a crisis as this.—With solemnity and
awe we cluster around the grave of the departed.
How much greatness, how much that is truly noble,
how much worth, how much goodness, is entombed
there ! All that is mortal reposes in the sepulchre—
we cover up in that grave all earthly greatness, tem-
poral dignity, and worldly pomp. But all that is
intellectually and morally great, and good, and noble,
is transplanted to a more congenial world; so that
though we mourn, yet it is in hope. “ Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it.” Eccles. xii. 7.
Living in times of perplexity such as these, there is
special need that we should pray fervently that this
6


national calamity may be fruitful of salutary results.
In the present posture of mourning, the British people
are in a frame of mind and heart best fitted for serious
reflection, repentance, and amendment. And God
knows our £ crying sins ’ and ‘ social evils ’ are many
and grievous, threatening impending ruin. At the
grave of this illustrious Prince may England be
brought to a consciousness of her short-comings, and
weep over them and forsake them ; then would this
sad stroke be over-ruled for wide-reaching good.
Yes, however startling, it is true, Prince Albert is
gone from among us, no more to return. A fatal
malady invaded the palace, and fastening upon him,
took him to his final home. Ho human skill availed
to save him. He sank under the ravages of a burning
fever, in the temperate climate of England, and in the
winter season. There is no escape from death; go
where we will, it follows. Ho rank exempts from its
piercing shaft. Prostrated by a malignant disease,
which no medical appliances could arrest, the energies
of life were dried up, and he closed his eyes
upon all the scenes, all the magnificence, and all
the pursuits of this world—and who shall describe
with whafc tenderness and affection he closed
them upon those nearest and dearest to him, especially
his Royal Consort, the Queen of England. Ah ! that
last gaze, that farewell look—who shall fathom it ?
But we must not intrude upon an exquisite sorrow.
There was bitterness in that tragic scene, there was
the natural struggle; but, we doubt not, faith was
7


triumphant in death. His eyes were closed in faith and
hope. Bright visions of the heavenly world lit up the
parting scene, and gave it an unearthly glow. Tem-
poral objects faded away and melted into nothingness ;
hut what of this, when eternal realities dawned upon
the expiring Prince ? The animating light of ineffable
glory, what a support amid the agonies of death !
Dying princes as well as dying peasants know that
Christ is all in all to mankind, and that the Cross of
Calvary is the only stay of the soul, the true centre
ot history, and the highest glory of the universe.
We may scarcely be half awake to the magnitude of
the stroke, so suddenly and so unexpectedly inflicted ;
but it will soon be practically felt. A mysterious
visitation of Providence has with little warning de-
prived the British nation of one of her most honoured,
exemplary, useful, and esteemed citizens—Prince
Albert. His position was unique. He stood next to
the throne by alliance with the Queen: and by rank
and elevation held the first place among English sub-
jects. And as he was first in rank, so he took the lead
in social influence. He was foremost in every good
and enlightened design. He had the best welfare of
the people at heart, and constantly exerted himself to
project and advance measures for the amelioration of
the social condition of the land. By his death, England
has lost an intelligent and experienced benefactor of
the most exalted rank.
This will call forth a profound grief among all
classes, and not least among the humbler grades of the
8


community. The British poor have lost in him a noble-
hearted friend, one who uniformly laboured to elevate
and improve them. Who can hesitate to believe that
the tears of the poor will prove a most pathetic testi-
mony to the worth and good qualities of that royal
Prince, whose premature removal we bewail with a
new-born sorrow, gushing from a wounded heart.
Humanly speaking, it is a premature removal, for
measured by time, the life of this excellent Prince was
a short one. When he died he was little more than
forty-two years old. But much had been compressed
within that comparatively narrow space. For fully a
half of that brief life time, he had been identified with
the English nation, having been the happy husband of
our gracious Queen nearly twenty-two years. He was
born on August 26th, 1819; married to Queen
Victoria on February 10th, 1840 ; and died on Decem-
ber 14th, 1861., This was but a limited earthly career.
After this striking example, who can presume on long
life ? What though we have health, strength, and the
gifts of fortune, is death on that account to be regarded
as afar off ? Go to the grave of Prince Albert, and
there dispel all such delusions. In the zenith of his
strength, and influence, and fame, lo ! his light is extin-
guished, and he descends to the cold grave. What an
impressive sermon is preached to the nation by his
early departure. What an affecting commentary does
it read upon the vanity and transitory nature of earthly
glory, and the futility of human calculations and
expectations. That man is poor and miserable indeed
A 5
9


who is only making provision for this life. He may never
want it. Eternity may suddenly hurst upon his view,
and what will he his dismay and terror when he finds he
has made no provision for it. We tamper with life, and
trifle with time, when we do not in our daily life look
heyond the grave, and base onr calculations upon a
measureless eternity. Do yon join in the general
mourning, and weep at the grave of a Prince snatched
away in the noon of life ? Listen to the response that
comes from that grave; remember how short your
time is; acquaint yourselves with God as your recon-
ciled Father in Christ, and supplicate earnestly that He
will so teach you to number your days, that you may
apply your hearts unto wisdom; if you have health,
and strength, and manifold blessings in the fresh morn-
ing or bright meridian of life, calculate not upon their
continuance, consecrate them all to the service of God,
redeem the time, keep heaven in your eye and in your
heart; rivet your affections and energies upon Jesus
Christ, let your powers expand and ripen by receiving
Him and His sanctifying Spirit; seek not for yourselves
great things in this shifting world, but seek for more
grace —fulfil your Christian work—do what you have
to do for God and Christ, your own souls and the
saving of a perishing world, with all diligence, and
zeal, and promptitude, while the day lasts; yes, in
this transitory scene, where one goeth away and
another cometh, pressing urgency is required ;
‘‘Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
10


nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” Eccles.
ix. 10. u Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow
we will go into such a city, and continue there a year,
and buy and sell, and get gain : whereas yon know not
what shall he on the- morrow. For what is your life ?
It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time,
and then vanisheth away.” James iv. 13,14.
It is now upwards of twenty-two years since the
marriage of the lamented Prince to the Queen; and
this forcibly reminds me with what amazing swiftness
time is passing away. After a lapse of more than
twenty-two years, we are now engaged in the sad act
of commemorating the death of the Prince Consort,
and the earthly severance of the marriage bond. More
than two months have passed away since the funeral;
at an advanced season, we are invited to take part in it
as mourners, bemoaning a national disaster; and, as
loyal subjects, giving expression to genuine sympathy
with our deeply afflicted Queen and her children.
Little did we think, when in this sacred house last
Sunday, that we should meet to day to join in a funeral
service for the Prince Consort; but so it is. Life is
full of strange vicissitudes—great changes come when
least expected. What we solemnize to day is a touching
instance of this. Doubtless our hearts are in unison
with the outward tokens of grief. None of us could
have heard with unconcern that Prince Albert was
dead. It was an abrupt and startling announcement
which, for the time put an arrest upon the usual cur-
rent of our thoughts and feelings. It must have
11


produced a mighty pause, and thrown us upon our
inward reflections. The language of our hearts must
have been something of this kind, —‘“Well, well,
what a slight hold we have on life ; how unsparing is
death, and how impartial isi his attacks. He invades
all places, all habitations, all ages, and all ranks.
Eternity is pressingly near; the great concern claims
my instant, my urgent, and my supreme attention and
regard.” When the shock first came we could not but
be powerfully affected. To have been indifferent at
such a moment would have been doing violence to the
emotions of human nature. Did we not, as it were, let
go our tenacious hold of the world ? But, unless we
follow them up with prayer and earnestness, such
feelings come and go without doing us any good. By
prayerful care and diligence we must endeavour to de-
tain, fix, and appropriate them, that they may become
lasting impressions, and active principles of living.
At any rate, whatever may have been the effect on us
individually, we know very well that the melancholy
intelligence has created a great sensation in this and
the neighbouring colonies. And I hope that we, as a
community, and as a congregation, share in it, and feel
that the death of so great and excellent a Prince, is not
only a bitter trial and bereavement to the Queen and her
children, but also a great national loss, which justly calls
forth a profound national sorrow. And I trust that God
will sanctify and bless this severe stroke to us, by mak-
ing it an occasion of softening and improving our hearts.
We are greatly in want of more tender feelings
12


towards J esus Christ and towards one another, both as
individuals and as a nation. Calamities like that which
we this day deplore, are eminently adapted by God’s
grace to open our hearts, to take away their hardness
and coldness, and make them susceptible of gentle,
tender, and loving emotions and springs of action.
May God open our hearts and draw them towards Him-
self in J esus Christ by godly sorrow, which worketh
repentance unto salvation not to he repented of; and
by faith in Christ as an all-sufficient Saviour, such a
faith as worketh by love and is faithful in all good works.
Yes, my friends, after twenty-two years we unite
this day in mourning for the death of the Prince
Consort, but as Christian mourners we mourn in hope.
I can very vividly recall the bridal day in February,
1840, when our Queen was married to the lamented
Prince under such auspicious circumstances. Through-
out the nation there was general rejoicing, and espe-
cially in London, where I then was, and participated in
the festivities of that joyous day. It is one of those
days of my boyhood which I can best remember now,
and go back to in thought and recollection. It was a
happy day and profitably spent. Hot only were good
things enjoyed, but good things were heard in harmony
with the gladsome event. The meaning and the les-
sons of that day were conveyed in a manner and tone by
intelligent Christian friends, which, without jarring
upon its festivities, made it not only a day of pleasure,
but of interesting instruction to the many English
boys and girls with whom I associated on that memor-
13


able occasion, which is deeply imprinted on my mind
and heart, and which within the last two days I have
recalled, and as it were lived over again with such a
melancholy delight. But I have again and again ashed
myself this weighty question,—Can it be credible—
yea, can it be possible, that more than twenty-two
years have rolled away since that well remembered
day, one of undying interest ? This day (March 2nd,
1862,) seems to border on that (February 10, 1840).
The space between appears like a floating dream. And
yet, in reality, twenty-two years have fully passed
away, and separate the two days, this and that, by a
large interval, and with it a considerable portion of life
is gone. I find it difficult to realize that lam twenty-
two years older than I was when our gracious Queen
was married to the deceased Prince; and yet so it is
with me, and with you my friends, as many of you as
were in existence then. So that life is rapidly passing
away , and the longer we live, the more quickly does
time seem to fly. Oh ! let us grasp it in its flight:
let us improve it while it lasts : let us part with nothing
so dearly as with time, for it is precious beyond all
price, and when once gone can never be recovered.
Past time we cannot buy back, that is wholly out of
our power. Let this stimulate us to buy up, and lay
out to the best advantage what remains. To some it
may be only a few remnants are left. Be this as it
may, let us for the future live while we live, up to the
full measure of life. God will in mercy and compas-
sion accept us, if without delay we seek him in Jesus
14


Christ with true repentance and lively faith. Postpone
not then the work of salvation. It is your chief work,
yea, your only work. If that is undone, all is undone
throughout a never ending eternity. God grant that
we may lay these solemn and soul-saving truths deeply
to heart. “ Behold, now is the accepted time—Behold,
now is the day of salvation.’’ “Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us: we pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye
reconciled to God.”
15


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY G. R. ADDISON,
411, George Street.
3 1508 00618837 4
