

Ai *. yjg'ag yyy
REGENERATION.
“YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN”—JOHN ill., 7
ADDRESSED TO ALL.
BY THE
RET. M. B. BROWNRIGG,®
w 7
® INCUMBENT OF ST. JOHN’S CHURCH, ®
/TMHk (Ml)
LAUNCESTON. W
He that cannot endure to lire to God, will as little endure to
hear of being born of God”— Owen.
Price, Twopence; or Is- 6d. per dozen, > $
f ®
SECOND THOUSAND.
Sold by Walch, Brothers & "Birchall, and Hudson & Hopwood,
Launceston ; Waleh & Sous, and William Westcott, Hobart Tow
{Tasmania :
J. S. V. TURNER, PRINTER, BRISBANE-BTREET, t/AUKCESTON
IH 1870




REGENERATION,
• .Jesus answered verily, verily, I say nnto thee, except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, be cannot enter into the kingdom of God. — John ill., 5.
Reader,
The doctrine of Regeneration (or the new birth) is
one of the most important in the Bible. It was taught by
our Lord to Nicodemus. It is clear, however, that Nico-
demus did not understand what Jesus meant when he de-
clared the need of being born again. He thought that
Jesus was speaking of natural birth, and the difficulty
at once presented itself to his mind, “ How can a man
be born when he is old,” To this Jesus answered.
“ Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born
of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot 'enter into the
kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh ; and that which is born of the spirit is spirit.”
It was as if he had said to Nicodemus, Supposing it
were possible for a man to be born again, in a natural
way it would not profit, for still he would be Jlesh, and
of the same nature as that from which he was born, for
“ that which is born of the flesh is flesh,” it can be
nothing else but flesh—a corrupt and sinful nature. It
is, therefore, of another kind of birth that I speak : a
spiritual birth—a being born of water and of the Spirit,
so that another and anew nature is produced, for “ that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit,”—is good and holy
like that which begat it; so “ marvel not that I said
unto thee, Ye must be born again.” Reader, it is of this,
new birth that I have somewhat to say unto thee. It
is a doctrine of world-wide application, and mbst neces-
sary it is that you should understand it clearly. May>
God help me to make it plain to you, and
you to know this truth savingly. It is a weighty state-
ment, that “ Except a man be born again he cannot see


the kingdom of God.” Now, before explaining this
doctrine of Regeneration, I would say a word as to the
meaning of the “ Kingdom of God.” The Kingdom of
God is that spiritual kingdom of which God is the King.
That kingdom is ruled by the laws of God. All who
are subjects of that kingdom, though their habitation is
in this world, have God for their King, and submit to
God’s laws. By nature, however, man is not a mem-
ber of that kingdom. He will not recognize God as his
rightful sovereign, nor will he desire, or try to keep
God’s laws. Before, then, a man can enter that king-
dom he must go through a certain change, called being
“ born again” —and “ Except a man be born again he
cannot enter the kingdom of God.” Of this change 1
shall now proceed to speak. It shall be my effort to
describe the nature of that change, and then show you
some marks by which you may judge whether you have
been t( born again”—and afterwards explain the reason
why such a change is necessary.
I shall speak, first, OF the change which Jesus
says is necessary before a man can enter the Kingdom
of God. In describing, in the first place, the natui eof
this change, I would have you distinguish it from what
is sometimes mistaken for it.
For one thing, I would have you distinguish between
Regeneration and Baptism. I say distinguish between
them, because Scripture teaches us that Baptism
and Regeneration are not necessarily connected.
I am aware that some hold the doctrine of Bap-
tismal Regeneration. I cannot but regard this
as a very dangerous doctrine If by Baptismal
Regeneration is meant, that baptism necessarily re-
generates the soul—that every infant or adult that is
baptised is necessarily there and then, by the act of
baptism, born again, within the meaning of our Lord’s
words, then I hesitate not to say that the doctrine has
no foundation in Scripture ! What the writings of the
old Fathers may teach upon this point I do not pretend
to know. This much is certain, their authority can
never be greater than that of the word of God, and the
writings of the Father, the Holy Scriptures, teach
no such doctrine. The Bible is the only safe guide in
doctrine, and (as our Article expresses it) “ Holy


Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation;
so that, whhatsoever is not read therein, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that
it should be believed as an article of Faith, or bo
thought requisite or necessary to salvation.” (Art viV
But if it be maintained that Baptism and Regeneration
are necessarily connected, and therefore that none are
to be esteemed regenerate who have not been baptized,
how then can you justify the apostle in saying “ I thank
God I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gains
and agrfin, “ for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel.” (I Cor. i., 14, 17.) If men could
not be regenerated, that is, be “ born again,” without
the act of baptism, then surely Paul had not good reason
for thanking God that he had baptized so few. The
possibility that slanderous persons might say that he
had baptized in his own name (when he had really done
no such thing) could not have been a sufficient reason
for his denying to souls that which were essential to
salvation, as it would be, if they could not be “ born
again” without being baptised. On this ground only
could he be justified, viz., if the act of baptism be not
essential to regeneration! And what saith the Scrip-
ture on this point ? In what light does it represent
baptism ? I answer in the same light as it represents
circumcision, viz., as a sign or seal. Speaking of the
faith which “ was reckoned to Abraham for righteous-
ness, the apostle enquires how was it then reckoned ?
when he was in circumcision, or in uncirumcision ?”
To which he answers “ not in circumcision, but in un-
circumcision. And he received the sum of circumci-
sion, a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he
had yet being uncircumcised.” (Rom, iv , 10, 11.) In
this same light does Scripture teach us to regard baptism
viz., a a sign or seal. And that one may have the sign
without the thing signified is most clear from Scripture,
“ for,” saith the apostle, “ he is not a Jew, which is
one outwardly ; neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; buf he is a Jew which is one in-
wardly ; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter.” (Rom. ii,, 28, 29.) And
again, “in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new reature .”


(Gal. vi., 15.) By which he means, that it will not
profit a man to say that he has been circumcised—his
circumcision cannot regenerate him ; he cannot claim
to be born anain unless his life attests the reality of the
change. Let it be remembered there was as much need
for the Jew to be born again as for the Gentile, before
he could enter into the Kingdom of God. And here,
let no one say I teach anything contrary to the views
of the Church of England. Ido no such thing. What
I have now stated is in accordance with such teaching.
And now that I have shown you that the Scripture
represents baptism as a sign or seal, I shall proceed to
show you that our Church also represents it as a sign or
seal. Take the case of adult baptism. When, in such
case, I ask, is the act of baptism administered ? Before
or after the expression of faith on the part of the candi-
date? Not before, but after it. The candidate is first
examined as to his belief. He makes a profession ac-
cording to the summary of faith drawn up for that pur-
pose, when he says, <e all this I steadfastly believe.”
Now, if his profession be not sincere, will anyone ven-
ture to say that the act of baptism will make it sincere,
and thus regenerate the soul ? I should think not;
but if the profession be sincere, it can be so only because
the soul is already “ born again then the candidate
receives baptism, not as the regenerating agent, nor
necessarily as the regenerating instrument, because, if
his profession be genuine, he is already regenerate, but
as a sign of the faith that he had before he was bap-
tized, and as a pledge to assure him thereof; then,
upon the faith of the sincerity of the profession the
minister proceeds to declare the man to be regenerate,
and gives thanks to God accordingly. It is plain, how-
ever, that such a declaration can only amount practi-
cally to a judgment of charity, for it is evident that if
the man be not regenerate, no declaration on the part
of the minister can make him regenerate. In this same
sense also must the passage in the Baptismal Service
for infants be understood That service is in ac-
cordance with the principle upon which all the
various services cf cur Church arc based, viz.,—
that all who use them are believers. Now as the sove-
reignty of God might give grace to an infant, at any


time, even before, or at the time of baptism, and as no
blessing is too high to expect for the child of a believer,
the declaration, “ seeing now that this child is rcnene-
rate,” can only be fairly explained to amount to the
expression of a charitable belief that that grace has been
already conferred. And as no man could take upon
himself the responsinility of denying it in the case ot
any particular infant, the safer course is adopted, viz., —
charitably to hope it of all. It is, however, most
important to discern between the siyn, and the thivy
signified. That the sign may be had without the thing
signified is awfully true ; and it is quite as true that
the thing signified viz,,—grace, may be had without,
through force of circumstances, the sign thereof being
actually received.* No soul will be lost simply on the
ground that it had not been baptized, and recognizing’
this fact our Church speaks of the Sacraments as being-
only “ generally necessary to salvation.” But let me
guard you against supposing that Baptism is an unim-
portant ceremony. We must never think lightly of any
ordinance that is appointed by Christ himself, though
we must be careful on the other hand not to advance it
beyond its due place. We must not give to it an
importance which has not been assigned to it by the
Lord himself. We must not make that essential to salva-
tion which He has not made essential thereto. Ido not
indeed deny that Baptism when rightly received (thatis
where there is faith on the part of the recipient) is a
means of grace, as well a sign of grace, but I do deny
that Baptism is of any saving value (no matter how
correctly administered) where there is no faith in
the recipient. Ido not deny that God may, and
sometimes does confer grace upon the soul of an
infant in Baptism, but I do deny that God’s grace
is so inseparably connected with baptism, that
every infant that is baptized is there and then
* We have an acknowledgement to this effect on the part of our Church in the
foot note to the “ Communion of the Sick,” thus “ But if a man, either by
reason of extremity of sickness, or for want of warning- in clue time to the
( urate, or for lack of company to receive with him, or by any other just impe-
diment, do iot receive the Sacrament of Christ’s Body and' Blood, the Curate
shall instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of his sins, and s’ edfastly believe
that Jesus Christ hath suffered death upon the Cross for him, and shod his
blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he hath thereby,
and giving him hearty thanks therefore, Ac doth cat and drink the Body and
Blood of our Saviour Christ profitably to his Soul's health, although he do not
receive the Sacrament with his mouth.


bound to be regenerated. I dare not limit the opera-
tion of the Holy Spirit to certain specified means, for I
find that the Holy Spirit can be received even before
baptism. I turn to the account of Peter’s visit to
Cornelius, and there read “ Can any man forbid water
that these should not be baptised which have received the
Ilohj Ghost as well as we? (Acts x., 47. Reader,
accept it as a great scriptural truth that you may have
been baptised, yet may not be “ born again.” Baptism
and Regeneration are not necessarily connected, there-
fore, if you would not commit a great error, be careful
to distinguish between these things.
Further, I would have you distinguish between
Regeneration and mere outward reformation. It is pos-
sible that there may be great improvement in a man’s
life, while there is no regeneration experienced. The
drunkard may give up his intemperance, the unclean
man may give up his licentiousness, the dishonest man
may renounce his dishonesty, and yet not be “ born
again.” It is possible, also, that a man may go further
than this, and not be “ born again.” He may be true
and just in all his dealings—he may be kind and ami-
able, and affable and courteous, —his conduct may be
blameless in the sight of man, he may even be doing a
great deal of good, may be remarkable for his abilities
or his gifts, or his usefulness, and yet not be “ born
again.” These are hard sayings, but reader, they are
true sayings. This outward reformation, this appa-
rently correct living may be accounted for, without any
foundation in the new birth. For instance, a removal
from the scene of temptation, an improvement in worldly
circumstances, or the natural growth in age may effect an
alteration in the conduct of a man —his integrity in deal-
ing may have no better foundation than the old maxim
that “ honesty is the best policy ” —his amiability and
affableness and courteousness, may be nothing more than
natural qualities bestowed upon him—his good deeds
and philanthropic efforts may arise from nothing more
than self-love—or desire of applause—or private ends
to be served. Now, Ido not say that this is the expla-
nation of every reformation in life. I would earnestly
trust that many a reformation has a better origin than
this. But I feci it to be a duty to guard you in this


point. I feel it to be a duty to warn you against being
content with an outward reformation —or taking an
outward reformation to be the same thing as regenera-
tion. I believe that many have no better foundation
for their hope of eternal life than the outward correct-
ness of their conduct. Reader, be not deceived by any
such thing. Every regenerate soul is indeed outwardly
but it does not follow that every one who is
outwardly correct is therefore regenerate. Keep this
distinction clearly in view. Do not regard Regeneration
and outward Reformation as one and the same thing.
Again, I would have you distinguish between
Regeneration and Religious Profession. There may be
a great deal of religious profession even where there is
no regeneration. A man may read his Bible—say his
prayers —attend a place of worship—be a communicant
—may be able to distinguish between truth and error—
may feel delight in sermon hearing—take a leading-
position in every good work, and yet not be “ born
again.” These again are hard sayings, but reader, once
more, I affirm, they are true sayings. I do not say
that these are not marks of a regenerate soul, but
1 do say they are not the best marks by which
to judge whether a soul be regenerate. Does not the
Scripture teach this ? What saith the Lord by Isaiah
concerning the profession of Israel ? —“ This people
draw near me with their mouth , and with their lips do
honour me, but have removed their heart far from
me .” (Isa. xxix., 13.) And what saith the Lord
by Ezekiel on this same subject ?—“ They come
unto thee as the people coraeth, and they sit before thee
as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will
not do them : for with their mouth they shew much love,
but their heart goeth after their covetousness.” (Ezek.
xxxiii., 31.) And what saith the Lord ?—“ Many will
say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not pro-
phesied in thy name ? and in thy name have cast out
devils ? and in thy name done many wonderful works ?
But then, in that last day, saith Jesus, “ I will profess
unto them I never knew you : depart from me ye that
work iniquity.” (Matt, vii., 22, 23.) Reader, with
these examples before you can you deny that there may
be much religious profession where there is no regene-
a 5


ration? On this point, I believe again, that many
make a mistake, and need be warned of their danger.
Religious profession may exist apart from regeneration,
and may be accounted for in quite another way. For
instance, the verdict of society would be directly against
the man that were to make no profession of religion,
and that might influence him to profess religion. Be-
sides this, early training and custom may lead one to
conform to the externals of religion, and so prone are
men to self deception that they readily take religious
profession as in itself a sign of regenei’ation. This is a
serious mistake. Every regenerate man, it is true, wil /
make a profession of religion, but it does not follow thatf
every religious profession proves a man to be regenerate.
Reader, if you would not fall into error on this point
you will keep the distinction clear between regenera-
tion and religious profession.
Once more, I would have you distinguish between
Regeneration and Sensationalism. There is a great ten-
dency towards sensationalism in the religion of the
present day. Many, it would seem, cannot wor-
ship God without all the accessories of elaborate
music, a gorgeous ritual, incense, banners, crosses,
vestments, processions, and the like. These things
may seem to some to be very harmless, but I
believe they are very dangerous Ido not deny that
there may be some religion in all this, as one says
“ where there is much smoke there surely must be a
spark.” I shall not say these things are not well
meant. Doubtless they are, but I do repeat the con-
viction that they are attended with much danger. To
say nothing of the unprotestant character of such prac-
tices, there is a tendency in these things to produce a
mere sensationalism too often mistaken for religion.
But while there is danger in this respect, there is as
much need to be upon your guard even under other
circumstances. During seasons of great religious ex-
citement many serious mistakes are likely to be
made. It is not well to judge of your state
under such influences. The case of the “ stony
ground” hearers speaks a solemn warning. As man is
constituted he is apt to be worked upon by what he sees
and hears, and then to overlook the possibility that strong


feelings may be nothing more than mere sensationalism.
Reader, again I say, if you would not fall into error on
this point, keep clearly before you the radical distinc-
tion between regeneration and mere sensationalism.
Having put before you certain things which, because
they look like it, are sometimes mistaken for regenera-
tion, I would now proceed to answer the question—
What is Regeneration. ? In what does it consist ? In
other words, what is it to be born again ?” I would
answeip that Regeneration consists in a new nature
given to man, called in Ezekiel xxxvi., 26, “ a new
heart,” and “ a new spirit,” it therefore consists in a
change OF heart — in such a renewal, that a man
opposes his natural views and feelings regarding sin and
holiness, and shews such opposition where it may be
shown in a hatred of sin and a love of holiness. And
so thorough is this change of heart that the man who is
regenerate, or born again, is called in Scripture “ a new
creature” (2 Cor. v , 17), and such terms as “ renewed”
and “ new man,” are applied to him (Col. iii., 10). How
this great change is effected no one can explain ; it has
not been disclosed to man. This is one of the secret
things which belong unto God, and avc must not at-
tempt to be wise above that which is written. But the
great agent which makes this change is God the Holy
Spirit. Therefore it is that the man who is regenerate
is said to be “ born again, not of corruptible seed, but
of incorruptible” (1 Peter i., 23) —to be “ born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God (John i., 13), and thus, too, he is said
to be a partaker <e of the Divine nature. ’ (2 Peter i., 4.)
Now, to the Holy Spirit, our Lord traces up this change.
He tells us that if a man would enter the Kingdom of
God, he must “he horn of water and of the Spirit .”
Here, perhaps, you will say, does not this teach that
before a man can be “ born again” he must be baptized. ?
I answer, it is by no means clear that such is the teach-
ing of the passage. The Greek word, in this place,
some think, nr y be rendered “ even” instead of “ and,”
thus be born of water, even the Spirit,” but I shall not
build upon this. It is doubtful whether baptism is here
referred to at all, but certainly not as essential to re-
generation. Christian baptism, be it remembered, had


not at that time been instituted as an ordinance by
Christ. It was not until the close of his ministry that
he nade his disciples “go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt, xxviii., 19).
If baptism be at all referred to in our Lord’s words to
Nicodemus, it can only be so in a remote way and by
anticipation, yet not as being essential to the new birth.
But a case in point will decide the question. If it shall
be said that baptism is meant, and therefore that it is
essential to being “ born again,” how do you account
for the salvation of the penitent thief? It is certain he
had no baptism with water, yet to him the Lord said
“ to-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise !” But ad-
mitting that baptism may here be alluded to, in what
sense is the allusion to be understood ? I would sug-
gest, only in a sense that is in accordance with other
parts of Holy Scripture, and in no other sense. Yet
Uo passage can be produced to prove that baptism is
essential to regeneration, or that it is always even the
instrument thereof. But on the other hand evidence
can be shown of baptism being received without accom-
panying regeneration, as in the instance of Simon
Magus ; again, that regeneration may take place before
baptism as in the instances of the Philippian jailer,
Lydia, and the Ethiopian treasurer j and finally of re-
generation taking place without any water baptism, as
in the instances of John the Baptist and the penitent
thief. Hence if it be allowed that our Lord referred
to baptism when he speaks of being “ born of water f it
must be admitted from the above examples, that he
does not speak of it either as a necessary instrument of
regeneration, or as being absolutely needful to the new
birth. Why, then, you may ask, should baptism be
observed. I answer, it should be observed because
Christ has commanded the observance of that rite—be-
cause also baptism is a means of grace, though grace
does not necessarily accompany the act, and because it
is a badge of discipleship, and an appropriate dedication
of the soul to Christ. On these grounds it is right and
proper that persons should be baptized. But I incline to
the opinion that as water is used as an emblem of the
Spirit’s work, it may be so understood in this passage ?


It is not uncommon to set forth the work of the Holy
Spirit under an emblem. In Matt, hi.-, 11—Fire is
referred to as an emblem of the Spirit’s Work—“ He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.”
This cannot mean as some have supposed “ eternal
punishment.”—Everlasting fire for the punishment of
the ungodly. No such subject is referred to in that
verse, the fire is rather an emblem of the Holy Ghost.
The emblem of the Spirit’s presence and Avork Avas seen
in the form of fire on the day of Pentecost (Acts ii., 3.)
I, therefore, understand the expression to be bap-
tized Avith the Holy Ghost and Avith fire,” to mean—to
have the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, the effect of
Avhose Avork in the heart shall be like that of fire upon
gold, not to burn but to purify^- and, in like manner, I
understand the expression to be born of water and of
the Spirit,” to mean to have the heart reneAved by the
Holy Spirit, the effect of Avhose work therein shall
be like the effect of Avater on the body nof to drown,
but to cleanse. In this sense God speaks by the mouth
of Ezekiel, saying, — (( Then will I sprinkle clean Avater
upon you, and ye shall be clean,” signifying the effect
that would be produced upon their heart by the gift of
the Holy Spirit.
Thus, reader. Regeneration, or “ neAV birth,” consists
in a NEAV NATURE GIVEN TO MAN BY THE HOLT SFIRIT,
the cleansing effect of Avhose Avork is described under
the emblem of water. Having tried to explain the
nature of this change, I shall go on to state the infallible
marks by Avhich a man may know Avhether he has been
ft born again”—l call them infallible marks because they
are such marks as God has declared to be the proper
evidences of Regeneration. Noav he Avho is the subject
of this change will find in himself to a greater or less
degree these marks.
The first mark I shall name is this—“ Whosoever
helieveth that Jesus is the Christ is horn of God—
(1 John 1.) This does not mean that whoe\*er sim-
ply acknoAvledges that Jesus is the Messiah or anointed
of God, is born of God. Millions acknoAvledge this
much Avho are not born again. An intellectual assent to
this truth is an easy thing, and may be given by per-
sons who are unregenerate, The Avord is beliea*eth,


believetli that Jesus is the Christ, and the believing that
is meant, is a practical, influential belief. Thus when
the Ethiopian treasurer said to Philip “see here is water,
what doth hinder me to be baptized ?” Philip said “ If
thou belie vest with all thine heart, thou mayest.” Then
answered the eunuch “ I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God.” This was no cold and formal acknow-
ledgement of a great truth but the profession of a living
powerful faith in the Lord Jesus Christ It was a
profession of hearty acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah,
and as the Son of God. Thus he gave evidence of
being “ born again,” and having professed his faith, he
received the sign of that new birth—he was baptized.
So to believe that Jesus is the Christ—is to believe that
Jesus is the Messiah that was promised to the world—
that He is the alone Saviour of mankind. It is to trust
in Jesus, in his offices of Prophet, Priest, and King. It
is to depend upon his merits and mediation alone for
salvation, and to show the proper influence of such faith
in every-day life. He that thus believes , is born of God.
Another mark is set forth in these terms “Every one
that loveth, is born of God ” —(1 John iv., pt 7v.) This
again cannot mean simply that if a man loves his
father or mother, or wife, or relations he is born again.
Such love is natural, and can be totally unconnected .with
grace ; nor again can it mean, if a man love only those
.of his own creed, or sect, or party, or views that he is
therefore regenerate. Nor again can it mean, that if a
man loves only those who love him, he is born again,
for as our Lord says “Do not even the publicans the
same.” No! The love that is a mark of a regenerate
soul is more than this. It is a love for all who give
evidence that they belong to Christ. It is love to them
because they love the Lord Jesus, and thus, are members
with us of Christ’s mystical body. Such love as this
is not compassed by denominational boundaries. Such
love forbids all jealously at the spiritual success of others.
Such love makes us rejoice when believers are added
unto the Lord, no matter by whose agency they are
brought to a saving knowledge. And lest there should
be any mistake as to the nature of this love we have a
sure test given to us in these words. “By this we
know that we love the children of God, when ice love


God, and keep his commandments” (1 John v.. 2.) —and
the reason why such love is a mark of being “ born
again” is, that such love can come from God only—for
“ God is love” and the “ fruit of the Spirit is love.” —So
then, everyone, no matter what his station or circum-
stances in life may be, be he high or low, rich or poor,
ignorant or learned, be that one man or woman, or child,
everyone that loveth is horn of God.
Again, another mark is set forth in these terms
“ Whatsoever is horn of God overcometh the world ,
and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
faith ”(I John v., 4). To be of the world is a mark
of the unregenerate soul, but to overcome the world is
a sign of being “ bom again.” And what is it to
overcome the world? To overcome the world is to
gain the victory over the temptations of the world. It
is, not to be ruled by its precepts or its example.
It is not to fihd one’s happiness in the pleasure or
pursuits of the world. It is not to make this
world the object to live for. Now the means by
which this victory is obtained, is said to be faith.
It is not mere prudence, or self discipline, or stoicism,
or disgust, that gives the true victory, but faith.
“ This is the victory which overcometh the world” (that
is, this is the instrument by which we overcome the
world in the right sense) “ even our faith.” And how
does faith overcome the world? Faith gives us the
victory by making us see the vanity of the world.
Faith makes us to realize the value of the soul, and the
need of attending to the interests of the soul. Faith
gives a reality to heaven, and to hell. It leads us to
think more of Christ and of heavenly things, than of the
world, and of our worldly tilings. So, faith giving us
this insight into the real nature of things enables us to
overcome the world. “ Who is he that overcometh the
world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of
God” (I John v., 5) ; and this means that no one can
truly overcome the world except he be a believer. To
overcome the world hy faith is a proper mark of the
new birth.
But another mark of the new birth is given in
these words, ts Whosoever is horn of God, doth not com-
mit sin ; for his seed remaineth in him ; and. he cannot


sin , because he is born of God ” (1 John hi., 9). And
again, “we know that whosoever is born of God,
sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth
himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not”
(1 John v., 18). The usual meaning of this is that the
man who is born again, does not willingly sin—does not
sin with the full consent of his will—does not malici-
ously, and in an aggravated and determined manner
commit sin. But it probably means that his renewed
nature sins not. And this distinction is not a
fancied one. The apostle speaks of this twofold nature
(See Rom. vi). He says “ I find then a law that when
I would do good, evil is present with me, for I delight
in the law of God after the inward man; but I see
another law in my members warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin which is in my members.” And again, he says,
“For the good that I would, I do not, but the evil that
I would not, that I do. Now if Ido that I would not,
(that is, if I do that evil against which I strive), “ it is no
more I that do it,” (it is not my renewed nature that
does it,) “ but, ( the opposing law that is in my members ,
viz.), sin that dwelleth in me.” And he adds—“So
then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God;
but with the flesh the law of sin.” Thus the renewed
nature strives against the remains of former corruptions.
It aims to bring every thought into subjection to the
obedience of Christ (2 Cor, x., 5). It suffers not sin
to reign in its mortal body (1 Rom. vi., 2). The ex-
ceptional sins into which the regenerate are surprised,
are owing to the new-life principle being for a time
suffered to lie dormant, and to the sword of the Spirit
not being drawn instantly. Thus, too, he that is be-
gotten of God keepeth himself, which means, that the
believer defends himself from the assaults of Satan,
by taking unto himself “ the whole armour of
God” (Ephesians v., 13.) One of the oldest
manuscripts renders this “ the having been begotten of
God keepeth him.” It amounts to the same thing in
whichever way you read it. No man can keep himself
without God’s help. So it is said of believers, that
they “ are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation” (1 Pet, i, 5). It is therefore by the help of


God being extended to the renewed soul—it is by the
protection of God being thrown around the regenerate
that “ that wicked one (the devil) toucheth him not.”
And, by the expression “ toucheth him not,“ is meant
that Satan cannot vitally wound the regenerate soul.
That “ wicked one” may tempt, and buffet, and annoy
the soul, but he cannot regain dominion therein.
Thus it is that Satan, being kept out from dominion
over the soul, by a stronger than he (Luke xi., 22), the
renewed sold keepeth himself”
Now, the last mark to be noticed is given in these
words “ Ye know that every one that doeth righteousness
is born of Him” This is a positive mark of being
“ born again.” The renewed soul doeth righteousness,
because it has “ put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousnes and true holiness” (Ephes. iv.,
24). The righteousness of which this passage speaks
consists in more than the mere uprightness and honesty
which satisfies the world, and procures a good name
before men. It means doing that which is right before
God and man from proper motives. It is doing our
duty faithfully in that station to which God has called
us, “ not with eye service as men pleasers, but in single-
ness of heart, fearing God.” It is doing everything
“ heartily as to the Lord, and not to men” (Col. hi.,
22, 23). It is doing “all to the glory of God”
(1 Cor. x., 31). None can do righteousness in this
sense except from a renewed nature. Corrupt nature
may produce a resemblance to this, but not the thing
itself. “ Let no man deceive you; he that doeth
righteousness, is righteous, even as he (God) is righte-
ous” (1 John hi., 7.) Therefore “ye know,” or as the
margin has it “know ye , that everyone that doeth
righteousness is horn of him ” (1 John ii., 29).
Now upon the review of this you will surely say
the standard is a very high one. It is indeed high, but
as the Holy Spirit has appointed these as the proper
signs whereby to discover regeneration, no man dare
make that standard lower. But it is not to be asserted
that a man is not “ born again” until he is able
to find all these evidences m perfection in himself. It
would be enough to prove that lie is “ born again” if lie
is conscious that lie aims sincerely to have these evi*
17


deuces, and testifies that sincerity by earnest efforts
in such respects, depending upon the help of ihe Holy
Spirit.
And here, Reader, in the presence of these marks
I would ask the question Are you regenerate ? Have
you been horn again ? Ido not ask have you been bap-
tized—or are you living an outwardly correct life—or do
you make a religious profession—or are your feelings
worked upon by the accessories of worship ? You may
be able to answer in the affirmative to all these questions
and yet not be born again—you may have all these
appearances of good things and yet be finally lost!
Again, Ido not ask when were you born again ? This
is a question which you may not be able to answer.
Many a soul is born of God, and is a long time before
it can find, as it thinks, evidence enough to satify it
that the change has been produced. It is a more im-
portant question than one of time when , it is a question
usioa. fact —Have you been born of God ? Has your soul
experienced that change which our blessed Lord
declares to be necessary before you can enter the
kingdom of God? Face these questions plainly and
faithfully.
Try yourself by the marks already named. Are
you Regenerate? Do you believe that Jesus
is the Christ ? Do you believe that Jesus is the
Saviour whom God promised to the world ? As a
proof of that belief are you trusting to Christ alone for
your salvation ? Have you cast away your own good
deeds as quite unable to save you ? If you cannot say
<c Yes” to these questions, then you are not born again—
but if you can from your heart say “ Yes”, then it is
evidence that you are born again. Ido not say that
your faith in Christ must rise to strong assurance before
you can be born again. Your faith may be small, very
small indeed, it may be no bigger than a grain of mus-
tard seed, but if it be real, that faith, small as it is, will be
enough to save you, it will be enough to prove in God's
sight that you are “ born again;” but you must pray
for an increase of faith if you would have the comfort
of such evidence to yourself of being “ bonr again.”
But try yourself again, by another mark, Do you
love God , and the children of God 9 Is God the chief


object of your delight ? Is his service your chief joy ?
And as a proof of love do you strive to keep his com-
mandments ? Do you honour His holy name and His
word ? Do you use the means of grace because they
bring you into more immediate contact with your
Maker? Do you lovaalso the children of God ? Are you
glad when you can see in anyone evidence that that one
is born again ? Can you feel a pleasure in recognizing
such one to be a brother or sister in Christ, though that
one may be in connection with some other communion
than your own ? Do you look forward with joy to the
time when denominational limits (which doubtless now
serve good ends) shall be done away with the coming of
the Lord, and all his children shall appear as one family
in heaven? If you cannot say “ Yes” to these ques-
tions, you are not “ born again” for saith the Scripture,
“ He that loveth not his brother is not of God,” and
again, He that loveth not his brother, abideth in
death ’ —(l John hi., 10,14.) But if you can from
the heart say “Yes,” to these questions then it is evi-
dent you are “ born again.” Ido not say, that you
must be conscious of this love in vigorous exercise
before you can appear unto God to be “ born again.”
I do not say that if your love be weak that you are not
born again There is a vital difference between no
love, and iveak love. You perhaps complain that your
love is very weak, but to this I will say, if it be’ real
it will grow the better you become acquainted with God,
and if your complaint of weak love proceeds from a
heart sincerely sorry on such an account, that
very sorrow is evidence of regeneration, and
will lead you to strive earnestly for more of that love
which Jesus had when he died on the cross for our
redemption.
Again, try yourself by another mark, Are you
overcoming the world? Are you becoming more and
more insensible to its attractions ? Are you resisting
its temptations? Are you regulating your conduct
by what God’s word says, rather than by what the world
says ? Are you setting your affections on things above
and not on things below ? Are you laying up for yourself
treasure in heaven rather than upon earth ? If things
are not thus with you, —if you are finding your interest


in this world—if you are happy only when engaged in
the pursuits or pleasures of this world, then you are not
as yet born again. For saith the Scripture “If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but
is of the world, —(1 John ii., 15.16). But if things are
thus with you because of your faith, (mark that word !)
then you are “born again.” Observe, I do not tell you, that
it is necessary that you should have a complete victory
over the world, that is never be overcome by the world be-
fore you can be said in God’s sight to be born again. If
you are gaining a victory over the world as a ride, and as
the result of faith, that is a true sign of being “ born
again.” The conflict may be fierce —the tempta-
tions very great —the attractions very numerous, but if
in consequence of your belief in Christ, and love for
Christ, you are getting the mastery in these things
accept it as a sign that you are a regenerate soul. That
faith which enables you to overcome the world, is a fruit
of the Spirit—for the fruit of the Spirit is faith—(Gal.
v., 22.)
Once more, try yourself by another mark. It is
said “ He that is horn of God, doth not commit sin.” I
confess that this is a difficult point to handle. I fear
lest any statement of mine should cause one weak-
believcr to conclude that he is not born of God. I
trust that I may be kept from saying anything that
should not be said, and that every real child of God may
)Q able to perceive his regeneration though he may have
to look at it through much that is perplexing. But
ny present duty is to apply this mark of regeneration
which I have already explained Would you know if
you are born again, then consider, —Is sinning a habit
with you ? Do you take pleasure in sinning ? Do you
in with the full consent of your will? Do you sin
without regret —that is without that kind of regret
which would cause you to strive against your corrup-
tions in future ? Then, if such is the case with you, it
is a clear sign that you are not born again, for saith the
Scripture, “Tie that committeth sin (that is wilfully and
in a determined way) is of the devil” (2 John iii., 8 ).
But if it be thus—if you are fighting against your sins.
20


even though you are occasionally overcome by them, it
is a sign that you are regenerate. To make the appli-
cation closer, Does it give you real sorrow when the
opposing law in your members overcomes you ? Does
it make you more watchful ? Does it send you to God
for more strength ? Does it cause you to resolve to be
more steadfast in future ? then it is good sign of being
“ born again.” Your sincerity is a valuable testimony
to your regeneration. Your renewed nature sins not,
because it is a “ partaker of the Divine nature”* which
cannot sin—the real conflict is between the renewed
nature, and the law of sin which is in your members.
In the gaining the victory over this opposing law con-
sists the proof of regeneration. Sometimes the “ old
man” will be stronger than the “ new man,” which
ought not so to be, and this occasional triumph will
necessarily dim your perception of your being “ born of
God,” but be not dismayed on this account, strive more
earnestly in the strength of the Lord against all the
temptations to which you may be exposed, and the evi-
dence of your being “ born again” will appear the
clearer as you are enabled more completely to gain the
victory over the lusts of your mortal body.
Finally, try yourself by this mark, “ Everyone that
doeth righteousness is horn of him” Do you do that
which is right before God and man ? Are you true
and just in all your dealings ? From what motive do
you act ? Do you do what is right simply because it is
expedient, or rather because it is well-pleasing unto the
Lord ? Do you shrink from taking advantage of the
ignorance, or of the circumstances of your neighbour,
because to take such advantage violates the law of
Christian love ? If not, you are not “ born again.”
For the Scripture saith, “ whosoever doeth not righte-
ousness is not of God” (1 John hi., 10). But if you do
that which is right from motives which will stand the
scrutiny of God, then all is well. It is a clear sign
that you are “ born again.”
Reader, let me now ask you to weigh well these
* The reader will clearly understand that to be a “partaker of the Divine
nature" does not mean to be a partaker of the Godhead. The Godhead or essence
of God cannot be communicated to any man ; but it means that lie is a partaker
of a new and holy principle such as can come only from God. This holy princi-
ple is referred to under various terms in Scripture, such as ‘■'■grace''' "spirit,"
“ new man," “ incorruptible seed," cfc. This principle cannot sin, because it
has emanated from God.


several points. It is not a matter of unimportance
whether you are “ born again” or not! The Saviour
himself has said “ except a man be born of water and
of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.”
It will not be sufficient at the last day to plead your
baptism, or your good works, or your morality, or your
religious professions; all such things will be well
enough, but they will go for nothing if you intend
them to supply the place of regeneration. There is no
salvation to be had apart from regeneration. The want
of this “ new birth,” will shut a man out for ever
from the kingdom of God. And lest this should seem
to you to be hard or unreasonable, give me your atten-
tion for a few moments and I will endeavour to explain
THE REASON why such a change is necessary. There
are three short but pointed reasons I would give.
In the first place Heaven is the place for God’s
children, and not for God’s enemies. Now until the heart is
changed men are not children of God, but children of
wrath. Until the heart is changed men have no in-
terest in the privileges of God’s family—they are in a
state of opposition or enmity against God. “ The carnal
heart is enmity against God, and is not subject unto
the law of God, neither, indeed, can be” (Rom. viii.)
As enemies they have no claim to the kingdom of God ;
they have, in fact, no love or desire for that kingdom.
Where Jesus is there his people shall be also (John xvii.,
24). But his foes shall be banished from his presence
(2 Thess. i., 9). And thus, as heaven is not the place for
God’s enemies, they cannot, while they are enemies,
enter into the kingdom of God.
In the next place. There is only one way of yetting
to heaven, and as the unreyenerate despise that way, they
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. “I am the way,”
says our blessed Lord, “no man cometh unto the
Father but by me” (John xiv., 6). “ And,” says the
apostle, “ neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved (Acts iv., 12). But
unregenerate souls will not come to Christ that they
might have life. They will not “ believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ.” Thus, they leave themselves without any
Saviour. How, then, can they enter into the kingdom
22


of God? They cannot enter therein unless they come to
Christ —unless they believe on Christ and be “ born
of water and of the Spirit.”
But the last reason I would give is The positive state-
ment of our Lord to that ejfect. He prefaces that state-
ment with the words “ Yerily,verily”, that is, truly and
indeed, “ except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God.” Who, then, shall venture to say that
an unregenerate man can enter the kingdom of God
without being born again when Jesus says “he cannot”?
God’s decree in this respect cannot be reversed, therefore
says Jesus “ Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must
be born again”.
Reader, if you have not been “ born again” let me
beseech you to ponder these things seriously. Do not
for a moment allow the idea that you can enter the
kingdom of God without having been “ born again”—
you CANNOT do so. If you are not at this moment “ born
again” you are at present outside the kingdom of God.
You may have been baptized and call yourself a Chris-
tian—may claim the privileges of the outward and
visible church, but all this will be of no avail while you
are not “ born again.” If you are not now renewed, you
have not taken yet one true step toward eternal life.
Do not deceive yourself on this point—you cannot be
saved except you be “ born again.” What then are you
to do ? I would say seek this change at once ! This
change can be effected only by the Holy Spirit. You
must ask for that Spirit. You are encouraged to do
this, for “ God will give his Holy Spirit to those that
ask him.” “ Ask and it shall be given you, seek and
you shall find”—Take your soul with its sins to Jesus,
and His blood will cleanse all that sin away. The
Spirit of God strives with you, resist Him not. Yield
to his influences, and He will change your heart. Delay
not this great business any longer. Boast not thyself
of the morrow. If you refuse to do this now, you may
tempt God to sware in his wrath that you shall never
enter into his rest. Then, think, O think what will
become of your soul for ever! But, if Reader, you have
been “ horn again f praise God for his infinite mercy
in changing your heart. Take heed that you walk in
newness of life. Be very careful to use the means of


-TA fp
fcf6uo
grace. Neglect not prayer, and the study of God’s
Holy Word, and the waiting upon God in His “ House
of Prayer,” and the partaking of the memorials of the
love of your once dying, but now living Redeemer.
Watch yourself closely in your intercourse with the
world. Be firm in your witness for Christ. Testify
your love for Christ by being ready to every good work.
Do something for Jesus in the station, in which, He has
put you. Think of others who know not, as yet, of this
change. Pray that God may bless this Tract to the
awakening of such to a sense of their danger, that
through God’s grace they may be “ born again.” Live
up to the enjoyment of your privileges in the life which
now is, and look forward to the higher privileges you
shall enjoy in the life to come, for being “ born of God”
you are now a child of God, and if a child, then an heir
of God, and a joint heir with Christ of an everlasting
inheritance.
W. TURIGESG '&ACBIKE PRINTER, BRISBANE ST,, LAUNCESTON,
\ '•* “ \ A* : >£■ . * h• J
