

REGIMENTAL
STANDING ORDERS
OF THE
SEVENTEENTH REGIMENT,
March , 1831.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY STEPHENS, STOKES, AND M'GARVIE,
REDMAN’S-COURT, GEORGE STREET.
1831.


INDEX.
Page.
Introduction 3
Divine Service ~ ~ 4
General attention of Officers . 4
Dress •• •• •• •» •• •« . * 9
The Lieutenant Colonel .. ~ ~ .. 9
The Major .. . • .. .. .... 10
Captains .. ». .. .. .. .. 10
Subaltern Officers .. ~ .. ~ 12
The Surgeon .. .. .. .. .. 13
The Paymaster .. .. . • .. .. 16
The Adjutant ~ . . ~ . • .. 16
The Quarter Master .. *. .. 18
Drill of Officers .. .. .. . • .. 20
Duties of Officers .. ~ .. .. 21
Field Officer of the week .. .. .. 21
Captain of the day .. . • . • . • 22
Subaltern Officer of the day ~ .. .. 24
Selection of Quarters .. .. .. 26
Leave of absence . • .. . • . # 26
Regimental Colours .. . • . • 27
Officers commanding detachments .. .. 27
Courts Martial .. . • •» • • 28
Courts of Enquiry .. .. • • 31
Mode of making applications ... .. 31
Meetings of Officers . • .. . • 32
Saluting .. »* ». 32


PART 11.
Non-commissioned Officers • • • • 85*
The Sergeant Major • • • • • • 84
The Quarter Master SefgiSaht ~ .. 35
The Drill Sergeant ' .. . • • • 36
The Colour Sergeants .. . • • • 36
The Pay Sergeants .. . • • • 36
The Armourer Sergeant .. • • 37
The Schoolmaster Sergeant and School .. $8
The Regimental Clerk .. • • 4fi
The Band *. .. ..
Blaster Tailor and Tailors *« .. 42
Shoemakers • • .. .. 42
Drum Major *• .. ' » . 4^2
Orderly Sergeants and Corporals .. .. 43
Private Soldier .. .. .. 46
Interior economy of Companies • • .. 49'
Men’s accounts and account books ... # 61
Arms, accoutrements, and ammunition .. 63
Barracks .. .. .. 64
Guards .. .. .. 65
Punishments .. .. . • 58
Ob a march ~ .. .. 59
The Hospital ~ .. . . 61
Furloughs and Passes ~ .. .. 62
Servants ~ ~ ~ .. 62
Men allowed to work . • ~ ~ 64


INTRODUCTION.
The numerous changes that have taken place in the
General Regulations and Orders of the Army, within the
last few years, rendering a revision of the Regimental
Standing Orders necessary, the Lieutenant Colonel, with
the sanction of the Colonel, directs, that the following
Regulations shall be considered as the guide for carrying
on the duties in the 17th Regiment, and all former Regi-
mental Standing Orders are cancelled from this date.
i
It is very desirable that the Standing Orders of a Regi-
ment should be as plain and concise as possible, and that
the duties of each Rank should be so distinctly explained,
and laid down, as not to admit of any misinterpretation.
The first duty Of either Officer or Soldier, is strict obe-
dience to the orders of his superiors, and nothing will
tend more to strengthen the authority of each Individual,
over those placed below him, than the example, in his own
person, of strict obedience to those above him.
i
Composed of such materials as the 17th Regiment now
is, both in officers and men, the Lieutenant Colonel feels
it unnecessary to say more on this subject, and he will
therefore, only remark further, that whenever an oppor-
tunity may be in his power of conferring a favour or dis-
tinction, it will always be to that person, whose strict
attention to his duty, and obedience to orders, may be most
conspicuous.


FIRST PART.
DIVINE SERVICE.
The strictest attention to be paid by all ranks to the at-
tendance at Divine Service on Sundays, and the greatest
respect paid during the performance of this important duty.
The necessity of a strict observance of all religious, as well
as moral duties, should be strongly impressed upon the
soldier’s mind ; and he should be taught to recollect, that
those who are best prepared to meet death, will always be
the most ready, when called on by their duty to their King
and Country, to expose themselves to it.
All Officers are required to attend Church Parades: those
only excepted, who have the Special Leave of the Com-
manding Officer.
Those men who profess a different Religion from the
Church of England, will be regularly marched to their
respective places of Worship, (when such are near their
quarters) under charge of an Officer, or Non-commissioned
Officer, who will be responsible for their conduct during
the time, as well as for their being regularly marched back
to quarters, when the Service is ended.
OFFICERS.
Officers should always recollect, that nothing will tend
more to the good or bad conduct of the soldier, than the
example that is shewn them by their Officers; whenever a
Regiment is conspicuous for the zeal and attention of the
Officers, it will be equally so for that of the men, and, on
the other hand, where neglect and inattention prevail on


the part of the Officers, they will always produce insubordi-
nation and crinle on the part of the men.
The first duty of an Officer on joining’ the Regiment, is
to make himself acquainted with the Standing Orders, that
he may immediately become acquainted with the Customs
and Regulations in force, and ignorance of them will never
be admitted as an excuse for neglect, by any Officer, after
he has been three months doing duty.
Each Officer must make himself perfectly master of the
Field Exercise and Drill of his Company, so that he may,
at all times, be able to put his men through their evolu-
tions, when called upon to do so by his Commanding
Officer.
9
, Officers are to attend all Parades, except in cases of sick-
ness, or leave of*absence; in the former case, they will im-
mediately apply to the Surgeon, who will personally visit
them instantly, and afterwards insert their names in his
Morning Report, which Report will be the Adjutants au-
thority for inserting them in his Return. Officers wishing
for Leave of Absence, will apply personally to the Com-
manding Officer, before the hour of one, on the day previous
to their requiring it; in cases of emergency only, when
time will not admit of personal application, it may be made
in writing, but always addressed to the Commanding Officer.
No Officer to quit his cantonment or quarters, without
leave from his Commanding Officer, nor is he ever to sleep
out of barracks or quarters, without his previous consent.
Officers should be extremely particular, at all times, in
their early attendance at Parade: nothing will tend more
to make the soldiers attentive to this part of their duty,
than the correct example set them by their Officer. The Pa-
rade State will be always signed by the senior Officer of
the Company, present on Parade, who should never affix


his signature to it, without having previously made himself
acquainted with the correctness of the statements, and
thereby enabling himself to answer any question, the Com-
manding Officer may put to him, respecting the distribution
of his men.
All Words of Command, whether in the examination of
the men’s Arms, the Drill of the Company, or the Field
Exercise of the Regiment, are to be used in strict confor-
mity with the Orders of the Commander in Chief.
No Officer is to exchange his duty with another, unless
he has previously obtained the sanction of the Command-
ing Officer.
No Officer, who is in the Surgeon’s Report, is to appear
out of his barracks, without the Commanding Officer’s
sanction, which will only be granted when recommended
by the Surgeon, on account of health, and this recom-
mendation will be made by the Surgeon, in person, to the
Commanding Officer.
The Officers will, at all times, consider themselves called
upon to notice every irregularity they may see committed
by men of the Regiment, whether on or off duty, and to
correct the same on the spot, whether the offender belongs
to their own Company or to any other.
Drunkenness should never be overlooked, and whenever
a soldier is seen drunk, out of his quarters, he should be
directly sent to them; if inclined to be riotous, a file of the
guard should be sent for, and he should be taken away by
force, and confined.
A soldier when in a state of intoxication, should always
bo confined in a separate place by himself, and not in the
common guard room, where he is liable to be teazed and
irritated, till he commits the crime which it was the object
of confinement to prevent. There is no case in which Of


ftcers should be more particular, than in their treatment of
men when under the influence of liquor, and they should
also be most particular with their Non-commissioned Officers
on the same point; no conversation should ever be held
with a drunken man, by either Officer, or Non-commissioned
Officer; a Guard should immediately be sent for, and the
man committed to confinement by force, if necessary, but
even then, the Non-commissioned Officer should never be
permitted to put his hand oh him.
Whenever men are confined for crimes committed while
in a state of intoxication, particular enquiry should be made
into the circumstances, to ascertain if any unnecessary harsh-
ness or irritation, had been made use of by the Non-com-
missioned Officer, and when it appears that such had been
the case, the punishment shouldalways be lessened, and the
Non-commissioned Officer strongly reproved.
Much greater anxiety and attention should be shewn to
prevent crime, than to punish it, and the Lieutenant Colonel
feels confident, that His endeavours to effect this, will be
aided and supported by every Officer under his command.
Minor offences are allowed to be punished by the Officers
commanding Companies, and a report is to be made daily,
to the Orderly room, of every man ordered punishment by
the Officer commanding the Company. (Vide punish-
ments, p, .)
Reprimands should seldom, if ever, be given to the Non-
commissioned Officers in presence of the men, as everything
tending to lessen their consequence, will also tend to lessen
their authority; when reproof is necessary, it should be given
privately, or if of a serious nature, in presence of the other
Non-commissioned Officers of the company, and conveyed
with temper and mildness, which will always be found to
have better effect, than when accompanied with either pas-
sion or violence.


Replies, from either Non-commissioned Officer or Soldier
under Arms, when found fault with, must never be permit-
ted, and if persisted in, when ordered to be silent, the of-
fender must be ordered into confinement.
There is no point that Officers should be more particular
in, than the language they adopt towards the men ; Oaths
should never be made use of: and above all, they should
never attempt to strike, or even push them. A soldier is
never to be struck, whether at Drill or any other Parade.
Before concluding these Remarks upon the General Sys-
tem and Conduct to be observed by Officers, the Lieutenant
Colonel wishes most strongly to impress upon their minds,
the painful situation they may often be placed in, when re-
quired to pass Sentence, and award Punishment, for breaches
of Military Discipline, which they may, themselves, have
been in the habit of committing; and how doubly painful
must it be, when they see the soldier undergoing, perhaps,
a corporal punishment, for a neglect, that the example of
his Officer might have induced him to believe was trivial.
Strict and impartial Justice will ever be the surest road to
the esteem and affection of the Soldier, and when reproof
is necessary, it should be done with decision and firmness,
but without unnecessary harshness.
Punishment of the slightest degree, should never be or-
dered, without hearing the offender’s story, personally ; and
although every exertion must be used to enforce the great-
est respect and obedience to the Non-commissioned Officer,
still, he should never be encouraged in making frivolous
complaints against the men, which will sometimes occur,
from private pique and dislike. There should also be a
constant attention to alleviate the wants, and redress the
* •
grievances of the soldier, and every indulgence shewn him,
compatible with that strict discipline and obedience to or-
ders, lhat must never be lost sight of, undct any circum-
stances.


Nothing- can be a better criterion of the ability of an
Officer, than the conduct of the men placed under his
immediate control; and where justice is administered with
a firm and decided hand, but at the same time, tempered
with mercy, it will always produce obedience, content,
and satisfaction.
DRESS OF OFFICERS.
The dress and of Officers, will at all times
be in strict conformity wf& His Majesty’s Regulations,
from which no deviation will ever be permitted. As fre-
quent changes are made in the dress, by order of His
Majesty, it is not requisite that they should be detailed in
these Orders, but all Regulations on the subject may be
seen by every Officer, on reference to the orderly room ;
and to preserve uniformity as much as whenever
a change in the dress is to be made, it will always be
published in\ Regimental Orders, with the mode and time
of carrying it into execution.
Officers are never to appear out of their barracks, unless
regimentally dressed, and they are never to appear in
plain clothes, when doing duty, either at Head Quarters,
or with any other part of the Regiment.
THE LIEUTENANT COLONEL
Is charged with the general control, management, and
responsibility, of the Regiment. From him (or during
his absence from the temporary Commanding Officer) must
emanate all Rewards, and Promotions, as well as all
Punishments, and the responsibility of a good or bad
system of interior economy, must rest with the Lieutenant
Colonel alone ; no temporary Commanding Officer being
authorised to interfere with, or make any alteration what-
ever in, the system laid down for general guidance. All
complaints which are of too serious a nature to be settled
by the Officers commanding Companies, should be investi-
B


gated by him personally. And this duty the Commanding-
Officer should never delegate to any person. He should
appoint certain hours daily for the settlement of all Regi-
mental business, besides which, he ought to be accessible
at all times in cases of particular emergency, both for
Officers and men; no official correspondence should ever
pass through thp orderly room, without having his ap-
proval, and the Company's accounts should be frequently
inspected by him ; in fact, there is no part of the whole
duties of a Regiment that ought not to come under his
constant attention, and the greater the example of un-
ceasing care and attention set by him, the more it will
be followed and acted up to by those under his command.
To him, should every body look for impartial- justice,
and it should never be supposed that he was swayed in
his decisions by the opinions of others.
/
THE MAJOR.
The Senior Major present, is charged with the Drill
of the Officers, and no Officer when sent to Drill is ever
to be dismissed till he is personally inspected by the
Major as to his efficiency, and reported by him as efficient
to the Commanding Officer. In the absence of the Lieut.
Colonel, he shall consider himself entirely as standing in
his place without any restriction, except those laid down
by His Majesty's Regulations, prohibiting any alterations
being made in the general system laid down by the
permanent Commanding Officer, for the guidance of the
Regiment. All vacancies that may occur amongst the
Non-commissioned Officers may be filled up by him, the
Staff appointments excepted, which are to be only done
temporarily.
CAPTAINS.
The whole care and responsibility of the Company is
rested in the Captain, subjected to the inspection and


correction of the Commanding* Officer; he will personally
inspect every part of the management of his Company,
as well as payment of his men, and he should hear every
complaint, and never order a punishment on the report
of a Non-commissioned Officer, without having the offender
personally brought before him. His constant attention
should given to prevent crime, to,encourage good con-
duct, by frequent indulgence to the well-behaved, and by
general care to encourage that sort of confidence towards
O / o
himself amongst his men, that is always sure to promote
subordination, content, and satisfaction. The Captains
will consider themselves answerable for the good order and
cleanliness of their barracks, the clean appearance of their
men at all parades, as also that x the arms and appoint-
ments are kept in a constant state of repair; any loss
or damage that may occur to the arms or accoutrements,
are to be made good by the Captain, except in cases of
desertion, or on actual service.
Particular attention must be paid by the Captains, to
their men’s messing, that their provisions are purchased
at the cheapest rate, and when it can be done, that they
are paid for daily, and in presence of a man from each
mess. The same attention is required as to their neces-
saries, which should be supplied at the best and cheap-
est rate, and of the approved Regimental pattern. The
Pay-Serjeants, should never be permitted to supply any
article of necessaries, as it only holds out a temptation to
them to make money, which ought to be avoided. En-
couragement should be always given to the men to pur-
chase their own necessaries, taking care, that they are
of the approved pattern, and they must (after being
approved of) be stamped with the Regimental mark.
The Captains will make frequent inspections of their
arms and accoutrements, clothing and Regimental
necessaries, for any deficiency in which, the Command-
ing Officer will consider them responsible.


It is also the duty of the Captains to instruct the
Subaltern Officers attached to their Companies, in the
several duties required from them. They should be par-
ticular in requiring* their early attendance at all Parades,
and in making* them inspect the Company in the
lated manner. The Captains should also make their Sub-
alterns visit their barrack rooms'frequently during the
week, and report to them any irregularities they may
notice; in fact, the Captain shoujd consider himself as
responsible, for the correct performance, by the Subaltern
Officers of all the Company duty, as he does for his
Non-commissioned Officers and private men.
No Subaltern Officer can receive leave of absence,
t x *
till it is ascertained from his Captain, that the Company
duties are provided for.
In the event of the Captain g*oing away, the Officer
appointed to command the Company in his absence, will,
previous to taking charge, inspect the arms and accoutre-
ments, and require them to be put into a complete state
of repair. From the time the Subaltern Officer receives
them in charge, he becomes responsible for every part
of the arms, and appointments, and will consider him-
self liable to make good any deficiency, which he may
have neglected to notice prior to his receiving charge. A
Subaltern Officer, when appointed to command a Com-
pany, is to be considered in every respect, as standing in
the Captain’s place, and every thing laid down in this
Regulation as applicable to him.—(For accounts. —See
Ledger.)
SUBALTERN OFFICERS.
When a Subaltern is appointed to the command of a
Company, he is to consider himself invested with the entire
control and responsibility attached to it, the same as the


Captain. He will draw the contingent allowance from
the day he receives charge, and from that day he will be-
come responsible to his Commanding Officer for the care
and good order of the arms, accoutrements, clothing and
every other appointment belonging to the Company,
Before receiving charge, he is to require an inspection
of the arms and and have a note made
of any repairs required, that they may be charged to his
predecessor in the command; neglecting to do this, he be-
comes liable to pay them all himself, and will be required to
do so. When he has taken charge, he will sign a Certificate
to that effect, in a book kept for that purpose in the order-
ly room. Whatever repairs of arms may be required,
while the Subaltern is in command of a Company, will be
paid for by him out of the contingent allowance, as also
a fair proportion of the books expended the same time.
The Subaltern Officers Eire required to assist their Cap-
tain in every part of the Company's duty, and to comply
with all directions and instructions he may give them rela-
tive thereto. They should make themselves acquainted
with the names and characters of the men of their Com-
panies, and be always ready to answer any questions
relative thereto, that may be put to them by the Command-
ing Officer in the absence of their Captain.
THE SURGEON.
The general charge and management of the hospital
and sick of the Regiment, is under the control of the
Surgeon, (or in his absence of the Assistant) who will
communicate personally with the Commanding Officer on
all points connected therewith. He will send a daily Re-
port of the sick to the orderly room, and he will deliver
pi person, to the Commanding Officer, every week, a State
of the sick, according to the annexed form, on such days
as may be appointed, and in the event of any man


dying, he will make an immediate personal report to the
Commanding Officer.—'All Officers on the Sick List, are
to be included in the Surgeon’s daily and weekly States,
and whenever an Officer in the sick list, may require per-
mission to go out for air and exercise, the Surgeon wil!
recommend the same personally, for the approval of the
Commanding Officer,
He will consider it his special duty to visit every Officer
daily, who may be included in his Sick List, whether they
are attended m'edically by him or his Assistant; and the
Commanding Officer will expect at all times, when the
Surgeon is present with the Regiment, that he will be able
to answer all questions relative to the medical care, and
treatment of every sick Officer. No sick Officer will return
to his duty, till reported fit, by the Surgeon.
The Surgeon will attend all Punishment Parades; —he
will also attend all Parades for firing, and his hours of
attendance at the hospital, will be strictly regulated by the
hospital Regulations, any deviation from which, that par-
ticular circumstances may render necessary, will be com-
municated to the Commanding Officer.
In the absence of the Surgeon, the senior Assistant
will consider himself responsible for the performance of
every duty required from the Surgeon.
The Surgeon will point out what orders are necessary
for the sentry at the hospital, which will be issued to him,
after being approved by the Commanding Officer.
The Surgeon will inspect the men, reported sick, every
morning at eight o’clock, and any of them that appear to
him to have been so reported without cause, are to be
immediately sent back, that they maybe in time for parade
or duty, and their names reported at the orderly room.
This Regulation to be strictly attended to.


Form of Surgeon’s Weekly Report.
WEEKLY REPORT of the SICK, 17th Regiment.
November, 183
Detail.
Officers.
i
i Sergeants
u
a
E
a
w
p
Rank
and
File.
Names of sick Officers.
GrenadierComp.
No. 1
>>
Light
Total
*
i
Number of Men,
whose time in
hospital exceeds
One Month. .
Two „
Four „
Seven „
Total
No. 2, & 7, Companies.
„ 3, 7, 9, & 10, do.
,, 7> do.
Grenadier do.
Number of Men admitted into hospital
during* the last Week
Number of Men discharged from hospital
during the last Week


THE PAYMASTER.
All papers respecting’ the Pay Department, that require
the commanding* Officer's signature, will be presented
personally by the Paymaster for that purpose, and every
voucher and other document required, as authority for the
same will be produced at the same time. /
The abstracts of the different Companies will be closed
on the first of every month for the preceding one, and ready
by that time for the inspection of each Officer commanding
a Company ; a copy of which will be supplied to each
Company in one week afterwards. The Balance of the
last Abstract (if any) will be paid to the Officer on the first
of each month, and account shall ever exceed one
month without being closed..
The subsistence of the men, after making whatever deduc-
tions may be authorised, will be issued in advance, weekly to
Officers commanding companies, viz: on the Ist Bth 15th and
22nd. of each month, the last issue to include the odd days
to the end of the month. The remaining duties of the
Paymaster are so fully detailed in the War-office regu-
lations, that it is unnecessary to add more here.
THE ADJUTANT
Is to be- considered as the proper channel for all orders and
regulations that may be issued from the Commanding Officer,
the execution of which are also under his special charge ;
it is his duty to take notice of all neglects, whether com-
mitted by Officers, Non-commissioned Officers, or men,
to point them out to the individual, and if not corrected,
to report the same to the Commanding Officer. It is also
his particular duty to instruct the young Officers in
the various points of duty required from them on first join-
ing the Regiment, and he should be looked up to by all
Officers, as a proper example to follow, both from his
unceasing attention to all duties, as well as strict per-
formance of them.


In his Dress, he shouldnever deviate, in the slightest
degree, from the Standing Orders of the Regiment, so that
every Officer will know from him, how to correct any
irregularity in his own. The Adjutant will attend all
Drills,—He will keep the Roster of duties for the Officers,
to the regularity of which he must pay strict attention.—
He is to attend all regimental Courts Martial, and will
consider himself responsible that the proper evidences are
duly warned.—He will submit all crimes against prisoners
to be tried, to the Commanding Officer, previous to their
being laid before the Court. He is also responsible, that
the prisoner has sufficient previous notice of his trial, with
a copy of his crime, and that any evidences he wishes to
call for, are properly warned.
The Adjutant is to parade and inspect all Guards, and
parties for duty, or Piquets, previously to their leaving the
private parade. The execution of all minor punishments,
is under the immediate charge of the Adjutant, and he
will be particular that the slightest deviation never takes
place from the regulation on this head, as laid down by
the Commander-in-Chief, either as to tjie mode of inflicting
the punishment, or the quantity inflicted. The Adjutant
is to consider it his duty, to inspect the practice of the
drums and bugles, that they beat accordingJo the proper
time for marching, which must be always regulated by
the Pendulum, and that the sounds and calls are strictly
in conformity to the custom of the service.
The orderly room wdl be under the Adjutant’s special
charge, and he will be held responsible for the proper
care of all regimental books, and for seeing them pro-
perly filled up at stated periods, and that they are always
ready for the Commanding Officer's inspection, when called
for. Ho will be held answerable for the conduct of the
clerks employed in the orderly room, amongst whom, no
change must ever be made without the approbation of the
Commanding Officer. There is no department in the
c


Regiment, where the advantage of a regular system bein<.
adopted, and undeviatingly followed up, will be found o
such real good> as in the orderly room. Books regularly
kept, and public papers arranged in a regular system
facilitate business, and lessen trouble to every one, and tc
carry this into effect must be the Adjutant's constant care.
The books and public documents at the orderly room,
are not open to the inspection of any person, without the
Commanding Officer's permission, and the Adjutant will
be careful, neither to permit this himself, nor allow the
clerks to do so.
The Adjutant will deliver a weekly state of the Regi-
ment, to the Commanding Officer every monday morning,
and he will make an immediate report of any casualty, or
extraordinary circumstance that may occur.
Every official letter, written by the Adjutant in the
name of the Commanding Officer, will be submitted to
him for approval before sending.
All communications from the Adjutant to the Command
ing Officer are invariably to be made in person, and never
in writing, except in cases of sickness or some other
unavoidable reason.
THE QUARTER MASTER.
The general care and distribution of all arms and
accoutrements of every sort are vested with the Quarter
Master ; he will keep a correct account of every article
issued to the different Companies, which he will produce
at all periodical inspections of arms, &c. by the Command-
ing Officer, at which time he will always insert the state
in which the arms of each Company were found.
The sole management of the clothing, as well as every
article the property of the Colonel of the Regiment, is
under this officer's particular care and responsibility; every


thing supplied for the use of the Regiment, will be first
taken in charge by him, and after being inspected by a
committee, will be served out to the different companies
us required, in his presence, for which he will take
a receipt. He will never issue ammunition of any descrip-
tion, without receiving a receipt, signed by the officer com-
manding the company.
The Quarter Master is responsible for the cleanliness
and good order of the barracks both of officers and men ;
he will visit them frequently at uncertain hours, and
immediately report to the orderly room, any neglect or
want of order he may perceive, naming the rooms and
individuals who have caused it.
He will also have the entire management of the issue
of provisions for the Regiment; and will consider himself
responsible, that they are of a good quality, and that the
proper weights and measures are made use of; any fault
either as to the quality or quantity issued, will be im-
mediately reported by the Quarter Master, to the Captain
of the day, and to the Commanding Officer.
It is very desirable, that the Quarter Master should be
always ready to ispue supplies of regimental necessaries
to the men, when applied to by Officers commanding
Companies; patterns of which will be'" submitted for the
approval of a Committee of Officers, by whom the quality
and price are to be approved; they will then be stamped
with the regimental stamp, and every Officer command-
ing a Company, is at all times authorized to call for those
stamped patterns, to compare them with those issued.
This paragraph is not to prevent Officers commanding
Companies, supplying their men with necessaries where they
can at the cheapest rate, but it is presumed, that if care and
attention is paid by the Quarter Master, he will be always
able to supply necessaries at a cheaper rate, and of a better


quality than can be procured from retail shops. The list of
prices to be hung* up in the orderly room, and a copy
furnished to each Company.
Articles of necessaries supplied by the officers com-
manding* Companies are always to be brought to the
Quarter Master to be stamped, as‘being of a proper
quality, before they are issued to the* men.
%
The Quarter Master Sergeant and Pioneers are under
this Officer’s control and management.
All bills for barrack damages are to be made out by the
Quarter Master, who will apportion the share to each
Company, and he will take care that nothing is charged
under the head of barrack damages, except the sum
actually charged by the barrack department. All bills
due to the Quarter Master for the supply of necessaries
to the different Companies, to be paid monthly, and to en-
able the Officers to charge them in their monthly accounts.
They will be sent in by the 25th of the month. The
Quarter Master will keep a book containing a debtor and
creditor account, of the necessaries issued to each
Company.
This account to be balanced and closed monthly, and
will be always kept ready for the Commanding Officer’s
inspection when called for.
Whenever the Regiment arrives at a new quarter, the
Quarter Master will be held responsible that the credit
of the regiment is cried down according to his Majesty’s
regulations, and he will always report to the Command-
ing Officer his having done so.
DRILL OF OFFICERS.
All Officers under the rank of Field Officer will, on
first joining the Regiment, be inspected as to his know


ledge, of the drill by the Major, and, when, found,perfect
by him, will be reported as such to the Commanding
Officer.
Officers who have never joined any Regiment previously,
will attend all drills, parades, Courts martial. Courts of
enquiry, &c., and are not to be put upon any duty, till
they have attained a competent knowledge of every thing
necessary for the performance of it.
Such duty will be performed the first time as a su-
pernumerary.
DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
i
Ist. The detail of Officers for duty will be always
published in orders the preceding day, knd no Officer
when once named for a particular duty, will ever change
it with another, without having previously obtained the
approval of the Commanding Officer.
FIELD OFFICER OF THE WEEK.
Whenever the number of Officers present at head quarters
will admit of it, there will be a Field Officer, or acting Field
Officer for the week, whose duty it will be to visit the men's
barracks, at least, once during the week, inspect their
cleanliness and good order, as well as to see that the
men's messing, both breakfast and dinner is conducted in
an orderly manner, and that their provisions are. good and
purchased according to standing orders. He will also
visit and inspect the regimental hospital, and the regi-
mental school, and occasionally examine the proficiency
made by the scholars, as well as into the mode of teaching
adopted by the master, and the ability shewn by him;
at the expiration of the week, he will deliver a written
report to the Commanding Officer, according to the
annexed form: —•


REPORT OF THE FIELD OFFICER OF THE
WEEK.
Visited and inspected the men's barracks and messing
during’ the preceding* week, found the barracks in good
order, {except room of No, company). The
messing was good,, and the men satisfied with the mode
of purchasing their provisions,
I visited the hospital, which was in good order (or
otherwise), and the men satisfied with their treatment.
Visited the regimental school, and was satisfied (or
otherwise) with the progress of the scholars, as well as
with the conduct and ability of the master.
(Signed)
The Field Officer of the week will also occasionally
inspect the different drill*, and notice any neglect or
inattention he may perceive, whether on the part of the
Adjutant, Serjeant Major, or Drill Sergeants, and if he
considers them of sufficient consequence, he will mention
them in his weekly report.
CAPTAIN OF THE DAY.
The Captain of the day will, consider himself as
having charge for the time, of the internal good order,
cleanliness, and regularity of the barracks, and men's
messing, in supporting which, an Orderly Subaltern
Officer is placed under his immediate orders.' He will
inspect every barrack room at the -hour of dinner, give
such orders as he may consider necessary, regarding
any want of good order or cleanliness. He will examine
the dinners, that they are of a good quality, and properly
cooked, and enquire into any complaints the men may
have.
The Captain of the day will visit the regimental hos


pital, see that it is clean, and enquire if the sick have
any complaints.
He will also visit the regimental school, at any hour he
pleases, and report whatever neglect he may perceive,
either on the part of the schoolmaster or the scholars.
He will attend all parades. The regimental guards are
placed under his charge, ahd He Will therefore visit them'
both day and night , directing the’Subaltern of the day
to visit them likewise, both by day and night, at such
hours as he may consider most proper.
The Captain and Subaltern of the day .will commence
their duty at the hour of regimental guard mounting,
and will consider themselves on duty till the guard is
relieved, although from peculiar circumstances, that may
be long after the usual time.
The Captain of the day will inspect the men's pro-
visions, before they are served out by the Quarter Master,
every morning, and prevent their being issued if they
are of a bad quality.
On being relieved, he will deliver, a written report,
with that of the Subaltern of the day, enclosed to the
Commanding Officer, according to the annexed form: —
CAPTAIN OF THE DAY'S REPORT,
Nov. 18
I visited the barracks at the hour of dinner; found the
rooms clean and in good order (or otherwise); the
dinners regular, and according to order ; no complaints
(or otherwise as may be).
I visited the regimental hospital, found it clean, and
enquired of the patients if they had any complaints (here
mention them, if any).
I visited the regimental school, found the master ab


lentive, and the scholars regular (or otherwise, as the
case may be).
I visited the regimental guards, at by day, and
at by night, and found them . I also directed
the Subaltern of the day to visit them at by day, and
at by night. I inspected the provisions for the Regi-
ment, and found them good (or otherwise).
Nothing irregular has occurred during, my tour of duty
(Signed)
SUBALTERN OFFICER OF THE DAY.
The Subaltern Officer of the day is entirely under the
i %
orders of the Captain of the day, and will attend him
when he visits the barracks at the hour of dinner.
He will visit the barracks at 8 o’clock in the morning,
when coming' off duty, see that the rooms > are well
cleaned, and that the beds are properly turned up. He
will also inspect the men’s breakfast, and insert in his
report to the Captain of the day,, whether they were of
a proper quality, and the men all present.
He will personally receive the tattoo reports, order all
lights to be extinguished, and should any men be re-
ported absent, he will immediately order patroles to be
sent out to search for them, and direct the Non-com-
missioned Officer of the patrole to report to him on his
return.
He will visit the black holes, and see that the prisoners
have their proper allowance of provisions, as well as
that their cells are properly cleaned out, and well aired.
He will visit the regimental guards at such hours as
may be pointed out by the Captain of the day.
The Orderly Officer will consider himself as liable to
be called upon at a moment’s notice, to perform any duty


that sudden emergency may require; and it is therefore
expected, that he will not leave the barracks for a longer
period than the performance of his duty may require.
In case of any alarm or riot in barracks, he will im-
mediately repair to the spot. ' He will attend all parades,
and consider himself liable to be called on at all times
to perform the duty of Adjutant, both on, the parade,
as well as in the orderly-room.
In visiting the barrack-rooms, the Orderly Officer will
be particular in seeing, that the men's arms are properly
arranged in the arm-racks, with the pans open and the
cocks down, and the accoutrements regularly hung up.
When coming off duty, the Subaltern Officer of the day
wilLsend in Report to the Captain of the day, a little
before guard mounting, according to the annexed form.
t
REPORT OF THE SUBALTERN OFFICER OF
THE DAY.
Attended the Captain of the day round the barracks,
at the hour of dinner, when every thing was regular and
according to order, (or otherwise, as may be.) Visited
the prisoners confined in the black holes, and ascer-
tained that their provisions were properly supplied,
and that the cells were well aired. I collected the
Tattoo Reports, and found all present, except
(when there are any absentees, the Officer will insert the
following paragraph in his report: —
Ordered patroles out, which returned, and reported to
me, that the absent men were (or were not) found.
Saw the lights and fires in the barracks extinguished.
Went round the barracks at breakfast hour this morn-
ing, when the beds were all folded up, and the rooms
clean. The breakfasts were good, and the men all present.
D


Visited the regimental guard, at by day, and at
by night, found them alert, and the sentries attentive.
(Signed)
SELECTION OF QUARTERS.
Whenever the Regiment changes quarters, the Officers
will choose„their rooms in barracks;.according to seniority,
and no permanent choice to be made till the head quar-
ters arrive. Any Officer who may not have arrived by
that time, must appoint some other to choose for him.
/
Officers who may be on leave of absence, have no
right, on their return, to dispossess others of their quarters,
although they may be of junior rank, but must be satis-
fied with the accommodation vacant when they arrive.
No Officer can consider himself as having a right to
more accommodation in barracks than his rank entitles
him to, whenever there are any spare rooms, they will
be appropriated by the Commanding Officer, and must
be received as a favor, not as n right.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
All Officers requiring leave of absence, must make
their application personally to the Commanding Officer,
in sufficient time to admit of its being forwarded to the
proper authority, and an answer received before its
commencement.
Application for all leaves, that do not require reference
to higher authority, will be made to the Commanding
Officer the day before it is wanted.
Officers in charge of Companies, applying for short
leaves of absence, if there is no other Officer in the Com-
pany, must get one not in charge of a Company to take
the command, &c., during their absence.


All Officers returning from leave of absence, will im-
mediately report themselves in person to the Commanding
Officer on the day of their arrival. They are. also expected
to make themselves acquainted with all orders, both
general and regimental, that may have been issued during
their absence.
REGIMENTAL COLOURS.
The colours are to be carried on parade by the two
senior Ensigns present. ,
The highest respect is invariably to be shewn them, and
no Officer or soldier should ever pass the colours of
his own Regiment, or those of any other, without saluting
them.
OFFICERS COMMANDING DETACHMENTS.
When Officers are employed on detached commands,
they are to be guided as much as possible by the*!* Regi-
mental Standing Orders ; but there are many situations
in which (from local circumstances) they must in some
degree be deviated from, and therefore much must be left
to the discretion of the Officer,
The Commanding Officer will, therefore, always con-
sider detached commands as affording him an opportunity
of forming an opinion of the judgment, zeal, and attention
of Officers so placed, who are then doubly called on to
exert themselves, to preserve the same discipline, in every
respect, as established at Head Quarters, both as to the
Officers, and men under their command.
If their men are in billets, they are to visit them fre-
quently, and use every exertion to make their men retire to
them at the beating of tattoo.
It being of the most material consequence to cultivate
the good will and confidence of the inhabitants, every
complaint made by them, should be immediately enquired
into, and instant redress given.


Nothing’ speaks so highly for the good order and disci-
pline of a Regiment, as the conduct of its detachments,
and therefore increased vigilance and activity on the part
of the Officers in those situations are necessary.
Whenever it is necessary to bring an offender to trial,
an immediate report will be made to the Commanding
Officer of the Regiment, with a detailed statement of all
the circumstances, who will take steps for having the
offender tried on the spot.
COURTS MARTIAL.
The duty of Court martial is one of the most serious
that an Officer can be employed on, and should always be
conducted with a degree of solemnity and attention, calcu-
lated to impress on the mind, not only of the prisoner, but
of the Regiment at large, that.every exertion will be made
by the >£Ourt to investigate impartially the - circumstances
against the prisoner, as well 1 as every "thing calculated to
weigh in his favor, and thereby convince them that im-
partial justice will be always administered.
The Adjutant will prepare every crime, deliver a copy
thereof to the prisoner, and lay another before the Court,
both signed or countersigned by himself. He will also
prepare a list of all evidences, both for and against. He
is to lay before the Court copies of all instructions neces-
sary for guiding the proceedings, as well as the Articles
of War.
After a copy of the crime has been given to the pri-
soner, no alteration should ever be made in it, except
under cases of peculiar urgency, and then never without
reference to the Commanding Officer.
Every Court martial will be composed of a President
and four Members, when so many can be assembled, but
when that number cannot be had, it may be composed of
a President and two Members.


Every Court martial is to be duly sworn in presence of
the prisoner. The President will first administer the oath
to the Members, after which, the senior Member will
administer the same to him. The President will also
administer the usual oath to all witnesses before re-
ceiving their evidence.
It being desirable that a uniform mode should be fol-
lowed in conducting the proceedings of all regimental
Courts martial, the following form is directed to be
invariably followed in commencing them, viz.:—
FORM.
Proceedings of a regimental Court martial, held by
order of , commanding 17th Regiment, for the
trial of ,' , No. Company.
HEAD QUARTERS, Nov. 183
President , Captain r *
Members , Lieut. Lieut.
Lieut. Ensign
The court being assembled, proceed to. the following
trial:—
PRISONER AND CRIME.
John Thomas, of No. company, tried for
on the 2d January, 1830.
By Order,
D. L.
Lieut. 17th Regt.
Adjutant.
The prisoner being called into court, and the President
and Members duly sworn, the crime is read to him, and he
is asked the following question:—
You have heard the crime with which you stand
charged, read over. Are you guilty or not guilty thereof.*
Answer. —Not guilty.


The prosecutor, Sergeant Major being duly sworn
states, that
The prosecutor having concluded evidence, which
may be given either in the form of a deposition, or by
question and answer ; is then liable to.be cross-questioned
by the prisoner, and afterwards by the Court; all evidences
called in support of the prosecution are also liable to be
cross-questioned in the same way. The iprisoner is not
liable to be on his defence; but all his
evidences are liable thereto in the same manner, as those
l 7
for the prosecution ; the prosecutor having the right of
doing so first.
The evidence of each witness must be read over to him
before he leaves the Court, and he may then make what
correction he pleases.
Although a prisoner may. plead guilty to the crime,
still evidence for the prosecution must be called, to
enable the Court to judge to what extent the prisoner may
have been guilty, and by that means apportion the punish-
ment to the extent of the crime, and also to enable the
* 7
Commanding Officer to judge how far the sentence ought
to be carried into execution.
Evidence to character may be brought forward by the
prisoner before he closes his, defence ; but if brought for-
ward by the prosecutor, it cannot be received till after
the Court has given its opinion that the prisoner is guilty,
it must then be received and recorded before the amount
of punishment is voted. Evidences to character are
always to be sworn, whether for or against the prisoner.
The President of every Regimental Court martial, must
hold himself responsible for the correctness and le-
gality of the proceedings. It is his duty to point out to the
young Members what the law is, and by explaining to them


the different modes of punishment apportioned to the
crime, enable them to form a more correct judgment than
might be expected from their own experience.
When more than one prisoner is to be tried'by the same
Court, the whole proceedings must be commenced afresh,
and entirely unconnected with the preceding one.
No person, whether Officer, Non-commissioned Officer,
or soldier, should ever be permitted to appear before a
Court martial, unless properly dressed in his uniform.
COURTS OF ENQUIRY.
Evidence before a Court of Enquiry is not to be taken
on oath, neither are the Members composing it to be
sworn.
A court of enquiry may consist of a President and four
(or two) Members (as ordered). The court will not
record its opinion unless particularly ordered to do so,
but the proceedings in every case will be signed by the
President and all the Members..
No person having sat as Member of a Court of Enquiry,
can afterwards sit as Member of a Court martial, ordered
for the investigation of circumstances that have been sub-
mitted to the Court of enquiry.
MODE OF MAKING APPLICATIONS.
On till occassions when Officers are desirous of com-
municating officially with the Commanding Officer, they
are requested to do so in person at his quarters, and cer-
tain hours will be appointed in orders for receiving those
communications, according to the nature of the service in
the country where the Regiment may be serving.
As the Commanding Officer will be always open to,
and ready to receive communications from his Officers in
person, at any hour when the urgency of the case requires


it, all applications’ in writing* are forbidden, except in
very peculiar circumstances, such as will prevent their
being* personally made.
All applications from Non-commissioned Officers must
be made to the Commanding* Officer, through the Officer
commanding the company, or the Adjutant.
No Non-commissioned Officer or soldier is ever per-
mitted to address the Commanding Officer on parade ex-
cise where, unless he is accompanied by the Officer com-
manding the company. They are never to go to his quar-
ters for that purpose, but if at any time their applications
are refused to be forwarded by the Officer of the company,
they are permitted to make them themselves, by attend-
ing at the orderly room, and respectfully submitting them
through the Adjutant.
MEETINGS OF OFFICERS.
All meetings of Officers, or Non-commissioned Officers,
(unless called with the sanction of the Commanding
Officer), being contrary, to his Majesty's regulations, are
strictly forbidden.
SALUTING.
Officers should never allow either Non-commissioned
Officers or privates to pass them, either on parade or else-
where, without paying the proper compliment due to
their rank, and they should be most particular on this
point with all sentries.
END OF PART FIRST.


SECOND PART.
NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS.
There is no part of a Regiment that requires more
constant care and vigilance than that of the Non-com-
missioned Officers, nor is there any, where the bad conduct
of individuals will have more injurious effects. The Non-
comissioned Officers form a body in direct contact with
the private soldier, and a bad example set by them, will
have a more demoralizing effect than it would from those
of higher rank. The Non-commissioned Officers are
therefore called on to pay the strictest obedience to all
orders from their superiors, and to exact the same from
all under thorn. They are to be constant and unceasing
in their attention to their own duty, and by the strict
example they shew in this respect, encourage the men to
do the same. They are never to treat any man with
unnecessary rigour or harshness, but, when required, they
must enforce discipline with firmness and decision.
Arguments between Non-commissioned Officers and
privates, on points of duty, must never be permitted, the
former will give his orders, and if not obeyed, he will
instantly report the circumstance to higher authority, or
confine the man in the guard room. The conduct of the
Non-commissioned Officers to men in a state of intoxication,
must be particularly guarded, they must always remember,
that men in that state are not in possession of their senses,
and therefore ought never to be irritated or goaded on to
„ommit crime. If a drunken man is quiet and inoffensive,
he should be allowed to remain in his barrack room, and
reported when he is sober. If he is refractory, a file of
the guard should be instantly sent for, and he must be
taken away by force, and confined in a separate place from
E


the guard or other prisoners till he is sober. When force
is necessary, it must be used by the privates of the guard,
not by the Non-commissioned Officers.
Non-commissioned Officers must be particularly careful,,
that they at all times pay the utmost respect to all Offi-
cers, but more particularly to the young ones ; any advan-
tage taken of the want of experience in a young Officer,
by a Non-commissioned Officer, will be punished most
severely by the Commanding Officer.
Non-commissioned Officers are never to use harsh or
opprobrious language to the men; they are never to swear
at them, or to call unbecoming names, and on no occasion,
are they ever to strike them.
When off duty, the Non-commissioned Officers will
always treat the men with civility, but never with famili-
arity, and no excuse will ever be received for a Non-com-
missioned Officer having been found drinking with the
privates.
i
The Non-commissioned Officers must be responsible
for the cleanliness and good order of the barrack rooms
they individually belong to, as well as that the arms and
accoutrements of the men are properly arranged.
Although the Commanding Officer is determined to
watch most carefully the conduct of the Non-commissioned
Officers towards the men, to see that they do not exceed
their authority, either by unnecessary harshness or irri-
tation ; he is also determined to support them most strenu-
ously in the execution of their duty: and insolence to a
Non-commissioned Officer will never be allowed to pass
unpunished.
THE SERGEANT MAJOR.
The Sergeant Major is placed at the head of all the
Non-commissioned Officers, and inferior only to the


commissioned Oflicer; he is at all times to be treated
with the greatest respect, by every part of the Regiment.
He will consider the Non-commissioned Officers as under
his immediate charge, and all neglects and inattentions on
their part will be noticed by him.
He will particularly endeavour to make himself ac-
quainted with the character of every man in the Regiment.
He is to attend all parades, and all drills, to the latter
of which, he will pay constant attention, and be particu-
larly careful that the drill Sergeapts do their duty, and
that the drill is conducted, and the recruit, instructed
strictly in compliance with His Majesty’s Regulations ;
any deviation from which, he will immediately correct.
No squad of recruits shall ever be sent to their duty, till
they are inspected first by the Sergeant Major, and after-
wards by the Adjutant.
The Sergeant Major will alway consider himself the
head of the Sergeants’ mess, and any irregularities com-
mitted, or alterations wished for, will be communicated
by him, through the Adjutant, to the Commanding Officer.
He will also conduct the roster of duties for the Non-
commissioned Officers, and will take care that strict jus-
tice is done every one.
The Sergeant Major is not subject to be reproved by
any Officer, but the Commanding Officer and the Adju-
tant. If any Officer has cause of complaint against him,
he will refer it to the Commanding Officer.
QUARTER-MASTER SERGEANT.
The Quarter-Master Sergeant, is next in rank to the
Sergeant Major, but he is under the control ot the
Quarter Master. His attention will be particularly direct


ed to tho cleanliness and good order of tho barracks, which
ho is frequently to visit, and to report all neglects. He
is also to pay groat attention to the issue of all provisions
for the Regiment, that tho proper quantity of every article
is issued; he is to aid and assist tho Quarter Master in
every branch of his duty, and obey all orders he may re-
ceive from him.
THE DRILL SERGEANTS.
The Drill Sergeant has not only the care of teaching
the recruit under his charge, which he is directed to do,
in strict compliance with His Majesty's Regulations, but
he is also called on to aid and assist the Sergeant Major
in all his duties ; and all irregularities and neglects that
come under his notice, are to be immediately reported by
him to the Sergeant Major.
He will also superintend the drill of all defaulters, and
be careful that instruction is combined with punishment.
COLOUR SERGEANTS.
Th is honorary Badge having been granted by His Ma-
jesty, as a reward for faithful and meritorious services,
the Sergeants holding it, will be always considered as the
Sergeant Majors of the Company, and command all other
Non-commissioned Officers, the regimental Sergeant Major
and Quarter Master Sergeant excepted.
Tho Commanding Officer hopes, that every Sergeant
receiving this honour, will consider the high value of the
distinction conferred on him, and that it will instigate him
to increased zeal and attention to his duties.
No Sergeant has any claim to this situation, but from
meritorious service, and on such only, will it be conferred.
PAY SERGEANTS.
Much depends on the Pay Sergeant, regarding tho


peace and good order of the Company. Particular care
must be taken, that the strictest justice is done by the
Pay Sergeant, that he is never permitted to derive a pro-
fit, from the purchase of any part of the men’s neces-
saries or provisions.
No Pay Sergeant is ever to purchase any article of
necessaries or other supplies for the men, except by the
previous order of the Officer commanding the Company ;
and any instance occurring in disobedience of this order,
will be most severely noticed.
The Pay Sergeant is to be exempt from Company’s order-
ly duty, but this will not exempt him from being equally
responsible with the other Non-commissioned Officers, for
the good order and cleanliness of the barrack ; and the
arms and accoutrements are particularly under his charge.
When the conduct of a Pay Sergeant, is equally meri-
torious in every respect with others, the Commanding
Officer will always consider, his holding that situation, as
giving him a superior claim to the situation of Colour
Sergeant.
No Staff Sergeant is permitted to hold the situation of
Pay Sergeant.
THE ARMOURER SERGEANT.
•
The Regimental Armourer having the full rank of
Sergeant, is entitled in every respect, to be treated as such.
His attention is to be entirely given up to the repair of
arms, and other regimental work.
tie is never to receive a firelock for repair, without a
ticket from the Pay Sergeant specifying the particulars ;
and if his bills are afterwards disputed, and this point
neglected, the decision will always be given against him.
He will make out his bills monthly, and deliver them


lo the Companies by the 25th of each month, to give time
tor their being inserted in the account closed on the end
of the month. The Armourer’s bills to be invariably paid
monthly .
The Armourer will be guided in his prices, by the rule
laid down in the letter from the Horse Guards, dated
All complaints against the Armourer Sergeant, will be
submitted to the Commanding Officer for his decision.
SCHOOLMASTER SERGEANT. AND SCHOOL.
The Schoolmaster will give in a report every week
to the orderly room, stating the number of scholars that
attended school the preceding week, with the number
absent, and the reasons of their being so. In this report
he will specify in separate columns the number of chil-
dren, male and female, and the number of Non-commis-
sioned Officers and soldiers.
When the Schoolmaster requires stationery, he will
apply to the Quarter Master, who will supply him there-
with, keeping a regular account, which will be balanced
every half-year, at the expiration of which time, should
any balance remain in the fund, the Commanding Officer
will give directions regarding its appropriation.
The Schoolmaster will keep a book, in which he will
enter the name, age, and sex, of every child, as well as
the date of their joining the school, and of their leaving it,
with the cause of the latter.
The names of the Non-commissioned Officers and Pri-
vates attending the School, are also to be inserted in the
same book, and the dates of their joining and leaving it.
The Schoolmaster will also insert in the same book, the
general character and progress of all the children, and the
progress of the Non-commissioned Officers and men.


Every Non-commissioned Officer or private man that
wishes it, has the option of attending the school, and as
the knowledge of writing and reading is almost indispensi-
ble in a Non-commissioned Officer, the Commanding
Officer strongly recommends every one desirous of raising
himself in his profession, to avail himself of the oppor-
tunity afforded him.
The books provided for the use of the school, are never
to be taken out of the school room, nor are the copy books
of the scholars to be taken away ; they will always be
kept ready for inspection, when called for by the visiting
Officer.
The utmost respect and obedience to be paid to the
Schoolmaster, by every person attending the school ; and
he is directed to make an immediate report, of any person
infringing this regulation, or transgressing any of the rules
of the school,
The school to be opened every day except Sunday. The
hours of instruction must Vary according to the climate the
Regiment may be serving in.
A book to be kept at the school, in which the visiting
Officer will be pleased to insert any observations he may
think necessary, regarding the conduct of the Schoolmas-
ter, his ability for the situation, and whether he follows a
proper mode of teaching. Any particular irregularities
should also be noted in this book by the visiting Officer.


WEEKLY REPORT of the REGIMENTAL SCHOOLMASTER.
Number of Children.
N on-com missioned
Officers, and Privates.
Total Number on the
School Books.
Boys.
Girls.
N on-commission
Officers.
Privates.
Present
Absent
Present
Absent.
Present
Absent
Present
Absent.
Bo3’s.
Girls.
Non-com.
Officers.
Privates.
Monday . .. .
T nesday ....
Wednesday. .
Thursday. ,. .
Friday
Saturday....
Total. .
•
FORM of School Master’s Weekly Report.


Hours of attendance, for children, from 9 till 12, and 2
till 4.
Hours of attendance, for Non-commissioned Officers, and
Privates,
Of the Children reported absent, two were sick, the
others without cause.
Of the Non-commissioned Officers reported absent, three
were on duty, two sick/and two without cause.
Of the Privates reported absent, two were on duty, two
sick, and one without cause.
«
On the back of the Report will be inserted the names of
all those absent without due cause.
REGIMENTAL CLERK.
The duty of the Regimental Clerk is entirely confined
to the Orderly Room, and he is placed under the special
charge and control of the Adjutant.
He is never to be employed by any other Officer without
the permission of the Commanding Officer.
THE BAND.
The Master of the Band, having the rank of Sergeant,
will be responsible for the conduct and behaviour of the
men composing the Band. He will never parade, or as-
semble the Band, (except for practise), without the per-
mission of the Commanding Officer. He will be held
responsible for the care of the instruments, and music ; and
any damage or loss to either, arising from neglect, will bo
charged to the Master’s account, unless reported by him
at the time it happened.
The Band Master will make no changes amongst the
men of the Band without the Commanding Officer’s know-
ledge and permission, or that of the Officer in charge.
F


No Officer is ever to interfere with the Band arrange-
ments, except those who may be appointed by the Com-
manding Officer to the special charge of it.
The Band is never to be taken to play at any place, pub-
lic or private, except with the approbation of the Com-
manding Officer.
MASTER TAILOR AND TAILORS.
The Master Tailor, and Tailors, are placed under the
charge and control of the Quarter-master ;• when regi-
mental clothing is in hand he will not allow any of them
to be employed in private work, without the leave of the
Commanding Officer. When not so employed, they are
allowed to work for Officers; and regulated prices will be
fixed on by a Committee of Officers.
SHOEMAKERS.
Whenever it becomes necessary to employ Shoemakers
to do regimental work, they are also to be placed under
the charge and control of the Quarter-master; and the
prices charged for their work will be regulated by a Com-
mittee of Officers.
DRUM-MAJOR.
The Drum-major is to take charge of all the Drummers
and Fifers, and will be held responsible not only for their
general conduct, but that they are properly instructed in
their different duties. He will take them himself to prac-
tise every day, when not prevented by duty, or other un-
avoidable necessity ; and he will consider himself an-
swerable for their making proper progress. The drums
and fifes are to be placect under his immediate care ; —he
will inspect them frequently, and any loss, or damage, that
may occur, will be charged against his account, unless
reported by him at the time.


The Prum-majpr will regulate the duties fpr the drum-
mers, fpr which purpose he will keep a roster, and be
careful that suo injustice is dppe.
ORDERLY SERGEANTS, AND CORPORALS.
An Orderly Sergeant, and Orderly Corppral, will be
appointed every day, fpr the duties of the Regiment.
The Orderly Sergeant is to attend the Captain and Su-
baltern ojf the day, when-they visit the barracks.
He will collect the ‘Tattoo Reports, with the Subaltern
of the day, and afterwards accompany him to see the lights
and fires extinguished.
He will never be absent from the barracks duripg the
day or night; neither is he ever to be seen in the canteen,
or other place of public resort, for the purpose of drinking,
but will be always ready to attend when called for whe-
ther by the Officers on duty, the Adjutant, or the Sergeant
Major.
The Orderly .Corppral is .to go round the barracks every
morning at 7 o'clock, collect the names of all men re-
ported sick. He will afterwards parade those men for the
inspection of the Surgeon-at S o'elock, and he will be
careful to immediately march back all those who have not
been declared sick on examination, and report their names
to the Orderly room.
He will never absent himself.from the barracks during
his ,tour of duty, nor .is he .to .resort to the canteen, but bo
at all times ready when called on.
If the Orderly Sergeant should be sent away on any
other duty, the Orderly Corporal will take his place.
There will also be an Orderly Sergeant, and Corporal,
for each Company, to be relieved weekly ; they will bo
held responsible for the interior cleanliness of the barracks.


as well as the regularity with which the arms, accoutre-
ments, knapsacks, and clothing, are arranged, and put by
in each room. They will attend every parade, whether of
iho whole or any part of the Company, as well as that of
every party that may be paraded for duty. They will be
answerable that the sick of the Company are assembled
at the hour ordered, and given over to the Regimental Or-
derly Corporal.
The Orderly Sergeant of the Company will always at-
tend when the drum beats for orders, and will copy them
into the Orderly book. He will prepare and fill up States
of the Company, for every parade of the Regiment; and
he will deliver a copy of the same at the Orderly room
every morning.
He will [be answerable that the Company is warned in
sufficient time for every parade, or other duty ; that all
orders relating to the men, are communicated to them ; and
lie will also be responsible that all orders are imme-
diately communicated to the Officers of the Company, and
i iiatthey arc duly warned for all extra parades or duties.
The Orderly Sergeant will see that the Company falls
in on its private parade in the different squads; and after
the roll being called, and the squads inspected, by the se-
veral Non-commissioned Officers ; he will assemble the
whole Company, and carefully inspect their arms, ac-
coutrements, and cleanliness, himself, before the arrival of
his Officer, to whom he will immediately report all de-
faulters. The Orderly Sergeant being liable to be called
on at any hour, to answer all matters regarding his bar-
racks and men, will not absent himself without leave,
which must be obtained from the Commanding Officer
through the Adjutant.
Whenever the garrison details will admit of it, the Com-
pany Orderly Sergeants, or Corporals, are not to be put on


guard, or other detached duty, for the week, but wrtll con-
sider themselves for the time entirely employed in the in-
terior cleanliness and good order of the Company.
The Orderly Sergeant will call the roll of his Company,
at tattoo, and at all other times ordered ; and will be held
responsible that no man is reported present who is not ac-
tually so.
PRIVATE SOLDIER.
A good soldier is obedient to his Officer, sober, and re-
gular in his quarters, attentive to the care of his arms and
accoutrements, clean in his person, and careful of his
clothing and regimental necessaries. He should obey all
orders quickly and cheerfully, and discharge every
duty with alertness and exactness.
Every means should be made use of to impress upon the
mind of the young soldier, the necessity of avoiding the
destructive and prevalent vice of drunkenness ; —to this
vice may be attributed almost every crime committed, and
when once a soldier gives himself up to this temptatio n
he may consider his ruin as complete, and disgrace and
])unishment certain.
A man once known to be addicted to drinking can never
be placed in a situation of either trust or confidence, and
therefore he must not expect promotion. The plea of
drunkenness will never be admitted as an extenuation of
crime, on the contrary, it will be considered an aggrava-
tion, and not only increase the extent of punishment, but
prevent the Commanding Officer from extending pardon
where ho might otherwise have felt a wish so to do.
A drunken soldier, when inclined to be riotous, is never
u) be expostulated with, but is to be immediately confined,
and, if necessary, a guard sent for, and force made use of.
The well-conducted soldier will always meet with cn


couragement and support from his Officers, and no oppor-
tunity will ever be omitted of increasing* his comforts, and
promoting his advancement in life.
No soldier is ever to reply to an Officer, or Non-com-
missioned Officer, when reported for neglect, either on the
parade or on duty; and any one persisting in doing so,
after being ordered to keep silence, is to 'be immediately
confined.
♦
Every soldier should be careful of his regimental ne-
cessaries, that they are neither lost nor destroyed, nor other-
wise made away with. Selling or exchanging necessaries
is strictly forbidden ; and this crime being a breach of the
Articles of War, the Commanding Officer will never
overlook.
Soldiers having applications or complaints to make will
request a Non-commissioned Officer of their Company to
accompany them to their Officer, to whom they will make
their representations in a respectful manner, and they will
always be received and complied with, or redressed, as far
as circumstances will permit.
No soldier, or Non-commissioned Officer, is ever to pass
an Officer without paying him the proper compliment, and
sentries are to be most particular in this respect.
All cursing, swearing, .and obscene language,aro strictly
forbidden, and persons making use of cither, will bo pu-
nished for disobeying this order.
Any soldier concealing disease, or using other medi-
cines to cure himself, besides those supplied him by the
Surgeon, will be punished.
Gambling is most strictly forbidden, and men caught in
the act are to bo immediately reported to the Orderly
room.


Quarrels or riots, either in barracks or elsewhere,
amongst the soldiers themselves, or between the soldiers
and the inhabitants, are most disgraceful to the credit of a
Regiment, and every exertion 'must be used to prevent
them, the offender in all cases to be immediately confined,
and the Commanding Officer will never overlook crimes of
this sort.
Particular attention and respect is invariably to be paid
to the Magistrates, and every branch of the civil power,
without reference to the rank of the individual who may
be in office. They are at all times to be implicitly obeyed
and every support given them.
No soldier is ever to put a private mark or in any
manner to alter, any part of his arms, accoutrements, clo-
thing, or appointments, without leave ; any man disobey-
ing this order will be severely punished.
No soldier is ever to take his arms or accoutrements out
of barracks, or quarters, without leave, or to do dirty
work in his regimentals.
No Non-commissioned Officer, or soldier, is ever to ap-
pear out of the barracks unless properly dressed, according
to the orders of the Regiment, and any person seen out in
disobedience of this order to be confined. All guards
and sentries are particularly ordered to stop every one at-
•:erupting to leave the barracks improperly dressed
No Non-commissioned Officer, or soldier, isevor to marry
without the permission of the Commanding Officer, in
writing, and which must bo applied for through his Cap-
tain, or Officer commanding his Company. Any man
disobeying this order will be confined to barracks, and his
wife never admitted into them, nor will she ever be con-
sidered as one of the women belonging to the Regiment,
or receive any indulgence as such.


No soldier will ever receive a furlough', or pass, whose
name has appeared in the list of defaulters, during the pre-
ceding three months.
Any soldier who may think himself injured, or treated
with injustice, either by his Officer, Non-commissioned Of-
ficer, or any other person, is at liberty to make his com-
plaint to the Commanding Officer, through the Officer
commanding his Company ; but if the Officer should re-
fuse to forward it, he is at liberty to refer to the Com-
manding Officer direct, by whom his complaint will not
only be received, but the most impartial justice afforded.
And should the complaint prove a just one, he need not
fear that any future severity will be shewn him for having
made it: at the same time the Commanding Officer pledges
himself to support most strenuously both Officers, and
Non-commissioned Officers, in the execution of their duty,
mid that frivolous complaints against either will bo en-
iirely disregarded, and unjust or malicious ones punished
with severity.
Books will in future bo kept in which not only the
names of those men who have committed crime will
bo enrolled, but a separate part will be allotted for
the names of all men who have been distinguished for so-
briety, cleanliness, and other good qualities ; and as this
book will be the principal guide in making out discharges,
and recommending men for pensions, the Commanding Of-
ficer takes this opportunity of exhorting the men to con-
sider the material effect their good or bad conduct may
have on their comforts hereafter, as on that will princi-
pally depend the rate of pension they may receive on dis-
charge, at a time of life when, from ago or disease, they
may be incapacitated from assisting themselves, and a copy
of this character being sent to their parishes, it will, if a
bud one, prevent their receiving any assistance there.


INTERIOR ECONOMY OF COMPANIES,
Each Company will be told off in three Squads, a Ser-
geant and Corporal to be appointed to the charge of each
-quad.
The Colour Sergeant being considered as Company
Sergeant Major, to be exempt from this duty, and will
superintend the whole. When three Sergeants are not
present, the senior Corporal will take charge of one squad;
and, in all cases when the Sergeants are away on duty,
the Corporal of the squad will take his place.
The squads will fall in separately when the first bugle
sounds, a quarter of an hour before the parade of the Com-
pany is formed, and be inspected by the Non-commissioned
Officers, who will report all absentees to the Orderly
Sergeant, as well as all men late in turning out, and those
who are dirty, either in person, arms, or accoutrements.
The Non-commissioned Officers in charge of squads,
will be answerable for the cleanliness and regularity of
ihc men of their squad, as well in barracks, as on parade.
The Colour Sergeant of the Company, will keep a roll of
each squad, with the na.i.o of the Non-commissioned Of-
ficers in charge, and when he reports a defaulter, cither to
his own. Officcror the Orderly-room, ho will state the squad
the man belongs to, and the name of the Non-commissioned
Officer in charge.
Each squad to be divided into two or more messes, and
the Non-commissioned Officers in charge will attend to
the regularity of the messing, and be held responsible that
the men sit down to breakfast and dinner, clean and pro-
perly dressed.
All married men arc to bo told off in the squads, the
same as others, and will comply with every regulation re-
el


garding them, messing’ excepted, which they are per-
mitted to do by themselves, as long as their own conduct
and that of their wives is such as to entitle them to this in-
dulgence.
Particular attention must be paid, both by Officers and
Non-commissioned Officers, to the state of the men's ne-
cessaries, which are, to be inspected every week, and all
deficiences immediately replaced. The necessaries must
be of the established pattern, as well in quality as in other
respects, and every article marked with the man's name,
and the regimental stamp. The Pay Sergeants are never to
be permitted to supply any description of necessaries with-
out the particular order of the Officer commanding the
Company, who will always give him a written order, when
they are to be procured at a shop. Any Pay-sergeant dis-
obeying this order will be tried by a Court Martial. The
vegetables, coffee, tea, and sugar, or whatever other ar-
ticles may be provided for the men’s messing, in addition to
their bread and meat, will be paid for by a Non-commis-
sioned Officer of each mess, who will receive the money
from the Pay Sergeant, and pay it away in presence of a
private man from each mess.
A regular weekly sum will be stopped from each man and
paid by the Pay Sergeant of the Company to the women
who wash for them ; —the amount will be fixed according
to the season of the year, and the country the Regiment is
serving in.
Whenever a man becomes non-effective, cither by death
or desertion, the Officer commanding the Company will, in
presence of two other Officers, cause an inventory to be
taken of the effects left behind ; these will afterwards be
sold by public auction, of which three days previous no-
tice will be given, and every man in the Regiment per-
mitted to attend, and nurchase anv article he mav wish, if


he is not in debt, to the amount of seven days full stop-
pages ; this amount he must not exceed, without his Of-
ficers permission. The Sergeant Major is always to be
the auctioneer.
Assignment rolls from each Company to be sent to the
Orderly-room, by the sth of each month, signed by the Of-
ficer commanding the Company. This roll will contain a
statement of the debt or credit of every man in the Com-
pany, with his signature affixed ; —men who are in hos-
pital, or absent, will have it so stated opposite their names.
The usual certificate to be aflixedatthe bottom of the roll.
MEN'S ACCOUNTS, AND ACCOUNT BOOKS.
A ledger will be kept in each Company in which every
man's name belonging to it will be entered alphabetically.
Every article issued to the men during the month, as
well as their pay received, bread and meat, and other sub-
sistence, washing,&c. will be entered under separate heads,
with the exact price of each article, and the date of de-
livery, and no charge shall bo made, except such as are
in strict conformity with His Majesty's Regulations.
No erasures, or alteration of figures, shall ever be made
in the ledger. If an error occurs, either in the price
charged on any article, in the credit given to the man, or
in adding up and balancing the account, it will be no-
ticed in the succeeding month's account, as follows :—By
error in last month’s account on overcharged, or
undercharged, as the case may bo.
Whenever an alteration is unavoidable, it will always he
made in red ink.
Every account to be balanced and closed monthly, and
signed by the man, if he can write, if not, his mark to bo
affixed; it will also be signed by the Captain or Officer


commanding’ the Company, and it is desirable that it should
be witnessed by an Officer, if there is a second doing* duty ;
if not, by a Serg*eant, not being* the Pay-serg*eant.
Nothing* shall ever be charged under the head of bar-
rack damages, beyond the exact proportion of the charg*e
made by the Quarter-master ag*ainst the Company, as re-
ceived by him from the Barrack Master.
The accounts of every man in hospital, to be closed
monthly, and the balance carried forward to the next
month's accounts; this practice is never to be deviated
from.
Whenever compensation, in lieu of clothing* or on any
account, is to bo paid a soldier, whether it is done in con-
sequence of his being* about to be discharged, or for any
other reason, it will invariably be done through the Of-
ficer commanding the Company, and the amount inserted
in the ledger.
The statement of accounts of all non-effective men,
transmitted to the War Office, and signed by the Officer
commanding the Company, is in every instance to be a
bona fide copy of the entries in the ledg*er, and to the fol-
lowing extent, viz.—lf the man has been present with the
Regiment for three months, the statement to be made up
from the latest period of settlement prior to the man be-
coming non-effective. If the man has not been present
with the Regiment for three months, the statement is to
be made up from the date of his enlistment (if recruited at
Head Quarters), or from the date on which ho joined, if
sent from a detached party.
The Memorandum, or Day-book, to be of the prescribed
form and size, and every article charged to have the price
set down separately, as also the date of delivery.
The account to be added up and closed monthly, and


the total amount charged for articles furnished during the
month, to be stated at the bottom.
The men's Small Account Books to be kept strictly ac-
cording to regulations, and the Officer commanding the
Company will be held responsible, not only for the cor-
rect entry of the monthly balance, but also that the de-
scription of the man, and the statement of his services, un-
dergo no alteration, after being tilled up and signed by
the Commanding Officer, and Adjutant; and to ensure this,
frequent inspections of the small books will be made, and
they are to be shewn at every inspection of necessaries.
When those books are worn out, application will be
made to the Orderly-room for new ones, and when they
are received, the man's description, service, &c. will be en-
tered from the old ones ; both books will then be sent
back to the orderly-room, for the purpose of being proved
and having the Commanding Officer's signature affixed.
The signature of the Commanding Officer will exonerate
the Officer of the Company from any blame respecting im-
proper credit given to the man, either as to age or service,
but not from the responsibility of the book being care-
fully preserved without alteration or erasure. Should any
man lose his book, a new one will be applied for, and in
that case, the age, and service, will bo filled up in the or-
derly-room.
ARMS, ACCOUTREMENTS, AND AMMUNITION.
The arms, and accoutrements, are under the special care
and responsibility of the Captain, or Officer commanding
the Company.
The barrel of the firelock is never to bo taken out of the
stock without leave, neither are men to bo permitted to
screw in their flints with their ramrods. Whenever fire-
locks require repair, they are to be sent to the Armourer
with a ticket from the Pay-sergeant of the Company,
without which they are not to be received.


The arms of the Company to be kept in a constant state
of good order, and no excuse will be received for their
being* otherwise, unless the cause was reported at the time
it happened.
The spare arms to be kept in the arm-chest, and con-
stantly looked after to see that they are lit for service, and
none are ever to be placed there without being* first put
in thorough repair.
The number of the Regiment and letter of the Com-
pany to be marked on each firelock.
The accoutrements are never to be cut, or have holes
made in them, except by order of the Commanding* Officer.
The ammunition to be inspected weekly, by the Officers
commanding Companies, and a report sent to the Orderly-
room, every Monday morning, specifying the state it was
found in, as well as any deficiencies that may have taken
place, and whether they have been from neglect or other-
wise.
BARRACKS.
On first taking possession of a barrack, every utensil
will be delivered over in complete repair, after which, the
Company will be considered responsible for the care of
them. The messes will be immediately formed, and the
number of each mess, with the Captain’s name posted up
on the door of each Room.
A dinner drum will beat every day at one o’clock, for
the men to sit down to dinner ; a quarter of an hour pre-
vious to which, taps will be beat on the drum, through
the barracks as a signal to take up the dinners.
The men are to sit down in a clean and orderly manner.
The dinners of the men on duty, are to be sent to them
under charge of a Non-commissioned Officer.


Every man to get out of bed at six o’clock in summer,
and seven in winter; the beds to be folded up immediatelyi
after, and the rooms cleaned out, ready for breakfast, and
for the inspection of the orderly Officer,
One day in the week, will be appointed for airing the
bedding, on which day, the beds and every article of bed-
ding will be taken out and exposed to the air, and the
rooms thoroughly cleaned out.
The Tattoo Reports being collected at the proper hour,
immediately afterwards, all lights and fires to be ex-
tinguished, except those for which special leave Has been
given, and the men will retire to their beds at the same
time.
GUARDS
The strictest attention must be paid by every person on
Guard, they are to be ready to turn out at a moment's no-
tice, day and night, and no part of the accoutrements is
ever to be allowed to be taken offi
The orders of tlie Guard, to be read to the men immedi-
ately after mounting, and no man to bo permitted to leave
his Guard, except in cases of urgent necessity.
The sentries to be visited frequently, both by day and
night, and every attention paid to keep them alert on
their posts.
Every relief is to be inspected before marching out, by
the Officer or Non-commissioned Officer, who will be
responsible, that every man is in perfect order.
Particular attention to bo paid by the Corporal march-
ing each relief, that the men keep their files well locked
up, that their arms are properly supported, and a strict
silence preserved..


No Gambling* or drinking* is ever to be permitted in a
Guard room, nor are improper women ever to be admit-
ted in, or permitted to hover about the doors ; nor are
the men to be seen speaking to them.
A sentinel (in dry weather) is to walk briskly back and
forward on his post; and he is never to sit down, whistle,
sing, smoke, or hold conversation with any person what-
ever ; he is to carry his arms to all Officers under the rank
of Field Officer, and to present his arms to all General,
and Field Officers, as well as to all Commanders, Cap-
tains, and Admirals in the Navy. He is to present arms
to all parties under arms, passing his post, when a drum
is beat; —if there is no drum, he is to carry arms.
Sentinels posted on ramparts or out-works, are always
to face outwards, and to continue so, when they salute an
Officer, though he may pass in their rear. They are in all
cases, to keep their post clear, to suffer no rioting about
it, and when they challenge at night, they are to do it
in a brisk, loud, and clear voice, at the distance of twenty to
forty yards, and remain with their arms ported, ready to
defend themselves, till their challenge is answered.
A sentinel is never to communicate his orders to any
person, except the Commandant of the garrison, the Field
Officer, or Captain of the day; the town, or fort Major,
and the Officers, and Non-commissioned Officers of the
Guard; neither is he ever to receive orders, from any other
person, except as above.
No sentinel is ever to quit his post, till regularly
relieved, either on plea of sickness, or on any other
cause; in the event of his requiring to do so, he will
call for the corporal of the Guard, who will relieve him
if necessary. Any sentinel allowing himself to be reliev-
ed, except in the presence of the Non-commissioned Offi-
cer of the Guard, will be severely punished, as well as
the man that relieves him.


A sentinel mav order his arms, and stand at ease for
w - *
live minutes at a time, but while doing- so, he must pre-
serve silence, and steadiness. When an Officer approaches
his post, he will immediately pome to attention, and re-
main so, till the Officer is passed.
Sentinels are to salute Officers at all times, day or
nig-ht, whenever there is sufficient light to distinguish
them.
All regimental Guards, will turn out to their own Com-
manding Officer, whatever rank he holds, with presented
arms, whenever he passes. To all Field Officers, they
will turn out once a day, with shouldered arms, —at other
times, they will stand by their arms.
Any Officer, or Non-commissioned Officer wishing to
confine a man, will send him to the barrack Guard ; a
crime in writing will N either be sent with him, or immedi-
ately afterwards.
A man once confined, can never be released by any
one but the Commanding Officer.
Whenever a man is confined by an Officer, who does
not Sommand, the company the offender belongs to, he
will send notice of it to the Officer commanding it, and
a Non-commissioned Officer confining a man, will im-
mediately report his having done so, to the Officer com-
manding the company, as also to the Adjutant.
The Sergeant of the Guard will be held responsible,
that liquor is not allowed to be brought to any prisoner in
confinement; that no provision is brought him, but what is
prescribed by regulation ; that no cards, pipes, or tobacco is
ever allowed him; that no persons are permitted to see
IfitP, or talk tp him without permission.
H


He will also pay particular attention to the cleanliness
both of the prisoner's person, as well, as that of the place
of confinement, and immediately report any circumstance
that prevents either.
The Sergeant of the Guard, will send a report every
morning before he is relieved, to the Captain of the day,
and a duplicate thereof to the Adjutant, in which he will
specify the number of prisoners in his charge,—the crimes
for which they were confined; —(the originals to be al-
ways sent to the Orderly room) ; —the number of days and
nights they have been confined, and whether in the (( black
hole/' or “ guard room."
PUNISHMENTS.'
There is no part of the interior ecbnomy of a Regiment,
that requires more attention, , than the system of Punish-
ment adopted, and the mode of carrying it into execution.
None should ever be but what is strictly con-
sistent with the orders of the Commander-in-Chief, and
it must be carried through with decision and firmness, but
without either unnecessary harshness, or irritation, and by
that means convince the soldier, that his punishment arises
from the necessity, of supporting discipline and good con-
duct, and not from any pleasure that is felt in seeing him
punished.
2. Officers commanding Companies, are permitted to
order punishment for trifling offences, according to a scale
which will be furnished them by the Adjutant, and this
must always be ordered on the parade ; and Officers are
most positively forbidden, from ordering punishments in any
other place, or without hearing the offender’s story from
himself. Every punishment ordered by an Officer, will
be reported the same day to the Orderly room, for the
information and approval of the Commanding Officer.


3. All crimes of a serious nature are to be brought be-
fore the Commanding Officer at the Orderly room, at such
hours as he may appoint. The Officer commanding the
the Company will always attend, as well as the Non-
commissioned Officers of the squad the prisoner belongs
to.—The Adjutant and Sergeant Major, are also to be
present.
4. Men confined, when in a state of intoxication, are
always to be sent to the black hole, and not confined in
the guard room, where they are liable to be teased, and
irritated.
5. A Non-commissioned Officer is never to be sent to the
guard room, he is to be placed in arrest, and confined to
his room, whenever his conduct is such, as to render con-
finement necessary.
6. A Non-commissioned Officer, is never to be permitted
to resign his situation, in preference to being tried by a
Court Martial—the custom is illegal.
7. Men confined in the black hole, are for the time
placed under the special charge of the Sergeant Major,
who will supply them with provision, and receive the
regular rate of payment from the Pay Sergeants of Com
panics.
8. The Drum Major is charged with the care of pro-
viding the instruments of punishment, which he will be
careful to have made strictly according to custom.
ON THE MARCH.
Whenever the regiment is on the march, the utmost
care and attention are necessary, on the part of both
Officers and Non-commissioned Officers, to preserve good
order and discipline. The companies are always to be
told off in sections, which they will be careful to preserve
while on the road.


On arriving* at the end of the day's journey, no man is
o be suffered to fall out, till ho has received his billet,
tnd been regularly warned of the hour, he Is next to fall
n at, or, for duty, if required.
An Advance Guard, will always be formed before
marching’ off; this guard will move about one hundred
yards in front of the Regiment, and on .arrival at the end
of the march, it will become the regimental guard, and
take charge of all regimental prisoners from the rear
guard ; the following day, (if the march is continued), it
will become the rear guard, moving about two hundred
yards in rear of the main body, and bringing up all
prisoners and stragglers ; —on delivering them over to the
new guard, it will be dismissed.
There is nothing denotes good discipline in a Regiment,
more than the order and sobriety on the march; it is then
exposed to the observation of every body; and riot or
drunkenness cannot be concealed. Every man should there-
fore, have the credit of his corps at heart, and endeavour,
not only to avoid such disgraceful conduct in himself, but
to repress it in others.
It is also on the march, that the soldier has the oppor-
tunity of establishing a good character for himself and his
Regiment, by the courteousness of his behaviour to the
inhabitants, with whom he is at that time in constant con-
tact, as well as by his civility to travellers on the road,
and the care taken not to commit depredations on, or in-
jury to, the property of the inhabitants he may pass on
dis route.
The Quarter Master will be answerable, that billets
are procured in a proper time, and always ready to be
issued to the men immediately on their arrival.


A baggage guard will be formed at the commencement
of the march, which is not to be relieved, till the
regiment arrives at its final destination. This guard will
be under the charge of an Officer, or Non-comissioned
Officer, according to circumstances, and be composed of
Officers' servants, with as many other men added as may
be considered necessary. They will collect the whole of
the baggage every morning, and move off with it, at the
hour detailed in orders ; on their arrival at the place of
halting for the day, the baggage will be delivered over in
charge to the regimental guard, from whom, it will again
be received on the following morning, and so on.
The Officer, or Non-commissioned Officer in charge, will
be particular that the waggoners, or drivers are not mo-
lested or ill used by the men ; that their \vaggons or carts
are not overloaded, or any men permitted to get up on
them, except those ordered by the Surgeon. If the women
get up, it must be by the voluntary permission of the drivers,
I *
and force is never to be used,
The men accompanying the guard, being frequently cal-
led on to assist in loading and unloading baggage, will be
allowed to put their knapsacks on the waggons ; but their
arms are never allowed to be placed there, and must be
carried by the men themselves.
The regiment will re-assemble, on the same ground it
was dismissed on, unless some other place may have been
specially appointed.
THE HOSPITAL.
The Hospital is under the care and control of the Sur-
geon, and not subject to the interference of any person but
the Commanding Officer. It is to be conducted strictly ,
according to the general regulations, issued for the guid-
ance of Hospitals. The hours of attendance there laid,


down, to be punctually complied with; should any circum-
stance render it necessary to deviate therefrom, the appro-
bation of the Commanding* Officer must first be obtained
before it can be acted on.
The directions for the guidance of the sick, will be posi-
ted on a board, and hung up in some conspicuous place in
the Hospital, where every person may have an opportunity
of examining them.
FURLOUGHS AND PASSES.
No man can be permitted, to obtain a “ Furlough/ 1 or
“ Pass” till he is dismissed Drill, and has been at his duty.
No man can obtain a “ Furlough,” or “ Pass,” whose
name has appeared in the Defaulter's Book, during three
months preceding.
Any man who overstays his Furlough, or gets it re-
newed, without leave from the Regiment, (except in case
of sickness), will be prevented from receiving a similar
indulgence at any future period.
Men going on Furlough, are to conduct themselves with
order and sobriety; and any reported for having acted
otherwise, will be immediately recalled, and not on any
account receive the same indulgence a second time.
SERVANTS.
Officers will confine themselves in the choice of Servants,
to the men of the Company they belong to themselves.
The Field Officers, and Staff, are not included in this re-
striction, they may choose from any, with the exception of
the Flank Companies
No man is ever to be employed as a Servant, till he is
dismissed drill, and has been at his duty ; and Officers are


desired, to choose their Servants from rear rank men, and
* \
where it can be done, from amongst the older soldiers.
A list of all men employed as Servants, to be kept in
the Orderly room, and, whenever an Officer wishes to
change, notice will be sent there of his intention to do so,
with the cause for which the former Servant is to be sent
to his duty.
No man who has been dismissed from the service of one
Officer, is ever to be employed by another, without the
sanction of the Commanding Officer; and therefore, a
Register will be kept of the reasons for each dismissal. *
All Servants are liable to be called on, to attend drill
twice every week, and any deviation from this rule, must
be considered as an indulgence, and not as a right; and it
will be most strictly enforced, whenever any Servant is
observed going about in a dirty slovenly state, or impro-
perly dressed; or who is found to keep his master's quar-
ters in a dirty state, or commits any nuisance about the
barracks.
Servants are not permitted to do their master’s work
in their regimentals, nor are they ever to be permitted, to
leave the barracks, unless dressed in plain, or livery clothes,
or in complete Regimentals; partly dressed in plajn
clothes, and partly in regimentals, is never to be permitted.
The Officers are to be strictly guided in paying their
Servants, by the Regulations, dated, Horse Guards, 1829,
which are not, on any account to be deviated from.
An Officer, transferred from one Company to another,
will be permitted to take his Servant with him, except
when the Flank Companies are concerned, where for
obvious reasons, it may not be desirable.


MEN ALLOWED TO WORK.
No man is to be allowed to Work privately for any
person, without the sanction of the Commanding Officer
being first obtained, through the Officer commanding the
Company.
Any man permitted to Work privately who shall ap-
pear on parade at any time, with his arms, accoutrements,
clothing, or regimental necessaries, dirty, or in any way
out of order, is to be immediately ordered to his duty, and
the indulgence will not be again granted to him.
Any man permitted to work,, who shall be guilty of
drunkenness, or rioting, will be punished with severity,
THJB END
Stephen* ic Co. Frinlers, Redman’* court, O«orge*itreet.
