

IN THE
HIGH COMMISSIONER’S COURT,
FIJI.
REGINA Y. WAITE.
AFFIDAVIT OF WILLIAM WAITE, AND HIS
REMARKS THEREON.




IN THE HIGH COMMISSIONER’S
COURT, FIJI.
REGINA v. WAITE.
I, William Waite, of Levnka, in the Colony of Fiji, Master
Mariner, Board of Trade Certificate No. 12,878, make oath and
say as follows
1. On or about the 10th day of September, IS7S, I left
Levnka in charge of the schooner “ Marion Eemry ” to recruit
laborers in the New Hebrides. The name of my mate was Henry
Shipman, and my crew consisted of four Eotnmah boys, and one
named “ Sam,” a native of Tnnna, who bad been with rac on a
previous voyage of six and a half months’ duration, who spoke
English as perfectly as savages can do, and whom I engaged as
boat-steerer. There was an European cook and steward; and
Captain Haddock' was tho Government Agent. On the passage
down I stayed at the island of Tanna, and recruited four men as a
boat’s-crew, whom I promised to bring back there on my return to
Fiji. “ Sam ” acted as my interpreter. The log which was used
on the voyage is now, .1 believe, on board the said schooner', and
she has been absent from Levnka for many mouths on a trading
cruise, therefore I have to trust to my memory, and can only give
the dates as nearly as I remember.
2. On or about the Cth of December, 1878, having nearly-
recruited my complement, I was sailing along the East Coast of
the Island of Espiri tn Santo (generally spoken of as “Santo”)
had passed between Qniros Island and Capo Quires, also on tho
inside of Hat Island, and when approaching’ two other small


islands which are not named on the chart, the native name of the
first being “ Rue,” a native came off in a canoe, which he kicked
adrift as ho got on hoard. This native made me understand that
lie wanted the boat to fetch his wife from the farther of the two
islands, so I told the mate that I would take the boat for her, and
I left him in cargo of the schooner. In passing close to the nearer
island, two men hailed me, and said they wanted to go to Fiji. I
went close in shore, so that they might get into the boat, when,
their friends, of whom there were a great number, objected to their
coming, and not wishing to take any man without the free consent
of all parties, I ordered the boats-crew to pull away. As they did
so, the natives, who were armed with bows and arrows and spears,
ran along the beach in the direction in which I was going, when
“ Sam ” told me they were going to shoot. I told him to fire a
musket over their heads, thinking when they knew we wore armed
they would not attempt to attack us. “ Sam ” did so; and point-
ing the musket in the air, fired only one shot. I then went to the
other island, picked up the man’s wife, and returned to the
schooner.
3. About a fortnight after this occurrence, on I think the
20th December, tiie Government Agent reported to mo about
eleven o’clock one night that one of the women wo had recruited
was missing from the women’s compartment of the vessel. On
looking into the forecastle I discovered her and “ Sam ” together.
He knew that he had committed a breach of the regulations, and I
put him off duty from that time, and told him when I got back to
Levuka I should have him punished. On or about the 3rd of
January, being anchored inside the island of Isisi, I saw a fire on
the mainland of ,f Santo,” which is the usual signal that laborers
are willing to go with us, and I wont to bring them off in the boat.
This was a month after the shot was fired, and a fortnight after I
had put Sam ” off duty. During my absence “ Sam ” took
occasion to toll the Government Agent the story about his firing-
the gun over the heads of the natives—only he added, that I told
him to shoot at the natives, and that be did so, and wounded one.
The Government Agent entered this statement in his log without
first consulting mo about it, and when I returned on hoard, and
the Agent mentioned it to me, I most emphatically and indignantly
denied the truth of it.
L On or about the 6th of January I started on my return to
Fiji, and called at Tamm, in order to laud my boat’s-orew as
promised. It was, however, blowing very hard, and I could not


laud them without their getting everything wot; so I promised
that if they would go with mo to Fiji they should live on hoard
the “ Marion Kenny,” and be returned to Tanna on my next trip.
They were quite agreeable to do tins, and Captain Haddock drew
np an agreement to that effect, which I signed and gave to the
men.
5. On or about the 15th of January, 1879, I arrived in
Levuka, when the Acting Agent-General of Immigration com-
plimented me on the condition of the ship, and the appearance of
the laborers, and she was chartered to make three trips during the
next season. After being in Levuka four or five weeks, the
Inspector of Police told me 'one day that the Attorney-General
wanted to see me. I went at once to his office, hut met him in the
street, and asked him what he wanted to see me about ; ho
hesitated before ho replied : —•' That he. thought I should not he
wanted at all.” However, two or three days afterwards I received
at the hands of the Bailiff of the High Commissioners Court, a
Summons to attend before the Court on the following morning and
answer a charge that “I did feloniously and maliciously incite,
procure, and command one “ Sam,” a Polynesian native, to shoot
with intent to do some grievous bodily harm to a certain person
unknown.” When the Court; opened I presented myself, and the
Judge, Mr. (now Sir) John Gorrio, asked me if I had had any
legal advice. I told him no ! that I did not consider it necessary.
He, however, adjourned the hearing for two days, and told mo to
obtain legal assistance, and he accepted one surety of one
hundred pound's for my appearance, and I was liberated on bail.
On the 24th February, 1879, I again attended the Court, and this
time with a solicitor. The Judge sat on the Bondi, and two
Assessors also sat with him. One of these was Dr. McGregor, the
Koceivor-Genoral and Chief Medical Officer of the Colony of Fiji ;
the other, Lieutenant Horne, Commander of Hot Majesty’s schooner
“ Sandfly.” .Captain Haddock was called and produced his log,
but stated lie believed at the time lie made the entry that it was
merely a story which “ Sam ” had invented. “ Sam ” was called
to repeat the story, and so wore the boat’s-crow, three of whom
supported “ Sam,” bat the fourth would not say anything about
the matter, except that “ho did not remember.” I was convicted;
fined twenty-five pounds ; and imprisoned for nine months; after
which I was bound over in the sum of live hundred pounds for
future good behavour.
0. Since my liberation I have been absent from Levuka most, of
the time until now as Captain of tire trading schooner “ Elizabeth,”


hut I have written to my friends in England about my treatment
and caused representations to be made, to the Member of Parlia-
ment for Hastings, which is my native place, but with the oniy
result that I am advised now to make an affidavit of the circum- ■
stances, and forward same with my own remarks thereon.
WILLIAM WAITE.
Sworn before me, at Levuka, in the Colony of Fiji, this 24th
day of August, a.p. 1881.
HAMILTON HUNTER.
Commissioner.
Levuka, 24-th August, ISBI.
Jlkmahkk Oil my affidavit, sworn this' clay in the case of
Ebgina v. Waite.
1. The boat’s-crew -whom I engaged at the island of Taiina,
in the month of September 1878, were wild savages, countrymen
of “ Sam’s,” and could not understand a word, of English. If I
could not make them understand by signs, I employed “ Sum’ 4 to
interpret, which he did in the Tanna language. As I had endless
opportunities of judging whether they did or did not understand
English after having them on hoard with mo for nearly four
mouths, I state most emphatically and distinctly that they did not j
yet these were called months afterwards to give evidence of the
words I addressed to “ Sam,” in English, on the 6th of December
1878.
2. When I took them back to Tanna in the early part of
January 1879, I could not land them without their getting every-
thing wet. My action in signing an agreement and giving it to
the men, promising to return them on the next trip of the “ Marion
Ecuny,” scarcely looks as though I was afraid of anything they
could say against me. Had X been guilty of any irregularity, I
should liave taken care to have left four out of the five witnesses
behind, and not have so far assisted in my own condemnation by
bringing them to Fiji. I put the vessel to the expense of keeping


them for three mouths, with the solo object of preventing them
getting their things wet when landing. In my opinion, not a very
inhumane thing to do.
3. I had not the remotest idea that any charge could bo
made against me, and therefore thought it very strange when the
Inspector of Police ashed me to go and see the Attorney-General,
and when the Attorney-General hesitatingly informed me that “he
thought I should not be wanted at all; ” but when, two or three
days afterwards, I received from the Bailiff of the High Commis-
sioner’s Court a summons to attend before that Court to answer a
charge of felony, I then made enquiries into the proceedings of
“Sam” and the boat’s crow for the past week or two, and
ascertained that they had all been at the Attorney-General’s
office almost every clay. During this time “ Sam ” would, no
doubt, bo drilling into them the evidence they were to give; for
“ Sam ” being their countryman, and looked upon by them as
their chief, tribal custom would almost compel them to support
him in anything ho said.
4, When recruiting vessels return to Fiji the logs of the
Government Agents are handed in and perused by the head of the
Labor Department. Captain Haddock’s entry being seen, a sus-
picion would, no doubt, be created, that there had been something
wrong, and no doubt an enquiry ought certainly to have been held;
but I must say, that not having the subject mentioned tome before
I received the summons charging me with felony, does seem to bo a
most arbitrary proceeding. Evidence could have been obtained
by Judge Gorrio without much trouble as to whether or not
“ Sam’s ” story was true, from the island of Rue itself; and why
was not such a confirmation procured ?
.5. My appearing before Judge Gorrie on Friday, the 21st of
February 1879, without a solicitor, and tolling him that I thought
it unnecessary to consult one, docs nor, I submit, look like the
action of a guilty man. When I attended again on the 24th with
a solicitor, and saw that both assessors were officials, I thought
it was determined that I should not have a fair trial; for
Lieutenant Horne being professionally engaged in suppressing the
very'acts like the one with which I was charged, would naturally
feel a certain amount of prejudice against me, and Dr. McGregor,
from his official position, could not sit as an unbiassed assessor.
6. Captain Haddock produced his log, but said at tiro time lie
made the entry, ho believed that “ Sain ” had invented the story,
and “ Sam ” was called to repeat it; but sight appeared to be lost


of tho fact that he did not tell it to Captain Haddock until a month
after it was supposed to have happened, and that on it toeing
mentioned to me, I indignantly denied it. I was not surprised
that three out of four of the boat’s-crew said what “ Sam had
doubtbless told them to say, tout the fourth would say nothing,
except that “he did not remember.” It seems very singular that
men who could not understand English should profess to remem-
ber the expression and retain in their memory the very words that
“ Sam ” said I made use of to him in the boat on the 6th of Decem-
ber. Their evidence, which was very contradictory, was given in
Fijian, and they had been in Fiji but six weeks' —thus, not only were
they interrogated in a language which it was impossible for them to
understand, but they were, asked to repeat a conversation that was
supposed to have taken place in a language of which they wore
equally ignorant. These men were savages, not Christians, and
had no idea of the meaning of an oath, yet, on such testimony
was I convicted ! Virtually it was on the unsupported evidence
of ‘‘ Sam ” who owed me a grudge for putting him oft duty, hut
who not complaining until a month after tho event, all chance of
my satisfactorily refuting it on that voyage had then passed. I
was deprived of liberty and confined in a felon’s cell lor nine long
months, after what I do not consider was even a fair trial.
7. lam a freeborn British subject; am a baron and freeman
of the town and port of Hastings, and am now 46 years of ago.
I have a Master’s Certificate, No. 12,878, from the Board of Trade,
London. I have never in my life done anything of which 1 tan
ashamed in the eyes of God or man, or of which I have, cause to
bo ashamed ; and, as proof of my fellow colonist’s opinion of mo,
they subscribed the amount of my tine, found me, a bondsman,
and gave me employment immediately I was released. I have Har-
bour Master’s certificates of competence from Wellington, Lyttel-
ton, Kaipara, and Mannkau, New Zealand ; I have a pilotage
certificate from tho Marine Board of New South Wales ; I have
testimonials of tho highest character, from James W. Waller,
Auckland; Messrs. Learrnouth and Dickinson, Sydney ; 11. Wood,
Lyttleton ; John" Mowleui, Wellington; W. B. Chute, and Angus
Maclarhmo,.of'Fiji ; and from Captain Gr. A. Phillips and David
Gilbertson besides a great number which I loft behind in England
when I was leaving there ten years ago.
Lastly. I have not stated a single word in either my affidavit
or this document that is not strictly accurate, and I most solemnly
declare that tho charge on which I was convicted, was a base


fabrication of “ Sam,” my boat-steerer, and that there was not
one word of truth in it.
WILLIAM WAITE ,
Certificate; No. 12,878
Board of Trade, Loudon.
