

V
»
!»
•»
REGULATIONS
*•
V
s
S
FROM THE
SYDNEY:
FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY,-SYDNEY.
ZBOIR/ZR/OWEIE^S
LENDING BRANCH.
THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. —1876.
4 1 3—76




9 ■ <=,
FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY, SYDNEY.
REGULATIONS FOR BORROWERS
FROM THE
LENDING BRANCH.
1. The Lending Branch of the Free Public Library will
be open on Tuesdays , Thursdays , and Saturdays, from 10
o’clock a.tn. until! o’clock p.m. during each week, excepting
the last week of December in each year; and the Library
will be closed on New Year’s Day, Anniversary of the
Colony, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Queen’s Birthday,
Prince of Wales’ Birthday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day,
and such other days as the Trustees may direct.
2. Books will be lent only to persons residing in the
City or Suburbs, or to such districts as the penny postage
extends.
3. Persons wishing to borrow books to read at home,
must first obtain a recommendation from one of the
Trustees of the Institution, the Mayor, or one of the
Aldermen of the City, on proper forms of authority which
can always be obtained from the officer in charge of the
Library. This recommendation will have to be signed by
the person applying for a book, guaranteeing the Trustees
against loss or damage done to any book. The voucher,
when duly signed and found correct, will be exchanged for
a Borrower’s Ticket, entitling the person recommended to
borrow books for twelve calendar months, from the Ist of
January in each year, subject to the Regulations.


4. Every person before obtaining a Borrower’s Ticket, is
required to read the Regulations, and must sign his or her
name and place of residence in a book containing a copy of
the printed Regulations, and such signature shall be taken
and be considered as an assent to the Regulations.
5. It is not absolutely necessary that books should be
delivered to, and returned by, the borrowers personally ;
but when they cannot conveniently visit the Library they
must send a responsible messenger, competent to deliver
their message, and to take due care of the books—the
officer in charge having instructions to refuse books to
messengers whom he may consider incompetent to take
proper care of them.
6. Borrowers or their messengers must produce their
tickets every time a book is applied for, as no book will be
issued except upon the production of a duly authorized
ticket.
7. Books when returned, must not be left on the counter,
nor be given to any one except the Librarian, or the officer
in charge, and the borrower will be held responsible for
books said to have been delivered in other way.
8. No person shall under any pretence be admitted
behind the counter, nor shall any person but the Librarian
or officers in charge be permitted to take books from the
shelves of the Lending Branch.
9. Borrowers must wait to be served in their turn.
10. Borrowers are cautioned against losing their tickets,
as they will be held responsible for any book or books which
may be taken out of the Library by the use of their lost
tickets, until the period for which the Tickets are granted
has expired. But a lost ticket may be replaced subject to
this responsibility.


11. Any change of residence of a borrower must be
intimated to the Librarian within one week of such change,
under penalty of the forfeiture of the right to borrow
books.
12. Folding down the leaves, writing in, or marking any
book or books, or returning books torn, or in a dirty con-
dition, will render the borrower liable to have his or her
ticket cancelled, and to be excluded from the future use of
the Library.
13. If any book or books be soiled, written in, or other-
wise injured, or lost, the borrower must immediately pay
the value of the damage done, or pay the full value of the
book if lost or stolen from his or her possession, at the
discretion of the Librarian. But all books stolen or lost
shall continue the property of the Government, although
paid for by the person who borrowed it.
14. Persons leaving the Colony or going into the country
are required to return their tickets to the Librarian, other-
wise they will be excluded from any future use of the
Library.
15. All applications for books must be written in ink on
the proper slips provided at the counter for the purpose,
and the catalogue number of the book must be inserted on
the slip. But the applicant should first ascertain from the
officer in charge if the book is out.
IG. Only one volume will be issued at a time unless
specially sanctioned by the Librarian ; and the officer in
charge may refuse to change books tiwce on the same day.
17. All books must be returned within the period of
seven days, but may be renewed, except in cases of works
in frequent demand. Non-compliance with this rule will
render the borrower liable to the suspension of his or her
ticket for three months.


18. If at any time the Trustees should deem it necessary
to stop the issue of Books for any period either by notice
in the Library or by advertisement in the daily papers, all
books for whatever period they may be lent, must bo
returned within the time prescribed by such notice; and
any borrower failing to return his or her book before the last
day of such notice, will be excluded from the future use of
the Library, unless the Trustees shall see fit to decide
otherwise.
19. The Librarian shall have the power at any time to
cancel a borrower’s ticket, either for not returning a book
within the prescribed time, or for any other non-compliance
with the Regulations, or if it should be discovered that the
borrower has imposed upon the person recommending him, or
if books are not in the opinion of the Librarian being taken
proper care of. But if on application to the Trustees a
sufficient guarantee is given that the Regulations will be
strictly complied with, they will grant a fresh ticket.
20. No book can be engaged beforehand; the person
who first applies for a book after it has been returned is
entitled to have it, provided he is not the borrower by whom
the book has just been returned.
21. The officer in charge has the power to exclude, or if
necessary to remove by force, from the Lending Room, any
person or persons misconducting themselves, or for non-
compliance with any reasonable request, or for any
infringement of the Regulations of the Institution.
22. The Trustees shall at all times have the power to
cancel any borrower’s ticket, or may refuse to issue a ticket
to any person producing a recommendation, or may forbid
at any time, or for any period, the issue of any book or
books, without assigning any reason therefor.




. I'Afp
&U&UO
fc>t>
'U COW
*
r.
