

REGULATION
FOR THE CATHOLIC GIRLS’ SCHOOL,
AT UGBROOK.
CHUDLEIGH: PRINTED BY J. E. SEARLE.




REGULATIONS
Approved hy the Right Reverend the Vicar
Apostolic of the Western District of England, for
the Catholic Girls School at Ugbrook, in the
County of Devon , under the protection of the
Blessed Virgin Mary and St. Joseph.
ARTICLE I.
The Catholic Girls School at Ugbrook is intended
by Lord Clifford to be henceforth solely for the
education of the female children of those who are
or have been tenants, servants, or labourers on his
estate, or tradesmen in the employ of his family at
Ugbrook, and who sincerely, -and not out of any
human respects desire, that their children. : should
be trained up in the principles, spirit and practice
of the Catholic Religion; in the duties of the state
of life in which God has placed them by their birth;
and in the acquirement of such knowledge, as in
the opinion of their parents and pastor, is suited to
that state of life. The Schoolmistress has power
to admit any such children, if there be room in the
school ;* but no other children can hereafter be ad-
mitted, except under very particular cases of ex-
ception, and at the express, desire of Lord Clifford
and of the Chaplain at Ugbrook.,
The parents of the. children are to consider
themselves at liberty to withdraw them entirely
from the School whenever they think proper, upon
.* Note. The'Lords of the Committee of Council on Education, appointed
to carry into effect the wish of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, that “the
“children and teachers in National and other Schools should be duly trained
“in the principles of the Christian Beligion, -while the rights of conscience
“should be respected” (Printed Minutes p. viii.) recommended p. 29,
that “six feet square b® to® medium allowance for each child."


giving notice of their intention to that effect to the
Schoolmistress; but unless they give such notice,
they will be expected to send their children regu-
larly, or to assign some sufficient cause for their
absence, either by word of mouth in person, or in
writing to the. Schoolmistress; The power of ex-
pulsion of a child from the School, on the repre-
sentation of the Schoolmistress that the continuance
of such child’s attendance is incompatible with the
order and regularity of the School, is reserved by
Lord Clifford to himself; or in his absence to the
Chaplain at Ugbrook.
11. The School is a Free School; that is to say;
none of the parents of the children attending it,
will be expected to contribute to the expences of
the School, in any manner..
111. The parents, however, may agree among
themselves, to contribute to a fund for the reward
of merit, to be laid out in prizes; of such nature
and value, and for distribution by the Schoolmistress
at such periods of the year, as Lord Clifford and
the Catholic Chaplain at Ugbrook attending, it,
may direct, and the mothers are also to agree
among themselves, to visit each in their turn the
School, so that one mother may visit it each week
on any one day.
IV. The religious instruction of the children,
will be entirely under the direction of the Catholic
Chaplain at Ugbrook, acting under the authority
of the Right Reverend Bishop, Yicar Apostolic of
the Western District; and the Schoolmistress will
be guided in all things relative to such instruction
by his directions ; for he is the Pastor =of the
children and of their parents.


V. All other instruction, and whatever relates
to' thd order, idiscipline, and cleanliness of the
School,;will be;under the Sole direction of,the
Schoolmistress, whom the children must be taught
by their Parents to consider as invested by them
with their authority, - which each and both of them
derive immediately from God, to instruct, direct,
and correct-their-children, as the Catholic Cate-
chism teaches in the explanation of the fourth
commandment.
VI. In order to impress upon the children that
to their parents alone does God give authority to
chastise them, the Schoolmistress will not-nse'Ctm/
corporal punishment in the School or/out of-it,
without previously speaking herself each time to
the mother, if alive and residing in the neighbour-
hood, of the child whom she may think it necessary
so to correct; and without being thus;perfectly
sure, that it is the mother’s desire ; except in two
cases hereafter to be specified, see article vm., in
which two cases she must be understood to have
received a general direction to that effect from the
parents,- who have delegated to her as their repre-
sentative, their authority over their children.
VII. The Children must, before being admitted
into the School, be clearly made to understand by
their parents, that they must be in the School in
the constant disposition to submit willingly to
whatever corporal punishment the Schoolmistress
shall under the above regulation think fit for them
to suffer, in order to do penance, and thereby
obtain of God the correction of their faults or dis-
positions, in the same manner as when they grow
older they are to approach the sacred tribunal of
confession, in the disposition to perform whatever


penance .their pastor shall think fit to impose upon
them according to the spirit, principles, and prac-
tice, of their Holy Mother the Catholic Church.
VIII. The two cases; in which alone the School-
mistress will consider it fit to use corporal punish-
ment for the correction of the children* without
previously speaking each time to .the mothers are,
, ls£. The; case of a child, after having been in
the School a fortnight at any time after the date
of these regulations, obstinately refusing to speak
or to read, if able to read, with a voice sufficiently
loud to be heard by the other children clearly and
distinctly; and
2nd, The case of a child obstinately (that is. to
say with deliberation) refusing to answer or to do,
in obedience to the commands of the mistress, what
the mistress and the other children clearly see that
the child so refusing is able to answer or to do.;
IX. No child refusing to submit l to such cor-
poral punishment as the Schoolmistress shall think
fit to inflict upon her,i in either of these two cases,
will be punished without its consent; by the mistress;
since the child ; would not .in such case be doing
penance; but the mother of the child so refusing
will have immediate notice from the mistress, that
her daughter! must not return to the School till her
mother herself brings her, with the intention of
seeing her submit willingly to the punishment from
the Schoolmistress, to; whichshe > had refused to
submit.
X. In the event of any child committing a fault
not specified finder article vm, the Schoolmistress
upon being made acquainted with it, will exercise
her discretion either by reprimanding the child, or


giving it a printed ticket, with the words Ticket
for correction, to take home to its mother, whoni
the child is to inform in, such case of the reason
why the Schoolmistress gave the ticket; and the
mother will, in all such cases, exercise her discretion
either by speaking herself upon the case to the
Schoolmistress or correcting as she may think fit
her child, who will report to the Schoolmistress the
next day, the account which she gave of its fault to
its mother and the atonement which its mother
thought fit that it, should make for it, whether by
Corporal punishment or otherwise.
XI. Every mother who wishes her daughter to
attend the School, must, previous to the admission
of the child, have assured the Schoolmistress, that
she has clearly given her daughter to. understand *
that a girl disgraces-herself by doing what she
knows to be wrong; but that so far from disgracing
herself or being disgraced, or from her parents
or family being disgraced,’ by her receiving sub-
missively such corporal or other penance for her
faults as her‘parents or the Schoolmistress shall
think fit for her, • she is to consider,- that she is not
only giving good example to her Schoolfellows, but
acquiring great merit in the sight ofGod, by doing
corporal penance if such be imposed upon her;
or in other words, employing the sense of feeling in
the service of her Soul, by suffering, in. the spirit of
Humility; ‘ Atonement and • Obedience, what it is
the will of God she should suffer 1 ; since the will of
her parents; and of her Schoolmistress, who is her
mothers representative, is, in this regard, clearly
the will s of God-; and that she has every reason to
hope, that then God will reward her humility and
Obedience by giving her- His grace to overcome
herself in future, and to correct herself of her fault
or bad disposition ; but not otherwise.


XII. In the event of a candidate for admission
into the School, being motherless,- the • father, ■„ if
alive, will be required to name some married female
relative or neighbour, to be approved by the
Catholic Chaplain at Ugbrook, ;who shall supply in
all matters relative to the above regulations of the
School,, the place of . the mother.
~ XIII.;: The children., will be taught from: the
third chapter of the Book of Genesis, the text of
which, as well as that of the two preceding chapters
and of parts of the two first chapters of the Gospel
of St. Matthew and St. Luke, will be hung up
printed in large letters as reading lessons in the
School, with notes appended to them by authority
of the Right Reverend the Vicar Apostolic of the
District, adapted to the capacity of the children* to
consider their Dress jor Clothing,.not merely as a
defence or protection against cold, still less as in-
tended principally for ornament ; but rather as a
Badge or remembrance appointed by God, .imme-
diately after the sin of Adam and Eve in the
terrestrial Paradise, of the fallen nature of man;
which badge, all are to wear in obedience to the
command of God, each one according to his or, her
state of life, in order that all may thereby be con-
stantly put in mind of the fallen nature, of man: so
that they may, in dressing themselves every morn-
ing, be every morning put in mind, by, that act, that
they are constantly in danger of offending God in
many, ways, even in their , childhood; and much
more so as they grow older; and that they cannot
preserve themselves from this danger unless they
are assisted by the grace of God for which they
must consequently pray every morning, as soon as
they have dressed themselyes.


XIV; < Every mother who sends her daughter
to this School, is requested, and will 'be expected,
to-impress this notion of dress; by precept and by
example, into the minds of her children; as a great
Ereservative- against r Vanity and Indecency in
>ress; as a most effectual means of impressing
upon the children the importance of the truth, that
they are to consider themselves as disobedient to
God and depriving themselves of His Grace, with-
out which they cannot hope to avoid offending Him
if they uncover their • bodies, unless they know it
to be the desire of their parents that they should
uncover themselves; and also as inculcating the
importance of the duty of Morning Prayer.
XV. In the case of orphan girls, having neither
father nor mother* * their nearest relativ.es will be
directed by Lord Clifford and the Catholic Chaplain
at Ugbrook, to select a respectable married woman
of known mild character in the neighbourhood, to
undertake the office of a mother in their regard, in
all matters relative to the above regulations of the
School; for so long as the orphans attend it.
XVI. The mother of each child attending this
School, or the female holding the place of a mother
,in regard of any of them, will be required, as well
as the Schoolmistress, to sign, previous to the ad-
mission of the child hereafter, or, in the case of the
children actually attending, within' fourteen days
after the date of these regulations; twd'printed
copies of them. These regulations have been
drawn up by Lord Clifford and have been approved
by the Right Reverend the Vicar Apostolic of the
Western .District, with the view of inspiring the
children attending the Catholic Girls School
at Ugbrook, with correct notions of their duty to
God and to their parents; and of inspiring their pa


rents, with correct notions of their duty to God and
to their children. One of the copies so signed must
be placed in the hands of the Schoolmistress ; the
other copy will remain in the hands of the mother
or of the married woman holding her place, to be
kept by her as long as the child remains at the
School,
Ugbrock, March 25th, 1841.
I promise on my own behalf and oh behalf
°f
conformity to these regulations for so long as
shall attend the
Catholic Girls School at Ugbrook.
{Mother ,
or
baring charge
of 18
I engage to conform to these regulations in
reference to
Schoolmistress.
18


EXTRACT
From the Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and ether principal
Saints, compiled from original Monuments and other
authentic Records, by the Rev. Alban Butler.
Vol. I, January 16. Life of St. Macarius the Elder of Egypt.
St. Macarius the elder, was born in Upper
Egypt, about the year 300, and brought up in the
country in tending oattle. In his childhood, in
company with some others, he once stole a few figs
and eat one of them : but from his conversion to
his death, he never ceased to weep bitterly for this
sin. To shun the esteem of men, he fled into the
vast hideous desert of Scete, being then about
thirty years of age. In this solitude he lived sixty
years, and became the spiritual parent of innumer-
able holy persons who put themselves under his
direction and were governed by the rules he
prescribed for them, but all dwelt in separate
hermitages.. The austerities of St. Macarius were
excessive and for twenty years, as he himself once
said to one of his diciples he never once eat,
drank, or slept, as much as nature required. His
face was very pale and his body weak and
parched up.
God revealed to St. Macarius, that he had not
yet attained the perfection of two married women,
who lived in a certain town. He made them a
visit and learned the means by which they sancti-
fied themselves. They were extremely careful
never to speak any idle or rash words, they lived
in the constant practice of humility, patience,
meekness, charity, resignation, mortification of
their own will and conformity to the humours of
their husbands and others, where the divine law did
not interpose : in a spirit of recollection they
sanctified all their actions by ardent ejaculations,
by which they strove to praise God, and most
fervently to consecrate to the divine glory all the
powers of their soul and body.
St. Macarius died in his desert in the ninetieth
year of his age.
[ Searlc, Printer, Chu<Jleigh.J
