

STATUTORY RULES.
1940. No. 290.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE NATIONAL SECURITY
ACT 1939-1940.*
WHEREAS it is necessary for the efficient prosecution of the present
war that peace in industry should be preserved in the Common-
wealth :
And whereas, in order to preserve that peace in industry, it is
desirable that certain limitations on the jurisdiction of industrial
tribunals constituted under the laws of the Commonwealth should be
removed and that provision should be made for those tribunals to deal
with industrial disputes with greater expedition;
Now therefore I, the Governor-General in and over the Common-
wealth of Australia, acting with the advice of the Federal Executive
Council, hereby make the following Regulations under the National i
Security Act 1939-1940.
Dated this sixteenth day of December, 1940.
GOWRIE
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
H. E. HOLT
for and on behalf of the Minister of State
for Defence Co.-ordination.
National Security (Industrial Peace) Regulations.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the National Security
(Industrial Peace) Regulations.
2. —(1.) In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention
appears —
“ the Act ” means the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitra-
tion Act 1904-1934;
“ the Minister ” means the Minister for Labour and National
Service.
(2.) Expressions used in these Regulations shall, unless the con-
trary intention appears, have the same meaning as in the Act.
3. Subject to these Regulations, the Act and these Regulations shall,
so long as these Regulations continue in force, be construed as if the
provisions of these Regulations were incorporated in the Act as
amendments thereof.
♦ Notified In the Commonwealth Gazette of 17th December, 1940.
7396.— Price 3d.


4. So long as these Regulations continue in force, the provisions
of the Act shall be applied and construed as if from the definition of
“ industrial disputes ” in section 4 the words “ extending beyond the
limits of any one State ” were omitted, and the jurisdiction of the
Court shall be extended accordingly.
5. In addition to the industrial disputes of which the Court has
cognizance in pursuance of the Act, the Court shall also have
cognizance of all industrial disputes—
(a) which the Court is satisfied are, or which the Minister
certifies to the Court as being, proper to be dealt with in
the interests of industrial peace and national security; or
(h) which are referred into Court hy the Court or Judge in
pursuance of sub-regulation (4.) of regulation 15 of
these Regulations.
6. —(1.) The Court shall, as regards every industrial dispute of
which it has cognizance, have power to declare, by any award or
order, that any particular regulation, rule, custom, term of agreement,
condition of employment or dealing whatsoever, determined by an
award in relation to any industrial matter, shall he a common rule of
any industry in connexion with which the dispute arises, or of such
portion of that industry as the Court thinks fit, or of any group of
industries of which that industry is one.
(2.) Where the Court has cognizance of an industrial dispute it
shall have power to make an award (in these Regulations referred to
as an “ industry award ”) regulating the whole or so much of the
conditions of employment in relation to the industry in which the
dispute exists as the Court thinks fit and, for the purpose of making
an industry award, the jurisdiction of the Court shall not be limited
by the ambit of the matters in dispute.
(3.) Before declaring a common rule or making an industry award
the Court—
(a) shall pay. due regard to the extent to which the industries
or the persons affected enter, or are likely to enter, into
competition with one another; and
(c) by notification published in the Gazette and in such other
publications, if any, as the Court directs, specifying the
industry or portion thereof, or group of industries, and
the industrial matters in relation to which it is proposed
to declare a common rule, or in respect of which it is
proposed to make an industry award, shall make known
that all persons and organizations interested and desirous
of being heard, may, on or before a day named in the
notification, appear or be represented before the Court,
and the Court shall, in such manner as it directs, hear
all such persons and organizations so appearing or
represented.
7. In addition to the parties, persons and organizations on whom
an award is declared by the Act to be binding, an award declared to be
a common rule or an industry award, as the ease may be, shall also be
binding on all organizations and persons on whom the award or industry
award is declared by the Court to be binding.


8. Where any law of the Commonwealth affects the wages, terms
or conditions of employment of any employee, the Court may either on
its own motion or upon an application made by the Minister or an
organization the members of which are affected, make an order, not
inconsistent with that law, interpreting that law or implementing its
application in any industry or to any employee or class of employees.
9. Where the Minister is of the opinion that any industrial matter
has led, or is likely to lead, to industrial unrest, he may refer that
matter to the Court and, notwithstanding that an industrial dispute
affecting that matter does not exist, the Court may proceed to hear
and determine the matter in like manner as if it were an industrial
dispute.
10. (1.) Where any organization or employer is aware of the
existence of any industrial matter which may lead to the occurrence of
a strike, a stop-work meeting or any other interruption of work, he
shall forthwith notify, in writing, the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar
accordingly, and the Registrar or Deputy Registrar, as the case may be,
shall refer the matter to the Court.
(2.) The Court shall thereupon hoar and determine the industrial
matter, or cause a Conciliation Commissioner or Board of Reference
to hear and determine the matter, and the Court, Conciliation Com-
missioner or Board of Reference, as the case may be, notwithstanding
that an industrial dispute affecting the matter does not exist, may
hear and determine the matter in like manner as if it were an industrial
dispute.
11. In any case where the Court deems it desirable in the interests
of industrial peace or national security so to do, it may exercise any
jurisdiction under the Act or these Regulations on its own motion.
12. In any case where the Court or a Conciliation Commissioner
deems it desirable in the interests of industrial peace or national security
so to do, it or he may make an order dispensing with the service or
filing of any process required by or under the Act to be served or filed.
13. An award or order of the Court or of a Conciliation Commis-
sioner shall not be invalidated—
(a) by reason of its containing provisions relating to matters
not within the ambit of the industrial dispute;
(h) by reason of the proceedings, or any part thereof, in which
the award or order is made, having been conducted in a
manner other than by conciliation or arbitration; or
(c) by reason of any process not having been duly served or
filed as required by or under the Act or these Regulations.
14. The number of Conciliation Commissioners which the Governor-
General may appoint under sub-section (1.) of section 18c of the Act
may exceed three, hut the appointment of any Conciliation Commis- '
sioner appointed while these Regulations are in force shall, notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (2.) of section 18c of the
Act, be for such term as is specified in the instrument of appointment
and shall, notwithstanding that any term so specified has not expired, he
terminated when these Regulations cease to be in force.
15. —(1.) Where a Conciliation Commissioner is of the opinion ,
that an industrial dispute has arisen, or is threatened or impending, j
he may investigate all matters connected with the dispute. 1
Interpretation
of industrial
laws.
Reference by
Minister of
matter likely
to lead to
industrial
unrest.
Reference by
organizations
and employers
of matter
likely to lead
to industrial
unrest.
Court may
exercise
jurisdiction on
own motion.
Court may
dispense with
procf“
Validity of
orders and
awards.
Appointment o
additional
Conciliation
Commissioners.
Additional
powers of
Conciliation
Commissioner.


(2.) In addition to, or in lieu of, convening a compulsory conference
in the manner provided by section 16a of the Act, the Conciliation
Commissioner may, for the purpose of investigating any industrial
dispute, appoint an equal number of representatives of the employers
and employees concerned in the dispute to assist him in his investi-
gation.
(3.) Upon completion of the investigation, the Conciliation Com-
missioner shall report fully to the Court or a Judge on the results of
the investigation and of his efforts to induce the parties to arrive at
some agreement.
(4.) Immediately upon receipt of any such report the Court or
Judge shall—
(a) if an agreement between all or any of the parties as to the
whole or any part of the dispute has been arrived at,
cause a memorandum of the terms of the agreement to
be made in writing and shall certify the memorandum
after which it shall be filed in the office of the Registrar,
and, unless otherwise ordered and subject as may be
directed by the Court, shall, as between the parties to the
agreement or any successor or any assignee or transmitee
of the business of a party bound by the agreement,
including any corporation which has acquired or taken
over the business of such party, have the same effect as,
and be deemed to be, an award for all purposes, including
the purposes of section 38, of the Act;
(h) refer the industrial dispute back to the Conciliation Com-
missioner with a direction that the Conciliation Com-
missioner shall hear and determine the dispute; or
(c) refer the industrial dispute into the Court.
16. Where the Minister is of the opinion that for the Court or a
Conciliation Commissioner to obtain cognizance of an industrial dispute
in any other manner prescribed by the Act or by these Regulations
might result in a delay that would be prejudicial to the interests of
industrial peace, he may direct a Conciliation Commissioner forthwith
to hear and determine the industrial dispute and the Conciliation Com-
missioner shall thereupon have cognizance of the industrial dispute.
17. —(1.) The Court may, in connexion with any industry or part
of any industry, appoint a Board of Reference consisting of one or more
persons, even though no order or award in relation to an industrial
dispute in that industry has been made.
(2.) The Board of Reference so appointed shall have such powers
of investigation and report in connexion with such matters as the Court
directs.
(3.) The Court may direct that any Board so appointed shall hear
and determine any industrial matter and, subject to any contrary direc-
tion of the Court, the determination of the Board shall, for all the
purposes, including -the purposes of section 38, of the Act, be deemed
to be an award of the Court.
(4.) The provisions of section 31a of the Act shall apply to any
determination of a Board of Reference in like manner as they apply
to an award or order of a Conciliation Commissioner.
By Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
