

w
If *
4 f V
[circular.]
2lst November, 1848.
Reverend Sir,
In the absence of the Secretary, I heg to forward to you a copy
of the Regulations of the Clergy Orphan and Widows Association , and to
inform you that an Account will be opened at the Bank ol Australasia, in Hobart
Town and Launceston, for receiving Annual Subscriptions.
I have the honour to be,
Reverend Sir,
Your obedient Servant,


REGULATIONS.
1. Ihat a C'lekoy Ouphan and Widows’ Fund be established in the Diocese of Tasmania.
11. That an Annual Payment of Six Pounds shall entitle any Clergyman in the Diocese to
partake of the benefits of the Association.
111. That the Fund be in the care of Seven Trustees—viz., the Archdeacon of Hobart Town,
the three senior Chaplains, and three others elected by the Contributors from year to year; and
that a Member of the Association only may bold the office of Trustee.
Ihat a Permanent Capital of One Thousand Pounds be formed, which shall not be touched;
the interest being available for the general purposes of the Society.
\. That one-half of the Annual Subscriptions for the first five years, and then one-third, shall
accumulate to form the Permanent Capital, until it reaches the sum of One Thousand Pounds.
VI. That the balance of each year shall be laid out from time to time, to the best advantage, by
the Tiustees ; but that the whole funds shall be always available, if required, to make up the
Annuities of Widows or Orphans, with the exception, of course, of the Permanent Capital.
VII. That the Widow of a Contributor shall be entitled to an Annuity of £5O a-year during her
widowhood ; and the Orphans to £2O a-year each until sixteen, if boys; twenty-one, if girls.
VIII. That the several claims in each year be satisfied rata to the extent of the available
income.
IX. That, when the Fund has reached the amount of Two Thousand Pounds, it shall be
competent to the Tiustees to increase the above Annuities to the extent of the available income,
and similarly on every further accession of Two Thousand Pounds to the Fund.


X. That Annuitants may reside in any part of the world, and Contributors leave the Diocese
without prejudice to their several claims.
XI. That the Annual Contribution be paid on the Ist day of January, 1849, and on the same
day of each succeeding year; that defaulters be allowed six months more upon condition of paying
a double contribution ; and that the claim of any Contributor on the benefits of the Association be
forfeited, if payment be longer deferred.
XII. That Clergymen wishing to associate themselves after the Ist day of January, 1849, shall
be admitted on payment of all contributions in arrear, calculated from the commencement of their
ministry in the Diocese, with such additional premium as shall seem fit to the Trustees.
XIII. That the affairs of the Association be managed by the Trustees, who shall appoint their
own Secretary, Treasurer, and Auditor. Should a difference arise among the Trustees respecting
the interpretation of any of these Regulations herein set forth, reference shall be made to the
Bishop, whose decision shall be final.
XIV. That the Trustees shall annually furnish a printed and audited Account of their Receipts
and Expenditure for the use of the Members of this Association.
XV. That no alteration shall take place in these Regulations but by consent of three-fourths at
least of the Contributors; nor unless such alteration be allowed by the Bishop as not inconsistent
with the fundamental principles of the Association.
H. AND C. BEST, PRINTERS, “ COURIER ' OFFICE, HOBART TOWN.


I
• i
X
