

COMMONWEALTH MILITARY CADET CORPS.
REGULATIONS
AND
STANDING ORDERS
(Provisional.)
1907.
By Authority:
J. kEMP, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE,
C.14220- PRICE 6D.




WITH COMPLIMENTS.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE.
MELBOURNE.




COMMONWEALTH MILITARY CADET CORPS.
REGULATIONS
AND
STANDING ORDERS
( Provisional.)
1907.
:
J. KEMP, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE,
C. 14220. —Price 6d.




CONTENTS.
Page.
Part I.
Commonwealth Military Cadet Corps Regulations —
Section i.—Senior Cadets ... ... ... ••• ... 7* 11
Section 2. —Cadets ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n-14
Section 3. —General ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14-16
Section 4. —Instructional Staff ... ... ... • ... 16, 17
Section 5. —Instructional Staff (W. & N.C.O.s) ... ... ... 17, 18
Part 11.
Standing Orders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21-30
Appendices ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31-37
Index ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 39-44
A 2




PART I.
REGULATIONS
FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH MILITARY CADET CORPS
UNDER THE DEFENCE ACTS 1903-1904.




STATUTORY RULES.
1907. No. 63.
PROVISIONAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE DEFENCE ACTS
1903-1904.
I THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL in and over the Commonwealth of
, Australia, acting with the advice of the Federal Executive Council,
hereby certify that, on account of urgency, the following Regulations
under the Defence Acts 1903-1904 should come into operation on the Ist
July, 1907, and make the Regulations to come into operation accordingly
as Provisional Regulations.
Dated this 18th day of June, One thousand nine hundred and seven.
HARRY H. RAWSON,
Governor-General’s Deputy.
By His Excellency’s Command,
THOS. EWING.
Regulations for the Commonwealth Military Cadet Corps.
The Regulations made by Statutory Rules 1906, Nos. 31, 61 and 93,
are hereby repealed, and the following Regulations are substituted
therefor: —
Section /. —Senior Cadets.
1. Senior Cadet Detachments may be established by the Governor-Gene-
ral in such places as may be recommended by the District Commandant,
with the approval of the Military Board, and must consist of not less than
twenty members between the ages of fourteen and nineteen years, and who
are not less than 5 ft. 2 in. in height and physically fit; provided that
there is a suitable person available who is capable of acting as Commanding
Officer. A room must be available in which the Government property issued
to the detachment may be stored, and a guarantee must be obtained from
some responsible person that he will be liable for its safe care and custody.
Where accommodation cannot be made available in Government buildings,
applications must be submitted through the usual channels for financial ap-
proval for the rent of suitable rooms.
No senior cadet shall remain a member after the age of nineteen years.
Formation of
Detachments,


Rank.
Personnel.
Horses.
Officers.
Warrant Officers.
Staff Sergeants
and Sergeants.
Drummers or
Buglers.
Rank
and
File.
Total.
Riding.
Draught.
Total.
Detail attached to Head-
Quarters —
Lieut.-Colonel or Major ...
Adjutant
Quartermaster ...
Signalling Officer (Captain
or Lieutenant)
Medical Officer ...
Regimental Sergeant-Major
Regimental Quartermaster
Sergeant
Orderly-room Sergeant ...
Band Sergeant ...
Band ...
1
1
!
l
:::
i
i
i
i
...
21
) 4
l'
21
f!
1 !
1
...
1
1
1
1
1
Total ...
5
l
•>
21
30
5
#
5
Detail of a Company—
Major or Captain
1
...
} 3
...
...
Lieutenants
2
)
Colour Sergeants
i
} 4
...
Sergeants
...
3
•••
J
Drummers or Buglers
...
...
...
Corporals
4
1 51
Privates
...
f 51
Privates, as stretcher-
2
)
bearers
Total for one Company
3
4
2
51
60
...
Total for eight Companies
24
32
16
408
480
Add Head-Quarters Detail
5
i
3
...
21
30
5
Total ...
29
i
35
16
429
510
5
*
5
2. A Battalion of Senior Cadets shall consist of eight Companies.
Detail as under :
• As required.
3, The number of Units to Lie maintained shall be —
Two Battalions in New South Wales,
Two Battalions in Victoria^
One and a-half Battalions in Queensland,
One Battalion in South Australia,
One Battalion in Western Australia,
Half Battalion, with Band, in Tasmania.
4- During each year the following allowances will be paid, subject to
the amount being voted by Parliament, viz. :
(a) Allowances to officers.
Commanding Officer of a Battalion ... ... ;£ lO
To each Officer of the Battalion Staff (except to Com-
manding Officer) within the Establishment ... 7
Officers in command of Companies, each ... ... 5
Lieutenants, each ... ••• ••• 3^ and on
first appointment a further sum of towards cost of uniform.


{b) Senior Cadets not attending School.
Effective allowance for each effective within the
Establishment ... ... ... ... jQx
(c) Senior Cadets attending School.
For each detachment certified as effective by the Officer Commanding
Cadets and approved by the District Commandant—
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 20 or
band of a minimum strength of 20 ... ...
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 30 ... 4
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 40 or over 5
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 60 or over
in one school ... ... ... ... 6
Clothing allowance (for each Senior Cadet within the
Establishment who has completed the prescribed
Musketry Course) ... ... ... ... 7/6
To be effective 80 per cent, of each Detachment must, prior to 31st
December, have completed the musketry course laid down.
The above allowances wall be paid to Battalion Commanders or, sub-
ject to the approval of the District Commandant, to officers commanding
detachments.
5. In order that the amounts laid down in the preceding paragraph
may be claimed, the following conditions must be observed:
( a) Officers appointed to Detachments other than School Detach-
ments. —Each officer must provide his own uniform, of the
approved pattern, and have been returned effective on the
30th June preceding the financial year in which payment is
made. In the case of a new appointment, the officer must
have been appointed to his Battalion, Company, or Detach-
ment prior to the 30th June preceding the financial year in
which payment is made.
Officers appointed to School Detachments. —Each officer must provide
his own uniform, of the approved pattern, and have been returned effective
on the 31st December, or, in the case of new appointments, have been
appointed to their Battalion, Company, or Detachment prior to that date.
( b) The allowance of any officer or officers may' be stopped or re-
duced at the discretion of the District Commandant, if in the
opinion of the Inspecting Officer, the Battalion, Company, or
Detachment is not in a satisfactory state.
(c) Officers in command of Battalions, Companies, or Detachments
must keep a complete record of all drills and rifle practices
held, and also the necessary books showing the amounts re-
ceived and the expenditure incurred by them on behalf of
their commands. These books must be produced at each
official inspection.
(d) No payments will be made to Officers of Battalions, Companies,
or Detachments which have been disbanded during the year,
nor to any officer not connected with an effective Detachment.
(e) The Effective Allowance for Senior Cadets not attending school
shall be applied to the supply and maintenance of Uniform,
expenses incidental to musketry practice, drills, bands,
camps and exercises, postage and telegrams.


Detachment Allowances shall be applied to expenses incidental to
musketry practice, drills, bands, camps and exercises, postage
and telegrams.
Clothing Allowance for Senior Cadets attending school shall be
utilized for the supply of uniform of the authorized pattern,
and for incidental expenses connected therewith, such as
cleaning, repairs, alterations, &c. ; no portion of this
allowance is to be diverted to any other purpose.
No monetary grant is to be made from the foregoing allowances to any
Senior Cadet.
(/) To be effective, Senior Cadets not attending school must, prior
to the 30th June, have attended at least twelve drills, and
completed the prescribed musketry course, or, in the case of
those who have not served the full year, they must, after
having been passed into the ranks, complete the full mus-
ketry course and attend drills at the rate of at least one pei
month.
M Claims for Allowances must be rendered on the forms supplied
by District Head-Quarters, and, before being paid, be counter-
signed by the Officer Commanding Cadets. No claim will
be paid without the authority of the District Commandant.
6. In the event of an officer in Command of a Battalion, Company, 01
Detachment being transferred or removed, he shall render to his successor,
as officer of the Battalion, Company, or Detachment, a true and correct
account of all vouchers, receipts and up to date, together with
the balance of allowances unexpended, before being relieved of his respon-
sibility.
7. Every officer in command of a Battalion, Company, or Detachment,
shall sign the approved document, making himself personally responsible
for the disbursement of any allowances paid to him. In any case, how-
ever, in which it is estimated that a greater amount than £5O per annum
will be drawn from Departmental Funds by any officer in command ol a
Battalion, Company, or Detachment, such officer shall be guaranteed in
the fund established by, and in accordance with, Treasury Regulation No.
137. District Paymasters shall be responsible that this instruction is ob-
served.
8. The uniform in each State shall be of a pattern to be approved by
the Military Board. Senior Cadets will wear belts, pouches, and bayonets.
9. Senior Cadets not attending school, who have been effective for not
less than twelve months, are seventeen years of age or upwards, and fulfil
the regulations as regards height and physique, may, with the approval^of
their Commanding Officer, present themselves at the recruits examination
for transfer to any corps of Militia or Volunteers. Every candidate must
produce a recommendation from the Commanding Officer of his detachment
as to general character, and certifying as to the above-mentioned require-
ments Senior Cadets so transferred, if passed by the Inspecting Officer,
will, providing there are vacancies, at once be taken on the strength of the
corps provided that they have completed the course of musketry for recruits.
When Senior Cadets are transferred to any other branch of the Military
Forces, their connexion with the Cadet Corps shall cease. No cadet may
join any other branch of the Defence Forces until he has been regularly
discharged from the Cadet Forces.


Personnel.
Rank.
Officers.
Warrant
Officers.
Staff-Ser-
geants and
Sergeants.
Jrummers
or
Buglers.
Rank
and
File.
Total.
Detail attached to Head-
Quarters —
Commanding Officer (Major or
Captain)
\
1
I
Adjutant ...
i
1
1
I
Quartermaster
Signalling Officer (Captain or
Lieutenant)
1
1
Medical Officer
1
...
1
Regimental Sergeant-Major
...
...
Regimental Quartermaster
Sergeant
1
1
1
1
Band Sergeant
21
21
Band
Total
5
1
2
21
29
Detail of a Company-
Captain or Lieutenant
1
1
2
Lieutenants
Colour Sergeant
2
...
i
1
3
Sergeants ...
2
2
Drummers or Buglers
4
Corporals ...
1
47
47
Cadets
Total for one Company
3
4
2
51
60
Total for eight Companies
24
...
1
32
16
408
21
480
29
Add Head-Quarter’s detail
5
2
Total ...
29
1
34
16
429
609
—
10. Senior Cadets on leaving the corps, provided they have been effective
for at least one year, shall receive from the Commanding Officer a certifi-
cate of discharge specifying length of service and general conduct. Iwo
classes of certificates will be issued —
(1) To those who have been effective for one year, printed in
black type.
(2) To those who have been effective for two years or more,
printed in blue type.
Section 2. —Cadets.
11. With the approval of the Education Department of the State con-
cerned detachments may be formed in schools where a teacher is qualified
to act as Officer in Charge pending the appointment of an Officer, or, where
the services of a Warrant or Non-commissioned Officer of the Instructional
Staff are available for drill purposes, and where there are not less than
fifteen boys who are prepared to obtain the approved uniform, and who
are of the prescribed age and height. .
In the case of schools not under the control of an Education Depart-
ment, companies or detachments may be formed, as approved by the
Governor-General.
12. Establishment of a Battalion of Cadets.


I 3-
The number of battalions
to be maintained
in each District shall
be—
New South Wales
16
Victoria
... 13
Queensland
6
South Australia
• ■ • 5
Western Australia
4
Tasmania
2
Total
... 46
Battalions shall be arranged topographically.
y 14. Cadets, not exceeding 20 per cent, of the establishment, may be
t- borne as supernumerary after leaving school provided they come within
the cadet age, and in the case of a detachment not being up to its estab-
lishment a proportion of cadets who are not attending school may be
included in that establishment.
This would only apply in places where Senior Cadet Corps have not
been established, or, if Senior Cadet Corps are full, 20 per cent, may
still be borne as supernumerary in Cadet Establishment, pending vacancies
in such Senior Cadet Corps, to which vacancies these supernumeraries shall
have prior claim, if of the requisite age and height.
15. No boy shall be enrolled unless he is 4 ft. 6 in. in height in
stockinged feet, 12 years of age, and also physically fit. Each boy must
have the written consent of his parents or guardians to become a member.
Officers Commanding Detachments will be held responsible that these pro-
visions are strictly carried out.
16. Cadet Corps shall be inspected once every six months by the Dis-
trict Commandant, or an officer detailed from District Head-Quarters, as
may be arranged in each case with the Education Department, or, in the
case of Non-Government schools, the Head Master.
17. The detachments shall be drilled twice a week, each drill not to
be less than half-an-hour, or once each week of three-quarters of an hour’s
duration, the time for the drill to be fixed by the Education Department,
or, in the case of Non-Government schools, the Head Master,
18. The minimum establishment of a company, except as otherwise
approved, shall be —
1 Captain (or Lieutenant),
2 Lieutenants,
1 Colour-Sergeant,
3 Sergeants,
4 Corporals,
2 Buglers or Drummers,
47 Cadets, of whom 4 may be Lance-Corporals, if required.
Total... 60 of all ranks.
19. In each year an allowance (subiect to the amount being voted bv
Parliament) will be paid to the following Officers, within the authorized
Establishment;
To the Officer Commanding Cadets in each State ... £2O
To the Instructor of Musketry in each State ... ... 15
To each Officer Commanding a Battalion ... ... 10
To each Officer of the Battalion Staff (except the 0.C.),
as provided for in the Establishment ... ... 7
To each Officer Commanding a Company ... ... 5
To each other Officer within the Establishment ... ... 3 and
on first appointment a further sum of £2 towards cost of uniform.
These allowances will be paid to officers direct.


Amounts as under will be paid (subject to vote bv Parliament) to each
detachment certified as effective by the Officer Commanding Cadets, and
approved by the District Commandant:
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 15, and bands
of a minimum strength of 20 ... ... •••
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 30 ... 4
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 40 or over ... 5
Each detachment of a minimum strength of 60 or over in
one school ... ... ••• ••• •••
Detachment allowances will be paid to Officers Commanding Detach-
ments or, where there is no officer in command, to the Head Master, and
will be devoted to the payment of expenses connected with musketry, bands,
dulls, camps, parades, ” postage and telegrams of the detachment, and
must be duly accounted for by the officer in charge. On no account is any
allowance to be given to a cadet.
To be effective 80 per cent, of each detachment must, prior to 31st
December, have completed the musketrv course laid down.
20. In order that the above amounts may be claimed, the following (
conditions must be observed :
(a) Each Officer must provide uniform of the approved pattern, and ■
have been appointed to his Battalion, Company, or Detach-
ment, previous to 31st December.
(b) The allowance to any officer may be stopped or reduced at the
discretion of the District Commandant if, in the opinion of
the Inspecting Officer, the battalion, company, or detach-
ment is not in a satisfactory state, and the Education De-
partment will be informed. In the case of non-Govern-
ment schools, the Head Master will be communicated with.
(c) Officers in command of detachments must keep a complete record
of all drills and rifle practices held and also the necessary
books showing the amounts received and the expenditure
incurred bv them on behalf of their commands. , 1 hese
books must be produced at the half-yearly inspection.
(d) No payments will be made to officers of detachments which have
been disbanded during the year, nor to any officer unconnected
with an effective detachment.
(e) Claims for allowances must be rendered on the forms supplied
by District Head-Quarters, and before being paid be counter-
signed bv the Officer Commanding Cadets. No claim will
be paid without the authority of the District Commandant.
(/) In the event of an officer in command of a Detachment being
transferred or removed, he shall render to his successor, or
to the Head Master, a true and correct account of all
vouchers, receipts, and expenditure up to date, together with
the balance of allowances unexpended, before being relieved
of his responsibility.
(g) Even* officer in command of a Detachment shall sign the ap-
proved document, making himself personally responsible for
the disbursement of any allowance paid to him. In any
case, however, in which it is estimated that a greater amount
than per annum will be drawn from Departmental
Funds by anv officer in command of a Detachment, such
officer shall be guaranteed in the Fund established by, and in
accordance with Treasury Regulation No. 137. District
Pavmasters shall be responsible that this instruction is ob-
served.


21. Subject to the amount being voted by Parliament, an annual
allowance of seven shillings and sixpence for each Cadet within the estab-
lishment who has completed the prescribed musketry course, will be paid
to Battalion Commanders or, in cases approved by the District Command-
ant, to Officers Commanding Detachments. This allowance shall be uti-
lized for the supply of uniform of the authorized pattern to Cadets, and
for incidental expenses connected therewith, such as cleaning, repairs,
alterations, &c.
No portion of this allowance is to be diverted to any other purpose
nor is any monetary grant to be made to a Cadet.
22. The uniform of Cadets shall be of a pattern in each State as
approved by the Military Board, All Cadets must wear the numeral of
the battalion to which they belong on the shoulder straps, and a special
school badge, not exceeding i inch square, on each side of the collar, in
front, may be worn,
23. Cadets on leaving the Corps, provided they have been effective for
at least one year, shall receive from the Officer Commanding Cadets a
certificate of discharge, specifying length of service and general conduct.
Two classes of certificates will be issued: —
(1) To Cadets who have been effective for one year, printed in black
type.
(2) To Cadets who have been effective for two years or more, printed
in blue type.
Section 3 — General.
24. Officers Commanding Cadets in each State shall be appointed by the
Governor-General.
On the recommendation of the Officer Commanding Cadets and the
District Commandant, the Governor-General may appoint an Instructor of
Musketry.
The Officer Commanding Cadets ma.y be of the rank of Colonel, and
the Instructor of Musketry of Major.
25. Officers may be appointed bv the Governor-General, on the recom-
mendation of the Officer Commanding Cadets and the District Com-
mandant, with the approval of the Military Board, provided that in the
case of candidates in the employ of the Education Department the ap-
proval of that Department shall have been previously obtained. Officers
of Cadets will rank with officers of the Military Forces, but as juniors in
their grades; but such rank will not entitle any officer of Cadet Corps to
assume command over any officer of another branch of the service.
Officers of high standing in the Education Department or non-Govern-
raent schools shall have such rank, on appointment to the Cadet Corps, as
may l>e specially approved.
26. Officers may be appointed to command Battalions on the recommen-
dation of the Officer Commanding Cadets and District Commandant, with
the approval of the Military Board, and (except in the case of Battalions
formed entirely from non-Government schools) the concurrence of the Edu-
cation Department.
If such officers already hold the rank of Captain, they may be pro-
moted to the rank of Major if they have passed the prescribed examination.


Lieutenants, after one year’s service in command of a company may,
within the Establishment, be recommended for the rank of Captain, on
passing the prescribed examination.
Officers of Cadets who were on the Unattached List at the date of
coming into force of these Regulations are eligible for transfer to the
Active List of the Cadet Corps, subject to the recommendation of the
Officer Commanding Cadets, with the concurrence of the Education De-
partment.
27. An Unattached List will be formed, to which officers of the Com-
monwealth Cadet Corps shall be transferred when unable to maintain an
effective detachment, or to remain actively connected with the Cadet Corps.
Failing to return to active duty within three years, they will be retired.
28. Officers of the Cadet Forces who have served for not less than 5
years and are then retired may receive permission to retain their rank and
wear the prescribed uniform.
29. An Officer of the Commonwealth Cadet Corps Unattached or Retired
List shall report himself at the commencement of each year, in writing, to
the Commandant of the District in which he last served on the Active List,
failing which his name may be removed from the List.
30. Examinations for promotion of officers of the Cadet Corps shall
be arranged by the District Commandant at least half-yearly.
31. The appointment of Non-commissioned Officers and the power in
regard to ordinary promotions of Non-commissioned Officers and to reduc-
tion to a lower grade or to the ranks will be exercised by the Commanding
Officer of the battalion. The power of discharge for misconduct, &c.,
will also be exercised by this Officer, but subject to the approval of the
Officer Commanding the Cadets in each State.
32. Proportionate numbers in detachments or companies will be allowed,
Officers and Non-commissioned Officers being fro rdta, as approved by the
Officer Commanding Cadets,
33. All applications for the formation or disbandment of detachments
must be forwarded by the Officer Commanding Cadets through the Dis-
trict Commandant for the approval of the Governor-General, in accordance
with paragraphs 1 and n of Part 11.
34. Detachments in suitable localities shall be formed into companies
and'battalions, and should, if possible, assemble for battalion drill not less
than four times a year, two of which shall be half-yearly inspections, the
dates and hours of parade to be approved by the Officer Commanding
Cadets.
3v Arms and accoutrements shall be kept in the school, and be used
only for drill or rifle purposes. The Head Master shall be held respon-
sible for the preservation of all Government property issued to the Cadet
Corps in his school, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
36. No cadet shall use a rifle for any other purpose than parades, drills,
or target practices, in each case under the command of an Officer of Cadets
or an Officer or Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff.
37. Every member shall, on demand, deliver up to the appointed person
in good order and condition, fair wear and tear only excepted, any Govern-
ment property which may have been issued to him.


38. Arms and stores issued bv the Government shall be inspected I
an Officer or Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instructional Sta
at least every six months, and, where there is evidence of neglect or wilfu
damage, the stores may be at once called in.
39. An Officer (or a Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instruc
tional Staff) must be present with the Cadets at target practice and exercis
the utmost vigilance to prevent accidents, observing that each cadet handle
his rifle with the care necessary to prevent the possibility of danger
himself and others. The ammunition must be retained in the possessio
of the Officer (or Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instructional
Staff), only the requisite number of rounds necessary for the practice bein
handed to each Cadet, and at the conclusion of the practice every precai
tion must be taken that none remain in his, possession. Arms must b
examined before the practice commences, and at the conclusion of th
firing at each range, and before leaving the ranges. The Officer (or Non
commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff) in charge will
held personally responsible that all target practices are in every respec
regularly carried out at an authorized Rifle Range, and that the necessar
flags, discs, &c., are provided, and in order for use. A Cadet must neve
bejjermitted to act as a marker. ——-
40. Officers shall provide Uniform of the approved pattern. Sword
will not be worn except when ordered for ceremonial parades.
Belts, “ Sam Browne,” or “ leather slings ” will be worn as the Officer
Commanding Cadets may decide, but the uniform in each State must be
alike, except under special circumstances approved bv the Military Board
41. If the Officers of Cadet Corps in any State desire to have a Mess
Dress, the pattern must be submitted to the Military Board for approval
mess dress, however, in all cases shall be optional with the Officer, anc
evening dress may be worn instead.
42. Cadets must appear on all occasions either in the authorized uni-
form, or in purely civilian dress.
43. Bands may be formed as approved by the Officer Commanding
Cadets in each State, provided the expenditure voted by Parliament be
not exceeded.
44- All correspondence relative to Cadet Detachments shall be addressed
to the Officer Commanding Cadets in the State or to the Instructional Staff
Officer, as may be arranged by the Commanding Officer, except that Officers
( ommanding Battalions, Companies, or Detachments will correspond with
District Head-Quarters on matters in connexion with money or stores.
Section 4, Administrative and Instructional Staff (Officers).
45. Officers of the Cadet Corps of the Commonwealth are eligible
for appointment to the Administrative and Instructional Staff of the Cadets,
provided thev are between the ages of 22 and 35 years at the date of holding
the examination, and are certified by a Medical Board as being physically
qualified, and subject to passing the prescribed Educational and Military
Examinations.
46. Notice of vacancies will be given by advertisement in all the States
and by notice in Military, District, and Cadet Orders. Applications from
candidates will be forwarded through their Commanding Officers to the
Officer Commanding of the State, who will forward same with
his recommendation to the District Commandant for transmission to the
Military Board.


47. When forwarding applications, District Commandants will, as^' 1 . as
possible, state their opinion of the fitness of each candidate for appoint-
ment.
a8 Candidates will be informed of their nomination to undergo the ex-
amiftion prescribed, and should there be more candidates than vacancies,
the examination will be competitive.
4Q. A successful candidate will be appointed for six months on proba-
tion. At the end of this period his appointment may be confirmed on the
report of the District Commandant under whom the candidate that
he P has satisfactorily performed the duties of an Officer of the
tive and Instructional Staff, and is likely to become a suitable Staff Officer.
co. The subjects and scope of the Educational and Military Examina-
tions shall be as prescribed for the appointment of Officers to the Adminis-
trative and Instructional Staff of the Commonwealth Military Forces.
ci. In the event of there not being sufficient candidates _ forthcoming
from the Officers of the Cadet Corps to fill any vacancies existing, applica-
tions may be invited as prescribed in the Commonwealth Military Regula-
tions for appointment of Officers to the Administrative and Instructional
Staff. r
c2. Officers of the Cadet Instructional Staff will be eligible for transfer
to the Administrative and Instructional Staff, provided_ that they have
served for not less than three years in the Cadet Instructional Staff, have
passed the examination prescribed for the rank of Captain (Administrative
and Instructional Staff), and are recommended by the District Com-
mandant.
Section 5. — Instructional Staff (Warrant and N.C. Officers).
ct. Appointment on the Instructional Staff (Warrant and Non-Commis-
sioned Officers) will be granted to members of the Cadet Corps under the
following conditions as to age, physical fitness, educational and mihtarv
qualifications: — .
A candidate will not be eligible for appointment on probation unless
he is between the ages of 22 and 40 years, and unless he has
served for at least three years in the Active Force o tie
Military Forces of the Commonwealth or in the Cadets, except
under special circumstances approved by the Military Board.
ca. Notice of vacancies will be given by advertisement in all the States
and by notice in Military, District, and Cadet Orders. Applications from
candidates will be forwarded through their Commanding Officers and the
Officer Commanding Cadets of the State, who will forward same with
his recommendation to the District Commandant for transmission to the
Military Board.
cc When forwarding applications District Commandants will state, as
far as possible, their opinion of the fitness of each candidate for appoint-
ment.
C 6 Candidates will be informed of their nomination to undergo the ex-
amination prescribed, and should there be more candidates than vacancies
the examination will be competitive.
c 7 Each candidate will be medically examined, either by the Principal
Medical Officer or Staff Officer of Medical Services or the medical officer
appointed to medical charge of Permanent Troops of his station, of each
District, and will not be further tested unless certified to be physically
qualified.


• 581 he u subjects and scope of the Educational and Military Examina-
tions shall he as prescribed for the appointment to the Instructional Staff
(Warrant and Non-commissioned Officers) of the Military Forces of the
Commonwealth.
59. Successful candidates will be appointed for six months on probation.
At the end of this period the appointment mav be confirmed if recom-
mended by the Commandant, and the Commanding Officer under whom the
candidate has served certifies that he has satisfactorily carried out his duties
as a Non-commissioned Officer of the Instructional Staff and is likely to
prove himself an efficient Instructor.
Candidates who pass the examination, but who are not successful in
securing an appointment at the time, will be eligible for appointment
to any vacancy occurring within twelve months subject to again passing
the medical examination, as prescribed.
60 In the event of there not being sufficient candidates forthcoming
from the teachers to fill any vacancies existing, appointments will be made
as prescribed in the Commonwealth Military Regulations for other branches
of the service.
61. Non-commissioned Officers of the Cadet Instructional Staff will be
eligible for transfer to the Instructional Staff of the Commonwealth Mili-
tary Forces, provided that they have served for not less than 3 years in the
Cadet Instructional Staff, and when first appointed they have passed the
examination prescribed (vide paras. 154 to 160 of CM. Regulations),
and have been confirmed in their appointment.


PART II.
STANDING ORDERS.




STANDING ORDERS AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH MILITARY CADET CORPS.
(To come into operation on the ist July, 1907, and to be substituted for all
Standing Orders for (Commonwealth Cadet Corps heretofore made.)
1. — Discipline.
It is the duty of Officers to repress and instantly report any negligence
or impropriety of conduct in Non-Commissioned Officers and Cadets in
uniform, although the offenders may not belong to their battalion, company,
or detachment. All grievances, complaints, or charges which cannot be
dealt with by the Company Officer should be forwarded to the Battalion
Commander.
No battalion, company, or detachment or any portion of the Corps is
allowed to appear in uniform for any purpose unconnected with ordinary
drills or rifle practices without the sanction of the Officer Commanding
Cadets.
2. —Honours and Salutes.
Non-commissioned Officers and Cadets, when dressed in uniform, are
to be instructed to salute Officers of the Naval and Military Forces at
all times.
Officers,
3. —Battalion Commanders.
It is by the zealous exertions and constant superintendence of officers in
command of battalions that the system of discipline essential to the reputa-
tion and success of the Corps is to be maintained.
Officers Commanding Battalions should ascertain that the officers under
their command are well versed in their several duties. Nothing will be of
greater assistance in this respect than the holding of regular baltalion
parades, at which the Officers in turn, if considered expedient, should have
the work of Field Officers allotted to them.
It is also advisable to hand over the whole parade to such officers
occasionally, so that, in the absence of the senior officers, the battalion
may be confidently and correctly handled.
4. — Adjutants.
The Adjutant will generally assist the Battalion Commander in his
duties. He is to be considered the mouthpiece of the 'Battalion Com-
mander, and any orders given by him as such are to be obeyed with the
same alertness as though given by the Battalion Commander himself.
The various company officers will report the numbers on parade to the
Adjutant, who will be held responsible for the production of a properly
filled up “ parade state ” at all inspections and reviews.
Battalion orders will be signed “ By Order ” and issued by the Adju-
tant to the various companies and detachments in the battalion.
5. —Officers of Detachments.
The Head Master is responsible for the proper care and custody of
all arms, accoutrements, and stores issued to the detachment in his school.
The Commanding Officer is responsible for its discipline and efficiency.


The “ Muster Roll Book ” is to be kept by Officers of Detachments,
who are responsible that the several columns are properly posted and kept
up to date, and must be produced at all inspections of. the Detachment.
(Officers of Detachments are also responsible that such returns as required
are forwarded.)
The “ Quarterly Return ” is to be forwarded by Officers of Detach-
ments at the end of each quarter, direct to the Officer Commanding the
Battalion, and special care must be taken that the columns indicating the
state of all equipment are properly filled in after actual inspection.
The “ Musketry Course” must be carried out under the supervision
either Officers Commanding Detachments, the Instructional Staff Officer,
or a Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff, who will be
held personally responsible for the regularity of all target practices.
The “Annual Return of Government Property” must be forwarded
to the Commanding Officer of Cadets at the end of the year, certified to
as correct by Officers Commanding Detachments. Before any articles of
equipment are returned, authority to be first obtained, and early intima-
tion of the source of return must be given.
In matters connected with parades, rifle practices with other detach-
ments, and battalion organization, Detachment Officers will communicate
with their Battalion Commander.
All orders and circulars from District Head-Quarters are to be kept in a
book for reference, and this book, and also the Regulations and Standing
Orders, corrected to date, must be produced at every inspection.
6. —Musketry Instructor.
The Musketry Instructor will carry out such duties as may be arranged
by the Officer Commanding Cadets.
7. —Medical Officers.
Medical Officers of the Commonwealth Cadet Corps will be
appointed in similar manner to that of Medical Officers of the A.A.M,
Corps, i-e., from members of the medical profession, and registered as
such within the Commonwealth of Australia.
Rank on_ appointment. Captain, Commonwealth Cadet Corps,
Medical Services.
Duties. Attend such parades and carry out such duties as mav be
arranged by the Officer Commanding Battalions.
Uniform. Of approved Cadet pattern for the State, with a special
gorget patch to show Medical Services.
B. —lnstructional Staff.
Officers and N.C.Os. of the Instructional Staff of the Commonwealth
Cadet Corps are not to be considered as available for District Staff Duty,
the services of such Officers and N.C.O’s. being entirely utilized for the
Instructional purposes with Cadet Corps.
9• —A 7 on-commissioned Officers.
The. Non-commissioned Officers of a Company or Detachment should
be specially selected Cadets, who are intelligent, smart, and respected bv
tneir comrades, so that, in the temporary absence of the Officer, drill or
other military duty may be confidently, intrusted to them.


As much practice as possible should be allowed Non-commissioned
Officers in “ proving ” and inspecting companies or detachments, in dn mg
the recruits in the rifle exercises, and in talcing charge of detached squads
It should be strongly impressed on Non-commissioned Officers that it is
their duty to point out and correct mistakes on all occasions.
A Non-commissioned Officer should be proud of his position, and y
his smartness, obedience, and good behaviour, cause a feeling of ambition
in the ranks to receive promotion for similar qualifications.
io. — Cadets.
The constant dutv of a Cadet is to respect the uniform he wears by
becoming conduct on all occasions, strict silence and steadiness in the
mnks, and implicit obedience to orders. Those best fitted ultimately
to command are those who have shown they can obey.
A Cadet is never on any account to reply to an Officer or Non-
commissioned Officer when reprimanded for any neglect of duty. Obed
ence is the first duty of a soldier, young or old.
Any Cadet misbehaving in uniform should be reported at once to t
Officer' in charge of the Detachment, and if the case is too serious to
me! with a reprimand, it should be forwarded to the Battalion Commander
Wlt On parade, Cadets should be clean and tidy, arms and accoutrements
in good order, and hair cut short. The head dress to be worn straight
on the head. No neck-tie or shirt collar should be visible.
It should be the pride of every Cadet to appear in uni f°™ a
fault to be found with his dress, arms, or accoutrements and his behaviour
should be such as to show, not only his officers, but the general puohc, that
he fully estimates the responsibilities of the young soldier.
r i .—Stretcher Bearers.
The instruction of Stretcher Bearers of the Commonwealth Cadet Corps
will be carried out in accordance with the Syllabus laid down.
Examinations.
i 2
Officers will be first appointed on probation as Lieutenants, except as
specially provided in Part 1., paragraph 25. They must be over seventeen
years of age. After six months on probation, commissions as Lieutenants
will be granted on passing the prescribed examination.
I3 .—Syllabus of Theoretical and Practical Examinations.
Lieutenants — _ .
(a) To show a thorough knowledge of the rifle exercises and t e
Cadet Musketry Course. . „
(b) To act as Captain or Section Commander in Company Dnl .
(c) To show a fair knowledge of the manner of mounting guar ,
posting and relieving sentries. >
(d) To show a thorough knowledge of the Regulations and Standing
Orders, for Cadet Corps.
Ca-btains —As for Lieutenants, and— . . „
P Batfalion Drill (Part III—“ Infants Training ).
Majors— As for Captains, and —
Brigade Drill.


PART
II.
No.
Description
Class
Distance
of
of
Instruction for Conduct
Practice.
Practice.
Target.
Yards,
Rounds.
of Practice.
Remarks.
1
Independent
3rd
50
5
Lying ...
2
9 9
3rd
100
10
Kneeling
With ball
3
9 9
3rd
200
10
Lying ...
h ammuni-
4
99
2nd
200 :
15
Lying ...
1 tion.
—
—
—
—
PART
II.
No,
of
Practice.
Description
n ° f .
Practice.
Class
of
Target.
Distance
in
Yards.
No.
of
Rounds.
Instruction for Conduct
of Practice.
Remarks.
1
o
3
4
Independent
51
5 5
5 5
3rd
3rd
3rd
2nd
100
200
300
400
5
10
10
15
Lying ...
Kneeling
Lying ...
Lying ...
] With ball
1 aminuni-
1 tion.
*4- —Schools of Instruction.
Classes of Instruction may be held at such times and places as may
be arranged in accordance with Syllabus laid down
Whenever possible, these classes should be held in the District in which
Corps are situated.
x 5- —Annual Course of Musketry.
(a) Cadets Armed with Francotte Rifle.
part 1.
Instructions in firing positions, viz. :
1. Sitting,
2. Kneeling,
3. Standing,
4. Lying down.
Lectures on musketry.
Classification.
Marksmen 4 ° roUnds fired obtain 10 5 points and upwards
ist Class* Wh ° ln thC 4 ° r ° UndS fired ° btain 80 points ’ but less than 10 5~
Those who in the 40 rounds fired obtain less than 60 points—3rd Class.
(b) Cadets Armed with Westley-Richards Rifle.
PART I.
Instructions in firing positions, viz. :
1. Sitting.
2. Kneeling.
3. Standing.
4. Lying down.
Lectures on musketry.


PART II.
No.
of
Description
Class
Dis-
tance
No.
of
Position.
Instructions.
Prac-
tice.
Practice.
Target.
in
Yards.
Rounds.
1
Independent!
3rd
200
5
Kneeling
1 Any kind of natural or
2
3rd
300
5
Kneeling
I artificial rest may be
or sit-
ting
Lying
I used if found necessary.
3
2nd
oOO
5
4
>>
2nd
600
5 I
Lying
PART III.
5
Independent
Vanishing
300
10
Lying ...
Target exposed 8 seconds.
The rifle may be brought
to the present before the
target appears. (See Note
n.)
Fixed head
300
10
Lying ...
The firer, crouching behind
cover, momentarily exposes
ders
himself sufficiently to tire
a rapid shot; 8 seconds
allowed for exposure, fire
and complete return to
cover, from command or
signal of commander.
The”rifle may be rested and
the firer must expose as
little as possible of his
head and arm ; when the
spotting disc is fixed or
the shot signalled the man
will rise by command to
observe the residt of his
shot, and will resume con-
cealment. (See Note II.)
Classification.
Those who in the 40 rounds fired obtain no points and upwards
MErksm^n
Those who in the 40 rounds fired obtain 85 points, but less than no
ist Clciss. _
Those who in the 40 rounds fired obtain 70 points, but less than 85
Those who in the 40 rounds fired obtain less than 70 points 3rd Class.
(c) Senior Cadets (.303 Rips).
PART I.
Instructions in firing position, viz. '•
x. Sitting.
2. Kneeling.
3. Standing,
4. Lying.
Lectures on musketry.
Note I. —Dimensions of targets and scoring as per Musketry Regu a-
tions, paragraphs 9 and 10, except Practices 5 and 6, in which hits count
2 points.


Note H —Description of targets for Practices 5 and 6:—To be of
•lack and white colours; head and shoulders; dimensions as follows: A
rectangle 2 feet wide by 1 foot high, with a rectangle 1 foot square on the
top I his figure can be painted on or affixed to a third-class target.
sho^^ g the COUrse , for th e. first time, and second and third-class
shots of previous year, may be permitted to fire at 100 yards.
Classification.
Marksmen. Wh ° “ 4 ° r ° UndS fired obta!n 115 points and u P w «d»—
II5 ™° s fcTa°s ” ‘ he 40 r ° Unds Hred obtain 95 P° ints ’ but less than
2n / c “ ih the 4° rounds fired obtain 80 points, but less than 95-
3rd Clals. Wh ° “ the 40 r ° UndS fired ° b ‘ ain 60 P° ints ’ but less than B °-
rfi- Small Arm Ammunition.
The annual allowance of Small Arm Ammunition will be—
(r) For each Cadet armed with Francotte or Westlev-Richards
ntles—
Free:
For musketry Ball, 40 rounds
kor practice Ball, 40 rounds
, , Blank, 10 rounds
At reduced cost:
For each effective ... Ball, 100 rounds
.303 Ammunition.
(2) for each Cadet armed with .303 rifle
Free:
For musketry Ball, 40 rounds
kor practice ... ... Ball, 50 rounds
... , , Blank, 10 rounds
At reduced cost:
. /°r each effective ... Ball, 100 rounds
nnrHn rvf * of 6 , ach ye f r ’ unex P ended ammunition will be counted as
portion of next year s supply.
Note .—All ammunition purchased at reduced cost will be kent on
ciaige, and issued to Cadets in exactly the same way as free ammunition.
17. —Musketry Badges.
Badges will be issued to those who qualify as “ Marksmen.”
18.— Instructions for Target Practice
Z firing fs.TakingXe" 8 °" * conspicu P° sition the public
as fTLZ'K Z 6 by ‘ he ■? isley system > or b > - dis “, coloured
IT -- Whlte for bull’s eye, 5 points; red for centre. 4 points; white
and black for magpie, 3 points; and black for outer, a points The
marker will signal a miss by waving his flag. There are never to be more
than two marking —one to carry the flag, the other to disc.
' o practice is to take place in school grounds, except at such miniature
ranges as have been most carefully inspected and approved by the Officer
Commanding Cadets, or an Instructional Staff Officer (Cadets) deputed by


him, or at any of the mam ranges '^‘’^^Zcefdetailed by him; and
passed by the District Commandant or Staff Officer d«
at all practices the officer in charge must have a whistle, wmcn
“ in charge, or N.C. officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff
in charg" paragraph 37 of these Regulations), is not to practise
himself when the cadets are firing. f taking aim, the number
He will instruct each cadet to call out, before ta g > direct u to
at “ the rest ” —muzzle pointing upwards. In the P " . , ,
at the res I <{ w hen the flag will be raised, and
othcer m charge wi 1 ask AV I fired- when ret ired under
c^er m The e Xr in chart will call out “ All dear,” when the flag will be
lowered, and the next flag will be lowered, and soon.
All volley practices must be done single rank.
19. — Miniature Rifle Ranges.
The following designs of miniature rifle ranges have been recommended
as stable foTufe in Zool grounds throughout the Commonwealth, where
construction of same may be possible.
(a) Tube with safety and travelling targets—-see figure 9, 0
( pamphlet on “ Miniature Rifle Ranges, their Construction and
(M SafettTtvelling target (open or closed range) with screens
' and firing point embrasure —see figures 12, 13, and 4>
pamphlet on “ Miniature Rifle Ranges, their Construction and
(c) The^instructions for Rifle Practice at Rifle Ranges established at
schools, are as follows:
I Ranees —(a) No Practice will be allowed in School Buildings
or in Playgrounds of such Buildings until the place selected for a
Miniature Range has been inspected and reported upon as sa
a Staff Officer detailed by the District Commandant.
(b) A Miniature Range is not to exceed 25 yards in leng [
which Miniature Rifles and Ammunition as defined in Paragraphs 2
A’fL U -A Miniature Rifle may be of any pattern, and of any
c libre not exceeding .23 of one inch, or, a Rifle of larger calibre
fitted with any device for firing Miniature Ammunition as defined
Sights may be of any pattern fixed or adjustable, both vertically
“3. 'TmmuMion.~A Miniature Cartridge may be rim fire or antral
fire, with projectile of any calibre not exceeding of.one mdu
The powder charge may not exceed 7 grams of black powder or
cased with other meta, and
S d Master will be he,d
responsible that every precaution is taken to prevent an, eg
beimr done to walls or other parts of School Buildings.
,PMnary Training- -No bov will be allowed to fire until
he s has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Officer Commanding
the Company or Detachment, his ability to load and unloa


and to handle it with safety to himself and others, and has received
instruction in aiming.
6. Conduct of Practice.— Practice will only be permitted at such
regular times as may be approved by the Head Master.
7- Supervision.—(a) Practice must be supervised by the Officer
or Detachment or by a Staff Officer or
i\.L. Officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff, '
( b) Absolute discipline must be maintained and the Standing-
Orders strictly adhered to.
B. Discipline.—(a) Only those actually practising should be al-
lowed on the Range.
( b ) The Officer or N.C. Officer of the Cadet Instructional Staff in
c large must have two senior pupils as Assistants—one to act as
Travel fin 6 Target latt6r t 0 mani P ulate the Suspension
A ag or ni,at ma y be laid down for the firer to lie on. Only
° r InstrU( : tor and P u Pil firing should be on this mat.
{a) All other pupils should be at least 6 paces behind.
( e ) Cartridges should be handed to the firer one at a time.
(/) While loading or unloading he must keep the Rifle pointed
towards the Target.
Sp , Af t er firin S he must at once unload and lay the Rifle down
with the breech open.
Note. The instructions contained in sub-paragraphs (/) and
(g) must never be departed from.
ih) The person instructing the firer must carefully watch how the
latter handles his Rifle when loading, aiming and unloading, and
insist on the Rifle being kept pointed towards the Target. Ordinarily
a sl l ould o nl y fire from sto 10 rounds at any one Practice,
v T e rfect silence must be maintained.
{]) No person other than the Officer in charge or selected coach
must speak to the firer.
(k) No one is to be permitted under any circumstance to go be-
tween the firing point and stop-butt.
Tt must **. distinctly understood that nothing can relieve the
Head Master of the responsibility for maintaining strict discipline
and adherence to these orders during the conduct of Miniature
target Practice.
20 •—Correspondence and Returns.
All communications, no matter on what subject, connected with cadet
business must be sent either through the Battalion Commander, Adjutant, or
the Instructional Staff Officer, as the case may require.
. fitters should be written on paper of foolscap size, with a quarter mar-
gin, to facilitate reference. The address should be as follows
om l. here s ta te rank, and detachment or Battalion].
Sir,
******
I have, &c.
Documents forwarded to an officer marked “To be returned,” should
be marked Noted and returned.”
(Name, rank, detachment, or battalion) —
(Date)— 7


Minutes on correspondence should follow in consecutive order, and be
numbered in red ink, and dated. When the sheet is full, a new one is to be
attached.
21. —Issue of Stores.
Commanding Officers of Detachments will forward Requisitions on the
prescribed form, see Appendix No. VI., to the Officer Commanding Cadets,
who will initial the Requisition and forward same to the Senior Ordnance
Officer.
This Officer will make the issue and forward the articles to the address
on the Requisition, and forward the latter to the Officer Commanding the
Detachment, for his signature as having receiveS the Stores.
The Officer Commanding the Detachment will then return the Requisi-
tion signed to the Senior Ordnance Officer.
22. —Repairs of Rifles.
When repairs are required to be effected to rifles, or spare parts of
rifles, the Officer Commanding the Detachment will forward the rifles
direct to the 5.0.0., transmitting at the same time to that officer a “ Repair
Requisition,” in duplicate (as per prescribed form). See Appendix
No. VII.
This requisition is to contain the following particulars :
(a) Number and description of each rifle.
(,b) Nature of repairs, to be effected.
When the repairs have been completed, the rifles will be returned by
the 5.0.0. to the Officer Commanding the Detachment.
23. —Railway Travelling.
Railway travelling will be in accordance with the Railway Regulations
issued in each State from time to time.
Cadets are not allowed to travel to rifle practice unless in charge of an
officer. They must be marched into and out of the railway station. At
all battalion parades, the Battalion Commander will detail the Adjutant
or other senior officer to entrain. He must be accompanied by a bugler.
On the “ G ” being sounded, the cadets will quietlv enter the carriages and
sit with their rifles between their knees. The entraining officer will step
out on the platform first at the station of arrival, and cause the bugler to
sound a “ G,” on which the cadets will quietly open the carriage doors,
step out and fall in without noise, ready to be marched off. As far as
possible, every compartment must be in charge of an officer or a non-
commissioned officer, who is to be held responsible that no leaning out of
the carriage window is allowed, and that the cadets are quiet and orderly.
No beating of drums nor playing of band instruments is to be allowed
whilst on the station premises.
24. —Leave of Absence.
OFFICERS, WARRANT AND N.C. OFFICERS AND CADETS.
(a) Officers Commanding Battalions may grant leave of absence not ex-
ceeding 3 months.
(b) The Officer Commanding Cadets in each State may grant leave
of absence not exceeding 6 months.
( c ) Applications for leave beyond the foregoing periods will be sub-
mitted to the District Commandant, who may approve of same, if not
exceeding 12 months.
id) Applications for leave beyond the period specified in ( c ) will be
submitted by the District Commandant, with his recommendation, for the
consideration of the Military Board.


2 5. —Financial Instructions.
SENIOR CADETS (SCHOOL DETACHMENTS EXCEPTED).
(*) The Cash Statement will be balanced at the close of each financial
year (30th June), and all vouchers for expenditure, and the bank pass-book,
showing the balance at credit of the detachment, produced when required
by the Auditor.
(b) On or before the 10th July in each year, a balance-sheet of the
past year’s receipts and expenditure, signed by the Officer Commanding
Battalion, Company, or Detachment, and countersigned by two other officers
(if available), must be forwarded to the Authorizing Officer, who will trans-
mit same to the Secretary for Defence, with any remarks he may consider
necessary. No portion of the annual allowance shall be issued to anv
corps until such balance-sheet shall have been received.
CADETS (INCLUDING SCHOOL DETACHMENTS OF SENIOR CADETS).
(c) Receipts must be obtained for all expenditure, provided that, where
the amount does not exceed 55., a certificate by the Officer Commanding
the Detachment “ that the money has been paid,” will be accepted in cases
where it is impracticable to obtain receipts.
(d) The Cash Statement must be properly balanced, and, together with
all vouchers for expenditure, and the bank pass-book, showing balance at
credit of the detachment, produced at any official inspection.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS,
(e) All moneys paid to Officers Commanding Detachments by the De-
partment are to be immediately placed to the credit of the detachment in
such bank as may be approved. No other moneys are to be paid into this
account.
.00 vouchers must show full particulars, and be numbered to agree
v, ith the order in which, they are shown in the Cash Statement.
(s) An y expenditure not in accordance with the Regulations and In-
structions will be disallowed by the Inspecting Officer, and the amount
thereof deducted from the next effective allowance becoming due.
(/i) On the disbandment of any Corps or Detachment, the cash-book and
vouchers shall, together with any unexpended balance of Corps Funds, be
forwarded to the District Paymaster.
(z) The accounts of all Cadet Battalions, companies and detachments
me subject tc Audit by the Government Audit Inspector at any time.
26. —M iscellaneous.
The arras and accoutrements must always be kept clean and in good
cider. After firing practice, the rifles should at once be cleaned. The
authorized oil should only be used.
The keeper-action screws, which secure the block-axis pin in the Fran-
cotte rifles, should be kept tightly screwed up, with the centre vertical.
Officers char S e °f detachments should, as early as possible, intimate
to Battalion Commanders if any cause will prevent their detachments attend-
ing a battalion parade.
At the end of each half-year, a Return should be forwarded to the
battalion Commander showing how the free ammunition has been expended,
also the quantity of unexpended ammunition on hand.
By order,
S. A. PETHEBRIDGE,
A „ Secretary, Military Board.
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 24th May, 1907.


|
Number.
Date of
Enrolment.
cc
£
»■<
|
P
p
tz5
Q
1
si
3
1
p
Years.
Age on
Enrolment.
•^1
Height on
Enrolment.
f
Name and
Residence of
Parent or
Guardian.
i
Signature of
Member to
Correctness
of foregoing
Entries.
1
Date and
Cause of
leaving
; Detachment.
! Remarks.
APPENDICES.
APPENDIX I.
(Referred to in S.O., paragraph 5.)
Cadet Corps.—Muster Roll Book.
Directions for Keeping the Muster Roll Booh.
1. No name is to be entered as a member until uniform has been
obtained.
2. Each member then must sign the column as to correctness of entries.
3. The numbers must be consecutive; when a member leaves the corps
finally, or is transferred to any other branch of the Military Forces, the
column for this entry should be filled and a red line ruled through his
name, but not his number, .
4. The Muster Roll Book must be ready for inspection at all times.
6. Ages and heights to be entered thus; —John Brown, 12 7-12 years,
4 10-12 feet.
CADET CORPS.
Detachment in Battalion No


— ——
Rt
ceipts.
Payments.
Date.
From
Whom.
Officer’s
Allowance
Clothing
Allowance.
Detachment
Allowance.
Total.
Date.
To Whom,
and for What.
No. of
Voucher.
Officer’s
Allowance.
Clothing-
Allowance.
Detachment
Allowance.
Total.
1
>o
M
rC
a,
rt w
o
2 «
oj
a
z
r w
O S
. w
C/2 H
C H
•- 1 co
■2 a
T 3 to
(3J <
fc u
0)
'-M
OJ
<s
$
<3>
<o
■KJ
’S
*K*
s
<o
>v»
3
APPENDIX II.


* Cash Account for Financial Year ending 30th June, 19
Date.
Keceipts.
Amount.
Expenditure.
Amount.
£
s.
d.
£
s
d.
Balance, as per last return
From District Paymaster—
A/c Officers’ Allowance
A/c Clothing
A/c Detachment Allow-
ance
Balance as per last return
By Officers’ Allowance..
Clothing ..
Detachment Expenses
—
—
—
Balance in Bank
—
—
—
Statement of Assets and Liabilities—Financial Year ending 30th June, 19
Date.
Assets.
Amount.
Liabilities.
Am mnt.
To Balance in Bank
Amount due from Dis-
trict Paymaster!
Clothing!
£
s.
d.
By Officers’ Allowance
Clothing
Detachment Expenses
Balance
£
6’.
d.
APPENDIX III.
(Referred to in 5.0., paragraph 25.)
Senior Cadets (School Detachments excepted).
Finance Statement.
* This account to give totals under each heading in Cash Statement during year,
t This should include the Effective Allowance due on Ist July.
t This should include unworn clothing and material in store, but not clothing in wear by the Corps.
N.B. —No private property of Corps should be shown in this Statement.
Countersigned.
Commanding
C. 14220. B


(Referred to in S.O.* paragraph 5.)
LIST OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY ACTUALLY IN POSSKSSION AT THIS DATE
Description.
No.
Condition.
As per Stock on Charge.
Service-
able.
Repair-
able.
Unservice-
able.
Total.
Deficient.
Surplus.
Stock on
Books.
Pulls through
Rifles
Bugles, copper; and
cords
Arm chests ...
Capes
Other Articles —
APPENDIX IV.
Certified that this Return is correct, and that it was forwarded to
Head-Quarters (in compliance with head note) on 1
Signature of
Officer Commanding Detachment.
Head Master.
APPENDIX V.
(Referred to in Part 1., paragraph 1.)
FORM OF GUARANTEE FOR SAFE CARE AND CUSTODY OF GOVERNMENT
PROPERTY ISSUED TO SENIOR CADET CORPS.
I hereby hold myself responsible for all Government property issued
to the Detachment, Senior Cadets
and I undertake to be liable for the s,afe care and custody of such Govern-
ment property.
Dated at this day of 19 .
Signature
Position and address .
Witness
APPENDIX VI.
(Referred to in Part 1., paragraphs 7 and 20.)
FORM OF APPROVED DOCUMENT FOR DISBURSEMENT OF ALLOWANCES.
Detachment at
Date...,
I, the undersigned, hereby undertake that all moneys received by me
in connexion with the detachment of Cadet Corps at
will be disbursed in accordance with the Regulations and Orders issued
from time to time for the government of the Commonwealth Cadet Corps,
and that I will be personally responsible for anv payments made which
are not in accordance with the Regulations and orders above quoted.
Signed
Witness to Signature
34


Required to
Complete.
Ledger Folios.
Description of Articles Required,
(One item only on each line.)
a
W
.22
Store.
Equipment.
Remarks.
a
O
05 ®
u B
Store.
Corps.
* Bayonets, M.E.
•Belts, waist
* Bottles, water ...
* ,, oil, M.E. rifle ...
Brushes, cleaning, Francotte
Bugles, copper
’Cartridges, Ball 'SOS" ...
* ,, Blank -303"
„ Ball, W.R. -310" ...
„ Blank, W.R. -310" ...
,, Ball, Francotte, ’230"
,, Blank ,, „
•Coats, great
Cotton waste lbs. ...
•Flags signal, blue, 2' x 2'
* ,, ,, m 3' x 3'
* ,, ,, white, 2' x 2'
* „ „ „ 3' x 3'
Flannelette yards
•Frogs, bayonet
Oil, rifle pints ...
,, Rangoon ,,
•Poles, signal flag, large
* „ ,, ,, small
•Pouches, ammunition ...
•Protectors, front-sight, M.E
„ • „ W.R. ...
SJ ,, Francotte
•Pull-throughs, M. E. ...
„ „ W.R
•Rifles, M.E. -303"
,, Westley-Richards, '310" ...
,, Francotte ’230" ...
Rods, cleaning, Francotte
'Scabbards, bayonet, M.E.
•Slings, rifle
•Straps, great coat
* ,, shoulder, water-bottle ...
Strings, bugle, green
*
t
*For issue
to Senior
Cadets
only.
APPENDIX VII.
(Referred to in S.O. 21.)
CADET CORPS,
Ordnance Office No.
State of
Name of Detachment To be delivered at
REQUISITION AND RECEIPT FOR STORES FROM THE ORDNANCE DEPARTMENT.
Note.—Erasures are strictly prohibited.
Received by f
Date
Signature of Officer Commanding )
Detachment, >
No Battalion Cadet Corps 1
Date
Signature of 0. C. Cadets
Date .. ••*•*
Note. —This Requisition duly signed on the line marked thus t by the person receiving
the articles must be returned without delay to the Senior Ordnance Officer.
B 2


Description of Articles
No. or
By whom
Date returned
Cost (if any)
to be repaired.
Quantity.
repaired.
to
Detachment.
incurred.
£
ft.
d.
APPENDIX VIII.
REQUISITION FOR REPAIRS,
(Referred to in S.O. 22.)
To be delivered at Railway Station. REPAIR.
Requisitions to be made in duplicate. Ordnance Offloo NA
•One on black and One on Red Form. VAranance UIDCe IMO.
CADET CORPS.
Requisition for Repair of Stores by the Ordnance Department and Re-issue
to Detachment No. Battalion Cadet Corps.
• Here insert the nature of the repairs to be effected.
Repairs completed
190
Signature of Officer Cora-'j Name....
manding Detachment I
No. B’t’n. Cadet Corps J Rank
190
Approved
190
APPENDIX IX.
' F ORM I.
(This Form, with all details filled in, must be forwarded to District Head-
Quarters direct at the end of each quarter.)
Cadet Corps.
No Battalion. Detachment in School.
Quarterly Return for i
Strength as per last Return ... Any remarks:
Number joined during the quarter ...
Total
Number struck off during the quarter
Present strength


DETAILED STRENGTH OF
DETACHMENT.
Cupping.
Lieutenants.
Acting
Lieutenants.
Colour-
Sergeants.
Sergeants.
Corporals.
Buglers or
Drummers.
Cadets.
Total.
*
DRILLS PERFORMED
DURING QUARTER.
Date.
Duration of.
Nature of.
Remarks.
Form 2.
Form 3.




INDEX.
Definitions.—!., 16, means Part I. (Regulations), para. x 6; 11., 16, means
Part 11. (Standing Orders), para. 16.
A.
Address j 20
annual report of, Officers ......
Adjutants — * 4
duties of
A limit, boys attending school ... ••• "* I I 'i I q
limit, boys not attending school ... ••• ••• ••• •” •’ ’
for appt. to Instructional Staff ... ••• ••• •" •>
Allowances — # 1., 19
cadet corps ••• ••• ••• *’* "* " I , 4, 21
clothing - I.’, 5, 20
conditions gov. payment 01 ... ••• “ jj 2 r
financial instructions ••• •” •** j’’ ig
Musketry Instructor ••• ••• ••• ••• "j 1 2l
not to be given to cadets ... ••• ••• ’j ’ ig
officer commanding cadets ••• ••• ’** 4
senior cadet corps ... ••• ••• ••• 11., 16
S.A. ammunition ... ••• *” j xq
to be paid to officers direct ...
Ammunition — II } x g
annual allowance, S.A. ... •" r - g H.^6
not to be in possession of cadets ••• ••• .. 11., 26
return of
Applications— I . -it
formation and disbandment, cadet corps ••• j ’
outside cadet corps .••
Appointments — I ( 2^.28
cadet officers " 1' 4q SQ , 11., 12
confirmation of ••• ••• *“ ” _ i, } 24
Musketry Instructor ••• ••• ••• "• i’’ ~
N.C. officers ••• ••• •" ”* I.’ 24
officers standing in Edu. Dept, and Sec. schools jJ'* \\
on probation ••• ••• ••• "• ’’ 4y ’ 5 r gr
to Instructional Staff
Arms and Accoutrements— T } 2 2
cadets not to wear ... ••• ••• *” " 1 », II c
Head Master responsible for ... ••• ••• "* j*’
inspection of ••• ••• •** ‘ i_ g
senior cadets to wear ••• .”’ ", I
to be examined before and after firing ••• ...» j 5
to be kept in schools ••• ••• •" j - c ’ 26
to be used only for drill, &c.
B.
Badges j jy
musketry, for marksmen ••• •• *" j’’ 22
school, for cadets
Bands— 1., 4, 19
allowance tor ... ••• j }
formation of
Battalion — ... 11. t
commanders, duties of


Battalions—
command of ... ... ,
establishment—cadets ... ... ... ” 2
establishment —senior cadets ... ... .* j’ 12
formation of coys, and detachments into ... .. ”. j ’
numbers to be maintained, cadets ... ... I ’ 3 !!
numbers to be maintained, senior cadets ... ... ”, j 3
to be arranged topographically ... 3
Roard— * 3
medical, candidates for appt. I. Staff ... .. T
military (see Military Board) ' ’’ 57
Books—
instructions for keeping ... ... ... jt
production of, at Inspections ... j # 5j 23
C.
Camps—
provision for ... ... ... j
Certificates— ’ 4>
discharge—cadets ... ... ... ... j
discharge—senior cadets ... ... ... " y’’ 23
Clothing— " ’’ IO
allowance—cadets ... ... T
allowance—senior cadets attending school ... ... j 2X
Command—
Battalions ... T ~
* *” ••• ••• ... 1., 20
Companies—
establishment of ... ... ... ... y «
formation of, into Battalions ... ... ..* ‘ ‘ *’* j’’
Correspondence— ’
rules for ... ... ... T TX
••• ••• ••• 1., 44, 11., 20
D.
Detachments—
allowance ... ... j
care of Gov. property issued to ... ... j . .. ’ T y’
duties of officers of ... ... ... ’ ’ 33, jj’’ 3
formation and disbandment of ... ... ... . . I i u oo
formations into Coys, and Battalions ... ... ... ’ * I 34
Disbandment— ’
cadet detachments ... ... ... ... y
financial instructions on ... ” TT ’’ 33
••• ••• ••• ••• ... 11., 2c
Discharge—
certificates of, cadets ... ... ... ... y
certificates of, senior cadets ... ... ... ... j ’ 23
from cadet forces prior to joining Defence Forces ... /
powers of O.C. Battalions re ... ... ... *” j ’
senior cadets after reaching age of iq years ... .. r 3 T
Discipline—
O.C. responsible for ... ... ... ... jj
repress and report of misconduct, &c. ... ... ... jj ’ j
Dismissal—
members of cadet corps ... ... ... ... ... j
District Commandant—
applications submitted through ... ... ... j 1 2c 26 r?
approval of ... ... ... ... ... L, 4,19, IL, 18
discretion of, to reduce or stop allowances ... ... ... 5 * J*, 5/20
to arrange examinations for promotion ... ... ... ... j.
to inspect cadet corps ... ... ... ... j ’
Drill —
hours of ... ... ... ... T
record of *.V. ”i., s’, 20


Duties — TT
Adjutants ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• **' Af"* 4
Battalion commanders ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• “•» 3
cadets •• , ;•*
District commandants ... ... ••• ••• '•) I 0» 3°> 10
medical officers ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 7
musketry instructor ... ••• ••• ••• ••• *•* {•■>
N. officers ••• ••• ••• •• _ ••• " T "*’» §
O. cadets ... ••• ••• ••• ...1., 4, 10, 19, 23, 11., 18
officers and N.C, officers of I.S. ... ... ••• ••• ••• °
officers of detachments ... ••• ... 5> 7> 2 °> 5
E.
Education Department—
approval of ... ••• ... ••• ••• !•» IX » I P’ x 7» 2 5
teachers of, eligible for I.S. ... ••• • ••• 45» 53
Efficiency—
senior cadets ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ...1., 4> 5
Enrolment —
conditions of, for cadets ... ••• ... ••• ••• ••• *•> x 5
conditions of, for senior cadets ... ... ••• ••• ••• *•’ 1
Establishment —
battalion of cadets ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 12
battalion of senior cadets ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 2
company of cadets ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• z l ’ 1
supernumerary ... ••• ••• ••• -• x 4
Examination —
medical ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 45> 57
for appointment to I.S. ... ... ••• *•» 4°> s°> S®» 5°
for confirmation of appt. ... ... ••• ••• ••• 11., 12, 13
for promotion ... ... ••• ••• ••• !■> 3°> 5 2 > AA, > *3
F.
Field Officers —
instruction in work of ... ... ••• ••• ••• AA ' S 3
Financial — T
guarantee under Treasury Reg. 137 ... ... ••• ••• 1 •’ 7» 20
instructions ... ••• ••• ••• ••• "* A ’’ 2 5
G.
Government Property—
annual return of 11., 5 , Appen. IV.
care of L » *» 35. 5
return of, on demand ••• ••• ••• ••• **' ’’ 37
Governor-General —
appointments, &c., by ... ••• ••• ...1., x, n, 2 4> 2 5
Guarantee — T
safe care of Gov. property ... ... ••• ••• ••• A » *
under Treasury Reg. 137 ••• ••• ••• ”* '* 7> 2
H.
Head Master— T r
approval of ... ... ••• ••• *" *" ’’ i-’ '
responsibility of ... ••• ••• ••• *” 0 35. •» 5
Honours—
(see Salutes)
I.
Inspecting Officer — T ,
• • f ... ... 1., 5, 20
opinion of ... ... ••• ••• J
Inspection— j g
by District commandant ... ••• ••• ••• •" '** T ’
half yearly {*» g
of arms and stores ... ... ••• ••• " T TT ’ J
production of books, &c., at ... ••• ••• ••• ■* 2 °> •» ■>


Instruction —
schools of ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• H.j 14
stretcher bearers ... ... .... ... ... ••• ••• 11., xi
Instructional Staff —
not available for District Staff duty ... ... ... ... ... 11., 8
(Officers) —
age of candidates ... ... ... ... ••• ••• !■» 45
applications outside cadet corps ... ... ••• ... L, 5 1
applications submitted through D.C. ... ... ••• ••• !•> 46
appointment on probation ... ... ... ... ... 1., 49
approval of candidates ... ... ... ... ••• ••• I-, 47
eligibility of candidates ... ... ... ••• ••• !•» 45
examination, competitive ... ... ... ... ••• L, 48
medical examination ... ... ... ... ••• •• I*, 45
notice of vacancies ... ... ... ... ... ••• I-, 46
transfer ... ... ... ... ... ••• !•> 5 2
(W. and N.C.O.s) —
applications outside cadet corps ... ... ... ... ••• !•> 60
appointment on probation ... ... ••• ••• ••• I-, 59
eligibility of candidates ... ... .. ... ••• L, 53
examination, competitive ... ... ... ... ••• I-> 5^
medical examination ... .. ... ... ... ••• I*, 57
opinion of D.C. ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• I-, 55
notice of vacancies ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 54
transfer ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• !•» 6i
L.
Leave of Absence —
grants of ... ... ... ... ... ... .. H-, 24
M
Markers —
cadets never to be permitted to act as ... ... ... ••• !•» 39
Marksmen —
badges for ... ... ... .. ... •• •• ••• H*» J 7
Medical —
examinations ... ... ... ••• ••• •• !•» 4S> 57
officers —duties of, &c. ... ... • . ••• ••• H«» 7
Military Board —
approval of ... ... ... ... ••• ••• !•> x> 2 4> 2 5
Military Districts —
number of units to be maintained ... ... ... ... 1., 3> *3
Militia —
transfer from cadet forces to ... ... ... ••• ••• !•» 9
Miniature Rifle Ranges—
construction of, &c. ... ... ... ••• ••• H-i J 9
Musketry—
badges for marksmen ... ... ••• ••• ••• H*» xy
course, supervision of ... ... ... ••• ••• 11., 5
course, syllabi for ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• H«» X 5
Instructor, allowance ... ... ... ••• ... ••• I-» xq
Instructor, appt. and rank of ... ... ... 1., 24
Instructor, duties of ... ... ••• ... 6
N.
N.C. Officers —
allotment of ... ... ... ... ... ••• !•» 3 2
appointment of, &c. ... ... ... ... ••• ••• !•> 3 1
of I.S. to be present at target practice ... ... ... ••• I-« 39
to be specially selected cadets ... ... ••• ... ••• 9


o.
O.c. Cadets —
allowance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... !•> *9
applications forwarded through ... ... ••• ••• !•* 25, 26
appointment of ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• L, 2 4
approval of rifle ranges ... ... ••• ••• ••• 11., *8
correspondence addressed to ... ... ••• ••• ... 1., 44
duties and responsibility of ... ... ... L, S> 2 °> 4°> 46, 54> !!•» *8
rank of ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• !•» 2 4
to countersign claims ... ... ... ••• ••• !•» 5
Officers —
allowances ... ... ... ... ... ••• •• !•> 4> I 9
allowances may be stopped ... ... ... ••• *•> 5> 20
appointment of ... ... ••• ••• •• !•» 2 5> H*» 12
commanding detachments, responsibility of ... ... ••• L, 6, *5» 20
duties of ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• !!•> 3> 4> 5
examination for promotion ... ... ••• ••• ••• !•> 3°> H*» 12
medical, duties of ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• H*» 7
responsible for disbursement of effective allowance ... ... !•> S> 20
syllabus of examination ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• H*> 13
to be present at target practice ... ... ••• ••• !•> 39
to keep record of drills, &c. ... ... ... ••• *•» 5’ 20
to provide uniform ... ... ... ••• ••• *•» S> 20
Orders —
instructions re ... ... ••• ••• ••• 5
notice of vacancies published in ... ••• ••• ••• !•» 54
P.
Parades —
duration of ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• *" *•»
half yearly ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •" 18
Pay— T
not to be given to cadets ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• *•’ x 9
Promotion —
examination for ... ... ••• ••• ••• 3 0, > I2 > *3
R.
Railway Travelling—
instructions for ... ••• ••• ••• •• ••• " '* ’
Rann — TT
medical officers ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ’’ '
Musketry Instructor ... ••• ••• **' T ’* 4
O.C. cadets - 4
officers of cadet forces ... ••• ••• ••• I > 2 5> 12
officers of high standing in Edu. Dept, and Sec. Schools ... ••• i> 2 4
Reduction — T
of N.C. officers 3
RENT— , , T T
when Gov. buildings not available ... ... ••• ••• •••
Repairs— II 22
requisitions for
Requisitions — ' II 21
for issue and receipt of stores ... ••• ••• jj - ’ 22
for repairs of rifles
Retired List — j 2 g
officers placed on ... ••• ••• *” I' 20
* officers to report address annually ••• ”* .
Returns — ... 11., 5, 20
instructions re
Rifle Ranges— ... ... ... n., 18
approval of ••• ••• .. ... u., rg
miniature
Rifles— 1., 35, 11., 5
care of ••• ••• "* * . ... ... 11., 22
repairs of ... ••• *” .. ... ... 1., 36
to be only used for parades, &c.


s.
Salutes —
instructions re ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11., a
Stores —
care of ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 1., 35’ H., 5
inspection of ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 1., 38
issue of ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 11-, 21
Stretcher Bearers —
instruction of ... ... ... ... .- ••• ••• 11., i*
Supernumerary—
cadets borne as ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 1., *4
T.
Target Practice—
description of targets ... ... ... ••• ••• IL, is( f )> l 9
rules for ... ... ... ... ••• ••• !•» 39’ H*, *8
Transfers —
disposal of documents on ... ... ... ... ... !•» «> 20
from cadet corps to Defence Forces ... ... ... ... ••• !•» 9
from I.S. to A. and I. Staff, C.M. Forces ... ••• ••• !•» 5 2 >
from Unattached List ... ... • • ••• ••• ••• !•> 2^
to Retired List ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• !•» 2^
to Unattached List ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• X*> 2 ~
U.
Unattached List —
formation of ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• !•* 2 7
transfer from ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• *•» 2 ®
transfer to ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• L, 2 7
Uniform —
grants for ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• !•’ 4> 21
medical officers ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 7
officers and cadets ... ... ... ••• L, 8, 22, 40, 41, 42
officers to provide ... ... ... ... ••• !•» S’ 20
V.
Vacancies —
notice of. Instructional Staff ... ... ... ••• L, 46, 54
Volunteers —
transfer from cadet forces to ... ... ... ... ••• L, 9
Authority: J. Kemp, Acting Government Printer, Melbourne.
