

Department of Lands and Survey.
NEW ZEALAND.
REGULATIONS
UNDER THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915.
Gazettes No. 112, 22nd August, 1918; No. 147, 7th November, 1918;
No. 168, 19th December, 1918; No, 53, 1st May, 1919.
WELLINGTON.
BY AUTHORITY: MARCUS F. MARKS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1919.




REGULATIONS
UNDER THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT
ACT, 1918.
PART I.
REGULATIONS PRESCRIBING SPECIAL TENURES.
Applications.
1. Applications to purchase land under section 4 of the said
Act shall be in the Form No. 1 in the First Schedule hereto,
and applications to lease land under the said section shall be
in the Form No. 2 in the said Schedule.
2. Every application to purchase or to lease land under
the said Act and these regulations shall be accompanied by a
statutory declaration in the Form No. 3 in the First Schedule
hereto.
3. (1.) If two or more applications are received in respect
of one allotment of land, the Land Board shall determine
which of the applicants, in its opinion, is most suitable to
occupy the land, or is most in need of the land, and shall
dispose of the land so as to comply with the direction of the
said Act that the Board shall as far as practicable assist
applicants in acquiring suitable allotments.
(2.) If the Board is unable to determine between the claims
of any two or more applicants, as provided in the last pre-
ceding subolause, it shall cause a ballot to be taken in the
manner in which ballots are taken for the purposes of the
Land Act, 1908.
4. In the case of lands to be disposed of by way of sale
or lease under section 4 of the said Act, the price or capital
value shall be fixed by the Minister of Lands. The price or
capital value so fixed shall be such amount as the Minister
considers reasonable, notwithstanding that in the case of
lands purchased by the Grown under the Land for Settle-
ments Act, 1908, or the Native Land Act, 1909, the price or
value so fixed may be less than the price paid for such land,
together with the charges and expenses incurred by the Crown
in connection therewith. (As amended by Order in Council
dated 17th December, 1918. Gazette No. 168 of 19th December,
1918.)
Purchases of Land.
5. In the case of lands purchased on deferred payment the
following provisions shall apply :—•
{a.) The purchaser shall forthwith on the approval of his
application pay a deposit equal to 5 per centum of
the price of the land, or such lesser amount as the
Minister may in any case determine, and shall there-
upon be entitled to receive a license to occupy the
said land, in the Form No. 4 in the First Schedule
hereto.
(6.) The license to occupy shall provide for the payment
of the balance of the price by equal annual instal-
ments extending over such period as the Board
in each case determines, with a right to the licensee


to pay off at any time the whole or any part of the
price then remaining unpaid, and shall also provide
for the payment by the licensee of interest half-
yearly at the rate of 5 per centum per annum from
the date of his purchase upon such part of the price
as for the time being remains unpaid.
(c.) Upon payment of the price in full, and of all interest,
the purchase shall be deemed to be completed, and
a certificate of title for the said land shall be issued
accordingly.
{ d .) Residence on any land held under license to occupy
shall be compulsory, and shall commence in the case
of bush or swamp land within four years, and in the
case of open or partly open land within one year,
from the date of the license, and shall thereafter
be continuous during the whole of the remainder
of the term of the license : Provided that the Land
Board may in its discretion dispense with com-
pliance with the requirements of this paragraph.
6. Every license to occupy and every certificate of title
issued in respect of land acquired for cash or on deferred
payment under these regulations shall have endorsed upon
or written thereon a memorial to the effect that the land
comprised therein shall not, except with the consent of the
Land Board and the approval of the Minister of Lands, he
capable of being transferred until the expiry of ten years
after the date of the sale, or, in the case of land the fee-simple
of which is acquired pursuant to clause 12 hereof, after the
date of the lease.
Leases.
7. Every lease issued under section 4 of the said Act and
these regulations shall be in the Form No. 5 in the First
Schedule hereto, and shall be for such term, with or without
a right of renewal, as the Land Board in each case may
determine : Provided that no lease under these regulations
shall be for a longer term than thirty-three years in the case
of lands acquired under the Land for Settlements Act, or
sixty-six years in the case of other lands, with a perpetual
right of renewal for further successive terms of thirty-three
years or sixty-six years, as the case may be.
8. The value of improvements required to be effected by
the lessee during the term of his lease shall in each case he
determined by the Land Board, and for the purpose of fixing
such value the Land Board shall take into consideration the
purpose, as set out in his application, for which the lessee
intends to use the land.
9. Every lessee of land disposed of under these regulations
shall be required to reside continuously on the land com-
prised in his lease : Provided that the Land Board may
postpone the date of the commencement of such residence for
such period in any case as it thinks fit, or may dispense with
such residence if it is satisfied in any case that the land may
be effectively used by the lessee for the purpose for which it
was acquired without his residence thereon.
10. (1.) In the case of lands acquired pursuant to section 3
of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amendment Act, 1917,
and disposed of under these regulations, the annual rent
shall be an amount equal to 5 per centum of the capital
value thereof, as determined in accordance with clause 4
hereof, and in all other cases the annual rent shall be an
amount not exceeding 4J- per centum of such capital value.
(2.) The said rent shall be paid to the Receiver of Land
Revenue in equal parts on the Ist day of January and the


Ist day of July of each year during the continuance of the
lease : Provided that the rent for the period elapsing between
the date of the lease and the due date of the first half-yearly
payment shall be payable, at the option of the Board, either
with such first half-yearly payment or on the due date of
the next succeeding half-yearly payment.
(3.) The rent payable on renewal of a lease under the
foregoing regulations shall be determined by the Land Board,
and shall be based on a valuation of the land comprised in
the lease as at the date of the renewal, exclusive of the value
of improvements effected or paid for by the lessee or by a
predecessor in title.
11. (1.) On the termination by effluxion of time of a lease
granted under these regulations, if a renewal of such lease is
not granted, the lessee shall be entitled to receive from the
Crown the value of all existing improvements of a permanent
character effected or paid for by him or by a predecessor in title.
(2.) For the purposes of this regulation the value of im-
provements shall be such value ss may be agreed on between
the Land Board and the lessee, and in default of agreement
shall be determined by arbitration under the Land Act, 1908.
12. (1.) Before disposing of any land by way of lease under
these regulations the Minister of Lands shall determine the
price in accordance with clause 4 hereof, and the lessee may
at any time, during the continuance of his lease, with the
approval of the Land Board and consent of the Minister,
acquire the fee-simple of the lands comprised therein at the
price so determined; Provided that nothing in this regu-
lation shall authorize the acquisition of the fee-simple of any
national-endowment land. (As amended by Order in Council
dated 17th December, 1918. Gazette No. 168 of 19ih December,
1918.)
(2.) The provisions of clause 5 of these regulations (relating
to purchases of land on deferred payment) shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply in respect of the acquisition of the fee-simple
under this regulation.
13. The Land Board, with the consent of the Minister,
may accept the surrender of any lease granted under these
regulations, and the land comprised in such lease shall there-
upon be again available for disposal under the said Act and
these regulations, and the provisions of sections 72 to 77 of
the Land Act, 1908, shall thereupon apply, in the same
manner as if the lease were a lease under that Act forfeited
for breach of conditions.
General.
14. The following provisions of the statutes mentioned
shall, so far as applicable, and except as may be otherwise
provided in the said Act or in these regulations, apply to
lands disposed of under these regulations, namely —•
The Land Act, 1908 —Sections 63 (1) {a), 66, 82, 84, 86,
88, 90, 92, 93, 94, 99, 101, 102, 107, 108, 110, 111, 112,
113, 114, 115, 116, 125, 127, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
150, 151.
The Land Laws Amendment Act, 1912 —Sections 9 and 13.
The Land Laws Amendment Act, 1913'—Sections 7, 11,
19, 20, 29, 30, and 33.
The Land Laws Amendment Act, 1914—Sections 15,
25, and 29.
The Land Laws Amendment Act, 1915 —Sections 4,5,
21, and 22.
The Land Laws Amendment Act, 1917—Section 3.
The Land for Settlements Act, 1908 —Section 57 (except
paragraph {A) thereof).


The Reserves and other Lands Disposal and Public
Bodies Empowering Act, 1911-—Section 25.
15. (1.) All titles in fee-simple issued under these regulations
in respect of any Crown land shall be subject to the provisions
of Part XXII of the Land Act, 1908.
(2.) All titles in fee-simple issued under these regulations
in respect of any land which is or was at any time settlement
land shall be subject to section 60 of the Land Laws Amend-
ment Act, 1912.
16. On the transfer of any lease or license issued pursuant
to section 4 of the said Act the transferee, if not a discharged
soldier, shall be required to make a declaration in such one
of the forms (with the necessary modifications) prescribed
under the Land Act, 1908, or the Land for Settlements Act,
1908, as the case may be, as the Land Board may determine.
17. Two or more applicants may make an application to
hold any land set apart under section 4 of the said Act
as tenants in common, and in any such case the provisions of
section 196 of the Land Act, 1908, shall, so far as applicable,
extend and apply.
18. Clauses 23, 24, and 25 of, and the Second Schedule to,
the regulations under the Land for Settlements Act, 1908,
made on the 16th day of March, 1909, shall, so far as appli-
cable, and with the necessary modifications, apply to lands
with buildings thereon disposed of under the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act in the same manner as they apply to
lands with buildings thereon disposed of under the Land for
Settlements Act.
19. The provisions of section 41 of the Land Act, 1908, and
of the regulations relating to Land Board elections made on
the 7th day of February, 1913, and published in the New
Zealand Gazette of the 13th day of February, 1913, shall, so
far as they relate to the election of elective members of Land
Boards, apply to every discharged soldier who is the owner
of a lease issued pursuant to section 4 of the said Act, and
accordingly every such discharged soldier shall be eligible to
vote for the election of any elective member of the Land
Board for the land district im which such discharged soldier’s
land is situated.
PART II.
FINANCIAL.
20. With respect to advances under section 6 of the said
Act (as extended by section 4 of the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Amendment Act, 1916), and under paragraphs (c)
and (e) of section 2 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Amendment Act, 1917, the following provisions shall apply
(a.) The amount of advance that may be made to anyone
person, including all other advances made to the
same person and still remaining unpaid, shall not
exceed £5OO : Provided that the Minister may, if
in his opinion special circumstances render such
amount inadequate, authorize an additional ad-
vance not exceeding £250 : Provided further that in
the case of bush lands the Minister may authorize an
advance under this regulation not exceeding £l,OOO
in ordinary cases, or £1,250 in cases where in the
opinion of the Minister special circumstances warrant
such amount being advanced.
(6.) The amount of any loan made for the purpose of
clearing, draining, fencing, erection of buildings, and
general improvement may, in the discretion of the
Minister, be advanced by progress-payments cor


responding to 75 per cent, of the value of the im-
provements from time to time effected by the
mortgagor. In such case the value of the improve-
ments so effected shall from time to time be ascer-
tained and certified to by some person authorized
by the Minister in that behalf, and any certificate
given by such person shall be final; the balance of
the advance may be paid on receipt of a final certi-
ficate that the improvements in respect of which
the advance is made have been satisfactorily com-
pleted.
(c.) In no ease shall the amount advanced for buildings
exceed £250.
(d.) All moneys advanced shall be secured by way of first
mortgage over the land or the applicant’s interest
therein in the Form No. 6 in the First Schedule
hereto.
(e.) Where money is advanced for the purpose of purchasing
stock and implements, such money shall be further
secured by a collateral bill of sale in the Form No. 7
in the First Schedule hereto.
(/•)|d n cases where further advances are made for purposes
other than the purchase of stock or implements, and
the applicant has on the land stock or implements,
not already encumbered by bill of sale, the Minister
may require, before granting such further advance,
collateral security over such stock or implements
by way of bill of sale in the Form No. 7 in the First
Schedule hereto.
( g■) hor the purpose of the administration of these regu-
lations, the Minister may authorize the Commissioner
of Crown Lands or any other officer of the Lands
and Survey Department, to pay advances, and any
such authority to make an advance issued by the
Minister shall be deemed to be an authority to
advance and readvance moneys on current account
so that the total indebtedness, exclusive of interest,
of the person to whom such advance is made shall
not at any time exceed the amount so authorized.
21. For the purpose of assisting settlers with respect to
any of the matters for which advances may be made as
aforesaid, the Minister may purchase such materials or
articles as may be required, and may dispose of the same to
settlers on such terms as he thinks proper. Where any such
materials or articles are not paid for by the settler, their value
as determined by the Minister shall be deemed to be an
advance within the meaning of these regulations.
22. With respect to advances under paragraph (a), (6),
or ( d ) of section 2of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Amendment Act, 1917, the following provisions shall apply ;
(a.) Every application for such an advance shall be made, in
the Form No. 8 in the First Schedule hereto or to the
like effect, to the Land Board for the land district
within which the land affected is situated, and shall be
accompanied by the prescribed valuation fee. The
Land Board shall, before making its recommendation,
require the applicant to appear personally before it'
or before such person or persons as it may appoint.
(6.) Valuation fees shall be payable in accordance with the
following scale
On an application for a loan not ex- £ s. d.
ceeding £lOO .. .. .. 010 6
Exceeding £lOO but not exceeding £250 1 1 0
Exceeding £250 but not exceeding £500.. 111 6
Exceeding £6OO but not exceeding £2,600 2 2 0


(c.) An application for an advance for any of the purposes
mentioned in paragraphs ( a ) or (b) of the said sec-
tion 2 shall not be considered unless it is accompanied
by an option to purchase the fee-simple or to acquire
the lease or license, as the case may be, given by the
owner or the lessee to the applicant. Such option
shall be in the Form No. 9 in the First Schedule
hereto or to the like effect.
(d. ) The amount of advance to any person for the purchase
of a dwelling and appurtenances on other than rural
land shall not exceed the sum of £l,OOO, and for any
other purpose shall not exceed the sum of £2,500.
(e.) Except as provided in paragraph {g) hereof all advances
shall be secured by first mortgage over the land or
the applicant’s interest in the lease or license in the
Form No. 10 in the First Schedule hereto or to the
like effect; and the Minister may as collateral security
require that a bill of sale be given over such stock
and other chattels belonging to the applicant as he
may decide.
(/.) Except as provided in paragraph ( g ) or paragraph (h)
hereof, all moneys advanced under this clause,
together with interest thereon at the rate of 5 per
cent, per annum, shall be repayable by half-yearly
instalments over a period of 86J years. Every half-
yearly instalment shall consist partly of interest
and partly of principal, and shall be calculated and
apportioned according to Table A of the Second
Schedule to the State Advances Act, 1913.
(g.) In such cases as the Minister may approve, advances
under this clause may be made on flat mortgage for
any period not exceeding ten years. Advances made
on flat mortgage shall bear interest at the rate of 5
per centum per annum, and shall be secured by first
mortgage in the Form No. 6 in the First Schedule
hereto, with the necessary modifications.
(h.) In the case of applications for an advance to purchase
a dwelling and appurtenances on other than rural
land, the provisions of paragraph ( b) of the next
succeeding clause shall apply in lieu of the pro-
visions of paragraph {/ ) of this clause.
(i.) In the case of any advance made in respect of leasehold
land the following additional provisions shall apply ;—-
(i.) The mortgage skull be deemed not only to
cover the mortgagor’s interest in the lease, but to
extend to and include his interest in any further
lease issued to him in lieu of such first-mentioned
lease, whether by way of renewal or otherwise.
(ii.) The term of the mortgage shall, unless the
lessee receives in lieu of his lease a title in fee-simple,
expire on the due date of the prescribed half-yearly
instalment next preceding the date of the expiration
of the lease (which term shaU be deemed to include
any lease issued in lieu thereof whether by way of
renewal or otherwise), and such instalment shall
include the balance of principal then owing under
the mortgage.
(iii.) No surrender of any lease on the security of
which money has been advanced shall, so long as
any portion of the moneys advanced remains unpaid,
be accepted, nor shall any such lease be declared
forfeited by a Land Board without the consent of
the Minister.
(iv.) For the purposes of section 74 of the Land
Act, 1908, any moneys owing by a lessee on account


of an advance made pursuant to these regulations,
together with interest due thereon, if any, shall be
deemed to be moneys dxie in respect of the land, and
such moneys shall constitute a first charge on moneys
received by the Receiver of Land Revenue pursuant
to that section.
(v.) The terms “lease” and “lessee” include
license and licensee.
23. Advances for the purpose of the erection of a dwelling-
house on other than rural land may, on the recommendation
of the Land Board, be made by the Minister of Lands sub-
ject to the following provisions :—■
(a.) The amount of the advance shall in no case exceed the
sum of £750.
(6.) Unless otherwise determined by the Minister as
hereinafter provided, all moneys advanced, to-
gether with interest thereon at the rate of 5 per
centum per annum, shall be secured by first mort-
gage over the land in the Form No. 10 in the First
Schedule hereto or to the like effect, and shall be
repayable by half-yearly or monthly instalments over
a period of 25J years. Every instalment shall con-
sist partly of interest and partly of principal, and
shall be calculated at the rate of 7 per centum
per annum on the amount of the advance, and
shall be applied towards payment of interest and
principal in the proportions set out respecting the
appropriate payment in the Second Schedule hereto.
Form No. 10 in the First Schedule hereto shall be
altered where necessary to provide for payment by
monthly instalments. Any discharged soldier who
has obtained an advance and has contracted to pay
instalments of interest and principal half-yearly
may, with the consent of the Land Board, be per-
mitted to pay such instalments monthly, whereupon
the amount payable monthly shall be one-sixth of the
amount which he has contracted to pay half-yearly.
(As amended by Order in Council dated 7th November ,
1918. Gazette No. 147 of 7th November, 1918).
( c.) The amount of any loan may, in the discretion of the
Minister, be advanced by progress-payments to an
amount not exceeding the value of the work from
time to time completed.
(d.) Every application for an advance shall be made, in the
Form No. 11 in the First Schedule hereto or to the
like effect, to the Land Board for the district within
which the land affected is situated, and shall be
accompanied by the valuation fee calculated in
accordance with the scale prescribed by paragraph (6)
of the last preceding clause of these regulations.
The Land Board shall, before making its recom-
mendation, require the applicant to appear person-
ally before it, or before such person or persons as it
may appoint.
(e.) In such cases as the Minister may determine, advances
may be made on flat mortgage for any period not
exceeding ten years. All moneys so advanced shall
bear interest at the rate of 5 per centum per annum,
and shall be secured by way of first mortgage over
the land in the Form No. 6 in the First Schedule
hereto, with the necessary modifications.
24. All the powers conferred upon His Majesty the King
as mortgagee by any mortgage to secure repayment of moneys
advanced under these regulations, or pursuant to any law


as such mortgagee, may be exercised in his own name by the
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the land district within
which the land affected by such mortgage is situated, and all
actions and proceedings for the recovery of moneys advanced
or interest thereon may be taken by the said Commissioner
in his own name.
25. Upon the transfer, otherwise than pursuant to the
will or on the intestacy of the mortgagor, of any property
upon the security of which an advance has been made pur-
suant to these regulations, the balance of the principal unpaid
in respect of such advance shall be immediately due and
payable : Provided that this regulation shall not apply in
the case of a transfer to a discharged soldier as defined by
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915, or the amend-
ments thereof, where such transfer has been duly consented
to by the Land Board and approved by the Minister.
26. No registration fee shall be payable in respect of any
memorandum of mortgage or any bill of sale given as security
for any advance made under the authority of these regulations.
27. Where two or more discharged soldiers hold or propose
to acquire any land, whether freehold or leasehold, as tenants
in common in equal shares, advances may be made to them
jointly to the aggregate amount that they would have been
entitled to obtain individually.
28. Dorms Nos. 6 and 10 in the Dirst Schedule hereto may
be modified to such extent as may be necessary in cases in
which the land affected is not under the Land Transfer Act,
1915.
PART III.
DWELLINGS.
29. In the following regulations, unless inconsistent with
the context, —-
“ Capital value ” of a dwelling means the capital value
fixed by the Minister;, and shall cover the value of
the land, the cost of its acquisition, the cost of survey,
reading, subdivision, and other works and operations
done on the land (inolmding the value of the dwelling),
the proper proportion of the value of so much of
the land as is absorbed by roads or streets, and the
estimated cost of administration :
“ Dwelling ” means any residence erected on land set
apart for the purpose of soldiers’ dwellings pursuant
to section 4 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Amendment Act, 1917, and includes the land on
which the same is erected or which is held therewith,
and also includes all outbuildings and sanitary and
drainage arrangements necessary for such residence;
“ Purchaser ” includes any discharged soldier to whom
land has been disposed of under these regulations,
whether under agreement to purchase or under a
provisional undertaking to purchase as hereinafter
provided.
30. (1.) Land set apart for the purposes of section 4 of the
Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amendment Act, 1917, shall
be divided into such allotments as the Minister may direct;
and the Minister may cause to be erected thereon buildings
suitable for soldiers’ residences, or may convert any buildings
thereon into soldiers’ residences, and may from time to
time alter, enlarge, repair, rebuild, and improve any such
dwellings.
(2.) The capital value of any dwelling disposed of under
these regulations shall not exceed £l,OOO.


31. The Land Board, with the consent of the Minister, may
dispose of any such allotment to a discharged soldier under
agreement to purchase as hereinafter provided.
32. (1.) Applications for allotments shall be made to the
Land Board in the form numbered ,12 in the First Schedule
hereto, and shall be accompanied by a deposit of 5 per
centum of the capital value (in the case of an allotment on
which a residence has been erected), or 6 per centum of the
estimated prospective capital value (in the case of an allotment
upon which a residence is to be erected by the Minister), or
shall be accompanied by a deposit of such lesser sum as the
Minister, in any special case, may determine.
(2.) The amount of such deposit shall, if the application is
approved by the Minister and the Land Board, be applied
towards the cost of the dwelling, and shall, if the application
is not so approved, be refunded to the applicant.
33. Every applicant for an allotment under these regu-
lations shall be required to appear personally before the
Land Board, or before such person or persons as the Land
Board may appoint.
34. (1.) Allotments may be disposed of either before or after
residences have been erected thereon by the Minister.
(2.) In the case of an allotment disposed of upon which no
residence has been erected, the Minister may erect thereon a
residence with the necessary appurtenances in accordance
with plans and specifications agreed upon between himself
and the purchaser, provided that the capital value of the
dwelling shall not exceed the maximum prescribed by these
regulations.
35. Every agreement to purchase shall be in the form
numbered 13 in the First Schedule hereto, and shall provide
for the payment of the balance of the capital value (after
deducting therefrom the amount deposited in accordance with
clause 32 hereof), together with interest thereon at the rate
of 5 per centum per annum, by monthly instalments payable
on the first day of each and every month for a period of
25i years, such instalments being calculated at the rate of
11s. Bd. per month for every £lOO included in the balance of
capital value.
36. (1.) The total period during which instalments shall be
payable as provided in the last preceding clause shall be
divided into periods of six months, the first of such periods
commencing on the first day of the month next following
the date of the execution of the agreement to purchase.
(2.) The total amount of the monthly instalments for any
such period of six months shall be deemed to be in part
satisfaction of principal and interest for that period, in pro-
portions calculated in accordance with the table in the Second
Schedule hereto as for the appropriate period of six months :
Provided that if in any case the full amount of such instal-
ments has not been paid no allocation shall be made in
respect of principal until the full amount of interest has been
satisfied.
37. Every applicant to whom an allotment with a residence
erected thereon has been disposed of shall execute an agree-
ment to purchase in the form numbered 13 in the First
Schedule hereto. The first instalment pursuant to such agree-
ment shall become due on the first day of the month next
following the date of the execution of such agreement.
38. (1.) The disposal of an allotment upon which no resi-
dence has been erected shall be conditional upon arrangements


being completed between the Minister and the purchaser for
the erection on the allotment of a residence with the necessary
appurtenances at a cost within the limit of value provided
in these regulations. In any such case a provisional under-
taking to purchase, in the Form No. 14 in the First Schedule
hereto, shall be entered into by the purchaser.
(2.) Failing the completion of such arrangements the Board
by direction of the Minister may cancel the provisional under-
taking, and the applicant shall thereupon be entitled to a
refund of his deposit.
39. All agreements or other instruments shall be executed
on behalf of His Majesty the King by the Commissioner. _
40. Payment of all moneys due in respect of any applica-
tion or agreement to purchase shall be made to the Receiver
of Land Revenue for the land district within which the land
is situated.
41. Upon payment in full by the purchaser of the capital
value, together with interest thereon in accordance with the
agreement to purchase, the Land Board shall certify to the
Minister that the purchaser is entitled to a certificate _ of
title in respect of the land purchased, and a certificate of title
shall accordingly in due course be issued to him.
42. (1.) No dwelling disposed of pursuant to these regula-
tions shall, except with the consent of the Land Board and
the approval of the Minister, be capable of being assigned
or otherwise disposed of until the expiry of ten years after
the date of the agreement to purchase ; and under no cir-
cumstances shall any dwelling while held under agreement
to purchase be transferred, except pursuant to the will or on
the death intestate of the purchaser, to any person who is
not a discharged soldier.
(2.) Upon approval of any transfer or other disposition
the Commissioner shall record the same by endorsement
upon the agreement to purchase.
43. No discharged soldier to whom a dwelling has been
disposed of pursuant to these regulations, and who makes
any disposition of such dwelling whether by way of assign-
ment or otherwise, or whose agreement to purchase is cancelled
by reason of default in compliance with the conditions thereof,
shall be eligible to acquire any other dwelling under these
regulations : Provided that the Minister on the recommenda-
tion of the Land Board may, in any case where he is of opinion
that exceptional circumstances render such a course desirable,
direct that this regulation shall not apply.
44. The purchaser of a dwelling under these regulations
shall reside continuously therein, and if he fails to do so the
Land Board may, with the approval of the Minister, cancel
his agreement to purchase, and the dwelling shall thereupon
revert to the Crown : Provided that the Land Board may
(subject to such conditions as it thinks fit) grant exemption
from the requirement of continuous residence for any period
not exceeding twelve months at any one time on sufficient
and satisfactory grounds being shown for non-residence.
45. (1.) The purchaser shall pay all rates and taxes levied
on or payable in respect of his dwelling.
(2.) The non-payment of rates shall be deemed to be a
breach of conditions of agreement, and shall render the
agreement liable to cancellation.
46. (1.) Irrespective of the prescribed monthly instalments
the purchaser may at any time pay to the Receiver of Land
Revenue the amount, in no case less than £lO, of principal
included, according to the table in the Second Schedule hereto,
in the instalments corresponding to any number of consecu


tive six-monthly periods next succeeding the six-monthly
period then current.
(2.) The payment of any such amount shall not affect the
periodical continuity of monthly instalments, but the amount
of principal and interest included in the succeeding instal-
ments shall be calculated according to the table in the Second
Schedule hereto as if the appropriate number of six-monthly
periods corresponding to the instalments of principal so paid
had expired, and the period of 25J years during which the
monthly instalments would otherwise have been required to
be paid shall be reduced accordingly.
47. (1.) If the purchaser fails at any time to comply with
any of the provisions of these regulations, or makes default
for thirty days in the due payment of any moneys payable
pursuant to an agreement to purchase, the Land Board
may, with the consent of the Minister, cancel the agreement,
and the purchaser shall thereupon deliver up to the Com-
missioner possession of the dwelling in good order and re-
pair.
(2.) No cancellation or termination shall affect any right
or remedy on the part of the Crown as to the recovery of
instalments or other moneys due, or shall otherwise release
the purchaser from any penalty in respect to anything don©
or omitted to be done by him.
48. (1.) Any dwelling with respect to which an agreement
to purchase has been cancelled pursuant to any of the pro-
visions of these regulations may be again disposed of under
these regulations at such capital value as the Minister may
determine.
(2.) The amount (if any) by which the capital value of the
dwelling when again disposed of exceeds the amount of
principal unpaid by the outgoing purchaser may at the
discretion of the Minister be paid in whole or in part to the
outgoing purchaser, after deducting therefrom all costs con-
nected with the cancellation and disposal together with any
sums, other than principal - moneys, that may be due and
unpaid in respect of the agreement that has been cancelled.
49. If an applicant who has entered into a provisional
undertaking to purchase any dwelling pursuant to these
regulations withdraws his application he shall not be entitled
to a refund of his deposit in respect of his purchase-money ;
but the Land Board may, if it thinks lit, refund the balance
of such deposit after deducting an amount not less than £1
in respect of expenses.
50. The purchaser shall insure in the name of the King, to
the full insurable value against loss by lire, any dwelling in
respect of which the whole of the purchase-money has not
been paid, and shall lodge the insurance policy with the
Commissioner.
51. If a dwelling in respect to which an agreement to pur-
chase has been entered into is destroyed or damaged by fire
and the purchase-money has not been paid, the Minister may
expend such insurance-money as may be available for the
purpose in the re-erection or restoration of the dwelling ; and
if the occupancy of the dwelling has ceased on account of the
fire the payments due under the agreement to purchase
may be suspended by the Minister until the dwelling has
been re-erected or restored, and the currency of the agreement
to purchase shall be extended accordingly. In lieu of re-
erecting or restoring the dwelling the Minister may, by agree-
ment with the purchaser, cancel the agreement to purchase,
refunding to him such sum as is agreed upon from the amount
paid on account of principal.


52. If the purchaser permits any nuisance to exist on or
about his dwelling, and fails to remove the same on receiving
notice from or on behalf of the Land Board so to do, the Land
Board, with the consent of the Minister, may thereupon
terminate the agreement on such terms as it thinks fit; or
may itself have the nuisance removed, and may recover the
sum thus expended from the purchaser by such monthly
instalments of principal and interest (computed at 5 per cent,
per annum) as the Land Board may determine. The amount
of such instalments shall be added to the instalments payable
under the agreement to purchase the dwelling, and the agree-
ment shall, until the additional instalments aforesaid are
paid, be deemed to be amended accordingly.
53. The purchaser of a dwelling shall, until the total pur-
chase-money has been paid, keep his dwelling in good order
and repair to the satisfaction of the Land Board. Without
limiting the foregoing provision, the purchaser of a dwelling
shall have all exterior woodwork of his dwelling painted with
two coats of paint at least once in every five years, and all
exterior metal-work shall be painted with one coat of paint
at least once in every five years. If any purchaser fails or is
unable to the satisfaction of the Minister to comply with this
regulation the Minister may, in his discretion, carry out such
work as he deems necessary, and may recover the sum thus
expended from the purchaser either immediately or, at the
option of the Minister, by such monthly instalments of
principal and interest (computed at 6 per cent, per annum)
as he thinks fit. The amount of such instalment shall be
added to the instalments payable under the agreement to
purchase the dwelling, and the agreement shall, until the
additional instalments aforesaid are paid, be deemed to be
amended accordingly.
54. No alterations to a dwelling shall be made except with
the consent of the Land Board.
65. The Commissioner or other officer or officers appointed
by him for the purpose shall have power at all reasonable
times to enter and inspect any dwelling.
66. None of the provisions of the Workers 5 Dwellings
Act, 1910, shall, except in so far as they are incorporated
herein, be applicable to lands disposed of under these regu-
lations.
PART IV.
LAND SET APART UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE SAID ACT.
57. Every application to purchase or to lease land set
apart under section B of the said Act shall be in the Form
No. 1 or the Form No. 2 in the First Schedule hereto, with
such modifications as may be required.
SCHEDULES.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Form No. 1.
APPLICATION TO PURCHASE LAND UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915.
To the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
I, [Name in full], of [Address], [Occupation (if any)], hereby
apply, under the provisions of the Discharged Soldiers


Section.
Block.
Survey
Area.
<6
Method of Purchase.
District.
(a) Bor Cash.
(6) On Deferred
Payment.
Question.
Answer.
1. What is your full name and Regimental No. ?
2. Of what Naval or Expeditionary Eorce
were you a member ?
3. What was—■
(a.) Your length of service in such
Eorce ?
(6.) The date of your discharge ?
(c.) The reason of your discharge ?
4. What physical disabilities (if any) do you
suffer from by reason of wounds or
disease resulting from your naval or
military service ? State particulars as
to loss of limb or faculty or as to con-
dition of health.
5. (I.) Have you applied for a pension under
the War Pensions Act, 1915 ?
(2.) If so, has your application been (a)
granted, or (6) refused, or (c) not
finally dealt with ?
(3.) If granted, to what rate of pension
are you entitled ?
(4.) If refused, what were the grounds of
refusal?
(5.) In the case of an applicant who is
married —
(a.) To what rate of pension under the
War Pensions Act, 1915, is your
wife entitled ?
(6.) To what rates of pension are you en-
titled under the said Act in re-
spect of your children (if any) ?
6. What was your occupation prior to your
becoming a member of the Forces ?
State period.
7. For what business or purpose do you intend
to use the land for which you are apply-
ing?
8. What experience (if any) have you had in
such business ?
9. What experience have you had (if any) in
any kindred business ?
10. What is the amount of capital at your dis-
posal for use on the land ? —
(a.) Amount of cash
(6.) Value of stock (if any)
(c.) Implements or other property ..
Settlement Act, 1915, and the regulations thereunder, to
purchase the land hereinafter mentioned, namely : —■
For the purposes of this application I make the following
replies to the questions hereinafter set forth : —•


Question.
Answer.
11. What financial assistance will you require
to enable you to work the land success-
fully ? State particulars.
12. Are you single, married, or a widower ? If
married or a widower, state number of
children (if any) dependent on you.
13. What land (if any) do you at present own
or have an interest in ? Give par-
ticulars.
14. If married, what land (if any) does your
wife own or have an interest in ? Give
particulars.
15. Have you at any time held land or received
an advance under the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act ? If so, state
particulars.
Section.
Block,
Survey District.
Area.
Question.
Answer.
1 . What is your full name and Regimental No ?
2. Of what Naval or Expeditionary Force
were you a member ?
3. What was—
(a.) Your length of service in such
Force ?
(6.) The date of your discharge ?
(c.) The reason of your discharge?
4. What physical disabilities (if any) do you
suffer from by reason of wounds or
disease resulting from your naval or
military service ? State particulars as
to loss of limb cr faculty or as to con ■
dition of health.
•
Dated at this day of , 191 .
[Signature of applicant.]
Form No. 2.
APPLICATION FOR LEASE OF LAND UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915.
To the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
I, [Name in full], of [Address], [Occupation [if any)], hereby
apply, under the provisions of the Discharged Soldiers Settle-
ment Act, 1915, and the regulations thereunder, for a lease
for a term of years, with [or without] right of renewal,
of the land hereinafter mentioned, namely:—■
For the purposes of this application I make the following
replies to the questions hereinafter set forth :


Question,,
Answer,
5. (1.) Have you applied for a pension under
the War Pensions Act, 1915 ?
(2.) If so, has your application been (a)
granted, or (6) refused, or (c) not
finally dealt with ?
(3.) If granted, to what rate of pension are
you entitled ?
(4.) If refused, what were the grounds of
refusal?
(5.) In the case of an applicant who is
married, —
(a.) To what rate of pension under the
War Pensions Act, 1915, is your
wife entitled ?
(5.) To what rates of pension are you en-
titled under the said Act in re-
spect to your children (if any) ?
6. What was your occupation prior to your
becoming a member of the Forces ?
State period.
7. For what business or purpose do you intend
to use the land for which you are apply-
ing ?
8. What experience (if any) have you had in
such business f
9. What experience have you had (if any) in
any kindred business ?
10. What is the amount of capital at your dis-
posal for use on the land t —
(a.) Amount of cash
(6.) Value of stock (if any)
(c.) Implements or other property ..
11. What financial assistance will you require
to enable you to work the land success-
fully ! State particulars.
12. Are you single, married, or a widower ? If
married or a widower, state number of
children (if any) dependent on you.
13. What land (if any) do you at present own
or have an interest in ? Give par-
tioulars.
14. If married, what land (if any) does your
wife own or have an interest in ? Give
particulars.
15. Have you at any time held land or received
an advance under the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act ? If so, state
particulars.
Dated at this day of
, 191 .t
[. Signature of applicant.]


Form No. 3.
STATUTORY DECLARATION TO AÇCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR
LAND UNDER THE DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT
Act, 1915.
I, ['Name in full], of [Address] , [Occupation [if any)], do
solemnly and sincerely declare —
1. That I am a discharged soldier within the meaning of
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1916.
2. That I am, subject to the provisions of the said Act,
applying for the land described in the accompanying appli-
cation solely for my own use and benefit, and not directly
or indirectly for the use or benefit of any other person or
persons whomsoever.
3. That my answers to the questions set out in the said
application are true and correct in every particular.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believ-
ing the same to be true, and by virtue of the Justices of the
Peace Act, 1908.
[Signature.]
Declared at this day of ,191 ,
before me— , a Justice of the Peace for New r Zealand
[or Solicitor, or Notary Public],
Form No. 4.
OCCUPATION LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THE DISCHARGED
SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915, ON THE PURCHASE
ON DETERRED PAYMENT OF ANY LAND UNDER THAT ACT.
This Deed, made the day of , 191 ,
between His Majesty the King, of the one part, and ,
of (who, with his executors, administrators, and
assigns, is hereinafter referred to as “ the licensee ”), of the
other part:
Whereas the licensee, being a discharged soldier within
the meaning of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915,
has agreed, pursuant to the provisions of the said Act and
the regulations thereunder, to purchase on deferred payment
the land hereinafter described for the sum of £ :
And whereas the licensee, in pursuance of the regulations
under the said Act, has paid a deposit of £
Now, this deed witnesseth that His Majesty the King, in
consideration of the premises and of the said covenants
hereinafter expressed on the part of the licensee, and in
pursuance of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1916,
and the regulations thereunder, doth hereby grant to the
licensee an exclusive license to occupy all that piece of land,
containing by admeasurement acres roods
perches, be the same a little more or less, situated
in the Land District of , and being Section No.
, Block , Survey District ; as the
same is more particularly described in the Schedule hereto,
and delineated on the plan drawn hereon, and thereon
coloured red in outline : To hold the same imto the licensee,
under and subject to the covenants and conditions herein-
after expressed, for the term of years from the
day of , 191 , or until the said land is


sooner granted in fee-simple to the licensee. And the licensee
doth hereby covenant with His Majesty the King, in manner
following:—
1. The licensee will pay to His Majesty the balance of the
aforesaid price of the said land by equal annual
instalments of , the first of such payments to be
made on the first day of , 191 :
Provided always that the licensee shall be at liberty at
any earlier time or times to pay to His Majesty the whole
or any part or parts of the said price ; and all moneys so
paid under this proviso shall to the extent thereof be deemed
and taken to be paid in satisfaction and performance of the
obligations of the licensee under the foregoing covenant.
2. The licensee will pay to His Majesty interest at the rate
of 5 per centum per annum on such part of the said price as
is for the time being unpaid, computed from the
day of ,191 ,by a payment on the day of
next of so much interest as shall then have accrued,
and thereafter by half-yearly payments on the first day of
January and the first day of July in each year.
3. The licensee will not at any time during the continuance
of the license, without the previous consent in writing of the
Land Board of the land district in which the said land is
situated, remove any minerals from the said land, or commit
any other species of waste in respect thereof :
Provided always, and it is hereby agreed and declared,
that if the licensee make default in the due and full payment
of any instalment of the said price, or of any interest due in
respect thereof, the aforesaid Land Board may cause to be
given to the licensee, or to any person who is for the time being
in occupation of the land or of any part thereof, notice under
the hand of the Commissioner of Crown Lands that if the
moneys so in arrear are not paid within one calendar month
after the date of the notice the Land Board will forfeit this
license : And it is hereby agreed and declared that if the
moneys so in arrear are not paid within one calendar month
after the date of the aforesaid notice the Land Board may,
in its discretion, without any further or other notice, by
resolution, forfeit this license, and thereupon the license and
the contract between His Majesty and the licensee for the
purchase of the land, and the interest of the licensee in the
said land shall absolutely cease and determine, and all
moneys theretofore paid by the licensee under this license
or in respect of the said, contract shall remain the property
of His Majesty; but. no such forfeiture shall relieve the
licensee from his obligation to pay to His Majesty any moneys
in arrear under this license at the date of such, forfeiture, or
from any liability for any breach theretofore committed of
the covenants herein expressed.
4. The licensee will commence to reside on the said land
on or before the day of , 191 , and will
thereafter reside continuously thereon during the term of
the license.
[Any other special terms or conditions that the Board, with
the approval of the Minister, may determine.]
In witness whereof the Commissioner of Grown Lands for
the Land District of , on behalf of His Majesty the
King, has hereunto set his hand, and these presents have also
been executed by the licensee,
n set—Regs,


THE SCHEDULE.
[Description of Land.]
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Signed by the Commissioner of Crown Lands, on behalf
of His Majesty the King, in the presence of
Licensee.
Signed by the above-named licensee in the presence
of
Form No. 5.
LEASE UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE DISCHARGED SOLDIERS
SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915.
This Deed, made the day of ,191 ,
between His Majesty the King (who with his heirs and suc-
cessors is hereinafter referred to as “the lessor”), of the one
part, and , of , in the Land District of
, in the Dominion of New Zealand (hereinafter, with
his executors, administrators, and permitted assigns, referred
to as “the lessee”), of the other part, witnesseth that, in
consideration of the rent hereinafter reserved, and of the
covenants, conditions, and agreements herein contained and
implied, and on the part of the lessee to be paid, observed,
and performed, the lessor doth hereby demise and lease unto
the lessee all that piece or parcel of land, containing by
admeasurement acres roods perches,
a little more or less, situated in the Land District of
aforesaid, and being Section numbered , Block ,
Survey District of ; as the same is more particu-
larly delineated and described in the plan drawn hereon and
therein coloured red in outline, together with the rights,
easements, and appurtenances to the same belonging ; to
hold the said several premises intended to be hereby demised
unto the lessee for the term of years, commencing
from the Ist day of , yielding and paying therefor
unto the Receiver of Land Revenue for the said District of
the annual rent of (£::), payable half-
yearly, in advance, on the Ist day of January and Ist day
of July in each and every year during the said term, free
from all deductions whatsoever.
And it is hereby declared and agreed that the lessee shall
have a perpetual right of renewal for further successive terms
of years, at a rent to be determined by the Land
Board,
And the lessee doth hereby covenant with the lessor as
follows, that is to say:—
(1.) Subject to the provisions of the regulations in force
under the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1916,
the lessee will reside continuously on the demised
land from the date of this lease.
(2.) The lessee will put on the demised land substantial
improvements as under :■ —
[To be determined by the Board, taking into con-
sideration the special circumstances of each case.]
(3.) The lessee will pay all rates, taxes, and assessments
levied on or payable in respect of the demised land
during the said term,
(4.) The lessee will at all times during the said term keep
in good repair and condition, to the satisfaction of


the Land Board, all buildings and erections for the
time being standing on the demised land, and will
not destroy, pull down, or remove them or any part
thereof without the previous permission, in writing,
of the said Board.
(5.) The lessee will fully and punctually pay the rent here-
inbefore reserved at the times and in the manner
hereinbefore named in that behalf.
(6.) The lessee will once a year throughout the term of
this lease, and at the proper season of the year,
properly cut and trim all live fences on the demised
land, and will stub all gorse not growing as fences,
and will also stub all broom, sweetbrier, and other
noxious plants.
[Any other special terms or conditions that the Board, with
the approval of the Minister, may determiine.]
And it is hereby further declared—
(l.) That the lessee may at any time during the continu-
ance of this lease, with the approval of the Land
Board and the Minister of Lands, acquire the fee-
simple of the demised land for the sum of £ ,
either for cash or on deferred payments ;
(2.) That if the lessee makes default in the payment of
rent or other payments, or in the observance or
performance of the conditions expressed or implied
in this lease, or makes any false declaration in
'sespeot of the land comprised therein, then and in
any such case the Land Board may, without any
previous or other notice or demand, forfeit this
lease, and in such case all the lessee’s interest therein
shall absolutely cease and determine ; and
(3.) That if any dispute or disagreement shall arise between
the parties hereto touching the construction of these
presents, or in anywise relating hereto, such dispute
or disagreement shall be referred to arbitration in
the manner set forth in section 9 of the Land Laws
Amendment Act, 1912, as modified by section 33 of
the Land Laws Amendment Act, 1913, and neither
of the said parties shall take or cause to be taken
any steps or proceedings to set aside or call in ques-
tion any or decision which may have been
given upon any such reference as final.
And it is hereby further declared and agreed that these
presents are intended to take effect as a lease under section 4
of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915, and the
provisions of the said Act, and of the regulations thereunder,
applicable to such leases so far as the same apply to the
term, estate, or interest hereby granted or created, and to the
relations between the lessor and lessee from, time to time,
shall be binding in all respects upon the parties hereto in
the same manner as if such provisions had been fully set
out herein.
In witness whereof the Commissioner of Crown Lands for
the Land District of , on behalf of the lessor, hath
hereunto set his hand, and these presents have been also
executed by the said lessee.
Signed by the said Commissioner on behalf of the lessor,
in the presence of
Signed by the above-named , as lessee, in the
presence of


Form No. 6.
TINDER THE DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT ACT, 1915.
Memorandum op Mortgage.
(hereinafter called “the mortgagor”), being
registered as proprietor of an estate [Here state nature of the
estate or interest ], subject, however, to such encumbrances,
liens, and interests as are notified by memoranda under-
written or endorsed hereon, in piece of land situated
in the [District, county, hundred, or township ], containing
[Here state the area, exclusive of roads intersecting the same, if
any], be the same a little more or less [Here state rights of way,
privileges, or easements, if any, intended to be conveyed ; if
the land to be dealt with contains all that is included in an exist-
ing grant or certificate of title or lease, refer thereto for description
and diagrams ; otherwise set forth the boundaries in chains,
links, or feet, and refer to plan thereof on margin of or annexed
to the lease, or deposited in the Registry Office]..
Whereas the mortgagor has, pursuant to the provisions of
section 6 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915,
received an advance of £ from His Majesty the King
(hereinafter called “the mortgagee”) :
Now, therefore, in consideration of such advance and of
any further advance or advances which hereafter may be made,
the mortgagor doth hereby covenant with the mortgagee as
follows
1. That the mortgagor will pay to the mortgagee the said
advance and any further advances, and all other moneys
that may be owing by the mortgagor to the mortgagee, on
the day of : Provided that upon the
transfer, otherwise than pursuant to the will or on the in-
testacy of the mortgagor of the lands hereby mortgaged, or
of the|who!e or any part of the mortgagor’s interest therein,
all principal moneys hereby secured shall become immediately
due and payable to the mortgagee ; Provided further that
this condition shall, not apply in the case of a transfer to a
discharged soldier as defined [by the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Act, 1915, or the amendments thereof, where such
transfer has been duly consented to by the Land Board and
approved by the Minister.”
2. That the mortgagor will pay interest, on all amounts
advanced and still remaining unpaid, at the rate of
pounds per centum per annum, by equal payments on the
Ist day of January and July in each and every year.
3. That the mortgagor may, on the Ist day of January
or the Ist day of July in any year, without previous notice
of intention so to do, repay the whole or any portion of the
moneys advanced.
4. That the mortgagor will forthwith insure, and so long
as any money remains owing on this security will keep insured,
all buildings and erections for the time being situate, on the
said land against loss or damage by fire, in the name of the
mortgagee, to their full insurable value, in the State Eire
Insurance Office or other reputable insurance office to be
from time to time approved by the mortgagee, and will duly
and punctually pay all premiums and sums of money neces-
sary for the purpose of keeping every such insurance on foot;
and will, not later than the forenoon of the day on which any
premium falls due, deliver the receipt therefor to the mort-
gagee, who shall also be entitled to the exclusive custody of
all policies of insurance.
5. That the mortgagor will from time to time, so long as
any money remains owing on this security, well and sub


stantially repair, and keep in good and substantial repair
and condition, all buildings or other improvements erected
and made upon the said land; and that the mortgagee may
at all times be at liberty, by himself, his agents or servants,
to enter upon the said land to view and inspect the said
buildings and improvements.
6. That if the mortgagor fails or neglects to insure or
keep insured the said buildings and erections as aforesaid,
or to deliver any premium receipt as aforesaid, or to repair
the said buildings and improvements, or to keep them in
good and substantial repair and condition as aforesaid, then
and in any such case, and as often as the same shall happen,
it shall be lawful for but not obligatory on the mortgagee,
at the cost and expense in all things of the mortgagor, to
insure the said buildings or any of them in such sum as afore-
said or in any less sum, or to pay such premium, or to repair
the said buildings and improvements and keep them in good
and substantial repair and condition.
7. That in the event of the said buildings and erections
or any of them being destroyed or damaged by fire, all moneys
received by the mortgagee under any insurance in respect of
such destruction or damage shall be applied at his sole option
either in or towards rebuilding or repairing the buildings and
erections so destoyed or damaged, or in or towards payment
of the principal, interest, and other moneys for the time
being covered by this security, notwithstanding that the same
or any of them may not have accrued due under the terms
of these presents.
8. That all moneys expended by the mortgagee in and
about effecting or keeping on foot any insurance as aforesaid,
or in repairing or keeping in repair any of the said buildings
and improvements as aforesaid, or in attempting to exercise
or enforce any power, right, or remedy herein contained or
implied in favour of the mortgagee, shall be payable to him
by the mortgagor on demand, and until paid shall be charged
on the said land, together with interest at the rate of 5 per
centum per a.nrmm computed from the date or dates of such
moneys being expended.
9. That the power of sale and incidental powers in that
behalf conferred upon mortgagees by the Land Transfer
Act, 1915, shall be implied herein, with this modification :
that they may be exercised without any notice or demand
whatsoever if and whenever the mortgagor makes default
for fourteen days in the full and punctual payment of any
moneys hereby secured, or the interest thereon, in accordance
with the respective covenants for payment thereof herein
contained, or if and whenever the mortgagor makes default
in the faithful observance and performance of any other
covenant or condition on his part herein contained or implied.
10. That if and whenever the mortgagor makes any such
default "as in the last preceding covenant mentioned it shall
be lawful for the mortgagee to call up and compel payment
of all principal, interest, and other moneys for the time being
owing under this security, notwithstanding that the time or
times hereinbefore appointed for the payment thereof respec-
tively may not have arrived.
11. That the covenants, powers, and provisions implied in
mortgages by the Land Transfer Act, 1913, are modified or
negatived in so far as they are inconsistent with or repugnant
to these presents.
12. That in the case of lands held under lease or license the
mortgagor will at all times punctually pay the rent or other
payments reserved by, and faithfully perform and observe
all the covenants and conditions contained in, the lease or


license herein, mentioned; and that if he fails or neglects so
tojdo itjshall be lawful but not obligatory on the mortgagee
so r to do at the cost and expense in all things of the mortgagor ;
and all moneys so expended by the mortgagee shall be payable
to him by the mortgagor on demand, and until paid shall be
charged on the said land together with interest at the rate of
5 per cent, per annum computed from the date or dates of
such moneys being expended.
13. That the mortgagor will at all times cultivate and
manage the mortgaged land in a skilful and proper manner
and according to the rules of good husbandry.
14. And it is hereby declared that this memorandum of
mortgage is intended to be collateral with a certain mortgage
of stock and chattels bearing even date herewith and made
between the parties hereto, whereby certain stock and chattels
were assigned by way of mortgage to the said mortgagee.
15. All powers and duties conferred by these presents upon
the mortgagee or directed or implied by statute shall, on
behalf of the mortgagee, be exercisable and may be per-
formed in his own name by the Commissioner of Crown
Lands for the time being for the Land District.
And for the better securing to the said mortgagee the
repayment in manner aforesaid of the said principal sum
and interest the mortgagor hereby mortgages to the said
mortgagee all the mortgagor’’s estate and interest in the said
land above described.
In witness whereof the mortgagor has hereto signed his
name this day of , one thousand nine
hundred and
Signed by the said as mortgagor in the presence
of — [Name, occupation, and address of witness ].
Form No. 7.
This Deed, made the day of , 19 , be-
tween (hereinafter called “ the grantor,” which ex-
pression where not inconsistent with the context shall include
each of the parties aforesaid and his executors, administrators,
and assigns), of the one part, and His Majesty the King
(hereinafter called “ the grantee ”) of the other part:
Whereas the grantor is the true owner and in possession
of the stock and other chattels mentioned and described in
the First Schedule hereto : And whereas the grantor has
applied for an advance under the provisions of the Dis-
charged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915, and the Minister of
Lands has authorized the granting of such advance, and the
grantor has agreed with the grantee to secure in manner
hereinafter appearing the payment to the grantee of all
moneys so advanced or which are now or may at any time
hereinafter become due, owing, or payable by the grantor to
the grantee (other than rent falling due upon the land leased
from the grantee and described in the First Schedule hereto),
and the grantor in consideration of all such moneys has also
agreed to appoint the grantee the agent of the grantor for
the purposes and upon the terms hereinafter appearing :
Now this deed witnesseth that, in pursuance of the said
agreement and in consideration of the premises, the grantor
doth hereby assign, transfer, and set over unto the grantee
all and singular the stock mentioned and described in the
First Schedule hereto and branded and marked as follows :
. And also all and singular the sheep, cattle, and
horses which shall at any time hereafter during the continu-
ance of this security be in, upon, or about or belonging to


the lands mentioned in the First Schedule hereto, or any
other lands which may now or hereafter during the con-
tinuance of this security belong to or be used or occupied
by the grantor, whether worked in conjunction with the
lands mentioned in the First Schedule hereto or otherwise.
And also any other sheep, cattle, and horses which may now
or shall at any time hereafter during the continuance of this
security belong to the grantor wherever the same may be
depasturing. And all the natural increase of any of the said
stock, sheep, cattle, and horses. And ail the wool which shall
during the continuance of this security grow upon any sheep
comprised in or for the time being bound by this security,
and that both before and after such wool is shorn. And also
the brands and marks shown in the margin being the regis-
tered brands and marks of the grantor, and the exclusive
right to use the same for branding or marking stock, as well
as all instruments for the time being and from time to time
used by the grantor for branding or marking stock. And
also all and singular the implements of husbandry, farming
plant, and other chattels mentioned and described in the
First Schedule hereto. And also all chattels of what nature
or description soever which shall hereafter be acquired by
the grantor whether in addition, to or in substitution for the
said implements, plant, and chattels or any of them and
shall be used in or about the business of , farmer, or
grazier, carried on or to be carried on by the grantor upon
the lands mentioned in the First Schedule hereto or any
other lands as aforesaid. To hold unto the grantee by way
of mortgage for securing the payment by the grantor to the
grantee of all moneys now advanced or which are now or
which may at any time hereafter become due, owing, or pay-
able by the grantor to the grantee under these presents (other
than rent falling due upon the land leased from the grantee
and described in the First Schedule hereto).
And this deed further witnesseth that it is hereby cove-
nanted, agreed, and declared by and between the parties
hereto as follows :
1. The grantor on the day of , 191 ,
will pay to the grantee at the office of the Commissioner of
Crown Lands at the balance due upon the account
current between them the grantor and the grantee, and also
all other moneys (if any) which may for the time being be
owing by the grantor to the grantee and secured by these
presents : Provided that upon the transfer, otherwise than
pursuant to the will or on the intestacy of the grantor of the
lands described in the First Schedule hereto, or of the whole
or any part of the grantor’s interest therein, all principal
moneys hereby secured shall become immediately due and
payable to the grantee: Provided further that tin's condition
shall not apply in the case of a transfer to a discharged
soldier as defined by the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act,
1915, or the amendments thereof, where such transfer has
been duly consented to by the Land Board and approved by
the Minister.
2. All moneys owing by the grantor to the grantee at the
date of the execution by the grantor of these presents shall
be included in the said account current, and if the grantor
shall at any time have more than one current account open
with the grantee all the provisions hereof shall apply to all
such current accounts.
3. The interest payable by the grantor upon the balance
for the time being of the said account current shall be at
the rate of 6 per centum per annum, and shall be payable
on all sums properly charged by the grantee to the grantor


on such account from the respective dates upon which the
same shall have been so charged to the grantor in the boots
of the grantee. Such interest as aforesaid shall be payable
on the first day of January and July in each and every year.
4. All costs, charges, and expenses incurred by the grantee
in or about the preparation, execution, registration, renewal
of registration, or release of these presents, or of any other
security for the payment of the moneys intended to be
hereby secured or of any part thereof, or in or about the
exercise or enforcement or attempted exercise or enforce-
ment of any power, right, or remedy conferred upon the
grantee by law or by these presents, or otherwise reasonably
incurred by the grantee owing to default in payment of any
moneys intended to be hereby secured, or the breach of any
covenant on the part of the grantor herein expressed or
implied, or with a view to the protection or preservation of
the property comprised in this security, shall be deemed to
be part of the principal moneys owing under and secured by
these presents, and shall bear interest accordingly computed
in each case from the time when the same shall be respec-
tively incurred.
5. The books of the grantee shall be prima facie evidence
of the amount for the time being owing on the security of
these presents and of ail other particulars entered in such
books, and shall be admissible as evidence accordingly in all
Courts of Justice and before all persons acting judicially.
6. This security shall be deemed to be a running and con-
tinuing security irrespective of any sums which may from
time to time be paid to the credit of the account current of
the grantor with the grantee, and notwithstanding that such
account may appear at any time to be in credit, and not-
withstanding any settlement of account or any other matter
or thing whatsoever, this security shall remain in full force
and effect, and shall not be deemed to have been released or
discharged or in any way vacated until a memorandum, of
satisfaction thereof shall have been executed by the grantee.
7. All moneys received by the grantee on behalf of the
grantor from sales of stock, wool, produce, or chattels may
be appropriated as the grantee may determine towards the
reduction of the indebtedness for the time being of the
grantor to the grantee, and the entries in the books of the
grantee shall be conclusive evidence of such appropriation.
8. The grantor will brand and earmark with the registered
brands and earmarks of the grantor aforesaid such of the
sheep, cattle, and horses mentioned and described in the
First Schedule hereto as are not already so branded and
earmarked, and also all sheep, cattle, and horses which during
the continuance of this security shall be brought by the
grantor upon the lands mentioned in the First Schedule
hereto or upon any other lands that now are or at any time
hereafter shall be the property of or occupied or used by
■the grantor, and any other sheep, cattle, and horses which
shall at any time hereafter belong to the grantor wherever
the same may be depasturing, and also the natural increase
of any of the said sheep, cattle, and horses. The words “ will
brand ” herein used shall have the meaning assigned to them
by statute, with such extension as is hereby given to them.
9. The grantor will not (whether in the ordinary course of
business or not) sell or dispose of or mortgage, charge, or
otherwise encumber the stock and chattels for the time being
comprised in this security or any of them, or remove any of
the same fromjthe lands mentioned in the First Schedule
hereto, without the consent in writing of the grantee first
had and obtained.


10. If any of tlie sheep, cattle, or horses hereby assigned
or for the time being subject to this security shall during the
continuance of this security die or be lost the grantor shall
and will forthwith replace the sheep, horses, or cattle so
dying or lost with other stock of the like nature and of equal
value.
11- The grantor will during thue continuance of this secu-
rity render and deliver to the grantee whenever required
returns in writing setting forth the numbers, ages, sexes, and
other particulars of the stock, and the particulars and de-
scriptions of all other chattels for the time being bound by
these presents. And it is hereby declared that the covenant
implied herein on the part of the grantor to give and afford
all reasonable assistance to enable the grantee, his agents or
servants, to view the state and condition of the said stock
shall be deemed to include a covenant to muster the said
stock whenever required so to do in the notice to be given
under the said implied covenant.
12. The grantee shall have the full and absolute power of
determining the mode and time and place of the sale and
disposition of all stock, wool, produce, or other chattels sub-
ject to the provisions of these presents.
13. The grantor will not without the consent in writing
of the grantee give any lien or any other security over the
wool growing or to grow upon the sheep hereby assigned or
for the time being subject to this security, or over any of
the crops, produce, or chattels grown and raised upon or on
the lands mentioned in the First Schedule hereto, or any
other lands now or hereafter owned or occupied or used by
the grantor, whether worked in conjunction with the scheduled
lands or otherwise.
14. The grantor will from time to time when required so
to do by the grantee execute and give to the grantee a lien
or other security in the usual form under the statute relating
to such matters for the time being in force over the wool
growingor to grow upon the sheep hereby assigned or for the
time being subject to this security, or over the produce or
chattels mentioned in paragraph 13 hereof, or any of the same,
with a view to collaterally securing the moneys intended to
be hereby secured, such lien or other security to be prepared
by the grantee at the expense of the grantor, and to contain
such covenants, provisoes, and conditions for the protection
of the grantee as the grantee shall think fit.
15- The powers conferred by statute upon grantees of
entering and taking possession of chattels assigned by in-
struments by way of security, and of shearing the wool
assigned by instruments by way of security over wool, shall
be exercisable by the grantee in respect of the stock, wool,
and other chattels for the time being subject to this security
at any time whether or not default shall have been made
by the grantor in the payment of any of the moneys intended
to be hereby secured, and whether or not any of the other
events shall have happened upon which any of the said
powers are made exercisable by statute, and the provision
implied herein by statute for the retention and use by the
grantor of the chattels assigned by these presents is hereby
modified accordingly.
16._ If and whenever the grantee shall become entitled to
exercise the power of sale herein implied the grantee may at
any time and from time to time at the expense in all things
of the grantor remove the stock and chattels hereby assigned
or any of them to such place or places as the grantee may


deem most convenient for the purpose of any sale or resale
in exercise of the said power of sale.
17. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to oblige
the grantee to make any further advances.
18. No delay or omission on the part of the grantee to
enforce any covenant or exercise any of the powers hereby
conferred shall be taken to imply a waiver thereof, nor shall
the grantee be answerable or responsible for any loss which
may happen in or about the exercise by the grantee or his
agent of the powers hereby conferred or any of them in the
event or on the occasion or at any time hereinbefore con-
templated, or at any time or on any" occasion when he
may reasonably be induced to believe that he is entitled to
exercise the powers aforesaid.
19. This security and the security or securities mentioned
in the Second Schedule hereto are held by the grantee as
collateral securities for the moneys or some part of the
moneys expressed or intended to be hereby secured.
20. All the covenants, provisoes, agreements, and powers
directed by statute to be implied either in instruments gene-
rally or in instruments by way of security or in instruments
by way of security over stock shall be implied herein, modi-
fied only so far as the same or any of them are modified by
these presents either expressly or by necessary implication.
And this deed further witnesseth that the grantor do
hereby irrevocably while any moneys shall remain owing
on the security of these presents nominate, constitute, and
appoint the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the time
being for the Land District of , or the person
who shall for the time being be acting as Commissioner
of Crown Lands for the said district, to be the attorney
of the grantor for and in the name or otherwise on behalf
of the grantor to do, execute, and perform all and every
act, matter, deed, and thing which shall or may be
deemed necessary or expedient for more fully and perfectly
transferring, assigning, and assuring unto the grantee or to
any purchaser from the grantee under the power of sale
herein implied all and singular the stock, chattels, brands,
wool, and premises or any of them hereby assigned or assured
or expressed so to be or intended to be included in this
security, or the stock, chattels, wool, and premises reduced
into possession by the grantee pursuant to the power in that
behalf herein expressed or implied, or for carrying into effect
the covenant for further assurance on the part of the grantor
herein implied, or for carrying into effect the covenant to
execute and give to the grantee a lien or security over wool
or other produce or chattels when so required by the grantee.
And this deed further witnesseth as follows :—-
21. The grantor hereby appoints the grantee as agent of
the grantor to effect all sales of sheep, cattle, horses, wool,
or produce which the grantor desires to sell, and the grantor
shall not sell any of such sheep, cattle, horses, wool, or pro-
duce other than through the agency of the grantee unless
with the written consent first obtained of the grantee.
22. The grantee shall be entitled in effecting such sales as
aforesaid to employ such firms, persons, or agents as he may
in his discretion think fit, and to pay all commissions, charges,
and expenses incurred in connection with such sales, and to
deduct the same out of the proceeds of such sales.
23. The grantee shall receive all proceeds of such sales as
aforesaid, and shall credit the grantor with the balance of
the proceeds of such sales (if any) after payment of all ex-
penses incurred in the current account, but it shall be entirely
in the discretion of the grantee whether any of such proceeds


THE
SECOND SCHEDULE HEREINBEFORE REFEREED TO.
Date.
Name of Parties.
iNature of Security.
Amount
Secured.
*
Section.
Block.
Survey District.
Area.
to Title—•
land Transfer o r
Deeds Begister Office.
shall be readvanced to the grantor. Provided always that
the grantee may in his absolute and uncontrolled discretion
pay such portion of such proceeds as he thinks fit to the
grantor, and such payment shall not be treated as an advance
or readvance, and repayment of such sum shall not require
to be made by the grantor nor shall it be secured by these
presents. Provided further that in such case the grantee will
on making such payment state in writing to the grantor that
such sum is not to be deemed to be an advance or readvance
and repayment of the same is not secured by these presents.
24. All powers and duties conferred by these presents upon
the grantee or directed or implied by statute shall (on behalf
of the grantee) be exercisable and may be performed in Ms
own name by the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the time
before for the Land District.
In witness whereof the grantor has hereunto subscribed Ms
name this day of , one thousand nine
hundred and
THE FIRST SCHEDULE HEREINBEFORE REFERRED TO.
The sheep, cattle, horses, implements, and other chattels
of the grantor now in or upon or used by the grantor in
connection with the farming, grazing, and working of
The particulars of the said sheep, cattle, horses, imple
ments, and other chattels are as follows ;
[Signature.]
Signed by the above-named in the presence of
Form No. 8.
APPLICATION FOR AN ADVANCE UNDER SECTION 2 OF THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT AMENDMENT ACT,
1917. !
To the Land Board for the Land District.
I, [Name in full], of [Address and occupation, if any], hereby
apply, under the provisions of the Discharged Soldiers Settle-
ment Amendment Act, 1917, and the regulations thereunder,
for an advance of £ for the purpose of* the
land hereinafter mentioned, namely :
* If advance for purchase of freehold or leasehold land, option to
purchase must be produced.
The land is situated miles from Post-office,
and miles from Railway-station. Access is
by


1
Question.
Answer.
1. What is your full name and Regimental
No. ?
2. Of what Naval or Expeditionary Force
were you a member ?
3. What was —
[a.) Your length of service in such
Force ?
(6.) The date of your discharge ? ..
(c.) The reason of your discharge ?..
4. What physical disabilities (if any) do
you suffer from by reason of wounds
or disease resulting from your naval
or military service ? State partiou-
lars as to loss of limb or faculty, or
as to condition of health.
5. (1.) Have you applied for a pension
under the War Pensions Act, 1915 ?
(2.) If so, has your application been (a)
granted, or (6) refused, or (c) not
finally dealt with ?
(3.) If granted, to what rate of pension
are you entitled ?
(4.) If refused, what were the grounds
of refusal ?
(5.) In the case of an applicant who is
married, —
(a.) To what rate of pension under
the War Pensions Act, 1915, is
your wife entitled ?
9
(6.) To what rates of pension are you
entitled under the said Act in
respect of your children (if
any) ?
6. What was your occupation prior to your
becoming a member of the Forces ?
State period.
7. For what business or purpose do you
intend to use the land ?
8. What experience (if any) have you had
in such business ?
9. What experience have you had (if any)
in any kindred business ?
10. What is the amount of capital at your
disposal for use on the land ? —
{a.) Amount of cash
(6.) Value of stock (if any)
(c.) Implements or other property
11. What financial assistance will you re-
quire to enable you to work the land
successfully ? State particulars.
12. Are you single, married, or a widower ?
If married or a widower, state number
of children (if any) dependent on you
For the purpose of this application I make the following
replies to the questions hereinafter set forth


Question.
Answer,
13. What land (if any) do you at present own
or have an interest in ? Give par-
ticulars.
14. If married, what land (if anjr) does your
wife own or have an interest in ? Give
particulars.
15. Is title freehold or Crown leasehold ?
If leasehold, give particulars as to
tenure.
16. Who is the present owner or lessee ? ..
17. Is land subject to any encumbrances ?
Give particulars.
18. Where may titles be obtained ?
19. Are there any buildings on the land ?
Give particulars.
20. Are buildings insured ? State office and
amount.
21. State area in bush ; area in grass ; area
ploughed; area in flat land capable
of being ploughed.
22. Give particulars of fencing .. ..
23. What stock is land now carrying ?
24. Do you intend to enter into personal
residence upon the land ?
25, Have you at any time held land or re-
ceived an advance under the Dis-
charged Soldiers Settlement Act ? If
so, state particulars.
Dated at , this day of ,19 .
[.Signature of Applicant.]
Statutory Declaration to accompany Application for Advance
under Section 2 (a), ( b), or (d) of the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Amendment Act, 1917.
I, [ Name in full], of [ Address and occupation], do solemnly
and sincerely declare—
1. That I am a discharged soldier within the meaning of
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915.
2. That my answers to the questions set out in the attached
application are true and correct in every particular.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true, and by virtue of the Justices of the Peace
Act, 1908.
[Signature.]
Declared at , this day of ,19
before me-
Justice of the Peace for New Zealand
[or Solicitor, or Notary Public].


Form No. 9.
OPTION TO PURCHASE.
To [Name and address ].
I, [Name and address of vendor], in consideration of the sum
of * paid to me by you (the receipt whereof I hereby
acknowledge), hereby give you the option to purchase my
property, being Section , Block , Survey
District of , containing , together with ail
buildings (inclusive of ranges, stoves, tanks, and all other
fixtures), yards, gates, drains, wells, windmills, water-troughs,
plantations, and all other improvements, rights, easements,
and appurtenances existing thereon or belonging thereto at
the date of this option, at the price of per acre.
This option for purchase shall remain open to you for a
period of weeks from the date hereof, j -
Dated this day of ,19 .
[Signature.]
* A nominal consideration —say, ss.
f In the case of town or suburban properties or rural land
readily accessible, it is desirable that the period of option be
not less than four weeks, and in the case of land situated
in isolated localities a period of two months, in order that
sufficient time may be provided for special inspection and
valuations, &c.
Form No. 10.
Under the discharged Soldiers Settlement AMendment Act, 1917.
MEMORANDUM OF MORTGAGE.
(hereinafter called “ the mortgagor ”), being re-
gistered as proprietor of as estate [ Here state nature of the
estate or interest ] subject* however, to such encumbrances,
liens, and interests as are notified by memoranda underwritten
or endorsed hereon, in piece of land situated in
the [District, county, hundred, or township] containing [Here
state the area, exclusive of roads, intersecting the same, if any ]
be the same a little more or less [Here state rights of way,
privileges, or easements, if any, intended to he conveyed ; if the
land to be dealt with contains all that is included in an existing
grant, or certificate of title, or lease, refer thereto for description
and diagrams ; otherwise set forth the boundaries in chains,
links , or feet, and refer to plan thereof on margin of or annexed
to the lease, or deposited in the Registry Office],
Whereas the mortgagor has, pursuant to the provisions of
section 2 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amendment
Act, 1917, received an advance of £ from His Majesty
the King (hereinafter called “ the mortgagee ”):
Now, therefore, in consideration of such advance the
mortgagor doth hereby covenant with the mortgagee as
follows I
1. That the mortgagor will pay to the mortgagee at the
office of the Commissioner of Crown Lands at the
moneys hereby secured, together with interest thereon at
the rate of £5 per centum per annum, from the first day of
, by instalments of , each pay-
able on the first day of January and first day of July in
each year during the period of years from the first
day of , and one instalment of £ payable on
the first day of January or July next following the date
upon which the last of the aforesaid instalments becomes
due and payable. The first such instalment of principal and
interest shall be payable on the first day of ,


On the first day of ,19 , the mortgagor will pay
to the mortgagee the sum of £ in payment of interest
on the amount of the advance for the period from
to
All moneys paid by the mortgagor in respect of instalments
shall be applied by the mortgagee in payment of interest
and principal in the proportions applicable to the appropriate
payment calculated in accordance© with
2. The _ mortgagor may at any time, without previous
notice of intention so to do, pay fco the mortgagee the amount
(in no case less than ten poundls) of principal included, ac-
cording to the table in the , in any number of consecu-
tive half-yearly instalments nexft succeeding the instalment
corresponding to the half-yearly period then current.
The payment of any such amount shall not affect the
periodical continuity of half-yearly instalments, but the
amount of principal and interest included in the succeeding
instalments shall be calculated according to the said table as
if the half-yearly periods corresponding to the instalments of
principal so paid had expired, and the period of years
during which instalments of principal and interest would have
been payable shall be reduced accordingly.
3. That the mortgagor will forthwith insure, and so long
as any money remains owing on this security will keep in-
sured, all buildings and erections for the time being situate
on the said land against loss or damage by fire, in the name
of the mortgagee, to their full insurable value, in the State
Fire Insurance Office, or other reputable insurance office to
be from time to time approved by the mortgagee, and will
duly and punctually pay all premiums and sums of money
necessary for the purpose of keeping every such insurance on
foot; and will, not later than the forenoon of the day on
which any premium falls due, deliver the receipt therefor to
the mortgagee, who shall also be entitled to the exclusive
custody of all policies of insurance.
4. That the mortgagor will from time to time, so long
as any money remains owing on this security, well and
substantially repair, and keep in good and substantial repair
and condition, all buildings or other improvements erected
and made upon the said land; and that the mortgagee
may at all times be at liberty, by himself, his agents or ser-
vants, to enter upon the said land to view and inspect the
said buildings and improvements.
5. That if the mortgagor fails or neglects to insure or
keep insured the said buildings and erections as aforesaid,
or to deliver any premium receipt as aforesaid, or to repair
the said buildings and improvements, or to keep them in good
and substantial repair and condition as aforesaid, then and
in any such case, and as often as the same shall happen, it
shall be lawful for but not obligatory on the mortgagee, at
the cost and expense in all things of the mortgagor , to
insure the said buildings or any of them in such sum as
aforesaid or in any less sum, or to pay such premium, or to
repair the said buildings and improvements and keep them
in good and substantial repair and condition.
6. That in the event of the said buildings and erections
or any of them being destroyed or damaged by fire, all moneys
received by the mortgagee under any insurance in respect of
such destruction or damage shall be applied at his sole option
either in or towards rebuilding or repairing the buildings
and, erections so destroyed or damaged, or in or towards
payment of the principal, interest, and other moneys for
the time being covered by this security, notwithstanding


that the same or any of them may not have accrued due
under the terms of these presents.
7. That all moneys expended by the mortgagee in and
about effecting or keeping on foot any insurance as aforesaid,
or in repairing or keeping in repair any of the said buildings
and improvements as aforesaid, or in attempting to exercise
or enforce any power, right, or remedy herein contained or
implied in favour of the mortgagee, shall be payable to him
by the mortgagor ■on demand, and until paid shall be
charged on the said land, together with interest at the rate
of 6 per centum per annum computed from the date or dates
of such moneys being expended.
8. That the power of sale and incidental powers in that
behalf conferred upon mortgagees by the Land Transfer
Act, 1915, shall be implied herein, with this modification :
That they may be exercised without any notice or demand
whatsoever if and whenever the mortgagor make default
for fourteen days in the full and punctual payment of any
moneys hereby secured, or the interest thereon, in accordance
with the respective covenants for payment thereof herein
contained ; or if and whenever the mortgagor make de-
fault in the faithful observance and performance of any
other covenant or condition on his [their] part herein con-
tained or implied.
9. That if and whenever the mortgagor make any such
default as in the last preceding covenant mentioned it shall
be lawful for the mortgagee to call up and compel payment
of all principal, interest, and other moneys for the time
being owing under this security, notwithstanding that the
time or times hereinbefore appointed for the payment thereof
respectively may not have arrived.
10. That the covenants, powers, and provisions implied
in mortgages by the Land Transfer Act, 1915, are modified
or negatived in so far as they are inconsistent with or re-
pugnant to these presents.
11. That in the case of lands held under lease or license
the mortgagor will at all times punctually pay the rent
or other payments reserved by, and faithfully perform and
observe all the covenants and conditions contained in, the
lease or license herein mentioned ; and that if he [they]
fail or neglect so to do it shall be lawful but not obligatory
on the mortgagee so to do at the cost and expense in all
things of the mortgagor ; and all moneys so expended by
the mortgagee shall be payable to him by the mortgagor on
demand, and until paid shall be charged on the said land,
together with interest at the rate of 5 per centum per
annum computed from the date or dates of such moneys
being expended.
12. That the mortgagor will at all times cultivate and
manage the mortgaged land in a skilful and proper manner,
and according to the rules of good husbandry.
13. All the powers and duties conferred by these presents
upon the mortgagee or directed or implied by statute shall,
on behalf of the mortgagee, be exercisable and may be per-
formed in his own name by the Commissioner of Crown Lands
for the time being for the Land District.
14. That upon the transfer, otherwise than pursuant to
the will or on the intestacy of the mortgagor of the lands
hereby mortgaged, or of the whole or any part of the mort-
gagor’s interest therein, all principal moneys due hereunder
shall become immediately due and payable to the mortgagee :


Section.
Block.
Locality.
(Give Particulars
of Streets, &c.))
Area.
Reference to Title in
Land Transfer or
Deeds Registry Office.
Provided that this condition shtall not apply in the case of a
transfer to a discharged soldier as defined by the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915, or the amendments thereof,
where such transfer has been diuly consented to by the Land
Board and approved by the Mimister.
15. That in the case of lands held under lease or license
the mortgagor doth hereby appoint the Commissioner of
Crown Lands for the time being for the Land District of
to be the attorney sand agent of the mortgagor,
in his name and on his behalf to do all things, give all notices,
and execute all deeds and documents necessary to obtain
an extension or renewal of the said lease or license, and on
the completion of the same to execute such mortgage or
mortgages as may be necessary or required to charge the
interest of the mortgagor in suob renewed or extended lease
or license with the balance of moneys still due and owing
under this mortgage.
And it is hereby declared that; the provisions of the regu-
lations made by Order in Council dated the day of
, 1918, are implied herein so far as applicable, and
shall have the same force and eiffeot as if the same were set
out in full.
And for the better securing to the said mortgagee the
repayment in manner aforesaid of the said principal sum
and further advances and interest the mortgagor hereby
mortgages to the said mortgagee all the mortgagor estate
and interest in the said land above described.
In witness whereof the mortgagor has [have] hereto
signed his [their] name this day of , one
thousand nine hundred and
......... Mortgagor.
Signed by the said ,as mortgagor ,in the presence
of—
Witness :
Occupation :
Address :
Form No. 11.
APPLICATION FOR AN ADVANCE UNDER SECTION 2 OF THE
DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT AMENDMENT ACT,
1917, FOR THE ERECTION OF A DWELLING ON OTHER
THAN RURAL LAND.
To the Land Board for the Land District.
I, [Name in full], of [Address ancH occupation], hereby apply,
under the provisions of section 2 of the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Amendment Act, 1917,, and the regulations there-
under, for an advance for the erection of a dwellinghouse in
accordance with the attached plams and specifications on the
land hereinafter mentioned, namely :—-
Plans and specifications, which may be inspected at any
District Lands and Survey Office ; , are available for use of
applicants free of charge. Applicants desiring their own
designs must submit plans and specifications prepared by
an architect.


Question.
Answer.
1. What is your full name and Regimental
No. ?
2. Of what Naval or Expeditionary Force
were you a member ?
3. What was—•
(a.) Your length of service in such
Force ?
{ b .) The date of your discharge ? ..
(c.) The reason of your discharge ? ..
4. What physical disabilities (if any) do you
suffer from by reason of wounds or
disease resulting from your naval or
military service ? State particulars
as to loss of limb or faculty, or as to
condition of health.
5/(1.) Have you applied for a pension
under the War Pensions Act,
1915 ?
(2.) If so, has your application been (a)
granted, or (6) refused, or (c) not
finally dealt with 1
(3.) If granted, to what rate of pension
are you entitled ?
(4.) If refused, what were the grounds
of refusal ?
(5.) In the case of an applicant who is
married,—
(a. ) To what rate of pension under the
War Pensions Act, 1915, is your
wife entitled ?
( b ,) To what rates of pension are you
entitled under the said Act in
respect of your children (if any) ?
6. What is the amount of capital at your
disposal for use on the land ?—
(a.) Amount of cash
(6.) Value of other assets
7. Are you single, married, or a widower ?
If married or a widower, state number
of children (if any) dependent on you.
H. What land (if any) do you at present
own or have an interest in ? Give
particulars.
9, If married, what land (if any) does your
wife own or have an interest in ?
Give particulars.
10. Is land subject to any encumbrance ?
Give particulars.
11. Where may titles be obtained ?
12. Are there any buildings on the land ?
Give particulars.
13. Are buildings insured ? State office and
amount.
14. Do you intend to enter into personal
residence upon the land ?
For the purposes of this application I make the following
replies to the questions hereinafter set forth :—-


Question.
Answer.
15. Have you at any time held land or re-
ceived an advance under the Dis-
charged Soldiers Settlement Act ? If
so, state particulars.
Section.
Block.
Survey District.
Area.
Dated at , this day of , 19
[.Signature of Applicant.']
Statutory Declaration to accompany Application for an Advance
under Section 2 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amend-
ment Act , 1917 , for the Erection of a Dwelling on other than
Rural Land.
I, [Name in full], of [. Address and occupation ], do solemnly
and sincerely declare—
1. That I am a discharged soldier within the meaning of
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915.
2. That my answers to the questions set out in the said
application are true and correct in every particular.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true, and by virtue of the Justices of the Peace
Act, 1908.
[Signature.]
Declared at , this day of ,19 ,
before me—
Justice of the Peace for New Zealand
[or Solicitor, or Notary Public].
Form No. 12.
APPLICATION FOR DWELLING UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE DIS-
CHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT AMENDMENT ACT, 1917.
To the Land Board for the Land District.
I. _ , hereby apply under section 4of the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Amendment Act, 1917, and the regula-
tions thereunder, to purchase the undermentioned land
together with the residence (a) erected thereon, or (6) to be
erected thereon, in accordance with (1) standard design
No. , (2) plans and specifications attached.
LNotb. —'Standard plans and specifications, which may be
inspected at any District Lands and Survey Office, are avail-
able for use by applicants. Applicants who require other
designs must attach plans and specifications prepared at their
own cost by a qualified architect.


Question.
Answer.
1. What is your full name and Regimental No. ?
2. Of what Naval or Expeditionary Force were you a
member ? Give regimental number.
3. What was—
(a.) Your length of service in such Force ?
(b.) The date of your discharge ?
(e.) The reason of your discharge ? ..
4, What physical disabilities (if any) do you suffer
from by reason of wounds or disease resulting
from your naval or military service ? State
particulars as to loss of limb or faculty or as to
condition of health.
5. (1.) Have you applied for a pension under the
War Pensions Act, 1916 ?
(2.) If so, has your application been {a) granted,
or ( b) refused, or (c) not finally dealt with ?
(3.) If granted, to what rate of pension are you
entitled ?
(4.) If refused, what were the grounds of refusal T
(5.) In the case of an applicant who is married , —
{a.) To what rate of pension under the War
Pensions Act, 1915, is your wife en-
titled ?
(6.) To what rates of pension are you entitled
under the said Act in respect of your
children (if any) ?
6. What is the amount of capital at your disposal ?
(a.) Amount of cash
(6.) Value of assets in property
7. Are you single, married, or a widower ? If married
or a widower, state number of children (if any)
dependent on you.
8. What land (if any) do you at present own, or
have an interest in ? Give particulars.
9. If married, what land (if any) does your wife own
or have an interest in ? Give particulars.
10. Have you at any time held land or received an
advance under the Discharged Soldiers Settle-
ment Act ? If so, state particulars.
For the purposes of this application I make the following
replies to the questions hereinafter set forth :
Dated at , this day of , 191 .
[, Signature of Applicant.]
Statutory Declaration to accompany Application for Land
under Section 4 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amend-
ment Act, 1917.
I, [ Name in full], of [ Address and Occupation], do solemnly
and sincerely declare —
1. That I am a discharged soldier within the meaning of
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915.


2. That I am, subject to tine provisions of the said Act,
applying for the land described in the accompanying appli-
cation solely for my own use amd benefit, and not directly or
indirectly for the use or benefit of any other person or per-
sons whomsoever.
3. That my answers to the -questions set out in the said
application are true and correctfc in every particular.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously be-
lieving the same to be true, amd by virtue of the Justices of
the Peace Act, 1908.
[Signature.]
Declared at , this day of , 191 ,
before me—
........ Justice o)f the Peace for New Zealand.
[or Solicitor, or Notary Public.]
Received on , 191 ,at
........ Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Form No. 13.
AGREENMENT TO PURCHASE A DWELLING UNDER SECTION 4
OF THE DISCHARGED SOLDIERS SETTLEMENT AMENDMENT
ACT, 1917.
Memorandum of Agreement made this day of
, 19 , between the Commissioner of Crown Lands
for the Land District (hereinafter called the Com-
missioner), on behalf of His Majesty the King, of the one
part, and , of , a discharged soldier within
the meaning of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1916,
(hereinafter with his executors, administrators, and assigns
referred to as the purchaser) of the other part, whereby it is
agreed as follows : —•
1. Subject to the provisions of section four of the Dis-
charged Soldiers Settlement Amendment Act, 1917, and the
regulations thereunder, the Commissioner agrees to sell and
the purchaser agrees to purchase the land described in the
Schedule hereto together with the buildings erected thereon
for the sum of
2. The purchaser, having paid before the execution of this
agreement the sum of , will pay to the Receiver of
Land Revenue at the District Lands and Survey Office,
, the sum of as balance of purchase-money,
together with interest thereon at the rate of five pounds per
centum per annum.
Payment of the said sum of £ , together with interest
calculated as aforesaid, shall be made by instalments
of pounds shillings pence each, pay-
able monthly on the first day of each month in each year
during a period of years commencing from the date
hereof.
The first of such monthly instalments shall be due and
payable on the first day of next.


3. Irrespective of the prescribed monthly instalments the
purchaser may at any time pay to the Receiver of Land
Revenue the amount (being in no case less than ten pounds)
of principal included in the instalments corresponding to any
number of consecutive six-monthly periods next succeeding
the six-monthly period then current.
The payment of any such amount shall not affect the
periodical continuity of monthly instalments, but the amount
of capital and interest included in the succeeding instalments
shall be calculated as if the six-monthly periods correspond-
ing to the instalments of principal so paid had expired, and
the period of twenty-five and a half years during which the
monthly instalments would otherwise have been required to
be paid shall be reduced accordingly.
4. The purchaser shall pay all rates and taxes levied on or
payable in respect of the land and improvements thereon.
5. If the purchaser fails at any time to comply with any of
the provisions of the said regulations, or makes default in
the due payment of any moneys payable in respect of this
agreement, the Land Board may, with the consent of the
Minister of Lands (hereinafter termed the Minister), by
resolution cancel this agreement, and the purchaser shall
thereupon deliver up to the Commissioner possession of the
dwelling in good order and repair.
6. The purchaser shall insure the dwelling in the State
Fire Insurance Office in the name of His Majesty the King
to its full insurable value against loss or damage by fire, and
shall deliver the policy or policies of insurance to the Com-
missioner, and shall duly and punctually pay all premiums
and sums of money necessary for the purpose of keeping every
such insurance on foot; and shall, not later than the forenoon
of the day on which any premium falls due, deliver the receipt
therefor to the Commissioner.
7. If the purchaser fails to insure the dwelling and keep it
insured, or to keep it in good and substantial repair and
condition, the Minister may at the cost and expense of the
purchaser insure the dwelling in such sum as he may decide
or effect such repairs as he may deem necessary. All moneys
so expended by the Minister shall be deemed to be moneys
due and payable by the purchaser under this agreement, and
shall be payable to the Receiver of Land Revenue together
with interest thereon at the rate of five pounds per centum
per annum from the date or dates of such moneys being
expended. It shall be optional with the Minister whether
such moneys shall be payable on demand or by monthly
instalments of principal and interest in accordance with
clause twenty-five of the said regulations.
8. Upon payment of all moneys payable pursuant to this
agreement the purchaser shall be entitled to a certificate of
title in respect of the land described in the Schedule hereto.
9. And it is hereby further expressly stipulated and agreed
that this agreement is entered into subject to the provisions
and conditions relating thereto contained in the regulations
made pursuant to section four of the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Amendment Act, 1917, which provisions and
conditions shall be deemed to be included herein.


10. The purchaser hereby acknowledges to have received
on the execution hereof a copy of the said regulations.
In witness whereof the parties have hereunto set their hand
the day and year first above written..
Signed by the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the Land
District of , on behalf of His Majesty the King, in
the presence 0f—
......... Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Signed by the said as purchaser in the presence 0f—
......... Purchaser.
SCHEDULE.
[Description of Land.]
Form No, 14.
PROVISIONAL UNDERTAKING TO PURCHASE A DWELLING.
To the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the Land
District, on behalf of His Majesty the King.
In consideration of your having allotted to me, pursuant to
the regulations under the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Amendment Act, 1917, all that parcel of land containing by
admeasurement , and being ,1, , of
, , do hereby undertake, upon completion
of the erection thereon of a residence in accordance with
plans and specifications as agreed upon between the Minister of
Lands and myself, and when called upon so to do, to execute an
agreement to purchase the said land (in the form numbered 13
in the First Schedule to the said regulations) at a capital value
equal to the value of the land as already fixed (viz., £ ),
together with all moneys expended by the Minister in the
erection of a residence and other works and operations done
on the said land ; and I hereby agree that if I shall fail to
execute such agreement to purchase as hereinbefore provided,
the sum of , being the amount deposited by me in
respect of my application for the said land, shall be absolutely
forfeited to you.
[ Signature .]
Signed by the above-named in the presence of .


No. of Six-
monthly
Period.
Amount
of
Interest.
Amount
of
Principal.
No. of Six-
monthly
Period.
1
Amount
of
Interest.
Amount
of
Principal.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1
2
10
0
I
0
0
27
1
12
0
1
18
0
2
2
9
6
1
0
6
28
1
11
1
1
18
11
3
2
9
0
1
1
0
29
I
10
I
1
19
11
4
2
8
6
1
1
6
30
1
9
1
2
0
11
6
2
■7
11
1
2
1
31
1
8
1
2
1
11
6
2
7
4
1
2
8
32
1
7
0
2
3
0
7
2
6
10
1
3
2
33
1
5
11
2
4
1
8
2
6
3
1
3
9
34
1
4
10
2
5
2
9
2
5
8
1
4
4
35
1
3
8
2
6
4
10
2
6
0
1
5
0
36
1
2
6
2
7
6
11
2
4
5
1
5
7
37
1
1
4
2
8
8
12
2
3
9
1
6
3
38
1
0
2
2
9
10
13
2
3
1
1
6
11
39
0
18
11
2
11
1
14
2
2
5
1
7
7
40
0
17
7
2
12
5
15
2
1
9
1
8
3
41
0
16
4
2
13
8
16
2
1
0
1
9
0
42
0
14
11
2
15
1
17
2
0
4
1
9
8
43
0
13
7
2
16
5
18
1
19
7
1
10
5
44
0
12
2
2
17
10
19
1
18
10
1
11
2
45
0
10.
9
2
19
3
20
1
18
0
1
12
0
46
0
9
3
3
0
9
21
1
17
3
1
12
9
47
0
7
9
3
2
3
22
1
16
5
1
13
7
48
0
6
2
3
O
o
10
23
1
15
7
1
14
5
49
0
4
7
3
5
5
24
1
14
8
1
15
4
50
0
2
11
3
7
1
25
1
13
10
1
16
2
51
0
1
3
2
10
6
26
1
12
11
1
17
1
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Table showing for bybet £lOO oe Capital Value the
Amount oe Principal and Interest included in In-
stalments PAYABLE DURING BACH SUCCESSIVE PERIOD
oe Six Months eeom the Dub Date oe the First
Monthly Instalment.
By Authority ; Marcus F. Marks, Government Printer.
[20,000/3/19—3440
