

Queensland
REGULATIONS
UNDER
THE DEFENCE ACT OF 1884.
BRISBANE:
JAMES C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1885.


REGULATIONS
UNDER
“THE DEFENCE ACT OE 1884.”
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 24th February, 1885.
HIS Excellency the Governor, in pursuance of the provisions of “ The
Defence Act of 1884,” has been pleased to make the following
Eegulations for the general government, discipline, and management of the
Land Force established by the said Act.
S. W. GRIFFITH.
SECTION I.
INTERPRERETION
' 1„ In the interpretation of the Eegulations, the words within inverted
commas mentioned in section 2 of “ The Defence Force Act of 1881 ” shall
have the meanings given to them by the said section, and the following terms
within inverted commas shall have the meanings set against them respec-
tively, unless the contest in any case otherwise requires:—
“ Defence Act ”or “ Act" —“ The Defence Act of 1881.”
“Volunteers” —Members of Eifle Corps and Drill Associations formed
under section 53 of the Act, and the adjective “Volunteer” shall
have a corresponding meaning.
“ Land Force ” —The Land Force established by the Act.
“ Marine Force ” —The Marine Force established by the Act.
“ Queen’s Eegulations ” —The Queen’s Eegulations land Orders for the
Army in force for the time being.
“ Eepealed Act ” —“ The Volunteer Act of 1878.”
“ Year ” —A financial year, commencing Ist July, and ending 30th June
following.
SECTION II.
REGULATIONS TO BE FOR LAND FORCE ONLY.
2. These Eegulations shall apply only to the Land Force and to corps
and members of the Marine Force when attached by the Governor to the
Land Force, under section Cl of the Act,


SECTION III.
PRECEDENCE
3. The following shall bo the order of precedence of the different arms
of the Force, viz. t—
-Ist. Horse Artillery.
2nd. Cavalry.
3rd. Field Artillery.
4th. Mounted Infantry.
sth. Garrison Artillery.
6th. Engineers.
7th. Battalions of Infantry.
Bth. Companies of Infantry.
9th. Mounted Volunteer Corps.
10th. Volunteer Companies.
4. Corps of the same arm shall take precedence according to the dates
of their respective formations, except that a corps of the Permanent Force
shall always take precedence of a corps of the same arm not forming part of-
the Permanent Force.
5. Marine corps when parading with the Land Force shall take pre-
cedence next after the Garrison Batteries of the Permanent Force.
6. On parade, or for purposes of manoeuvring, brigades, battalions, and
corps shall be distributed and drawn up in the mode which the officer in
command may judge most convenient and best adapted to the purposes of
the service.
7. The relative precedence of officers of the Force shall be determined
solely by the ranks and dates of commissions therein.
8. The relative precedence of officers holding commissions of the same
rank and date shall be determined by reference to previous commissions.
9. If the relative precedence of officers cannot be settled by means of
the last preceding regulation, it shall be determined by the order in which
their latest appointments are inserted in the Gazette.
10. Medical officers under twelve years’ service shall hold the relative
rank of captain. Those over twelve years’ service shall hold the relative
rank of major. The principal medical officer shall hold the relative rank of
lieutenant-colonel. Staff veterinary surgeons under five years’ service shall
hold the relative rank of lieutenant. Those over five years’ service shall
hold the relative rank of captain.
SECTION IV.
COMMISSIONED OFFICERS.
11. All proposed appointments, promotions, and resignations of com-
missions of officers must be submitted to the Governor by the Com-
mandant through the Minister.
12. The Commandant, with the approval of the Minister, may, by
General Order, appoint gentlemen to acting rank as officers provisionally.
Acting officers shall rank as junior to all officers of the same grade who
have received commissions, but in other respects shall rank for the time
being as if actually commissioned.
13. All appointments, promotions, resignations, and dismissals of com-
missioned officers shall be inserted in the Gazette, and such resignations and
dismissals shall, unless notified to the contrary, bo held to mean absolute
withdrawal from the Force.


14 No officer holding an honorary commission shall, by virtue of it,
fake command of any officer holding a substantive commission or acting rank
as an officer.
15. Every officer must possess a competent knowledge of his duties, and
give a proper attendance to the drills of his corps, and the administrative
duties connected therewith.
16. Any officer who fails to pay proper and diligent attention to the
duties of his position will not be allowed to retain his commission, unless the
Commandant reports to the Governor that there arc special reasons to the
contrary.
17. The Commandant may, with the approval of the Governor, appoint
such officers of the Active Force as he may think fit to be examiners of
candidates for commissions and promotions.
18. A Board of officers for the examination of candidates for promotion
in the Southern'District will be assembled in Brisbane in the months of
May and November, the actual dates whereof will be notified in General
Orders. The travelling expenses of officers attending for examination will
be paid on the usual scale. Officers from the Northern District may attend
at Brisbane, or a separate Board may be ordered for the Northern District,
as may be most convenient at the time.
10. Officers of the different grades must pass ar, exahiinajion In accord-
ance with the following conditions:— ",- . • ■
(1.) The examinations required will comprise the following subjects :
(a) Ecgimcntal duties. , * *|• • ,
(b) Drill. ’
(c) Military law. ••" ■ • ».... u -
( d) Duties in the field. ~ ■ 1 . '
(2.) The scope of each subject will vary according to the fank’for which
the examination is required. The various; subjects “iV'to “d ”
are detailed in a syllabus set forth in Appqndjx A, hereto, which
shows the scope of the examination to be required from officers in
each rank. ' ’ ’ ■
' (3.) The examination for each rank will be as foliptvS':—
1. Acting lieutenants of all arms, before bcirg grantcq'cOihmissions
as lieutenants, in subjects “a,” “b," and, V c.” ■
2. Lieutenants of all arms, before promotion‘tp the rank-of captain,
in “a,” “6,” “c,” and “d,” as laid down "in tlu; said syllabus
for the rank of captain. ‘ t .....
3. Captains of all arms, before promotion to ipajbr, will bo examined
in subjects “a,” “b,” “c,” and “ d,” i.s laid down for the
rank of major. : p » .
(4.) Officers transferred from one arm of the Force to ano+h.er will be
required to pass the examination for their rank;,in,,their new branch
within twelve months.
(5.) Acting lieutenants and acting captains will be required to pass their
examinations within one year from the date of their appointment.
(6.) The Commandant may extend the time within which examinations
are required to be passed in the event of there being special reasons
for doing so ; such extension will bo published in General Orders.
20. Surgeons may be appointed as a medical staff to the Force generally,
and shall perform such duties as may be required of them under the direc-
tion of the Commandant.
21. Veterinary surgeons may be similarly appointed, and shall act
similarly under the direction of the Commandant.
3


SECTION V.
UNATTACHED AND RETIRED LISTS.
22. Officers on the Unattached List shall hold the same rank in the
Force as attached officers, and shall take precedence according to the dates
of commissions.
23. Unattached officers who do not perform any military duty for three
years will be liable to bo placed on the Eetirod List.
24. The Eetircd List will be formed of all officers of the Force who pass
the limit of age mentioned in section 21 of the Act, or who, though under
the limit, desire to retire permanently from the Active Force, and of other
officers who may bo gazetted thereto.
25. If an officer on the Eetircd List is appointed to a commission on the
Unattached List or in any corps, ho shall rank according to the date of such
appointment and not by reference to any previous commission, except for the
purpose of ascertaining his relative precedence with respect to any officer
gazetted on the same day.
26. The services of unattached officers shall at all times be at the
disposal of the Governor.
27. Unattached officers shall not perform any military duty unless
specially directed." " * 1 -
28. All officers-of-the Defence Force are required to furnish themselves
with the latest editress'ef the books mentioned in section vii., paragraph 26 of
the Queen’s’ Etguldt-ons, as required to be in the possession of the officers of
Her Majesty’s Keg alar Army, according to the respective branches of the
service, except- that officers of the Defence Force need not provide them-
selves with-the “iicyal Warrant for pay and promotion.”
29. ThVbboks in l the possession of every officer must be produced for
the inspeettoh of the inspecting officer at the annual inspection.
SECTION VI.
NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS.
30.,N0n-commfssioned officers, in addition to the annual training, may
be required to attend sc course of such special instruction as their positions
may require ;'*and*awynon-commissioned officer who does not qualify as an
efficient ttilf’itot "bo a'lowed to retain his grade unless it shall appear to the
Commandant that there arc special reasons for a relaxation of this regula-
tion.
SECTION VII.
MEMBER.
31. No person above the ago of fifty years shall be enrolled as a member
of any corps, nor shall any person under the age of eighteen years be enrolled
as a member of any corps other than a cadet corps, except boys of fourteen
years of ago and upwards, who may be enrolled for the purpose of being
trained as buglers and trumpeters, subject to a special examination as to
probable fitness.
32. Apprentices shall not be enrolled without the consent of their masters.
33. No member of one corps shall be enrolled in another until ho has
legally ceased to be a member of the former corps.
34. A member of a corps shall be transferred to another corps only with
the approval of the Commandant.
35. No man who has retired from any corps for any reason whatever
shall bo enrolled in any other without the approval of the Commandant.
36. Persons dismissed from a corps shall not bo re-enrolled in any corps
of the Land or Marine Force unless balloted for compulsory service.
4


Standard for Recruits.
Corps.
Height.
Chest measurement.
Field Artillery—
Gunners
5' 0" and upwards ...
.* 5 J
When under £M0", in height, 34"
Drivers
5' 4" to 5' G"
When 5'10" in height anc> upwards,
35" , '
si" •' >
Garrison Artillery and
5' 0" and upwards ...
When under 5''l0" iu height, 34"
Engineers
Infantry and Mounted In-
5' 4" and upwards ...
When 5'‘'10" l 'iil , heightjor upwards,
35" .. .
Under 5'‘C? in heigh*’, 33",
fantry
5' 0" and upwards and.ppdor 5' 10",
34" '
5' 10" in height or upwards, 35"
37. Enrolled members shall be classed as efficients and non-efficients.
38. Supernumerary members shall be doomed to bo members enrolled
beyond the establishment of a corps. They may be enrolled to the extent
of 20 per cent, beyond the establishment.
39. It shall be competent for the Commandant to require of commanding
officers to bring forward from time to time for discharge such men as may be
unfit for the performance of their military duties through age, infirmity, or
other cause, and also such men as may be below the standard or requirements
of these Regulations.
SECTION VIII.
RECRUITS.
40. The standard height and chest measurement for recruits shall be as
follows; but exceptions to the standard may be allowed, with the approval
of tho Commandant.
41. In the inspection of recruits for the Force, officers, must be. guided
by their judgment and experience in determining whether the men.possess
the physical capacity requisite for discharging their military duties.
42. Recruits desiring enrolment must be examined by tho' commanding
officers to see that they fulfil all the conditions directed “by the .Regulations.
43. The Commandant is required, at his inspection, to reject from further
service any men whom he shall consider physically unfit <ts discharge their
military duties; and in case of doubt, to obtain thdj opinion "bf "a medical
officer for his guidance. The pay of any man so rejected,, atu) a|l. expense
which may have been incurred in supplying him with unijorm or otherwise,
shall be made good from any money duo to the officei; who passhd him into
the ranks, including any money due as the contingent allowance of the corps,
in case such man shall have been passed by a commanding officer. When
possible recruits should bo passed into the ranks by a staff' officer.
44. Every recruit should before enrolment attend twenty drills, go
through a course of musketry or gun drill, and pass in squad drill and tho
manual and firing exercise, unless he has at some previous time been in the
army, or a member of a militia or volunteer force, in which case it shall bo
sufficient to attend such drills as the commanding officer of the corps may
order, and to pass inspection. The recruit course of musketry may, under
special circumstances, be postponed till after enrolment.
45. The first ten of the recruit drills will be unpaid. Commanding officers
should take the opportunity on the completion of the first ten drills to reject
any men who, to the best of their judgment, are not likely to prove efficient.
5


46. Recruit drill will bo conducted by the Permanent Staff, and no
recruit shall be entitled to pay (except pay for recruit drills after the first
ten, which shall be at the same rate as for men enrolled) until he has been
passed into the ranks by the commanding officer of the corps which he joins,
or by a staff officer.
47. A man’s period of three years’ service will commence from the day
of his joining the recruit squad.
, 48. Under ordinary circumstances, recruits will not bo taken on in the
Southern Military District between the 15th December and the 15th
February, and in the Northern Military District between the Ist December
and the Ist March.
SECTION IX.
PERMANENT STAFF.
49. The Permanent Staff shall bo composed of officers and non-
commissioned officers, and shall be generally under the orders of the Com-
mandant, notwithstanding such officers or non-commissioned officers may bo
attached to a corps.
60. The duties of the following officers of the permanent staff—namely,
the Commandant,, thp lirigadc-Major, and the Infantry Staff Officer—are
prescribed 1c following Regulations ; but such duties, and the duties
of any ether cfficeH bf the Permanent Staff, may be varied, and added to
from time to, time ,'hy general orders.
(A)
-..for Duties of Commandant.
(1) He will'toakc an inspection of every corps of the Land Force once
" 'ahflitally, or in the event of his being unable to do so, will detail an
, ‘officer of suitable rank to carry out the inspection.
(2) He will, fi§ far as possible, inspect all volunteer companies and rifle
«. clvbs formeddn accordance with the provisions of “ The Defence Act.’’
(3) He will exercise a general supervision over all expenditure incurred
, inconnectidTf with the Force.
(4) r He will report to the Minister annually, as soon after the 30th Juno
as circumstances will permit, on the state of the Force and defences
' ‘•generally,.and will make such suggestions as he may think desirable
forjhe improvement thereof.
(5,) ,Hp will, as opportunity offers, carefully inspect the country in the
' vicinity of'the coast towns of the colony, or other portions thereof
which might become the theatre of warlike operations ; he will see
’ that his office is provided with charts of the coast and with maps
■ of the 'adjacent country, and that maps and plans showing the
military features of the ground are as far as possible made out for
those portions most liable to be attacked.
(C) He will, in conjunction with the Senior Naval Officer, see to all
matters connected with the river and inshore defence of the colony,
and will do all in his power to insure harmonious action of the
Military and Naval Services in the case of joint operations.
(7) Ho will closely supervise the working of the Permanent Force and
the system of instruction carried on, and will from time to time
submit for approval such regulations as will insure the instruction
of as many of the officers and non-commissioned officers of the
Defence Force as possible.
(8) He will inspect all forts and their armaments minutely, and will
see that they are kept at all times ready for service, and will report
at once gny deficiency or injury which may affect their efficiency.


(9) He ■will communicate direct with the Minister on all matters of
importance.
(10) The Commandant’s office will be known as “Head Quarters,” and
will be situated in “The Barracks,” Brisbane.
(B)
Duties of Beigade-Majob.
(1) The Brigade-Major is the staff officer of the Commandant, and is
the channel of communication for correspondence with corps.
(2) Ho will attend personally to all matters of expenditure of money or
stores, carefully check all pay lists, vouchers, &c., and initial them
before presentation to the Commandant for signature.
(3) He will carefully check all parade states, muster rolls, returns of
arms, equipment, &c., in possession of corps.
(4) He will keep returns of all stores received and issued, inspect the
stores from time to time, check quantities, and report at once to
the Commandant if any are deteriorating.
(5) Ho will supervise generally the work of the office, and will at all
times be responsible that correspondence is registered and kept in a
systematic manner, that the store ledgers a"e‘ corfcotcjlun to date,
and that no unnecessary delay occurs in answering -letters or com-
munications received, or in forwarding to-the • accountant of the
Colonial Secretary’s Department vouchers for phy or jo etc j claims
for payment for services connected with the Tofiie’. ,- 1 "
(61 He will, under the direction of the Commandant,'make, the-draft of
all general orders for insertion in the Oatfiti,' and have them
initialled by the Commandant. ' " •> . ’
(7) He will attend such parades and perform such other duties as the
Commandant may from time to time direct. ~,, ", .
(o rj-: .
Duties of Infantry Staff Officii. ’ ' ’ < > ' t
(1) The Infantry Staff Officer will be also the musketry instructor of
the Force generally, and will bo specially charged with the musketry
instruction and drill of the infantry branch of- the Fofco.
(2) He will be present on the range at Brisbane when any earns or squad
of recruits is going through the musketry courstvr.nd will personally
instruct all officers, non-commissioned officers,' and men) in this most
essential part of their duty. <-
(3) He will supervise generally the infantry drill andriflc. exercises of
all recruits in the Brisbane regimental division! °
(4) He will assist the officer commanding in all infantry and musketry
work connected with the Permanent Force, or with officers and men
under instruction.
(5) He will check all musketry returns and other matters connected with
the infantry branch of the Force referred to him by the Brigade
Major. _ . , . :
(6) He will make himself acquainted with the Brigade Major’s duties,
and be ready to act for that officer when necessary.
(7) He will from time to time, as directed by the Commandant, visit
outlying corps and assist them in carrying out drill or target
practice.
(8) He will perform such other duties in camp or elsewhere as may he
directed by the Commandant.
7


51. Appointments, promotions, and dismissals of non-commissioned
officers and other subordinates of the Permanent Staff shall be made by the
Commandant, after consultation with the Minister; and all such persons
shall take the oath of allegiance and sign a declaration similar to that here-
after prescribed for the service roll of corps, and be subject to all regulations
for the discipline of tho Force.
SECTION X.
SERGEAKT-INSTRUCTORS.
53. The sergeants of the Permanent Staff will bo called “ sergeant-
instructors.” There will be two classes of sergeant-instructors;—
(a) Those who arc entirely engaged in the service of the Government.
{!>) Those who are only paid for part of their time.
Sergeant-instructors of class (a) will bo available for any duties for which
they may be detailed, including cleaning of arms, drill and musketry instruc-
tion of any corps, and attendance on the range, office work, &c. They will,
in the case of infantry sergeants, take their orders from the Infantry Staff
Officer. - r t
63.. All'-sergeant-ills true tors who hold the rank of Colour-Sergeant, or
any equivalent rafil? £n Her Majesty’s regular army, will rank as sergeants-
major in tjie DefcaS;? Force. Sergeant-instructors of regiments will rank as
sergeawts-piajor., £.ll other sergeant-instructors will rank as colour-sergeants.
51. When g gqrgeant-instructor is attached for duty to any corps, and
there is’ duly one, qorps of that branch of the service established in the locality,
lie will, niVlpss other,v : se directed by the Commandant, hold the position of
colour-sergeant bf the corps, and will in that case in addition to his staff pay,
draw daily pay at thc-rato laid down for colour-sergeants for attendances at
drill (ftot exceeding ninety-six hours per annum) in accordance with the
lleguhJtlobS 'as tc payhereafter contained.
55". fsergeant.-yisitructors will instruct all recruits and attend parados of
corps as may be ordered. They will assist in making out the returns required
to be sent in'by corps' and keep the registers of target practice.
56. When Vsergpant-instructor has put a squad of recruits through their
recruit drill‘he will-bo required to attend ou the range while the recruits are
put througlrtheir course of musketry.
57. When -sergeant-instructor is attached for duty to any corps ho will
he required fo attend' on the range during the annual course of musketry and
assist in of the corps ; and ho will be required to invariably
attend camp.■with ms."corps for the whole period of training.
58. Kbn-commisjsioned officers of the Permanent Staff shall rank with
other non-commissioned officers of the different grades, according to the dates
of their appointments in the Force and the ranks in which they may have
been detailed to act when specially attached to a corps, but shall not
ordinarily take command of any portion of the Force except for purposes of
instruction; such orders as they may convey when attached to corps must
always be given by direction of the senior officer present.
59. The Commandant may place any non-commissioned officer, or other
subordinate of the permanent staff, under stoppages of pay for any offence,
such as irregularity of conduct or want of attention to his duties, which may
he proved against him; such stoppage for any such offence not to exceed one
month’s pay ; and no non-commissioned officer or other subordinate shall
receive more than half his pay during the time he is under arrest or suspended
from duty for any offence which may be proved against him.
8


60. Non-commissioned officers of the Permanent Staff when attached to a
corps shall, for the time being, bo under the direction of the officer com-
manding the corps, who shall report to the Commandant any irregularity of
conduct, incompetency, or want of attention, he may observe on the part of
these non-commissioned officers.
SECTION XI.
DUTIES OF ADJUTANTS.
61. An adjutant may bo appointed to give instruction to the brigade
or battalion to which he is attached. He shall be subject to the orders
of the field officer commanding, and shall assist him in carrying on the
duties of the battalion.
02.,The adjutant of a battalion shall have access to the muster rolls and
other official documents of all the corps composing it, and shall keep a battalion
muster roll.
03. The adjutant must keep a diary, showing the instruction imparted
by him and the hours during which he has been in attendance at his ollice,
and also the duties performed by the non-commissioned officers of the Per-
manent Staff attached to his brigade or regiment.
04. He must prepare and forward all such returns as may be required, as
well as keep or superintend the keeping of the books of his brigade Or battalion.
05. He must, when ordered, perform the duties of brigade or battalion
paymaster and quarter-master. ''l .
00. The non-commissioned officers of the Permanent Staff" atia'chcd to
his brigade or battalion will be specially under his supervision.’
SECTION XII.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR PERMANENT STAFF.
07. The leave of absence to which members of the Permanent Staff
will be entitled will be governed by the same regulations as ’are hereafter
contained with respect to the officers, non-commissioned -officers," toll men of
the Permanent Force.
SECTION XIII.
FORMATION OR CORPS, AND MODE OF ENLISTMENT. TRANSFER, AND
RETIREMENT.
GB. New corps may bo formed under the Act in tile 1 following manner,
that is to say- —any persons desiring to be formed into ?i corps may offer their
services to the Governor through the Commandant. '■ If* rlleir I services are
accepted, a notification of such acceptance, with the name of the corps and
the place where it is established, shall be published in the Gazette.' Upon
such notification being published the corps shall bo deemed lawfully formed
under and subject to the provisions of “ The "Defence Act!' *
09. When four or more companies of infantry exist in any regimental
division, they may bo formed into a battalion, and an officer appointed to
command it with the necessary staff.
70. When four or more companies are formed into a battalion under
the last preceding regulation, the battalion shall bo known as an adminis/
trative battalion, and shall be a corps within the "meaning of section 2 of
the Act only for the purposes of drill, and for such other special purposes
as are defined by the or are specially mentioned in General
Orders; but for general administrative purposes each company shall be a
corps within the meaning of the said section.
71. The field officer commanding an administrative battalion shall have
the general charge of the discipline, drill, and instruction of the several
corps under his command. He should inspect them from time to time, and
9


Battery or Com-
pany number.
Signatures of
officers and men
in full.
Bank.
Age, years and
months.
Height.
Chest measure in
inches.
Whether married
or single.
Date of attesta-
tion in the
corps.
I
Witness.
Remarks.
should take notice of any infraction of the provisions of the law or of the
orders of the Commandant relating to the use of the arms, the regulations
about clothing, distinctive marks of rank, or discipline. But it is not intended
that the appointment of afield officer to command an administrative battalion
should interfere with the constitution, financial arrangements, or the opera-
tion of the rules of the corps composing the battalion, or with the powers
conferred by law on their commanding officers.
72. In the absence of the field officer commanding an administrative bat-
talion, and of all senior staff officers of the battalion, the senior commanding
officer of the corps composing the battalion will perform the duties of officer
commanding the battalion.
_ 73. Where two or more companies of infantry exist in any regimental
division, and they have not been formed into a battalion under the preceding
regulations, the Commandant may direct that combined drills shall be carried
out by such corps, and may appoint a staff or other officer to take command.
74. Companies, whether belonging to the same or to different regimental
divisions, may bo formed as one battalion for drill or training purposes.
Volunteer corps and corps of the Defence Force may be similarly formed
at the discretion of the officer commanding.
75. Each company or battery should be divided into two half companies
or divisions, each .under a lieutenant, which should bo subdivided into two or
more squads,-a fgrgeant or corporal being in charge of each. As far as pos-
sible, thq men of ‘the squad should reside in the same vicinity, so that the
sergeant- may easily look after them. Each officer and non-commissioned
officer should ha-v-Badist of the names of the men in his division or squad,
with their, addrosie.s, so that they may be promptly notified of any parade or
other duty.- Officcx? and non-commissioned officers should have their division
or squad- book with them at every inspection.
7ffi Every corps of the Defence Force shall have a service roll, which
shall b„o ip .the formdollowing:—
' * THE' DEFENCE POECE OF QUEENSLAND.
Service Eoihof from 188 .
We, wh,osq,.qapie,s are hereunto subscribed, declare that we have taken
the oath of .allegiance to the Sovereign. And we hereby voluntarily agree
to serve in the ACiire Land Force of the Defence Force of Queensland as
members thereof, for a period of three years from the date set opposite to
our rojpepuvo signatures, under the conditions contained in “ The Defence
Act of: 1884,” and in any Eegulations which may be made thereunder. And
wo further agnep „t,O, be bound by the several provisions of the said Act,
and of any Act aiwpding the same, and by all Eegulations made thereunder
respectively. .■
10


77. The commanding officer of every corps, on his appointment to com-
mand, whether he has previously been sworn in or not, shall take the oath of
allegiance in the form prescribed by section 14 of the Act, and shall sign the
service roll of his corps, describing himself therein as commanding officer,
and shall fill in the required particulars in the presence of a justice of the
peace, who shall sign the service roll as witness.
78. Every other officer, on appointment to, and every man, on enrolment
in, or transfer to, any corps, shall sign the service roll of the corps and take
the oath of allegiance either before the commanding officer or before a justice
of the peace, and the required particulars shall be filled in at the time of
signature.
79. In all cases a note will be added showing the date from which the
three years’ period of service commences.
80. No man is to be brought into camp for the annual training unless
ho has been regularly sworn in and attested for service.
81. Any member of the Force who has completed a first period of three
years’ service will still remain a member of the Force if he so desires, but
may at any time retire under regulation No. 89.
82. Every recruit when enrolled, and every man when transferred from
another corps, and signing the service roll of a new corps, will receive a
number. The series of numbers in a corps will commence with i, and will
be given in sequence. The number will not be changed'so long,-as the
member remains in the corps; if he is transferred dr' discharged, dies or
leaves the corps, the number will not be given to any other member!. ■
83. In all documents relating to a man his number will, invariably pre-
cede his name. ‘ ‘ ' i
84. In addition to the service roll, every corps shall’ have a book to be
called the Clothing Book, which may be in any form approved by the Com-
mandant, and shall contain the following particulars relating to each member
of the corps, viz.:—his number, rank, name, and address) and the particulars
of all arms, accoutrements, and clothing issued to hup.., E'veiy’lMq shall
sign this book as a receipt for the articles issued to him..
85. Every change of address must be notified to the commanding officer
within fourteen days of such change.
86. If any man wishes to be transferred from one, corps to another, it
may bo done in the following way:—He shall give notiro tn writing to his
commanding officer stating the corps to which he wishes to be'transferrcd.
The commanding officer, if he approves of the transfer, shall ugnify the
same by filling in and signing a transfer return in any dorm approved, of by
the Commandant, and shall forward the same to the commanding officer of
the corps to which the transfer is to be made. The latter commanding officer
shall sign the transfer return (unless he has special reasons for oojucting to
do so), and forward the same to the Commandant, who may then order the
transfer to be made. If the commanding officer to whose corps the transfer
is to be made has special reasons for objecting to it, he shall forward the
return to the Commandant unsigned, with a statement of the reasons.
87. Upon any man being transferred he shall return to the commanding
officer of the corps from which he is transferred all property of the corps
which he has in his possession, but he shall take his uniform with him to the
new corps, if of the same arm.
88. Men may be temporarily transferred for duty with another corps.
In such case a transfer paper will be sent from the commanding officer of
the corps to which the man belongs to the commanding officer of the corps
to which he is to be attached. The transfer may be in any form, approved
of by the commandant. Upon any such temporary transfer being made,
11


the man shall wear the uniform of his own corps while serving with the
other corps, but shall leave his arms and other equipment with his own
corps, and shall be supplied with such arms and equipment as shall be
necessary for his service with the other corps by the commanding officer of
such corps. He shall be paid with his own corps, and a return of drills
performed with the other corps shall be furnished by the one commanding
officer to the other.
89. Men who have completed a first period of three years’ service, and
who re-engage for a further period, may retire from the Force, upon giving
one month’s notice in writing to their commanding officer, at any time except
in time of war or invasion, or danger of either.
90. Any man may bo permitted to leave the Force before the expiration
of the period for which he engaged to serve, on his leaving Queensland, or
leaving the place where his corps is established, and going to reside at a
place where no corps of the same branch of the Service is established, or
under other special circumstances.
91. Any man wishing to retire under the last preceding regulation shall
give notice in writing to his commanding officer of his desire, and stating
fully his reasons. Tho commanding officer shall make full inquiry into the
circumstances, make a report of the case to tho Commandant,
stating fiis opiniqjviybcthcr or not tho leave should be granted, and the Com-
mandalit slum take ,sqch action in the matter as ho shall see fit.
92.,Any man Retiring from the Force at any other time than at tho
oxpi rattan Eqf three years from his original attestation will be liable to
forfeiture pi deferred pay, in manner laid down by the Regulations as to
pay herejiter mentioned.
93.* Any map JcaVing the Force shall bo entitled to receive a written
discharge from his commanding officer. Such discharge may be in any form
approved o£ by t!^e_ Commandant.
SECTION xIV.
DISCIPLINE.
94. M(Jetipgs shall not be held by members of any corps for the purpose
of an opinion upon the acts of a commanding officer, or of recom-
mending any particular course of action; nor shall memorials be drawn up
to the sumb effect; ‘and no meetings except those called by, or under the
the commanding officer of a corps, who will be responsible for
doing so, shall bo Recognised. Deputations of members to Ministers are
strictly prohibited, .If any officer or man shall have cause to think himself
aggrieved, he pjrtsJ represent his case to his commanding officer. Any appeal
againsE Ehe decision of the commanding officer must be made through the
latter to the Confmandant; but in the event of the commanding officer
declining to forward such appeal, application may then be made direct to
the Commandant,
95. Particular attention must be paid to the following paragraph of the
Queen’s Regulations:—“ Commanding officers are to use their utmost vigil-
ance to prevent officers and soldiers publishing information relative to the
numbers, movements, or operations of troops or any military details; and
any officer or soldier will be held personally responsible for reports of this
kind which he may make without special permission, or for placing the
information beyond his control so that it finds its way into unauthorised
hands. Furthermore, officers and soldiers arc forbidden to give publicity
to their individual opinions in any manner tending to prejudge questions
that may at the time be undergoing official investigation by the military
12


authorities. Anonymous complaints, and the publication through the
medium of the Press of anything calculated to act injuriously on the
interests of the Service, or to excite discontent in the army, are also strictly
prohibited.”
96. The foregoing regulation is adopted and made applicable to the
Defence Force, and any officer or man offending against its provisions shall,
if an officer, bo liable to be deprived of his commission, and, if a non-
commissioned officer or man, be liable to be fined a sum not exceeding £3
and to be summarily dismissed the Force.
97. Every opportunity shall bo given for inquiry into well-founded com-
plaints and the redress of grievances, but officers and men will be personally
responsible if they prefer complaints of a litigious or frivolous character.
t 98. Commanding officers will ascertain whether or not any non-commis-
sioned officer or man has any complaint to make to the inspecting officer at
inspection.
99. Commanding officers will as far as possible inquire into any com-
plaint which they ascertain that any non-commissioned officer or man intends
to make to the inspecting officer at inspection, and in case of corps belonging
to an administrative battalion the commanding officer will lay the matter
before the field officer commanding the battalion.
100. The commanding officer and the field officer commanding the bat-
talion (in the case of administrative battalions) will in(fulro"info any- com-
plaint and ascertain if it is valid. “'* '
101. Inspecting officers will always, when inspecting, iunuire if tnorc be
any complaints, on which any member of the corps who may nave one to
prefer will simply answer “Yes,” on parade. The inquiry into die merits
of the case will invariably be made after parade, in the presence only of
those concerned. ” t
102. Anyone having a complaint or representation to make, which it may
be inconvenient to reserve until the occurrence of an inspection, must in
the first instance bring it before his commanding officii;. yduv Will lay it
before the Commandant—in the case of administrative through
the field officer commanding the battalion. The Commaadant will take such
steps in the matter as he may deem necessary.
103. All complaints must be made solely on the part'pf the person
seeking redress ; no representation expressing a collective opinion °or griev-
ance can be entertained, all combinations being sub-ersivo cf military
discipline. , , -
104. It is the duty of all officers, when receiving complaints for trans-
mission for the consideration of superior authority, to point out to the parties
concerned any irregularity in the means they employ In 'seeking redress,
and to refuse to forward any representations which may be aubversite of,
or contrary to, the general rules by which all military bodies arc governed.
105. Complaints, &c., of non-commissioned officers or men should not,
except in cases of unavoidable necessity, be allowed to be put in writing by
them; non-commissioned officers and men should make their statements
verbally to their commanding officer, who, should he be unable to deal with
the matter, will lay it before the Commandant.
106. Officers and men of a corps shall not, when in uniform, individually
or collectively attend political meetings, or join in public political discussions
or demonstrations. Hands of corps shall not appear in uniform for any pur-
pose without the consent of the commanding officer.
107. When a man has been discharged for misconduct, a notification of
the fact, with the cause of discharge, shall be inserted in General Orders.
13


£
S.
d.
(a.) Far appearing on parade not in the order of the day, or with
* J ‘'clothing, .arths, or accoutrements, dirty, incomplete, or im-
properly put on ...
0
2
6
fj.) Talking in the ranks
0
2
6
(o.) Inattention fir other minor irregularities ...
0
2
,6
(d.) Neglect of duty ... ...
0
5
0
Neglecting to notify to commanding officer change of address
. . withia fourteen days of such change
0
2
6
(/.) Leav>ng'tho ranks without permission ...
0
5
0
(g.) Drunkenness in camp or elsewhere, in uniform—
For the first offence ...
0
7
6
For a repetition of the offence
0 15
0
or dismissal, at the option of the Commandant.
(%.) For loading contrary to orders, or firing out of turn ...
0
2
6
(J.) For discharging the rifle accidentally ...
0
2
6
(£) For pointing the same loaded or unloaded at any person with-
out orders ...
1
0
0
{1.) Appearing in the streets or other public place in a mixture
of plain clothes and uniform ... ...
0
5
0
(m.) Absence without leave from any parade or drill specially
ordered by the Commandant, or the annual inspection, or any
muster paradf
0
5
0
108. Disobedience of orders, or any disrespect shown ter any officer,
must bo instantly reported to the commanding officer of the corps ; and it
must be earnestly impressed upon all ranks that discipline essentially depends
upon obedience to officers and non-commissioned officers. All commissioned
officers must sec that obedience to non-commissioned officers is always duly
enforced, and non-commissioned officers failing to report any contempt or
neglect of their authority will be liable to be reduced.
109. Duty with a corps shall be held to mean, hot only presence under
arms on parade, but the performance of all administrative duties of a mili-
tary nature in or out of uniform. /
110. Corps shall not assemble under arms for any purpose unconnected
with military drill, or rifle practice, except with the approval of the Com-
mandant.
111. When men belonging to one or more corps are brought together
under arms at rifle shooting matches or on other occasions, the senior officer
present, in uniform, or if no officer is present in uniform, then the senior
officer present out of uniform, shall be considered in command of all the
men on the ground ; and although his position in this respect shall not
involve any authority for his interference in the arrangements of the
meeting, yet he will be responsible for the due maintenance of order and
discipline-, *■
112. All commands shall belong to the senior combatant officer present
in uniform. 1 Whm corps or portions of corps are united, whether in camp,
garrison,’cjj - 'quarters, the senior combatant officer present shall command
the whole.'. ■ ' ■ "
113. 'The commanding officer of a corps shall mean the senior combatant
officer abtho timu>doing duty with such corps.
officers and men in uniform shall salute His Ex-
cellency the Governor, all commissioned officers of military and naval forces,
and all officers of-the Defence Force, and of Volunteers, when in uniform.
115.. The Commandant and all field officers and commanding officers
and the senior officer in command, subject to the approval of the com-
manding officer, shall have power to inflict the following fines: —
14


£ s.
a.
(».) Abscheo without leave from detached drills for one calendar
month continuously ...
0 5
0
(o.) Absence without leave from the annual training in camp or
during the time of such training ...
0 10
0
£ s.
d.
Lieutenant-Colonel...
1 1
0 per diem.
Major Commanding Administrative Battalion ...
0 18
0 „
Major
0 16
0
Captain
0 14
0 ,,
Lieutenant ... ...
0 10
0 »
Surgeons and "Veterinary Surgeons £ rank 6 ' 1 " 3
Battalion or Brigade Sergeant-Major
Quarter-Master Sergeant f
Sergeant Drummer I
Sergeant Bugler J
0 9
a
Commanding officers must report any case of drunkenness on duty to
the Commandant, who will give such instructions as he may think proper
thereon.
All fines not paid or recovered in accordance with the Act must be
deducted on the pay list.
11C. So much of section. 46 of “ The Army Act of 1881 ” as confers a
summary power of punishment upon commanding officers shall apply only to
the Permanent Force, and not to other corps of the Defence Force, unless
a general order shall have been made by the Governor directing that the
powers conferred by such section shall come into force for the time being.
117. Any person who interrupts or hinders any drill or rifle'shooting of
any body of the Defence Force, or trespasses on the bounds set out by the
proper officer for such drill, shall incur a penalty of £1 for each offence, and
ma}' bo removed from the ground.
118. The Commandant may issue such standing and temporary orders
from time to time as may be necessary to facilitate the administration of
military and public business. *' * "
119. No member of the Force shall be buried with military honours
beyond those due to his rank, nor except by the cxpieoS desire of his
friends notified to the commanding officer of the corps.
SECTION XV.
COURTS OF INQUIET AND COURTS-MARPTIAL.
120. Courts of inquiry and courts-martial shall bo hold in accordance
with the provisions of the Act, and it is hereby prescribed that officers,
non-commissioned officers, and men attending such courts, ■ whether as
members of the court, or as guards, or witnesses or otherwise, shall be
entitled to daily pay at the rate hereafter prescribed fui theii respective
ranks for a full-day parade, if such court assemble before noon, ana for a
half-day parade if the court assemble after noon; and in case any officer,
non-commissioned officer, or man is required to attend a court at,a. distance,
he shall, in addition to his pay, be entitled to rations ahd shelter at the
public expense, or an allowance in lieu thereof. ' 1 (r t
SECTION XVI.
REGULATIONS AS TO PAT AND ALLOWANCES.
121. The rates of pay for drill and training in time o£ peace Will be as
follows: — » •
15


£
s.
d.
Battery Sergeant-Major "j
„ Quarter-Master Sergeant /
Company Sergeant-Major (
0
8
6 per diem,
Colour-Sergeant J
Sergeant
0
8
0 „
Corporal ,.. ...
0
7
G „
Bombardier ...
0
7
0 „
Trumpeter, Bugler, Drummer,
Gunner, Driver, Sapper, Miner, £
0
6
0 „
or Private )
Officers temporarily employed on tlic Staff may bo allowed ss. per diem
extra.
122. Tllc sum of £7 10s. deferred pay will bo granted at the end of
three years to every non-commissioned officer and man who has qualified
each year as an “efficient,” and a further rate of £1 per annum for each
year that he may qualify as “ extra efficient.”
123. Men who have served in the Force for three years from the date of
tljcir original attestation, but who have failed to make themselves “efficient”
in any one or two years of service, will be granted deferred pay at the rate
of £2 IP§. ner tbfnlto for each year they have been efficient, and £3 10s. for
each year tbcyJmva been extra efficient, but will not be entitled to draw the
same until the espiaation of three years from their attestation.
Igl.'jJily mtiß retiring or being dismissed from the Force before the
expi ratfoft «o£ thits years from his original attestation will absolutely forfeit
all claiKido deferred pay on account of the period for which he has served
since hfs.attestMi«q.
125.* Men,wlw)*h*avc completed a first period of three years’ service and
who rc’rtigage for farther service, shall be entitled, in addition to their ordi-
nary pay, t$ dr^n;Referred pay at the end of each year of further service at'
the rate pf ,£2»los.«pcr annum if efficient, and £1 more each year if extra
efficient.* 5f thfcy Retire or arc dismissed from the Force during the cur-
rency of aity }Vat they will absolutely forfeit all claim to deferred pay on
account of Jhc period which may have elapsed since the then last 30th day
of June. • »•♦ • •
120 *l* ally maft shall become permanently incapacitated from military
duty by illjioss or accident, and shall thereupon obtain his discharge from
the IJqrf q, or all die, after having completed one-half of any period entitling
him io » sum of deterred pay, but before completing the whole of such period,
a proportionate am mint of such deferred pay up to the day of his discharge
or dfafth bhalbfempaid to him or his legal personal representative, as the case
may bo. < ••. • »
127. In s'cpdipg in returns for the purposes of determining efficiency,
commanding officers will report any men who are slovenly in their habits, or
who have not a fair knowledge of their duties and drill, and such men will
be liable to be classified as inefficient.
128. If any man alleges that he has been prevented by illness from
complying with the requirements for efficiency, he shall state the facts to his
commanding officer, who will make full inquiry into the matter and, in
sending in the annual returns, will make a special report of the case, enclosing
a medical certificate, and the Commandant will take such action in the matter
as ho may deem just.
129. JS T one but efficients shall be recommended to the Governor in Council
for release from serving upon juries under the provisions of “ The Jury -Jet
of 1857.”
16


SECTION XVII.
ALLOWANCE FOE HOUSES.
130. Non-commissioned officers and men who, when required, provide
suitable horses will bo allowed pay at the rate of 10s. per diem.
131. Officers who, when required, provide suitable chargers with proper
appointments will bo allowed pay at the rate of 15s. per diem.
132. Draught horses provided for guns or waggons will be paid for at the
rate of 15s. per diem.
133. All horses in camp will be provided with forage at the public
expense.
134. Every officer, whose duty requires his being usually mounted, may
instead of the above rate, draw the sum of £6 ss. per quarter, upon his
certifying that he is in possession of a fit horse and appointments which are
his lona fide property. The officer’s certificate must bo countersigned by the
Commandant.
135. Mounted infantry will only be allowed horse allowance for twelve
days in any year except under special circumstances which must be certified
by the Commandant.
136. The Commandant may reduce or disallow any of the above rates if
inferior or unsuitable horses are provided.
SECTION XVIII.
ENROLMENT OF HOUSES.
137. The sum of £2 10s. may be drawn for each draught horse enrolled
for the service of field batteries. Enrolled horses must be always available
for service with the battery for which they are enrolled. I£ sold, or become
non-effective, a report in writing must at once bo made to the officer com-
manding the battery.
138. Payment will be made annually in arrear.
SECTION XIX.
PAY.
139. When any company or battery goes into camp with its full com-
plement of officers and sergeants, but less than two-thirds of the established
strength, pay may only be allowed for two officers and two sergeants, or for
three sergeants in case there are four on the establishment; but the pay so
deducted will bo made good from any pay due to absentees.
14-0- Pay for the amount of drill performed during continuous training in
camp will bo distributed as soon as possible after camp. Pay for recruit
drills will be handed over on the 30Hi June following the day on which the
recruit was sworn in and attested for service. All other pay and allowances
(except deferred pay) will bo distributed at the close of each year. Deferred
pay will bo handed over to each man as soon as possible after he has com-
pleted the service entitling him to receive it.
SECTION XX.
CONTINGENT ALLOWANCE
141. An allowance at the rate of 10s. for every efficient (to be called
contingent allowance) may be drawn at tbe end of every financial year by
the commanding officer of every corps. Tbo contingent allowance is in-
tended to cover small losses, alteration, and fitting of clothing, advertising
n
17


in local papers, payment for lighting drill sheds, stationery, expenses inci-
dental to target practice, &c., &c. The disposal of the contingent allowance
will bo left to commanding officers, but in the case of an administrative
battalion the field officer commanding the battalion will arrange with the com-
manding officers of the corps composing the battalion the amount to be paid
from the contingent of each corps for general battalion purposes.
SECTION XXI.
DRILI, TRAINING, EXERCISE, AND EFFICIENCY.
142. The Defence Force will receive pay for ninety-six liours’ drill and
training in each year, and for the purpose of this regulation, a day’s attend-
ance in camp will count as six hours’ drill, whatever may be the duty per-
formed on any day. The drill will be disposed generally as follows :
Hours.
Eight days (of 6 hours each) in camp 48
Ten half days of 3 hours each ... ... ... 30
Twelve drills of 1 i-hours each ... ... ... 18
Total ... ... 96
143. There will be no whole day parades without special orders.
144. The rate of pay for drill and training is based on a payment of
Is. per hour to the privates of the Force for time actually devoted to drill,
and consequently their rates of pay will be as follows: —
s. d.
A drill ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6
Half day 3 0
Whole day ... ... ... ... 6 0
145. Officers and non-commissioned officers will be paid in proportion on
the scale above laid down, and horse allowance will be calculated in the same
way.
146. In addition to the above paid drills, it is expected that unpaid
drills to the extent of twenty-four hours at least per annum shall be carried
out by all ranks.
147. The time of a drill shall count from the calling of the roll till the
parade is dismissed, and no person shall be considered to be present unless
dressed in the uniform ordered for the occasion (except in the case of
recruits and newly formed corps). Any person arriving after the squad or
company has been told off will only count half a drill for that occasion; if
over half-an-hour late, he will not count any time for pay or efficiency.
148. Turning out as a guard of honour by day for the opening or closing
of Parliament or otherwise, or for inspection by His Excellency the Com-
mander-in-Chief, shall count as a half day. Inspection by the Commandant
shall count as a half day if in the day time, if in the evening it will only
count as a drill. Should officers and men, however, parade for a Guard of
Honour or salute before noon, they may receive pay for a whole day if they
perform two hours’ regular drill on that day.
149. All drills will count towards “ efficiency,” but men will not be
entitled to pay for more than twelve drills performed after sunset in any
year. Such drills will be known as evening drills.
150. Heads of departments and all other Government officials arc hereby
instructed to afford every facility for attendance at drill and training to
members of the Defence or Volunteer Forces under their orders.
18


SECTION XXII.
EFFICIENCY.
151. A non-commissioned officer or private, to classify as efficient, must
fulfil the requirements hereunder specified:—
(a.) Training and exercise for tour clear continuous days (counting from
sunrise on the first day to sunset on the fourth) out of eight days
once in every year in camp or such place as may be appointed in
lieu thereof.
(i.) Perform a total of eighty-four hours’ drill (including the attendance
in camp of six hours per diem).
(c.) Be present at the annual inspection made by, or by order of, the
Commandant, or (in case of unavoidable absence) attend an extra six
hours’ drill in the year.
(d.) Go through a course of gunnery for artillery and a course of musketry
for infantry and corps armed with rifles or carbines (the field bat-
teries excepted, unless otherwise ordered by the Commandant).
152. The Commandant is authorised to direct that certain corps may per-
form their “ Continuous training,” hy means of successive full-day parades,
or part full-day parades, and part training in camp; and members of such
corps may add such periods together in qualifying for efficiency, or extra
efficiency, hut not more than one Sunday may be included in such total.
SECTION XXIII.
EXTEA EFFICIENCY.
153. Non-commissioned officers and men will be classified as extra
efficient who fulfil the following requirements, viz.:—
(a.) Training and exercise for six days once in every year, in camp.
(5.) Perform a total of 102 hours’ drill (including camp, as above).
(e.) Be present at the annual inspection made hy, or hy order of, the
Commandant, unless he can justify his absence to the satisfac-
tion of the Commandant.
(d.) (i.) In the case of artillery, in going through the course of gunnery,
be amongst the number of those selected for laying the guns at
practice, and score in the rounds in which they personally laid
the guns.
(n.) In the case of infantry and corps armed with rifles, in going
through the course of musketry, come up to the minimum
standard of 100 points; and in the case of corps armed with
carbines, come up to a minimum standard of 88 points’.
154. Extra efficients will he granted a distinctive badge of the pattern
to be defined in the Dress Regulations hereinafter mentioned.
SECTION XXIV.
EFFICIENCY OF RECRUITS.
155. A recruit shall be entitled to classify as efficient on the Ist July of
any year if during the previous year he has attended a proportion of drills
according to the following scale:—
If attested on or before Ist August he must fulfil all the requirements in Regu-
lation 151.
If attested after Ist August, but on or before Ist September, lie must fulfil all
the above requirements, except that the total required under the heading “ b ”
will be only 81 hours.
19


If attested after Ist September, but on or before Ist October, lie must fulfil all
the above requirements, except that tbe total required under the heading
“ h ” will bo only 78 hours.
If attested after Ist October, but on or before Ist November, ho must fulfil all the
above requirements, except that the total required under the heading “ b ”
will be only 75 hours.
If attested after Ist November, but on or before Ist December, ho must fulfil
all the above requirements, except that the total required under the heading
“ b ” will be only 72 hours.
If attested after Ist December, but on or before Ist'January, ho must fulfil all
the above requirements, except that the total required under the heading
“ b ” will be only 69 hours.
If attested after Ist January, but on or before Ist February, ho must fulfil all the
above requirements, except that the total required under the heading “b ”
will bo only 63 hours.
If attested after Ist February, but on or before Ist March, he must fulfil all
the above requirements, except that the total required under the heading “ b ”
will be only 60 hours.
156. Eecruits attested after Ist March, or after the annual training of the
corps in camp has taken place, cannot qualify as efficients for the year ending
30tn of the following June.
157. All recruit drills performed before attestation may bo counted
towards efficiency for the year, as if performed after attestation.
158. Eecruits attested before the Ist March in any year shall bo entitled
to receive deferred pay for the quarter in which they wore attested, and
for each subsequent quarter of such year; and those attested after Ist
March in any year shall, for the purpose of earning deferred pay, bo con-
sidered to have been attested on the Ist July following.
SECTION XXV.
DRILLS.
159. Every corps will be inspected annually by tbe Commandant or other
appointed officer.
160. The senior combatant officer present at any parade will exercise
his discretion as to the continuance or otherwise of the parade on account
of the inclemency of the weather.
161. When the order has been given for a parade, those present will bo
entitled to count the parade for purposes of pay and efficiency, though the
parade may have been dismissed immediately after the names have been
taken.
162. When an officer deems it necessary to dismiss a parade on account
of the inclemency of the weather, he must report his having done so within
twenty-four hours. If the officer were a commanding officer he shall make
his report direct to the Commandant; any other officer will report to his
commanding officer.
163. With the exception of the December muster parade there will be no
paid daylight drills between the 15th December and the 15th February in
the Southern Military District, nor between the Ist December and the Ist
March in the Northern Military District, unless specially ordered.
164. To afford men opportunities for making themselves efficient, it is
directed that commanding officers shall hold (subject to the last preceding
regulation) at least one half-day parade and two moonlight drills in every
month. The quarterly muster parades hereafter mentioned and the Com-
mandant’s inspection will not bo included in the above.


165. In the case of administrative battalions the field officer command-
ing will, previous to the first of every month, issue an order stating what
battalion drills will be held during the month, and commanding officers of
corps forming the battalion will arrange for other drills so as not to inter-
fere with the battalion drills.
166. There will be a muster parade of every corps in the colony on the
first Saturday in December and the last Saturday in March, June, and
September.
167. It will be the duty of every commanding officer to have a muster
roll ready, and to fall in his men in the order in which they stand on the
roll. The mustering officer will then call the roll and make a note opposite
the name of each officer or man absent, stating whether with or without
leave.
168. The muster roll will be signed by the commanding officer of the
corps and by the mustering officer, and the latter will post it without delay
to the brigade-major. If no special officer is detailed, the senior-combatant
officer present will do the duty of mustering officer.
169. At the June muster parade stock will be taken of all arms,
accoutrements, and equipment of every description that has been issued to
the corps. Deficiencies will be reported, and if not satisfactorily accounted
for will be charged against the commanding officer.
170. When the muster is over the corps will fall in for such drill as may
be necessary to complete the time allotted for a half-day’s parade, pay being
allowed therefor.
171. The officers of a corps shall not bo absent from inspection or muster
parade without first having obtained leave from the Commandant.
172. In case of officers other than commanding officers, the leave must
be obtained through the commanding officer.
173. Officers and men who desire to be absent from the annual in-
spection or any muster parade for any very special reason must apply in
writing to the commanding officer, stating reasons for their application. As
it is very important that every one should be present, at these parades, it is
ordered that leave of absence shall not be given except under the most
urgent circumstances, and the reason for granting such leave will, in each
case, be given by the commanding officer. In case of sickness a medical
certificate must be transmitted within a week.
174. Absence from these parades will not prejudice efficiency, provided the
requirements of Regulation No. 151 are complied with, but those absent
without leave will be fined ss.
175. It shall bo competent for the Commandant or inspecting officer
and commanding officers to order a course of recruit drill for such men as
may fail to exhibit a proper degree of proficiency ; but such attendance at
recruit drill shall not count towards efficiency.
176. Commanding officers shall be responsible for forwarding the appli-
cations of officers for leave of absence from continuous training through the
proper channel, and in transmitting the same they shall express their own
opinions as to the granting or withholding of leave after having obtained
full information on the subject. An officer in asking for leave must not
content himself with stating urgent private affairs as the ground of his
application, but must give good reason why such leave is absolutely neces-
sary.
177. Any leave (except in case of sickness) must bo applied for not later
than seven days previous to the date fixed for the assembly of the corps for
continuous training. .
21


178. An officer who applies for leave on account of sickness must
forward a medical certificate, as follows:
, of the Corps [or Battalion],
having applied for a certificate on which to ground his application for leave of
absence, I do hereby certify that I have carefully examined this officer, and find
that [the nature of the disease is to he here fully stated, and the period during which
the officer has suffered under its effects ], and in consequence thereof I [state opinion
of case~].
179. Where the whole or any part of the Force shall be called out for
training, notices to the men on the service roll to attend training and exercise,
shall be sent by the order of the commanding officer of the corps to which
such men belong, by the post, to the residences of the several men as stated
in the clothing book, or as subsequently notified by them ; and such com-
manding officer shall cause such notices to be published in one or more of the
newspapers of the district fourteen days at least before the day so appointed.
Nothing herein contained shall bo held to interfere with the enactment con-
tained in section 88 of the Act as to the sufficiency of notices.
180. When any officer or man desires to bo absent from detached drills,
or from the place where the head quarters of his corps is established, for any
continuous period exceeding one month, ho must make written application for
leave of absence. In the case of commanding officers the application must
bo made direct to the Commandant; in the case of other officers and men the
application must bo made to the commanding officer, who will be responsible
for forwarding it, when necessary, to the Commandant.
181. Commanding officers shall have power to grant leave of absence for
any period not exceeding one month to all ranks under their command; if
longer than one month’s leave is required, application must be made to the
Commandant. It is to be distinctly understood that leave is not to be
unreasonably withheld, but this regulation must be strictly adhered to in
order that commanding officers may know where the men under their com-
mand may be found.
182. The senior combatant officer of any corps who is present on parade
will be responsible for seeing that a proper record is kept of the names of
those present on parade for entry on returns, and no pleas of error will be
entertained after such returns have been rendered to head quarters. The
sergeant-instructor (if any) attached to the corps must keep a duplicate list
of those present.
183. The senior combatant officer on parade may direct any officer to
assume command for the purpose of manoeuvring the Force present, although
other officers senior to him bo present in the ranks; or to detail an officer or
non-commissioned officer of the Permanent Staff to assume command on
parade of any corps for the purpose of exercise and instruction, or to trans-
fer officers or men to other companies for purposes of drill, &c.
SECTION XXVI.
MUSKETRY.
184. The course of musketry instruction shall he as laid down in General
Orders for recruits and trained members of the Force respectively.
185. With a view to stimulate individual exertion, and to reward profi-
ciency in the use and management of the rifle, a system of badges and
money prizes will be adopted, and the following llules for the award thereof
must bo strictly adhered to: —
22


' Frizes.
£
s.
d.
To the best shot in the Force
10
0
0
To the second,, „ ... ...
7
0
0
To the third „ „ ...
To the best shot of all the corps, armed with carbines, if there are
5
0
0
more than one such corps competing in any year ...
4
0
0
To the best shot of a corps if thirty men or upwards go through the
course of musketry
2
0
0
To the second best shot of a corps if thirty men or upwards go through
the course of musketry
1
0
0
To the best shot of a corps if forty-live men or upwards go through
the course
3
0
0
To the second best shot of a corps if forty-five men or upwards go
through the course ...
2
0
0
To the third best shot of a corps if forty-five men or upwards go
through the course
1
0
0
(«)
In the case of corps armed with rifles—
£
s.
d.
To men making 170 points and upwards ...
.. 2
0
0
To men making 150 points and upwards, but less than 170
.. 1
0
0
(»)
To men making 130 points and upwards, but less than 150
In the case of corps armed with carbines —
.. 0
10
0
To men making 150 points and upwards ...
.. 2
0
0
To men making 130 points and upwards, but less than 150
... 1
0
0
To men making 114 points and upwards, but less than 130
.. 0
10
0
Badges.
Distinctive badges will be given as follows: —
Ist. To the best shot of an administrative battalion.
2nd. To the best shot of a corps.
3rd. To all who qualify as “marksmen” in accordance with the General Orders.
The badges will bo of the pattern proscribed in the Dress Regulations
hereinafter mentioned, and will be retained for the period of one year from
the date of issue, or until the issue of next year’s badges. No man will be
allowed to take more than one badge during the year.
Garrison Batteries, Engineers, and Volunteer Eiflo Companies who go
through the prescribed course will bo entitled (as well as Infantry Com-
panies) to corps prizes as above, and to compete for the prizes given to the
best shots of the Force.
The following money prizes will be awarded to “marksmen”: —
Non-commissioned officers and men taking any of the prizes given to the
three best shots of the Force cannot take a corps prize as well. Marksmen’s
prizes may be added to any other prizes for the year.
No man will be allowed to take any money prize unless he classifies as
efficient. Prize money will bo distributed at the close of each financial year.
180. Pay as for two half-day parades will be allowed to men going
through the course in the manner prescribed by the General Orders; and
the time so devoted to going through the course will be counted towards
making up the number of hours’ drill required for efficiency.
187. In addition to the ammunition necessary to complete the course
of musketry, an amount of ammunition will be issued free to commanding
officers of corps at the rate of thirty rounds per annum for each man who
completes his course of musketry. This ammunition may be expended in
practice or in rifle matches, at the discretion of the commanding officer.
188. Every man must go through the course with his own corps; the
only exceptions will be in the case of men who, having commenced the course,
become ill and unable to go on, duly verified, or men who are absent on
special leave granted by the Commandant previous to commencing the course.
23


£
s.
d.
Under six months’service
... 2
10
0
Over six months and under one year’s service ...
Over one year and under two years’ service
... 2
0
0
... 1
0
0
SECTION XXVII.
GENNERY.
189. The course of gunnery shall be as laid down in General Orders.
The following prizes will be awarded :
Field Artillery.
£ s. d.
To the detachment making the highest score in the prize
competition ' ... 9 0 0
To the second best, where four or more detachments compete 4 10 0
Garrison Artillery.
To the detachment making the highest score in the prize
competition ... 900
To the second best, where four or more detachments compet e 4 10 0
SECTION XXVIII.
UNIFORM.
190. The uniform clothing of all ranks shall bo of such colour, pattern,
and design as shall from time to time be directed by the Dress Regulations
to be issued in General Orders.
191. Uniform and equipment for non-commissioned officers and men
will be supplied to corps by Government, and will remain the property of
the Government.
192. If any non-commissioned officer or man leaves the Force before the
expiration of his three years’ engagement there will bo deducted from any
pay then due to him the sums following to defray the cost of his uniform,
viz.
Or such sum may bo recovered by action at the suit of the commanding
officer from the non-commissioned officer or man so leaving.
193. When any part of a uniform has been fairly expended in service,
the commanding officer may certify that the non-commissioned officer or man
to whom it was issued is entitled to a new garment, and the same may there-
upon be issued, subject to the provision that if such non-commissioned
officer or man shall leave the Force before such new article shall have been
fairly expended in service a proportionate amount of the cost shall bo
repaid or recovered in a similar manner to that prescribed in the case of
uniforms originally supplied. Subject to this provision, commanding officers
may direct men who appear on parade with their uniforms shabby or dirty
to have the same renewed, repaired, or cleansed at the men’s own cost.
194. No issue of clothing will bo made to any man till he has completed
his recruit drills, and then only undress uniform. Commanding officers will
issue the balance when satisfied that the man is likely to prove an efficient
member of the Force.
195. If any uniform is destroyed in the performance of any military
duty, a report of the fact shall be made through the commanding officer to
the Commandant, who may appoint a board of officers to inquire into the
matter, and upon their report may award such compensation as shall be
just.
24


SECTION XXIX.
ARMS, ACCOUTREMENTS, AMMUNITION, AND STORES.
196. Every corps will be supplied with arms to the full, establishment.
197. Before any Government arms arc issued to a corps it will be neces-
sary for the commanding officer to satisfy the Commandant that a place of
security for the custody of the arms has been provided. The store must be
a dry and secure building. Armouries which have been approved must not
be changed without the authority of the Commandant.
198. Every rifle issued to a corps shall bear a number by which such rifle
must be known, and a clear record thereof must be kept both in the head-
quarters book and in the books provided for each corps.
199. No man must be allowed to use any rifle except that for which he
has signed a receipt, and every man must be cautioned that any interference
by another with the rifle for which he lias signed a receipt may render him
liable to a fine or charge for repairs in the event of damage thereto, in
addition to fine or charges for damage which his weapon may sustain when
in his own possession.
200. The commanding officer must provide against anyone having
unlawfully in his possession any arms, ammunition, clothing, appointments,
musical instruments, or other articles issued to the corps under his command.
201. All arms, ammunition, accoutrements, and other equipments issued
to a corps are in the custody of the commanding officer, and he will at all
times be responsible for their numbers and state, and will be primarily
charged with auy losses or deficiencies.
202. Commanding officers will be allowed (in addition to the contingent
allowance) the sum of 2s. Cd. per annum for each rifle on their establishment,
provided they are kept in proper order.
203. Officers commanding field batteries will be allowed a further sum
of £lO for care of guns, carriages, harness, &c., provided they are kept in
proper order.
20-1. The sums mentioned in the two preceding regulations may bo
reduced or entirely disallowed in case the weapons, &c., are found not to bo
in proper order at any inspection made by or by the order of the Com-
mandant. Such sums may be expended at the discretion of the commanding
officer, and may be paid to the drill instructor, or any other person who
undertakes the work of keeping such weapons, &0., in order.
205. The arms must be deposited after drill in the armouries of the corps
except when the commanding officer may judge it expedient to permit mem-
bers of the corps to keep their arms at their own houses for a limited period,
in which case a written permission is to be given signed by the commanding
officer, and a receipt will be taken for the weapons upon a form to be
supplied from head-quarters.
206. As the commanding officer is responsible for the condition of the
arms issued to his corps, it will be his duty to withdraw permission to men
to keep their arms at their own houses whenever such men fail to keep their
arms in proper order, and he must cause the same to be deposited after drill
in the armouries of the corps. In any case in which the arms are neglected,
the discretionary power granted to the commanding officer in this respect
may bo withdrawn.
207. It should be distinctly understood that it is one of the main duties
of officers to see that rifles returned to the racks arc clean and in proper
order. The caretaker of the rifles will then bo responsible for their being
kept so. It will be his duty to see that arms so returned, especially after
practice, arc clean, and in the event of their not being so bring the matter to
25


the notice of an officer at once. If the officer considers that the rifle has been
returned imperfectly cleaned, a .charge of threepence may ho made and
deducted from the pay of the man to whom the rifle belonged.
208. The guns and harness of held batteries should he returned into
store clean, and in the event of its not being possible to clean them on the day
of their being returned owing to any cause; the battery should parade on the
next day under the division officers and put everything right. The caretaker
will then bo responsible for their state while in store. In the event of any
of the equipment not being returned clean, he will report the fact to tho
officer commanding the battery, who will take immediate steps to have it
properly cleaned and put away.
209. The fact of there being a caretaker responsible for the cleanliness
of arms and other equipment in store in no way relieves commanding officers
of their responsibility; it is for them to see that the duty is properly per-
formed.
210. In the event of arms being damaged by accident or carelessness,
a report should at once be made to head-quarters, and the damaged arms
forwarded. It will be the duty of the commanding officer to make a
thorough inquiry into tho cause of the damage, and to state whether the
expense of repairing or making good the weapon should bo charged to any
individual. The cost of repairing arms, if damaged wilfully, or by neglect,
or want of due precaution, together with the cost of transmission to and fro,
will be charged to the corps or individual.
211. When tho commanding officer of a corps applies for leave of
absence for over three months, or intends to resign his commission, ho must
obtain a certificate from the officer next in command, that all arms and
other articles issued to the corps —a full list of which must be given
thereon—are complete and in good order. This certificate must accompany
the application for leave, or letter tendering the resignation.
212. If in any corps there is no officer next in command to the com-
manding officer, an officer will be detailed from head-quarters to give the
certificate mentioned in the last preceding regulation.
213. Ammunition may bo issued at the discretion of the Commandant.
214. Every country corps must provide a secure place for tho custody
of its small arm ammunition.
215. When ammunition is supplied by Government for the use of a
corps, careful arrangements must bo made by the commanding officer for
its conveyance from the railway station or place to which it may have been
transmitted.
216. The commanding officer shall be responsible to the Commandant
for all stores which arc supplied by Government for tho use of the corps.
217. Targets and mooring tackle will be supplied to Artillery Corps.
218. The hire of boats to place and remove targets will also be allowed.
219. All surplus stores—such as empty powder barrels, metal-lined
eases, metal cylinders, or empty bursters —must be forwarded to head-
quarters by the cheapest and most direct conveyance.
220. In cases where ammunition is forwarded to a corps for instruc-
tion purposes, the commanding officer shall bo held responsible for any
unexpended balance, and returns must be made to head-quarters of such
balance.
221. Any loss, damage, or destruction of arms, accoutrements, or stores,
which shall be chargeable against any officer or man may be made good by
stoppage of his pay, or, in default thereof, proceedings against him must be
instituted under the Act.
26


SECTION XXX.
BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS.
222. It shall be competent for the Commandant to require such hooks
to be kept by corps, and such returns and states to be rendered from time
to time as ho may deem necessary.
223. No claim against the Government in respect of allowances shall he
admitted for any year if not submitted for adjustment prior to the first day
of September in the year following, in order that the performance of the
public business may be facilitated, and the provisions of “The Audit Act ”
observed.
221. The sums due to Government for supplies of stores, and for repairs
of arms or otherwise, shall take precedence of other claims.
225. Commanding officers shall bo responsible to Government for the
due custody and expenditure of the contingent allowance, and no portion
thereof must pass from their control or be expended except by their direction.
The Government grant shall be kept as a special public bank account, and
all books and accounts connected with the expenditure thereof shall be pro-
duced, when required, to the inspecting officers, or such other persons as the
Commandant may direct. On Ist July in each year an audited balance-
sheet of the past year’s receipts and expenditure, signed by fhe commanding
officer, and countersigned by one officer and non-commissioned officer,
must be forwarded to head-quarters before the annual grant or any portion
thereof shall he issued. Surcharges, if any, for unauthorised expenditure
shall he deducted from the allowance due to each corps.
SECTION XXXI.
CORRESPONDENCE.
226. All official correspondence from corps shall proceed from the com-
manding officer or pass through him.
227. When a corps forms part of an administrative battalion, ordinary
correspondence relating to company matters need not pass through the field
officer commanding, hut may be sent direct to head-quarters. Only official
correspondence relating to complaints, as provided under the head of
“ Discipline,” and matters relating to more than one of the corps composing
the battalion, or connected with the duty of the field officer commanding, or
the battalion staff, need pass through the field officer commanding.
228. Letters and returns intended for the Commandant should ho
addressed:
The Brigade Major,
Head Quarters,
Brisbane.
Matters of a confidential nature should he marked “ confidential ” on the
envelope, as well as on the letter, and if intended for the Commandant
should bo addressed direct to him. •
229. Correspondence on field artillery subjects must be addressed to the
Officer Commanding the Field Artillery.
230. As a general rule the system of correspondence here laid down will
he adhered to ; but it will be competent for the Commandant to issue orders
in variation thereof from time to time, in view of facilitating the conduct of
public and departmental business.
27


SECTION XXXII.
POLICE.
231. Whenever men serving in the Police Force are called upon by the
Governor to serve in tho Active Land Force under tho provisions of section
29 of the Act, they shall, for the time being, be under the orders of tho
Commandant.
232. When men of the Police Force are so called upon to serve in the
Active Land Force, they will receive tho pay and allowances drawn by those
of corresponding rank in tho Defence Force, and such further sum as will
bring the total amount up to the pay of their own rank in the Police Force.
The corresponding ranks are as follows:
I. 11.
Rank In Police Force. Rank in Defence Force.
Constable... ... Private.
Senior-constable ... ... ... Corporal.
Sergeant ... Sergeant.
Senior-sergeant Sergeant-major.
233. Policemen called out for service with the Defence Force shall
serve together where possible.
234. The time during which members of the Police Force may be
directed to serve in the Active Land Force shall count for purposes of
pension or superannuation as service in tho Police Force.
235. Section 65 of the Act, making provision for the families of men
killed on active service, and for compensation to men permanently disabled,
and any regulations made thereunder, will bo applicable to members of the
Police Force while serving in the Active Land Force.
236. When members of tho Police Force are called upon to serve in
tho Active Land Force, all arms and equipment in the possession of tho
Commissioner of Police will, for tho time being, be at the disposal of the
Commandant for the purpose only of arming and equipping such members
of the Police Force as have been called upon for service. Such additional
arms and equipment as may be necessary must be supplied by the Com-
mandant.
SECTION XXXIII.
VOLUNTEER RIFLE CORPS.
237. Eifle corps on tho purely volunteer system may be formed, subject
to the following Eegulations :
238. Persons wishing to form a volunteer rifle corps must place them-
selves in communication with the Commandant, through whom they must,
in writing, offer their services to the Governor.
239. Upon the acceptance of such offer by the Governor, signified by
notice in the Gazette, a meeting of the persons signing such offer shall bo
called by tho Commandant, or such person as he may appoint, for the
purpose of adopting rules for the internal management of the corps, and such
other purposes as may be required.
240. When a volunteer corps is duly formed, it will be supplied gratui-
tously with arms by Government to the full number of its enrolled members,
if required.
241. The establishment of every volunteer rifle corps is to be as ordered
from time to time by the Governor, but shall not be less than the minimum
authorised by the next following regulation, nor greater than the maximum
thereby authorised, except that supernumeraries may be enrolled in a
similar manner to that laid down for corps of the Defence Force.
28


Mounted Corps,
Captain
Lieutenant
Minimum. Maximum.
... 1 1
... 1 2
Total of Officers
... 2 3
Company Sergeant-Major
Sergeants
Corporals
.Bugler ...
Bn rates ...
... 1 . 1
... 2 4
... 2 4
... 1 1
... 20 70
Total of Non-commissioned Officers and
Men 26 80
Captain ...
Lieutenant
Olher Corps,
Minimum. Maximum.
... i i
... 1 2
Total of Officers
... 2 3
Colour-Sergeant...
Sergeants
Corporals
Bugler ...
Privates ...
... 1 1
... 2 4
... 2 4
... 1 1
... 25 90
Total of Kon-commipsioned Officers and
Men 31 100
212. The establishment for Volunteer Eifle Corps will be as follows for
every company:—
Only one lieutenant will be appointed to any corps, unless the strength is
over 40 in the case of mounted corps, or over 50 in the case of other corps.
213. In addition to the Ecgulations contained in this section, the
following Ecgulations shall apply to Volunteer corps —viz., 1 to 39, 69 to
75, 82 to 88, 182 to 188, 196 to 203, 204 to 207, 209 to 224, 236 to 230, and
333 to 335, all the above figures to be inclusive.
241. JS T o member of the Defence Force shall be enrolled in a Volunteer
Eiflo Corps until ho has legally ceased to be a member of such Force for a
period of at least three months, except by special permission of the Com-
mandant.
246. Every volunteer corps shall have a service roll similar to that
prescribed for corps of the Defence Force, except that it shall contain an
undertaking by winch the subscribers agree to serve for one year only
and in the particular volunteer corps to which it belongs.
246. At or before the first meeting of the members of a Volunteer Eifle
Corps, the members shall, before proceeding to other business, take the
oath of allegiance and subscribe the service roll of the corps in a similar
manner to that prescribed for members of the Defence Force. The convener,
of the meeting shall act as chairman, but in his absence the persons present
may choose one of themselves to act as chairman.


217. The members of any rifle corps may at such first meeting submit
the name or names of any one or more of their members to the Commandant
for approval and recommendation for appointment as commissioned officers
thereof.
218. The person or persons whose name or names shall be so submitted
may bo appointed to acting rank as officers upon similar conditions to those
prescribed for acting officers of the Defence Force. Except as aforesaid,
volunteer officers shall be recommended for commissions and appointed in a
similar manner to officers of the Defence Force.
219. The oath of allegiance shall be taken and the service roll signed by
the commanding officer of every volunteer corps, and by other officers and
men respectively, in a similar way to that prescribed for the corresponding
ranks of the Defence Force.
250. Volunteers shall engage, in the first instance, for a period of one
year’s service, and such engagement shall thereafter continue for an inde-
finite period, subject to a power of retiring, as follows :—Any volunteer may
(except in time of war or invasion, or imminent danger of either) quit his
corps on complying with the following conditions, namely :
(1) Giving to the commanding officer of his corps three calendar
months’ notice in writing of his intention to quit the corps.
(2) Delivering up iu good order, fair wear and tear excepted, all arms,
clothing, and appointments, being public property, or property of
the corps issued to him.
(3) Paying all money due or becoming duo by him under the rules of
the corps, either before or at the time or by reason of his
quitting it.
And thereupon he shall be struck out of the muster roll of the corps by the
commanding officer.
251. If any volunteer voluntarily enrols himself in any corps of the
Defence Force he shall bo deemed discharged from the volunteer corps, and
the commanding officer shall strike him out of the service roll thereof. He
shall nevertheless be liable to deliver up in good order, fair wear and tear
only excepted, all arms, clothing, and appointments, being public property
or property of his corps, issued to him, and to pay all money due or
becoming due by him, under the rules of his corps, either before or at the
time or by reason of his discharge. If such arms, clothing, and appointments
are not so delivered up by him, or such money is not paid by him, then,
without prejudice to any proceeding or remedy against him, he may, under
an order of the Commandant, if it seems fit, be put under stoppages of any
pay or allowances receivable by him, or both, until the value of such arms,
clothing, or appointments not so delivered up, or such money (as the case
may be) is fully paid.
252. No member of a rifle corps shall be entitled to receive a uniform
unless and until he shall pass in squad drill and manual and firing exercises
in a similar way to that prescribed for recruits for the Defence Force.
253. To be classified as efficient, the following duties must be performed
by a member of a volunteer rifle corps in each year: —
(a.) Go through the same course of musketry as that prescribed for
members of corps of the Defence Force similarly armed, and also
attend—
(b.) (i.) Two battalion parades (if ordered).
(n). Two parades for official inspection (if ordered).
(m.) Eight other parades.
(iv). Twelve other cither parades or drills.
30


In the definition of an efficient, a parade shall mean an assembly of a corps
under arms in the open air, at which not less than 50 per cent, of the enrolled
members are present for a period of one hour at least.
A drill shall mean an assembly of a corps for drill, at which not less
than 25 per cent, of the members are present for one hour.
Attendance in camp may be counted towards efficiency at the rate of
two parades or drills for each day in camp.
In the case of mounted corps, eight open-air parades must be mounted
parades.
Officers commanding rifle corps may not return in any one month more
than four parades or four drills ordered by themselves. For the purpose of
inspection parades the Commandant may order other parades of corps in
addition to the four specified in this regulation.
A battalion parade shall mean an assemblage of a Volunteer Eifle Corps
in conjunction with one or more other Volunteer Eifle Corps or corps of the
Defence Force.
254. Volunteers joining after Ist July in any year must attend a propor-
tionate number of parades or drills for efficiency; but those joining after Ist
April cannot classify as efficients for that year.
255. At the commencement of each year the officer commanding a Volun-
teer Eifle Corps will bo credited for each member classified as efficient for the
preceding year the sum of £2 10s., to be expended by such officer on behalf
of his corps on the following items, viz.:—
Uniforms.
Orderly Eoom.
Drill-shed and Gymnasium.
Armoury.
Ranges.
Expenses, incidental, to authorised target practice.
Repairs generally.
Advertisements and other necessary expenses of the corps.
256. In the event of any Volunteer Rifle Corps failing to be entitled to
the efficiency allowance for 50 per cent, of its establishment, such corps may
be disbanded.
257. Volunteers, members of mounted corps, will be entitled to receive
£1 annually, if efficient, and provided with suitable saddlery; this sum will
be in addition to the capitation allowance.
258. Any volunteer who was returned as a non-efficient in the last
annual return of the corps shall be liable to pay to the funds of the corps,
on or before the 30th September following, a sum equal to the amount of
the capitation allowance which he failed to earn; such sum will be a penalty
recoverable by the commanding officer under section 84 of the Act, and when
paid or recovered, will be dealt with as part of the capitation allowance.
259. Any member failing to qualify as efficient shall, in addition to the
liability for payment of capitation grant above specified, be liable to be
removed from the corps by the Commandant, on the recommendation of the
officer commanding the same.
260. The sums due to Government for supplies of cloth, ammunition, or
other stores, and for repairs of arms, &c., will take precedence of other claims
to be paid out of the capitation grant.
261. Officers commanding rifle corps shall receive, for the purposes of
target practice during the course of musketry, 60 rounds of ball cartridge
for each man attending the course of musketry, which shall be used under
proper supervision; and they shall also be entitled to receive a further
31


quantity of ammunition equal to 30 rounds for cacli man who lias gone
through the musketry course, to be expended in such manner as the officer
commanding the corps shall think most desirable for improving the rillo
shooting of his corps. A full record of the expenditure of such ammunition
shall be returned to the Commandant in such manner as ho may from time
to time direct.
262. Officers commanding’ rifle corps arc responsible to Government
for the due custody and expenditure of the capitation grant, no portion of
which is to pass from their control or be expended, except by their direction.
The capitation grant shall bo kept as a special public bank account, and all
books and accounts connected with the expenditure thereof shall bo pro-
duced ivhen required to inspecting officers or such other persons as the Com-
mandant may direct. On the Ist day of August in each year an audited
balance-sheet of the past year’s receipts and expenditure, signed by the
commanding officer, and countersigned by one officer and non-commissioned
officer, must bo forwarded to the Commandant before the annual grant or
any portion thereof shall be issued. Surcharges, if any, for improper and
unauthorised expenditure will be deducted from the grant duo to each corps.
263. The Commandant is authorised to issue from time to time orders
for the general government, discipline, and management of rifle corps, and
for the due care and custody of arms, accoutrements, and other Government
property.
264. Any matter not referred to in these Ecgulations is to be dealt with
as nearly as possible in accordance with the “ Queen’s Ecgulations.”
265. No member of any rifle corps shall, except when called out for
active service in time of war or imminent danger thereof, be entitled to
receive any pay for his services.
266. The members of any rifle corps may, with the approval of the Com-
mandant, attend and take part in the duties at any encampment. The
expenses of their maintenance during such encampment will be borne by the
Government, and attendance at any such encampment may be allowed
towards the qualification for efficiency to the extent of counting each day’s
attendance in camp as two parades or drills.
267. Volunteer corps may be called out for actual military service in
the same way as corps of the Defence Force, and when so called out they
shall for the time being be entitled to pay at the same rates, and be subject
to the same laws as the Active Land Force, but will be entitled to be led
under their own officers.
268. With respect to the discipline of volunteer corps, the following
provisions shall take effect and bo in force while they arc not on actual
military service ;
(1) The senior officer in command shall have power, subject to the
approval of the commanding officer, to inflict any of the fines
mentioned in regulation No. 115 from ( a ) to (I) inclusive.
All fines imposed on members of a corps shall be entered in a book
kept under the orders of the commanding officer for that purpose.
All fines shall be paid on or before the Ist day of the month succeed-
ing that in which they have been incurred, and shall be collected
by one of the sergeants and paid by him to the commanding
officer.
No proceedings may be taken under the Act for recovery of fines
imposed on Volunteers under this regulation, but the non-pay-
ment of a fine shall bo sufficient cause lor dismissal under the
next following paragraph.


(2.) The commanding officer of a volunteer corps may discharge
' from the corps any volunteer, and strike him out of the muster-
roll, either for disobedience of orders by him while doing any
military duty with his corps, or for neglect of duty or miscon-
duct by him as a member of the corps, or for other sufficient
cause; the existence and sufficiency of such causes respectively
to be judged of by the commanding officer. The volunteer so
discharged shall nevertheless deliver up all public property,
or properly of the corps, and pay all money in the same way
as he is liable to do m voluntary retirement. But nothing
herein shall prevent His Excellency the Governor, as Her
Majesty’s representative, from signifying his pleasure in such
manner and giving such directions with respect tv any such
case of discharge as to His Excellency may appear just and
proper.
(3.) If any volunteer officer or man while under arms, or on march
or duly with the corps to which he belongs, or any portion
thereof, or while engaged in any military exercise or drill with
such corps or any portion thereof, or while wearing the clothing
or accoutrements of such corps, or going to or returning from
any place of exercise or assembly of such corps, disobeys any
lawful order of any officer under whose command he then is,
or is guilty of misconduct, the officer then in command of the
corps, or any superior officer under whose command the corps
then is, may order the offender, if an officer, into arrest, and if
not an officer, into the custody of any volunteer belonging to
the corps; but so that the offender be not kept in such arrest
or custody longer than during the time of the corps, or such
portion thereof as aforesaid then remaining under arms or on
march or duty, or assembled or continuing engaged in any such
military exercise or drill as aforesaid.
(I.) When any corps or detachment of volunteers is assembled for
the purpose of being trained and exercised with the Defence
Force, the volunteers will, for the time being, be subject to the
same laws as the Defence Force, although not entitled to any
pay.
(5.) When any volunteer shall with Ids own consent bo attached to
or doing duty with any body of the Defence Force, whether
he shall be in receipt of pay or otherwise, he shall be, for the
time being, subject to the same laws as members of the Defence
Force.
(6.) Sections 41, 6(5, and 67 of “ The Defence Act,” and the follow-
ing Eegulations as to discipline shall apply also to volunteers,
viz., Nos. 94 to 106 inclusive, and Nos. 108 to 114 inclusive,
and No. 115 as above-mentioned.
269. The Governor may at any time assemble a court of inquiry to
inquire into any matter relative to a volunteer corps, and to record the facts
and circumstances ascertained on such inquiry, and, if required, to report on
the same, for the information and assistance cf His Excellency ; such court,
when the inquiry is with reference to an officer, to be composed of volunteer
officers, and in other cases to bo composed either of officers and volunteers
belonging to the corps, or of such officers or of such volunteers.
270. The commanding officer of a volunteer corps may at any time
assemble a court of inquiry, composed either of officers and volunteers
c
33


belonging to- the corps, or of such officers or of such volunteers, to inquire
into any matter relative to the corps, or to any volunteer belonging thereto,
and to record the facts and circumstances ascertained on such inquiry, and,
if required, to report on the same, for the information and assistance of the
commanding officer; but nothing herein shall authorise any inquiry with
reference to an officer otherwise than in accordance with the last preceding
regulation.
271. The majority of the members of a volunteer corps present at any
special meeting of the corps (to be convened by the commanding officer for
the purpose on not less than seven days’ notice by advertisement in some
local newspaper) may make by-laws for the management of the affairs of the
corps ; but no such by-laws shall have any force or effect until the same
have been submitted by the officer commanding the corps, through the Com-
mandant, to the Governor, and a notification of his approval has been
published in the Gazette.
SECTION XXXIV.
RIFLE CLUBS.
372. Rifle clubs may be formed for tbo encouragement of rifle shooting
throughout flic colony, and will be supplied with rifles and ammunition in
accordance with these Regulations.
273. Before any rifle club can be formed under these Regulations the
names of not less than twenty men over the age of 18, wishing to form the
club, must be sent to head-quarters, together with a copy of the rules under
which it is proposed to form the club. (A model set of rules may be obtained
at head-quarters.) The list of names and copy of rules will bo submitted
by the Commandant to the Governor for his approval; and in case of such
approval being signified by notice in the Gazette, the club shall be thereby
duly formed.
27-1. The rules of every rifle club must provide for the election of a
president, and the office of president must always bo filled up. The property
of the club will be vested in the President in a similar manner to that in
which corps property is vested in the commanding officer. The President
will bo considered the representative officer of the club in all matters of
correspondence with the Commandant. He will have power to maintain order
and discipline among the members of the club at all rifle or other meetings
thereof, and may impose any of the fines (7i), (J), and (k) mentioned m
regulation Ho. 115 which fines may be collected in a similar manner to that
prescribed in the case of Volunteer Rifle Corps. He will have power to make
such rules as from time to time may bo necessary for the proper care of
arms, expenditure of ammunition in rifle practice, and the furnishing of
correct returns, Ac.
275. The rides of a rifle club may be varied from time to time, with the
approval of the Governor, but in case the number of members is not main-
tained at twenty, the supply of ammunition may be stopped.
276. Members of rifle clubs, in order to classify as efficient within the
meaning of section 53 of “ The Defence Act,” so as to be exempt from
enrolment in the Defence Porce, must also be members of a Volunteer Rifle
Company, and come up to the standard of elGciency required therein, and
the standard of efficiency for members of rifle clubs is hereby prescribed
accordingly for the purposes of the said section. In time of war or invasion,
or danger of either, members of rifle clubs who have not classified as
efficient will be liable to be called upon to enrol themselves in some Volunteer
Rifle Company or Corps of the Defence Force, and will then be deemed to
be men drafted for service within the meaning of section 77 of the Act.
34


Rifles.
£
s.
d.
Snider
1
0
0
Martini-Henry
3
0
0
„ Carbine
3
5
0
Ammunition (boxes included).
Box of 560 rounds of Snider ...
1
10
0
,, GOO „ Martini-Henry ...
3
5
0
277. Any rifle club duly formed maybe supplied by Government with
rifles and ammunition on the following conditions :
278. Eilles and ammunition must be paid for before issue, at the
following prices (which are less than cost price)—
279. In case the rules of any rifle club provide for the rifles becoming
the propertj' of individual members of the club, such rifles shall not be sold
by such members except: —
(a) To another member of the club.
(4) Back again to the club.
280. Not less than one box of ammunition will be forwarded at any time.
281. Eifles and ammunition supplied by Government will bo delivered
carriage free at any railway station or port named by the President of the
club.
282. Where Government rifle ranges have, been constructed in the
vicinity of rifle clubs, arrangements will be made to allow clubs to use such
ranges.
283. Members of rifle clubs will be expected at all times to have their
arms in good order, and to be acquainted with the manual and firing exercises
for rifle battalions and squad drill. They will be inspected from time to
time by the Commandant or other officer deputed by him.
281. The rules of every rifle club will prescribe a standard of proficiency
for members to test tbeir fulfilment of the requirements of the last preceding
regulation, and a free issue of fifty rounds of ammunition will be granted
annually for each proficient member.
285. Twcnty-cigbt rounds of the free issue of ammunition must be
expended annually in a practice (to be called the annual course), consisting
of seven rounds at each of the ranges 200, 300, 500, and OIK) yards, with
Wimbledon scoring and targets.
286. On the Ist July in every year, the President of every rifle club must
forward to head-quarters a return of the members of the club, and a return
showing the manner in which the free issue of ammunition has been expended,
and a return < f the annual course, shot by shot.
■ 287. If the Commandant is satisfied that a rifle club is being carried on
in a satisfactory manner, he may recommend an allowance of ten shillings
per man being made by the Government tor prizes for rifle shooting.
288. Members of the Delencc Force, or of volunteer companies, or of
the Marine Force, may be enrolled as members of rifle clubs, but no
allowances of ammunition or prize money w ill be made on behalf of such
members.
SECTION XXXV.
CADET CORPS.
289. If arms and accoutrements are furnished to any school, they shall
be issued subject to the following Ecgulations, which arc applicable to all
Cadet Corps.
290. Cadet Corps may be formed of youths of twelve years ol age aud
upwards.
35


291. The members of a Cadet Corps shall not bo attested for service.
292. An officer of a Cadet Corps may bo appointed with an acting com-
mission as a volunteer officer, and he may bo given a permanent commission
if he passes the required examination, and will rank with other volunteer
officers according to the date of his appointment or commission respectively.
293. Ho Cadet Corps shall be formed unless forty members can bo
enrolled, and prior to the acceptance of service a guarantee must be given
that due care will be taken of such Government stores as shall bo issued,
and that payment will be made of such charges as may bo assessed on
behalf of the Government against such corps on account of loss, damage, or
destruction.
294. Cadet Corps will only be formed in connection with schools and
colleges or similar institutions.
295. The sum of 15s. may be drawn by the Officer Commanding a Cadet
Corps, in aid of the first supply of uniform to a cadet.
SECTION XXXVI.
PERMANENT FORCE.
The following .Regulations under the above heading apply only to the
Permanent Force; —
206. The Permanent Force shall consist of one Battery of Garrison
Artillery, to be called “A” Battery, Permanent Force (which may be
abbreviated to “ A ” Battery), with a proportion of troop and draught horses,
for the purpose of instruction in mounted and battery drill.
297. The strength of the battery and the numbers of officers, non-
commissioned officers, and men of other corps of the Defence Force to be
attached for instruction shall be such as may from time to time be authorised
by the Governor, hot exceeding the limit prescribed by the Act.
298. “A” Battery will be under the command of a chief instructor
with the rank of major, and the title of Major Commanding “A” Battery,
lie will be directly under the orders of the Commandant, and his duties will
be as follows :
(1) He is charged with the command of “A” Battery and of all
officers, non-commissioned officers, and men attached thereto, and
will enforce strict discipline amongst all under his command.
(2) He will be responsible for keeping “A” Battery at all times
thoroughly efficient as a garrison battery, notwithstanding the
variety of duties which the members may have to perform.
(3) Ho will pay the closest possible attention to the drill of all under
his command, and will be especially particular in seeing that all
officers and non-commissioned officers are practised in instructing
recruit squads.
(4) He will, under the direction of the Commandant, supervise the
drill and practice of batteries of the Defence Force other than
“ A ” Battery.
(5) He will carefully check all expenditure connected with “A”
Battery and all returns connected with pay or stores.
(0) He will make requisitions from time to time for such ammunition
and stores as may bo required to complete the equipment of “ A”
Battery, and to provide for practice of the artillery of the
Defence Force generally.
36


(7) lie will take charge of the fort and armament at Lytton, and he
responsible that it is at all times in an efficient state and ready for
service.
(8) He will perform such other duties as the Commandant may from
time to time direct.
299. “A ” Battery, Permanent Force, shall have a service roll in a
similar form to that before prescribed for other corps of the Defence Force.
The Governor may authorise the employment of “ A ” Battery, or any
portion thereof, beyond the limits of Queensland.
300. The major commanding “A” Battery, upon his appointment to
command, whether he has been previously sworn or not, shall take the oath
of allegiance in the form prescribed by the Act and sign the service roll of
“A” Battery, describing himself therein as Major Commanding, and shall
fill in the required particulars in the presence of a justice of the peace, who
shall sign the service roll as witness.
301. Every other officer on appointment to, and every man on enlistment
in, “A” Battery shall sign the service roll and take the oath of allegiance
either before the Major Commanding or before a justice of the peace, and
the required particulars shall be filled in at the time of signature.
302. Officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of other corps of the
Defence Force when attached to “A” Battery for purposes of instruction
will not sign the service roll of “ A ” Battery or take the oath afresh.
303. Non-commissioned officers and men of “A” Battery will receive a
free kit and uniform on joining, and will be provided with fuel, light, barrack
accommodation, and free rations of bread, meat, and groceries.
304. The various articles included in the kit and uniform and the detail
of the daily rations will be published in General Orders.
305. Ilecruits for “A” Battery may be kept on probation for one month
prior to their signing the service roll and receiving the free kit and uniform.
Before being taken on probation they shall take the oath of allegiance and
sign an undertaking in the form following:—■
188
I, A.B. hereby declare that I have taken the oath of allegiance
to the Sovereign, and I hereby voluntarily agree to servo as a recruit for “A”
Battery, Permanent Force of the Defence Force of Queensland, for a period of ono
calendar month from the date hereof, under the conditions contained in “ The
Defence Act of 1884,” and in any regulations which may be made thereunder. And
I further agree to bo bound by the several provisions of the said Act, and of any
Act amending the same, and by all regulations made thereunder respectively. And
I further agree to enlist in “A” Battery, Permanent Force, and sign the service
roll thereof, if required so to do, at any time within the said month, by the olllccr
commanding.
306. The major commanding “ A ” Battery will take the opportunity of
the month’s probation to form an opinion of the value of the recruit, and
will either discharge him or enrol him in “A ” Battery at his discretion. In
the case of recruits thus enrolled their service will commence from the date:
on which they signed the above agreement.
307. "While serving under the above agreement recruits will be provided
with fuel, light, barrack accommodation, free rations, and pay on the scale
prescribed for gunners ; but they may be discharged at any time on twenty-
four hours’ notice, and will not be entitled to any pay after the expiration of
such notice.
37


308. The pay of the various ranks will be as follows :
Major Commanding ... ... ... ... £550 per annum
Captain ... ... ... ... ... ... 14s. per diem
Lieutenant ... ... ... ... ... 10s. „
Battery Sergeant-Major... ... ... ... paid on Permanent Staff
Quartern last or-Sergeant... ... ... ... ss. 6d. per diem
Sergeant ... ... ... ... ... ... -Is. Od. „
Corporal ... ... ... ... ... ... 3s. 6d. „
Bombardier ... ... ... ... ... 3s. Od. ~
Trumpeter, Gunner, or Driver ... ... ... 2s. 3d „
309. Officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of other corns joining
“ A ” Battery for courses of instruction will receive pay at the above rates.
310. The period for which men are to be enlisted in the Permanent Force
is defined by the Act to be three years, but with - a view to training efficient
officers and non-commissioned officers for the instruction of the Force at
large, the Major Commanding “A” Battery may, with the approval of the
Commandant, allow officers and non-commissioned officers who evince special
aptitude for imparting instruction to remain in “A” Battery for such periods
as may be considered advisable; but no excess of the authorised establish-
ment must occur without the sanction of the Minister.
311. Under special circumstances, to be approved by the Commandant,
discharge may bo allowed from “ A ” Battery before the completion of the
terra of three years. Men obtaining discharge under this clause, or being
discharged for inefficiency or misconduct, will be required to pay back to
Government the sums stated below to defray a portion of the cost of uniform
and free kit, viz.:—
Under one year’s service, £5.
Over one year and under two years, £3.
Over two years and under three years, £l.
312. Officers, non-commissioned officers, and men who complete three
years’ service, and are permitted to remain on, may at any time thereafter
bo permitted to retire or obtain their discharge on giving ono month’s
notice in writing to the major commanding “A” Battery, and repaying the
proportionate amount of the value of any uniform, Ac., issued to them.
313. Officers’ and sergeants’ messes will be established, and officers and
sergeants of other corps of the Defence Force joining “ A” Battery for
instruction, and officers and sergeants of the Permanent Staff shall be
members of such messes respectively.
314. Entrance subscriptions, and monthly contributions to officers’ and
sergeants' messes will be fixed on the general principles laid down in the
Queen’s Regulations; but officers and sergeants of other corps of the Defence
Force joining for courses of instruction shall not be charged entrance fees.
315. A mess allowance of £5 per quarter for the sergeants’ mess, and of
£l2 10s. per quarter for the officers’ mess may be drawn at the end of every
quarter by the major commanding “A” Battery on his certificate counter-
signed by the Commandant.
310. A canteen will be established in the barracks.
317. Although “A” Battery is organised as a battery of artillery, and
must at all times be thoroughly efficient tbereas, the officers and non-
commissioned officers will be expected to be able to instruct members of
other branches of the Defence Force. Those attached specially to the
mounted portion of “A” Battery must be available for affording instruction
to field artillery, mounted infantry, and other mounted corps.
38


318. Detailed arrangements will be published in General Orders with
regard to the attendance of all ranks of the Defence Force for long or short
courses of instruction.
319. With respect to the discipline of “A” Battery and of those
attached for instruction it is prescribed that, in lieu of the fines awarded by
the Queen’s Eegulations for drunkenness, the following scale of fines will be
observed; —
s. d.
For a first instance of drunkenness a fine of ... ... ... ... 2 G
For the second instance, if it occurs within three months of the first*. 5 0
For a third instance occurring within three months of the pre-
ceding instance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Wherever an instance of drunkenness occurs, and there has been an interval
of three months since the last offence, it will be treated as a first offence
except for the purpose of the following rule, viz.—when four instances for
drunkenness are recorded against a man within one year he shall be dismissed
the Force.
320. Leave of absence may be granted to officers, non-commissioned
officers, and men of “ A ” Battery, provided no extra expense to the public
is thereby incurred. Officers and non-commissioned officers, to obtain leave,
must give in the name of some suitable person to act for them and perform
such duties as may bo necessary during their absence.
321. As a rule, leave will only bo granted during the summer at the time
when parades and drills are generally suspended.
SECTION XXXVII.
PERMANENT FORCE RESERVE.
322. The reserve pay to be received by men drafted into the Permanent
Force Eescrvo will be according to the rank in the Permanent Force at the
time of being drafted into the reserve, at the following rates, viz.: —
Trumpeter, Gunner or Driver ... ... ... ... £5 per annum.
Bombardier ... ... ...' ... ... ... ... G ~
Corporal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 „
Sergeant ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 „
The above rates of reserve pay will be payable in arrear for each year ending-
30th June. But it will not bo phyable unless the reserve man classifies as
efficient in the corps (if any) of the Defence Force in which ho is serving, or
in the case of a man not serving in any corps, unless he serves annually for
not less than eight days’ continuous training with the Permanent Force, or
some other corps of the Defence Force appoin'ed by the Commandant for
the purpose.
323. Men of the Permanent Force Eeserve will be bound to rejoin the
Permanent Force at any time when called upon to do so within one year
from their last receipt of reserve pay by notice from the Commandant
requiring them to rejoin; such notice shall be sufficiently notified to all whom
it may concern by publication in the Gazette and in such newspapers as
the Minister shall direct;. Men failing to obey the notice will bo treated as
deserters.
SECTION XXXVIII.
HEAD-QUAETEES’ BAND.
324. Tlic Head-quarters’ Band will be directly under the orders of the
Commandant, and will be available for duty with any corps of the Defence
Force.
39


Colonel
£ s.
... 2 12
d.
G
Lieutenant-Colonel
... 2 2
G
Major ■
... 1 11
6
Captain
... 1 1
0
Lieutenant ...
... 0 10
6
325. When the Head-qnirlers’ Band has been ordered to attend any
drill or parade of any part of the Force, it will be under the orders of the
senior combatant officer present, in uniform, until the parade is dismissed.
320. The members of the baud will be attached, for purposes of drill
and discipline, to “A ” Battery, Permanent Force, and the Major Com-
manding will be the commanding officer of the band within the meaning of
the Act.
327. To qualify' as efficients, bandsmen must perform eighty-four hours’
drill in the year.
328. There will bo an evening band practice for one and a-half hours
every week. Pay will be allowed for one-half the total number of attendances
at these practices, and the time devoted to them will bo counted towards
efficiency.
329. In addition to pay for practices, according to the last preceding
regulation, bandsmen will be entitled to pay, according to their rank, for all
parades attended by order of the Commandant, without’regard to the total
number attended during the year.
330. Whenever permission has been given for the band to play at any'
concert or entertainment, the bandsmen will appear in uniform.
331. Whenever the band has been ordered out by the Commandant for
any purpose in uniform, and also during the weekly practice, it will be con-
sidered to be on duty for the time being.
SECTION XXXIX.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
332. A deduction of £2 10s. per annum will bo made from the contingent
allowance of each corps in the Brisbane Regimental Division in aid of the
Head-quarters’ Band.
333. All officers residing in the Brisbane Regimental Division, whether
staff, regimental, departmental, or unattached, shall pay the following annual
subscriptions in support of the Head-Quarters’ band, viz.:—
Departmental officers in accordance with relative rank.
334. Subscriptions will be payable in advance each year.
SECTION XL.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
335. When the Governor has appointed that any corps shall be established
in any place, he may appoint a fit person to act as recruiting officer of
the corps.
33t3. When a larger number of men volunteer to servo in any such corps
than is appointed by the Governor, the recruiting officer shall use his discre-
tion in choosing out of them those whom he may consider best suited for
service.
337. When a roll is to be made out for any military division the enrolment
officer shall advertise the fact in some local newspaper, and any person
claiming exemption from service must send in notice in writing of his claim
to the enrolment officer within the time im ntioned in the advertisement, or
40


in default will bo liable to bo placed on the roll as not exempt. When a
.claim to exemption is made out to the satisfaction of the enrolment officer,
he shall exclude the name of the exempted person from the roll, or place it
thereon with a note of exemption according to the class of exemption. Any
enrolment officer may exclude the name of any man from the roll upon any
evidence which he may think sufficient, or upon his own knowledge of the
fact that the man is entitled to exemption. In case of the refusal of an
enrolment officer to allow a claim to exemption there shall be an appeal to
two justices of the peace, but until such appeal shall bo decided the name
shall remain on the roll and the man be liable to be balloted.
338. Whenever in times of war or invasion, or danger of either, it shall
be necessary to hold a ballot under the provisions of the Act, it is hereby
prescribed that such ballot shall be taken in the following manner :
The ballot shall be taken in the presence of three magistrates (of
whom the police magistrate or the mayor or other chief officer
of the place shall be one) and of such number of men liable to
be balloted as the presiding magistrate may allow, according to
the space at his disposal.
In the case of a ballot for men to serve in an existing corps the
commanding officer will be present; in other cases the recruiting
officer will be present.
The presiding magistrate will give such public notice by advertisement
or otherwise as he may think best, of the time and place for the
ballot, and of the number of men liable to bo balloted who will be
admitted.
Two scrutineers will bo appointed, one by the men present liable to
be balloted, and tbe commanding officer or recruiting officer as
the case may be, or some other person to be specially appointed,
will act as scrutineer on behalf of Her Majesty.
The presiding magistrate will bo responsible for conducting the ballot
in accordance with the Act, and in such a manner as to produce
an impartial result.
339. In the case of men disabled on service and reported on by a medical
board as entitled to compensation, each case will be dealt with on its indi-
vidual merits by the Minister.
SECTION XLI.
CANTEENS.
340. The Commandant, with the approval of the Minister, may establish
any canteen or canteens which he may deem necessary for the use of mem-
bers of tiie Def ence Force and of Volunteer hide Corps.
341. The Commandant may place any such canteen under the care and
management of such person or persons as he may think lit, and may make
rules for conducting the same.
342. Subject to the terms of the Order establishing any canteen and of
any General Order relating thereto, it shall bo lawful for the person in
charge to sell exclusively to members of the Defence Force or of Volunteer
Hide Companies any spirituous or fermented liquors.
343. Every canteen will bo under the control of the officer commanding
the Force for whoso use the canteen is established, and the person in charge
thereof will obey all orders of such officer, and will be liable to a penalty
not exceeding £2O in case of disobedience.
41


SECTION XLII.
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE VOLUN
TEER FORCE EXISTING UNDER THE REPEALED ACT.
311. All officers holding commissions in the Volunteer Force existing
under the repealed Act who elect to remain in the Defence Force will
receive fresh commissions, hut their seniorit}' will be reckoned according to
the dates of their commissions in the late Force.
315. Officers holding honorary commissions in the late Force will receive
appointments as acting officers in the Defence Force, and will be deemed
to have been acting officers in the late Force during the time they held hon-
orary commissions therein.
316. The unpaid volunteer staff will not be reconstituted under “ The
Defence Act,” but officers of that staff, as well as officers on the unattached
list of the late Force, will be placed on the unattached list, to be constituted
under “ The DefenceAct,” if they signify their desire to that effect in accordance
with the General Order issued on the subject.
347. Payments for drills performed between 30th Juno and 31st Decem-
ber, 1884, will be made in accordance with the Regulations under the repealed
Act, but the new system of pay will come into force from Ist January, 1883.
348. Members of corps existing under the repealed Act who do not
retire from the Defence Force under the 11th section of “ The Defence Act,”
may qualify as “efficients” or “extra efficients” for the year ending 30th
Juno, 1883, by complying with the Regulations for efficiency or extra
efficiency hereby established; but they will only bo required to perform a
total of seventy-eight hours’ drill during such year for purposes of efficiency,
or a total of ninety-six hours for extra efficiency.
349. Recruits attested between 30th Juno and 31st December, 1884,
may classify as “ efficient ” by performing a proportionate amount of drill in
accordance with Clause 155, a further deduction of six hours being made in
each case.
350. Any recruits who may be attested between the Ist March and Ist
April, 1885, may qualify as efficient for the year ending 30th June, 1885, by
fulfilling all the requirements of these Regulations, except that the total
number of drills required will be only 54 hours.
351. Recruits attested between 31st December, 1884, and Ist April, 1885,
may count all their recruit drills for purposes of pay and efficiency.
353. All half-day parades attended during the time between 30th June,
1884, and the date of these Regulations may be counted as three hours’
drill, and all evening drills, whether moonlight parades, recruit drills, or
drills known under the old system as unpaid drills, as one hour and a-ha!f’s
drill, whatever may have in fact been the length of such drills respectively.
353. Members of existing corps who intend to remain members of the
Defence Force are required by the Act to sign the new Service Roll of their
corps, and they should do so on or before 23rd March, 1885, and a note
will be added showing the date of their original attestation in the Volunteer
Force, and the number of years of service completed by them before 30th
June, 1884.
354. Men who do not retire from their corps before the expiration of
three months from the passing of “ The Defence Act ” (i.e., before the 23rd
March, 1885) will be bound by the Act.
355. Men who avail themselves of the opportunity of retiring given them
by the 11th section of the Act must, on the expiration of their fourteen
42


(lays’ notice, send in all uniform, arms, and equipment which they have
received, or, if they neglect to do so, will he liable to the penalty imposed
by section 43 of the Act.
35G. With respect to officers and men who do not retire from (he Force
under the provisions of the Act, the following provisions shall take effect:—
(«.) All non-commissioned officers and men who were serving in the
late Force on 22nd December, 1884, will continue to draw their
deferred pay annually—that is to say, £2 10s. at the end of each
year, if “ efficient,” and £1 more each year if “ extra efficient.”
(b.) Men who, on the 22nd December, 1884, had completed a period of
three or more years’ service in the Volunteer Force, shall be
entitled to stand in the same position as men who have completed
a first period of three years’ service in the Defence Force, and
then re-sign the ServiceEoll in accordance with these Regulations,
(c.) Men who, on the 22nd December, 1884, had not completed a period
of three years’ service in the late Volunteer Force, will engage to
complete throe years’ service as if they had been attested under
“ The Defence Act" (except in regard to deferred pay, as above
provided for).
{(I.) Officers who held commissions in the late Force shall be entitled,
on the 30th June, 1885, to draw a sum by way of deferred pay
equal to half the amount set down for their respective ranks in
the Regulations under the repealed Act, but shall not be entitled
to any deferred pay thereafter.
357. Existing rifle clubs may bo constituted as rifle clubs under section
53 of “ The Defence Act” on the receipt by the Commandant of a written
undertaking signed by a majority of the members of such club (not being
less than twenty in number) to the following effect :
We, whose names are hereunder written, agree to serve in the
Rifle Club, on the conditions laid down in section 53 of “ The Defence Act of 1 SBt,”
and in any regulations made thereunder. And we further agree to be bound
by the several provisions relating to rifle clubs in the said Act contained, and
contained in any Act amending the same, and by all regulations made thereunder
respectively.
The rules of the Club must he submitted to the Governor for his sanction.
358. Gentlemen holding acting appointments as officers of the Force at
the time of the publication of these Regulations must, before 31st Decem-
ber, 1885, pass the examination prescribed for their respective ranks, except
that Acting Captains appointed after Ist July, 1883, will be allowed till 30th
June, 188 G, te pass the examination prescribed for Captains.
43


APPENDIX A.
SYLLABUS OF SUBJECTS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF OFFICERS
FOR PROMOTION.
A.—REGIMENTAL DUTIES.
All Amis.
The examination on this subject will be by written questions.
Acting-Lieutenant to be Lieutenant.
Lieutenant to be Captain.
1. Duties of regimental orderly officer.
2. Defence Act and Regulations.
Captain to be Major.
Discipline and duties per Regulations and Queen’s Regulations, as applicable to
Defence Force.
B.—DRILL.
The examination in this subject will be divided into two parts, one part will be
practical in the field viva race questions, the other by written questions set by the
Board. The knowledge of each candidate in drill is to be tested practically on parade,
and, in addition to giving the words of command, the candidate is to be required,
in respect of his own arm of the service, to give the explanation of the exercise or
manoeuvre about to be performed to the men on parade in a clear and audible manner.
The Board will enumerate in their report the manoeuvres and exercises performed,
and will state clearly their opinion of the candidate’s proficiency, whether he is
a good, bad, or indifferent drill.
Acting-Lieutenant to be Lieutenant.
Mounted Infantry.
Practical acquaintance with carbine exercise (manual and firing) and mounted
infantry drill.
Garrison and Field Artillery.
1. Practical examination in drilling with a company in close order.
2. Practical acquaintance with the rifle exercise (manual and firing), carbine
exercise for field artillery.
3. Practical acquaintance with drills of the guns in use in the corps.
4. General knowledge of ammunition and stores, and carriages for the same.
Engineers.
The same as for Artillery 1 and 2.
Infantry.
1. Practical examination in drilling with a company.
2. Duties of commander of a guard, and mode of marching reliefs and posting
sentries.
3. Practical knowledge of the rifle exercise (manual and firing).
4. Knowledge of, and competency to, superintend target practice.
44


Lieutenant to he Captain.
Mounted Infantry.
1. Practical examination in drilling mounted infantry Company (mounted and dis-
mounted), and drill of an infantry company.
2. Riding.
3. Practical acquaintance with carbine exercise (manual and firing).
4. Duties and_ formation of advanced and rear guards, and reconnoitring an enemy.
5. Aiming drill and orders at the firing point; knowledge of and competency to
superintend target practice.
Field and Garrison Artillery.
As for lieutenant with, in addition, field battery drill (company in battalion for
garrison artillery), and range finding, mounting and dismounting guns.
Engineers.
1. Practical examination in drilling a company in close and extended order and in
battalion.
2. Duties of a commander of a guard, mode of marching reliefs, and posting
sentries.
3. Practical knowledge of the rifle exercise (manual and firing).
Infantry.
1. Practical examination in drilling a company in close and extended order.
2. Command of a company in battalion.
3. Duties of a commander of a guard, and mode of marching reliefs and posting
sentries.
4. Practical knowledge of the rifle exercises (manual and firing), aiming and posi-
tion drill, and blank firing.
5. Knowledge of, and competency to superintend, target practice.
(!. Battalion drill (including extended order).
7. Shelter trench exercise.
Captain to be Major.
Mounted Infantry.
As for captain; and, in addition, battalion drill, in close and extended order;
range finding.
Field and Garrison Artillery'.
As for captain, including battalion drill; measurement of distances by means of
pocket sextant; range finding.
Engineers.
As for captain, including battalion drill and measurement of distances by means
of pocket sextant; range finding.
Infantry.
As for captain ; range finding.
All Arms.
Command of a small mixed force practically in the field.
C.—MILITARY LAW.
All Arms.
Acting. Lieutenant to be Lieutenant.
Defence Act and Regulations.
Lieutenant to be Captain-Captain to be Major.
1. Defence Act and Regulations. •
2. Army Act and Queen’s Regulations as applicable to Defence Force.


TX—DUTIES IN THK FIELD.
(Practical in the Field, and by written questions.)
Lieutenant to he Captain.
Mounted Infantry and Infantry.
Hasty entrenchments —
1. Shelter trenches and pits.
2. Gun and rifle pits.
Field and Garrison Artillery,
1. Nature of guns now in the service of the Colony.
2. Thickness of earth parapets to resist penetration.
3. Projectiles in use for the guns in the Colony.
4. Hasty Entrenchments —
1. Shelter trenches and pits.
2. Gun and rifle pits.
5. Knotting and lashing of spars.
Engineers.
(Hasty entrenchments.
* ( Obstacles.
2 f Field level.
* ( Boning and levelling.
3. Gabions and fascines.
4. Revetments.
5. Field works.
n (Improvised field defences.
* t Defence of posts,
and any two of the following subjects which the candidate may select.
7. Batteries,
o f Communications.
‘ 1 Cordage and use of spars.
9. Trestle and frame bridges.
10. Cask bridges.
jl f Camp and bivouacs.
* I Water supply.
Captain to he Major.
Mounted Infantry, Artillery, and Infantry.
1. Hasty entrenchments —
(1.) Shelter trenches and pits.
(2.) Gun and rifle pits.
2. Obstacles.
3. Gabions, fascines, cordage, and the use of ropes.
4. Knotting and lashing of spars.
Engineers.
As for Captain, and, in addition, road surveying with prismatic compass.
General Examination for rank of Field Officer.
In addition to the foregoing. Captains of all arms, before promotion to
Major, will be examined in—
1. Field fortification —
Its object and general principles.
Technical terms.
Penetration of musketry,
And field guns in use.
46


2. Improvised field defences—
Defensible hedges and walls.
Embankments, cuttings, and roads.
Stockades, tambours, &c.
3. Defence and attack of houses —
General principles.
Details of defence and attack.
4. Ability to read a military map, and mark thereon the ground to be occupied
by a small mixed-force for the defence of a certain position, or as an outpost of a
larger force.
All mounted and field officers must pass in riding.
By Authority: Jaaiks C. Beal, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane,
47
