

REGULATION S
OP THE
| erntoijg Joining
GOLD MINING DISTRICT A,
UNDER
“ Northern Territory Gold Mining Act, 1873.”
PALMERSTON, NOVEMBER 27, 1886.
Palmerston :
“ NORTHERN TERRITORY TIMES AND GAZETTE ” OFFICE.
1887.


'F'lSh^s


SU 7. *7O
NORTHERN TERRITORY
jBoAHD iSB I ].
At a meeting of the Mining Board, District A, in the Northern
Territory of South Australia, begun and holden at Grove Hill, on
Saturday the 27th day of November, 1886, the said Mining Board
made and passed the following Regulations numbered from 1 to 101,
both numbers inclusive, and the Schedules thereto, numbered from
1 to 20,both numbers inclusive, as follows, that is to say :
Regulations for mining for gold in the Northern Territory of
South Australia made by the Mining Board under the provisions of the
“ Northern Territory Gold Mining Act, 1873,”
Interpretation of Terms*
1. In the construction, and for the purposes of these Regulations,
and of the Schedules hereto, the following terms in inverted commas
shall have the respective meanings hereby assigned to them, unless
there is anything in the subject matter or context repugnant to such
construction (that is to say)—*
“ Business”—The selling or disposition of any chattels by hawking, or
in any other manner, except the hawking of farm or garden produce.
“ Claim”—The portion of Crown Land which any person or number of
persons shall lawfully have taken possession of, and be entitled to
occupy by virtue of his miner’s right or their miners’ rights ; for the
purpose of mining therein for gold, or any number of such portions law-
fully amalgamated by the holders.
“ Person”—-The holder of a miner’s right or business license issued
under the provisions of the Northern Territory “ Gold Mining Act,
1873.”
“ Miner ” —The holder of a miner’s right issued under the provisions
of the Northern Territory “ Gold Mining Act, 1873.
“ Efficiently worked or efficiently employed”—Working on or in con-
nection with a mining tenement on every lawful working day. as provided
by these Regulations.
“Schedule”—The respective Schedule referred to oy number of the
Schedules hereto.
“ Mining Registrar ” shall mean the Warden appointed from time to
time by the Government Resident.
“The Warden ” shall mean the Warden of the gold district wherein the
claim respecting which these Regulations apply shall be situated.
“ Mining Tenement ” —Any holding of whatever kind lawfully held
and enjoyed under these Regulations.


“ Mining Purposes”—-The purpose of obtaining gold by any mode or
method, and of stacking or otherwise storing any substance for the
purpose of obtaining gold.
“ 10. Mine.”—To disturb, remove, cart, carry, wash, sift, smelt, refine,
crush, or otherwise to deal with any substance by any mode or method
whatever for the purpose obtaining gold therefrom.
Gold As well any gold as any substance containing gold, or
having gold mixed therewith, or set apart for the purpose of extracting
gold therefrom.
“ Clear Days.” The days exclusive of the day from which or on which
any act is to be done.
“ Race”-—A channel for conveying water for mining purposes.
“ Camp ” —The residence of one or more persons.
The singular number shall, unless inconsistent with the context,
include the plural, and vice versa , and the masculine gender the
feminine gender.
Repeal of Existing Regulations.
2. From and after the time of the commencement of these regula-
tions, the Regulations and Schedules thereto made by the Mining Board,
and in force from the Ist day of January, 1885, shall be and the same
are hereby repealed : Provided that such repealing of the said Regula-
tions and Schedules shall not in any way injuriously affect any existing
right, interest, or privilege lawfully held under the said Regulations
hereby repealed, nor effect any proceeding, matter or thing lawfully
taken, done, or commenced thereunder.
DIVISION I.
“ Alluvial ” —*• Prospecting Areas and Claims .”
3. “ Prospecting ” shall mean searching for any new discovery of
gold in the manner hereinafter provided. “Prospecting Area” shall
mean the defined area of ground to which any prospector shall be
entitled to mark off to search for gold therein.
“ Prospecting Claim ”
Shall mean the defined area of ground to which any prospector
shall be entitled to within his protection area, as a reward for the dis-
covery and reporting of payable gold.
Protection Area, Size and Form.
4. Any miner shall be entitled to mark off and hold a protection
area of the following dimensions—
Half a mile and under 1 mile from the
nearest gold workings
One mile and under two miles
Two miles and under three miles
Three „ „ „ five „
Dive „ „ „ ten „
Ten miles and over
150 yds. by 150 yds.
200 „ „ 200 „
300 „ „ 300 „
400 „ „ 400 „
500 „ „ 500 „
800 „ „ 800 „


Protection Area must be Worked.
5. Every protection area shall be efficiently worked from the time
of marking off such area until payable gold shall have been discovered
therein, or until it shall have been abandoned.
Discovery of Gold must he Reported.
6. Within seven (7) clear days after the finding of gold in appar-
ently payable quantities within any protection area, the holder shall
report the said finding at the Warden’s Office under pain of forfeiture
of such area, and such report shall be in the form or to the effect of
Schedule I. The Warden shall then proceed to the ground, and if
sufficient gold has been found to warrant it he shall allot the prospectors
a reward claim in addition to the number of ordinary claims to which
they would otherwise be entitled.
Notice of Discovery to he Posted.
7. Upon receipt by the Mining Registrar or Warden of the report
mentioned in Regulation 6, a copy thereof shall forthwith be posted
outside the office of the Mining Registrar or Warden, for public
information.
Protection Area must he Marked and Registered.
8. All protection areas must be marked at each corner with a post
standing three feet above ground, and four inches in diameter, such
posts to be kept uncovered, and set in | trenches, three feet long and
six inches deep, and such marking shall be deemed a sufficient title
for seven clear days, subject to the labour conditions, after which time
all protection areas must be registered. Such registration must be
renewed monthly, but the Warden may, by a certificate, exempt for a
specified period any prospecting area from the necessity of such renewal,
and a notice shall be posted on some conspicuous part of the area with
the names of the holders, the numbers and dates of their miners’ rights,
the date on which the area was taken up, and the date of registration
and of renewal thereof (if any)or certificate of exemption from renewal
of registration.
Mode of taking Possession of a Claim.
9. Any miner desirous of taking possession of a claim shall com-
pletely and accurately define the same at the time of taking possession
thereof, and for the purpose of taking possession shall fix a post not
less than four (4) inches in diameter, and not less than three feet above
the ground, and cut an | trench not less than six (6) inches deep and
three feet long at each corner, or each angle, i.e., three feet on each side
of the post along each boundary line of any such claim, and such posts
and trenches shall be kept erected and well-defined by the holders of
the claim during their occupancy. Provided that when registration
is required such miner shall, within seven (7) days after such
marking, make application in the form of schedule 2 to the Warden.
The Warden shall thereupon issue to the applicant a certificate in the
form of schedule 3, who shall within twenty-four hours from the receipt,
cause it to be posted on some conspicuous part of the ground applied


for, and a copy thereof at the Warden’s office, for a period of six clear
days. If no objection be lodged against such application within such
period, the applicant shall be entitled to be registered for the claim by
the Warden, who shall thereupon give a certificate in the form of
schedule 4. Should, however, any objection be lodged within the time
specified, he shall defer registration until the matter has been heard
and determined, and thereafter be guided by the evidence submitted to
him, or the order of the Wardens’ Court. Provided also except in
ordinary alluvial claims, the pegs of which shall be of the following
dimensions—-not less than one inch in diameter, and not less than two
feet above the ground, and shall be kept erected during the occupancy
of such claim; such ordinary alluvial claim need not be registered.
Alluvial Claims. Reward Claims.
10. The size of reward claims which shall be given for the
discovery of payable gold shall be in the proportion to the distance from
the nearest occupied gold workings of the same description, and shall
be of the following dimensions
One half-mile
One mile
Two miles
Pive miles
Ten miles
Two men’s ground
Three „ „
Four „ „
feix ~ ~
Ten „ „
The above reward shall be in addition to the number of claims to which
the party would be otherwise entitled in ordinary alluvial claims, and
may be marked off in one block in any rectangular shape at the option
of the prospectors, provided that no side of the block shall be less than
100 feet.
Ordinary Alluvial Claims.
11. Ordinary alluvial claims shall be :
For one man ... ... 100 feet by 100 feet
„ two men ... ... 200 ~ ~ „
„ three men ... ... 300 „ „ „
„ four men ... ... 400 „ „ „
Provided that the claim of each party shall be a rectangular block, no
side of which shall be less than 100 feet, and such claim shall be
efficiently worked forty-eight hours after being marked off, and there-
after any share in a claim remaining unworked for three clear working
days shall be deemed forfeited.
DIVISION 11.
QUARTZ CLAIMS.
Definition.
12. The term Quartz Claim, shall mean any vein, reef, or substance
containing gold other than alluvial.
Prospecting Protection Area
13. The protection Area allowed to any miner seeking for any new
and unworked reef or vein, shall be double the length of the prospecting
claim to which he would be entitled under Regulation 14 and during


the period the said area is being worked the holder shall be protected
in the occupation thereof, and entitled to a reward claim within such
area.
Reward Claims.
14. The reward claim which shall be given for the discovery of gold
in apparently payable quantities on any new reef shall be in
proportion to the distance from any reef being worked and as follows—
-400 yards... ... ... 150 feet along the line of reefs
800 „ ... ... 200 , „
1 mile ... ... ... 300 ~ „
3,, ... ... ... 500 „ „ „ ~
5 750
JJ ••• ••• 1 >5 }> »
10 „ 1000 „ „ „
Ordinary Quart z Claims.
15. The extent allowed for each miner in any ordinary quartz
claim shall be 150 feet along the supposed line of reef by a width of six
hundred feet (600). The width of all quartz claims must be marked off
at right angles to the base line, but the whole or any part of such width
may be marked on either side of such line, at the option of the
shareholders.
To he Registered,
16. In all quartz claims the names of the shareholders and numbers
of their miner’s rights under which the claim is held, as also the name of
the reef upon which it is situated, and the number of the claim must be
registered in a book to be kept by the Warden, and a copy of the entry
must always be kept posted at or near as possible to the working shaft.
Working, Discovery of Gold, Reporting.
17. Regulations 6 7 8 and 9 shall apply to all “protection areas,”
and “ quartz claims” held under Regulations 13 and 15.
Size of Ordinary Quartz Claims .
18. Ordinary quartz claims shall not exceed four men’s ground.
Mode of Application for an Unoccupied Claim or Share Liable
to Forfeiture.
19. Whenever under these Regulations an unoccupied claim or
share in an unoccupied claim is liable to forfeiture, any miner may
apply for possession of such claim or share therein by posting a notice in
writing in the form of Schedule 5 hereto annexed at, or as near as possible
to, the working shaft of such claim and at the Warden’s Office, and serving
a copy thereof mi the holder of such claim or share, or his agent. If
no objection be lodged within six clear days (6) of the posting and
service of such notices the Warden shall (if requested) register the
claim or share for the applicant.
Any person objecting to such registration must within six clear
working days hereinbefore mentioned, lodge a written notice of
objection with the Warden stating the grounds of such objection, upon
receipt of which the Warden shall defer registration until the matter
has been heard and determined, and shall thereafter be guided by the
evidence submitted to him, or by the order of the Warden’s Court.


DIVISION 111.
Water Rights—Definition.
20. “ A water right ” shall mean the right to collect, store, divert>
and convey any or all of them for mining purposes, water from any
source in the manner herinafter provided.
Mode of Application.
21. Any miner intending to divert and use water for mining or
general purposes, or to out a race, or construct dams, or reservoirs in
connection therewith, shall give notice in writing thereof to the Warden,
and such notice shall set forth the source from which the water is to be
obtained, and describe with sufficient accuracy the point at which it is
to be diverted or used; the quantity in sluice heads required; the num-
ber of dams (if any) in which such water is to be stored, and their
situation ; the probable length of the race; its intended course and
termination, and the names of the applicants, and copies of such notice
shall be kept posted for six (6) clear working days at the Warden’s
Office, at the source from which the water is to be obtained, at the pro-
posed termination of the race, and on the site of any proposed dam or
reservoir, and if no valid objection be lodged at the expiration of six (6)
clear working days, the Warden shall grant the required permission.
Heads of Water.—Horn Gauged.
22. A box sluice-head shall be a body of water one (1) inch by
twelve (12) inches; a ground sluice-head shall be a body of water three
(3) inches by twelve (12) inches, and shall be gauged in the following
manner:—A box six (6) feet long, and twelve (12) inches in width,
with a scale of inches marked on the inner side at the lower end, shall
be placed at the head of the race, having a fall not exceeding six (6)
inches in the entire length of it, and the gauge of water shall be taken
at the mouth of the box where the water is discharged.
Quantity of Water Tahen and Left Running.
23. The quantity of water to which any person shall be entitled
under one water right for sluicing purposes on any claim shall not
exceed two ground sluice-heads; and in all river beds and running
creeks from which water is diverted for mining purposes, there shall be
left running at least one ground sluice-head for general use when re-
quired.
Priority of Water Rights.
24. The priority of water rights derived from common source shall
be determined by the date of grant and registration ; and in case of
failure of water supply, the person last registered shall forego his rights
during such failure of water, as against the person previously registered,
and so on in rotation as the supply diminishes; provided always that
the holder of a water right in the bed of a stream shall have a preference
over the holder of a water right whereby the water of such stream is
diverted from its natural course.
Water. — When Right Thereto C eases.
25. The right to any water under any water right shall terminate
whenever the water shall be discharged into any natural stream or
water-course after being used.


Water not to be Taken or Polluted.
26. No person shall take water from any race, clam, or reservoir,
without the consent of the owner, nor shall permit sludge or other
noxious matter to flow into or otherwise pollute the water in any dam,
race, or reservoir, nor shall injure the banks of any dam, reservoir, ©
race, or the works connected therewith.
Exemption from Use of Race.
27. The holder of any water right, or race, dam, or reservoir, in
connection therewith, desirous of retaining the same unused for any
longer period than fourteen (14) days, must post notices to that effect,
in writing on the said race, dam, or reservoir, and at the Warden’s
Office for six (fl) clear working days; and on good cause shown, and if
no valid objection be lodged, the Warden may issue a certificate of
exemption from use for a period not longer than six (6) months; and
register the same on receipt of the fee required.
j ßight to Cut R ace Anywhere .
28. Any party of miners may cut any race or drain for gold mining
purposes through any claim, or over or under any race or drain belong-
ing to any other party of miners, provided that no injury be done to
such claim, race, or drain, through or over or under which the first
mentioned race may be cut; and the original line of any race may be
altered or deviated from, by the consent of the Warden, if no prior
right be injured thereby.
Warden may Compel Repair ofHace.
29. When from imperfect construction or neglect, any race is in
such an inefficient state as to cause a waste of water, or to become a
nuisance to the public, the Warden may order the water at the head of
such race to be turned off until the defective portion is made good.
Bridging Hoads.
30. Whenever any race crosses any road or public footways, the
owner of such race shall construct and keep in repair a good and sub-
stantial bridge over the same, of the following dimensions : If over a
road—l2ft. in width ; if over a footway—6ft. in width.
Dams or Heservoirs.
• 31. Any miner intending to construct a dam or reservoir to collect
and store water therein for mining or general purposes, may make
application to the Warden in the form of Schedule 6 hereunto annexed,
describing with sufficient accuracy the site of the proposed dam or
reservoir, and the watersheds from which the water is to be collected.
Copies of such applications must be posted at the Warden’s Office, and
on the site of the proposed dam or reservoir for six (6) clear days. If
no valid objection be lodged during that period, the Warden may grant
the applicant authority to occupy the site applied for, and a right to cut
drains on the watersheds described, or such portions thereof as he may
think fit for the purpose of collecting the water therefrom; and the
applicant shall thereupon be deemed to have an exclusive right to such
water, provided no public interest or prior right is injured thereby.


Water for Domestic Use.
32. Any waterhole, spring, well, or abandoned reservoir, upon
application in writing to the Warden, signed by not less than six (6)
persons holding miner’s rights, or business licences, may be by him set
apart and reserved for domestic purposes, and no person shall use for
gold washing purposes, or waste, or by any means defile the water so
reserved, under a penalty of not less than live (£5) pounds.
Registration.
33. All water-rights races, dams or reservoirs, shares therein, and
any transfer of such water-right, race, dam or reservoir, or share therein
shall be registered with the Mining Registrar.
DIVISION IV.
Puddling Claims.
34. A puddling claim may be taken up on alluvial ground which
has been previously worked and abandoned, or on ground which
has been tested, and found to be too poor to pay for the ordinary method
of working, such ground to be worked in connection with a puddling
machine, and must be registered.
35. The size of claims allowed shall be 150 feet by 150 feet, for
every man employed on the claim, or at the puddling machine, or in
connection therewith, provided that in no case shall one claim exceed
six (6) mens ground.
DIVISION V.
Business and Residence Area.
36. When any gold deposit shall have been discovered likely to
be extensive, the Warden after gold shall have been reported, as pro-
vided by these regulations shall report to the Government Resident the
best site for a township, and reserves for public purposes ; the site to be
chosen in a position not likely to be auriferous,
37. The holder of a business licence, or miner’s right, shall with
the consent of the Warden as to the locality, be entitled to occupy for
the purpose of business or residence, an area of land not exceeding one
quarter of an acre, the frontage of which to any main thoroughfare,
creek, or waterhole, shall not exceed sixty-six (66) feet by a depth not
exceeding 165 feet, and every such area must be registered at the War-
den’s Office. Provided such registration may be cancelled should the
holder cease to occupy such area without first registering the same as
exempt from the conditions of occupation.
Business and Residence Areas may he registered as exempt from
occupation.
38. The holder of any business or residence area upon which
there are substantial improvements of the value of five pounds (£5),
may, upon application to the Warden, and upon payment of the fee
required, have such area registered as exempt from the condition of
occupation for any period not exceeding six months ; such registration


talay be renewed upon payment of a like fee. The holder of a miner’s
right shall be allowed to hold only one residence area.
Business and Residence At'eas to he kept clean .
39. The holder of any business or residence area shall keep the
same in such a state of cleanliness so as not to become a nuisance to his
neighbours or the public ; and shall make and maintain the necessary
drains, and keep them clear and free from all obstructions.
Warden to order remova l of camps.
40. The Warden shall have power to order and enforce the re
moval of any camp that may in his opinion pollute the supply of water
being used for domestic purposes, and shall then and there choose a site
for such camp, and any person refusing or neglecting (after notice to
remove the said camp has been given) shall be liable to a penalty of not
less than live pounds (£5).
Machine Areas *
41. Applications for machine areas with particulars of machinery
proposed to be erected, must be made in writing to the Warden after
the ground has been marked, accompanied with a sketch plan thereof
and a copy of such application must be posted on the ground on which
it is proposed to erect the machinery, as well as at the Warden’s Office for
six (6) clear days before the hearing of the application. If no valid
objection be lodged, the Warden may grant permission to occupy an
area not exceeding ten (10) acres and register the same • any such per-
mission to occupy may be cancelled should the holder fail to commence
the erection of machinery thereon within one (1) month (which may be
extended at the Wardens discretion on cause being shown) from the
date of permission to occupy or should the machinery thereon be
entirely removed.
Area for Stacking Tailings.
42. Application may be made to the Warden after the ground
has been marked for an area not exceeding five (5) acres for the purpose
of stacking tailings, by posting a notice of application on the ground,
and at the Warden’s Office, with a description of the ground applied for
six (6) clear days before the hearing. The Warden may, if no valid
objection be lodged, grant the application, and register the same upon
receipt of twelve month’s rent in advance. Provided that the Warden
may cancel such registration, should the holder not use the area in a
bona fide manner for stacking tailings for six months, or the annual
rent not be paid yearly in advance.
DIVISION VI.
TUNNELLING CLAIMS.
Tunnel Workings.
43. Any miner, for the purpose of working any mining tenement
by means of a tunnel to be driven from the surface, shall be entitled to
hold for that purpose, in addition to the mining tenement, a width of
twenty (20) feet on each side, measuring from the centre of the tunnel
from its commencement, to its junction with the mining tenement
proposed to be so worked. Any miner taking possession of an area


for a tunnel as aforesaid, shall place firmly in the ground every twenty
yards along the centre of the proposed course of such tunnel, posts not
less than four (4) inches in diameter, and projecting not less than three
(3) feet above the surface, and shall post a notice of application in the
form of schedule 2 in a conspicuous place upon such area, and a copy
of such notice shall be posted at the Warden’s office ; and if within
seven days thereafter no objection shall have been lodged against the
same, a certificate of title therefore shall be issued.
Protection to Tunnels.
44. Any miner or miners shall drive their tunnels within their
own parallels, as defined on the surface, but two or more miners may,
by agreement, registered by the Warden, use the same tunnel or any
portion thereof for the purpose of working their claims, separately or
conjointly. Twenty (20) feet of ground on each side of any tunnel, or
portion of a tunnel which may be outside of any claim held in con-
nection herewith, shall be protected from occupation.
Area for Depositing Quartz, Publish, &e.
45. An area of two hundred (200) feet square will be allowed at
the mouth of any tunnel, or for every claim using a common tunnel for
the purpose of depositing quartz or rubbish.
DIVISION VII.
RIVER AND CREEK CLAIMS,
Size of Claims.
46. One hundred feet frontage in the general direction of the
course of the stream, will be allowed each miner in the creek or river,,
with a width from bank to bank, unless such width should exceed one
hundred (100) yards, in which case the excess may be claimed by any
other miner. All claims taken up under this Regulation must be
registered.
Dam may he constructed.
47. Any holder of a river or creek claim may construct dams
within his claim for the purpose of turning water into his flood-race, on
the condition that his clams are only of such a height, and at such a
distance according to the natural fall of water from his upper'
boundary as in no way to interfere with the natural level of the stream
above his claim, and he may extend such flood-race for such a distance
beyond his claim as may be necessary for the effectual working of the
same, provided no other claim be injured thereby. In cases of dispute
in all running streams, the level of running water at the upper boundary
to be considered the natural level, and the Warden may order any darn
to be lowered or altogether removed if he deem it necessary for the
purpose of this clause.
DIVISION VIII.
GENERAL REGULATIONS. ,
Boundary Posts and Marks:
48. Claims, leasehold, business, residence, and machine areas, and
all authorised holdings must be marked at each corner, with a post four


laches in diameter fixed firmly in, and standing at least three (3) feet
above the ground, and the owner or any shareholder thereof shall point
Out the corner posts and boundary lines of any such claim or other
authorised holding to any person requiring to know the same, and no
person shall remove, injure, or obliterate any boundary posts or marks
of any claim or other authorised holding, or any posted notice relating
thereto.
Taking forcible possession a forfeiture of rights.
49. Any miner taking forcible possession of any claim or share
therein, or commencing to work the same after his right to take pos-
session thereof has been disputed, shall forfeit all right and title which
he may have acquired to the possession of such claim or share.
Marking too much Ground.
50. Any miner marking off’ more ground than he is entitled to,
shall be liable to have the surplus ground pegged off at either end of the
claim, at the option of any other miner applying to the Warden for the
surplus.
Non-registration not to he deemed a breach of Regulations if
caused by neglect of Mining Registrar.
51. The holders of all claims or other authorised mining tenements,
for which registration is required, must apply to the Warden for regis-
tration of the same within eight (8) clear working days, from the date
of their being entitled to such registration. Provided that non-registra-
tion within the prescribed time shall not be deemed a breach of these
regulations, if good cause be shown for such delay to the satisfaction of
the Warden, nor shall any penalty be inflicted for the non-performance
within the prescribed time of any act required by these Regulations, to
be done by the holder of any such claim or mining tenement, if such
holder can prove that the non-performance as aforesaid was caused by
the Mining Registrar or Warden, or from any circumstance over which
he had no control.
Rides and Agreements to be Binding.
52. All rules and agreements entered into by a majority of at least
two-thirds in number and interest of the shareholders of any claim or
leasehold for the management and working thereof shall be binding on
the shareholders therein, provided such rules and agreements are not
contrary to these Regulations.
All such rules and agreements shall be registered by filing a copy
signed by the parties or their agents at the Warden’s Office, and pay-
ment of the fee required by Schedule (20) hereto annexed, and such
rules or agreements may be abolished or amended at any time by a like
majority of the shareholders in any such claim or leasehold.
Claims Continuously Worked. Exceptions.
53. Claims must be continuously worked by the requisite number
of men within two clear working days after they have been marked off',
otherwise the share or shares unworked shall be liable to forfeiture, am’
thereafter any share in a claim remaining unworked for three clet
working days shall be liable to forfeiture. Provided that no mine
interest in any claim shall be liable to forfeiture under this regula J


if he be employed at any necessary work in connection with it, or if his
absence he caused through sickness, attendance at a court of justice, a,
general cessation from work through floods or rain, or on any public
holidays, or on holidays proclaimed by the Warden.
Exemption from Work in Case of Necessity .
54, The Warden may grant a certificate of exemption from work* ,
ing for any period not exceeding thirty days, renewable from time to
time for a like period at his discretion, in cases where he is satisfied
either that the persons claiming such exemption from work ate
incapacitated from working through accident or sickness, or that the
breaking down or the absence of machinery, or superabundance of or
want of water, to justify such exemption, and the Warden shall hear
and determine any objection to granting or renewing such certificate.
Exemption from Work ,
55. The owners of any registered claim may apply to the Warden
after having posted a copy of the application in the form of Schedule 7
hereto annexed, at the Warden’s Office, and on the claim six clear work
ing days prior to the day of hearing the application by the Warden, to
have the claim registered or exempt from work for a period not exceed-
ing six months, and provided that it has been duly registered and con-
tinuously worked for the preceding six months, the Warden may grant
the exemption in the form of schedule 8 applied for upon receipt of the
fee required.
The Warden shall hear and determine in open Court all applications
for exemption from work, and objections thereto, and may grant the
exemption applied for, upon terms as to bailing or any other conditions
he may deem necessary. Any failure to comply with such terms or
conditions shall be deemed a forfeiture of the exemption.
False Representation.
56. Any person who shall by false representation or fraudulent
concealment of facts obtain registration of any mining or other interest
or who shall by such means obtain a certificate of exemption from work
or occupation of business or residence area, shall be liable to forfeit his
share of the property in respect of which such registration or certificate
of exemption has been so obtained.
Roads Across Claims, fyc.
57. When requisite for the efficient working of any claim, lease-
hold, or machine, or for any public interest, any miner shall be entitled
to make a road, tramway, or any other mode of conveying material o\ ci
any gully, creek, claim, or leasehold, residence, business, machine, oi
other authorized holding. Provided that compensation be paid for the
removal of, or injury caused to, any improvements thereon.
Shafts and Holes near Roads to he Secured.
58. Any miner having a shaft within fifteen (15) feet of a public
road in ordinary use, shall securely fence or log the same,
and any miner abandoning any such shaft or hole shall
first either fill up or securely fence or log the same or in some
other way make it safe in a permanent manner, and no person snail
throw down or remove therefrom any fence or timber, or other material
placed for such purpose, or at any time wilfully injure or destroy any


shaft, drive, or other workings in any mine so as to prevent or impede
the further workings of such mine or any adjacent ground, under a.
penalty not exceeding ten (10) pounds.
No Injury Permitted to Claims or Roads.
59. No person shall cause or permit sludge, tailings, or water to
accupiulate in or flow from his claim, leasehold, reservoir, dam, machine
area, or other authorized holding, so as to cause danger, injury or
obstruction to any public road or any danger, inconvenience,
or damage to any public or private interest.
Unauthorised Shafts? &c.
60, No person shall sink any shaft, or disturb the surface of the
ground, or erect works, or deposit earth, stone, or other material in any
place so as to interfere with the supply of water used by the public, or
so as to obstruct a public thoroughfare ; and no person shall undermine
any road in such a manner as to endanger the public safety.
Liability to Penalty for Allowing Work in Insecure Shafts, Etc.
61. Whenever the Warden has reason to believe, or upon report
being made to him that the shaft or underground workings of any claim
or lease hold are unsafe through insufficient timbering or any other
cause, so that loss of life or bodily injury may be occasioned thereby, he
shall cause an examination of such shaft or workings to be made by two
competent miners, and upon their report the Warden may order the
owner of such claim or leasehold to do within a specified time whatever
may be considered necessary to remove the cause of danger, and may
prohibit any other work being done in such claim or leasehold until the
game has been made safe as ordered.
Accidents to he Reported.
62. In the case of any accident in connection with mining, whereby
loss of life or serious bodily injury has been occasioned, the mining
manager or other person in charge of the mine or other works, or some
one of the shareholders, shall immediately report at the Warden’s Office
the nature of the accident, and the Warden shall cause an inspection to
be made of the mine or other works where the accident occurred, by two
competent persons, and proceed to hold an inquiry into the nature and
cause of the accident, and shall forward a copy of the evidence taken at
such enquiry, with his report thereon, to the Government Resident.
Profs of Timber not to he Removed, or Ventilation Obstructed
without Consent.
63. The owners of any claim or leasehold shall not remove any
props or timber in their claim or leasehold, the removal of which may
endanger the workings of any other claims or leaseholds, and whenever
the underground workings of two or more claims or leaseholds, or of a
claim or leasehold communicate with each other, so as to afford the
means of ventilation, such ventilation shall not be obstructed by the
owner of any claim or leasehold without the consent of the owner of any
claim or leasehold affected thereby.
What considered a sufficient working.
64. A claim or leasehold shall be considered effectively worked
when eight (8) hours hondfde work is performed thereon by the com-


plement of men required by these Regulations, on every working d’ky
except Saturday, when four (4) hours work shall be considered sufficient..
Share not to ht declared abandoned through absence from sickness ..
65. When a shareholder in any claim shall absent himself from his
work through sickness, accident, death, or lunacy, his share-shall not be
liable to be declared abandoned through such absence, but in all cases
of absence, his partner in such claim may, if he think fit, hire in his
place any competent miner, in the event of the absentee failing to
provide an efficient substitute ; and such absentee shareholder shall be
responsible to his partner or trustees in the claim for any reasonable
wage due to the person so employed, and for his share of the working
expenses of such claim.
Abandonment of Shares in Claims.
66, Any shareholder in a registered claim wishing to abandon his
share therein, may do so by serving on one of the remaining share-
holders or his agent a notice to that effect (and if there be a lien on
such share, then serving a like notice on the lienee), and posting a copy
thereof at the Warden’s Office, and on the claim \ in such case the
Warden, after satisfying himself that the notices have been served and
posted in manner aforesaid, shall forthwith cancel the registration by
which such share has been held, and the said shareholder shall there-
upon be released from any further liability in respect of such share
thereafter incurred, and any applicant for such abandoned share may at
once be registered for the same without process of any kind beyond his
written application. Provided that the lienee, if any, shall have for
three clear working days after abandonment a. preferent right to be so
registered for the abandoned share. On failure of the lienee to avail
himself of such preferent right, the lien shall be cancelled, and the
remaining shareholders shall thereupon- have jointly a preferent right
for three (3) clear days to be registered for the abandoned share.
Claim not to be forfeited through absence of hired men without due
notice to owner.
67. If any miner who is employed to represent a share in a regis-
tered claim absent himself from such claim, or otherwise- neglect to
represent such share, unknown to the owner thereof, the same shall not
be forfeited unless it remains unrepresented for six (6) clear working
days after notice of such absence or neglect has been served on the
owner or his agent.
Quartz, Earth, &c., Stacked u Protected
68. Any miner having forfeited or abandoned his claim, or share
in a claim, shall be at liberty to retain possession of any stone or earth,
or other substance containing gold, the produce of such claim or share
in a claim, that may have been raised at the time of the forfeiture or
abandonment, provided such stone, earth, or other substance shall be
stacked on ground nob interfering with the working of the claim. And
the Warden shall, upon application being made to him, and upon
receipt of the fee required, register the same as the property of such
miner for any period not exceeding twelve months. A copy of such
registration, in the form of Schedule No. 9 shall be affixed on the stack,.


&nd no person during the period of such registration shall remove the
-said stack of Stone, earth, or other substance, or any of it, without the
permission of the owner thereof.
Mining Plant not to he forfeited with Claim or Leasehold.
69. The tools, appliances, and mining plant on or in connection
with any forfeited claim or leasehold, shall not be forfeited therewith;
provided always they are removed from the claim or leasehold within
one week from the declaration of the forfeiture, or within such reason-
able time as the Warden may direct at the time of the declaration of
the forfeiture of a share in ,a claim or leasehold, or within three (3) clear
days thereafter, the Warden or the Warden and assessors who tried the
case shall assess and declare the value of the forfeiting shareholder’s
interest in the tools, miner’s plant, and appliances used in or in con-
nection with the said claim or leasehold, and within six (6) clear
working days after the declaration of such forfeiture, the incoming
shareholder shall pay into the Warden’s Court the full amount of such
value for the use of the owner of such share; in default thereof the
share may be granted to any other miner applying for the same, and
paying into the Warden’s Court the assessed value of the forfeiting,
sliareholder’s interest in the tools, &c.
Compensation.
70. Any business, residence, or machine area or site occupied by
any dam, water-race, reservoir, tramway, and for stacking tailings or
any other authorised holding in actual occupation, may be mined upon,
provided the miners intending to mine thereon shall, before commencing
work, compensate the owner thereof for any loss, damage, or injury to
the improvements thereon that may be sustained by him in consequence
thereof. The amount of such compensation may be determined by the
Warden, or the Warden and Assessors.
Provision in case of Death or Lunacy.
71. Upon the death of the holder of any mining tenement or
interest therein his interest may be held in reserve and unworked for
twenty-eight days thereafter, and upon the lunacy of the holder of any
mining tenement or interest therein, the remaining shareholders may
manage such interest until it shall have been transferred to duly author-
ised Trustees as provided for in Clause 65 of these Regulations,
Interest of a Defaulting Shareholder to he Sold hy Auction.
72. The non-payment of any shareholder in a claim or leasehold
(when no deed of partnership exists) of calls made on him for the pur-
pose of defraying the working expenses of such claim or leasehold, shall
entitle the other shareholders to a preferent lien upon the defaulting
shareholder’s interest in the claim or leasehold in which such expenses
are owing, until the calls are paid.
Whenever any calls remain unpaid upon any share in a claim or
leasehold (when no deed of partnership exists) from a period of one month
from the call being due, a majority in number and interest of the share-
holders who have paid their calls, may request the Warden to enquire into
the matter, and if he is satisfied that such sum is legally due on such
share, he shall cause it to be sold by auction, of which sale due notice
shall be given by advertisement in any local newspaper, and the pro-
ceeds shall be applied to the payment of all legal expenses incurred by


the process, and the calls due on such share, and the residue, if any,
shall be paid to the late owner of the share, and the Warden shall
register such share without further process, in the name of the pur-
chaser thereof.
Plurality of Shares.
73. Any miner may hold more than one claim or share in a claim,
provided that each and every such claim or Share shall be fully repre-
sented by labour in accordance with these Regulations.
Transfers.
74. The holder of any registered claim Or share therein, any
registered business, residence, machine, or any other registered holding
under the Northern Territory Gold Mining Act of 1873, or these Regu-
lations, or any interest therein, or the registered holder of any lien
thereon, may in the form of Schedule 10 transfer the same after having
posted a notice of his intention to do so at the Warden’s Office and on
the area or other registered holding aforesaid, for three (3) clear working
days, and upon production at the Warden’s Office of his certificate of
registration, transfer certificate on lien ticket (or declaration of loss
thereof) and upon payment of the fee required ; and the Warden shall
issue to the transferee a transfer certificate, in the form of Schedule
11, and the transferree shall be liable for all encumbrances, agreements,
and conditions registered against the property so transferred.
A malgama tion.
75. Two or more contiguous claims may, upon application being
made to the Warden in the form of Schedule 12 with the consent of a
two-thirds majority in number and interest of the shareholders of each
such claim, respectively be united ; provided that the conditions of the
separate claims shall, in the aggregate, apply to the amalgamated claims ;
and the Warden shall grant a certificate of amalgamation in the form of
Schedule 13, and shall register the same Upon receipt of the fee re-
quired.
Shares may he treated and Increased
76. The registered holder of any mining tenement may in the form
of Schedule 14 create such, and so many shares therein as they may think
fit ; and on such form, signed by all the registered holders or their
authorized agents, being lodged with the Warden, the shares so created
shall be registered in the respective names of the holders, as set forth in
such form, and if demanded, share certificates shall therefore be issued
to such holders in the form of Schedule 15 and such certificates may
represent as many shares as such shareholders may desire; and such
shares may from time to time be increased in the same manner as here-
in created : Provided that no new share certificate shall be issued until
the original shall have been returned to the Warden and cancelled.
Liens , Etc., How Effected.
-77. The holder of any claim, leasehold, business residence, or
machine area, or any authorised holding whatever, or any share or
interest therein, held under “ The Northern Territory Gold Mining
Act of 1873,” or these Regulations, may give a lien upon the same as
security for the due payment of any debt; and upon the production to
the Warden of the miner’s rights of the lienor and lienee, and upon the
‘execution by the lienor, of a lien ticket duly attested in the form of


Schedule No. 16 hereto annexed, the Warden shall register a lien upon
the claim, or other authorised holding or share, or interest therein, and
shall then issue to the lienee a duplicate of the lien ticket, in the form
of Schedule 17, and every such lien registered: as aforesaid shall be a
specific charge uponi such' claim, or other authorised holding or share,
or' interest therein, until the debt has been paid in full and if more
than one lien has been effected on any claim, or other authorised hold-
ing, or share,, or interest therein, such liens shall take precedence
according to the date of their respective registrations.. Provided that,
upon the delivery to the Warden by the lienor of a certificate duly
signed by the lien, and attested, that the debt or liability for which
such lien was held has; been fully discharged, the Warden shall forth-
with cancel such Men. In the event of such Menor- failing to redeem
such claim, or other authorised holding or shares or interest therein,
at the time appointed, the lienee may cause the same to be sold by auc-
tion, after having advertised his intention of so doing in a local news-
paper, and posted’ a copy of such advertisement on a conspicuous part
of the claim, not less than seven days before the day of sale. And the
lienee shall stand possessed of the proceeds of such sale, upon trust, to
pay all costs consequent on such default, then to pay the debt secured
by the lien, and: to pay the balance, if any, to. the lienor- The lienor
shall be entitled to redeem at any time before sale, upon payment of
debt and expenses incurred; but in case of any sale under the powers here-
in contained,, the Warden shall, upon production of the lien ticket,
accompanied by a statutary declaration of default having been made
of the money secured thereby, and the miner’s right of the purchaser,
register such purchaser' as the holder of such claim! or other authorised
holding, or share, or interest therein, in lieu of the lienor. A lienee
shall not, by virtue of the lien, be held to be a co-partner in any claim,
leasehold, or other authorised holding, on any share in which he holds
a lien. The fee for registration of any lien shall be as required by
Schedule No. 20 hereto annexed-
Declaration of Loss of Miner r s Right , Certificate of Registration
Lien Ticket, or Transfer Certificate-
-78. When any miner has lost his miner's right, certificate of regis-
tration, transfer certificate, or lien ticket, he may make a declaration
of such loss in the form of Schedule 18, hereto annexed, before a
Warden or Justice of the Peace, and such declaration shall be received
at the Warden’s Office in lieu thereof for all the purposes required in
making a transfer, on payment of the fee required for filing the same.
Holidays.
79. Miners may be absent from their claims on any and all the
following days :—From Good Friday to Easter Tuesday, both inclusive ;
From 20th December to Ist January, both inclusive; on any day on
which the election of a member of the Legislative Assembly is held for
the district in which such goldfield may be situated, and on any public
holiday.
Examination of Registers by Owners and others.
80. Any registered shareholder of a claim, leasehold, or other-
authorised holding, or any registered lienee on any such holding, may,
upon application at the Warden’s Office, examine the register so far as


it relates thereto ; and any person may examine the register at the
Warden’s Office of any claims, leaseholds, or other holdings, upon, pay-
ment of the fee required.
Agents to he appointed .
81. Any person holding any share in any mining, tenement or
other authorised holding under “ The Northern Territory Goldfields-
Act of 1873,” or these regulations, shall, in the event of being absent
for a longer period than twenty-eight (28) days from the goldfield on
which such share is held, appoint an agent in the form of Schedule
19 hereunto annexed, whose acts shall be held as those of the principal,,
and the name and address of such agent shall be registered at the
Warden’s Office. In the event of such registration not being so made,
any notice, legal process, or document required by these Regulations to
be served, shall be deemed to have been sufficiently served upon such
absent person, provided a copy of such notice, process, or document be
posted for the period required by these Regulations at the W arden’s
Office, and on some conspicuous part of the mining tenement, or other
holding to which the same refers.
'Power to Warden to Fine Persons Mining Without Miner’s Eight.
82. If any person shall be found by the Warden to be
engaged in mining on any goldfield, without being able on demand to
produce his miner’s right, or without being able satisfactorily to account
to the Warden for not having a miner’s right, the Warden may inflict
a fine not exceeding ten (10) pounds, and forfeit any claim held by the
person mining without a miner’s right.
If any person shall occupy any waste lands of the Crown, within
any proclaimed goldfield, and carry on business thereon without having
a business licence empowering him in that behalf, he shall be liable to-
be fined by the Warden a sum not exceeding ten (10) pounds.
Boohs and Records, &c., to he hept.
83. There shall be kept such books and records as may be necessary
under these Regulations, and for the inspection by any person as
provided for by Regulation 89.
Penalties for Breach of Regulations.
84. Any person committing a breach of these Regulations, or
disobeying unlawful order of the Warden or the Warden’s Court, shall
for every such offence, for which a penalty is not otherwise specially
provided by “The Northern Territory Gold Mining Act of 1873 ” or
these Regulations, be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds (>£10)
Appointment of Assessors.
85, The warden shall in every year make or cause to be made a
list of persons not less than two hundred in number or of such a num-
ber under and as near two hundred as the population of the neighbour-
hood will permit of good repute and who shall be registered claim-
holders machine owners lease-holders or holders of business licenses
resident within such gold field. From such list the warden shall select
by ballot in open court a list of one hundred persons which shall form
the roll of assessors for the current year. In all gold fields whereon
sittings of a district court are held the warden shall forthwith forward


a true copy of the said roll of .assessors to the registrar of the said dis-
trict court who shall file the same in his office.
Assessors to be summoned by Warden.
BG. It shall be lawful for either of the parties previous to the
hearing of any such complaint to require or for the warden either before
or during such hearing to require that such complaint shall be heard
before such warden and two assessors and tnereupon such waiden shall
summon before him either orally or in writing not less than six nor
more than eight persons who shall be selected by ballot in open court
from the names upon such roll as aforesaid or if there shall be no such
roll or if two persons whose names shall be on such roll cannot be found
then of two indifferent persons to act as such assessors who shall form
the panel of assessors.
Notice when assessors required.
87. Upon the requisition of either party to any cause that the
complaint should be heard by the warden and assessors the warden or
his clerk shall appoint a time and place at which the ballot for the panel
of assessors shall take place and notice thereof shall be given by the
party making such requisition to the opposite party and each party shall
be entitled to be present at such ballot. Provided that the warden
shall not summon to attend at any one sitting of the court more than
one panel of assessors which shall be the panel of assessors for all cases
to be heard on such day before the warden and assessors.
Fee for assessors.
88, Before any assessors shall be summoned by any warden such
warden shall demand and receive the sum of .£3 (three pounds) from the
person demanding assessors and in case the hearing of any complaint
shall be adjourned to any future day the warden shall demand and
receive the further sura of one pound ten shillings for every such ad-
journment and the said sums together with the amount of all fines on
assessors shall form a fund for paying the expenses of assessors to be
dealt with and accounted for as the Governor in Council may direct.
Fees to assessors.
80. Every assessor summoned as aforesaid who shall attend a
warden’s court in pursuance of such summons shall for every day of
such attendance be paid at the rate of ten (10) shillings a day.
Challenges.
90. Either party shall bo admitted to challenge any number of
persons called as accessors not exceeding two without assigning cause
and any additional number provided he assigns of his challenge a cause
certain and the truth of such challenges shall be inquired of by the
warden.
Fines for non-attendance.
91, Any person so summoned who without lawful excuse shall
neglect or refuse to attend or to be sworn or serve as such assessor shall
be fined such sum of money not exceeding five pounds as such warden
shall think fit.
Oath or affirmation to he administered hy Warden to Assessors.
92. Before such warden’s court shall proceed to hoar any such


complaint, such 'warden shall administer to each of such assessors an
oath in the following form — ' A „ ...
I A.B. do swear well and truly to try and determine the matters which
shall be brought before me and a true judgment to give according to the evidence
without fear or favour.
:So help me God,
And on such oath being administered such warden’s court shall proceed
to hear such complaint and the -decision of the majority of the said
warden’s court shall have the same force -and effect as the decision ot
such warden if acting alone would have had Provided that in the case
of any assessor who may by law make an affirmation in lieu of swear-
ing the warden shall in lieu nf the oath hereinbefore mentioned
administer the following declaration— ..
I A.B. do solemnly sincerely and truly affirm and declare that the taking
of an oath is according to my religious belief unlawful and i I,J° also» wiemny
sincerely and truly affirm and declare that I will well and truly try and deter-
mine the matters which shall be brought before me and a true judgment give
according to the evidence without fear or favor.
SCHEDULE No. 1.
Reporting New Discovery of Gold (See Regulation 6).
We, the undersigned hereby report to the Warden of the Division A of the
Minins District, that we did, on the day of i 8 make a
discovery of payable gold in prospecting protection area, the particulars
of which are as follows
2 The which the discovery was made is feet from the surface.
3! The yield of gold was ozs. dwts. grs., from
4 The discovered auriferous deposit-consists of a , _
And make this report, which we hereby certify to the best nf our know-
ledseto be true in every particular ; and we hereby request the said Warden to
post and give the necessary notices of the discovery aforesaid, in accordance
with Mining Regulations in force in that behalf.
Dated at , this day of , 18 -
The Person Reporting [ Miner’s Right.
Signature I Addresses No. of Date of
Endorsement,
Received the within report this day of 18 ,at the hour of
o’clock in the noon. Warden.
SCHEDULE No. 2.
Form of Application Mining Tenement. (See Regulation 9)
We, the undersigned hereby give notice to the Warden ofjhe Man g
We to„°,”tet e e possession of°a Mining Tenement situated
, • prvntainins more or less, in accordance with the regulations
SSSi by the Mining BoaS in the Northern Territory of South A«.t»H» under
the nrovisions of the “Northern Territory Gold Mining Act of 1873, and we
request the said Warden to proceed in the manner prescribed in the said Regu-
lations, to register our title to such Mining Tenement.
Signature of Address Mmer» Right^
Endorsement. ~, ,
Received the within application this day of > 18 » at the nOUr
of o’clock in the noon. Warden.


SCHEDULE No. 3.
Certificate d/ Application (See Rcgulaticm 9).
This is to certify that did this day of at the hour of
■o’clock .m., make application for a Mining Tenement containing situated
,to be held under the provisions of clause of the Regulations as
a and should no valid objection be lodged on or before the day of
next, the said person will be granted registration for the said tenement.
Given under my hand at Burrundie, this day of 18 .
W ardken.
Note. —This form to be posted on the ground applied for, and at the
W arden’s Office
SCHEDULE No. 4.
Certificate of Registration. (See Regulation 9.)
This is to certify that I have this day, at the hour of
■of the
X 1110 JLO UV LOIWUJ * , 1 _ - p
elock, in the noon, registered the name of
as the owner of a situated at
Given under my hand this daynf Warden
SCHEDULE No. 5.
Mode of Application for Abandoned Shares. (“See Regulation 19.)
j ; xgf , do hereby make application to the Warden of the
Mining District A to be registered for share in the claim the
said share being Abandoned by who is now the registered holder thereof.
Dated at thi “ ** * ’ Signature.
Miner’s Right.
Signature No. Date. w „ d e.’n Office,
18
I hereby give notice that in pursuance of the above application, I intend to
register as the first applicant for the share alleged to have been abandoned
by Provided that no valid objection be lodged with me within six clear
days from the posting and due service of this notice.
SCHEDULE No. 6.)
Application for Dam or Reservoir. (See Regulation 31.)
We the undersigned, hereby give notice that it is our intention to construct
a containing a superficial area of about and we intend
to apply to the Warden of the Mining District A, 6 clear days from this date to
register us as the owners of such.
Dated this day of ,18 ,at
Applicant Miner’s Right No, Date of
SCHEDULE No. 7.
Application for Exemption from Work. (See Regulation 55.)
We, the undersigned, shareholders in the do hereby give notice that,
after the expiration of six clear days from this date, we intend to apply for ex-
emption from work of the above for the period of calendar months
on the grounds following, viz. Signature. ....
Objections against the above application must be lodged at the Warden’s
Office on or before , the day of ,18 .


SCHEDULE No. 8.
Certificate of Registration for Suspension of Work of Claims. (See Regulation 55).
Notice is hereby given that I have this day of 18 , registered
the claim know and registered as for suspension of work under Regu-
lation No. 55, for a period of
The cause of suspension is
Dated at this day of 18 .
Warden.
Note. —To be posted on shaft or claim.
SCHEDULE Mo. 9.
Certificate of Registration of Stack of Quartz, Sfc. (See Regulation 68).
Under the provisions of the Mining Board Regulation No. 68, I have this day
registered as the property of the stack of on the claim known as
situated at , and, provided the conditions of the said Regulation are com-
plied with, no person shall remove the said or any part thereof, for a period
of months from the date hereof, without the permission in writing of the
said
Warden.
Dated at Burrundie, this day of 18
SCHEDULE No. 10.
Form of Transfer. (See Regulation 74).
I, of for valuable consideration, do hereby transfer to
of my situated subject to all and singular the terms and
conditions under which the said has been held by me ; and I, of
, do hereby accept the said subject to the terms and conditions
aforesaid.
Dated at Burrundie, this day of 18 .
Signature of Transferor.
Signature of Transferee.
SCHEDULE No. 11.
Certificate of Transfer. (See Regulation 74.)
No.
Certified that I have this day duly registered Transfer from of
to of claim situated at known and registered as
Dated at Burrundie, this day of 18 .
Warden.
SCHEDULE No. 12.
Application for Amalgamation. (See Regulation 75.)
We, the undersigned, being the registered holders of the undermentioned
claims, and situated at , hereby request the Warden of the Mining District
A to amalgamate the said claims as one claim under the style of under
Miners Rights.
Signature of Holders. | Name of Claims. | Miners Rights.
j —— j No _ | Date of
Dated this
day of
SCHEDULE No. 13.
Certificate, of Amalgamation. (See Regulation 75.)
This is to certify that I have the day of at the hour of m.
united as one claim under the style of the undermentioned claims, that
is to say :
Given under my hand at Burrundie this day of ,18 .
Warden.


SCHEDULE No. 14.
Creation and Registration of Shares. (See Regulation 70.)
I, (or we), the undersigned being the registered holder of
I, (or we), the undersigned being the registered holder of the Mining
Tenement numbered , situated at , hereby create shares
■in the said Mining Tenement, and apportion such shares- in the manner set forth
hereunder, and hereby request the Warden of the Mining District J\ to
register as the holder of the shares set opposite name.
Dated this day of ,18
Signature of Holders. Number of Shares apportioned Miner’s Right
to- each Holder. No. I Date-
Endorsement.
Received the within application creating shares in the Tenement, numbered
this day of , 18 -
Warden.
SCHEDULE No. 15.
Share Certificate. (See Regulation 76.)
This is to certify that , of , is tire holder of shares in
the Gold Mining Tenement , situated , and that beholds such
shares subject to prior rights, and to the Regulations made by the Mining Board
in the Northern Territory of South Australia, and by virtue of Miner’s Right
numbered , and dated , 18 .
Warden.
SCHEDULE No. 16.
Form of Lien Ticket. (See Regulation No. 77.)
I, of do hereby grant to of a lien upon my
share in a numbered situated as security for the payment on or
before the day of of the sum of £ being the amount due and
owing by me to the said ; and until the sum aforesaid shall have been paid
in full, I hereby engage and bind myself not to transfer or assign the said share,
or any portion thereof, without the written consent of the said ; and I,
the said hereby accept the said lien upon the said I have as security
for the payment within the time specified of the aforesaid sum of £ ;
and upon such payment being made to me, I hereby engage and bind myself to
release the said
Dated at this day of 18
Miner’s- Right.
Miner’s Right.
Lienor.
No. Date of
Witness—
SCHEDULE No. 17.
Farm of Lien Register. (See Regulation No. 77).


Miner V Right ...
0
10
0
Business Licence (per annum)
4
0
0
Reporting Discovery of Gold
0
I
0
Application for Mining Tene-
ment
0
I
0
Registration of-—
Mining Tenement
0
!
0
Share Certificates, each
0
1
0
Amalgamation ...
0
5
0
Machine Areas —Per acre ...
0
5
0
Area for Stacking Tailings —
Per acre
0
5
0
Lien ...
0
S
0
Certificate of Lien ...
0
2
6
Cancellation of Lien
0
2
6
Rules and Agreements
0
5
0
Cancellation of Share Certifi-
cate ...
0
2
6
Stacked Quartz ...
0 10
0
Creation of Shares
0
2
6
Dated this 6th day of December,
18
ADAM
Business Areas ...
• ••
0
5
0
Residence
...
0
5
0
Machine Area ...
....
0
5
0
Tailings Area ...
...
0
5
0
Water Race
.*«
0
5
0
Dam or Reservoir
...
0
5
0
Exemption' of—
Business Area from
Occupa-
tion —Per annum
4
0
0
Residence
0 10
0
Claim from Labour
...
a
1
0
Race From Use ...
•••
0
5
0
Puddling Claims...
—
0
5
0
SCHEDULE No. 18.
Form of Declaration in Lieu of Certificates (See Regulation 78.)
Ij, t of in; the Northern Territory of South Australia,, do-
solemnly and sincerely declare that I have lost my No. , by virtue:
of which I hold and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously be-
lieving the same to bn true, and I request that for the purposes of transfer of the-
said this declaration may be received in lieu of the said lost.
Declared, before me at this day of ,18 .
Warden (or J.P.).
SCHEDULE No. 19.
Power of Attorney.. (See Regulation 81. >
I, of , do hereby authorise of , to
act as my agent, and I (hereby declare this authority to be irrevocable, and) agree
that all and whatsoever the I shall lawfully do under this power I will
at all times ratify and confirm as good and valid.
Dated at this day of 18 -
Signature,.
SCHEDULE No. 20.
Scale of Fees and Rents.
The following shall be the scale of Fees and Rents payable under the Northern
Territory Gold Mining Act, 1573, and these Regulations
£ s, D,
& s, D-
Transfer of—
Claims or Shares therein ... 0 5 0-
Declaration of Loss of—•
Miner’s Right ... ... 0 2 6
Certificate of Registration ... 0 2 6
Registers —
Examinationof (for each entry)’ 0 2 6-
JOHNS, Chairman of Mining Board
W. K. GRIFFITHS ) Members of Mining Board
JOHN B. KNOTT j MemDer 01 g




