

REGULATIONS
OF THE
AGED AND INFIRM MINISTERS’ FUND
Enacted by the General Assembly , iBgj.
I.—The Fund is designated the “ Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund,” and is for
the benefit of ministers in the Church, Professors of Divinity, the General Agent,
Secretaries of the Church being ministers and officials of Assembly, and ordained
and medical missionaries who have laboured in connection with one or other of
the Missions of the Church, who shall, through old age or confirmed ill-health,
have become incapacitated for the discharge of their official duties.
ll,—The administration of this Fund is in the hands and under the control of
the General Assembly, through its Standing Committee, known as the Committee
on the Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund.
lll.—The capital of this Fund consists of donations, bequests, and the surplus
of the yearly revenue.
IV.—The investment of the capital belonging to the Fund is entrusted to such
trustees as the Assembly may appoint, who report annually to the Assembly.
V.—The revenue of the Fund consists of rates, collections, and the interest of
the moneys invested for the year. The revenue alone is available for the payment
of annuities and expenses connected with the administration of the Fund. The
amount available is limited to the revenue for that year ; the surplus revenue is
capitalised.
Vl.—Each one having a right to membership of this Fund pays an annual rate
of £5, which, in the case of ministers already in the Church, dates from the
January preceding the carrying of this law, and in the case of ministers* hereafter
inducted dates from the January preceding induction to a charge in this colony,
and this amount is deducted by the Sustentation Committee from each minister’s
salary at the rate of 255. per quarter, and transferred to his credit in the Aged
and Infirm Ministers’ Fund. All rates are payable at the aforesaid dates, and
require to be paid within one month thereof. If not paid within one month after
due, 10 per cent, is charged thereafter on all arrears. Should any member fail to
pay his rates and interest on arrears for two years, he forfeits all claim to benefit
from the Fund ; such, however, may be restored to his position as a member on
conditions satisfactory to the Committee and General Assembly.
VII.—In the case of missionaries aforesaid, the Heathen Missions Committee
pay £5 on behalf of each, in addition to his own rate of the same amount.
VIII. —No member shall be admitted a beneficiary of the Fund, old age or
confirmed ill-health notwithstanding, until he shall have served the Church or has
* By enactment of the Assembly (1893) this Regulation applies also to “ missionaries and officials
of the Assembly being ministers.”


been a member ten years, and has paid the rates for which he is liable under these
Regulations.
IX.—A member cannot be admitted a beneficiary of the Fund without
certification by the Medical Referee of the Church, of his confirmed ill-health, or
of his labouring under disabling infirmity.
X.—The annuity from the Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund is £lOO per annum
to : commence with, but should the revenue be insufficient to afford this amount,
then a distribution to annuitants takes place pro rata, and the said payments form
a complete discharge of all claims for the year by the said annuitants.
XL—The Assembly decides whether the minister about to become a beneficiary
retains his position in the congregation emeritus or not; but whatever his position,
he receives from the congregation in lieu of a manse, whether there is a manse or
not, a sum of not less than £35 nor more than £75 towards house rent, the
Presbytery of the bounds taking care that the amount to be paid in lieu of rent is
duly provided by the congregation.
XII. —A member who becomes permanently infirm before having served the
Church ten years, or who, leaving the Colony, desires to relinquish his claim upon
the Fund receives back the amount of rates he has paid. A member who leaves
the colony or the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales before having served
the Church ten years, and a member who has served the Church for more than ten
years, and who on leaving the colony or the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales, desires to relinquish his claim upon this Fund, receives back three-fourths
of the amount of rates he has paid.
Xlll.—Ministers and others at present in the Church, and eligible for
membership of the Fund, are entitled to join it of whatever age ; but after the
passing of this Act, anyone otherwise eligible may not join it if at the time of his
induction or appointment he is upwards of fifty years of age.
XIV.—In the case of missionaries and officials of Assembly being ordained
ministers and entitled to become beneficiaries, but -not connected with the
Sustentation Fund, the said sum in lieu of house rent, with like modifications, is
paid from the sources whence their salaries were derived during active service.
XV.—As soon as the amount of this Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund, in the
judgment of the Assembly, warrants it, an addition of a given amount, to be
hereafter determined, shall be allowed to annuitants for each year of service over
ten years.
XVI. —Applications to be placed on the Fund pass through Presbyteries. The
Presbytery, after full inquiry into all the circumstances of the case, forwards the
application with its recommendations thereon to the Committee of the Fund, on
or before the Ist of January previous to the meeting of Assembly ; which
Committee forwards the said application, with the recommendations of the
Presbytery of the bounds, and their own, to the Clerk for presentation to the
Assembly next ensuing. In the case of missionaries, applications pass through
the Heathen Missions Committee to the Presbytery of Sydney.
XVII.—The Assembly alone places beneficiaries upon the Fund, and has power
to withhold or withdraw an annuity on grounds satisfactory to it; but should the
Assembly withhold or withdraw an annuity from a member of the Fund, such
member receives back the whole amount of his past contributions in rates, with
the current interest thereon for the time the Committee has had these rates in
its possession. Simple interest only to be allowed.
XVIII. —No personal liability shall be incurred in administering the Fund.
XIX. —The General Assembly may make alterations as to the amount of the
rate payable by members, or in the Regulations when it believes such to be
required in the interests of the Fund.
