

REINCARNATION
A
DEDICATION
TO THE
AUSTRALIAN TROOPS
SECOND EDITION.
FROM
M.E.C




REINCARNATION
A
DEDICATION
TO THE
AUSTRALIAN TROOPS
[SECOND EDITION].
FROM
M. E. C.




REINCARNATION.
"If he that slayeth thinks '‘l slay 7 ; if he
whom he doth slay thinks ‘I am slain, ’
then both know not aright! That which
was life in each cannot be slain nor slay!
Edwin Arnold.
The comprehension of reincarnation alters
entirely the view of death from that generally
held, it robs it of its terror,_ and lightens the
sorrow of parting to a considerable extent.
The person who grasps the meaning of re-
incarnation realises that life never ends, that
it is continuous. Nothing can be utterly
destroyed, its conditions only are changed.
The loss of.the physical body is really like the
casting aside of a garment no longer needed.
This body or garment is in no way the real
man —the wearer of the garment. Reincarna-
tion recognises that each soul is undying, its
future the future of a thing whose growth and
splendour have no limit. With it a man is
a dignified immortal being, evolving towards
a divinely glorious end to which he can look
forward with fearless hope, for however low
he may be in the scale to-day he is on the
ladder of divinity, and the climbing to its
summit is only a matter of time he can hasten
or retard his progress by his _ thoughts and
actions while on this earth. Pain follows mis-
takes of living and is ever remedial. The
good disposition, the capable brain, the noble
nature are the result of many a hard-fought
* Thoughts culled from various writings on this subject
which have helped me, and which I hope will bring similar
help to other minds.


battle in the lives that lie behind, battles of
strenuous effort to control and improve the
character mentally and morally. Also, the
reverse will show a younger growth of the
sou! not yet expanded through lack of time
and opportunity. Each soul earns its father
and mother, friends and environment in its
next life on earth,
11 Death cannot kill what never dies—nor
can spirits ever be divided that love and
live in the same Divine Principle.”
William Penn.
Without reincarnation man is a tossing
straw on the chance waves of circumstance,
irresponsible for his character or destiny. He
may be lucky or unlucky, but the strength and
beauty of a changeless Law is rent away from
him and he is left floating on an unnavigable
ocean of life.
Predestination in its most offensive form is
the alternative of reincarnation. Instead of
looking on a man as evolving, so that the
brutal savage of to-day will in time evolve
the noblest qualities (and thus giving us sure
knowledge of the justice of God, and seeing
in the World a wisely planned and wisely
directed process of growth) we should be
obliged to see life as a chaos of most unjustly
treated sentient beings awarded happiness or
misery, knowledge or ignorance, virtue or
vice, wealth or poverty, genius or idiocy by
an external arbitrary will.
4 ‘ Who toiled a slave may come anew a Prince
For gentle worthiness and merit wonj
Who ruled a King may wander earth in rags
For things done and undone.”
Edwin Arnold.


Evolution is the plan of -A attire. Evolution
of the spiritual and moral nature as well as of
the body. On what just ground save that of
reincarnation can “infant prodigies be
accounted for, men remarkable from birth,
leaders of thought, musicians, paintei s, etc. ?
It would be unjust that they should be so
favoured, if they had not earned their capa-
bilities in past lives, blow can souls having
marked mental and moral peculiarities come
suddenly into existence, unless there is a past
behind them? It is as incredible to imagine
as would be a stick without an end. For
instance, in scientific modern research it is
recognised that without the continuity of the
physical plasm there would be no means for
the evolution of physical peculiarities. With-
out the continuity of the intelligence there
would be no means for the evolution of the
mental or moral qualities.
Human evolution is not confined to a few
years of earth life. An everlasting future
cannot be hung on a fragment of existence,
if so, injustice would be the rule of life witti
the partialities of unearned genius and un-
merited criminality.
The special creation of a soul for every
body, implying that the soul could not exist
without the body, inevitably tends to the idea
that the soul dies with the death of the body
and leads to scepticism and hopeless mate-
rialism.
The teaching of reincarnation is that of a
temporary graded state for the working out of
evil passion, and a temporary graded heaven
for the transmutation of experiences into


faculties; not a never-ending heaven for which
no one is good enough, o>r a never-ending hell
for which no one is wicked enough.
The sacrifice of a man giving up his physical
body in the heroic action of battle may be of
greater value in the development of his soul
than would be a lengthened earth life without
this sacrifice. The hidden states of being
between one physical life and another are fully
as necessary states for the soul’s development
as the small physical portion during an earth
life.
The deeper study of this principle of rein-
carnation, and the subtler intuitions of man-
kind, show that we are really never separated
from those we love. During deep sleep we
can be consciously with our beloved ones only
we cannot bring the memory of it back to our
earth consciousness. At present the matter of
our brains does not vibrate quickly enough.
Some people at rare moments do get glimpses
of a deeper reality beyond. Strange happen-
ings, or a dream more vivid and beautiful,
more impressively lasting than any event of
daily life in the every-day world.
’''There is no Death in one region of the
Universe which looked at from another
region is not Birth.-”
Annie Besant.
Josephus states that the Jews believed in
reincarnation, and relates the story of a cap-
tain who encouraged his men to fight to the
death by reminding them of their return to
earth. The Christ axccepted it, telling his dis-
ciples that John the Baptist was Elias. Virgil
took it for grantecd, Plato taught it, and
Origen, the most llearned of the Christian


fathers, declared that “every man received a
body according to his deserts and his former
actions.” Hume declared that it was the only
doctrine of immortality a philosopher could
look at —a view somewhat similar to that of
the British Professor McTaggart, who came
to the conclusion that it was the most rational
theory of immortality put forward. Goethe
in his old age looked joyfully forward to his
return, and Wordsworth, Browning and Ros-
setti all believed in reincarnation, besides a
great number of other eminent writers of
prose and poetry.
“Not at any time verily was I not, nor
thou, nor these princes of men, nor verily
shall we ever cease to be hereafter.’ 5
(From the Sanskrit poem, the Mah&bh&rata, the
account of the great battle.)




THE BISHOP OF LONDON
ON
“LIFE AFTER DEATH.”
Preaching on Saturday, January 28th, at the
Church of St. Lawrence, Jewry, E.C., at a service in
connection with the Commercial Travellers’ Chris-
tian Association, the Bishop of London said: —
“ There was no subject on which Christians
were so mistaken as that of death. Death was
mistaken for the pain which sometimes pre-
ceded it. Being born into another world was
probably like being born into this. The sup-
posed horror of death was founded on nothing
more than a delusion. Death was an incident
that took place in a continuous life, and the
idea that the spirit slept after death was a com-
plete delusion. There were six things revealed
to us about the life after death —that the man
was the same man five minutes after death as
five minutes before it, except that he had passed
through one more experience in life; that his
character would grow; that he had a memorv;
that he would be a Christ in Paradise; that
there would be mutual recognition; and that he
would still have a great interest in the world
he had left. Such thoughts ought to make one
careful not to do something on earth which he
would be ashamed to remember five minutes
after death.”
London Daily Telegraph report,
January 30th, 1911.


THE LATE COLONEL BRAUND
SOLDIER AND THEOSOPHIST.
Speaking at the weekly public meeting of the
Theosophical Society, at Concordia Hall last night,
Mr. C. W. Leadbeater paid a cordial tribute to the
memory of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Braund: “It
is but right and fitting, 7 ' he said, “that I should
accord honorable mention to the passing of one of
our older members, who had gone to serve Ms coun-
try in the present war. Lieutenant-Colonel Braund
died leading his troops in Turkey on May 8, the
very same day of the year as that on which our
great founder, H. P. Blavatzky, also passed away
from her body. Colonel Braund had been a promin-
ent and active member of the Theosophical Society
for twelve years past. He was the founder of the
branch of the Society at Armidale, was a student
of Theosophy, and very earnest in his endeavors to
spiead the knowledge he acquired. Colonel Braund
was a practically living example of the Theosophical
ideal of duty to friend and country,
“We who are Theosophists do not look upon
death precisely as other people do, and we cannot
pretend to mourn for those who pass to a higher
and wider life. Actually we cannot out mark with
pride that one of our members has already received
the honor of dying in the service of his country.
The Sydney Lodge of the Theosophical Society
alone is represented at the front by about 15 of its
members, and it is more than probable that w©
shall have to speak of others as having followed in
the wake of the Colonel, but we cannot let this, our
first gathering since his death, pass without some
reference when he has received this honor of death
in the service of his country and Ms King.”
The Sun , May 17th, 1915.


SPIRITUAL PROGRESS.
BISHOP OF EDINBURGH ON THE
TOLL OF WAR.
In a pamphlet entitled "Life, Death and Immor-
tality," the matter of which he has incorporated
in a work entitled ‘ ‘ The Gospel of Hope, ’ ’ the
Bishop of Edinburgh deals with the question of the
apparent terrible waste which war entails in the
sacrifice of so many bright and promising young
lives. Many people, he says, feel deep down ia
their hearts that there is something dark in a
Providence that allows a fine strong life just reach-
ing the maturity of its powers to be cut off. Tak-
ing the case of one brave lad, very dear to him,
the Bishop holds that such a view leaves out of
account his relationship with God.
"Has the hand that moulded his career suddenly
stayed? What led the lad to the fields of France!
Was it selfish interest or pleasure! . . Does
Death, then, alter this onward progress from fair
to good and good to better? Is it possible that
when he reaches the topmost note of life, and in
the exhilaration of dying for his country makes
the supreme sacrifice of life, that there is a sudden
stop? Is it possible that God’s work is suddenly
thrown back? . , . Waste! Nay, surely. a
higher calling, unless we are going to divide life
into two parts and limit a man’s purpose to what
we can see and hear!"
“Who, looking at the whole of life and not sim-
ply at the end, can dare, ’ ’ asks the Bishop, ‘‘ to
say that its onward progress is checked by deathf"
4 ‘ Life, whether that of the plant, animal, or man,
never stays; it always goes forward, reaching ever
higher and higher stages. Our son’s soldier-life
showed that clearly. We might as well doubt Ms
mysterious beginning before birth as his mysterious
progress after death. None, not even his parents,


could suppose that the infant in the cradle, only
able to distinguish between light and darkness,
and. with ‘no language but a cry/ would develop
into that ripe manhood so expressive of varied gifts.
And having seen that miracle, are we to stay our
thinking and acquiesce in the deception of death?
Had there been no consciousness of personal iden-
tity, had the life, like that of the animal, been
without memory and hope, then death might take
us in, but the knowledge of the one self'persisting
throughout the extraordinary changes body and
spirit have known laughs at Death’s trickery.”
From Harbinger of Light.
