

Publication No. 11.
The British Society for the Study of
Sex Psychology.
REJUVENATION:
STEINACH’S RESEARCHES ON
THE SEX-GLANDS.
1* —Steinach’s Rejuvenation Experiments.
By EDEN PAUL, M.D.
2. —Recent Developments of Steinach’s Work.
By NORMAN HAIRE, Ch.M., M.B.
Printed for the Society by
J. E. FRANCIS,
Athen.eum Press, 11-13 Bream's Buildings, London, • E.C.4.


| * The British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology
accepts no responsibility for the opinions expressed
by individual writers in its publications.
All Rights Reserved.
First published in England m 1923.


STEINACH'S REJUVENATION
EXPERIMENTS
BY
EDEN PAUL, M.D.
{Read before The British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology.)
i.—THE IDEA OF REJUVENATION.
Man has a great dislike for the prospect of growing old. When
I say “ man," I am of course using the term in the generic sense—
to include woman. Few of us, of either sex, will wholeheartedly
echo the utterance of Browning’s ‘ Rabbi Ben Ezra ’ :
Grow old along with me,
The best is yet to be !
We may reject as a fable the contention that childhood is the Golden
Age, but with far more emphasis do we refuse to look upon senility
as desirable. We are averse to figuring as “ lean and slippered
pantaloons,” and we are not enthusiastic at the mental picture of
ourselves in a still later stage as “ sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste,
sans everything.” Ben Ezra, doubtless, was not really “ old ” ; he
was merely “ mature.” In old age we are more likely to resemble
another of the same poet’s figures, the Grammarian, attacked by
tussis. and racked by calculus ; and even if we are too tender-minded
to welcome death as a release, our tough-minded associates will do
it for us —and will say pleasant things about us on the day of our
funeral. But what Ben Ezra meant to imply was that there is an
age sandwiched in somewhere between Jaques’ Seven Ages, when
we shall have escaped the Scylla of youth without being shipwrecked
upon the Charybdis of senility. In the first book of Plato’s ‘ Republic,’
the old man Kephalos relates that the aged poet Sophokles, in answer
to the question, How does love suit with age, Sophokles, are you
still the man you were ? ” replied : “ Peace ; most gladly have I
escaped the thing of which you speak, I feel as if I had escaped from
a mad and furious master.” Kephalos continues : “ When the
passions release their hold, then, as Sophokles says, we are freed from
the grasp, not of one mad master only, but of many.” That is


precisely the assertion I have to challenge ! Can we escape the
passions can we attain the passionlessness, the ataraxia, which was
u r! ea , °' , cer , lalll Greek philosophers, without the dving down of
the libido which is the driving force of life ? I do not propose to-
night to answer this question with a dogmatic "No ! " But I shall
aim at showing that, in this respect, the researches of Steinach, the
Viennese physiologist, serve on the material side to reinforce the
conclusions which the New Psychology, has: during the last two
decades been basing upon the study of our mental life Tis love
that makes the world go round! Ponce de Leon’s quest was for
the fountain of Youth ; he was not in search of the Fountain of
Passionless Senility. Stemach’s Rejuvenation is an endorsement of
the cravings of the unsophisticated mind ; it holds out no hope of
the attainment of a land where it is always afternoon ; those who
are successfully ‘ Stemached ” will perchance have the crudity, as
well as the freshness, the vigour, and the beauty of morning !
2.—THE DUCTLESS GLANDS.
Most of the sciences are being rejuvenated in this revolutionary
age. There is a New Physics. (In fact there have been two or three
fhi C l t T y t St x- en V ays ') . There 18 a New Psychology. Some of us
think that a New Economics is knocking at the door, and that a New
Statecraft has already been inaugurated inMuscovy. Be that as it mav
there can be no dispute as to the rejuvenation of phvsiologv. At the
time of the first jubilee of Good Queen Victoria, when I acquired the
elements of a knowledge of the Old Physiology, we conceived that a
exl f ted , to P OU C secretion into a duct, and the function
of the ductless glands like the spleen, the thyroid, and the pituitary
body was wrapped in a mystery.’ ’ The first great advance towards
the new outlook was marked by the elucidation of the functions of
the thyroid ; and since then the extension of the idea that the ductless
glands contribute to the animal economy specific substances of vital
importance, has made rapid progress. Ere long it was realised that
m the case of the ducted glands, likewise, the furnishing of the secre-
tions was not necessarily their most important work. They, no less
man ductless glands, contribute hormones to the blood. A hormone
is a substance which, produced by a gland and poured into the blood
gives rise to important changes elsewhere in the body, usually bv
way of stimulating cellular growth or glandular activity of one kind
or another Phis generalisation, the outcome of numerous excision
and transplantation experiments, might have been formulated much
earher had we used our eyes and our intelligence, had we considered
the significance of castration and spaying (the removal of testicles and
ovaries) long practised on human beings and other animals for motives
different from those which actuate the physiological investigator.


byTX^
breasts swell, menstruation begins there is a growth nf h • ma , e ’ l^e
to that which occur. i„ tbe pub.™ ™fe*T tah " “t?S
desire assumes new and more active forms In u V
X", c bT sexu! “ lif v> «™*iy S~Ld \: h L h 7„S IfS
fifty yearsaoe^ hJl! ll " ' lmia( te n! or menopause, usually towards
tty }ears ot age, the hormonic activity of the ovaries ceasfsshn.rtl,,
|ass=j--£S
in their' Sf* «*—*
£^ft£‘S!i3
nnrl • Ch attendant emotions as jealousy may persist after
fn SSrt* the
lien, cV,!^-"’s
yersion now being played a. Z btbX
wavs tifl ! r T v heSC , ex P enment s may be made in three


3-—REJUVENATION IN MALE RATS.
The full title of Steinach’s monograph is 1 Rejuvenation by the
experimental Revmcation of the aging puberal Gland.’ For Steinach
distinguishes the puberal gland ” from the “ reproductive gland ”
proper Taking the simpler case of the male mammal, we find that
the male gonad, the testicle, consists of two associated glands : the
seminiferous tubules in which the spermatozoa are formed, these
comprising the reproductive gland proper; and the puberal’gland,
made up of the interstitial tissue between the tubules, having as its
function the manufacture of the hormones upon which the activity
of the sexual life depends. Now the foundation of Steinach’s method
ot rejuvenation is that ligature of the vas deferens or excretory duct
of the testicle, while necessarily preventing the discharge of sper-
matozoa derived from that particular testicle, and while primarily
followed by atrophy of the reproductive portion of the gland, leads
.? r rcasons which are still obscure—to hypertrophy of the inter-
stitial tissue or “ puberal gland.” This results in a marked increase
in the passage of sexual hormones into the blood, in a striking deve-
lopment of sexual libido, and (if the animal be senile) in rejuvenation.
le rat * s particularly well suited for experiments of the kind.
It thrives in captivity. Its life is short, for the average age reached
by the white rat and its crossings with the wild house rat is twenty-
seven to thirty months. Aging begins at from eighteen to twenty-
three months, and an age exceeding thirty months is very rarely
attained, ihe signs of senility are easily recognised, and the fact
of rejuvenescence after operation can be established, not only by
the appearance and behaviour of the animal, but by an actual pro-
longation of life to the extent of many months.
The operation is performed under anesthesia in an animal which
exhibits marked signs and symptoms of old age. The most obvious
s!gns of age are : loss of hair, depressed carriage of the head and the
whole body, lack of alertness and interest in the surroundings, loss
ot pugnacity and playfulness, total impotence, complete lack of
interest m the female even when she is rutting, wasting, disregard
for cleanliness, and the presence of numerous parasites. These signs
and symptoms are accompanied by certain internal changes which
can only be detected by operation or on post-mortem examination.
Ihe most notable are that the seminal vesicles are withered
shrunken, and empty, and that the accessory sexual gland known
as the prostate is likewise in an atrophic condition.
. A month after the ligature of the excretory duct of the testicle
the whole picture is changed. The beast has a new coat. It holds
up !ts head and takes a keen interest in life. It fights furiously with
other full-grown males, plays with young female rats, has renewed


sexual vigour, and shows all the potency of a beast a year and a half
younger. It rids itself of lice, and is particularly sedulous in care
for the toilet when females are present. (This trait gives a vivid
significance to the customary phrase which describes a young and
vigorous human being in contrast with one who is old and apathetic :
“ There are no flies on Blank !”) The layer of fat beneath the skin
is restored ; the animal gains weight; the muscles, which had been
pale, grow ruddy. The prostate resumes its former dimensions.
The seminal vesicles are enlarged, and enormously distended with
secretion. Whence does this secretion come if the vas deferens has
been ligatured ? Often the operation is performed on one side only.
But the activities of the various accessory glands suffice to fill the
vesicles with secretion. It must be remembered that the semen
contains many ingredients besides the spermatozoa.
Microscopical changes in the testicles accompany, and account
for, these remarkable phenomena. The changes have already been
summarised. They consist, essentially, in hypertrophy of the inter-
stitial tissue, i.e., hypertrophy of what Steinach calls the puberal
gland, with consequent greatly increased production of hormones—•
increased formation of internal secretion. Herein lies the secret
of the marvellous rejuvenation.
This is what Steinach terms the autoplastic method, since the
changes are not brought about by any introduction of organs from
without, but only by operative interference with the subject’s own
organs. In the homoplastic method the organs are influenced by the
transplanatation of like organs from another animal. If, in an aging
rat, testicles excised from a young rat be ingrafted beneath the ab-
dominal wall, in the implanted organs the reproductive elements
atrophy, but actively proliferating puberal glands remain. These
pour hormones into the blood of their new host, producing the same
direct effects as if they were still in the body of the young rat. Further
they cause rejuvenescence in the testicles of the old rat, and arouse
renewed activity both in the reproductive and in the hormone-
producing elements of the glands. Thus a further source of rejuve-
nation is tapped. The old rat is rejuvenated, not merely as regards
potency for intercourse, but as regards potency for parentage ; whereas
by the autoplastic method, when both vasa deferentia are ligatured,
the animal, though rejuvenated and potent, is incompetent for pro-
creation. But it must be carefully noted that by the ligature of the
duct in one testicle only, a rejuvenating effect can be produced in
the other testicle, just as in the transplantation experiments, so that
potency for parentage is restored as well as potency for intercourse,
since the untouched testicle now produces active spermatozoa.
Finally, as regards the homoplastic method, the transplantation of
young testicles can be repeated. In an aging rat, the possibilities
of rejuvenation by autoplastic operation are limited to the ligature


th T° teStideS ’ Cither at ° ne °P or successively.
-But as long as other young rats are available (and nature supplies
them with a lavish hand), the old rat can be repeatedly rejuvenated
by transplantation experiments. This is a field for research
Stemach mentions only two cases in which, after the autoplastic
method had, as usual, led to a revival of sexual potency in excess
f the normal, and senile impotence had ultimately recurred re-
juvenescence was reproduced by the homoplastic method-by the
implantation of testicles. One of these rats attained the aL of
fwX"ve pW c»t mPlyi " B “ el ° nBati °" ° f ,he na,ural lif « b >' f ”"y
4.—REJUVENATION IN FEMALE RATS.
In the case of the female mammal, no autoplastic method of
rejuvenation suggests itself. As I have riready%ointeTou^£;
raZiaVmbe f CSS f"* * 3 and
ballopian tube functions as an oviduct; but, since it is not struc-
turally connected with the ovary, ligature of the Fallopian tube
cannot induce in the ovary structural changes and physiological
reactions similar to those induced in the testicle by ligature of the
I™nit r “ S , Th f prind e al metto<l »f«j U ve„. y ,i„f a, p„sen?
S'™ 'S' " ■ ' herefore - * he homoplastic method
ingrafting of ovaries from a young female. The ovaries used for
this purpose were taken from animals about four months old in a
condition °f early pregnancy. The results are, if possibTe even
m re striking than in the analogous experiments in the male’ The
implanted young ovaries function as puberal glands, and supply
hormones to the blood of the new host Not merely do these sub
stances exercise a directly rejuvenating effect on the 7 entire system
bit they stimulate the senile ovaries of the aging female to renewed
activity, and this in turn reacts further upon the vital processes
As a primary result, within a few days of the operation there 's
improvement of appetite, more active tissue change, deposit of fat
of fa?- subc \ ltaneous t'ssue, and increase in weight. ThJsymptoms
f fatigue, inertia, lack of interest in the surroundings disappear
Aese e ason a Rutt, gr ° Wth ° f f Ur ’ tak ' ng P lace of
tWith the i re °T S ’ havln g in abeyance for months,
to the mak 1 mC ° n “ bec ° mes an ob J ect of
to tne male. But the most decisive result of the implantation of
UP ° n atr °P hic ovaries^which
vere lett in situ. These latter resume functional activity and
produce ripe ova. Concurrently there is a rejuvenescence of the
hormone-producing elements in the glands and henceforward the
Sr o Tthe e °rlft r s eS FT” 16 , th t leadershi P’ whatever the subsequent
te ot the grafts. External changes are conspicuous in the hyper


trophy of the previously atrophied teats, and there are other less
conspicuous but equally significant signs. The animal is now a
fully functional female. It admits the male to intercourse, becomes
pregnant, makes a nest, gives birth normally, and successfully suckles
the young. Of two such causes recorded by Steinach in detail, one
female gave birth to a litter when twenty-six months old, two months
subsequent to operation, after a period of sterility which had lasted
ten months , the other gave birth to a litter when twenty-nine
months old. This animal died by mishap under anesthesia. when
the teats were being photographed. The other survived to the age
of thirty-six and a half months. Since thirty months is normally
extreme old age for these animals, the deliveries at twenty-six months
and twenty-nine months respectively are quite as remarkable as the
case of Sarah in the book of Genesis—except, of course, that Steinach’s
methods were not practised four thousand years ago in the Land
of Canaan !
S- HERMAPHRODISM AND HOMOSEXUALITY ;
MASCULINISATION AND FEMINISATION.
Before passing to consider rejuvenation experiments in human
beings, it is desirable to make a brief reference to the research work
which culminated in the discovery of the rejuvenating influence of
the hormones secreted by the puberal glands. Most of the rejuve-
nation experiments were performed during the war ; but during the
years xgio to 1912, the foundations were being laid in the form of
castration experiments—excision of testicles and ovaries—-followed
after an interval by the ingrafting of new glands. Now you will
observe that to the bold experimenter it would soon occur that, having
removed testicles, it might be interesting to try the effect of im-
planting ovaries ; and conversely. A man like Dr. Moreau in Wells’s
book, a man of creative imagination, would not rest content with
the production of normalities. He would want to pluck the heart
out of the mystery of sex—as the witch in the old Teutonic folk-
story plucked the heart out of the brave man during sleep, to replace
it with the heart of a hare. Therefore, having removed the male
gonads, and having allowed time for the usual changes to supervene
upon castration, Steinach implanted female gonads in the gelded
beasts. Conversely, having spayed females, he then provided them
with ingrafted testicles, which were competent to function as puberal
though not as reproductive glands.
The results may be briefly summarised. The implantation of
female gonads in castrated males, gave rise in these animals to the
appearance of secondary sexual characters of a feminine type. The
implantation of male gonads in spayed females led to the develop-
ment of secondary sexual characters of a masculine type. Further


more, the influence of the ingrafted puberal glands was mental as
well as bodily. The psyche of the feminised male was erotised in
the female direction, and its general behaviour became that of the
typical female ; the psyche of the masculinised female was erotised
m the male direction, and its general behaviour became that of the
typical male Thus the sexual characters, mental as well as physical
Mere radically transposed. I cannot here trace all the psychological
implications of this remarkable series of experiments. Enough ,to
draw your attention to the vistas that are opened up.' Two of the
conclusions drawn by Stemach are : first, that the sexual hormones,
which we have been talking of as if they were undifferentiated, are
m tact specifically masculine or feminine ; secondly, it is very pro-
bable that hermaphrodism and homosexuality are (in part at least)
the outcome of hormomc influences, are due to the imperfect sexual
differentiation of the embryonic rudiment out of which the gonad
develops, and to the consequent supply of an internal secretion
containing imperfectly specific hormones. In a recent paper, Steinach
goes so far as to contend that microscopical study of the relevant
thfs a hypothesis aPhr ° dlte humEn beings and other animals, confirms.
One caution is necessary before dismissing this branch of mv
subject. As regards the mental differentiation of sex in human
beings much further study will be needed before we can unhesi-
tatmgty apply Stemach’s conclusions to our own race. The sexual
life ot man is far more complex than that of kindred mammals, is
complicated by the operations of a far more intricate consciousness.
1 do not doubt that the tendency of some of the pioneers of the
woman s movement has been to under-rate the importance of the
biological foundations of psychological mental differentiation in sex
btemach s work comes as a useful reminder of the breadth and solidity
of those foundations. But we do not yet know how large a proportion
of the obvmus differences between the mentality of the average man
and the average woman is due to the suggestive influences of educa-
tion (in the widest possible sense of that term). Nor shall we know-
tor a generation or two—until the revolutionary ferment now at
work upon the social life of our race shall have had time to operate
and when the results of its operations shall have been studied by the
light of a revolutionised psychology. J
6.-—REJUVENATION EXPERIMENTS IN MAN.
A publisher’s reader to whom Steinach’s ‘ Verjiingung ’ was
submitted with a view to the possibility of an English translation,
complained that the operations upon human beings were too few
to justify any valid conclusions as to the results. But all things
must have a beginning; the application of the method to man is


of very recent date ; and in my opinion the three cases recorded in
the booklet, taken in conjunction with the whole series of rejuvenation
experiments upon animals, amply suffice to establish Steinach’s
general thesis that old age need no longer be contemplated as an
absolutely incurable disease, but that within moderate limits we are
already able to provide an effective remedy. Let me summarise
these cases, in all of which the ligature of the seminal ducts was
undertaken as a supplement to another operation, and in two of
which it was done without the patient’s knowledge. The reason
for this high-handed procedure was the absolute necessity for avoiding
the suggestive influences that would have been at work had the patient
known of the accessory operation or of its contemplated results.
All pioneer operations are experimental ; but those of my audience
who might be uneasy at the prospect of being involuntarily “ Stein-
ached ” next time they find themselves on the operating table, should
console themselves with the thought that any such liberties as were
taken by Steinach and his colleagues Lichtenstern are, of course,
quite impossible in our own more favoured and stolidly conservative
land 1
Case I. was that of a working man, forty-four years of age,
suffering from premature senility. Emaciated, with a wrinkled facej
he was weak and easily fatigued. He found it very difficult to carry
on his daily occupation. Sexual desire and potency were almost
extinct. He was suffering from double hydrocele with pains in the
testicles, and was operated upon under local anaesthesia on November
i, 1918, for the radical cure of hydrocele. Simultaneously the
seminal ducts were ligated. By the spring of 1919, he was a new
man. There had been a notable gain in weight and the wrinkles
had vanished. Resuming his occupation, he could now with ease
carry two hundredweight on his back. Renewed growth of hair,
found it necessary to shave more frequently than before the operation.
Sexual desire and potency had returned to the degree characteristic
of early manhood. The rejuvenescence was fully maintained eighteen
months after the operation.
Case II.—A man of 71, head of a large enterprise. He was
suffering from an abscess in the left testicle. On February 10, 1919,
the left testicle was removed under local anaesthesia, and at the same
time the efferent duct of the healthy right testicle was ligated. The
testicular abscess was a recent trouble, but for years the patient
had been suffering from the signs and symptoms of old age—giddiness,
shortness of breath, weakness of the heart, extreme fatigue, tremor,'
&c. Sexual desire had been practically extinct for eight years’
Within a few months the whole picture was changed. To his amaze-
ment, sexual desire and potency had returned. Writing a report on
his condition nine months after the operation, he says ; “ My appetite
has become so keen that I find it very difficult to satisfy my hunger


p2,V^ d ,.^ d :t”rL p zfz i»»
look and feel fresh and via * d J °, y ° f lfe bas returned. I
contact refuse m believe ffit Wlth whom 1 come in
for an hour or more without fatimw* 3 se P tua S enar ' an -.. .1 can walk
think as clearly as iTould in Sth n^ 88 ° f breath - ■• - 1 can
part in conversation.... The tremor of m T play my
and muscular co-ordination is perfect.” hands has dlsa PPeared,
Had veari a f ge Way ' of business . 66 years of age.
He was likewise affected g , raVe s - vm P toms of senility,
of urine and uiTt£ «tentii
1 9 1 9> the patiem was%S a ted unon for'tf etef ' ,° n i 2 ,
tton was technically successful hut thi , condlt '°m The opera-
slow, and the patient fese tSgh? WOund was
a remedial measure, the two vasa defer™ g r Consequently, as
1920. The results were all could b" ° n JanUary
the operation there had been consmVnnu* d ’ F ° ur weeks after
condition, and the patient P improvement m the general
than half a pound IdayHif,S"? ’™ ,sht “ the ™“ «f -«
after .he operation he Jaa S3 !t "hT‘ .t”™' Eight week,
state which had existed nrinr trt !k } v and mentally, to the
noticeable was thf mnrovlent the ° nSCt ° f old age - Especially
sexual desire was S S wel n memory '. The of
later, the patient describes b’ ir abter , operation. Four weeks
young man. He has known of 3
for quite 20 years Three m tensity ot the sexual appetite
his appearance 7 is ‘‘ b foomLr” The a ter “S ature operation -
He has the aspect of a vigorous' tmH in wrinkles have disappeared.
=S pounds mots* WE"" 1 ' W ' ighs
male. The" po'sYbiSfiV.LTo™7‘f * Tlf 1 " h ™»”
ti°n of reproductive glands are far ™ the transplanta-
this lecture I must live T dlfficu lt t 0 ex P lore > a nd in
the ligature experiments I wish n “ >nsidered - , But before dismissing
of clinical material which ouc/br t h C - 3 aUent ion to a possible store
the legislature of Indiana US A mvest l gated - On March 9, 1907,
Procreation ofConfirmed S^, P £t° Ved T an “ Act to Prevent the
The idea was, I im ag Tne Imbeciles = a n d Rapists.”
vasa deferentia, and fhen to turn the per ? on ® b f hgature of the
they could no reproduce t£h T I? 80 ' ln the belief that, since
harm. of 7 COuld work further
the sexual libido to such an intensk^tha?^' °” “ ratS is t 0 raise
rape females that are not ru * I he re J uvenated male will
in the normal rat it ;« u f phenomenon never observed
ligature of the vasa deferent^'in 4 ■ r^fi^ 1 , whether the effec ts of
s.a aeterentia in confirmed rapists ”of our own


species would be wholly desirable ! It would be interesting to follow
up the history of all cases that have been subjected to operation, and
to discover to what extent, salutary or otherwise, rejuvenation has
taken place.
In women, as already explained, the autoplastic method of
rejuvenation is not available, because the ovary is a ductless gland.
As yet the only operative method which suggests itself is the ingrafting
of young ovaries, and this is inapplicable for obvious reasons. Even
as far away as Vienna is, modern sentiment would certainly not
tolerate robbing a young woman of her ovaries in order to rejuvenate
an old one, nor does Steinach suggest anything of the sort. But
possibilities may open up in the direction of the use of the glands of
other animals. If the thyroid of a sheep can supplement the defi-
ciencies in the internal secretion of the human thyroid, may we not
hope that similar benefits may be derived from turning to account
the hormonic function of the ovaries of other mammals ? The
defenders of animal rights will be up in arms. But only consistent
vegetarians are entitled to protest, for the invasion of animal rights
will be no greater than that thoughtlessly undertaken every day
by those who eat the flesh of castrated animals, nor will any greater
suffering be involved. But I will not follow these speculations further.
Nor do I propose to discuss roentgenization as an alternative method
of rejuvenation. Time presses, and the results as yet are dubious.
Suffice it to say that at present the prospects of rejuvenation are
less encouraging as regards women than as regards men. Another
injustice to women ; but the injustice is the work of nature, not of
man !
7.—PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS.
But this was to be a lecture on the psychological implications
of Steinach’s work on rejuvenation, and some of you must be thinking
that it is time for me to cut the cackle and come to the ’orses. As
a matter of fact, I have little left to say, for most of the psychological
implications will have become apparent in the course of the exposition.
The main point, at least, should be clear enough. We have long
known that men and women are in their prime, psychologically no
less than physically, during the three decades (more or less) in which
the sexual life is most active. Steinach’s researches merely emphasise
this truth from the physiological standpoint, from the outlook of
the biological laboratory. Of course we must not interpret the
formula in too rigid a sense. A familiar difficulty in the regulation
of life is that sexual desire becomes extremely active at an age when
the judgment is still immature. In abnormal cases the reproductive
glands may take on hormonic activity even in early childhood, so
that all the phenomena of puberty are witnessed during the first of
Jaques’ seven ages, while the infant is still mewling and puking in


the nurse s arms. Such instances are decidedly embarrassing, but
happily they are extremely rare. On the other hand, in fortunate
persons of both sexes, the onset of old age is deferred to a far later
date than the ordinary climacteric—the fiftieth year of life. ' But
for the most part, and in average cases, the middle years of the
period between 15 and 50 —say from 25 to 40 —are the best years
of life. They are the years during which the judgment is mature,
but still (in ten per cent or so of the population) capable of progressive
development ; and they are the years during which the sexual life
is in many respects at its best.
It would be too much to say that psychological senility is always
conditioned by a decline in the hormonic activity of the reproductive
glands. In the idiot, mental development is arrested in infancy.
In the imbecile, we have an arrest at seven years or so. The moron
is adult in body but has the mentality of a 12-year-old child ; such
persons are far commoner than is generally imagined. In the case
of the great majority, mental development would appear to be arrested
during the early twenties. They swell the voting lists of our precious
parliamentary democracies : in old age the “ successful ” specimens
of the tribe rule us, judge us, dragoon us, sit in the seats of the mighty.
St mommentum requiris, circumspice! If you want to study the
world they have made, look around ! lam not suggesting that X.,
Y., and Z. (I name no names, for fear of Dora) should be Steinached.
I should be far more inclined to recommend that they should pay
a visit to the lethal chamber. We are all familiar, each in his own
specialty, with politicians, men of science, poets, labour leaders,
who most emphatically ought not to be rejuvenated. Of whom we
say, as a certain man once said of a fig-tree in his vineyard : “ Behold
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and find none :
cut it down ; why cumbereth it the ground ? ” But some at least,
who might do good work, are prematurely old. Let us, in their
case, remember the answer of the vine-dresser concerning the barren
fig-tree : Lord, let it alone this year, also, till I shall dig about it,
and dung it: And if it bear fruit well: and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down.” The psychological implication I want you
to consider is that, while in many people, perhaps in most, the mind
ceases to grow even before sexual activity reaches its prime, the
decay of the sexual life is inevitably attended by the phenomena
of psychological no less than of physical senility. I advance this
inference tentatively. Much study will be needed before it can be
regarded as definitely established. But I contend that Steinach’s
researches reinforce the conclusion to which many other considerations
are driving a world desperately in need of a little young and vigorous
wisdom namely that of all the foolish maxims of hoary antiquity,
the most foolish is the maxim : “ Respect the Aged ! ”


I am reminded of a story I read in a weekly paper a good many
years ago A man of about 50 has just returned to England, retired
from public service in India. He is fairly well-to-do, unmarried
and in reasonably good health for one who has spent his best years in
for fT He „ Slts ° n , a s *‘. le °f e Sunday morning making plans
for the future. He will do this ; he will do that ; above all. he will
settle down, marry some nice young girl, and found a family
Apropos two nice young girls come along the footpath on their way
to churcln Our gallant makes way, and since the stile is a formidable
one he offers a hand to help them over. They pass on with a smile
and a friendly word But as they recede into the distance, he hears
■one say to the other in a voice louder than she is aware of: " What
a nice old gentleman ! ” Our friend’s card-house collapses. Alas
he is at the end of life, when he thought he was going to make a
new beginning.
• t For , m , y ,°' vn JP art ’ * an ? like the retired Anglo-Indian in my
inveterate habit of castle-building. I am always planning what I
am going to do when I reach the foot of the rainbow in the next field
It 1 am to fulfil one-half or a quarter of what I should like to do
il I am to see one-half or a quarter of what I should like to see, during
this most interesting age in the -world's history, I shall need two or
three more lives at least. As far as interest in my surroundings is
concerned I am not yet such a very old rat. Certainly I haven’t
as much interest in nice young girls as I used to have, but as Kephalos
and bophocles point out, there are compensations. Nevertheless as
soon as I am quite certain that nice young girls look upon me only as
p 1 1^ entleman ~J aice or nasty—l mean to enquire whether Sir
.Basil Ihompson will grant me a passport to Vienna.


RECENT DEVELOPMENTS OF
STEINACH'S WORK
BY
NORMAN HAIRE, Ch.M., M.B.
(Read to the British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology,
London, 28 th November, 1921.)
Steinach’s work on the significance of the testicle and ovary,
and the resulting amazing innovations in the surgical treatment of
sexual disabilities and aberrations, was first brought to my notice
by a very interesting and instructive lecture delivered to this Society
last January by Dr. Eden Paul, who is our chairman to-night.
He told us about Steinach’s original experiments on animals,
and the later application of the results to three human beings. Since
then I have been in communication with Steinach and a number of
other workers in the same field, and have been able to collect a large
amount of literature dealing with a very considerable number of
cases.
Up to the present I myself have had the opportunity of per-
forming Steinach’s operation of Vasectomy in only one case, but
several others are under consideration, so that possibly I may be
able to offer this Society a report of some personal experiences in
this field next year.
For the material of my paper to-night I am indebted to Steinach
himself, to his colleague Lichtenstern, who has been most obliging
and helpful, to Levy-Lenz and Peter Schmidt of Berlin, to Miihsam
of Berlin, to Dr. Hurty of Indianapolis, U.S.A., to Dr. Eden Paul;
and, though last not least, to Mr, Aeneas O’Neill, Mr. Austin Podmore
and Mr. Robert Pender, who have afforded me invaluable help with
the translations.
For the sake of those who were not present at Dr. Eden Paul’s
lecture last January, and who are unacquainted with the subject,
I must recapitulate, as briefly as possible, the essential points with
which he dealt, before passing to more recent work.


There are a great many glands in the body which produce what
are known as Internal Secretions or Hormones, that is to say, they
manufacture and pour into the blood substances which give rise to
important effects elsewhere in the body, usually by stimulating or
depressing cellular growth or the activity of other glands or organs.
The testicle has two functions. It produces the male reproduc-
tive elements or sperm cells which are conveyed to the exterior of
the body by the Sperm duct or Vas Deferens. It also produces
an internal secretion, which is of enormous importance to the or-
ganism, and which is carried away from the testicle by the blood
circulating through it.
At puberty, when the individual becomes sexually ripe, the
testicles begin to function more vigorously than before, producing
sperm cells and at the same time secreting the hormone much more
actively. As a result of the latter activity what are known as the
secondary sexual characters develop. The voice becomes deeper;
hair begins to grow on the face, the body and armpits ; the boyish
contours are replaced by the sharper and more rugged outlines of
the man, and sexual desire assumes mature and more active forms.
This change takes place usually between 13 and 18 years of
age, and persists for some 30 or 40 years. Then owing to the decrease
in the production of testicular hormone, and possibly also partly to
other causes, sexual desire and patency decline, and physical senility
gradually appears.
The ovary also has two functions. It produces the Ova or Egg-
cells, which are conveyed to the uterus by the Fallopian Tube :
the ovary has no duct attached to it analogous to that of the testicle.
In the Fallopian tube or uterus the ova are either fertilised to develop
into new lives, or are cast out unfertilised. In addition the ovary
produces a very important hormone, which is poured directly into
the blood, and which governs the female secondary sexual characters.
At puberty, which occurs at from 13 to 18 years, the ovaries
begin to function actively, producing egg-cells ripe for fertilisation,,
the breasts swell, menstruation begins, and sexual desire assumes
its active and adult form. The other secondary sexual characters
which develop include a general deposit of fat, giving rise to the soft
rounded contours of the adult female. This is especially marked on
the breasts, hips, and buttocks. Hair grows on the armpits and pubes.
These changes persist for some 30 years, and then towards the age
of 5 0 the hormonic activity of the ovary declines rather abruptly.
Menstruation ceases and ova are no longer produced, so that preg-
nancy can no longer take place, sexual desire gradually declines,
and often hair appears on the face.
In congenital under-development of the internal secretory
activity of the testicle, or in cases of loss of the testicles before puberty,
a condition known as Eunuchoidism occurs as a result. Some of


the secondary sexual signs fail to appear and others remain imperfect.
Especially characteristic are the abnormal length of the limbs, due
to the long persistence of the bone-forming centres, the accumulation
fat in certain positions in the body, the defective growth of hair,
the high pitch of the voice, the small size of the external genital
organs, and defective sexual desire and potency.
Castration of adults is also followed by a group of symptoms
known as Eunuchism many of which are identical with those just
described, though seldom reaching the same degree. Characteristic
are the loss of the beard, and the hair on the body and limbs, the
deposition of fat on the abdomen, the hips, the breasts and the neck,
atrophy of the prostate gland, change of voice to a higher pitch,
and loss or diminution of sexual desire and potency.
These changes, which exercise such an important influence on
the man’s capacity for work and his enjoyment of life, led to attempts
at cure. Brown Sequard in 1890 experimented with the injection
of extracts of animal testicles into man, and more recently many
others have followed him with varying success, the degree of which
depended largely on the mode of preparation of the extract.
But as permanent and general success was not obtained by
these means, attempts were made to replace the lost or imperfectly
developed organs by grafting those from other individuals.
The first scientific experiments on the transplantation of testicles
date back to 1780, when Hunter had grafted a testicle into a dog.
the results of this however were not properly realised. In 1848
Berthold experimented on a number of cocks. He castrated these
birds, and was able to preserve their male characters by transplanta-
tion of a portion of their own testicle, or by grafting into them a
portion of testicle from another bird. Fifty years later Foges came
to the conclusion that the testicle by its internal secretion has a forma-
tive influence on the secondary sexual characters. Pezzard then
succeeded in restoring the complete secondary sexual characters
which had disappeared in a cock as the result of castration. Numerous
other experiments followed, but not until the operations of Steinach
on rats and guinea-pigs was an absolute proof furnished of the possi-
bJ. ,y . tra nsplantation in mammals, with subsequent functioning
of the implanted organ.
In a very important and extensive series of experiments on
animals Steinach found that tying or cutting the vas deferens
or sperm-duct of the male, while preventing the discharge of sperm-
cells from that testicle, and while followed by degeneration of the
sperm-producing function of the gland, led to increased activity of
!ts hormone-production. This results in greatly increased passage
of the hormones into the circulating blood, with consequent aug-
mentation of sexual desire and potency, and if the animal be senile,
m restoration of its youthful characters.


This he terms the Autoplastic Method, since the changes are
brought about by interference with the subject’s own organs.
In the Homoplastic Method, the changes are brought about by
the transplantation of similar organs from another animal, of the
same species. If into the abdominal muscles of a senile male animal
a testicle from a vigorous young male be successfully grafted, this
testicle ceases to produce sperm-cells, but continues its secretion of
hormones. These hormones, circulating in the blood of the new
host act on him just as they would if produced in his own testicles,
and in addition excite his own testicles to renewed activity of both
spermatogenetic and internal secretory functions. The old male
is rejuvenated physically and mentally, has renewed sexual desire
and potency, and again becomes capable of impregnating the female.
Steinach then took young male rats and castrated them. As they
grew up they showed all the signs of Eunuchism. But by implanting
a testicle from another rat he was able to prevent the appearance
of these signs, or to remove them if they had already appeared.
He experimented further. He castrated young male rats and
then grafted into them ovaries from female rats. As a result they
failed to develop the secondary sexual characters of the male, but
instead developed those of the female. The penis ceased to grow,
or actually diminished in size, the breasts and fur took the female
type, and the animals approximated very closely to the female. Not
only so, but they were evidently changed also as regards their sexual
desire, so that they were not attracted to the female as they should
normally have been, but sought normal male rats and endeavoured
to have connection with them. Stranger still, they now exerted
the same attraction over normal males as females would do, so that
the normal males wooed them and attempted intercourse.
The experiments on females seemed to have yielded less fruitful
results up to the present. The ovary has not a duct of its own, the
Fallopian tube which conveys the ova to the womb not being in
direct structural continuity with it. In the female therefore no auto-
plastic method is possible.
On the other hand the homoplastic method has the most striking
results in the female. If an ovary is transplanted from a young into
a senile female, it ceases to produce ova, but continues to secrete
hormones which circulate in the blood of its new host and exert
directly a rejuvenating effect. They also stimulate the host’s own
ovaries to fresh activity of both its functions. The senile female
becomes more youthful, shows renewed sexual desire, attracts the
male, and after a long period of sterility is once more capable of
becoming pregnant and producing young.
If the ovaries are removed from young females, the results of
this spaying can be prevented from appearing, or removed after
they have appeared, by the grafting of ovaries from other young rats.


And, just as the castrated male may be feminised by the grafting
of an ovary, so the spayed female may be masculinised by the grafting
of a testicle.
These experiments of Steinach on animals formed the scientific
basis of the application of the results to man.
The first grafting of a testicle was done by Lespinasse in the
case of a man aged 38 who had lost both testicles as the result of
an accident, and in whom, in consequence, both desire and potency
had entirely disappeared. Lespinasse grafted into him the testicle
of a normal man, and a few days afterwards the patient had a strong
erection accompanied by normal desire. During a period of two
years over which observation was possible the effects of the operation
persisted.
In 1915 Lichtenstern operated on a lance-corporal, who was
wounded by an explosive shell, and whose testicles had to be removed
as a result. In the course of a few months the most striking signs
of total castration had appeared.
He became very fat, the moustache fell out, there was a great
loss of hair on the body, especially below the navel; and complete
disappearance of sexual desire and potency; increasing general
apathy and loss of strength.
An undescended testicle which had to be removed from another
patient was transplanted into this man, and as a result the bodily
and mental sexual characters were gradually restored. The great
deposit of fat disappeared, the muscles became obviously better
developed, the hair of the moustache, breast and body grew again
strongly. The whole mental condition was much improved. Sexual
desire and potency were re-established.
Two and a half years after the operation the recovery still
persisted. The patient had then been married for 15 months, and was
living happily with his wife, having intercourse normally, and being
able to carry out his agricultural work.
Lichtenstern reported two further cases of success. One was
a man of 28, who lost both testicles as a result of a wound, and had
a testicle transplanted three months afterwards. A perfect cure
resulted. The second was a man of 32, who had lost both testicles
10 years before, and all the symptoms of Eunuchism had appeared.
He was quite cured by transplantation even after 10 years.
Kreuter reports the case of a man aged 30, who had had both
testicles removed for tuberculosis. Sexual desire completely dis-
appeared as a result. Kreuter grafted into him a testicle from
another man, and three weeks later erections began to occur and
were accompanied by erotic feelings. At the time of report, the
patient had not yet had actual intercourse, but his desire was becoming
steadily stronger.


. Stocker and Ems both report that by grafting a piece of the
patient’s own testicle, in cases of castration, they were able to prevent
the onset of symptoms of Eunuchism.
Muhsam reports the following case :
A man aged 25, had one testicle removed in March, 1917, and
the other in June of the same year, on account of tuberculosis. Sexual
desire and potency disappeared slowly but completely. The hair
diminished, indeed on the face and in the armpits it had almost
completely disappeared. His voice became noticeably higher, a
growth of fat occurred on the neck and breast, and all the signs of
Eunuchism were present. On May 6, 1918, a normal testicle was
grafted into him. It took perfectly, but sexual desire did not appear
for some time. In November it began. His voice deepened, the
hair on his face and in his armpits grew more strongly and he was
able to have intercourse once a week. In March, 1919, he got married.
Muhsam examined him in April 1920, and found him in excellent bodily
health. The female type of fat-deposit had disappeared, the voice
was thoroughly manly, the hair on the face and armpits was almost
normal, the patient had a manly self-assurance, and was quite able
to carry on his occupation as a smith. There was no indication of
Eunuchism. He had connection about once in three weeks, avoiding
it more frequently, as it tired him. On February 7, 1921, Muhsam
reported further on his patient. "He assured me to-day that this
potency has further increased in the interval, and that it is only out
of consideration for his health that he avoids more frequent inter-
course. He works at his trade as a smith, but lately has not been
so well, as he has tuberculosis of one lung.” (It will be remembered
that this patient’s testicles were removed for tubercular infection.)
His voice has become markedly deeper and no longer recalls in the
least that of a Eunuch, which it indisputably did before the operation.
The beard has developed to quite an average degree, but the hair in
the armpits and on the chest and pubes has not progressed beyond the
stage which I reported last Spring.
June, 1921. No change. Undiminished success of the operation.
Lichtenstern also used transplantation of testicles to cure the
condition known as Eunuchoidism, which arises through defective
development of the testicles, or their loss at a very early age. In
four cases there followed an increased growth of hair on the face,
body and limbs, the high voice became deeper and more manly, the
penis increased in size, normal desire developed, erection occurred,
and finally erotic dreams-with emission of semen. The male charac-
teristics, energy, capacity for work, which formerly were almost
absent, appeared as well.


Finding that Steixach's homoplastic operation on animals could
be successfully imitated in man, the next step was to attempt to
carry out the autoplastic operation by ligature of the vas deferens.
Tying and cutting the vas deferens in man are not new operations
in surgery. These operations were formerly performed very fre-
quently in the treatment of enlargement of the prostate gland.
Lichtenstern therefore made an exhaustive search of the literature
of the operation to see whether rejuvenating effects had been noticed
after the operation by previous observers.
Now, it must be remembered that these operations had been
performed not for purposes of rejuvenation, but for cure of the
prostatic condition, and that therefore the operator would be on
the look-out for its effects on the prostate, and might easily overlook,
or attribute to other causes, any improvement which might result
from the operation on the vas deferens.
In spite of this Lichtenstern was able to collect the following
confirmatory evidence.
Lennander in 1897 reported that he had performed a double
vasectomy on a patient aged 57 for enlargement of the prostate,
and that six months after the operation the man had erections nearly
every night, and frequent seminal emissions.
In 1894 Isnardi reported that he had performed a vasectomy
on an old man aged 80, and that later on, the patient’s condition was
excellent and much improved by the operation. The operation
was performed in the hope of curing an enlarged prostate.
At the same time he reported another case of vasectomy in a
man of 65 who had suffered for many years from bladder trouble, and
said that the patient’s state was greatly improved by it. Isnardi’s
words are : “He is a new man ! ”
After the introduction of the operation of suprapubic pros-
tatectomy, it was noticed that some patients showed a marked
improvement which could not be accounted for by the removal of
the prostate itself. There was a rapid increase of weight, the skin
became firmer and more glossy, the hair grew more rapidly, the
capacity for work increased, and sexual potency and desire improved.
In these cases an examination of the semen showed an absence of
sperm-cells and spermin-crystals. In many such cases Lichtenstern
has been able to show that these results followed prostatectomy
where the removal of the prostate had been very difficult, and where
in the process of removal the ducts of the testicles had almost cer-
tainly been injured. Such injury would be followed by blockage
of the vas deferens, a condition similar to that following the operation
of vasectomy. This accounts for the beneficial effects of the pros-
tatectomy operation in these cases.


Payr, in a work recently published, reports that he has noticed
a real rejuvenating effect after certain cases of prostatectomy, and
gives the same explanation for it.
Lichtenstern then carried out a number of autoplastic operations,
and was followed by other workers including Levy-Lenz and Peter
Schmidt. The results of some of these follow.
Case i. (Lichtenstern).
A. W. 43. Admitted September 13, 1918. The patient, a
coachman, has noticed for some years that he very easily becomes
tired, and has very slight capacity for work. During the war
he served as a driver behind the lines, where the food was good
and the work light. Married seven years. One child. Sexual
desire and potency have declined greatly in recent vears, and
are now very slight. For the last few weeks he has been ill,
has lost his appetite, and had frequent attacks of difficulty in
breathing. He was sent to hospital on account of his evident
loss of weight.
O. E. He gives the impression of a worn out, prematurely
aged man. Weighs 7 stone. Muscles poor. Not much fat.
Skin dry and lustreless. Hair of head is blonde turning grey.
Rather bald on the crown. Beard very sparse and poor growth
of hair on body and limbs. Heart organically sound but of
poor tone. Slight bronchitis. Increased blood pressure. Tes-
ticles soft and flabby. Hydrocele on the left side. The extremely
poor condition of the patient is not due to any organic disease
and is to be regarded as a premature senility.
On October 1, 1918, under local anaesthesia both vasas were
ligatured and at the same time his hydrocele was operated on.
His recovery was uneventful and he left hospital eight week
later. During his stay in hospital no special signs of rapid
improvement were visible. He went back to his work as a driver,
but was put on to heavier work and much poorer food. He got
mainly bad bread and vegetables ; fat and meat only rarely, as
in consequence of the war, food supplies in Vienna" were very
bad. Nevertheless, in spite of the bad food, he improved visibly
from the third month after the operation. Excellent appetite,
rapid increase of weight, good appearance ; skin became smooth
and glossy. New hair grew strongly on the chest, abdomen
and thighs. Sexual desire and frequent erections became notice-
able. These changes persisted. A year later he was in excellent
physical condition, and had gained 32 lbs. in weight. He could
now carry a load of 200 lbs. Muscles well developed. Very
little fat. The hair of the head was thick, the moustache strong.
He had to cut his hair and beard, as well as his nails, much


oftener than before. The body and limbs were thickly covered
with blonde hair. The skin was soft, supple and moist. Pulse
and blood-pressure normal. Sexual desire and potency extra-
ordinarily strong, as they were in his youth.
Case 2. (Lichtenstern).
H. T. A pensioned official of high rank. 71. Admitted
to a nursing home February 10, 1919. For the past five years
he has been showing marked signs of age. Frequent attacks
of shortness of breath. Easily tired by walking or climbing
stairs. No longer capable of doing hard work. During the last
three years has had frequent headaches lasting all day, partial
retention of urine so that he always had to have the bladder
emptied by a catheter, and he has chronic inflammation of the
bladder. He had been under Lichtenstern’s care during this
period, but his condition was so poor that the latter would not
perform the operation of prostatectomy which was really neces-
sary for the bladder trouble. For five days before admission
he had had swelling of the right testicle with high temperature
and cold shivers. For many years he had suffered from a very
distressing eczema on the lower abdomen and upper part of the
tnighs, for which all sorts of remedies and been tried without
success.
O. E. Man of medium height, poor muscular development,
moderately fat. No teeth. Skin dry, rough and scurfy. Hair
on head and face sparse and white. Slight hair on chest and
abdomen, quite white. The right testicle was enlarged, swollen,
and showed signs of abscess formation. Heart enlarged, ir-
regular, and poor in tone. Pulse fast and blood pressure high.
Scattered patches of bronchitis.
As his condition was so bad he was given a local anaesthetic,
the abscessed right testicle was removed and vasectomy per-
formed on the left side. Twenty-four hours later his temperature;
was normal, and he made a good convalescence. He left hospital
four weeks later without any knowledge of the vasectomy having
been performed.
The general condition of the patient improved strikingly
in the following months. Three months later he had frequent
erections, erotic dreams, and seminal emissions, which had
previously been absent for many years. There was a rapid
increase in his weight and improvement in his appearance. The
skin became firmer and more glossy, the muscles stronger, the
hair and nails grew much more rapidly than before, and the
painful eczema ceased. The grow'th of hair on the body and
pubes was very striking, many new' dark hairs being visible.
He could take long w'alks, mount stairs easily, and carry on hard


work without weariness. His memory improved noticeably,
and became much more alert and precise. He can perform the
sexual act normally once a week. He gained about 16 lbs in
the eight months following the operation.
On August 13, 1920 (18 months after operation) he was
examined. He looked very well. Good growth of hair on head
and face. Eyebrows thick. Skin soft and silky. No sign of
former eczema. Nails not brittle. Pulse normal. Blood pres-
sure moderately high. Heart sounds good.
Case 3. (Lichtenstern).
W. K. Accountant. 61. Admitted to hospital December
12, 1919. For a long time he had had slight bladder trouble,
and turbidity of the urine. His capacity for work has declined
greatly in recent years. He gets tired very easily, and any
physical exertion distresses him. Climbing stairs, or walking far,
gives him heart trouble and shortness of breath. He used to
be a very enthusiastic Alpinist, but was obliged to give up this
sport years ago on account of the heart trouble.
O. E. Slight, gracefully built, small man, very pale.
Looks worn out, exhausted, prematurely senile. Skin dry and
scurfy, especially on the forearms and abdomen and the front
of the joints. Face very wrinkled. Hair of head sparse and
grey, beard thin, sparse hair on body and limbs. Blood pressure
high. Has disease of the aorta and of the arterial walls. Lungs
show senile changes. Prostate enlarged. There is a stone in
the bladder, which however causes little inconvenience.
December 23, 1919. Under local anaesthesia, the stone was
removed, and at the same time vasectomy was performed on
both sides. Healing of the operation wounds was slow, for the
patient's healing power was slight. No results of the vasectomy
were noticed for some months. But about five months after the
operation a striking improvement, both physical and mental,
took place. In spite of the food shortage, the patient put on
weight, his capacity for work increased remarkably, so that he
could carry out his office-work with ease, mount the four flights
of stairs to his apartments without difficulty several times a
a day, free from trouble with his heart or breathing. The
trembling of his hands which had often been a nuisance to him
when writing, completely disappeared.
In August, 1920, he spent a holiday in the mountains and
climbed a mountain of 3,700 feet altitude, the road up which was
very steep, without undue weariness. Sexual desire had greatly
increased. He can perform coitus several times a week without
tiring himself. One of the first things one notices about this
patient is the change in his skin, which has become smooth,


glossy, moist and elastic. His wrinkles have largely disappeared.
Growth of hair on body much thicker. Blood pressure about
normal. Pulse normal and regular. Hair, beard and nails
grow rapidly.
Case 4, (Lichtenstern).
B. L. 58. Commercial traveller. Admitted to hospital
November iz, 1919. For years past this patient has suffered
from inflammation of the bladder. Has to pass his urine
frequently and sometimes has pain after it. Capacity for work
has been decreasing for some years. Can no longer ’ follow his
occupation, and any exertion such as climbing stairs or walking
any distance exhausts him and upsets his heart. Frequently, in
recent years he has had attacks of heart weakness which his
doctor diagnosed as Angina Pectoris.
O. E.* , Medium height, very thin, looks like a man in the
late sixties. Skin very dry. Face very wrinkled, like crepe.
Skin of abdomen and limbs wrinkled, scurfy and inelastic. Hair
and beard sparse and grey. Not much hair on body and limbs.
The arcus senilis, a sign of age, is beginning to appear in both
eyes. No teeth. Lungs do not expand normally, and show
degenerative changes of old age. Heart sounds impure, arterial
walls show calcification. Reflexes normal. Blood pressure high.
Prostate rather enlarged. Cannot empty his bladder completely.
Kidneys normal. His bladder condition improved under treat-
ment, and December 5, 1919, double vasectomy was performed
under local anaesthesia. No change occurred while he remained
in hospital, and he was soon sent home to the care of his own
doctor. Nine months later his own doctor reported as follows :
B. L. was treated by me for 18 months for arteriosclerosis and
and prostatic trouble, and was sent into hospital for inflamma-
tion of the bladder. He returned a few weeks later improved,
and the treatment of the bladder was continued in his own
home. But he had frequent attacks of angina, so that it was
only possible to keep him alive with powerful injections of caffein
and other drugs. The heart trouble and the consequent con-
gestion of the lungs and swelling of the legs continued for weeks
without improvement. But suddenly he began to improve,
and the attacks became rarer and slighter and finally ceased so
that the patient, who for weeks had been unable to get out of
bed, now demanded to be allowed up. He took several walks
and then wanted to go away on business. As he had improved
so greatly I let him risk a journey in the care of his wife. After
a while he felt so well that he no longer needed her care, so he
sent her home, and continued to travel alone, feeling quite well,
and doing good business. I must say that I had given up all


hope of the patient’s recovery, during the period of his most
serious attacks, and I had prepared his wife for what I considered
the inevitable end. His condition showed no improvement
under all the ordinary remedies, so that when this change took
place I told his wife that I considered it quite inexplicable.
Only a few days ago I heard for the first time of the operation
performed in hospital and its object.’’
From this report there can be no doubt that in this particular
case the striking improvement was the result of the vasectomy.
Case 5. (Lichtenstern).
J. S. 66. Merchant. Admitted to a nursing home
November 8, 1919. For six years symptoms of old age have
been appearing. Diminution of capacity for work, loss of body
weight amounting to 14 lbs. in the last three years in spite of
the best nourishment. Breathlessness on exertion. Rapid
weariness on mental work. Bladder trouble the last three years
—frequency of urination at night. In March he found that he
was unable to pass his urine, and since then has had to draw it
off regularly with a catheter. In spite of the greatest care he
has had frequent attacks of inflammation of the bladder, and
it therefore seemed necessary to remove the enlarged prostate.
The sexual desire has declined greatly during the last five years
and has been quite absent this last 12 months. Only possible
with the greatest effort to follow his occupation during the last
two years.
O. E. Medium height, delicately built, muscles poorly
developed, little fat. Thick grey hair on head. Beard, and hair
on body, pubes and limbs sparse. Face very wrinkled. Skin
dry and lustreless. Skin peeling on both front and back of
joints. Blood pressure high. Arteries calcified. Pulse ir-
regular. Heart enlarged and sounds impure. Prostate enlarged
and soft. After passing as much urine as he can there still
remains a pint in the bladder.
On November 12, 1919, the enlarged prostate was removed
under local anaesthesia. He had no rise of temperature, but the
wound healed very slowly. After four weeks the wound was
still not fully healed, and in spite of the greatest care, the patient
did not make good progress. The kidneys were working well
and no organic reason for his poor condition could be found.
As his physical condition was bad, and as he was very depressed,
it was decided to do a double vasectomy in the hope of improving
his condition.
On December 21, 1919, we explained that we wished to
freshen the edges of the wound to promote healing, and while


doing this we also carted out a double vasectomy without the
patient's knowledge.
Six weeks later a striking improvement became apparent.
Appetite improved and patient felt better. Three months later
he had put on 8 lbs. weight, and was passing urine normally.
Skin moist and glossy, and body-hair increasing. Noteworthy
revival of sexual desire. He has frequent erections and erotic
dreams. His capacity for work is good, and he does part of his
former work, easily and without weariness. Climbing stairs
and walking causes no undue difficulty.
August 12, 1921. Looks very well. Skin soft, supple and
elastic. Wrinkles scarcely noticeable. The peeling of the skin
has almost disappeared. Patient reports that he has sexual
intercourse regularly, that it does not tire him, but that on
the contrary, he feels perfectly fresh after it. He has resumed
all his former work, and accomplishes it with ease.
In a letter which I received from Lichtenstern last June, he
told me that he has now performed this operation in 60 cases, with
very satisfactory results.
His next two cases are those of young persons, one an official,
aged 32, and the other a student of 29. In both of these there had
been noticeable since puberty a deficiency of sexual desire and potency,
rapid onset of weariness on mental work, lack of energy, and a certain
under-development of some of the secondary sexual signs. Both
patients had been treated for a long time with various medicines and
other therapeutic measures, including psycho-therapy without
success. At the urgent request of these patients a single-sided
vasectomy was performed.
Observation on these cases over ten months and six months
respectively has shown no visible improvement. They must be
regarded as instances where the operation has failed.
It is noteworthy that both these are young men who are suffering
from a congenital sexual defect. The only other case of failure which
I have been able to find in the literature at my disposal is also a young
man aged 31, whose defect was also congenital.
It is very probable that further experience will show that this
type of case is unsuitable for vasectomy (the autoplastic method)
and suitable for transplantation of a testicle from another individual
(the homoplastic method).
The history of the other case of failure is this ;
Case 4. (Levy-Lenz and Peter Schmidt).
H. E. 31 years old. Engineer. A strong well-nourished
man who has always been impotent. Erections were rare, and


discharge of semen was either much delayed or did not take
place at all.. All sorts of treatment had been tried, but without
success. Patient now wishes to marry. The organs and nervous
system were found to be normal. The patient had a varicocele
on the left side.
13.12.20. —Vasectomy on R. side.
17.12.20. —Patient left hospital.
20.12.20. —A noticeable swelling of the R. testicle and epi-
didymus. No temperature and no pain.
8.1.21. —The swelling of the testicle has disappeared, but
the epididymus is still swollen. Patient has no pain whatever
There is no change in his sexual potency up to the present.
26.2.21. —No change up to the present.
In addition to this one case of failure Lenz and Schmidt report
the following three successes :
Case 1. (Levy-Lenz and Peter Schmidt).
D. 51 years old. Complains of increasing debility, pains
in the back, quickly exhausted by physical or mental effort.
Sleeps badly at night. Falls asleep in the afternoon in his
office chair. Loss of memory is so bad that he fears he will
have to give up his work. For the past six moths has to pass
his urine frequently, by night as well as by day.
On examination we find him a prematurely aged man, well-
nourished. He is organically sound, but has a somewhat enlarged
prostate. Blood pressure normal.
26.10.20. —Under a general anesthetic the right vas deferens
was tied and cut.
28.10.20. —Patient insists on getting up.
30.10.20. —Patient left hospital.
4. 1 r. 20. —Stitches removed.
23.11.20. —-Patient reports “ To-day I am a little off colour
as I have a slight cold ; otherwise I am so well that I feel a new
man. Lumbago and trouble with the urine have disappeared.
.Mentally I feel clearer than I have for years. I need no after-
noon nap. I wake up early, about 5 a.m. feeling fresh. I do
not yet feel any change in my sexual desire, but do not mind
that. My renewed mental agility makes me very happy.”
25. ix. 20. —Condition still good and unchanged.
28.12.20. —Patient has put on considerable weight. Head-
aches and attacks of weakness have almost entirely disappeared.
Renewed pleasure in life and work. Considerable improvement
in the urinary trouble. He says he will be quite satisfied if
he keeps as well as he is now.


5. i. 21. —Patient in radiant health, further increase of
weight, and considerable improvement of eyesight. Good
conditions maintained.
May, 1921. —The authors add a manuscript note that
the patient has completely regained his sexual potency.
Case 2. (Levy-Lenz and Peter Schmidt).
F. 53 years old. A Russian. For several years has been
almost completely impotent. This occasions him severe mental
anguish, more for his mistress’ sake than his own.
On examination he is found to be strongly built. His hair
(what remains of it) is almost white. Facial expression depressed
and melancholy. No history of syphilis. Had gonorrhea 20
years ago. Organically sound.
12. n. 20. Vasectomy on right side.
18.11.20. —Stitches removed. Good condition.
24.11.20. —F. is very satisfied with his condition.
13.12.20. —Patient writes from abroad enthusiastically
that he feels very much better in every way psychically and
physically. Potency has decidedly improved.
26.2.21.—Condition the same.
May, 1921. —Effect of the operation much increased.
•Case 3. (Levy-Lenz and Peter Schmidt).
Sch. 62 years old. For some years has suffered from
increasing signs of age. Tiredness. Unable to think quickly
or to bear ordinary strain of business. Was formerly a bon
viveur but for years has been quite impotent. Feels very
unhappy. He has for years been under treatment for prostatic
enlargement and inflammation of the bladder.
On examination is found to be a weary old man. Thick
layer of fat. No grave organic changes. Blood pressure high.
Urine shows signs of inflammation of the bladder.
The bladder condition was treated, and on November 30,
1920, both vasae deferential were tied and cut.
1.12.20. —Patient feels well.
12.12.20. —He says, “ I wake early, feeling fresh, and
business matters, which formerly I would have left unattended
to for weeks, I now dispose of at once. I have good durable
erections, and not only when my bladder is full, as was formerly
the case.”
A few weeks later he was able to perform the sexual act
quite normally and with full satisfaction.


trouble which has lasted since
io. i. 21, Condition still equally good.
beginning to’ S °° d ’ ThiS pat ' ent is
increased! ° f ° peration considerably
analoglu^™sToTs?EitAr b R en !° ° btain m
testicfe into aman of a
he should attempt to wa \ natural that
tunity offered. other findings when an oppor-
femateftetroWi™?;™?‘"h"'" 8 ™ I™* 1 ™*" 1 ™ »f normal
sr ,hl =c.“
ow„2”"S; ( m4“"“i S“ d r f a .p™“ » or her
Of the most unfortunate disabilities 1 fro" ? ! east ’ one
suffer. Any possible means of ro«tn • 'S 110 * 1 individual can
this abnormality to normal is deserving of 1 !!, 11 ' 11311137 ub > ects of
vestigation, and as the first worker in thfs fLu l m ° St thorou S h ln-
the highest praise. 18 be d Lichtenstern merits
The following is the history of his first case
'u 30 years old, gunner. Admitted to hospital Mav
some nlmhf bS« had been «JIvS •
had very obvious female sexual characters . h pa nt
vestigation into his sexual history w L e
short^S- , irn h 'n had
was
aged 18, was described as being just like abov
smokes cigars. A vouno-pr Krr. + Rl •j- ; y ‘ bbe hunts and
seemed happily married The tw' . ° nly one brother
homosexual ;JractTces from had , been addicted to
feminine role He had fiSn^tNJ f alwayS the passive
offered himself to them willingly h He'S?'TauX* mCn ’ if nd
m the .rectum a, a comequenc. hir'd atil, E*d


He came from a well-to-do family, and had usually lived in big
towns, where he had had no difficulty in gratifying his inclina-
tions. Sometimes he had hired men to have intercourse with
him. He himself experienced the orgasm during such intercourse.
Very seldom he had had periods of attraction to women, the
longest lasting nine months. At such times he had intercourse
with women only occasionally, and it gave him no satisfaction.
"The whole episode always ended with a feeling of disgust towards
the female sex. For the past few years his homosexual relation-
ships were of a more Platonic nature, and loss of desire and
potency had set in and gradually become complete.
On examination he was found to be a man of middle height,
fair, well-nourished. Face had particularly soft contours.
Moustache sparse and soft. Well-developed swelling breasts,
like those of an average girl. Neck fat. Hips fat and prominent.
Pubic hair of the feminine type. A piece of testicle the size of
a hazelnut was present in the right side of the scrotum. The
prostate was abnormally small. Scar in the rectum from the
old gonorrhoea. Penis normal but small.
The patient was very nervous and effeminate in manner.
His appearance and speech were coquettish. When asked
questions about his sexual life he blushed and cast down his eyes.
Before the operation he made a will in favour of his male
“ friend ” of the moment.
He wished to be free from the eternal inconvenience caused
by his abnormality, and so consented to the removal of the
remaining testicle, and the transplantation of one from a normal
man. This was obtained from a married soldier who had come
into hospital to have it removed as it had not descended and
caused considerable pain.
The operation was performed on July ir, 1916 by Lichten-
stern.
Twelve days afterwards the patient announced that he had
erections, that he again felt sexual desire, but to his astonish-
ment it was directed towards women, not men. His sexual
dreams were also concerned with women. He could not remember
ever having had such a capacity for erections. A certain tender
relationship developed between him and his female nurse, which
had to be stopped. Soon after, he tore up the will in favour
of his male friend.
In the next few weeks his heterosexual feelings increased.
Memories of his former sexual habits were very painful, but
when questioned he answered quite frankly and freely, without
blushing or casting down his eyes. Six weeks after the operation


lie had normal sexual intercourse, and again freequently in
the following weeks and months. He was very happy over his
return to the normal. In addition he was much more active
relt more inclined for work, and his memory was much improved'.
Jnis appearance now was distinctly masculine. He was dis-
charged cured in November, 1916, and returned to light duties
in the army.
In the spring of 1917 he fell in love with a youm* girl and
became engaged to her. In June 1917 he married. In fulv he
reported that his health was very good, that he lived in happy
relationship with his wife, and that he looked back on his former
sexual habits with disgust. In November he was examined bv
Hr L ICHTENSTERNj and gtated that he had remained norma j
without any relapse into his former condition. His body had
altered no less than his mind. The female secondary sexual
characters had disappeared. The layer of fat, the feminine
bosom, and the prominent hips were gone. The male secondary
sexual characters had developed. The pubic hair had became
coarser and thicker and masculine in character. Hair had ap-
peared on the breasts. The moustache had grown and the
muscles had become better developed.
In a letter to me dated October 38, last, Lichtenstern in-
tormed me that this patient had been under his personal observa-
tion constantly, and that the cure remained absolute, having
lasted up to that time, for five and a half years. 5
Case 2. (Muhsam),
This patient was sent by Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld, to be
cured of his bisexuality. He was an intelligent young medical
man, who quite understood all aspects of his own sexual dis-
position He was 26 years of age at the beginning of the treat-
He had been conscious of bisexual feelings since 18
We had never had intercourse with a woman. He tried to but could
never get sufficiently excited to manage it. He had never
indulged in sexual practices with men. He felt attracted towards
men, and had had special difficulty while serving in the army
as he was constantly in the company of young men. He always
succeeded in controlling himself, and satisfied himself by mastur-
bating inoderately. He had been treated in the summer of
effect WUh mjeCtl ° nS ° f extracts of bull’s testicles without any
On April 9, 1919 a transplantation of a testicle from a normal
man was performed. The graft took perfectly. From ten
days to four weeks after the operation the patient had a period
ot strong attraction towards women. This was doubtless due
•to the primary absorption of hormones from the graft which


usually occurs soon after the operation. This declined then,,
and later returned. In June, he had connection with a woman
tor the first time. In August he noticed a permanent increase
in the pleasure afforded by women's society.
In April 1920, a year after operation, he no longer felt any
desire for men ; but on the contrary was decidedly attracted
by young girls. He had normal connections attended’ bv normal
satisfaction.
7.2.21. —This patient can be regarded as completely normal.
There is nothing to remind him of the former direction of his
sexual desire. In the autumn of last year he married, and lives
a happy conjugal life.
June, 1921. —No change. The success of the operation
continues undiminished.
Case 4. (Muhsam).
Man aged 26. Formerly he was not quite unattracted by
the female sex, but not specially interested in it. During the
war, in which he served as an officer, he felt strongly homosexual,
and all interest in women disappeared. His abnormality made
him very unhappy. He never actually indulged in homosexual
practices with other men. He masturbated freely, always
thinking of males at such times.
On September 29, 1920, he had one testicle removed, and
one from a normal male grafted into his abdominal muscles.
He had a strong desire to be cured, but at first there seemed to
be no change whatever. He declared himself to be very un-
happy, showed the same shyness and aversion to females, and
the same attraction towards men. But in January, 1921, he
noticed a growing attraction towards the female sex. He had
erections, especially on meeting a certain woman, and had normal
erotic dreams.
June, 1921. —Mu hsam reports : This patient has shown a
marked predilection for the feminine sex. He reports that he
now feels and behaves like a normal man.
Case 3. (Muhsam).
This patient was sent by Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld, and was
a doctor, aged 27. As long as he can remember he has only
been attracted to his own sex. A brother of his is also homo-
sexual. The patient served during the war, and became an
efficient officer, but once attempted suicide, owing to the diffi-
culties caused by his disposition. He has never had connection
with a woman, owing to complete absence of any desire in that
direction. He has always regarded his tendency as abnormal,
and wishes to be cured of it.


O. E. He was a weak timid young man with only moderate
growth of hair on the face and body, but he had no very notice-
able feminine sex characters.
On April 28, 1920 the right testicle was removed, and a
healthy testicle from a strong normal man of 18 was grafted into
the abdominal muscles. From the fifth day the patient awoke in
the morning with erections, accompanied by thoughts directed
towards a woman. From this time forward his erotic dreams
were only concerned with women, and he ceased to understand
his former desire. After 14 days a period of frigidity set in.
The patient noticed however that while he felt pleasure at
the sight of handsome young men it was no longer accompanied
by sexual excitement. The interest in the female sex continued
to increase. He had erotic dreams concerned with women, and
felt drawn, though only platonically, towards a girl he knew.
In short there were, according to his own observations, several
indications that his sexual feelings had undergone a reversal
from the homosexual to the normal. At the time of publication
of this case he was being kept under observation for the purpose
of coming to a final conclusion as to the success of the operation.
7.2.21. —The observation of this patient is of great interest.
In his case as time went on he noticed a gradual decline of his
desire for the female sex. It did not entirely disappear but was
clearly weaker. At the same time there was an increase of
homosexual feeling again, which gradually became so strong
that he himself said that he was bisexual. As he wished to
become normal, and as he was inspired with great confidence by
the result of the first operation, he was operated on again, this
time by Dr. Muhsam’s chief assistant, Dr. Eylenberg. Another
testicle from a normal man was grafted into him on July 22,
1920. Convalescence was uneventful and the patient left
hospital a week later. The fifth night after the operation he
had a markedly heterosexual erotic dream, with erection but
without emission of semen. No further sign of any change
occurred, so that the patient not only returned to his circle of
homosexual friends, but gradually even gave up all desire to
become normal. He said himself that he had “ arranged to
continue his life as a homosexual.” He was amazed, therefore,
to find in January, 1921, that he commenced to have heterosexual
dreams, and noticed an increasing pleasure in the female sex,
which for some time had produced an actually unpleasant effect
on him.
June, 1921. —The homosexuality has reappeared in this
patient. The operation has not been successful.


The failure of this case is not difficult to understand. Since
the testicles of the homosexual are in some way abnormal, and
exert an abnormal effect on the owner, it will be necessary to
remove both of them in order to get rid of their pernicious
influence, before attempting to change the direction of the
patient's sexual desire by grafting a testicle from a norma!
man.
Success may in some cases be obtained by the removal of
only one before the graft, but in many cases unless both are
removed the operation must be expected to fail. The last-
mentioned history is an example of such a failure. The omission
of the surgeon to secure a condition favourable to a successful
result, by removing both the patient's own testicles before grafting
the testicle from a normal individual, was due to his disinclination
to render such a young man sterile.
I have contented myself with giving you to-night the practical
results of Steinach’s work, as free as possible from technical details,
and leaving untouched the question of the microscopic structure of
the testicle and ovary, and the theory which Steinach puts forward
as to the particular cells which produce the hormones.
Nor will I spend any time in the details of the operations, except
to say that they are very simple, and can be performed with
ease by any competent surgeon. From the patient’s point of view,
which, of course is the one which will interest you most, it is attended
with little or no pain, and simply entails rest in bed for a period of
about four days.
Now a few words as to the source of the testicles for transplanta-
tion. Up to the present, it has been customary to use whenever pos-
sible, what is known as an undescended testicle, from another man.
The testicle in the embryo is inside the abdominal cavity, near the
kidney, and does not reach its position in the scrotum till just before
birth. In some people it fails to descend fully, and under these
circumstances may give rise to pain and therefore have to be removed.
These undescended testicles are very suitable for grafting.
In some few cases a father, a brother, or a friend has offered to
give one of his own testicles to restore the happiness of the patient,
but such self-sacrifice is hardly likely to be common.
In America testicles taken from criminals immediately after
execution, and from the bodies of those who have died suddenly from
some external accident, have been grafted with a delay of only a
few hours, and with good results. Here we have an indication of a
source of supply which is capable of great development.
It is, of course, very necessary to use every test to ascertain
that the person from whom the testicle is taken is sexually normal.


is in good health, and especially is not suffering from syphilis or tuber-
culosis.
Some workers have transplanted testicles from other animals
into man, and in some cases temporary results have been obtained,
suc “ < r ases graft is absorbed after a varying interval, and
the effects disappear.
In some cases of castration necessary owing to accident it is
possible to graft part of the patient’s own testicle and so avert the
onset of symptoms.
I regret that I am unable to offer you any information to-night
as to the application of Steinach’s work to woman. The German and
Austrian workers whose reports I have been able to see seem to have
neglected this aspect of it up to the present, and I have not had time
to search elsewhere for cases.
In woman there is no possibility of an autoplastic method, as
the ovary has no duct of its own ; and as there is no female condition
analogous to that of undescended testicle, the supply of material
for grafts is limited to voluntary donations of ovaries from mother,
sister or friend, and to glands obtained soon after death from suitable
corpses.
I am conscious that my paper has many shortcomings. For
its preparation I have had to snatch odd moments in the intervals of
my professional work, and as I was able to complete the translations
of the German and Spanish reports only last week, I have had a
very short time for the actual writing of the paper. I shall be content
if it has proved even half as interesting for you to hear, as it was
for me to prepare.


List of the Society’s Publications:
1. POLICY AND PRINCIPLES. GENERAL AIMS. 6d.
2. THE SOCIAL PROBLEM OF SEXUAL INVERSION.
6d.,
For Members only, a limited number remaining.
3. SEXUAL VARIETY AND VARIABILITY AMONG
WOMEN. F. W. Stella Browne. fid.
4. THE RELATION OF FELLOW-FEELING TO SEX.
L. Housman. 6d.
s- THE EROTIC RIGHTS OF WOMEN, AND THE
OBJECTS OF MARRIAGE. Havelock Ellis. is.
6. THE MARQUIS DE SADE: A Study in Algolagnia.
Montague Summers, M.A., F.R.S.L. is.
7. THE SOCIAL VALUE OF THE STUDY OF SEX
PSYCHOLOGY. The Rev. H. Northcote, M.A. is,
8. THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL MODESTY.
Edward Westermarck. IS-
9. THE PLAY-FUNCTION OF SEX. Havelock Ellis, is.
10. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF THE CHILD. Eden Paul. is.
xi. REJUVENATION: Steinach’s Researches on the Sex-Glands.
Eden Paul, M.D., and Norman Haire, Ch.M., M.B. is. 6d.
Postage 2d.
