

Pervv Pfm
“Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; and
unto God the thines that are God’s.” — Matt. 32:21,


Religion and the State.
The relationship of the church and the state, of
religion and the civil government, is a question that
does not belong alone to past ages. It is a living issue
to-day, and it will continue to be such while the church
and civil government exist.
The church and the state are institutions ordained of
God for the benefit of man. But like other wise pro-
visions for his good, they may be perverted; they may
be turned from their true purpose, and be used to
injure man. The good or the harm that the church and
the state may do to those connected with them, depends
very much upon the relation they maintain to one
another; and the relation they may maintain depends
upon the views of the church and the state held by those
entrusted with their management. In the maintenance
of their proper relations is bound up the rights and
liberties of the people. For this reason, if for no other,
the relations of civil government and religion should
receive the most careful study by all who prize liberty,
either civil or religious.
There has been a great deal of misapprehension as to
the true relationship of the church to the state, and as


a result fearful injustice has been done to large numbers
of the human family. Unhappily we are not beyond
the possibility of misapprehension, and so are not beyond
the range of injustice.
Among heathen nations, civil government and religion
were united, and the government ruled religion. This
was especially true of the Roman Empire. That
government declared that: —
“No man shall have for himself particular gods of his
own. No man shall worship by himself any new or
foreign gods, unless they are authorised by the public
laws.”— Cicero.
Thus the state assumed the right to rule in all matters
of religion. The emperor ruled the state, and the state
ruled religion. The gods were national, the religion
was national, and the priests were but the servants of
the state. The state and the religion were inseparable.
To be indifferent to the religion was to show disrespect
to the state. To refuse obedience to the religion was
to rebel against the state. To introduce a new religion
was “high treason.” The penalty for treason was
death.
During the reign of the Csesars, Christ, the founder of
Christianity, appeared among men. He revealed to the
world a God unknown and unacknowledged by Rome.
He taught a new religion, and denied that Caesar had
the right to interfere with the religion of his subjects.
This new religion was embraced, and its founder
worshipped, by thousands of Roman citizens.
For thus changing their religion, these hitherto loyal
citizens were looked upon by the state as rebels and
traitors, notwithstanding they still paid tribute to


Caesar, and rendered cheerful obedience to every require-
ment of the government, except in the matter of
religion. They were arraigned before the authorities,
accused, found guilty, and ordered to renounce their
religion, or suffer the penalties of the laws. The former
they could not conscientiously do, so they submitted to
the latter.
Thus began the pagan persecutions, accounts of
which fill us with shame for humanity. The gray-
haired sire, the delicate maiden, and the innocent youth
were dragged to the amphitheatre, subjected to the
most shocking barbarities, and finally, for the sport of
the exulting populace, thrown alive to wild beasts
in the arena. Thousands more were cruelly persecuted,
and put to death in various ways.
All this, and much more, was done by the state,
because it claimed the right to control the religion of Us
citizens, and because these citizens could not believe
and obey the religion of the state.
It is now declared that the state did these citizens
great injustice by thus persecuting them. But the
state did not view it in that light. The right to control
the religion of its subjects was a fundamental principle
of the government. In order to control the religion, the
state must of necessity declare what religion shall be
observed, and enact laws against all other religions.
And to give the laws force, it must punish those who
violate the laws. The enforcement of just penalties for
the violation of just laws is not persecution. Rome
claimed that her laws were for the preservation of the
state, hence were just. She denied the charge of
persecution, and disclaimed any desire to persecute


anyone. And this is the argument of all governments
that claim the right to control religion.
But the Christians regarded the whole thing as
persecution. They denied the right of the state to
interfere with their religion. They claimed the rights of
conscience, and for these rights they struggled with
Christian heroism. The contest was long and bitter,
but victory, at the cost of millions of lives, came at last.
It was a victory that brought to the church the priceless
boon of religious liberty.
This victory gained by the church, proclaimed the
greatness of its power; and when this power was fully
recognised, unprincipled men courted the favour of the
church to further their selfish schemes. Among the
suitors were the emperors of Rome. When they found
that the state could not control the church, they
proposed that the church assist them to control the
state. For this they made large bids. They became
“Christians,” made the church costly presents, gave
bishops state honours, legislated to please the church,
and gave official positions to none but professed
Christians. Religion became popular, churches multi-
plied, bishops grew dizzy and grasped the reins of civil
government. Constantine and the bishops joined hands
in the management of spiritual and political affairs.
Thus a union was formed between church and state.
But this union was on a different basis from the union
of the Roman Empire and the Roman religion. In
the former union, the state was the head. The state
controlled religion, and used it as a servant for political
ends. In the latter union, the church was the head.
The church ruled the state, and turned it into a


powerful engine for accomplishing its unlawful schemes.
And now mark the result. Instead of granting to all
within its sway that favour for which it had so long
and nobly struggled—the rights of conscience—the
church robbed them of every right, both civil and
religious. The church became a relentless persecutor,
and used the civil power to inflict horrible barbarities
upon those it was pleased to call heretics.
But men still lived who cherished liberty, and who
protested against being deprived of it by either the
church or the state. Then a terrible conflict began.
It was not the church against the state, but both against
individuals, —-the strong against the weak. Century
after century rolled drearily by. The world’s midnight
came, and the instruments of torture and death were
kept busy in the effort to exterminate the principle of
liberty. Millions of noble lives were extinguished, but
the principle still lived; for it was divinely implanted in
the hearts of men, and was one of the sacred elements
of the religion taught by Jesus of Nazareth.
At last the power of the church was broken, and the
rights of conscience were once more granted to men.
In the great Reformation of the sixteenth century, the
state practically threw off the galling yoke of the church,
and civil government and religion were to a greater or
less extent divorced.
This was the dawning of a new era. The present
generation is enjoying the liberty won in the last great
struggle for the rights of conscience. But the liberty
gained is not complete in all countries, nor is what we
have, insured in any way. It is an acknowledged truth
that history repeats itself. And there is at this present


time a strong tendency in various countries to revive
the union of church and state.
Neither the church in its present condition nor the
state is able to meet the mighty tide of evil that is
rising, and it is thought that by uniting they may be
more successful in their efforts. The state covets the
influence of the churches, and the churches clamour for
the assistance of the state —for the power of the civil
arm. But the whole history of the past has shown that
such a union, when permitted to operate, has been fatal
to the welfare of both the church and the state, and has
augmented the evil they have endeavoured to destroy.
It has resulted in injustice, persecution, and religious
wars.
On what grounds, then, can the present generation be
justified in attempting to revive inoperative church and
state unions, or to form new ones? Were past unions
formed on a wrong basis ? Has a better scheme been
developed? Have the institutions themselves so
changed that a union can now be formed that will prove
beneficial to both ? or is the whole thing an ignus fatuus ?
By reason of the nature of man, the constitution of
society, and the legitimate functions of civil government
and religion, no union of church and state can prove
beneficial to man.
The church and the state are ordained for different
purposes. The realm of one is in no sense the realm of
the other; hence there can be no union except at the
peril of both. The well being of each lies in entire,
yet friendly, separation.
This important proposition is susceptible of the
clearest demonstration. We have but to define these


organisations and compare the functions of each, to see
that, although not antagonistic, they are ordained for
totally different purposes—purposes so different that
they cannot be blended.
THE STATE
Is defined to be: “A political body or body politic;
the whole body of people united under one government,
whatever may be the form of the government.”
Thus the state is not only a body of people; it is a
political body; it is a body politic. Politics are inseparably
connected with the state from the fadl that it is a
political body.
That which is political pertains to public policy, to
state affairs, to national measures. It “has to do with
the regulations and government of a nation or state,
the preservation of its safety, peace, and prosperity, and
the defence of its existence.” Politics belong to citizens
as citizens.
For this reason state governments are called civil
governments. The word civil used to designate earthly
governments is expressive. It at once conveys to the
mind the domain of the government. It is defined thus;
“Civil: pertaining to a city or a state, or a citizen in
his relations to his fellow-citizens or the state.”
From these definitions it is obvious that the legitimate
functions of the state are national, political, civil, and
that these are designed to regulate the condudt of
citizens with their fellow-citizens. They have no
reference whatever to religion, nor to the relation of
men to their Creator. Political ethics are altogether
outside the realm of the spiritual.


The rulers of civil governments are civil rulers, and
their laws are civil laws. Their aim is to promote
civility. They define the social privileges and civil
duties of all within their jurisdiction. Civil government
springs from the people, and derives its authority and
just powers from the consent of the people. It exists
for the protection of the lives, property, and natural
rights of its citizens. Its purpose is to promote the
welfare of its subjects by securing to them every
advantage that does not conflict with the rights of
others.
Thus civil government relates only to the temporal
things of this world, and to this end it is ordained of
God.
THE CHURCH.
But the church is another institution entirely. It is
defined as: “A formally organised body of Christian
believers, observing the same rites, and acknowledging
the same ecclesiastical authority.”
It will be observed that the church is designated by
very different words from those used to define the state.
It is a Christian, not a political body. Its foundation is in
heaven; for it is built upon the eternal Rock, Christ
Jesus. Eph. 2:20. It is “the church of the living
God.” I Tim. 3:15. Its origin is divine, and its realm
is the spiritual. The head of the church is Christ, and
the church itself is the body of Christ. Eph. 1:22, 23.
Every one that is in Christ is a member of his body.
Eph. 5:30. And as the head diredls the whole body
and governs every movement of the limbs, so Christ
designs to direCt his spiritual body, the church. 'He
himself arranged its organisation, designated the various


offices to be performed, and reserved the right to direct
how men shall be chosen to fill these important offices.
In fact, He alone can fit human beings to perform the
functions of the church.
The church is a sacred organisation. We read that
Christ loved the church, and gave Himself for it, that
He might samftify it by the Word, and “present it to
Himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blemish.” Eph. 5:25-27. Such is the exalted,
holy character the church must possess, and as the
spiritual, moral tone of the church as a body depends
on the spirituality and purity of each individual member
composing it, every person who connects with the
church is required to be holy. “Be ye holy for lam
holy” is the command of God. 1 Pet. 1; 16. There
is no political organisation on earth that in any way
meets, or can meet, the requirements of the church.
How, then, can there be a union between the church
and the state?
Instead of union with the world, the church is
admonished to come out and be separate. 2 Cor.
6:14-17. The sense in which the church is called
out from the world, and in which it must be separate
from the state, is made very plain both by the teaching
and by the example of Christ when He was on earth. To
those who opposed Him He said, “Ye are from beneath,
I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of
this world.” John 8:23. And this is just the relation
his church must hold to the world. In his last prayer
for his followers, and for all who should become
his followers, He said, “ I pray not that Thou


shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou
shouldest keep them from the evil. They are not of
the world, even as I am not of the world. ... As
Thou hast sent Me into the world, even so have I also
sent them into the world.” John 17:15, 16, 18. Christ
was in this world, but he was not of it; and this must
be true of his church.
Now, this means not only separation from sin, but
that the church as a church shall be separate
from the state as a state. The whole life of Christ on
earth teaches this. He was a great man, the wisest,
the noblest, the best the world has ever seen. He was
God. When on earth, He was in a province, a world,
of his own. He had made it. His knowledge of men
and their natural rights, and the duties they owe to one
another, was absolute. He possessed every qualification
for a great politician, judge, and civil ruler.
Had Christ intended that his ministers and his church
should unite with the body politic in the management
of civil affairs, He surely would have set the example ;
but during his whole ministry He kept religion and civil
matters entirely separate. On one occasion, a man who
had evidently been impressed with his infinite wisdom,
asked Him to adjust a civil matter for him. But Christ
said, “ Man, who made Me a judge or a divider over
you?” Luke 12:14. He refused to bring such
matters within the domain of religion. To Pilate He
declared that his kingdom was not of this world.
John 18:36. And when Peter used his sword to defend
his innocent Master, Christ reproved him, and wrought
a miracle to heal the wound he had inflidted. These
incidents in the life of Christ speak volumes on the


question of church and state relationship. They teach
absolute separation.
But the separation enjoined by Christ was a proper
one. It was a friendly separation. He did not oppose
civil government. On the contrary, He sustained it.
In attempting to entangle Him in his teaching
respecting the church and the state, his enemies asked,
“Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not ? ” His
prompt and emphatic reply was, “Render therefore
unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s, and unto God
the things that are God’s.” Matt. 22:15-22.
Caesar, being the emperor of the world, here repre-
sents civil government. In this statement Christ
recognised the rights of civil government; and his
command is to render to the government its just dues.
He Himself did this. All through his life He complied
with the just requirements of the state.
But this statement of Christ does more than to
recognise that civil government has rights; it limits its
rights. He says, “ Render unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s.”
Everything does not belong to Cassar. Some things
belong to God alone. We are to render to each
his own. God does not ask man to render to
Him that which belongs to Caesar, and He for-
bids our rendering to Caesar that which is God’s.
And we are to render direCt to each that which is his.
Civil government does not stand in the place of God.
It is not the custodian of the things of God.
To it has never been given the right to receive from
man that which belongs to God. Hence, the things of
God cannot be rendered to Him through the govern-


ment —they must go diredl. Therefore render to civil
government the things that belong to civil government,
and to God the things that belong to God.
The things that belong to civil government are civil
duties, those duties which citizens owe to each other.
Every citizen possesses certain natural rights, such as
life, liberty, honour, chastity, and the acquirement of
property. No other citizen nor any number of citizens
can justly interfere with these rights. To do so would
be uncivil. It is the province of civil government to
promote civility, and so to protect every citizen in the
enjoyment of his rights. Hence every citizen must
render to the government the civility that belongs
to it.
The things that belong to God are religious or moral
duties. Religion is defined to be :
“ The recognition of God as an objedt of worship,
love, and obedience.” It is “man’s personal relation of
faith and obedience to God.”
By comparing these definitions of religion with those
of civility, it will not be difficult to see the distindlion
between civility and religion. Civility pertains to citizens
in their relations to their fellow-citizens. Religion pertains to
man's personal relation of faith and obedience to God. There-
fore civil duties are the things that man must render to
civil government, and religious duties are the things
that he must render to God. And as Christ forbids
rendering to civil government what belongs to God,
and as religion is what belongs to God, it is very evident
that civil government cannot of right have anything to
do with religion.


None but the Eternal God can define man’s relation
to Himself; God alone can measure the fulness of man’s
religious obligations; He alone can determine true
obedience and render suitable rewards. And surely
none but God can know the degree of guilt attached to
him ■who falls short, and decide the amount of punish-
ment he should receive. Now if the state can neither
define religious duties, determine true obedience,
measure the guilt of the disobedient, nor reward
either party, —if the state is incompetent to do these
things, it certainly cannot enjoin religion on any of
its subjects.
Nor is this all. The state cannot teach religion. It is
not ordained for that purpose. It has not the credentials
for such work. It has never received the commission
northe necessary power. That work is committed to
the family and to the church. It was to that end that
the church was established. It was to the church, not
the state, that Christ said, “Go ye therefore, and teach
all nations.” And He adds, “ Lo, lam with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.” In another place He
told them that He would be with them by his Holy
Spirit. This, He said, would give them the assistance
and power they needed to teach religion to good effedt.
He then enjoined them thus, “But tarry ye in the city
ot Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on
high.” Luke 24:49.
From these considerations it'is plain that the duty of
teaching and promoting religion has not been committed
to the state. What a mistake, then, for the state to
attempt to do that which it never can do with success !
And how strange it is that some Christian people


persist in demanding that the state do this work! It is
generally understood that ministers of the gospel,
church officers, and Sabbath-school teachers should be
devout Christians. They should believe the Bible and
love God. But why ?—Because they are to teach religion.
On what grounds, then, can we ask the state—a
political institution—to do a work of that character ?
Let the church and the family do the work that
rightfully belongs to them ; and let the state do that
for which it is ordained of God.
That civil governments are ordained of God, and
that they are ordained for the protection of the life,
liberty, prosperity, and temporal well-being of man, is
certainly the teaching of the Bible. Writing to the
Christians at Rome, who were suffering bitter perse-
cutions for their religion, Paul said, “The powers {hat
be are ordained of God.” And to show for what they
are ordained he said, “For this cause pay ye tribute
also; for they are God’s ministers attending continually
upon this very thing. Render therefore to all their
dues; tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom
custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.”
The powers that be, that is, civil governments, are
ordained of God. Government is the orderly arrange-
ment of society. It is the regulation, the control, of
society by the administration of laws. Without
government, society would be in a state of confusion,
of anarchy. But God, the author of society, is not a
God of confusion. “ Order is heaven’s first law.”
And to secure order among all the peoples of the
earth, God has instituted civil government; hence it
is ordained of God. It is not the form of the govern-


ment that is ordained of God, but “the genius of
government itself .”
But that civil government is ordained only for the
promotion of civil matters, and that it has nothing
whatever to do with religion, is certain from the example
of the Christians at Rome, and of Paul himself.
They were commanded by the powers that be, that
is, the Roman government, to renounce their new
religion and to honour the religion and gods of the
state. This they refused to do. They acknowledged
the divine authority of the government, but they knew
just how far that authority extended. They knew
that the government was ordained for civil matters
alone, and they knew that it had no right to invade the
sacred prccindls of the conscience. The government
was usurping the place of God when it entered the
domain of religion. And on that ground the Christians
took their stand. True, it cost them their lives. But
the rights of conscience, religious liberty, total separa-
tion of religion and the government,—all this was
dearer to them than life itself.
Their cause was right, and the right triumphed in
the end. And so it must ever be; “for right is right,
since God is God, and right the day must win.”
A. G. Danielle.
Price (post free) per dozen, I/- ; per 100, 6/-.
Address ECHO PUBLISHING CO., Best St, North Fitzroy, Melbourne, Victoria.
Australian Tract Society. 76 Pyrmont Bridge Road, Glebe, Sydney, N. S. W.
Or, New Zealand Tract Society, Banks Terrace, Wellington, N. Z.
