

2a.i&
Sy. <T .
j/SCt. '{pa
R.e uic.lo
B<2A Sr




Pt?TH v’chn
RELIGIOUS WANTS
NEW SOUTH WALES.




RELIGIOUS WANTS
OF THE COLONY OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
EXTRACTED FROM
THE COLONIAL MAGAZINE,
No. 6, FOR JULY, 1840.
FISHER, SON, & CO. PRINTERS.




RELIGIOUS WANTS OF THE COLONY OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Several, correspondents have suggested to us the propriety of making
known through our columns the religious wants of the colonies; and
no subject can assuredly be more interesting to us, or, we are per-
suaded, to the generality of our readers, than one which so intimately
affects the national honour; whilst bringing it forward may lead, under
the Divine blessing, to that supply being afforded them, which may wipe
away the reproach which has unfortunately too long attached to Great
Britain, that, notwithstanding her high privileges and pre-eminence as
Christian nation, she has been lamentably mean in the propagation of
her faith. “ The English,” declared Lord Macartney,* “ never attempt
to disturb or dispute the worship or tenets of others; they come
to China with no such views; they have no priests or chaplains with
them, as other European nations have.”
Too consonant with this principle has been the course pursued with
respect to her colonies; whilst the rulers of our nation have thus
courteously refrained from interfering with the faith and tenets, however
absurd, of those countries with whom it has been politic and wise to
promote the relations of commerce, and have so plainly shown that,
like Gallic, they “ cared for none of these things,” as far as foreigners
were concerned ; their practical infidelity has been carried yet a step
further, and has evinced, with respect to our own colonies, that even
that which may emphatically be termed “ the children’s bread,” has
been withholden from them, not that it might be “ cast to the dogs,’’
but as not being the “ one thing needful ” for them.
The colony of New South Wales was, to the reproach of the nation,
almost founded—and only preserved from it (under Providence) by the
charitable intervention and remonstrances of a private individual—
unblessed by the ordinances of religion: and notwithstanding that
interference, it was “ left to the care of a single clergyman for the
first six years of its existence, and of two for the next six, and one
for a third period of the same extent.” “ For six years the clergy-
man had to celebrate divine worship in the open air.” The first
“ temporary building appropriated to the purpose was built at his
own expense,” and when, four years after the establishment of the
* Journal—Embassy to China, Oct. 21, 1793.


colony, some Spanish ships of war visited it on a voyage of discovery,
nothing they saw elicited more surprise than that there was no church
provided for religious worship. It was justly remarked by these
foreigners, that “ had the colony been founded by their own nation, their
first care would have been to build a temple for the worship of Almighty
God.” Just was the remark, and pointed the reproof. Does Protestant
England glory (God forbid that she should glory but in the cross of
Christ) is England privileged with a purer faith ; and does she yet
evince less zeal than those nations whose many temples consecrated to
divine worship in every country where the Romish faith prevails, show
the sincerity at least of their belief, in the means taken to inculcate it
amongst others! It is not, however, our intention to review the past,
but to bring into notice the present state of the church in the colonies;
and we commence with that of one on many accounts most interesting
to our readers, viz. New South Wales. We avail ourselves for our
present purpose of the statement, which has been recently put forth by
Mr. Justice Burton, one of the judges of that colony, and we shall be
equally ready to give insertion in our columns to those who are
acquainted with the religious state of other parts of the Queen’s
dominions. We are well assured that in this work we are faithfully
serving our generation, and shall therefore, without apology, place before
our readers such extracts from the work which has been referred to,
as we think will both interest them, and persuade them individually to
do their duty towards their Christian brethren in that remote settle-
ment.
“ The number of Protestants at any one time attending divine worship, at the
commencement of 1839, cannot, it is feared, be estimated at more than 11,000.
Of these, the number attending the ministrations of the clergy of the church of
England was about 7,000, the number attending the ministrations of the clergy
of the Presbyterian church about 2,000, the number attached to the Wesleyan
connexion 1,450, those attending the Independent congregation 300, the Baptist
300, and the Quakers about 50.*
“ This estimate is formed with respect to the number attending divine worship
in 1839; at that time the general population of the colony had been increased
from 77,096 (the number in 1836) to about 102,000 ; the number of Protestants at
* The numbers attending at the Church of England, and the Presbyterian
churches and chapels, will be at once recognized as not including the whole
number of members of either church ; owing to various circumstances, as remote-
ness of place of residence, and others, persons, who are yet members, become, it is
obvious, irregular in their attendance : the attendance is not always composed of
the same persons. The numbers of the Wesleyans are of those in actual con-
nexion with them.


tie former period being 54,621; what proportion of the additional population was
of the same denomination, there are at present no means of ascertaining.
“ The number of Roman Catholics attending divine worship, in 1836, was not
estimated at more than 2,450 ;• the Roman Catholic portion of the community
being at the same time 21,898. The number of persons of that profession, and of
their congregations in 1839, is unknown.
“ No exact estimate can be formed of the proportion between those who could
attend divine worship, and did not; this would depend upon the exact number of
persons who were, at the time to which the calculation should be applied, without
the limits of location, or ‘ without the boundaries,’ (as it was improperly termed,)
in road parties and ironed gangs, in penal settlements, in colonial vessels at sea,
in the different gaols of the colony, and at stations so remote from the places of
public worship, as to render their attendance impracticable. It is not possible
very accurately to calculate their number. Some idea may, however, be formed
of it from a view of the distribution of the population at the time of taking the
last census, in 1836. The persons in these unfortunate situations must, it is
obvious, in many instances, have been proportionably increased, as the general
population of the colony has increased since that period.
“ The number of persons without the limits of location, in ironed gangs, and at
the penal settlements, was then reported as being 12,929 Protestants, and 5,539
Roman Catholics—the number in colonial vessels at sea was, Protestants 850,
Roman Catholics, 325; in all, 19,643 persons, f
“ There were also ten counties for which there was no minister of religion of
any denomination, and these counties contained at that time 6,667 Protestants, and
2,867 Roman Catholics—total 9,534; three of these (as will be subsequently
noticed) have since obtained the benefit of a Presbyterian clergyman, but none of
them have yet, either one of the Church of England, or of the Church of Rome.
“ Thus it will appear, that in the year 1836, when the whole population
amounted only to 77,096, so large a proportion as 29,177 were in situations in
which it was impossible for them to attend the ordinary ministrations of religion,
exclusive of that additional number, who, being at large, were yet unable to attend
them from their distance.
“ At the commencement of the year 1839 there were thirty-two places at which
private subscriptions had been entered into in the colony for the erection of
churches, to be consecrated according to the rites of the Church of England,
amounting to upwards of eleven thousand pounds; and ten other places, at which
churches were in progress of erection, and undertaken for, at an estimated cost of
upwards of twenty thousand pounds.
“ These undertakings by no means meet the urgent want which is still felt in
every part of the colony. The number of projected churches, and the amount of
private subscriptions, give proof that the desire of the inhabitants is most strongly
towards the tabernacles of the Church of England, yet few in comparison with the
Blue Book for 1837.
f Some estimate of the increase of these persons in 1839 may be formed from
the fact, with respect to the numbers without the limits of location; these were
reported in the census of 1836 at 2,968, but the commissioners of crown-lands
reported their number in 1839 to be 4,380.


necessity are in actual progress of erection, and three only have been at present
added to their number.
“ The church room in the country districts in 1836 could only accommodate
3,000 persons, the number of Protestants in those districts being about 40,000.
« Trinity Church, at Bathurst, which had been commenced in 1834, before the
bishop’s visit to England, has been completed since his return.
“ St. Thomas’s Church at Mulgoa has been wholly built since that time, and
Addington Chapel, at O’Connell Plains, purchased and enlarged.*
In every part of the colony is the want of churches most urgent, not in the
distant parts alone, but in the county of Cumberland, where they are most nume-
rous, in the very neighbourhood of Sydney, on the opposite shores, and in the
coves of Port Jackson, and in none more than in Sydney itself. The want of
church accommodation in the town of Sydney is so great, as to cause many pro-
fessing a desire to attend the ordinances of the church to frequent the chapels of
other communities dissenting, some of them very widely, from her doctrines, and
some even impatient of her existence as a church, and gives occasion for excuse
to those who would otherwise have no excuse, for neglecting public worship alto-
gether.
“ Neither is the Church of St. Phillip, nor that of St. James, capable of receiv-
ing the continual applicants for accommodation, and instances of disappointment
of this kind have often most seriously affected the writer of these observations,
who has known young men brought up in the communion of the church prevented
by this cause from attending its ordinances, and in consequence either wholly
falling away from public worship, or attending other places. The comparison of
the number of the Protestant population of Sydney, with the amount of church
accommodation, will at once prove this statement.
« la 1836 there was room in the Churches of St. James and St. Philip in
Sydney for 2,300 persons, the number of Protestants at that time being 14 391,
and no additional church room has yet been obtained in the national church in
Sydney.
“ The intended cathedral church of St. Andrew cannot be expected to be avail-
able for Divine worship for three years to come, if its trustees labour in the mean
time under no want of pecuniary means, in which they are at present deficient,
and even then it will not supply accommodation for those who are now without it.
“ This, however, is the only church in actual progress of erection in Sydney,
while there are certainly now required not less than four others in that town,
besides those already contemplated ; viz. first, the substitution of a larger and more
convenient church for the small, ill-built, and now dilapidated church of St. Phil-
lip ; another in the centre of Sydney; another at its northern extremity, in the
parish of St. Phillip; and another in the neighbourhood of Darlinghurst. One
is also required near the southern extremity of the town, in the parish of Alex-
andria, and subscriptions have been entered into for the purpose of its erection.
“ The enlargement, maintenance, and repair of the churches already in being is
also, in a great measure, cast upon the members of the church ;no provision is
made for this purpose, or for the salaries of church-officers, under the Local Act,
beyond the application of ‘ the revenues belonging to or arising from the use of
the particular church or chapel,’—that is, the pew-rents.
• Four churches, viz. at Penrith, South Creek, Cook’s River. Richmond, and
Goulburn, are, it is trusted, by this time completed.


“ But not only is there immediate need of more churches, but also for more
clergymen. The number available for parochial purposes, in March, 1839, was, as
already shown, thirty-three, more than double the number they amounted to, little
more than two years before ; but these extended numbers, judiciously stationed as
they were, require to be greatly increased for the spiritual occupation of the colony,
even of those parts for which some provision existed. Little need be said on this
point, to show the necessity remaining for more, than simply to refer to the vast
district of the Upper Hunter, scantily supplied by the periodical visits of the
Rev. Mr. Stack, from Maitland, to the fields of labour imperfectly occupied by
the Rev. Mr. Keane, on the Hawkesbury, the Rev. Mr. Edmonston, on the Colo
and Macdonald, the Rev. Mr. Stiles, in the Curryjong, the Rev. Mr. Hassall, in the
counties of Camden and Cumberland, and the Rev. Mr. Rogers, at Brisbane Water,
by the three clergymen stationed in the counties of Argyle, King, and Murray, by
every clergyman stationed in the county of Cumberland, the best supplied of any
part of the colony, and in the town of Sydney itself. The simple facts, indeed,
that so many as forty-two churches had been subscribed for in various parts of the
colony, and that no less than four additional churches were absolutely required in
Sydney itself, for every one of which congregations were prepared—else there
were no need perceived for the churches—these facts abundantly establish the
position, that more clergymen were still wanting. Nor does this comprehend the
whole necessity of the case ; the clergymen required in the districts, and for the
intended churches which have been referred to, are all within the nearest and most
populous circle of civilization. There were, at the commencement of the year
There were, at the commencement of the year
1839, seven counties for which there was no minister of any denomination, and
three others in which there was only a Presbyterian clergyman. The former are
Bligh, Georgiana, Hunter, Phillip, Roxburgh, Wellington (except on the aboriginal
Brisbane
Cook
Georgiana
Hunter
Phillip
Roxburgh
St. Vincent
Wellington
Westmoreland
ixburgh, Wellington (except on the i
Vestmoreland. Those which had tl
I none of any other denomination, n
ten counties* contained a population
FREE MALES. FR.FEMALES.
® aj ® O H ® aj 2 aJ H
(lies
B'S t'S | t'l I
> S ®<3 ° £ S ® « u
o aj oa>
D <1 &
112 13 219 17 14 1
220 51 974 81 36 16
678 306 366 377 298 27
192 50 227 65 36 5
258 99 225 119 92 15
54 5 169 12’ 6 1
595 142 891 212 100 40
150 21 341 44 25 11
163 19 283 38 22 5
182 37 260 160 32 8
mission in Wellington Valley), and Westmoreland. Those which had the benefit
of a Presbyterian clergyman, but had none of any other denomination, were Bris-
bane, Cook, and St. Vincent. These ten counties* contained a population, in 1836,
* COUNTIES.


according to the census then taken (and which has since been increased by the
addition both of emigrants and convicts), of 6,667 Protestants and 2,867 Roman
Catholics; of these, the large proportion of male persons, and especially male
convicts, as compared with the number of females, both free and convicts, ought
not to be considered a light circumstance.
“ There lie also, far beyond this circle, around the present limits of location, from
the eastern coast to the north, from the north to the west, and from the west to
the south, stations for cattle and sheep, occupied by thousands of human beings,
to whom the very name of religion is almost unknown. To these districts the
Bishop referred in his Report to the Diocesan Committee, in January, 1837.*
‘ Independently (he stated) of those portions of the colony to which, however dis-
tant, it is possible, though rarely and imperfectly, to extend the administration of
the offices of religion, there are others which lie utterly beyond the reach of any
exertions to which the present number of clergymen in the colony is or can be
physically equal.
“ The extended plains of Maneroo, and great part of the course of the Murum-
bidgee River,t are occupied by hundreds of beings to whom the very name of
religion is a stranger. The same observation may be applied to the territory to
the westward and northward of Bathurst, far beyond Wellington, with the whole
country of Mudgee and Molong, and the districts extending in a circuit which
includes Liverpool Plains, and the country beyond, as far as the river Namoi.
All these districts are more or less thickly covered with stations, and the dwelling-
places of nominal Christians, who are, however, far removed beyond the sound or
hearing of all that is Christian, living in a state of concubinage, frequently pro-
miscuous, without books or means of instruction of any description-the obser-
vation of the Sabbath-day totally obliterated among them—their children grown
up not only without baptism, but almost in unacquaintance with the name or being
of their Creator. These persons, I have reason to think, judging from the accounts
which I have collected, are placed in a situation as dreadful to contemplate as
that of any heathen existing upon this earth. I refer to these painful circumstances,
not merely to explain to the general meeting the extent of the field which lies
open for the exertion of their Christian charity, if it were in their power to
occupy it, but I refer to them principally in the hope that means may be devised for
making an effectual representation to the people of England, of the condition to which
such numbers of their countrymen are reduced, and of the stdl more deplorable fate
which awaits their descendants, urdess timely means be employed to arrest it:
“ Some estimate of the numbers of these persons may be formed from the
general summary subjoined, taken from the itineraries of the commissioners of
• First Rep. Dio. Com. p. 49. r
t In this district, however, it should be noticed, that the Roman Catholics are
particularly active in disseminating their doctrines and establishing churches. The
foundation of a church has been laid at Yass, one at the Tumat River and a third
about fifty miles distant, on the banks of the Murumbidgee, and two clergymen ot
that church have been already appointed to those distant stations.


crown lands, and
before
the council on the 14th of February, 1839 ;• it does
not, however, comprehend the whole.”
**-* 09
O *-«
0)
r O C
£ o
cd *c«
03
II
C 8 o
s °
<u
CO •
p
OJ £
*-d *->
co
pW Q
o
2^
a
u nd
oj v
rO H
S 2
£
N
oj
QOt^WOgjgOQ
o
5
r>\
00
io oo fN o
QO'thCOtM’tOO
o iO f-H rf CO Tf
N
• V
£ ,Jd
CO
2 nd
p 232^2^^°°
• o Cn r-H |> F-H
P3
CD
d
Qi
rP
m
<u
o
U-J
O *■>
<L>
<«
.2 $
E i-
rg a>
5 <3
O
« ®
»
’C
CO
s
cn
rC ’fi
■*-» cS M
M
c ,s a
q S 3 03
0) .S
f -5 to
S - .s
.a £ rS
C o -S
-E 2 c/>
w CJ
Sc «
c
0 o
£ 5 is
a;
B 3
#FH
nS « „ ®
O <L»
3 *X3
■S Cfl £
S. “ 5
rM >
1 a
«3 <u
_ -£
° c
i- o
a> .
bO
s _c
is -r S
* £
S-«
SUOSJ9J
OTfcoocooicaco o
(Nt'Oi'C'iraffloj oo
OT
•OM lejox
UOpipUOQ
piIB X9g
O lO O o
S : 05 3 5 : g
o 3
*3
S
*T3 D
P fa
O
t' n o n —i c* i>
ra
03 «5 03 O) ® ® O h t*
| :§8 3 8 8 S |
« IL
,X-t
6 o H 00 (N O CD 00 Q
I :3232 3 8 2 ° g
c :' s : i >* :
£ 'R U 2 2
S ’a = J 2 13 £
03 S 3 . C i? o
iia* o « > &
r% r n, V • QJ . v
<3^Kw_ s -CL )^a:
. O
0
I
1 ® I
I s J
“ a e
_ P
P *zr ; P
r T
a; O
§ | -
o °
TOL. 11. NO
:::: : p :
• : : : o
p - : : : "& :
« S : : : .6 !
So • • • .5 •
.S to ; : : *2 ;
> .5 • : : > •
pq ; ; » «
02 03 : T 3 S
ns £ • .g. 1 =
§ll • a * f
. S g . as t/i =2
5* “ s cu g ?-
B -a b g 3 t; -s t:
2 S 2 ;S O cs o
S « S u! o< a o-
0)
P
P
P
CO
£


.** * * *
“ Nor is this all; for after all this has been done, the free population alone, and
those of the prisoners, who are, comparatively speaking, at large, will be provided
for- there will yet remain the duty of providing for those who are confined in
gaols, and in ironed gangs and road parties. These persons can receive no reli-
gious instruction, except such as is conveyed to them in the several places of their
confinement.
“ And that it may be more readily perceived from what has been hitherto done,
how much is wanting to produce the desired reformation, through the influence of
religion, of those miserable beings, whom first, the just laws of their country
have transported to New South Wales, and whom subsequent offences have
caused to be confined in its gaols, factories, and ironed gangs, the number of
prisoners in these several places of confinement, compared with the amount of
religious care bestowed on them, and the expense thereby incurred by the public
treasury, need only to be stated.
“ First. On the Ist of February, 1839, the number of prisoners confined in the
different gaols of the colony, was 333, consisting chiefly of persons awaiting their
trials, and these are frequently confined for many months.
Sydney ... ••• ••• •••
Parramatta ... •• • •• • •• • J
Liverpool ... ••• ••• ••• j 9
Campbell Town • *. ••• 9
Oi>
Windsor
Bathurst ... ••• ••• •••
Newcastle ... ••• ••• •••
“ Second. There were at the end of the year 1838, in and out of irons in
Sydney, and on the roads, for various terms, from three months to three years,
1,988 persons, exclusive of an average number confined in Hyde Park barracks,
and employed in the streets of Sydney, of from 170 to 300 men.
“ Third. The number of female prisoners confined in the factory at Parramatta,
in the year 1838, varied from 321 to 712, there having been, during nine months,
600, and for two months above 350.
« Fourth. The average number of female prisoners confined in the factory at
Newcastle, in the year 1838, was about fifty. _
“ Fifth. The average number of female prisoners confined in the factory at
Bathurst, during the same year, was about forty.
<< Sixt h. These are exclusive of a great number of prisoners, male and female,
temporarily confined, but frequently for several days, and sometimes for many
weeks, and even months, in the various watch-houses or locks-up throughout the
colony, exclusive also of prisoners confined in solitary cells, for periods of from
a few days to a month.
“ The number of chaplains provided, to afford religious instruction to these
people, appears, from the estimate for the year 1838, as follows, (the cost of
the police establishment for the same period being £37,740. 11s. 3d.);—
For Sydney Gaol,
Two chaplains, one at £3O, and one at £25 per annum ... ■• • £l5 0 0


Country Districts.
Two chaplains, one at £3O, and one at £25 per annum ... ... £55 0 0
These were the only sums then proposed to be chargeable on the Colonial
treasury for these special purposes: the actual expenditure for that year did,
however, exceed it.
One Protestant chaplain, (the Rev. William Cowper,) having
received an allowance for attending Sydney Gaol 50 0 0
And one Roman Chaplain, for the same duty ... ... ... 50 0 0
With respect, also, to the country districts at Parramatta, there was
paid to a Roman Catholic clergyman, for attending the factory
there ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 0 0
And at Newcastle, to a Roman Catholic clergyman for attending
the gaol 50 0 0
And to the Protestant clergyman at Newcastle, (as voted,) for the
same duty ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 0 0
The total sum expended by the Colonial treasury for this special
purpose being, for the year 1838 ... .. ... ••• ••• 225 0 0
“ During the same period, however, there was, for the first time since the
Ecclesiastical Establishments was made chargeable upon the Colonial Revenue,
an allowance made by the Lords Commissioners of her Majesty’s Treasury in
England, partly applicable to this purpose , of .£‘soo a-year, ‘ out of Grants for
Convict Services, to provide for the Religious Instruction of Convicts employed
in the more remote Stations of New South Wales,’ and which being placed at
the Governor’s disposal, .£3OO of it was appropriated to the Church of England,
and applied towards providing clergymen of that church to officiate at some of the
penal establishments of the Colony.
Out of this fund there was paid to the Rev. Samuel Marsden, until
his death in May, 1838, for attending the female factory at Parra-
matta ... ... ... ... ... ... £lB 5 7
To a clergyman for attending the prisoners at Goat Island, the
new gaol and treadmill at Sydney, £5O, and for travelling ex-
penses, £45 £95 0 0
To another, for duties at convict establishments other than the above 100 0 0
To three others, for travelling expenses, £45 each 135 0 0
To another, for travelling expenses ... ... ... ... 40 0 0
There was also paid out of the same fund, to a catechist stationed at
Appin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 0 0
To a missionary at Moreton Bay 5000
And to two Roman Catholic clergymen at Norfolk Island ... 51 13 11J
“ Some of these items can scarcely, however, be considered as entirely applicable
to the instruction of prisoners in actual confinement; the allowances for travel-
ling expenses, for instance, enabled the clergyman receiving them to attend the
distant stations of their districts, as well as the prisoners actually confined within
them, and the allowance to the catechist at Appin, would appear rather to be
chargeable as a Colonial expense. But supposing the whole sum applicable to
p 2


this special purpose from the Colonial treasury, and from the British treasury, to
be so applied, the former amounts only to the sum of .£225 per annum, and the
latter to £5OO per annum, for providing religious instruction for all the prisoners
within the limits of the Colony.
“ It is not to he doubted that the reverend gentlemen, who afford the only
religious instruction to the prisoners in the several gaols and ironed gangs, which
they actually receive, discharge their duties to the extent of their power; but
when the nature of their regular duties, the extent of the country over which
they have to travel, and the amount of that attention which they are thus really
able to bestow on these important objects, are considered, it will at once appear
how very insufficient are the means at present employed.
“ In short, it may be affirmed, that in no case is this duty performed to the
prisoners under such charge oftener than once in a week, and that frequently not
on the Lord’s day; often only once a fortnight, and frequently not more than
once in a month. The arrangement made for fulfilment of so solemn a charge,
when the clergyman does not attend, (viz. the prayers of the church being read by
the military officer on duty,) is objectionable in many points of view, and it may
be justly feared is not a mode of conveying religious instruction likely to be-
effectual. *
“ The want of regular and devout attendance on these unhappy men is the
more lamentable from the circumstance universally attested by ministers, who
have ever officiated at the stations where they have been confined, that they
are most ready and attentive to hear, and grateful for attention bestowed
upon them.
“ They are persons, indeed, already self-condemned, and with whom therefore
the labour of the messenger of the gospel may be said to be half performed.
“ Were their religious means fully adequate, as the opportunities afforded by
their hours of exemption from labour are sufficient, many a criminal might be
arrested in his course of guilt or contemplated crime, by the warning or advice
of the preacher; many a crime now committed within the walls of the gaols
and the stockade of the ironed gangs might be prevented, many a conspiracy to
pervert justice by perjury be defeated, and the misery of a gaol or ironed gang be
not only converted by the instruction given within it, into an ultimate blessing to
the individual, but a lasting benefit to the community.
“ Were permanent ministers appointed to these establishments, which it is
maintained should be the case, it is incalculable what good might be produced
amongst their wretched, and now depraved and hardened inmates, by zealous and
pious ministers wholly devoted to the work, during the long periods of time for
which they are shut up in these receptacles, and debarred from other influence to
good or evil, than such as extends within their boundaries.
* ‘ If a chaplain or catechist attend the stockade, the officer will afford him
every countenance and assistance in the religious and moral instruction of the
convicts. If neither attend on Sundays, the officer will cause the prayers of their
respective communions to be read to the prisoners at least once in that day, and
will permit such religious instruction to be given as the pastors of those commu-
nions shall direct, to be imparted by one of their own persuasion.’ Extract. —‘ In-
structions of Government to Assistant Engineers in charge of ironed gangs.’


Every gaol, factory, ironed gang, and road party, should be provided with
the means of public worship and religious instruction, not only on every Lord’s
day, but should be frequently, and if possible daily, visited by a minister of
religion.
“1. A separate chaplain should be appointed for the gaol of Sydney, and for
the different ironed gangs in its immediate neighbourhood, with an adequate
salary, and having no other duty to perform, in order that his whole time may be
devoted to the sole object of giving reproof, instruction, and consolation to the
prisoners confined at those places.
“ 2. A separate chaplain should be appointed for every gaol hereafter estab-
lished in the colony.
“ 3. Arrangements should be made for affording more adequate religious in-
struction to the prisoners in the respective gaols and ironed gangs in the country
districts, by appointing ministers specially to that duty, and by so disposing them,
as to ensure its adequate and effective performance.
“ The number of clergymen for this purpose, in the country districts, ought
not to be less than seven, viz. one for the gaol and gangs in the neighbourhood of
Liverpool, one for the gaol and factory and gangs in the neighbourhood of Parra-
matta, one for the district of Illawarra, one for Berrima and the district of Cam-
den, and one for the district of Bathurst, one for the district of Maitland, and one
for Newcastle.
“ The next consideration is, by whom are the funds to be provided for furnish-
ing these necessary additional religious means to the prisoners in actual confine-
ment in New South Wales, and its penal settlements.
“ They are outcasts from the parent-country, and for their crimes are either
retained in confinement—having never been at large in the Colony, or, having
been at large, have committed fresh crimes against the community there which
have placed them in their present condition ; none but persons of this description
are placed in the ironed gangs, and the number of free persons who have not been
convicts, at any time confined in the Colonial gaols, is happily so insignificant, as
not to be worth noticing. It is answered, therefore, that the country which has
eased itself of the burden of their presence, and the operation of whose laws has
removed them from the opportunities of regular religious instruction, which they
could have had if placed even in confinement there, should provide for their
religious instruction and consolation in the country upon whose shores it has cats
them out.
“ Great Britain cannot so entirely exonerate herself of all care from these
unhappy persons, as not to allow them in the land, whither for their crimes they
have been sent, some religious means. Had they remained in confinement in the
mother-country, instead of being transported to New South Wales, the feelings
of the British people would never have endured that it should be permitted to
form a part, or even a consequence of the punishment inflicted on a criminal, that
he should be deprived of religious consolation ; the distance to which these per-
sons are removed from the actual observation of their countrymen, does not lessen
their claim upon them ; and it is maintained, that the necessary expense of their
religious instruction should not be a charge upon the Colonial revenue, but should
be borne by Great Britain.”


■




