





RELIGION AND THE HOME.
An Address to Parents and Young People Delivered in
the Australian Church, STH November, 1905.
Charles Strong, D.D.
“The Father” ( pater ) “from whom every manner of fatherhood”
( fatria ) “is named in heaven and on earth.”
—Ephesians hi, 15.
THESE words which I have taken as a text on
which to speak of Religion and the Home are as
near an equivalent to the Greek words as can be
given. The Greek word for father is pater. Derived
from this is patria, a family, clan, tribe. I bow my
knees, says the writer of this epistle, to the pater from
whom every patria derives its name. There is a play
upon the words pater and patria which we get in
English only by translating patria , not quite correctly
perhaps, as fatherhood, or paternity. The meaning is
that all human family relationship derives its significance
from the divine relationship, that earthly family, clan, and
tribe-relationship is, as it were, a shadow of a heavenly
relationship, the reflection of God’s relationship to man.
The earth-father suggests the Heaven-Father.
'i'he words may serve to introduce some thoughts on
the influence of Religion on the Home, and of the
Home on Religion.
I.— Let us think first of the influence of the Home on
Religion.
Have you ever thought how much our religious
conceptions, our thoughts of God, that is to say, and
of our relations to Him, are coloured by our family
relations ?


From earliest times the Divine Being has been con-
ceived of as Father, though not always in the deepest
and most spiritual sense of the word. The gods of our
Aryan ancestors were called father and mother. The
gods themselves, as you know, were often represented
also as married. They were a family. “In the Rig-
Veda,” says the late Professor Tiele “ the oldest
religous document of our race, some ten of the
highest gods are thus named—father and mother.
So too in the Avesta, the sacred book of the Zara-
thushtrians, Ahura-Mazda (the highest and only true
God in the system), is frequently called Father. And
the Greeks also called Zeus pater, the father of gods and
men, while the Romans have Jupiter, Diespiter, Mars-
piter.” {Elements of the Science of Religion.) You recollect
the words of the Greek poet quoted in the Acts of the
Apostles—“We are God’s offspring”; and another
Greek poet says —“ One is the race of men, one that of
the gods, from one mother we both draw our breath.”
{Pindar, quoted by Tiele).
Some people have thought of the gods as great rulers
like their own kings and despots. For instance, in the
Old Testament Religion it is this thought that prevails.
Divine Sovereignty is the key-note of Semitism. And
the difference between ancient Judaism and Christianity
was the prominence given in the latter to the fatherly
relationship which Jesus makes the very central thought
of Religion. Between Mahommedanism and the Reli-
gion of Jesus there is the same difference. Allah is the
sovereign, the king, the almighty disposer of all, and,
unless among the Mystics, this seems to be the key to
Mahommedan Religion.
The gods in ancient times were regarded by many
people not only as Fathers, but as Mothers also. “ There
frequently occurs,” says Professor Tiele, “ a divine mother
or grandmother as sole head of the spirit world. This
idea arose out of the matriarchate, a social system in
which the woman is the sole head of the household.”
Sometimes the gods are called father and mother,
grandfather and grandmother. And in the history of
Christianity we all know what an important place has
been assigned to the Virgin Mary. She is called the


“ Queen of Heaven” and “ Mother of God,” and has
been regarded as the ideal of divine motherhood,
whose tender compassion and help are invoked alike by
man, woman, and child.
We Protestants look upon this Virgin Mary worship
as unwarranted, and as a survival from polytheistic
days. We say that it was no part of the original
Religion of Jesus, but arose later on when Christianity
became the Religion of the Roman Empire. Greeks,
Romans, Egyptians, and other peoples had been accus-
tomed to worship female deities, such as Astarte, Hera,
Minerva, Artemis, Demeter, the heaven-goddess Nut,
and endless others. Perhaps they missed in the God
of the Christian the woman-nature they had been
accustomed to worship. When Christianity passed into
Gentile lands it is not to be wondered at that old ideas
slipped into the new religion and worship. The Chris-
tian teachers, we know, sometimes sought to accom-
modate themselves to their converts, and borrowed
from the other religions, of which Christianity, indeed,
was the spiritual evolution and fulfilment. In our so-
called Christian rites and robes and forms of worship,
our priests and churches, we are constantly reminded
of pre-Christian religions. The very dress of a priest,
and even the Genevan gown, take us back to Rome, and
Athens, and Jerusalem.
The Virgin Mary, then, we may think of as having taken
the place of old divinities. Her worship was a purer,
loftier form of the worship which had been offered to
the ancient goddesses. Side by side with the image of
the Son was the image of the tender and compassionate
Mother, representative of pure womanhood, before
whom the old goddesses melted away as twilight in the
dawn.
Through that worship the love of God has doubtless
reached the hearts of men, women, and children. There
was much in it that was noble and good. But it
was abused ; and our Protestant forefathers regarded
Mariolatry as idolatry. They removed the images
of the Virgin from the churches and roadsides, for
they thought that the worship of the Virgin was
drawing people’s hearts away from the worship of the


Father and His Son. When they came to read the New
Testament they found that Jesns never taught his
followers to worship his mother ; and to think that
Mary was more merciful than Jesus, or his Father, or
that she was needed to intercede with God for poor,
sick, sinful souls, seemed to them dishonoring to Jesus
and his Father. Each soul, they felt, might and must
go direct to God; there was no need of any go-between,
No priest, no Virgin Mary, no Saint, must come between
God and the soul, between the soul and Christ. A child
needs no go-between to plead with a true father and
mother.
The Religion of Jesus, we Protestants think, was and
is the Religion of Divine Fatherhood, including all that
is best and noblest in Motherhood. “ Our Father,” we
feel, is the keynote of the “good news” of Jesns. He
taught us to look on ourselves as sons and daughters of
God. “Be perfect,” he said to his disciples, “as your
Father is perfect.” St. Paul, in like manner, bids us
think of ourselves as “sons and daughters” of God.
“ God,” he says, “ has sent forth the spirit of His Son
into our hearts, crying Abba, Father.” “Ye are all the
sons of God,” he cries, “in Christ Jesus, by faith.”
Sons, not slaves, is the burden of his message. And in
the writings called by St. John’s name we have much
the same idea presented to us, but in different form.
“As many as received him to them gave he power to
become sons of God.” “ Beloved, now are we sons of
God.” “ Everyone that loveth is born of God.” “ I
call you not slaves but friends.”
This is the idea that lies at the very heart of Christ-
ianity—the idea not only of Jesus as Son of God, living
in close and loving fellowship with the Highest, and
delighting to do his Father’s will, but the idea also that
all Christians are called to be sons of God, and to be
one with God, —“as Thou, Father, art in me and I in
Thee.” “ I ascend to my Father, your Father, to my
God and your God.” And in the parable of the
Prodigal Son, even the wretched outcast who has
selfishly left his father’s house and spent all his sub-
stance in riotous living, as he sits among the swine,
cries out, “ I will arise and go to my father .” “ God,”


we read in a writing attributed to Athanasius, “ was
made man that man might become divine.”
This idea, however, of Divine Fatherhood full of
compassion and tenderness, which should be the central
thought of Christian Religion, has been often obscured
in ancient and modern times. Virgin, and Priests, and
Saints have been thrust in between God and man. Our
Protestant theology, too, has often obscured’it. The
sovereign, despotic, monarchical idea has been substi-
tuted, and Jesus has been represented as saving us from
God, instead of as drawing us into God as our Home —as
standing between us and God’s wrath, instead of as the
spiritual door of sonship and love through which God
has come into man and man has passed into God, and
into that life of trust and love “against which there is
no law.”
Modern Protestantism is the carrying out of the old
family idea of the relation between God and man, the
deepening and spiritualising of it. Its gospel is the
gospel of sonship ; Link yourselves to the spirit of Jesus
the Son, let the trustful Son dwell in you by faith, and
be ye sons and daughters of God. It is the carrying
out not only of what we find in the New Testament and
in the teaching of Jesus, but it is the carrying out also,
the fulfilment, of the idea which glimmered in the more
ancient forms of Religion. The idea of sonship has
indeed been purified, and the idea of fatherhood is far
nobler and loftier than that of Zeus or Jupiter, but it is
still the idea of the family that is at the root alike of
the old and of the new Religion.
And modern Protestantism is, further, the carrying
out, the fulfilment, of the old idea of Brotherhood.
The sons of God, according to Jesus, love. Their
Father forgives them only as they forgive. The love of
God and the love of neighbour are linked together
indissolubly in the Christian Religion. The prodigal son
is still a brother. The elder son’s shame, in the parable,
is that he refuses to recognise his “brother.”
It is this idea of brotherhood that Modern Protestant-
ism seems to broaden and emphasise. He that says,
4 I love God,’ must show his love in the love of one’s
neighbor, even one’s enemy. “ Brother ” cannot mean


just brother Christian, one of the same church, or the
same creed, or the same nation. It means all who have
need of us. To trust in a God of Love is to love widely,
infinitely, to commit oneself to Love as creation’s
deepest and “final law” —the Love that “seeks not
its own,” ever-upbuilding, up-lifting, turning the dross
into gold.
Thus you see, my friends, how the family idea lies at
the root of Religion—how Religion developes as the
family-idea developes—how it is from fatherly love and
motherly love, and the love of brothers and sisters,
and all the tenderness and affection, the discipline and
and reverence and trust of the Home, that our noblest
conceptions of Religion are born.
Sings Whittier, the Quaker poet—
The riddle of the world is understood
Only by him who feels that God is good,
Who, judging God by what in man is best,
With a child’s trust leans upon a Father’s breast,
And hears unmoved the old creeds babble still
Of kingly power and dread caprice of will
The purer, holier, more unselfish and loving the
Home becomes, the higher does Religion become.
Low thoughts of God come from low thoughts of the
Home. Unloving, selfish Homes must breed unloving,
selfish Religion.
When our children say “ Our Father,” must they not
think of the father and mother on earth ? When they
are told to love as brothers and sisters, must they not
think of the earthly Home ? If that Home is narrow
in its sympathies —if father and mother abdicate their
sacred position, if brothers and sisters are not taught to
love, is the name “Our Father,” applied to the great
God, likely to be “ hallowed,” or the injunction to treat
fellow-beings as brothers and sisters likely to be ful-
filled ?
Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters—the loftier our con-
ception of these sacred titles, the loftier will be our
conception of God, and of the reverence, trust, sacrifice,
duty, and love —summed up in the one word, Religion
that which binds to the Highest, and to Humanity.


If Religion decays is it not partly because the Home
decays—because in the Home there is little self-denying
parental care and discipline, little love, little duty, and
little reverence ? When parents neglect their children,
even seek to have no children, look on children as there
just for their own pleasure, or regard them as a
nuisance interfering with their comfort and amusement,
and pity those who devote themselves to the care and
nurture of the young, how can you expect Religion to
flourish ?
When, as to-day, a selfish individualism prevails, insist-
ing on its rights, but indifferent to its duties, and both
parents and children recognise nothing higher than
self, the lower-self , and its gratification, no Christian
Religion at least can grow.
To help Religion, let the ideal of Home be raised.
What does God require of us but that we should all
live as His family, and turn earth into a Home ?
11. Lei us think now , in the second place , of the influence
of Religion on the Home.
In the earliest times we find Religion bound up with
the life of the family and the clan.
You remember the story of Elkanah, told in the first
book of Samuel—how Elkanah went up out of his city
to Shiloh to offer sacrifices to Jahveh, and how after the
sacrifice there was a feast every year. “And when the
day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he gave to Peniunah,
his wife, and to all her sons and daughters, portions ;
but unto Hannah he gave a double portion.” You
remember the story, too, of Samuel choosing a king
from among the sons of Jesse—how he went to Bethle-
hem and called Jesse and his family to a sacrifice. In
the epistles of St. Paul we read about “ meat offered to
idols.” Christians would have heathen friends who
invited them to a social feast in the temple precincts
of a god. And what hurt the consciences of some of
the Christians was that the food set before them had
been offered up to a heathen divinity. The gods in early
times were invited to social feasts, and were thought to
partake of them with their worshippers. The same
was sometimes thought to be the case with the spirits
of ancestors. Thus rites of worship were at the same


time family or social meals. The gods and the spirits
of the deceased bound the worshippers together, as well
as the seen with the unseen. It was thus Religion that
held Society together in primitive times. Those who
worshipped the same god were brothers, and in bringing
gifts to the same departed ancestors they felt that they
belonged to the same clan or family. “In the early
world,” writes Dr. Hearn (“Aryan Household”), “it
was not the tie of blood, or of family habit, or of
superior physical force, that held men together, but the
far more potent bond of a common worship. Those
who worshipped the same gods were relatives, although
no drop of common blood flowed in their veins.”
In the Christian Church you know how a family
meal is one of its chief and most beautiful symbols of
fellowship with God and with fellow-man in God.
The communion-table rightly occupies a prominent
place in many of our churches. It expresses the old
idea in a higher and more spiritual form.
Early religion was necessarily narrow ; for people
thought there were many gods. Different localities and
different tribes had their own special gods. So outside
of a locality or a tribe, men were not brothers.
Banishment from one’s native place was considered a
terrible thing, for it separated the worshipper from his
god. When Cain was banished from his own land, for
the murder of Abel, he says, “ From Thy face shall I be
hid.” In the beautiful pastoral story of Ruth , Naomi
bids her daughter-in-law go back to her people and her
god , to which Ruth answers, “ Thy people shall be my
people, thy god my god .” But as men learned to feel
that God is One, that even if we go up to heaven, or
down to the grave, or dwell in the uttermost parts of
the sea, He is there, they began also to feel that they
had all one Father, and that they were brothers in Him.
What is wanted, you see, to make Religion broad is
more Religion—a larger sense of God, that is, and the
spiritual world. Religion often separates people. But
that is because the Religion is so narrow and meagre.
What modern Protestantism is trying to do is to
break down the fences which priests and ecclesiastics and
politicians have set up, and to teach the Fatherhood of


God ; that God is Spirit; that God is “in all, through all,
and above all” ; that His true worshippers, wherever they
are, are one ; and that His true worship is the hearts of
sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, seeking to do
the will of Love. It is trying to inspire the world with
more Religion.
One of the great bonds of Society has been the
Church. Think what the Church did for Europe ! But
the Church’s idea of God, like the old family and tribal
gods, has become too narrow. Just as people said long
ago, ‘ Outside of our tribal or family-god no safety, no
brotherhood,’ so they have said, and still say, ‘ Outside
of our Church-God, no safety, no brotherhood.’ We
need, therefore, more Religion—a larger, more living,
and more loving thought of God to bind the world into
one. And we find that such a thought is growing. We
need a Church also to correspond to this growing
thought. We want a Church expressing and embody-
ing the great spiritual family-idea of to-day And do we
not see signs of the coming of such a Church ?
Christianity was originally a great social-religious
movement; it must be so still, if it is living. And one of
the spheres in which it has to manifest itself is the Home.
The Protestant Reformation in the 10th century was,
in part, a revival of the idea of the Home. What is
called ‘asceticism’ crept in among Christians. It came
partly from Egypt and the East. The “ Saint” was the
priest, the monk, the nun, the hermit. Monasticism
spread from the Thebaid in Egypt all over Europe, and
became the leading feature in Christendom. Luther
and the other reformers insisted that the married state
was as sacred as the celibate, and that the best service
of God was to be good husbands and wives, good
parents and children, dutiful masters and servants. The
family and the home thus became, in the eyes of Pro-
testants, quite as sacred as the “saintly” ascetic life.
They took the place of the ascetic life. And the family
and home were to become a sort of church on a small
scale. Religion was to bind the members together. The
father was to be a priest in his household. And more
beautiful than any Madonna was the devoted mother
tending her children.


lii Burns’s poem, “The Cottar’s Saturday Night,” we
have presented to us the Protestant ideal of the Saint,
as, after the simple family meal, “ the big ha-bible ance
his fathers’ pride” is brought out, and, his bonnet
reverently laid aside, the father of the household leads
the family devotions :
Then kneeling down to Heaven’s Eternal King,
The saint, the father, and the husband prays.
Compared with this, how poor Religion’s pride,
In all the pomp of method and of art,
When men display to congregations wide,
Devotion’s every grace, except the heart !
The power incensed the pageant will desert,
The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole ;
But, haply, in some cottage far apart,
May hear, well pleased, the language of the soul ;
And in his book of life the inmates poor enrol.
Then homeward all take off their several way ;
The youngling cottagers retire to rest ;
The parent-pair their secret homage pay,
And proffer up to heaven the warm request,
That he who stills the raven’s clamorous nest,
And decks the lily fair in flowery pride,
Would in the way His wisdom sees the best,
For them and for their little ones provide ;
But chiefly in their hearts with grace divine preside.’
We thus come back to what Dr. Hearn calls “ the
old Ar yan Household,” when the father was the priest,
and the family was the Church, but to a higher and
purer form of it.
Religion, by which I mean the attitude of trust,
reverence, love towards the Supreme, the sense of the
presence of a spiritual world to which we and our de-
parted ones belong, gives to that old word ‘Home,’ a
sweetness and sacredness that nothing else can. Never
are hearts nearer one another than when they feel one
in God.
God of our fathers, be the God
Of their succeeding race.
But in these days, it is to be feared, the sense of
Religion is obscured. Business, pleasure, secularism,
sectarianism, and religious individualism have loosened
this old tie. The “ Lares and Penates,” such a feature
in the old Roman Home, have disappeared, and the


sacred “ fire ” of ancient India burns low on our family
hearths. Surely if there is anything in Christianity
at all, it should permeate the Home Life, and be
one of the chief elements in the Home, binding the
members into a real Church or Family of God. Religion
is not meant to separate, but to bind us together with
ties nobler and more human than instinctive affections
we share with the animal, and more lasting than this
brief span of life. The relations of husband and wife,
father and mother, brother and sister, child and parent
are sweetened and ennobled when, as in olden time,
they are linked to the thought of God, and the earthly
father and mother regard themselves as representatives
of the All-Father, “ of whom every kind of fatherhood in
heaven and on earth is named.” And the Home, so
apt to grow narrow and selfish, thus becomes as but a
sheltered haven opening out into the great ocean of
human life, sympathy, and love.


Fraser & Jenkinson, Printers, Lithographers, F,tc.,
420 Bourke Street, Melbourne.




