

RB
[?]
[?]






REMARKS
ON THE
CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS
EMPLOYED IN THE MANUFACTURE
OF
VIOLINS.
BY
JOHN MACKINTOSH,
12, LOWER ORMOND-QUAY.




PREFACE.
In publishing this treatise upon the formation, character,
and properties of the Violin, it may be necessary to
remark, that it is only intended for the perusal of those
who have already attained some practical knowledge of
the instrument, (to whom, I presume, it will not be unin-
teresting,) and such persons as are in the habit of manu-
facturing violins, who may find it to contain many useful
theories. They are the result of years of experience, and
the most minute and zealous investigation.
Having ascertained the description of wood with which
the best violins are made, and discovered a process which
brings the wood to the same state as that of the Cremona
violins, I feel that I am now able to represent its peculiari-
ties, and account for, as well as point out, the different
changes to which the violin is subject from the influence
of weather and other causes, respecting which there exist
so many speculative and erroneous ideas. I trust I shall
also be able tq show what are the intrinsic qualities of a


good violin, and to prove satisfactorily, that age is not one
ofthe essentials ; although it is a very generally-received
opinion, that a violin, intrinsically bad, may become pos-
sessed of a first rate tone when it can boast of an existence
of at least half a century; but such is not the fact, and, in
proof of the assertion, I may here observe, that there is a
far greater number of old violins had than good.
I will not detain my reader by entering into a detailed
description of the violin. It is now well known to be
the most useful of all musical instruments, and is un-
doubtedly the most superior in point of effect as a Solo
instrument, for its great compass, its pure and beautiful
tone (which is capable of so many modifications,) and
for its being adapted to all kinds of melody.
Its pecuniary value, as may be seen from a single
instrument producing 150 and 200 guineas, together with
the fact of its alone possessing the capability of pourtray-
ing the passions, and giving true and unlimited vent to
the offspring of musical genius, are characteristics which
combine to give the violin a just pre-eminence over every
other instrument. I therefore hope I shall not be consi-
dered presumptuous, or unnecessarily obtruding myself
on the attention of those whom it may concern, in offering
the annexed remarks on the subject of the violin, crudely
and irregularly put together I confess, but having at least
long experience to recommend them.


ON WOOD.
As it is my opinion, that on the description, quality, and
state of the wood with which a violin is manufactured,
together with the theoretical knowledge of the artist, must
materially depend the tone of the instrument, when per-
fected, I will first treat upon that subject, and shew how
'it happens that newly-made violins are, in general, so
valueless as to be sold at little more than a nominal price;
and further, that age alone could never make them good
instruments; a fallacy, which is almost generally believed.
The greatest number of violins are made in France and
Germany, and then exported to other nations, but these
are evidently put together by inexperienced mechanics,
without the least knowledge of, or reference to, the theo-
retic principles by which they should be guided. They do
not even stay to ascertain whether one instrument may be
better than another, but pack them up for exportation the
moment they are made to bear the form of violins, and by
this means they are never even tried until they get into
the hands of the purchaser.
The kind of timber invariably used for making violins
is deal, for the front or sound board, and sycamore or
maple for the back and sides. Of course, these woods
partake of a variety of qualities, only one of which I am


(ully convinced, is fit for working into violins, and that
one must be, as I shall presently shew, of full growth.
The French violins, for instance, are made of a wood
which is totally unfit for emitting a full or sonorous tone,
while, on the other hand, those made in Germany most
generally contain wood of a very superior description, but
irom not being of full growth, and manufactured while in
a green state, they are just as imperfect, and as devoid of
tone as the former.
The reason that wood, in a green or undried state, is
unfit for working into violins is, that the pores, which are
the conductors of the sound, are clogged with a resinous
or gummy substance, of which they must he cleansed
before it is possible to produce good tone, and it is in the
doing of this, without injury to the wood itself, that the
great difficulty consists. As I have already said, it must he
of a peculiar quality; it is not enough, for instance, to have
the front Deal and the back Maple, but the wood must be of a
firm and regular texture, with pores of a certain size and
formation, and, above all, it is essential that it shall have
attained not only full maturity of growth, but shall have
remained for some years after being felled, in order to
make it fit to go through a process by which the pores
(for that is the great object to be arrived at) may be
rendered so perfectly dried and cleared, as not afterwards
to be liable to close or alter their natural position, or
become crooked or irregular, as would be the inevitable
consequence if cut up previous to its being ripe, or even
when ripe, if cut immediately into thin pieces, as it is
then liable to shrink, which is also objectionable as being
injurious to the pores.
It is not to be wondered at, then, that the generality of
violins have a wretchedly bad tone, since we find them
principally made of unripe, unprepared wood, badly


constructed and put together—badly formed and coarsely-
finished inside as well as out.
The principal reason, therefore, that newly-made, as
well as the great majority of old violins, have so bad a
tone is, because they are made of bad material, or, if
otherwise, as in the case of German violins, of wood the
pores of which are so clogged, or have so far lost their natu-
ral form, from one of the causes alluded to, as to prevent
the sound from passing freely through, and consequently
limiting its power, as well as altering the quality it would
otherwise possess.
There are other reasons by which we may account for
the faultinessof violins, but they are of an extrinsic nature;
for instance, a new instrument formed of ripe and seasoned
wood, the pores of which have been cleansed, and which was
in every respect likely to be a good one, may be so materially
injured as to be rendered almost worthless by being played
upon by a very bad performer, whose grating and imperfect
intonation will so far injure the pores (which,notwithstand-
ing the observance of these rules, have to be ultimately per-
fected by the influence of proper playing,) as to counteract,
in a great measure, the precautionary work of the mechanic;
whereas, had the instrument (made, of course, upon the
principles I have laid down,) at first fallen into the hand
of an experienced violinist, or one at least who knew how
to produce tone, he might, in a very short period, improve
it to the very highest pitch of excellence to which it would
be possible for it ever to arrive.
So far I have been able to ascertain that age is not
necessary to constitute a good violin, since those changes
in the wood, so essential to tone, which hitherto age alone
has been acknowledged to bring about, can be effected
previous to the construction of the instrument. This is


no vague theory, but absolute fact, for I have of late
had frequent experience of its truth.
Having stated that a new violin may be permanently
injured by a bad performer, it may also be necessary to
add, that a good one (even with age to recommend it to
the prejudiced,) may be also so much injured, if it be left
for a month or so in the hands of an inexperienced
player, as to require perhaps twice the same length of
time on the part of a good performer to bring it back to its
former state of perfection.
OF TONE.
As it should be the aim of every violin-raafeer to attend
to those principles which conduce to give an effective and
proper tone to the instrument, (inasmuch as by the quality
of tone it is judged of, and becomes more or less valuable,)
it may be important to see how far the manufacturer
can proceed with certainty to effect this object.
Hitherto, violin-makers have put together a number of
instruments, trusting to chance for a good one; and even
when such were met with (which was seldom), no
reason could be assigned for its superiority over the rest.
But as in the foregoing chapter I have shewn how futile it
is to expect a good instrument made of material in a green,
juicy, and unprepared state, I shall now endeavour to give
some idea of the mode by which tone can be given to an
instrument, and how a perfect violin may be made.


The timber must be full-grown and of a peculiar qua-
lity, as already described, before it is attempted to be
brought into use; it should be first cleansed of all matter
obstructive to sound, with which it generally abounds
(until extracted by age or else by process). The great
difficulty is in doing this without injury to the pores or
fibres of the wood, which must be kept in their natural
state of regularity in order to produce a good free tone.
This theory may appear strange, but I have satisfied
myself of its correctness, by frequent examination of the
wood of first-rate violins and also of bad violins. I inva-
riably perceived (of coarse, by the aid of glasses,) the
pores of the former to be distinct, regular and open; whilst
those of the latter were either clogged with matter, or
imperfectly formed and irregular.
This theory can be carried still further. It is not
only possible to manufacture a good violin with certainty,
but by minutely attending to these instructions, a peculiar
quality of tone can be effected, and this I state from
experience.
In the manufacture of an organ, for instance, we find
the pipes of regular graduations of size from the treble to
the bass, according to the nature of the tone Required.
It may not be therefore considered inconsistent, when
I say a different-sized pored wood is necessary for violins,
tenors, violoncellos, and double basses.
As many would, perhaps, wish to be more particularly
instructed or informed why this distinction of wood is so
necessary to the tone of the violin, I trust I shall illustrate
it pretty clearly by the following brief chapter on the
Brdge and Sounding-post.


BRIDGE AND SOUNDING-POST.
Take up a good violin in proper order, put another
bridge or sound-post to it, and the chances are fifty to
one its tone will be greatly altered. By one bridge
you may give it a harsh and disagreeable tone, by ano-
ther, one so soft or muffled, that it would not carry; and
out of one hundred bridges you may not meet five to suit
the instrument.
This must already he known to many, hut how is it
accounted for ? Why, thus :—lt is necessary that the
timber of the bridge should have pores proportionate to
those of the violin, and to prevent this being left to chance,
it is necessary to examine the wood of the bridge, and not
put it on the violin unless it be of a quality suitable to that
of which the violin itself is composed.
CREMONAS.
As greater value is set upon what are termed Cremona
Violins (when once they are ascertained to be genuine,) than
on any other, it maybe well to state why such is the case.
Cremona is a town in Italy, in which violins of a
superior description were first made; and as they became
generally known by the name of Cremona Violins, they
were also much sought after ; none are properly so


called that have not been made in the town ol Cremona,
and by one of the makers of whom I am about to speak.
There were four persons of the name of Amati , natives
of Cremona, who were remarkable for good and beautiful
workmanship, and who distinguished themselves as makers
of first-rate violins; their names were Andrew, Jerome ,
Anthony , and Nicholas. Andrew flourished about 1600.
Besides these, were other celebrated makers, named
Antonins Straduarius and Joseph Guarnarius. Antonius
Straduarius flourished in 1700, and Joseph Guarnarius
subsequently. It has naturally been a matter of surprise,
how violins made by the above makers in particular,
should alone have obtained so great a character, and
retained it to the present day, whereas the instruments
made by their successors have not been held in estima-
tion.
~ On examining the wood of violins manufactured by the
makers above-mentioned, I found it to differ in one very
material and essential point, from the wood of violins that
were of a similar age, and made by different artisans. I found
*t was not decayed, nor did it even bear the slightest symp-
tom or likelihood of decay, and was as firm and perfect as
when made; which, however, I did not find to be the case
with many other old violins that I have met with, which
not only gave evidence of decay, but were breaking down,
and 6ould not be played upon, for continuance, without
losing their tone considerably, to recover which they
required to be laid by perhaps for two or three days.
This I look upon as proof presumptive, that these
makers of Cremona violins, whom I have named, were
in the habit of preparing their wood in some manner
beyond the ordinary mode, and I am borne out by tradi-
tionary accounts in believing, that they actually put their
wood through some process for the purpose (as I have


already laid it down to be necessary) of not only preserv-
ing but cleansing it, and making it consequently a better
conductor of sound.
Indeed, I may say, it was these traditionary accounts,
together with my own observance of the great contrast in
different violins, and my constant examination of the wood,
that first induced me, many years since, to make
those experiments, which have at length obtained for me
a plan by which (I do not say it without some proof,) I
can proceed with the greatest certainty, but not without
an immensity of toil and trouble, in the manufacture of
what may be termed violins of the first class.
This may appear egotistical and self-interested, but the
least apology I can offer is, that I have the assurance of
many first-rate musicians and violinists, that my theory
is well founded, and that my practice has proved it to be
perfectly capable of being acted upon successfully.
Imayhere mention, that, when experimenting, I have had
recourse to steaming, steeping, stoving, boiling, and baking
the timber; I have also used all kinds of spirits, caustics, and
acids, but all these disorganised the pores and impaired
the fibres of the timber; which ought to be preserved in a
sound and perfect state, as I have already observed. I
have also made use of deal which I procured from the
ruins of old houses, almost in a state of decay with age,
but found it nearly as ill suited to give tone as green
timber.
However, I must confess, that I am principally indebted
to chance for the discovery of my process.
About sixteen years since, I made three violins of timber
which had been in a certain situation for a particular pur-
pose—these violins, I have since been informed by their
owners, arc as good as any Cremona violins, and bear
as high a character ; and on examining the timber


of those instruments, I found it to be exactly in the same
state as that of the Straduarius violins.
But to return from this digression, there can be little
doubt then, that the Cremona makers who obtained a
character for their instruments, prepared their wood before
they worked it into violins.
Straduarius was the first also who improved on the then
style of the instrument; and by his excellent workmanship
he also added to the value of his violins.
When he finished his apprenticeship, he applied himself
first to the form and style, and certainly produced some of
a very superior description, as far as regards appearance
and workmanship.
After some years, as it would appear, he more particu-
larly directed his attention to the tone and general quality
of the violin, and as a proof that Straduarius must have
'improved upon the plan of his predecessors, we have this
fact, that the first instruments he made, though tolerably
goodand superior to the generality then manufactured, were
by no means so good as those he made subsequently; where-
as, those which were made by him (as ascertained by their
date) in fifteen or sixteen years after he commenced
business, many of which are still in existence, and justly
looked upon as of great value, are of the most beautiful
description, possessing the most superior quality of tone,
and are (as far as my experience goes, and I have seen a
great many of them,) free from decay, and as sound as
when they were first made.
And yet the qualities of a Straduarius can only be
appreciated by a good performer, for none other would be
capable of developing them. In the hands of the experi-
enced, they are most sensitive to the touch of the finger,
and give an equal tone upon every string in the most
rapid passages. The workmanship ot the Straduarius violins


which, when made, were justly considered of the most
superior description, is not, in fact, superior to that of many
other modern makers, nor indeed equal to some copies
I have seen, which were so like the original, that they
deceived me, until I heard their tone, and examined the
quality and state of the wood.
So far, I hope, I have shewn the necessity of creating
changes in the wood before it is worked into violins, and
hat by so doing a first-rate instrument may be produced
without waiting for age to justify such a character.
JOHN MACKINTOSH.




ROOKS
MANUSCRIPTS
(AUTOGRAPHS
a
G.
Telephone: museum 0660
Telegrams: “tregaskis, London ”
JAMES TREGASKIS & SON
E. B. TREGASKIS • HUGH F. B. TREGASKIS
The Caxton Head
66 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, W.C.x
[FACING THE BRITISH MUSEUM]
London Slat January, 19.3 C-
L W. Graham Esq.,
Glenmavis,
Meath Road,
BRAY, Co.Wicklow.
Dear Sir,
We thank you for your card but regret that our
latest old book catalogue is now out of print.
We note your interest in books relating to old
violins and beg to describe below an item which we have
in stock and which we hope will be useful to you.
MACKINTOSH (John) Remarks on the construction and materials
employed in the manufacture of violins. Bvo. wrapper.
£l. 10. 0. Martin Keene and Son: Dublin, 1837
'AN EXCESSIVELY RARE PAMPHLET. There is no copy of it
in the British Museum, or the Bradshaw Irish
Cambridge, and it is unrecorded by Heron-Alien: De fidiculis
bibliogranhia, Trinity College (Dublin) Library Catalogue,
or Fetis. •
We are, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
jyjjVi








