

REMARKS ON THE
EARLY DISCOVERY
AUSTRALIA
BV
E. DELMAR MORGAN, F.R.G.S.
WITH MAPS.
FOR THE GEOGRAPHICAL CONGRESS AT BERNE.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WHITING & CO.. SARDINIA STREET, W.C.




REMARKS ON THE
EARLY DISCOVERY
AUSTRALIA
E. DELMAR MORGAN, F.R.G.S.
WITH MAPS.
FOR THE GEOGRAPHICAL CONGRESS AT BERNE.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WHITING & CO., SARDINIA STREET, W.C.




MAPS SHOWING AUSTRAL CONTINENT.
(reduced facsimiles.)
i. La Salle, 1522.
2. Orontius Finaeus (Oronce Fine), 1531.
3. Gerard Mercator, 1538.
4. Ortelius, 1570.
5. Gerard Mercator, 1587.
6. Cornelius de Judaeis, 1593.
7. Wytfliet, 1597.
MAPS IN SEPARATE COVER.
General outline of coast by Jean Rotz, 1542 (British Museum).
Northern part of Australia „ „ „
» ff v
The “ Dauphin” Map (two parts), by Pierre Desceliers, 1546.
Pierre Desceliers’ large Mappemonde (Jomard), (two parts),
dated 1550 (British Museum).




EARLY DISCOVERY
AUSTRALIA
R the last thirty years the early dis-
covery of Australia has attracted the
attention of geographers. In 1859,
the late Mr. Major edited for the
Hakluyt Society a collection of docu-
ments relating to this subject,^accom-
panying these with a learned treatise on the earliest maps
and voyages to that part of the world. He was followed by
other writers, English and foreign, all of whom have en-
deavoured to throw further light on the discovery of the
southern continent. When was Australia discovered, and
by whom ? are nevertheless questions almost impossible to
answer at the present day. The fact that the earliest MS.
maps known to us are the work of French cartographers
would lead us to suppose that French navigators were the
first to visit those coasts and bring home reports of a vast
terra firma in the southern sea, named by them Jave la
Grande, were it not that the only Frenchmen who are be-
lieved to have sailed those seas in the 16th century are the
1 Early Discovery of Australia.


almost mythical Sieur de Gonneville and Captain Jean
Parmentier, who made a voyage to Sumatra in 1529, but
does not appear to have seen Australia. French writers
do not even claim for their countrymen the priority in the
discovery of the South Sea. 1 The Portuguese, on the
other hand, were settled in the East Indies at the begin-
ning of the 16th century; their viceroys at Goa were in
the habit of sending expeditions to explore the islands
and seas of the Malayan archipelago, and in the course of
these voyages the mainland may have been seen. Yet,
with one exception, that of Godinho de Eredia, there are
no records of any of their explorers having sailed so far
south, and even he obtained his information second-hand.
If we consider how it happens that information con-
cerning this southern continent is so fragmentary and
unsatisfactory down to the period of the Dutch voyages
in the 17th century, we are reminded that the maritime
nations of Europe were fully engaged in the exploration of
other parts of the world ; the new continent of America,
the East Indies and the Spice Islands, were the goal of
every expedition that sailed from the ports of Spain and
Portugal. Australia, though vaguely delineated on maps,
lay outside the track followed by vessels to the East Indies
and Malay archipelago; its riches were unknown and its
inhabitants savages. Nothing here tempted the early
navigators and adventurers, while the cosmographers
were content to theorise that a great continent surrounded
the Antarctic Pole to serve as an equilibrium to the vast
1 M. Guibert, in his Memoirespour servir ci Phistoire de la Ville de
Dieppe , does justice to the Normandy navigators, as do MM. Estan-
ceJin, Vitet, and Margry in their works ; nevertheless, no proofs have
hitherto been adduced of any French d’scovery of Australia in the
16th century, except the maps mentioned above. Unfortunately, in
the bombardment of Dieppe in 1694, most of the archives were de-
stroyed.


expanse of dry land in the northern hemisphere. But
where that continent began, how far it extended, and what
was its nature, were questions not likely to interest many
in those days. The golden secret of Australia was to
remain locked up for centuries, though Godinho de Eredia’s
Malayans had by chance revealed it. 1
The earliest printed indications of a southern continent
occur on the maps of Leonardo da Vinci, 2 the globes of
Schoner, and on a mappemonde by La Salle, 3 published in
1521 with a work on geography by this author. This last-
mentioned map, as originally drawn, probably dated from
the 15th century, the Australian part being added subse-
quently. The name given to this roughly delineated Terra
Australis is Patalie regio, meaning, according to the Vicomte
de Santarem, who derives it from the Sanskrit, “the nether
region”, i.e., “ hell”. 4
The next is a double cordiform map by Orontius
Finaeus, a French cosmographer of Provencal, dated 1531.
1 This explorer and his discoveries have been discussed by M.
Ruelens, Dr. Hamy (. Bulletins de la Soc. de Geographic, vD 116 serie,
tome 15), and by Mr. Major {Archceologia, vol. xliv), all of whom leave
the matter in some doubt. The general inference to be derived from
a study of their writings is that Godinho’s claims to rank as a dis-
coverer rest wholly on his surveys in Malacca, not on any presumed
discovery by him of Australia.
2 In 1514-15, according to Wieser, Magalhaes-Strasse und Austral
Continent , etc.
3 There are two versions of the La Salle map, the one reproduced
in the Vicomte de Santarem’s Atlas, and that in the Royal Library,
Stockholm, facsimiled in the Eng. ed. of Baron Nordenskiold’s Atlas.
Our reproduction is from the latter.
4 Wieser derives Patalis from the Latin pateo , meaning that it was
the open region masking the hidden interior of the continent. Mr.
Petherick, a well-known writer on Australian discovery, has suggested
that Patalis should be Pratalis, a name given by the Spaniards to a
part of S. America —the Rio de la Plata; the letters ‘T ’ and “r”
being interchangeable. His argument is based on the occurrence of
another American name, “ Brazil,” on the Austral continent.


On this, and the later maps of Gerard Mercator (1538),
Ortelius, Hondius, Philip Apian, Wytfliet, and others, the
Antarctic continent takes a more definite shape, showing
the influence of discovery on cartography. The coast-line
approaches South America, divided from it by the newly
discovered strait of Magellan ; east of Africa the land runs
up northwards with the legends, Brasielie regio , Psittacorum
regio (land of parrots 1 ); further east again the coast
stretches nearly as far north as the tropic of Capricorn,
and bears the above-mentioned legend, “ Regio Patalis.”
The Antarctic continent is indented by a deep gulf, nearly
dividing the portion corresponding with Australia from
the mainland ; mountains are shown at intervals round
the coast, and across the centre is the legend, Terra Aus-
tralis recenter inventa sed nondum plene cognita. These
maps were probably based on the discoveries of Amerigo
Vespucci and Magellan. Ramusio says 2 :“ E sopra tutto
e vietato il poter navigar oltra il capo di Buona Speranza
a dritta linea verso il polo Antarctico dove e opinione
appresso tutti li pilotti Portoghesi che vi sia un gran-
dissimo continente di terra ferma, la qual corre levante e
ponente solto il polo Antarctico. E dicono che altre
volte uno eccelente uomo P'iorentino detto Amerigo
Vespuccio con certe navi de i detti Re la trovo e scorse
per grande spatio, ma che dapoi h stato prohibito che
alcun vi possa andare. . . .” This passage would imply
that the Portuguese pilots knew of a great continent
bordering the seas they were navigating ; and this was not
mere theory or conjecture, for Amerigo Vespucci had
coasted along it 3 for twenty leagues before turning towards
the equator ; and lastly, with the well-known secrecy of
1 Possibly the birds of paradise of New Guinea.
2 Navigationi e Viaggi, 1554, vol. i, fob 124.
3 Or some island, probably Georgia, in 52' S. lat.


those times, further exploration in this direction had been
prohibited.
“ The shores are but little known,” writes Wytfliet to-
wards the end of the 16th century, “and the route thither,
after one or two voyages, has been abandoned ; only acci-
dent could have driven some storm-tossed vessel in that
direction.” 1
Exaggerated notions prevailed of this southern continent,
for the navigators who had visited those seas imagined that
the islands they saw were connected with the mainland.
Ortelius and Mercator had indeed separated New Guinea
from Australia, while expressing the uncertainty of the
period by the following legend : “ Noua Guinea nuper
inuenta quae an sit insula an pars continentis Australis
incertum est.” But in later maps, 2 for many years after
Torres had sailed through the straits named after him,
New Guinea was represented as a peninsula of Australia,
and it was not till Captain Cook’s famous voyage in 1770
that the two were finally separated.
The MS. maps of Australia of the 16th century are all
French, There are, I believe, seven or eight of them in
existence, and five of these emanate from the school of
Arques, near Dieppe. All that is known of these Dieppe
cosmographers is contained in a few lines in Pere Fournier’s
1 Descriptionis Ptolemaicce. augmentum.
2 Two book maps should also be mentioned ; one occurs in a poly-
glot Bible of Arias Montanus, dated 1571. The other is engraved
from a pen-and-ink sketch found in the narrative of a voyage in 1668
to the Ladrcne Islands, by Friars Diego Luis de San Vitores and
Marcelo de Ansaldo. This map bears the signature of the last
named of these monks; it represents the whole Antarctic region as a
continent, with the words “ Tierra Austral no conocida” across it.
New Guinea appears as a promontory, but the islands of Java,
Sumatra, and the Moluccas are detached and in their right positions.
This map is reproduced in the Cartas de Irdias, published by the
Ministerio di Fomento, Madrid, 1877.


Hydrographic , quoted by M. Harrisse 1 : “La 3 especes (sic)
est de certaines cartes qu’on appelle Reduites, dont un
nomine le Vasseur, natif de Diepe, a enseign6 la pratique a
nos Francois. Cet Homme quoique tisseran en son bas age,
ayant eu quelque instruction d’vn nomm£ Cossin, Homme
fort ingenieux et qui auoit une excellente main et veu les
memoires des certains Prestres d’Arques, Bourg pres de
Diepe, qui estoient excellents Geographes, dont I’un se
nommoit des Celiers et I’autre Breton, a si bien sceu
menager ce peu de lumiere qu’il a receu d’eux qu’a force
d’esprit et de trauail continu, il est arrive a un tel point
qu’il a est 6 admir£ de plusieurs. II est mort a Rouen
depuis peu d’annees.”
Two of our maps are contained in a handsome atlas
by Jean Rotz, in the British Museum, dated 1542, of
whom little is known, except what he tells us of himself
in his dedication—that he was hydrographer to Henry
VIII, King of England, and had originally dedicated his
book to the King of France, his sovereign and natural lord.
There is, however, some ground for believing that he is
the same person as John Rut, captain of a ship sent on a
voyage of discovery to Newfoundland in 1527. A letter
written by this John Rut to King Henry VIII is printed in
Purchas’s collection (hi, 809).
Three or four more of these MS. maps are the work of
Pierre Desceliers, 2 the priest of Arques referred to by Pere
Fournier in the passage quoted above, and in M. Harrisse’s
opinion the person of whom Desmarquets 3 speaks as the
author of French hydrography. Two of his maps now
in the British Museum are fine specimens of the art of
cartography in the 16th century. They are large plani-
1 Jean et Sebasiien Cabot, p. 216.
2 Deeds relating to the Desceliers family, dated as far back as 1537,
have been discovered at Dieppe. (Harrisse, /. c., p. 217.)
3 Mdmoires Chronologiques de Dieppe, 1785.


spheres of the world on parchment, with illuminated
borders, bearing the arms of France and Dauphiny. The
earliest is known as the “Harleyan” map, having belonged
to Edward Harley, Earl of Oxford.
Another of the Desceliers maps in Jomard’s facsimile
atlas has been photographed for the British Museum, and
on this the words “ Faictes a Arques par Pierre Desceliers,
presb r ® 1546” are distinguishable in the right-hand top
corner. This copy formerly belonged to Jomard, and was
afterwards acquired by the late Earl of Crawford. A third,
also in the Museum, purchased from the late Prof.
Christoforo Negri of Padua, bears the date “1550”, and
is probably the most elaborate and finest of all. M,
Harrisse 1 mentions another map by Desceliers, the pro-
perty of the Abbe Sigismond of Bubics, near Vienna,
exhibited at the Geographical Exhibition in Paris in 1875,
but this has not been accessible. Besides these there is
the atlas of Nicholas Vallard (1547), in the late Sir Thomas
Phillips’collection, and that of Guillaume Le Testu (1555),
a pilot of Havre de Grace, preserved in the Ministry of
War at Paris, To these must be added a mappemonde by
Nicolas Desliens, sometimes confounded with Desceliers,
made in Dieppe in 1566 ; and lastly, a semi-elliptical map,
by Jean Cossin, dated 1570, reproduced by Gaultier of
Paris.
On all these MS. maps of the first half of the 16th
century, Australia appears as a huge continent, extend-
ing to within five or six degrees of the equator, and form-
ing, as it were, a great peninsula of a still larger southern
continent, filling in the whole southern border of the old
maps. There is, however, a marked difference between
the way in which the coast-line of this conjectural “Terre
Australle” is drawn, and that of Australia proper, for
1 Jean et Sebastien Cabot , p. 218.


while the former is indefinitely and conventionally put in,
the latter shows, with full detail, islands, bays, peninsulas,
capes, and rivers, and has all the appearance of being
founded on actual survey.
Examining these maps more closely, we find the position
of Australia twenty degrees too far to the westward ; the
island of Java separated by only a narrow strait from Jave
la Grande, the mainland ; the interior of this continent
filled with descriptive texts and curious figures of animals,
such as camels, elephants, lions, representations of the
natives and their habitations, castles, trees,etc. —in fact,any-
thing but what one would find in Australia. Cartographers
in those days were, however, accustomed to fill in blanks
on their maps with imaginary pictures and hearsay de-
scriptions, a mixture of fable and romance.
The coast-line is approximately correct, always bearing
in mind that it extends twenty degrees too far to the west,
and that the island of Java has been almost united with
the mainland. Allowance having been made for the
difficulty of computing longitudes in the 16th century,
and for the influence of Marco Polo’s geography, the
old maps will be found substantially to agree with the
modern as far south as 3 s°. On the east, however, a pro-
montory juts far out to sea, terminating with Cap de
Fremose, or Beautiful Cape, in about the position of
Wilson’s Promontory on modern charts. This shows that
a fictitious coast-line has been run out to join a headland
actually seen. South of 35 0 the coast-line has been con-
tinued indefinitely to the southward to block the seaway.
With regard to this Cape Fremose, or Fremoso, several
explanations have been given. One is that the point of
land here represented is part of New Zealand, the northern
island being in about the same latitude ; another—that the
Spaniards gave by analogy to this coast the same shape as
South America, where a cape or river Fermoso also occurs;


Old Names.
Modern Identifications.
Cabo Leoa. 1
Cape Leeuwin.
Abrolhos. 2
Houtman’s Abrolhos.
Lame (Haure) de Cisne.
Swan flat and river.
Terra Anegada (submerged land).
Shoal Bay. 3
Costa d’Ouro. 4
Gold region recently found in
Kimberley
R. de S\° Spirito.
Daly River.
a third suggestion is that this promontory is Tasmania,
pushed up to the cast coast.
An Australian geographer, Mr. George Collingridge of
Gladesville, N. S. Wales, has lately sent me his interpre-
tations of the names on the so-called “ Dauphin” chart
of Desceliers, restoring the Gallicised names to their
original (as he thinks) Portuguese forms.
West Coast.
North and East Coasts.
Old Names.
Anda ne Barcha. 6
Islas de los Aligadores.
Ribera de Muchas Islas (Coast
of many Islands).
Costa Peligrosa.
Bahia Perdita (Lost Bay).
Modern Identifications.
Gulf of Carpentaria.
Crocodile Islands.
Sandy Cape.
Dangerous coast. 6
Broad Sound. 7
1 Probably so called by the Portuguese from the resemblance of the
continent of Australia to a lioness’s head.
2 Said to have been discovered by the Portuguese navigator, Don
Jorge de Meneses, in 1527.
3 A name given by Captain P. P. King to the same locality.
4 Showing that the existence of gold in the locality was evidently
known to the Portuguese. An old chart is said to have the words
“ Terra Aurifera” here.
* Meaning, “No boats or ships go here.” Two islands at the
entrance of the gulf are probably Baly and Lambok.
* Referring to the barrier reefs shown on modern charts.
7 The same as Cook’s Bay of Inlets.
13


Costa de los Herbages (Coast of
Pastures).
Coast between Port Macquarie and
the McLeay River. 1
Wilson’s Promontory.
C. de Fremoso or Hermoso
(Beautiful Cape).
Costa de las Gracias 2 (Coast of
the Pope’s Grant).
Point Perpendicular and Jervis
Bay.
Looking at these charts with all their detail of nomen-
clature, their compass bearings, scales, and the generally
correct idea they give of the coasts of Australia, it would
be impossible to assert that they are purely imaginary,
fictitious representations of an undiscovered continent.
But the narratives of voyages in the early part of the 16th
century contain no description of a southern continent.
The only allusion to one is that given by Ramusio from
the account of the pilot Gaetan, who heard that a small
vessel, the San Juan , sailed 650 leagues (2,600 miles)
without losing sight of land, running nearly east and west,
and that this land was found to be inhabited by a naked
black people with short hair, who came to the coast
carrying darts and clubs to make war, and that they
were very active. This, observes Mr. Petherick, in an
article contributed to the Melbourne Review , is the earliest
account we have of the natives of Australia, and may be
taken as a true picture of the inhabitants of Queensland
250 years ago. But this was in 1545, and the earliest of
the French charts is dated 1542.
The first authenticated voyage to Australia is that of
the yacht Buyfhen, or Dove , in 1606, the same year
that Torres sailed through the straits between Australia
1 This part of the Australian coast presents a succession of
scrubby flats and scrub-covered plains, with here and there rounded
timber-covered peaks. This country, adds Mr. Collingridge, looks
very much like pasture land from the deck of a vessel at sea.
2 The eastern coast of Australia fell within the Spanish hemi-
sphere, according to Pope Alexander’s line of demarcation.


and New Guinea. In 1642, Tasman sailed across the
southern tropic, and discovered New Zealand and Van
Diemen’s land, now named after him. But the Dutch
voyages in the Pacific were made with the express aim of
discovery, and to make known the unexplored continent
which Quiros had boasted that he had discovered, and to
which he had given the high-sounding title of Tierra del
Espiritu Santo.
15




18. Map of the wo>W from La Satade nouvtlUmmt imfrimie, Paris 1522. (Orig/ *Uc as 4 X 257 m. m-)>
MAPPEMONDE (LA SALLE) CIRCA 1522,
(Reduced from Nordenskiold’s Atlas.)






*
•
'
' • - - •
.“‘•i— V.-
V
; ‘' . v
'■ ■ •:
■ ■ ’’ -P-. "y '
•
v y /■- ■ -
•'
*
-
' •• : '■ •
- . ■ •
.:•: ' .• ■■■
- ; ■
■ •- .
s. ; •
i4t
•
-


o >
3 -a
20
2
a.%
k O
>»
c.r
a
a
a
a
if.
a
a
z
jV
a
H
P
O
a
t/1
Q «
OS<
O W
:0
M* C
r. V
U
U< o
02
cu g
<s
5 §
§1
5~
a
o
o
a
a
p
o
Q
w
a
o
H
<;
o
Cd
a
5
6




SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE (Reduced from Nordenskiold’s Atlas.)
MAP OF THE WORLD, BY G. MERCATOR (1587).
MAP OF THE WORLD, BY ORTELIUS {1570) SOUTHERN PART (Reduced from Nordenskiold’s Atlas.)




S 3
Q
D
57
« g
."O
W g
«Z
ffiS
£.§
cn"“
HT)
S 8
a -3
KT3
z£
Cj
w
X
H
O
CO
O
a.
<
2S




in
.2
o
o
cj
u.
fl 4
O
O
SX
a.
s'
p
G
<L>
rrp
H tJ3
Z P
Q 1
Z 8
HH O
H*c3
gS
O «
U O
«*
<2 m
J‘3
0.2
fVa.
ffi'C
M in
§Q
w.“>
fe.2
02
s a
o
TJ
(U
O
P
T 3
<U
£
a
p
O)
to
p
*5
J 3
CO
cq


