

REMARKS
ON THE
MONETARY LEGISLATION
OF
GREAT BRITAIN.
BY
WILLIAM WARD, ESQ.,
FORMERLY M.P. FOR THE CITY OF LONDON.
LONDON:
PELHAM RICHARDSON, CORNHILL ; J. OLLIVIER, 69, PALL MALL.
1847.


LONDON:
GEOIIOR WOODKAtL AND SON,
A.NOKI- COURT, SKI.VNKR STRKKT.


REMARKS
ON THE
MONETARY LEGISLATION
oF
GREAT BRITAIN.
Recent events having again brought under consi-
deration and discussion the regulations that have been
made regarding the circulating medium of the country,
I venture to commit to writing the opinions I entertain
on the subject, together with many of the facts and
arguments in support of them, that have resulted from
long experience; having been requested to do so by a
portion of those whose interests I formerly repre-
sented.
As a pressure on the commercial interest has been
aggravated by a want of confidence, greatly injurious
in its consequences, I shall deal with the present emer-
gency in the first instance, and then advert con-
tinuously to the legislation that has prevailed relating
to money in its more extensive signification.
Towards the end of the year 1834, the King
thought proper to appoint Sir Robert Peel as his Prime
Minister; on that occasion the chief magistrate of the
a 2


city of London invited him to an entertainment, at
which I was present. On thanking the company for
their warmth of feeling in drinking his health, Sir
Robert dwelt much on the benefit of confidence; he
adverted much to the feeling of confidence that had
always animated the soldier when under the com-
mand of the Duke of Wellington : in military matters
it is not sufficient that the cavalry, infantry, and
artillery should be excellent, but it is also requisite
that a co-operative influence should exist, accompanied
with a feeling of confidence between the commanders
and those they command. The probability of suc-
cess became greatly enhanced by this feeling; and
the result has long since, gladdened the heart of every
right-thinking Englishman. lam not surprised then
at the expressions of Government in adverting to the
commercial pressure that now exists, aggravated as it
undoubtedly is by the absence of confidence. An
absence of confidence in a commercial community is in
fact a national calamity. Confidence, with the British
merchant, is nearly what the soul is to the body; and
it is now to be ascertained whether legislative enact-
ment has or has not contributed to the interruption of
so necessary an element of success. My own opinion
is in the affirmative; and that opinion is strengthened
by what I see going on around me. The British
merchant is interrupted in the ordinary course of
business, by noticing an almost numberless amount of
causes for anxiety, and he is not allowed to make the
best of whatever may befall. He is virtually instructed
by the law of the land to scan invidiously every
movement of the Bank of England, to view its weak
points, and, by suspicion,provide out of his own resources
against any untoward occurrence that may befall.


Nor is the Bank allowed to view him with a more
favourable eye: suspicious and suspected they must
both be, and that generous feeling in commercial inter-
course that formerly existed between both the one and
the other must be no more remembered. This state of
things may be, perhaps, best brought under notice by
pointing out specific cases of disorder. The cheapest
Government security (the Long-Annuity) yields 6 or 7
per cent, interest; while Reduced Stock gives little more
than one-half that rate. One reason for ihis is to be
found in parliamentary legislation : the property tax
may be increased: and those that held this class of
security, when the tax was laid on, were compelled to
pay the same rate of property tax for a terminable
annuity that is charged on a perpetuity; and even the
Bank itself is obliged to submit to this injustice, as far
as regards the dead-weight annuity. The capitalist,
then, withholds confidence till he sees whether the in-
justice be repeated.
The foreigner that had invested property in our
funds was obliged to bear the deduction of the
property tax, contrary to the practice that formerly
prevailed; his confidence is shaken, and he declines
availing himself of the present low price.
A falling off of the revenue at the rate of some
millions per annum exists; and this is calculated to
impair, and does impair, every feeling of confidence:
this was occasioned by legislation.
The amount of grain imported has long exceeded a
million quarters per month: it is no longer required. In
the third week of October, however, grain valued at half
a million sterling arrived, and money is required to pay
for it, as well as for the freight. Under the law sanc-
tioning the graduated scale that was supported by


the Duke of Wellington and Mr. Huskisson, this could
not have happened. Here, again, legislation has caused
the absence of confidence.
The Currency Committee of 1819* believed that the
increased monetary stringency would occasion a de-
pression of 6 per cent., and they recommended increased
taxation to a corresponding amount. The late Par-
liament, however, added greatly to the stringency of
currency, and then almost immediately weakened our
financial position by taking off several millions of
taxes.
The Bullion Committee of 1810 recorded its opinion
that enlarged accommodation is the true remedy for
that occasional failure of confidence to which our
system of paper credit is unavoidably exposed.
“ Your Committee have much satisfaction in think-
ing, that the Directors are perfectly aware that they
may err by a too scanty supply in a period of stag-
nant credit. And your Committee are clearly of opi-
nion, that although it ought to he the general policy
of the Bank Directors to diminish their paper in the
event of the long continuance of a high price of bul-
lion and a very unfavourable exchange, yet it is essen-
tial to the commercial interests of this country, and
to the general fulfilment of those mercantile engage-
* In the year 1819 I was examined by the Committee of the
House of Lords on the Bank Affairs, as to the eifect of the reduc-
tion of notes on the price of commodities. My answers were;—“ I
conceive that it would be necessary for the Bank to feel its way as
it proceeds, and stop short of that point that would render the
amount of distress great.”—“ The effect can only he ascertained by
experiment.”—“ If reduction led to want of confidence, it is im-
possible to say to what extent the depression of prices might go.”
Those answers were disregarded, and prices were reduced above 20
per cent.


ments which a free issue of paper may have occa-
sioned, that the accustomed degree of accommodation
to the merchants should not be suddenly and mate-
rially reduced; and that, if any general and serious
difficulty or apprehension on this subject should arise,
it may, in the judgment of your Committee, be coun-
teracted without danger, and with advantage to the
public, by a liberality in the issue of Bank of England
paper proportioned to the urgency of the particular
occasion.”
The Bill of 1844 enforces the opposite of this, and
is not satisfied with using moderate means of counter-
acting the long continuation of an unfavourable ex-
change, but also establishes an anti-confidence course
of proceeding.
On former occasions, when loans were negotiated,
an assurance of financial surplus was usually given
to the contractors. Last summer this was dis-
pensed with ; and the capitalist, otherwise disposed to
invest, is uninformed as to a most material point affect-
ing confidence, and if he invests his means he may
again find a deficiency of twelve millions in six years,
such as occurred under Lord Melbourne’s government.
The deficient revenue (of itself a cause of discredit),
and all the other circumstances occasioning a want of
confidence, have been brought about by the ill-con-
sidered measures of the late Parliament. Persons
qualify themselves if they purpose entering the army
or the navy; for the law and the church a long course
of preparation is required; and a merchant serves his
apprenticeship; but a Member of Parliament has only
to obtain the votes of persons paying 10/. per annum
rent, and then he is to be deemed qualified to direct
what is to be done regarding the complicated bearings
of whatever relates to the commercial, financial, and


monetary concerns of Great Britain. I recommend
new members, however, to read Mr. Huskisson’s
speech on Finance in March 1813, and then either
act upon its suggestions or answer its arguments.
The Government letter to the Bank asserts that a
check has been given to transactions of a speculative
character, and that this was calculated to cause the
influx of capital from abroad. This is very uncalled
for; and lam surprised that members of the Govern-
ment should throw at the commercial community the
imputation. They know well that speculation was in
great part caused by the conduct of the late Parlia-
ment. On every occasion extension, by means of re-
laxation of duty, was the object aimed at; and credit
was taken for the success of enlightened measures.
Speculation, however, on the instability of legislation
was the successful course; and those that relied on the
stability of legislation had great reason to deplore the
confidence they placed in those that governed them.
Railway undertakings were likewise promoted to an
extent unknown in the history of mankind, by the
very parties that now turn round on those that have
been duped, and charge them as the peccant specu-
lators. Parliament must have known, and certainly
ought to have known, the impracticability of providing
the pecuniary means of fulfilling what itself had sanc-
tioned. As to the transfer of capital from other coun-
tries, I am surprised that Government should be insen-
sible to the effect of trifling with public credit; it
knows that, contrary to the expressed opinions and
practices of Mr. Pitt and Mr, Fox, the late Parliament
disgraced itself by inflicting the income tax on
foreigners, and that one of their own party, (Mr.
Baring, the former Finance Minister,) much to his
credit, endeavoured to prevent the disgraceful proceed


ing. It is too much, then, to expect that the foreigner
should come to the rescue and expose himself to the
effect of unprincipled spoliation by becoming interested
in the public funds. The Government manifesto fur-
ther declares that it will not depart from the law that
has placed the currency of the country on a sound
basis, and that the vital principle of maintaining the
convertibility of the note shall be preserved. I
know of no one that doubts, as a principle, that
paper, by limitation of quantity, can be kept on a
level with the precious metals; but the question raised
is, whether under the circumstances that exist, and
the objectionable mode of applying the principle, the
remedy be not worse than the disease, in the present
state of supply of metallic means. For years past
a thirst for new laws has sprung up, and all these new
laws (with one exception) have for their object to add
to the supply by importation, regardless of the means
of paying for it; millions being required to pay for the
grain alone, over and above what was required; and
this would have been prevented under the previously
existing law. A larger quantity, and at a higher price,
is imported, and a declining rate is the characteristic
of what we have to export in exchange. I have seen
in a recent publication that one thousand millions is
the amount of loss that now exists by depression and
reduction of price. If the amount of the National
Debt be taken at eight hundred millions, the lowered
price at twenty to twenty-five per cent., and other
properties at five times the amount of the National
Debt, the estimate is hardly too high. Certain it is
that paper, convertible into gold, will be accepted for
double the amount of railroad property that it was in
1845 ; and both the property purchased and the instru


ment of payment are called into existence by Parlia-
mentary enactment. The case of the Bank Stock itself
is a further evidence that something disjointed is in
operation, the price being thirty per cent, lower, while
the profits announced in September were thirty per
cent, higher, than last year. The only restriction that
has been added (and to which I alluded) is that which
ties the hands of Parliament, and prevents its reducing
the interest on one-third of the National Debt for
thirty years, should opportunity present itself, as it
probably will do. During three centuries the rate of
interest, with occasional interruption, has been on the
decline. It is chiefly dependent on the rate of profit,
so that, if high profit prevail, so also will means of pay-
ment ; and, if declining profit occur, a lower rate of
interest will suffice for the public creditor. The hands
of future Parliaments, however, are tied, and the coun-
try must forego the benefit.
It may be as well now to define the object contem-
plated in determining what ought or ought not to con-
stitute the currency used by the community in the
various transactions in which it is engaged.
This purpose will probably be best answered by con-
sidering it under two heads, viz., the one as a standard
or measure of value, and the other with reference to
convenience in use.
Transmission of equivalent in value cannot be ef-
fected from period to period without care being taken
that the coin (or whatever else is used as such) should
not be subjected to great and constant fluctuation, by
which either the parties receiving or paying are bene-
fited ; and it has generally been found more necessary
for the party receiving, than for the party paying, to


obtain the protection of the State. The Sovereign is
the party whose prerogative constitutionally affords
this protection; and the express image of the sovereign
indicates a test that quantity and quality have been
ascertained in the coins of the realm that circulate; and
to falsify this test is criminal in the greatest degree. A
kind of trusteeship thus exists for the faithful and equal
fulfilment of covenant, as far as money is concerned.
It may here be remarked that any thing approach-
ing to insurmountable difficulty has never yet pre-
sented itself when actual mensuration has been under
consideration ; nor does any apprehension exist that
the future will be less fortunate than the past.
Equal good fortune, however, has not attended the
efforts of those that have endeavoured to establish and
maintain a standard; the metals themselves being
changeable in value, both generally and with reference
to each other.
Those that have handled the subject have been
many in number, and an unusually great proportion of
them gifted intellectually in the greatest degree. They
have most diligently bestowed their every energy on
the subject; but, unfortunately, complete success has
not attended their exertions. In fact, they have dis-
agreed among themselves ; and the circumstances of this
country have become so changed, that in any case dif-
ficulty was to be apprehended; for, in addition to the
ordinary occurrences in buying and selling, the collect-
ing of revenue, and the Exchequer receipts and pay-
ments, (connected as many of them are with fiscal
regulations, continually changing,) some amount of
artificial disturbance cannot be avoided.
Having shared responsibility when questions con-
cerning currency have been under discussion, I think


it right here to state that I have thought, and continue
to think, the subject an intricate one; that the operation
of inventive faculties is unsuited to it; and that the re-
moval of ascertained imperfections is preferable to dan-
gerous novelty and amateur legislation, not called for
by the circumstances of the times. The greatest evil
of modern periods has been the fluctuative value of the
currency; and the cause to which it has been ascribed
has been, in some considerable degree, the use, concur-
rently with the precious metals, of circulative credit—
economical and convenient in the greatest degree, but
at one period unaccompanied by any metallic regulator
whatever.
As it is one object to consider how far the Act of
1844 was wise, it is necessary to go into some detail
concerning the assertions and arguments on which it
was founded; and lam sorry to say that assumptions
on this and on former occasions do not appear to have
been fully borne out.
It has been stated that gold was formerly the standard.
We have here the asserted regulation that existed up to
the termination of the war, as a preliminary, at least, to
that which followed. A most material inaccuracy has,
however,found its way into this statement; and I think
it arose from the Bullion Report of 1810, and was
taken for granted as accurate by those that have fol-
lowed. The assertion is that gold was the foundation
of British currency. Now it appears to me to be en-
tirely inaccurate that gold was, previously to that time,
the foundation of British currency.
To trace currency completely from its origin would
be tedious, but some of the more remarkable periods of
its history are worth regarding, and they show clearly
that the adoption of a currency purely of gold is quite


of modern date, and a most gratuitous departure from
former practice.
The first notice of money is to be found in the
Book of Genesis. We read that Abraham “ was rich
in cattle, and in silver, and in gold.” On the death of
his wife, he purchased a field for a burying-place, the
payment for which was made with four hundred
shekels of silver, which he delivered, not in coin, but
“ by weight, according to the currency of merchants.”
Joseph was sold by his brethren “ for twenty pieces
of silver .” When established in Egypt as minister, his
brothers brought “ silver in their sacks’ mouths ” to
purchase corn. He subsequently presented to his
younger and favourite brother three hundred pieces of
silver. Gold was perfectly well known in those days,
and highly valued, but it did not perform the function
of money. Gold was appropriated, like the onyx, the
sapphire, crystal, pearl, topazes, rubies, and other
jewels, as ornaments. The amount of gold possessed
by Solomon (though he possessed other wealth) was
enormous, but it was not used as coin. Large masses
of gold and silver were collected by Ninus, the founder
of Nineveh; and Semiramis, the wife of Belus, who
built the city of Babylon, erected a temple to Jupiter,
with a statue which was forty feet in height, and
weighed a thousand Babylonian talents. There is, per-
haps, some exaggeration in the amount of the precious
metals collected, but the probability of the accumula-
tion of gold to a great extent in Babylon is strength-
ened by the narrative, in the book of Daniel, of the
great size of the image of gold erected by Nebuchad-
nezzar on the plain of Dura, near that city. The
amount of the precious metals drawn from the con-
quered provinces by Darius Hystaspes was immense;


but it became the practice to coin no more gold and
silver than was needed to conduct the commerce and
defray the expenses of the State, which were not large
in amount, by reason of the paucity of commodities
and the low prices that existed. This is the first ap-
pearance of gold in the capacity of coin. The pieces
were of great purity, on which quality Darius prided
himself, and they were called Darics. The number
that circulated was not great, and but few have ever
been met with; but the name was subsequently given
to all gold coins as indicative of purity. Now, if it
be true that Abraham was born in the year 2008;
that the kingdom of Assyria was founded by Ninus
in the year 2059 ; that Darius Hystaspes, the first per-
son that coined gold, was born in the year of the
world 3479 ; it follows that fourteen centuries elapsed,
at least, between the prevalence of a silver coin, and
one of that metal connected with a gold one. It is
also to be observed, that the circumstances of the
period are totally different from those of the present
day, and that at that time abundance of the precious
metals existed, with very little use for them as coin;
whereas at present there is every occasion for them as
coin, and no over-abundnnt supply within our reach.
There could also have been little or no loss by abrasion,
as now occurs; and one account asserts that the coin-
age commenced 894 years before the Christian era.
The metals were wanted for uses connected with re-
ligion, and also as preparation for war. By an old
law of Athens, it was ordained that a thousand talents
should be set apart annually, for defence against foreign
invasion; and applying them to any other purpose was
punishable with death. There was no gold coin in
Thrace till Philip of Macedon put the mines of Thrace


in full operation about 360 years before Christ, and
the produce was coined into pieces called Philippi.
Silver was first coined at Rome 266 years before the
Christian era, but it was not till sixty-two years after-
wards that gold coin followed. Thus gold coins existed
about 150 years before the accession of Augustus, and,
the metal being pure, but little was lost by friction.
The object of purity has not been disregarded in our
time, and the only coins more pure than ours are the
Dutch ducats, of which few exist. Silver coins were
by no means so perfect as the gold, but notwithstanding
the immense size of the towns of Nineveh and Baby-
lon, which have been stated to have been sixty miles
in circuit, a much larger amount of the precious metals
must have remained in deposit, and ought to be regarded
more in the light of forthcoming capital than circulating
medium. No amount of wealth probably ever existed
in the shape of metallic means, greater than that which
was procured either during, a little before, or a little
after the Augustan age; and this must be attributed
chiefly to the plunder that was perpetually brought to
Rome after successful warfare. It must not be for-
gotten, however, that this excess is meant com-
paratively, both with reference to the population, and
the probable amount of call for money, by reason of
the number of transactions. The locality for the use
of the large amount of wealth, was chiefly the more
eastern shores of the Mediterranean, and the towns
situated in the neighbourhood; and the estimated sum
of the two metals was three hundred and fifty-eight
millions. Debasement of coins became subsequently
common, and a gradual reduction of the quantity seems
to have continued steadily from the year 14 to the
termination of the Western Empire, between the years


470 and 490, when less than one hundred millions was
the whole that remained. In the two centuries which
passed between the termination of the Roman Empire
and the propagation of the Mahometan religion, and
for a century afterwards, a further reduction took
place. No account can be obtained of the reduced
prices that prevailed at this period, though those that
ruled at Rome in its days of abundance are known to
have had enormous sums. Doubts and difficulties
attend inquiries from this period: it is believed, how-
ever, that depression of price was progressively con-
siderable, and that exertions were not wanting to supply
the precious metals by renewed mining undertakings.
It has been asserted, that at the Conquest the
Norman pound was a troy pound of twelve ounces,
divided into twenty parts called shillings, and these
again subdivided into twelve parts called pennies or
pennyweights. My impression is that an unimportant
error exists here, in as far as the weights are con-
cerned ; the Tower pound, the Moneyer’s pound, and
the Rochelle pound, have all been in use; but I take
the Tower pound, and it was ascertained to have
been three quarters of an ounce lighter than the troy
pound, which was only adopted some centuries subse-
quently, in the reign of Henry VIII., the annual fair at
Troyes in France being the place where accuracy of
weight was well established. There was no gold
money in existence of British coin, but a few Byzan-
tines were occasionally to be met with ; they were so
called from Byzantium or Constantinople, where the
coins were struck.
The practice of clipping and counterfeiting was
carried on to a great extent, notwithstanding severe


laws that were unsparingly carried into effect; but
large payments were made by weight, so that clippers
were counteracted. Our earlier sovereigns, however,
do not seem to have had the pride of maintaining their
credit, for several of them altered to their own ad-
vantage the amount of metal in the same denomination
of coin, it forming part of the royal prerogative to
determine what should constitute the coin of the
realm, independently of Parliaments, that had no au-
thority on such subjects. The first enactments to be
found were in the reign of Edward I.; but they were
more directed against the exportation of the existing
coin, and the procuring of additional coin, than the
establishing of different money; diminution of the
metal by clipping being also provided for. These
Acts open to our view the monetary policy of this
country at that period. The possession of the precious
metals in this country was considered indispensably
necessary, and as we could hardly be said to produce
them, it was thought right, by way of precaution, to
make some provision on the subject. Wales yielded
some little metal, and a mint was, I think, at one time
worked at Aberystwith; but neither that source'of
supply, nor any other in this country, sufficed for our
requirements. The enactments were very pointed:
though worded in French and Latin, they were di-
rected against weakened and enfeebled moneys, (as
they have been sometimes termed,) and they had the
additional object of getting rid of an inferior money
called black money. Searchers and exchangers were
appointed at Sandwich, then a great port of egress,
(small vessels only requiring a small draft of water
being used,) and at Southampton: provision was even
made to prevent exportation by pilgrims, who, using
n


unfrequented roads, little known to any but themselves,
were supposed to carry each of them a little out of
the country. In the county of Kent one of these
roads still remains.
In the reign of Edward 111., gold first began to cir-
culate as coin, and 1344 was the period of its in-
troduction. Hume says that it was the established
opinion that gold coin was not struck till this reign;
but he adds, that proof had recently been adduced
that gold coin was as ancient as the reign of Henry
HI. The fact is, that coins were actually struck in
the reign of Henry HI., but they did not circulate in
consequence of the general disinclination to use them;
and the king yielded to the remonstrances that were
made, and withdrew them. This information was
obtained through the instrumentality of the archives
of the city of London in 1732. There are two of
these coins in the Museum; a Kentish gentleman
possesses another; and a fourth is believed to exist,
though Ido not know where. Gold, for a very long
period, was far from an acceptable coin; loss by
abrasion was from time to time incurred; foreign gold
was preferred, because it did not escape the notice of
the goldsmiths and exchangers that a discreditable
degree of seignorage was sometimes deducted from
the weight of the metal, which was also valued too
high by comparison with silver; and some little un-
favourable feeling continued to exist, even at the
period of the re-coinage in the years 1773 and 1774.
After various changes and uncertainties, Elizabeth, in
her fortj-third year, fixed the weight and quality of
the silver coin; the pound being cut into sixty-two
shillings the pound troy, and eleven ounces two penny-
weights pure, with eighteen of alloy; and it remained


so till the end of the late war. It is worthy of remark,
that prices are believed to have harmonized generally
with the quantity of money that circulated commodi-
ties. One instance occurred in 1299, when the Common
Council of London fixed unusually low prices; the price
was five shillings per quarter for wheat. The circum-
stance occasioning low price in 1336, was the supply
of money for warfare—the metals carried out of the
country required for that purpose, leaving a vacuum
severely felt. Another instance occurred in 1199, when
Hugh de Bosca, sheriff of Hampshire, stocked the
king’s lands of Mienes, with oxen at 9s. 3d., sheep at
Is. each.
It is now necessary to notice the most important
circumstance that ever occurred relating to money—l
mean the discovery of America, and the addition con-
sequently made to the precious metals. “ The exu-
berant profusion,” says Robertson, “ with which the
mountains of the New World poured forth their trea-
sures, astonished mankind, who had been accustomed
hitherto to receive a penurious supply of the precious
metals from the more scanty stores contained in the
mines of the ancient hemisphere.” He estimates the
quantity of gold and silver poured into Spain annually at
four millions sterling during 283 years, or eleven hun-
dred and thirty-two millions in all. He does not seem,
however, to have been sufficiently aware of the immense
deduction to be made in so long a period of time for waste
and wear. The quantity, however, was sensibly felt, and
greatly increased prices absorbed the greater part of the
surplus ; but new articles of consumption and increased
population moderated the effect produced, although
the prices were at least quadrupled. The amount of
gold and silver at the end of the century terminating
b 2


1599, has been estimated at one hundred and thirt}'’
millions, and at the end of the next century, 1699, at
two hundred and ninety-seven millions. Under the
influence of additional stimulants, new articles of con-
sumption were introduced, such as turnips, carrots,
parsnips, early pease, rape, and clover generally; ar-
tichokes, currants, cherries, onions, asparagus, and po-
tatoes, were added to corn and cattle. When Erasmus
visited this country the houses were built of mud and
wood, and were thatched with straw; but in the latter
end of the 17th century, the word “comfort” became
known in our vocabulary, and the additional popula-
tion and articles consumed, established an absorption
of the precious metals for centuries unknown. In the
earlier history of coins, the proportion of gold to silver
was as 1 to 13 ; on an extreme occasion it reached 17,
and no instance again occurred of such an extreme
evaluation till during the siege of Cadiz in 1812, when
a doubloon exchanged for 17 dollars. 1000 doubloons
weigh 867 ounces, and 1000 dollars 865: both are
below standard; the doubloon grains, and the dollar
7 and 8 pennyweights. 13 ounces of silver for 1 of
gold was a high evaluation in early days, and 10 was
a common rate. In the reign of Elizabeth, an ounce of
coined gold was deemed equivalent to 9.1. 15s. 11c?., or
about 11 to 1. In the year 1605, King James coined
an ounce of gold at the rate of Si. 2 s. Id., being an
alteration of 11 per cent. In 1612, he again altered
the rate to Si. 7s. Id., being an alteration of 10 per
cent. One or two per cent, more alteration took place
in the 17th of James I.; but in 1633, Charles 11. fixed
the rate at Si. 14s. 2 d. the ounce of gold, making one
ounce of gold equal to of silver. In the reign of
William 111., controversy was carried to an extreme


point, in consequence of the remedies to an admitted
evil being so various. The coins were very imperfect,
and it appears that for years people managed to en-
feeble the coin by getting away a part of the metal,
and then reintroducing into circulation defective coin,
much to their benefit. Bacon says, “ whatever is
somewhere gotten is somewhere lostand the nation
O 7
lost in this case what the clippers got. The Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer of that day consulted Mr.,
afterwards Sir Isaac Newton, and many others ; an
immense sum was spent in improving the coins, but
years elapsed before a satisfactory settlement or ad-
justment could be obtained. Eventually Sir I. Newton,
in 1717, recommended the pound of silver to be cut into
sixty-two shillings, and the pound of gold into forty-
four guineas and a half, that is, gold at 31. 17s- 10 \d.
per ounce, and silver at ss. 2d., establishing about fifteen
pounds and one-fifth of silver as equivalent to one
pound of gold. The changes between the 43rd of
Elizabeth and the period here alluded to, may in some
degree be excused, because the production of the mines
was calculated to occasion disturbance; but the changes
are not supposed to have been wisely effected. With
the exception of the runs on the Bank in 1721 and
1745, years elapsed without the occurrence of any
thing deserving notice, except the increasing use of paper,
which is usually beneficial at the commencement, but
eventually requires regulation. That regulation is pre-
ferred which causes the paper to be assimilated to the
coin it represents. Now it must be borne in mind that
Sir I. Newton was well acquainted with the imperfections
of the coin before any paper money circulated ; before
any national debt existed (there being only a small
arrear due to the Goldsmiths); before the Bank was


established, and while King William’s anxiety on the
score of coin led him to accelerate the peace of
Ryswick. He knew also of the changes that had too
often occurred both before and after the 43rd of Eliza-
beth, and that the National Debt was far advanced in
its magnitude. With all this information his advice
was, that gold occasionally varied in its price; that it
might be worth something less whenever there was a
great demand for the export of silver, particularly to the
East Indies, and perhaps something more when a Plate
fleet arrived from Spanish America, but that twenty-one
shillings was the preferable rate for gold guineas.
The guinea was accordingly lowered by proclamation
to twenty-one shillings, and guineas became legal tender
at that rate, concurrently with silver at sixty-two pence
per ounce. This settlement continued for years without
complaint against the standard; but a scanty provision
only was made for keeping up the metals to their
proper level, and enfeebled coin was the consequence.
Such would also have been the case had brass or copper
been the metals used; hut payments into the Ex-
chequer, and the redistribution of those sums as divi-
dends, and for salaries to public servants, were not
interrupted : but it is asserted that by practice, and by
the recoinage enactments of 1773 or 1774, the standard
became gold. Sir R. Peel admits that there is a very
material difference of opinion as to the real nature and
character of the measure of value in this country. He
asserts that legally and practically it was gold, and if
we are not agreed upon this point we are unlikely to
agree in what follows; and Ido not know how any
more candid or fairway of approaching the subject can
be devised. As he also asserts that the true policy of
this country is to work as far as possible with the


instruments ready for your hand; to avail yourselves
of that advantage which they possess from having
been in use, from being familiar, from constituting a
part of the habits and usages of society; they will
probably work more smoothly than perfectly novel
instruments of greater theoretical perfection; if we
disturb that which has been established, let us have
some practical reason for the change.
I will now assign my reasons for believing that no
change of standard was intended to take place, or ever
did take place at that period. A few years before the re-
coinage, the Bank issued notes of a reduced denomination,
which most likely produced the usual effect of causing
the preferable money to leave the kingdom, leaving the
weaker money here. The practice of diminishing the
metal was in operation, and a clerk in the Bank itself
was detected in his courses. The firm of Neale and Co.,
bankers, stopped, and a panic ensued in 1772. The
high rate of bullion, both gold and silver, payable in
weakened money, pointed out the necessity of remedy.
On the 13th January, 1774, the King remarked in his
speech the state of the gold coin: the degree of dimi-
nution which it had suffered was truly alarming; but
it was with satisfaction he had seen the evil checked
by the measures of the last session, and he hoped the
present grievance would be removed and the commerce
of the kingdom secured from a similar grievance. On
the 22nd June, at the close of the session, the King
thanks his Parliament for its regard for credit, by
removing mischief from the impaired state of the gold
coin. The Commons, on the 1 Oth of May, had agreed
to seventeen Resolutions.
The first declared that about three millions and a
half of gold coin were deficient nine per cent.


2nd. That another portion was deficient five, and
another two and a half per cent.
3rd. That it had been the practice to melt down
and export the new and perfect coin.
4th. That the new and perfect coins are likely to be
melted.
sth. That all guineas weighing less than 5 penny-
weights 8 grains be called in and recoined.
6th. That they be called in as fast as circulation
will allow.
7th. That certain days be appointed, after which
they cannot be received.
Bth. That recoinage be of the standard weight and
fineness.
9th. Regulates how the loss is to be sustained.
10th. Declares that the previous laws to prevent
clipping had been ineffectual.
11th. That the effectual mode of prevention is
making money current by weight as well as tale.
12th. That any person receiving insufficient money
shall be compensated.
13th. That compensation shall be at the rate of half
a guinea for every sixty-five grains deficient.
14th. That silver coin below the Mint standard had
been imported.
15th. That it be made unlawful to import such
coin.
16th. That for a limited time silver coin be not legal
tender beyond 50 1., but according to its value by
weight at the rate of ss. 2 d. per ounce.
17th. Establishes the weights.
The first nine resolutions were presented to the
king, whose prerogative enabled him to act, and the
last three became the subjects of enactment.


These Resolutions passed with some feeling of dis-
inclination for gold coin on the part of the community.
This disinclination for gold was formerly such, that
from the commencement of gold coinage till the reign
of Henry VII., it only amounted to about 3000/.
annually. The seignorage, however, prevented its
being applied to any other use than coin for domestic
use. The uncertainty of the amount of seignorage
was another impediment to free circulation; but it was
well known to the Lombards and goldsmiths, who of
course acted on the information they possessed. The
disinclination to British gold coin continued strong till
the improvements in the reign of Elizabeth; but the
moidores of Portugal were preferred in our western
counties to British coin; and Mr. Jacob, in his work
on the consumption and production of the precious
metals, asserts that it had not wholly subsided when
the recoinage took place in 1774.
All this was embodied in three enactments of the
14th of Geo. 111, cc. 42, 70, and 92. No complaint
appears to have been made of the standard, and the
Act was to terminate in about two years, from which
I conclude that the community was to be protected
from the inconvenience of an inundation of light silver
coin ; that a limit to 25/. in tale was established; and
that larger amounts might be paid in silver by weight,
the means of weighing with improved accuracy being
provided for. The whole of the arrangement was,
however, only intended for a temporary purpose, and
the enactment disappeared till the arrangement of
1798 revived a suspension of silver coinage, but not
an alteration of standard of value. What occurred
at early periods may thus be recapitulated. At
the Conquest the pound of silver was twenty shil


lings. By disreputable practices sixty-two shillings
had become substituted for twenty ; when Elizabeth
thought it wise to fix the standard at sixty-two shil-
lings, and a concurrent gold coin was used in cir-
culation. I believe it to be inaccurate to say that the
standard was altered in 1774, as stated; and this
opinion will become strengthened by reverting to what
occurred at various periods, when the subject was
again considered. Some modification of the gold coin
took place in the period intervening between the Act
of Elizabeth and the reign of William III.; nor is it
to be wondered at, for after the discovery of the mines
in America, which altered the quantities of silver pro-
duced, by comparison with gold, a considerable period
was likely to pass before things could settle down, and
adjustment become perfected. At the period of King
William’s reign, however, the evil to be remedied was
the imperfection of the coin; and, with the exception
of the very limited alteration in value suggested by
Sir I. Newton, the subsequent complaints have arisen
from the diminutions of the coins, and not from the call
for change of standard. These complaints took a dif-
ferent direction towards the end of the last century,
in consequence of the nonconformity in the value of
the paper circulation with either a gold or a silver
standard ; and it was for the purpose of bringing back
the paper circulation to a conformity with the standard,
that the Committee of 1810 was embodied. Greatly
is it to be regretted that that Committee considered
gold as the foundation of currency previously existing.
The Committee, however, of 1819, seems to have gone
on in error, notwithstanding the best evidence that
it was under mistake; for Mr. Mushett, officially en-
gaged at the Mint, distinctly informed the Commit


tee that previously to the late Act of 181 G, gold at
3 1, 1 7s. 10 \d., and silver at ss. 2 d., were each a legal
tender. Nothing can be more important than this
change of standard, or more calculated to unsettle
men’s minds and compromise their interests.
Mr. Attwood, in his evidence before the Select
Committee of the House of Lords, in 1836, asserts that
“ the old standard of this country was silver money,
coined after the rate of one ounce of silver into ss. 2 d.
of money; and gold money, one ounce of gold standard
into Si. 17s. of money, either money being a
legal tender, at the option of the party having money
to pay.” He says also, “ The whole National Debt, a
large contract, is of that kind which sustains injustice
from the permanence of the present standard. All the
debt existing at the conclusion of the war was con-
tracted either in the old standard of the country, viz.,
silver at ss. 2d., as well as gold at Si. 17s. or
in a cheaper standard than that, namely, a paper
standard. The debt prior to the war was founded on
the old national standard. There is no part of the
present national debt which can be paid in the present
standard without injustice.” And he states, further
on, that “ in fact the whole proceeding is one of those
almost incredible errors which have distinguished all
our legislation for the last forty years upon the subject
of money, beginning with 1797, when the Legislature
gave to the Bank of England and the issuers of paper
money a power of augmenting the amount of money
in circulation at their pleasure, without taking any
precaution to secure that money from depreciation:
going to 1810, when a Committee of the House
of Commons having ascertained that the paper money,
become then the actual standard of value, had sus


tained a depreciation, adopted a recommendation that
all existing debts formed in such depreciated paper
should be paid in money of the old standard, and that
cash payments should be resumed, in the midst of
the war: proceeding to 1811, when a solemn resolu-
tion of the House of Commons declared that no depre-
ciation of paper money had taken place; then, in
1819, effecting an alteration in the standard of value
and measure of property to the extent of from thirty to
fifty per cent., believing that they were doing this to
the extent of no more than four and a half or five per
cent.” *
The public has thus been deprived of a most
valuable option, namely, that of vindicating its obliga-
tions in whichever of two metals might be most to its
advantage. The call at the end of the war was for a
resumption of cash payments, which had been sus-
pended; or a restoration of that which previously
existed. But an increased value in the money used
previously to 1797 was not called for, nor was it just;
and the annuitant and public creditor have received
more than they ever gave a valuable consideration for.
Bacon’s opinion was, that what one man lost another
might gain; and, in describing the consequences of
change in the value of money, Mr. Haldimand, in his
evidence before the Commons in 1819, says, “what
the annuitants, stockholders, and all the servants of
Government, with fixed salaries, gained, would be lost
by the rest of the community.” This is a true debtor
and creditor view of the case, and a most deplorable
one it is.
Another circumstance has been recited and adverted
to as preparatory to the late enactment—l mean a
* See Appendix, No. 1.


portion of the first Lord Liverpool’s letter to the
king.
“ First, That the coins of this realm, which are to be
the principal measure of property and instrument of
commerce, should be made of one metal only.
“ Secondly, That in this kingdom the gold coins
only have been for many years past, and are now, in
the practice and opinion of the people, the principal
measure of property and instrument of commerce.”
If Lord Liverpool had said that gold was legally the
standard, I should have said, Produce your commission ;
what act, of what reign, ever determined this to be the
case ? and where is there any proclamation declaring
such to be the case ? The simple statement of that
able and eminent nobleman was, that “in the practice
and opinion of tl\e people ” it had been many years,
and then was, the principal measure of property and
instrument of commerce. It should be borne in mind
that Lord Liverpool was not then occupied with a
measure to restore the diminution in value of the cur-
rency, for it was not till many years after that, that
the currency became so much depreciated. It was in
consequence of a subsequent degradation of the coin
that the Committee sat in 1810, long after Lord Liver-
pool’s production; and thus his authority is not appli-
cable to the restoration that was recommended. It
only remains, then, for me to assert that, in the practice
and opinion of the people, gold was not the measure of
property and instrument of commerce; but bank notes
were. The returns of the paper circulation in substi-
tution of gold (and not of silver), to the House of Com-
mons, abundantly prove such to have been the fact;
and I conclude that Lord Liverpool entertained the
idea that gold was a preferable standard to silver, and


that he would have acted on this belief whether there
had or had not been a paper controversy.
A great blunder has been made, even by the best in-
formed, and those officially connected with the subject.
I have been personally present when assertions have
been made in public debate; and a greater failure never
existed, than when gold alone was claimed to have
been the standard previously to the Bank Restriction
Act in 1797-
Now I do not assert that, if new arrangements were
now to commence, I should not consider well before
I adopted the double standard, nor can I say whe-
ther gold or silver would be best; but, during the
century that elapsed subsequently to the alteration of
1717, much less discrepancy in value between the two
metals occurred than had existed ; and the
complaints were directed against the diminished amount
of metal in the coins, and not against the standard of
value. Nothing more occurred than that no great
amount of profit accrued from using one metal prefer-
ably to the other; but gold was most convenient , because
a larger amount of value was transferred by it with less
trouble, and it would have been time enough to consider
of alteration if evil had arisen. It is true that different
quantities are measured by the inch, the hand, and the
foot; but these measures are all derived from one com-
mon parent root. Such also is the case with weights:
the ounce, the pound, and the ton, are of the same
description; but it seems strange that it should be
deemed essential that the same commodities in small
quantities should be estimated in one standard, and in
large quantities in another. Such is not the case in
weights; such is not the case in measures; nor need
such be the case in money.


Another mistake also exists in the account given of
the removal of notes below the value of 51. They
were not removed for the purpose of making room for
gold. A commission of scientific men sat in the hope of
devising the means of circulating notes that would not
be imitated, so that punishment for forgery might be
got rid of. The same section of the public that ob-
jected to slavery, also objected to punishment for
forgery on the score of feeling. Whether a change has
taken place as to forgery I know not, but as to slavery
a change has taken place. The utterers of forged in-
struments have changed their course, and now occupy
themselves with uttering spurious metallic money ; and
I am uncertain whether, on the whole, benefit has re-
sulted. The purpose, however, for which small notes
were withdrawn was a plain one, namely, to put an
end to punishment for forgery, the Commission having
failed in their endeavour to render the notes inimit-
able.
In the century that elapsed from the period of Sir
Isaac Newton’s suggestion down to the year 1816,
when the mistake was made of rendering gold exclu-
sively the measure of value, no collision had taken
place between the two metals sufficient in degree to
require an alteration of standard. If there had been, it
would have been ascertained practically how the matter
really stood, and a remedy suited to the evil would
have been applied; but, unless it was profitable to use
one metal in preference to the other, gold was probably
used, because an equivalent in value is fifteen times
more cumbrous in silver than in gold. Gold was some-
what cheaper in the earlier periods of the reign of
George the Third, but it did not continue so.
The question regarding the two metals, silver and


gold, is a difficult one. When the Mexican mines were
taken up by English capitalists, it was probable that
machinery would be used, and that a very increased
quantity of metal would be obtained. The result has
not been successful. It now appears that Russia has
succeeded in obtaining gold to the extent of three mil-
lions and a half in the year, and that metal has at this
moment the probability in favour of abundance. In
either case, previously to 1816, the public debtor had
only covenanted to pay the creditor in whichever
of the two metals might, at the periods of payment, be
most advantageous to him. The debtor has thus,
without notice, without its having been pointed out to
him that his interest was involved, been duped into an
acquiescence in laws, the effect of which he did not
understand. The framers of these laws never intended
any thing wrong, but probably fell unconsciously into
error. I assert, however, that inquiry should be made
on the subject by those competent to grapple with it.
As far as regards the double standard, I am of opinion
that it would have been much better to have allowed
the laws to remain, that had existed for a century
without injury, in preference to sanctioning alteration,
until some real evil was threatened. I, for one, was
disinclined, when a Director of the Bank, to have much
to do with silver. Above 60,000/. was lost to the
Bank on one occasion by melting; and very large sums
have been sacrificed by the Bank in consequence of the
efforts it has made to assist the public, its own notes
not being redeemable in silver.
The Act 14th of Geo. 111. cap. 42, is to prevent the
importation of light coin, and to restrain the tender
thereof; beyond a certain sura, the silver ma} r be
seized to ascertain whether it lie of standard weight


and fineness, and after condemnation to be melted
down. No tender to be made in tale beyond £25,
but by weight at ss. 2d. per oz.
The 14th of Geo. 111. cap. 70, provides the means
of defraying the expense of the recoinage, and deter-
mines the details of exchanging the coins.
The Act the 14th of Geo. 111. cap. 92, regulates the
weights to be made use of in weighing the gold and
silver coins of the realm.
Comments on these proceedings were indulged in
freely, and among other things it was remarked, that
there are few matters that have more exercised the
judgment of men versed in commercial affairs, of the
most able political calculators, and first-rate mathema-
ticians, or in which they have more differed in opinion,
than in what relates to the circulation of every kind
of currency, whether in coin or in paper. It is even
still a matter of doubt whether the subject has ever
been thoroughly understood, or investigated upon right
principles. This uncertainty, in a matter of so much
importance, and so critical in its nature, has rendered
statesmen in commercial countries very cautious in all
measures that affect the circulating coin,' and induces
them often rather to bear with inconveniences, the
extent of which they know, than risk the unknown con-
sequences of innovation.
The measure was severely felt, as it happened at a
time when the commercial and manufacturing part of
the nation were, from other causes, suffering distress;
with public and private credit at a low ebb. No al-
ternative, however, could be found; and the Govern-
ment, finding the evil admitted, carried their measure
with little difficulty. I have carefully investigated
this memorable era in its circumstances, that I may
D


with the more confidence make two assertions: the
one, that, to my mind, the silver standard was never
changed; and the other, (if ingenuity will have it that
the' contrary is the case,) that I then assert that the
whole change was got rid of, and the previous state of
things restored by the early expiration of the Acts of
which I have been speaking. I think it probable,
however, that Mr. Jenkinson, afterwards Earl of
Liverpool, who took an active part in the business,
first conceived his idea that it was preferable that but
one standard should exist, and that that standard
should be gold ; a proposition that I am not prepared
altogether to contradict, but which requires and will
receive much consideration, by reason of the compli-
cated interests that are affected, and which have grown
up under a different state of things. What I allude
to is the change and its consequences. I think it is
Mr. Harris that asserts, “ the standard measures of a
country being once established and known, any devia-
tion from these afterwards could answer no good pur-
pose, but on the contrary must be attended with
mischievous consequences: they would disturb the
arithmetic of the country, confound settled ideas,
create perplexities in dealings, and subject the ignorant
to frauds by abuses. Should other measures be altered,
people would soon accommodate themselves to the
change; but money is not only an universal measure of
the value of all things, but it is also, at the same time,
the equivalent as well as the measure in all countries.”
It seems that the elements of money should be well
defined and well ascertained if possible; and, if this be
not done, a great change in value may take place. We
experience a great difficulty in this country because its
concerns cannot be conducted (by reason of their


magnitude) without paper; paper cannot answer its
purpose without credit; and credit is fluctuative in
the extreme. The hitherto received opinion is, that
convertibility at the will of the holder is the best
regulator. It appears to me, however, that nothing
can be more capricious than the will of the holder;
and in periods of difficulty the inability to ascertain
the will of the holder becomes a serious evil. Means
are withheld as a resource against not only what is
contemplated, but also against what may befall in con-
sequence of the unreasonable apprehensions, the narrow
views, and selfish considerations of the holders of notes.
At the period of the South Sea bubble, in 1745,
previous to the restriction in 1797, and in May 1832,
when holders ran on the Bank for gold (consequently to
Lord Grey’s resignation) to the extent of two millions,
and on other occasions, the exercise of the will of the
holder has been injurious in the aggregate, and has
not been based on legitimate principle.
Such also is the effect of the deposits in the Bank of
England; the depositors having the right of withdraw-
ing them at pleasure. Holders of notes have used the
facility they afford in ordinary times, and injure the
rest of the community whenever difficulty presents
itself, and I think this ought to be provided against for
the future. As to the change of standard of which I
spoke as bearing on the particular suggestion, I do not
mean to condemn the principle, but I mean to assert,
(confirmed as I am by Mr. Harris’s opinion,) that all
changes are dangerous, many of them unjust, and
none more unjust than the one that took place in 1816,
when it was determined to fix the whole National Debt
on a gold basis, though it was incurred on the basis of
gold or silver, whichever might be most advantageous
D 2


to the party paying. Mr. Harris’s opinion was, that
it was self-evident that no alteration could be made in
the standard of money, without an opprobrious breach
of faith with all the world, without infringement of
private property, without falsifying all preceding con-
tracts, and without producing disorder. Taxes, wages,
and commodities of all sorts, and last (though not
least) the National Debt, becomes altered in effect, in
proportion to the alteration of currency in which it is
paid. Lord Liverpool, however, never unduly pressed
the alteration when he addressed his Sovereign on the
subject in 1805 ; and many intervening difficulties had
grown up before the measure was decided on in 1816.
He had doubts on his mind regarding the paper cir-
culation under the Bank Restriction Act, though he did
not live to see those doubts converted into certainties,
by the disregard of the foreign exchanges by the Bank
Directors, who neglected to shape their course with refer-
ence to them. The National Debt itself was increased
two or three hundred millions in the interval. At the
time he wrote, the money annually raised and coined in
South America exceeded seven millions, being more in
amount than it has ever been either before or since; but
in 1816 the amount was only two millions and a half,
and therefore the available means were greatly altered.
At the end of 1804 the Bank notes were seventeen
millions, but in 1816 they were twenty-seven millions,
and therefore more difficult to be dealt with. In 1805
the depreciation of notes had not been sensibly felt,
but in 1810, when the Bullion Committee sat, it had
become 15 per cent., and in 1814 the degree of de-
preciation was doubled. In 1816 the Corn-Law agi-
tation had been violently got up. In 1805 Lord
Liverpool had certainly known a Corn Law, but it


was a Corn Law conferring a bounty on exportation;
and as to importation, though some increase had sub-
sequently taken place, nevertheless the last twenty
years of the previous century had terminated with
very little beyond one hundred thousand quarters of
annual importation of wheat.
I have made these remarks before the proper
moment, and while I was treating of the re-coinage
of 1774, because Lord Liverpool probably laid the
foundation of his subsequent suggestion at that period,
and when his understanding (which was a most
superior one, and one much devoted to the service of
his country) had more of freshness than when he
wrote his letter in 1805 ; and I can only repeat that I
can find no one circumstance to establish as a fact, that
silver was got rid of as a standard at the period of the
re-coinage in 1774. I am not surprised that the pre-
cious metals were dear, when paid for in weakened
coin: such has been the case on other occasions; but it
happened with respect to both metals, both gold and
silver. It is likewise more than probable that the dis-
credit of 1772 rendered the exchange favourable, as
it usually does, and that the foreigner transmitted
whichever of the two metals he could most con-
veniently spare. If the silver became inconvenient
from its being more bulky than gold, a desire might
arise to consult convenience without violating the
established standards. It was not new to have recourse
to weights in using money; it was practised in earlier
days in Europe; and when I was Chairman of the Com-
mittee of the House of Commons, previously to the
renewal of the East India Company’s Charter, both
Mr. Marjoribanks and Sir J. Davis, with whom l am


connected, informed me that the practice existed in
the East of carrying scales about the person for the
purpose of weighing what was to pass as money; and
the Sycee silver, of which a quantity came to this
country, is nothing more nor less than evidence of the
little regard paid by the Chinese to the state of coin;
and I do not doubt that the whole was passed in value
by weight.
Although much might be written relative to the
next event of importance, (I mean the Bank Re-
striction,) my notice will be short. Political appre-
hension and depression, together with the breaking
down of credit, occurred at a time when the Bank
was entangled with too heavy advances to Govern-
ment. The sans-culotte chiefs were dazzled with the
idea of English wealth; and Parisian ladies made
purses for them, that were to be well stored on their
arrival in this country. Too many of our country-
women provided themselves with an invasion purse ;
and the resources of the Bank were for the moment
insufficient: hence the restriction. No question of
standard, however, arises: the same thing would have
occurred had the metallic coin been other than silver or
gold ; and it was not even alleged that the misfortune
arose on account of the particular metals. But as
metallic payments were restricted altogether, so was
the “ resumption of cash payments ” intended to re-
place the Bank in the situation from which it had been
dislodged; and no one dreamt that advantage would
be taken of the interruption that had occurred, for the
purpose of upsetting the measure, that cost Sir Isaac
Newton so much labour and anxiety to establish.
During a century it had not worked ill; and the defects


in executing his intentions, by allowing a deterioration
of coin (but not of standard) had been satisfactorily
removed.
In 1798 and 1799, the Act of 1774 was revived.
The words of the Act are most unsatisfactory, and do
not convey the full meaning of its object, if any altera-
tion regarding the standard was intended. It was,
however, a renewal both of the Act and of the mistake;
the discredit and depression of 1797 were felt, the
effect being a requirement of more circulation. The
foreigner, with his usual sagacity, finds this out, and
transmits the metal most convenient for him to spare.
Messrs. Dorrien, Magens, and Co. sent a quantity
of bullion to the Mint to be coined according to the
law (which had never been repealed) that allowed
any one to avail himself of the Mint for that purpose
on paying certain dues. The whole was coined from
dies prepared in 1787, but o w changed to 1798. On
the day appointed to receive the coin, an Order in
Council made its appearance, commanding it to be
melted, as it had not the sanction of a Royal Proclama-
tion. I had this account from one of _ the partners;
and likewise find the circumstance related by Mr.
Hawkins of the British Museum, whose information
and intelligence on these subjects are exceeded by none.
It appears that when George 111. ascended the throne
the currency was bad; scanty in amount, and de-
preciated, without there being much effort to improve
it. In 1762 and 1763, an issue took place of about
5000/. This could not have been struck from any
dies of George 111., for no coinage, except of Maunday
money, was issued, with his portrait, before 1763,
when shillings to the amount of 100/. were struck,
for tl'e purpose of being distributed among the popu


lace when the Earl of Northumberland made his first
public appearance in Dublin as Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, from which circumstance they are called Nor-
thumberland shillings. Ruding considers it difficult
to understand how the Earl’s going to Ireland should
occasion the coinage of English shillings. The fact
appears to be, not that dies were made, in order to
strike the coins upon this occasion, but that dies
being in course of preparation for the general use of
the country, an effort was made to strike a small
amount, to add to the eclat of the Earl’s entrance into
Dublin. Why a larger amount for general currency
was not issued, is to be accounted for, by the high
price of silver at that time; but the preparation of
these pieces, and the pattern shilling of 1764, may be
considered proofs that such an issue was in contempla-
tion. My surmise is, that little was attempted during
the first three years of George the Third’s reign, because
we were at war; that for several years coins re-
mained imperfect, because the alternative did not
readily present itself; that increase of the evil, forced
the making some effort to remedy it; and that when the
re-coinage of gold took place, the whole affair was dis-
posed of by making silver beyond a certain amount pass
by weight. The degradation of gold, which was in some
cases nine per cent., was got rid of, and the importance
of the perfection of silver coin became materially di-
minished, when it was made to pass by weight. Cer-
tain it is, however, that a scarcity of silver existed for
a long period during the earlier part of the reign ; and
among the causes that contributed to this I find none
more remarkable than the use of tea. The quantity
of this article consumed last year was about forty-six
millions of pounds, being probably between fifty and


one hundred times the quantity consumed at the com-
mencement of the last century. Large sums were an-
nually transmitted by silver in payment, nankeens and
silks being also to be provided for, there being no ex-
ports in merchandise from this country to our Eastern
possessions, by comparison with those that now exist.
But the effect produced was not limited to the adjust-
ment of the balance. . Utensils became used at this
period that for years absorbed enormous quantities of
silver, the consumption of which continued to extend,
till several pence beyond the Mint allowance were
paid in the market in order to procure it. The silver
tea-pot was used, the silver milk-jug, the sugar-tongs,
and above all the silver spoon. The usual beverage
of early days was taken in draught; but tea is
usually sipped after the sugar has been stirred up,
and silver spoons have increased in use for other
purposes, such as in taking soup, as waiters, and
numerous other things. In the year 1830 Mr. Hus-
kisson made the last of his excellent speeches, and I
extract the following sentences from it: “ The rate
of duty on wrought plate in 1804 was Is. 3d. per
ounce; on gold, 165.; it was afterwards raised to
Is. 6d. for silver, and 17s. for gold. But what has
been the increase in the nett produce of the duty?
It has risen from less than 5000/. in 1804, to upwards of
105,000/. in 1828—a rise of more than twenty-fold, not-
withstanding the greatly diminished supply from the
mines, and the consequently increasing value of the
precious metals.” It may be further remarked that this
augmented consumption shows how large a portion of
gold and silver is annually diverted from the pur-
poses of coin to those of ornament and luxury. The
decorative art, which must have greatly improved and


finished workmanship, no doubt rendered metallic or-
nament attractive; and though in earlier days the dif-
ference in value between coined metal and manufac-
tured was not great, it would now, with improved
manufacture, become double at least.
Unsatisfactory as was the determination of the Go-
vernment to prevent the circulation of now and good
silver coin, (from which the nation had at no time
sustained injury,) not less so was the wording of
the Bank Suspension Acts. It was true, as stated,
that apprehension was entertained lest sufficiency of
cash might not be forthcoming for the exigencies of
the state ; but it was also stated that alarm was ill-
founded. Now a descent had been threatened on our
coasts, and in the Isle of Wight alone the troops were
estimated at 3000, and there were no less than four
general officers on the staff" in the island. The restric-
tion was, however, fixed in 1803 for the remainder of
the war. It must be confessed, however, that no in-
convenience, comparatively speaking, was felt. Those
that wished for the precious metals could easily pro-
cure them, without that extreme sacrifice of property
which is now required before any one can obtain
them. Strange as it may appear, legislative restriction
was accompanied by every possible practical facility,
even for export, whereas now there is no limit to the
sacrifices made by reductions in price of stock and of
commodities, before the precious metals can be ob-
tained, even for domestic purposes.
For several years subsequently to the Bank Restric-
tion Act, few people seemed to concern themselves as
to its existence; but in 1809 our military undertakings
abroad could not well be continued without a supply
of the precious metals. The Directors of the Bank were


not sufficiently provided. Wheat exceeded 100 s. per
quarter, and they had not regarded the high price of
gold bullion for the purpose of limiting their issues.
Here, then, were three causes of pressure; and Mr.
Horner, in 1810, moved for a Committee to inquire
into the subject. His object was to supply a remedy
proportioned to the evil that existed. He obtained
the concurrence of the Committee in reporting that the
value of the paper circulation was greatly dependent
on the quantity of it. This harmonises well with all
the commercial maxims that have ever been acted on,
the supply and demand being deemed the material
causes of high and low prices. Simple as this is,
controversies were carried on without limit, and in-
temperate courses adopted that were calculated to
throw every thing into confusion.
Mr. Horner's wish was, to have as extensive a
paper circulation as was compatible with a metallic
basis. He desired to revert to the doctrines and
opinions of the most able and practical statesmen,
previously to the Bank Restriction, and considered
their principle to be, that paper money, was a great
benefit, if excess in quantity were provided against
by convertibility into coin at the will of the holder.
(It is worth while here again to notice, that it deserves
consideration, whether some other mode of upholding
its value, than the will of the holder , would not be pre-
ferable.)
Mr. Horner was prepared to uphold the credit of
the Bank: it had been of great advantage to the
public, and its founder’s exertions to restore the li-
berties of his country had been aided by it. Both
the Government and commercial credit had been bene


fited by it. Support might continue to be looked for
from the same source. The interests of the Bank of
England, therefore, form an integral part of the public
credit of the state. He wished to remedy the evil
(excessive quantity of paper issues) by restoring things
to what they were prior to the restriction year, 1797.
His object was to restore (though considerately to-
wards existing interests) a state of circulating medium
attested and proved by long experience to be not less
favourable to private, than propitious to public pros-
perity —a state every departure from which must be
injurious to public credit and national interests, in the
full proportion of the extent to which it is carried.
He prepared several resolutions, and proposed a re-
medy. The point from which we had improperly
departed was the proclamation of the 4th of Geo. 1.,
which fixed gold as a standard at Si. lls. and
silver at ss. 2d. per ounce. His fifth resolution was
directed to the Act of 1774, which I think entangles
the subject. It was only a modification, by which
payments were to be made in silver by weight, and
not in tale, if they exceeded 25/. But it did not alter
either the standard or the legal tender ; and any one
could pay his taxes into the Exchequer in silver, as
previously, if he conformed to the modification alluded
to. The Act was only to last two years, and had had
no existence whatever for many years when the Restric-
tion Act of 1797 (with which Mr. Horner was deal-
ing) took place. I notice this the more, because I
consider it an error to assert that gold was our ancient
standard, or that silver, which had preceded gold as
money, in the history of the world, in the history of
Rome, and in the history of this country more espe


dally, ever had been superseded. If it had not been
legal tender, it could have been refused at the Ex-
chequer.
His 9th Resolution imports that the law restricting
payment in cash did not sanction any alteration in
value : and a most important one it is, for the sequel
proves that it was the abuse and not the use of the
Bill that was injurious. The Bill was intended
prevent one section of the community from worrying
the other, by giving effect to its fears, and impairing
the general resources of the country at a time when
they were required in their fullest integrity. Such has
frequently been the case with the holders of notes;
such may be the case with depositors ; and I hope an
effort will be made to place matters on a better
footing.
The 11th Resolution declares that the value of Bank
notes and country notes had greatly fallen in value.
The 12th declares that the exchanges had been
unfavourable, for a long time and in a great degree.
The 13th admits the adverse circumstances of our
trade and our military expenditure, but asserts that
depreciation of paper also existed.
The 14th, that the Directors ought to look to the
exchanges and bullion market in regulating their issues,
and that convertibility is the proper remedy, and that
this ought to take place in two years.
It appears from this that Mr. Horner’s opinion har-
monised with the last regulation made before the Re-
striction Act of 1797» I mean the 4th of Geo. I. A
resolution then passed both Houses of Parliament that
gold and silver coin should not be altered in weight,
standard, or fineness; and thus we have the authority
of the two Houses of Parliament, in addition to that of


the Sovereign, the exercise of whose prerogative would
probably have been sufficient. Mr. Horner was dis-
posed to try, experimentally even, a return to the
provisions of the law of Geo. I. It was inconvenient
to Government to have this subject pressed, and still
more so by men of unusual ability; and every feeling
was adverse to admitting that the currency or credit
o£*the country was injured. It was contended that
with war or scarcity of grain the exchanges had been
at former periods unfavourable, and the bullion high,
more particularly gold bullion, that could be legally
exported. The absurdity of some matters were, how-
ever, too apparent, for with the law as it stood, the
guinea became both promoted and degraded by one
and the same act. On becoming less in weight than
5 dwt. 8 gr. it sunk, and became no more passable as
coin at twenty-one shillings, but immediately com-
manded many shillings above that price as bullion,
exportable by law, or to be used in trade. The point
most insisted on by the bullionists was, that the value
of currency must necessarily be in the inverse ratio to
its quantity. The anti-bullionists asserted that the
amount of currency necessary for carrying on the
transactions of the country must bear a proportion to
the extent of its trade, and its public revenue and
expenditure. There was some management in the
application of these principles, but I consider both of
them sound; and greatly is it to be regretted that the
legislators of the last Parliament neglected to observe
them. Every relaxation, it was contended, was fol-
lowed by extension; and yet not one man presented
himself to call for an extension of the basis of currency
to meet the requirements of more extended commerce,
and the enormous amount of railway speculation which


Parliament had sanctioned. That the value of currency
is in the inverse ratio to its quantity, is made to appear
by the sacrifices of property that are daily made.
The Resolutions of Mr. Horner were not carried; but
in my opinion his remedy of a return to cash payments
in two years, must have cramped the Duke of Wel-
lington’s military efforts, which required a supply of
cash. If I had then been a member of the House, I
would have heartily seconded Mr. Horner, if he had
moved that no addition should be made to the paper
circulation (while the exchange was unfavourable to
the extent of fifteen per cent.), without Parliamentary
sanction.
It is now time to speak of the proceedings of 1816 ;
and most extraordinary they were. The return of
peace had occasioned a renewal of intercourse with
France, and the bad state of silver coin caused an
importation of indifferent French money, to the injury
of our retail traders. Some of these, in Spitalfields
and elsewhere, petitioned Parliament for assistance to
prevent their being subjected to continual prejudice.
The Government, as if eager for a pretext, did not
limit itself to providing a remedy, but went to work
to destroy the measures that had been prepared a
century before by Sir I. Newton’s advice, and which
had been so much to the satisfaction of Mr. Horner.
It decided that a new silver coin, six per cent, de-
graded, should be struck, and that the whole system
of currency should be altered by making gold the
sole standard. This was gratuitous: no one had asked
for it; and it altered the relations of debtor and
creditor in a country owing eight hundred millions.
It was asserted that gold was a better standard : Lord
Lauderdale denied this, and added that the laws of


the country would be more easily violated; as gold
was fifteen times greater in value, and therefore smug-
glers could carry it away with fifteen times more
facility, there must likewise be fifteen times more
inducement to clippers. Lord Holland asked the
nature and extent of the evil to be remedied; but was
not informed, nor was any Committee allowed to sit
on the subject. It is singular that down to the present
day no one can say with certainty which will event-
ually prove the better standard. If machinery in
Mexico had succeeded, silver would probably have
been cheaper, as I believe more silver than gold is met
with there. The Ural Mountains, in the eastern part
of Russia, are now producing a considerable increase
of gold; and for the present some benefit may arise, as
nearly four millions of metal is produced imthe year,
by accounts; but as the duty is above twenty per
cent., much is circulated that does not find its way into
account at all. No one, however, can say what will
occur in the long run.
In the Commons, more was said on the change in
the currency; but minor considerations were put pro-
minently forward, and the more important ones en-
tirely kept back: most assuredly not so from any
improper motive. Gold was asserted to have many
advantages over silver; and those that were enumerated
are in some cases questionable—in others they may be
true. Some assertions that were made, were, I think,
inaccurate. It was stated that, from the proclamation
in the reign of Geo. 1., gold became the standard, and
was considered so here and in our foreign exchanges,
and that in the practice and opinion of the people it
was preferred. For many years during the last cen-
tury there was some scarcity of silver; one reason


was the demand for India, where one pound of gold
passed for twelve pounds of silver, whereas fifteen is
the proportion here; balances were therefore ’ ad-
justed in silver rather than in gold, and Sir I. Newton
knew this when he advised the proclamation. We had
also demands for the Baltic to pay for naval stores, and
the silver trade in spoons and other things increased;
but, so far from silver being preferred, Mr. Jacob dis-
tinctly asserts in his work, that disinclination towards
gold was shown of old date, and remained at the period
of re-coinage in 1774. In 1798,1 have already shown
that Messrs. Dorrien’s request for silver coin was not
admitted; and it seems strange that the absence of
proclamation should be then urged against the supply,
and then that the Master of the Mint, in 1816, should
claim the practice and opinion of the people in his
favour without any proclamation whatever. I, for
one, entirely deny the assertion regarding the foreign
exchange; and I have transacted more business in the
foreign exchanges in this country than any man now liv-
ing. The immense increase of notes further corroborates
the denial of the statement, for they were all issued in
substitution of gold, and not silver coin; and Mr. H.
Thornton, in his evidence before the Secret Committee
in 1797, distinctly states “the increased trade of the
country has actually created a necessity for an in-
creased use, chiefly of notes to bearer on demand,
though partly bills and cash; guineas being used only for
small or broken sums.” There can be no doubt that
people did use, and always will use, what is most to
their advantage. One of the pieces of information that
ought never to have been withheld, was the actual
supply of the precious metals. When Lord Liverpool’s
letter was written in 1805, the mines yielded, by
E


Porter’s account, seven millions annually; but they
only yielded two millions and a half in 1816, when,
with increased trade, tonnage, and population, more
was required. The supply never escaped Mr. Horner;
and in 1810, when he moved in the matter, there
existed, according to Mr. Jacob’s showing, no less than
three hundred and eighty millions ; he having made
his computation from Baron Humboldt’s and Mr.
Ward’s (the present Secretary to the Admiralty) in-
formation *. The declension of supply was not un-
known, for nothing could be more notorious than the
revolution in Mexico, consequent on the political state
of Old Spain; and under such circumstances to cramp
circulation, by limiting it to what could exist on the
basis of gold, was dangerous in the extreme.
It ought also to have been noticed that the National
Debt was to be dealt with, and that a great difference
was occasioned by making it an obligation based on gold
instead of gold or silver at the option of the debtor.
What the amount of that difference may be, I shall
now endeavour to show, in connection with the legis-
lation of 1819, which fixed the return of cash pay-
ments ; not without expressing my regret that Parlia-
ment should have so lightly considered so important a
matter, no less than three years before called for,
(as the notes did not become payable in the altered
standard till after the Bill of 1819,) instead of com-
bining the one measure with the other, when the
assistance of the able Committee of 1819 was avail-
able for the purpose of consolidating the two to the
best advantage. In 1819, the very efficient Committee
* The excellent Secretary to the Admiralty was, for a consider-
able period, our minister in Mexico, and became well informed on
all subjects.


that was embodied fell into the mistake that the
Committee of 1810 made when it asserted that gold
was the measure of value by law, and had been
so ever since the Act of the 14th Geo. 111., that
is, 1774. Now, I have already stated that that
Act was to last two years ; but had for many years
ceased to exist, when the Restriction Act of 1797
took place. The Committee of 1819 had before it
the evidence of Mr. Mushett, the Mint officer, who
stated that, previously to the late Act, the standard
was gold at Si. 17s. and silver at ss. 2d., and
each a legal tender. The Committee, nevertheless,
reported that compensation for difficulties would be
found in “ restoring the standard, by which, previously
to 1797, the value of commodities was measured, and
which, though variable in some degree, is much less
exposed to fluctuation than any other that can be
devised.” This standard was established by Sir I.
Newton in 1717, and by it an enormous amount
of difficulty that had for years existed was got rid of;
and from that day to this, being a period of 130
years, no one has fixed on it any amount .of ill worth
regarding. Imperfections of coin that were removed
in 1774, were occasioned by neglecting the state of the
coin, and by other things than error of standard; and
the neglect of the Directors of the Bank to regard the
foreign exchanges, would have equally occurred with
any other state of metallic money, and therefore the
evil is by no means attributable to the Mint indentures
130 years ago. As to the effect produced by change
from an optional standard of gold or silver to a
cramped one of gold only, it can only be surmised,
though it must be great. The population was in 1816
thirteen millions six hundred thousand: it is now above
e 2


twenty millions. The exports are increased by official
value one hundred millions, and by declared value
twenty millions, while the tonnage is doubled. The
amount of the precious metals procurable I am unable
to state; but when Mr. Jacob made his statement
fifteen years ago, the amount annually required for
trade purposes was 800,000/. in silver, and double
that amount in gold. What may remain for coin
must therefore be limited ; and silver being by law
forbidden, a most scanty amount only remains, and the
difficulty is increased by the change of law that now
permits exportation. Gold for exportation, which was
required to be “sworn off” as it was called, that is, not
coin bullionized, used to pass for a shilling or two more
than coin per ounce; and therefore the coin is addi-
tionally altered to that extent, and the whole policy of
former legislation, from the first enactments in the
reign of Edward 1., has been hastily changed, to the
detriment of our circulation as applicable to our
internal and domestic uses, increased as those uses are
by the circumstances I have enumerated. The use of
small notes has likewise been forbidden ; and the pre-
valence of forgery is the cause assigned. If Par-
liament had taken the trouble to inquire, it would have
found that one (and not two) pound notes were those
most subjected to forgery. Had two pound notes
remained, the difference would have been greater
in reality than in appearance, because two pound
notes can be paid in silver, whereas five pound notes
cannot. The National Debt, however, is the object
most worth regarding. When the war termniated in
1815, the Debt amounted to about eight hundred mil-
lions. It had been contracted in currencies varying in
value, and sometimes depreciated about thirty per


cent. ; but the Legislature had provided that the re-
storation of currency should take place six mouths
after the ratification of peace, when the whole Na-
tional Debt, interest and principal, would have been
an obligation on the resources of the nation redeem-
able in the money as it stood in 1796, and not 1797;
and this circumstance, important as it is, and which
would have been a fit subject for consideration in
Committee, was hardly touched upon by those that
were enamoured with the coin frivolities of 1816.
The one was the shadow, the other the substance.
The community’s interest was little concerned whether
gold was or was not homogeneous, and whether the
other pctiteyses concerning coin which were enume-
rated were true or not. But a substantial pressure on
the means of the country resulted from the neglect
of considering the effect of a change of standard. The
estimated amount of the metals available as coin, both
gold and silver, at the time of the Report of 1810, was
three hundred and eighty millions, independently of
what might exist in Asia. Some gold coin had been
hoarded here, and some existed in deposit-; but little
was to be met with in circulation till the exchanges
became favourable. Very little supply was required
to meet all probable demands, if the law operative in
1796 was to be acted on, unless the small notes were
directed to be withdrawn. If thirty-eight millions of
metallic money had been required, exchangeable value
might have been sacrificed to the extent of ten per
cent., in addition to the pressure occasioned by restor-
ing the exchanges to par. The moment it was deter-
mined that gold alone was to circulate, the sacrifice
became increased in the degree that would be deter-
mined by the difference between three hundred and


eighty millions of united metal, and whatever amount
of gold bullion formed part of the three hundred and
eighty millions. If the two metals were equal, ten per
cent, would have been the infliction in one case, and
twenty per cent, in the other. That portion of capital
requisite to procure this amount must be withdrawn from
other employments; and additional pressure must by
these means be inflicted on the well-being of the coun-
try, by the purchase of an expensive and unproductive
instrument of commerce. The vis inertice would keep
the gold where it was till the stimulant of inducement,
sufficient for the purpose, could be applied, and which
required time to operate. The stimulus was the sur-
render for a long time of the fruits of industry to an
unprecedented extent, with the certainty of reaction
when the havoc was completed. It was under these
circumstances that the community was complacently
informed that the pressure would amount to about six
per cent.; and six per cent, additional taxation was
accordingly provided, that financial enfeeblement might
not be added to other disasters. The Mint laws
remained unchanged, and no other provision was
made for any undue contraction of the circulating
medium. This provision was totally inadequate, be-
cause contraction could continue, and did continue, to
operate much faster than the counteractive power thus
relied on. The same thing would now occur if five
pound notes were to be relinquished, if the coin
required were as large, were it not that the Bank
Directors of the present day understand the subject,
while the Directors of 1819 did not. The Committee
that was embodied in February 1819, found the notes
of the year 1818 at forty-eight millions (that is, Bank
of England and country notes,) and in 1821 they had


become thirty millions and three quarters. The reduc-
tions in price of various articles were made known to the
Bank Committee of 1832. They were reduced from
January 1819 to July 1821, as follows: —Sugar, from
86s. to 745.; coffee, from 1435. to 1195.; cotton, from
17 d. to 9\d.', hemp, from 50/. to 40/.; yellow soap,
from 78s. to 455. 6d.; Petersburg ditto, from 745. to
425.; Spermaceti, from 93 1, to 65/.; deals, from 22/.
to 17/. 10s.; timber, from 6/. 15s. to 5/. 55.; Virginia
tobacco, from 12/. to 6/., there being no instance of in-
creased price in the whole table at pages 94 and 95 of
Appendix to Bank Committee of 1832. Mr. Ricardo
had the candour before he died to admit that he was
greatly in error on the subject; but I do not know
what opinions prevail with others that took an interest
in the subject.
In 1822 it was found that this state of things could
be borne no longer, and Parliament authorized the
continuance of the country small notes after the Bank
had made preparation for that event. The effect was
a reaction too extreme to admit of regulation ; specula-
tion after speculation was entered into till joint-stock
and other adventures, in 1824 and 1825, were carried
to the extent of many hundred millions, and which, of
course, could not be maintained in healthy action.
Speculative anticipation of success by relaxation of
duties, had induced the Parliament to take off taxes,
and no surplus of income existed. Financial was thus
added to monetary disaster, and wide-spread ruin to
trade also was the consequence. Many speculations
were in mining undertakings, and three-fourths of the
original outlay was lost.
The last enactment (previously to the one in 1844)
with which I have to deal, is that of 1832; and I


must make comparisons and advert to circumstances,
to some of which I have before alluded, in order to
bring the whole case fairly under consideration. At
this period Mr. Huskisson was no more; and on sub-
jects such as I have had to do with, he was the master
spirit of the age in which he lived. With the person,
departed also the description of legislation he was
wont to uphold. He was a free-trader, but careful
and circumspect in his mode of applying the principle ;
and, above all, anxious to strengthen every step in ad-
vance by financial power and monetary sufficiency.
The Parliament of 1832, however, took a different
view, and as long as it could go the pace in commercial
changes, disregarded these requisite supports ; and the
unconcern with which the Bank Committee viewed
matters of vital importance admits of no excuse.
The Parliament of 1819 confided the inquiries of
that period to a most efficient Committee; and the Re-
port on Bank affairs that resulted from the unusually
trying investigation, reflects great credit on all con-
cerned. The crowning specimen of excellence, how-
ever, was the speech of the Speaker * ; and it will be
seen by this elegant composition, which I subjoin, that
financial strength was intended to go hand in hand
with monetary excellence.
“ But, Sir, of those measures which we have com-
pleted, the most prominent, the most important, and,
as we trust, in their consequences the most beneficial
to the public, are the measures which have grown out
of the consideration of the present state of the coun-
try, both in currency and finances.
“ Early, Sir, in the present session, we instituted an
* Lord Colchester's (then Mr. Abbott's) speech to the Prince
Regent on presenting the last Money Bill of the Session.


inquiry into the effects produced on the exchanges with
foreign countries, and the state of the circulating
medium, by the restriction on payments in cash by
the Bank. This inquiry was most anxiously and de-
liberately conducted, and in its result led to the con-
clusion that it was most desirable, quickly, but with
due precautions, to return to our ancient and healthful
state of - currency; that, whatever might have been
the expediency of the Acts for the suspension of pay-
ments in cash at the different periods at which they
were enacted, (and doubtless they were expedient,
whilst the country was involved in the most expensive
contest that ever weighed down the finances of any
country,) still, that the necessity for the continuance of
these Acts having ceased, it became us, with as little
delay as possible, (avoiding carefully the convulsion of
too rapid a transition,) to return to our ancient system ;
and that if, at any period, and under any circum-
stances, this return could be effected without national
inconvenience, it was at the present, when this mighty
nation, with a proud retrospect of the past, after having
made the greatest efforts, and achieved the noblest
objects, was now reposing in a confident, and, as we
fondly hope, a well-founded expectation of a sound
and lasting peace.
“ In considering, Sir, the state of our finances, and
in minutely comparing our income with our expenditure,
it appeared to us that the excess of our income was
not fairly adequate for the purposes to which it was
applicable —the gradual reduction of the national debt.
It appeared to us, that a clear available surplus of at
least five millions ought to be set apart for that purpose.
This, Sir, has been effected by the imposition of three
millions of taxes. Sir, in adopting this course, His


Majesty’s faithful Commons did not conceal from them-
selves that they were calling upon the nation for a great
exertion; but well knowing that honour, and character,
and independence, have at all times been the first and
dearest objects of the hearts of Englishmen, we felt
assured that there was no difficulty that the country
would not encounter, and no pressure to which she
would not willingly and cheerfully submit, to enable
her to maintain, pure and unimpaired, that which has
never yet been sullied or shaken—her public credit,
and her national good faith.”
The next circumstance deserving notice is the de-
claration of the Committee in 1832, that the Bank was
amply provided with bullion, and that, if this informa-
tion had been suppressed, the public might have be-
lieved that the Bank was not so well supplied with
bullion as was desirable, and that this belief might
have had an injurious effect. Now the bullion held
by the Bank on the 29th of February, 1832, was
about five millions and a quarter; and when it is re-
collected that the country notes were not then regulated
as they are now, (and therefore that more metallic sup-
port was required,) and that sixteen millions of gold
and silver were in the coffers of the Bank about two
years ago, one conclusion only can be arrived at,
namely, that no transaction whatever can be based on
the amount of treasure possessed by the Bank, and
that any computation on the published returns are
worse than useless. It is impossible that five millions
at one time and sixteen millions at another, can be both
right; and if Directors had relied on the sufficiency of
the five millions and a quarter that was approved of
by the Committee of 1832, they must long since have
shut their doors.


With regard to the standard of value, the Committee,
I assume, did not choose to go into the question,
though the mistakes of earlier periods had been pointed
out. When it was changed from silver and gold to
gold only in 1816, the community was informed of
all the petitesses concerning brassage, seignorage, dura-
bility and steadiness of gold, and that it was equally
homogeneous with silver; but it was kept in the back-
ground that the National Debt became payable in a
currency greatly enhanced in value, and that provision
for the greatly increased amount of commodities had
been entirely neglected. Whatever attention was paid
to paper, the superstructure, none whatever was paid
to the precious metals, constituting the basis, and
discreditable legislation was the consequence. Subse-
quently to Lord Liverpool’s letter in 1805, that re-
commended the gold standard, a great increase had
taken place in population, in tonnage, in the National
Debt, and in foreign securities become marketable in
this country, besides an increased amount of trans-
actions. I search, however, in vain for the desired
increase of a corresponding medium of exchange. The
coin, raised in South America in 1805, was seven
millions; in 1831 it was only 837,000/.; and in 1832,
938,000/., or about one-eighth part of what existed in
Lord Liverpool’s time. It further appears by Mr.
Jacob’s account, that in the interval between the
Bullion Report of 1810 and the year 1830, no less
than sixty-six millions was diminished in the forth-
coming amount of the precious metals, so that the
general mass amounted to only three hundred and
thirteen millions, instead of three hundred and eighty
millions : the interruptions to the working of the mines,
and the use of the metals for purposes of trade, are


beyond the reach of doubt, and one-sixth part is
the estimated amount. When we bear in mind
that the currency was enhanced forty per cent, at
the end of the war; that it was further enhanced by
the change from a joint to a gold standard; that pro-
vision was to be made for the one and two pound
notes; and that a great increase of gold in deposit was
also to take place, with limitation of subsequent issues
—we cannot be surprised at difficulty. The transition
from previous facilities would be greatly felt at any
time, under any circumstances, and in any country. To
add to the causes for embarrassment that were left
most unrighteously as a legacy by the Committee of
1832, seems to me to have been a most inconsiderate
step ; but, in spite of repetition, I must again enumerate
some of the additional calls for currency facilities, when
I think the stringent provisions of the Act of 1844 might
have been spared. The population had increased
about eight millions between 1805 and 1844, on the
previous amount of eleven millions; the tonnage from
two and a quarter to five millions; and the general
amount of transactions had become quite changed.
No limit seems to me to have been fixed to railroad
adventure. The amount required has long been about
one million per week; or about equal to the revenue
collected, and therefore requiring about an equal
amount of currency for the conduct of business. All
the changes of law regarding commerce have been on
the side of diminution of duty: more merchandise was
intended to be brought, and at a higher price; nor can
we forget the money required for foreign railroads, or
the French loan. At no period has there been so
much to be paid for abroad; and proportionate must
be the sacrifice of property before the means can be


supplied. Evidence was taken before the Lords Com-
mittee in 1819, relative to the supply of metallic means,
to the following effect:—“ From the first discovery
of the mines of South America, the relative value
between gold and silver has experienced a progressive
and regular alteration, and constantly in favour of
gold, that is, gold as compared with silver has pro-
gressively increased in value; and silver as compared
with gold has progressively decreased in value.” In
support of this I can refer to the practices that pre-
vailed between the reign of Elizabeth and George
1., when gold invariably was the metal altered when
required, and not silver. Years ago I expressed my
opinion that, if an alteration was wise in 1816,
I preferred a paper currency, payable one-half in
silver and one-half in gold, to the change that then
took place. At present, the amount of property
must be one hundred times greater than the money
that circulates that portion which appears at market.
The aggregate for this, and for adjustments for
commodities and transactions of various descriptions,
is such, that confidence is requisite as an element
of exchange. No one has yet found out how to render
confidence equable and correspondingly operative at
all times: it will not follow, it must lead, and
is in the inverse ratio to requirement. Sufficiency
in what is instrumental as means of exchange, must
be provided, if we mean to vindicate our national
obligations, and remain a commercial nation. It is
under these circumstances that I recommend a Com-
mittee of Inquiry or a Commission, such as formerly
existed. There was a Commission, in 1819, of seven
persons, that inquired into the subject of forgery; and
there is no impediment to a Commission that I know


of. It could make inquiries into the working of the
Bill of 1844, and ascertain whether the difficulties oc-
casioned by the failure of the potato crop were in-
creased or not by the particular mode of working the
principle of a metallic standard that has been adopted.
Nothing can be more unsuitable than heaping personal
abuse on the constituted authorities. They have had
much to contend with, and indulgent forbearance, such
as characterised the bullionists of 1819, is most essential.
Practical usefulness was their object, and it did them
credit. The Bill of 1844 is not a failure, though sus-
ceptible of modification. Immense advantage has re-
sulted from its provisions, that prevented the fluctua-
tive circulation of the country notes; and it steadily
keeps in view as a principle that all paper circulation
must have a reference to the metals it purports to re-
present. There is no contradiction, however, in say-
ing that these desirable ends may be accomplished by
more suitable means, and with less of that sudden ef-
fect that for a time so seriously disturbs the relations
of property. It may be considered whether it be wise
that the same parties should have to hold themselves
prepared to meet the calls of depositors to the extent
of near twenty millions, that are also ready to answer
the demands of the holders of notes. This class, in-
cludes the wise and the unwise, the rational and the
silly ; and the latter of these have, on all trying occa-
casions, added to the difficulties that have presented
themselves, till self-defence has rendered it prudent for
even well-intentioned men and good subjects to call
for gold, and scatter mischief. A Board of Currency
might be the preferable means of managing this most
serious national concern; and the Governor and Deputy
Governor of the Bank might occupy seats at the Board


as they now do as Commissioners of the National Debt.
The points of the Bill of 1844 that are complained
of are these, viz.—it is essentially an anti-confidence
Bill—it is too stringent —it has not prevented specula-
tion, as was intended—and the notes are not diminished
and increased with the ebbing and flowing of the
precious metals. The circulation withdrawn by the
revenue during its collection, and re-circulated with the
issue of the dividends, renders this almost impracticable.
The assertion that it is gold on which this Bill is based
is entirely inaccurate; and this principle, so long acted
upon, has injured those that have to provide the means
of vindicating the national obligations, and would have
left the creditor a gainer had he not been defrauded by
the counteractive effect of a neglected sinking fund that
had been promised him. The departure from the for-
mer currency laws was intended to be for a period
only, and the sums borrowed were intended to be re-
paid ; the restorative means have been sadly disre-
garded, and commercial restrictions for revenue pur-
poses have been continued longer than they otherwise
would have been.
CONCLUSION.
I commenced these pages in the belief that time
would be afforded me, till the meeting of Parliament
in January, to accomplish what I wished. Being de-
prived of this needful period by the earlier assembling
of the House, I yield to the necessity it imposes, and
request that imperfections thus occasioned may be in-
dulgently considered. Usefulness has been the pre-
dominant stimulant in collecting information; but I


wish I had farther time allowed me to arrange it. Such
as it is, I place it at the disposal of others who may
be able to use it to better purposes, where I may have
been unsuccessful. I have unceremoniously taken ad-
vantage of the writings and opinions of older and bet-
ter qualified persons than myself; and without refer-
ence to party feeling. If party benefit could be made
to accrue from what I have done, I should decline to
accept it on such terms, satisfied as I am that contri-
buting or endeavouring to contribute to the welfare of
all has far greater claims to solid satisfaction. The
persons that I most deferred to (though not always
concurrent in opinion) are Mr. Huskisson, Mr. Ri-
cardo, Mr. M. Attwood, Mr. Tooke, and Lord Ash-
burton. I have long cherished a feeling of personal
obligation towards them for their valuable services,
where individual gain could never have influenced
them. They preceded me by many years; and I
am not too proud to imitate them, nor do I think
that I leave this subject in a worse position than I
found it, if I submit the subjoined questions, continu-
ing to regard the following remarks.
“ There are few matters which have more exercised
the judgment of men versed in commercial affairs, of
the most able political calculators, and first-rate mathe-
maticians, or in which they have differed more in
opinion, than in what relates to the circulation of every
kind of currency, whether in coin or in paper. It is
even still a matter of doubt whether the subject has
ever been thoroughly understood, or investigated upon
right principles. This uncertainty, in a matter of so
much importance, and so critical in its nature, has ren-
dered statesmen in commercial countries very cautious
in all measures that, affect the circulating coin, and


induces them often, rather to bear with inconve-
niencies the extent of which they know, than to
risk the unknown consequences of innovation.”
Keeping steadily in view the limited degree of
approach to perfection in all matters relating to cur-
rency that has always characterised this critical
subject; was not the accredited circulating medium of
this country, after the restriction of 179 1, as free from
the unfavourable comments of the more reasonable por-
tion of the community, as any that ever preceded it, till
the disregard of the state of the foreign exchanges and
of the bullion market called for the interposition of le-
gislative authority to vindicate and maintain the stand-
ard of value established by law?
Was not the interposition of legislative authority
called for in 1816 by retail dealers in the city of
London, in consequence of the introduction of inade-
quate foreign silver in substitution of the legal coin of
the realm ?
Did any one of His Majesty’s subjects at that time
sustain, or assert that he sustained, any injury from
exercising his preference in selecting whichever of the
two metals (gold or silver) he chose, in effecting his
payments in whatever transactions he might chance to
be engaged ?
Was not the state and every subject of His Majesty
called upon, in consequence of the Act of 1816, to fulfil
engagements in a currency not contemplated at the
time they were entered into ?
Has not the effect of that Act been to diminish the
circulative power in existence, and render it inadequate
to sustain the enormous increase that has taken
place in the general business of the country,
F


without a sacrifice of property frightful to contem-
plate ?
If, on going into these questions, it shall appear that
no evil exists, it follows that no remedy is needed; if
otherwise, let the remedy be proportioned to the
disease: and, above all, let minor considerations be
disregarded, that we may all endeavour to advance
whatever is best calculated to promote the safety,
honour, and welfare of Her Majesty and her do-
minions.


APPENDIX.
(No. 1.)
As Mr. M. Attwood and others have bitterly complained of the
course pursued at various times, I have endeavoured to fix, as
accurately as I can, how far they are borne out by real cause
for complaint, at those periods when legislation was taken
in hand, believing that it will be a satisfaction to the general
feeling to trace the course of events. Mr. Pitt, in a moment
of extreme political difficulty (and not from choice), pressed
heavily on the resources of the Bank, which were easily
placed at his disposal, with the best intentions, in too great
a degree. The more alarmed and selfish portion of the com-
munity cared more for itself than for the general benefit, and
ran for coin till it caused the Bank Restriction Act; but
little inconvenience ever resulted from this Act till, for want
of proper regulation as to the quantity of Bank of England
and other notes, the standard of value became violated, and
persons having fixed sums to receive got only the nominal
and not the real value; the public creditor, that previously
received 44J guineas or AQI. 14s. 6d., could claim this sum in
metal, but under the changed law he could only get it in
Bank notes, and before he could convert these notes into
metal he would have to pay a large premium, and he was
injured to that extent. The same thing occurred if Govern-
ment selected silver as the metal it chose to use on the occa-
sion. Where it formerly paid one pound of silver at the
fixed rate of 31. 25,, it paid 3/. 2s. under the new Act in
Bank notes; and*if the receiver required silver he could
F 2


only procure it by paying a premium for it. The foreigner,
being aware of this, would no longer give so much in the
metals of his own country for Bank paper here, and the ex-
change became proportionately unfavourable, and the prices
of commodities were as much higher than they ought to
have been, as the paper was lower by comparison with the
precious metals it purported to represent.
In 1810 Mr. Horner exerted himself in Parliament to
obtain a return to the previous state of things, without suc-
cess. He avowed, however, his high opinion of an accredited
paper currency, as long as its limitation, in point of quantity,
kept it equal in value with the coin it purported to represent.
He never suggested any alteration of the standard, but it
seems probable that he considered gold as the standard coin
with which the Bank had to deal previously to the Restriction
Act of 1797. If such was his opinion, it was a most mis-
taken one, there being in reality two metals (both gold and
silver) in which payments might be effected, at the option of
the party having payments to make. Little inconvenience
could arise, since the Exchequer was obliged to receive, and
did receive, whatever was brought, in either metal.
In 1816, on the return of peace, foreigners managed to
introduce inferior silver money into circulation, to the dis-
advantage of retailers, who petitioned Parliament that they
might be protected against so prejudicial a practice. A new
coinage of silver at sixty-six shillings to the pound, instead of
sixty-two, was the remedy. At this period some senators
thought that a little fancy might not be amiss, and that by
way of variety they might indulge their humour, and present
a specimen of amateur legislation that should serve as a
model for all future generations. It was recollected that in
1717 a settlement of the currency had taken place, which
had put an end to the long-continued vexations on that sub-
ject, and that little worth notice occurred till the earlier part
of the reign of George the Third, when it was acertained that
the coins were impaired, and that light silver had been im-
ported from abroad. To remedy this, the gold was recoined,
and it became requisite to use weights in paying silver, if it
exceeded 25 1, in value. The question of standard was not


adverted to. The first Earl of Liverpool occupied himself
much on the occasion, having taken a great interest in the
subject. He conceived the idea (and probably on that occa-
sion) that it was preferable that there should be but one
standard instead of two, and that that standard should be
gold. He was a member of the Privy Council in 1798,
when some silver which had been requested to be coined by
Messrs. Dorrien and Co. was ordered by the Council to be
remelted and not used as coin, on the ground that it was
not authorized by any Royal Proclamation.
In 1805 he published his Letter to the King, and candidly
expressed this opinion concerning the standard: much may
be said both for and against this opinion, as a principle.
What, however, can be done when one principle militates
against another? The other principle to which I advert is
that of change; to which all writers on currency object; and
more particularly so, when the consequences cannot be fore-
seen. This opinion became the pretext for meddling with
this ticklish subject in 1816; yet no committee of investi-
gation was appointed, nor was full information as to the con-
sequences of the change ever communicated, though it was
asserted that the practice and opinion of the people had
already outstripped the enlightenment of the legislature, by
adopting gold as the sole standard.
I have evidence in support of my opinion .that such was
not either the opinion or the practice of the people; and if
it had not been so, where was the proclamation to which we
were to bow, and which was required in 1798 ?
The bill of 1816, establishing gold as the sole standard,
became enacted with the following considerations neglected.
No change ought to have taken place till the exchanges had
become steadily settled. They were at the time only just
recovered from a depression of upwards of twenty per cent.:
Austria required ten millions of treasure; Russia ten millions;
and Denmark three millions and a half for currency purposes;
and France had to pay about thirty millions for indemnities: so
that nothing in the shape of settlement existed. The system on
which bank payments were to be resumed had not been
determined on, and if an alteration of standard was to take


place, the two measures should have gone hand in hand,
which they did not.
An estimate of the amount of the business of the country,
by comparison with former periods, together with the amount
of circulative means of carrying it on, ought to have been
made; this was neglected. If a comparison had been made,
every point would have been established against the change ;
the trade, the population, the tonnage, and the revenue, had
all greatly increased, and consequently a corresponding de-
mand for additional circulative means.
The probability of being able to supply this increased
demand ought to have been regarded; but it was not. If the
question had been gone, into it would have been apparent
that the supply of the precious metals had received a heavy
blow and great discouragement; while the use of them as
plate, or for ornamental purposes, had immensely increased.
The Mexican Revolution of 1810 had brought down the
amount raised and coined there from seven millions, at the
period of Lord Liverpool’s Letter, in 1805, to two millions
and a half in 1816; and consequently diminution of supply
occurred concurrently with increase of demand.
Inquiry ought to have been made in order to ascertain
what portion of metallic means existed in silver, and what in
gold, before the community was to be called upon to have its
hands tied by being deprived of the use of silver: nothing
of the kind ever occurred; and legislators were entirely ig-
norant of the degree of pressure that would be occasioned ; it
being certain that the whole effect of diminished supply would
fall on gold coin, the plate ornamental trades remaining
undiminished.
The more important neglect, however, was the disregard of
the effect of the measure of the public debt. The community
became called on to pay what it did not owe. It never
received a consideration for payments in gold to the ex-
clusion of its option to pay in either gold or silver.
These circumstances establish a just cause of complaint
against precipitate and inconsiderate legislators, who, in
handling this subject, have attempted to throw dust in our
eyes, by placing before us miserable minutiae, and keeping


back substantial facts, pregnant with consequences, the
extent of which are not even yet fully ascertained; and
I am not surprised at Mr. Attvvood’s expressed dissatis-
faction.
The arrival in Paris of about five millions of what was
coined in a year or two, attested the precipitation with which
the measure was urged on.
Mr. Attwood’s next complaint is against the Committee on
the Bank in 1819, when the resumption of cash payments
was considered.
I do not think it deserved censure on account of the
standard; because that was not the subject referred to it.
Parliament, having previously determined on the coin, did not
appoint that Committee to reopen that subject. The complaint,
however, of having misled every one as to the degree of de-
pression in prices is well founded; the Committee acted on
the belief that about six per cent, reduction would be effected;
and it turned out to be considerably above twenty. This is
proved by the actual prices that were reported to the Bank
Committee, in pages 94 and 95 of the Appendix, in 1832,
which exhibit the prices of about a dozen articles which
establish these alterations satisfactorily in point of fact, while
no instance occurs of any increase, and the whole is corrobo-
rated by a reference to the currency report in Porter’s
Tables, where it appears that the Bank of England and
country notes together amounted to forty-eight millions and
a quarter in 1818, and to only thirty millions and three quar-
ters in 1821. I consider Mr. Attwood has established a just
cause of complaint on this occasion.
With regard to the permission to continue the small notes
in 1822 for a longer period, I think indulgence must be
shown. The country suffered greatly, and all other modes of
mitigating suffering had failed.
In 1832, when the Committee sat, before the renewal of
the Bank Charter, the same course of proceeding was re-
newed. An immense mass of detail was entered upon, and
even the pen-cutters’ emolument was accounted for; but the
substantial points were disregarded. By this I mean the in-
crease of tonnage, of population, and of transactions, were


never placed in juxtaposition with the diminution of the
precious metals. The periodical opportunity of regarding
these matters of business was allowed to pass over as if this
part of the subject should be got rid of. This is the more to
be regretted, because there were no less than four additional
sources of information opened at that time, and all pointing
in the same direction; namely, diminution of metallic means,
with increase of demand, Mr. Jacob had recently finished
his work, and had come to the conclusion that the metals
had been reduced by one-sixth part in the expired twenty
years. Mr. M'Culloch, at about the same time, had just
finished his Dictionary; and according to his information
the diminution was most considerable.
Mr. Albert Gallatin’s work appeared at about the same
period, and by him the proportion of gold to silver is esti-
mated at no more by weight than one part in forty-eight.
The last account to which I advert is the one published by
Mr. Porter in his Tables. It there appears that the mines
yielded seven millions in Lord Liverpool’s time, but no more
than about 800,OOOL in 1831, and 900,000 Z. in 1832; and
with all this information available, the Committee recom-
mended the renewal of the Bank Charter with as much
superfluous detail concerning paper, the superstructure as
deficiency of attention to gold that was to constitute its basis.
The last Act (in 1844) was not preceded by consideration
or investigation in any Committee; but the same erroneous
assertion was again made, that gold was the basis of cur-
rency, and this being the last Act, I draw the same com-
parisons between the period of Lord Liverpool’s letter in
1805, and the period of this enactment in 1844: 11,400,000
population was increased to 19,400,000. The tonnage was
raised from two millions and a quarter to five millions, and
the general increase of business and transactions had become
immense. Not one word, however, do I find that informs
me what the aggregate amount of the metals had become,
how much had been used for trade objects, or how much
that existed was in gold. Additional undertakings were how-
ever sanctioned, particularly in railroad adventures; and
there has been no limit to the efforts made to obtain com


mercial extension by reduction of revenue, with the certainty
that whenever the period of reaction should arrive, this
course must occasion a shock to public credit, by bringing
into collision individual and public requirement for aid from
the very Bank, the hands of which are tied more stringently
than at any former period of our history. Those that have
presided over the Mint have constantly occupied also a seat
at the Board of Trade, but they have not exerted themselves
to see that with the extension of commercial, railway and
other business, the circulative means required sliould be ex-
tended also. If we have then gone on too long, adding to
the sail we carry, without attending to the ballast below, we
must not be surprised at a disastrous result. The mainte-
nance of paper on the level with gold is not the only principle
to be regarded; and the altered rates of interest accompanied
by a disturbance in the relations of property were never car-
ried to so injurious an extent as under the too stringent ope-
ration of the present. In fact, property has never been so
trifled with before.
G. Woodfall and Son, Printers, Angel Court, Skinner Street, London.
