

REMARKS
ON THE
REGISTRATION OF DEEDS
REAL PROPERTY
WM. FAIRFAX AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
1859.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
78, COLLINS STREET EAST.


pua* m URN THIS sjgggj/m&ms
I — j 'I.. ur Qs report
LJ NO> ye 'Will send aboul
i ° ;:
O O:;.o(„ r ,„, b order ;o,e. ' ;;
S ° rder cancelled '""t
L—J Searching (Notes if
n ' m ° re fh ° n $A2 above esfim ♦ j
U item sold 0 , e Se " d '"9) " ma,ed Pri “- before
PLEASE CONFIRM ORDER P ° bllS,,er - Order cancelled.
— 1 Part of Series ; «
□ Correct ht r l s
REMARKS:


PREFACE.
Fz^eq
W M 5 S'/p %£o<f
K-S~. 7/
It may be thought presumption on the part of an unprofessional
man to treat of a subject that is so abstruse and difficult to be grap-
pled with as that relating to the laws about real property. It may,
however, be alleged that a professional man can hardly do justice to
this subject. His mind must, in a greater or less degree, have
become narrowed by constant attention to the minutiae of convey-
ancing, and has a natural repugnance to any change that will render
the information acquired by long years of study comparatively useless
to him.
The evils of our conveyancing are forced on the notice of every
inhabitant of the colony, in a greater or less degree. The author
did not search for them, he only examined them when they came
in his way, and he has tried to discover a cure for some of them.
If he has succeeded in making himself intelligible to the mercantile
community, he will have succeeded in the end he had in view in
writing this pamphlet.
There is one subject he has not alluded to, the propriety of keeping
the register secret. That has been already determined in the
negative. Our register is intended to make all deeds public.
Melbourne, October, 1859.




REGISTRATION OF DEEDS.
The system of conveyancing and laws relating to landed property
at present in force in this colony are so universally acknowledged to
be indefensible, that it is useless to attack them. They have no
advocates ; even the conveyancers have not a word to say in their
favour, though they are very loquacious and ingenious in finding
out faults in any plan that may be proposed for remedying the evils
which we sustain by the maintenance of such an absurd system.
Nearly every one of the candidates in the recent elections for seats
in the Legislative Assembly promised their support and endeavours
to remedy the evil. Some of the bad effects of our present system
of conveyancing are prominently brought out in the evidence taken
by the Committee of the Legislative- Council, which was moved for
by the Hon. Mr. McCombie, in 1857. In that Committee we find
His Honour Judge Barry saying, “ A man who buys one acre of land
must be as particular in ascertaining that the title is correct as the
purchaser of 10,000 acres. The title, particularly if the land
originally granted may have been subdivided and passed through
many hands, must be more or less complicated. The searches at
present are in the Registry of the Supreme Court, to see that all
deeds have been properly attested and executed, and receipts for
money given, and that the parcels are correctly described, the parties
correctly named, the dower of married women barred, and that
trustees have executed their trusts correctly, that all the proper for-
malities have been complied with. Should a question of heirship
arise, it is necessary to examine next the Registrar-General’s Office,
and pursue inquiries as to relationships, absent persons, &c. It is
necessary to search the Sheriff’s Office for writs affecting the pro-
perty, the Office of the Supreme Court for judgments, the Office of
the Clerk of the Crown for Crown deeds and recognizances ; and it
may be further necessary to search the Supreme Court and Court of
Quarter Sessions for recognizances and other liabilities which may
possibly affect the person or estate of the vendor.” Mr. Barry tells


us further that he has known £3OO paid for searching, and neces-
sarily so, or otherwise the title would not have been safe.
We are further informed by other witnesses who gave evidence
before the same Committee, that they had known £lOO paid for a
set of attested copies, £7 5 modestly demanded by one solicitor for
an abstract of the title to one acre of land, that solicitors refuse to
allow the perusal of deeds in their possession until their costs,
amounting to £2OO, £3OO, or £5OO, have been paid. After such
information it does not surprise us to learn that where a purchase,
amounting to £124 10s., has been made, the solicitor’s bill for
making out a conveyance should be £lOl 16s. 2d., and after taxation
should amount to £Bl 14s. Bd. For such a small sum it seems un-
reasonable that the purchaser should expect a better title than the
one he got, it was a blistered one. We also learn from the same
evidence that nearly £2,000 has been paid for one conveyance.
Such is the present system of conveyancing in operation in this
colony, with the exception that titles are still further complicated by
all transactions that have taken place with regard to land in the two
years that have elapsed since the evidence taken by Mr. McCombie’s
Committee of the Council was given.
I think I hear the reader say that this is very much exaggerated,
or how would it be possible to make all the searches that are required
in the daily transactions of buying and mortgaging land. If the
expenses are so heavy, how is it that I was only charged six or ten
pounds for the legal expenses when I raised a thousand on mortgage
on my shop in Collins-street ? The answer to this will perhaps
astonish many a mortgagee, and it is that the lawyers, bad as they
are called, are not half so bad as the laws they have to keep in
operation. They see that it would be quite impossible to make all
the searches that are requisite to ensure perfect safety to their em-
ployers, and they accept the responsibility they incur by receiving
deeds as correct instead of seeing that they are so. They have, in
most instances, either no search, or they accept the conveyance to
the holder of the ground as being correct, perhaps from no better
reason (this reason was assigned in the writer’s, presence when both
solicitor and mortgagee were aware that the land had been dealt with
frequently and been subject to various mortgages) than that it has
been prepared by a respectable solicitor, and only search for dealings
of the proposed mortgagor with the ground. Many a purchaser and
mortgagee have found out this to their cost, after it was too late to
remedy the evil.
The difficulties in the way of remedying our laws are great, and


were found insuperable by Mr. Barry when he was Solicitor-General,
and also by Mr. McCombie ; the former brought in a bill to remedy
some of them, but was forced to withdraw it through the obstructions
thrown in his way by the legal profession. Mr. McCombie never, I
believe, presented a bill to the H ouse ; he gave way after he got the
evidence of the Committee. It remains to be seen if any of our
present members have the courage and ability to purify this Augean
stable, to grapple with all the technical objections, to form a system
that can be easily and cheaply worked, and that will provide a suffi-
cient security for all present and future interests.
We have an advantage now that we did not possess a few years
ago by having two systems of conveyancing, at once simple and eco-
nomical, working in our immediate vicinity, one in South Australia,
and the other in New Zealand. By studying these two, and taking
from each their advantages and leaving out their defects, it may be
possible to form a system much superior to either.
The registration of titles, as at present in operation in South Aus-
tralia, is fully explained in a very valuable pamphlet, by Mr. Torrens,
the Registrar-General. This system embraces two prominent points,
the mode of bringing lands under the new Act, and the way in which
they are dealt with when fairly involved in the procedure of that
Act.
All land alienated from the Crown after the first day of July
1857 must be conveyed and treated under the new system, but lands
previously alienated may also, at the instigation of the owner of it,
be brought under the terms of the act. The process by which this
is accomplished is very simple where the title to the land is good,
even as a holding title, but it does not affect property of which the
title contains an essential flaw.
On the application of the owner of any land to have it brought
under the South Australian act, the title to it is examined by solicitors
who are permanently engaged as counsel to the Commissioners, they
certify to the correctness of it, or point out all the flaws that it may
contain. The report of the solicitor is then laid before the Lands
Titles Commission, which consists of the Registrar General, and
two others who, however, cannot be legal praclioners. This Com-
mission has the power to order any publicity they may consider
requisite to the application, such as advertising in the local or other
newspapers and gazettes, and fix a time after such publication is
made for caveats to be sent in against the application being
granted. If during the time prescribed by the Commissioners there
should be no caveats lodged, the Registrar General is, at the expiration


of it, bound to impound all the title deeds of the land and to issue a
fresh title which is indefeasible. For this there is a small fee
varying from one to three guineas charged, and one halfpenny for
every pound of the value of the land. The halfpenny is carried to
a fund called the Assurance Fund, the object of which will
be explained hereafter. Should the Commissioners reject an
application to have land brought under the act, and the
applicant be dissatisfied with their decision, or should a caveat
be lodged against a fresh title being issued, the matter is referred
to the Supreme Court, which may direct a fresh title to be
issued, and the Registrar General is bound to obey the order. These
titles may be set aside on the ground of fraud or concealment, but
if the land has been conveyed to a party that was not cognizant of
the fraud for a valuable consideration the real proprietor has only
the power of recovering the value of the land at the time when the
error was made from the party who committed the error or fraud.
This sum can in the case of the inability of the person who com-
mitted the fraud to pay, be recovered from the assurance fund,
which may if insufficient be supplemented out of the general revenue
of the Colony. * The expense incurred by the owner of land who
brings it under the South Australian act varies from one to three
guineas, according to the nature of the title, and about three per cent,
only of the applications have been refused. The proportion of really
bad titles must be considerably more than three per cent., as it is
only reasonable to suppose that those only make application to have
their land brought under the Act who are not aware of any real de-
fect in the title they hold by. A man holding land by a title that
he is aware of being essentially bad, will say nothing about it.
After lands have been brought under the South Australian Act
they are called freed lands and the mode of conveyancing is very
simple. The Registrar General cancels and impounds all deeds
relating to the land and issues a fresh title upon the production of
properly attested bills of sale, mortgage, incumbrances, or leases, all
of these are very short deeds. A memorandum of the nature of
these bills or leases is endorsed on the title with a reference to the
bill of sale, &c., which is numbered and filed for future reference.
If a partial sale of the land takes place it is also endorsed on the
deed and the title is cancelled as far as relates to the lot that has
been sold, but it is still valid for the remaining portion of the
* The Assurance will most likely become bankrupt in a few years as there are no
additions made to it after the land is bought under their law, and it is liable for every
mistake that may be made by the Registrar. It seems only reasonable that a small
addition should be made to it at every transfer of the land.


ground. A fresh title is issued for the portion sold, on which in like
manner all transactions are endorsed. By this means the Registrar
General can at any moment show exactly how the property stands,
who is the owner, and what liabilities are attached to the property.
The advantage of this system is very great and the facility of dealing
with land almost appears miraculous to one who has been accustomed
to the tedious and cumbrous system of conveyancing in operation in
this colony, where days, weeks, and months are constantly consumed in
ascertaining to whom a piece of land really belongs, and after having
learnt the ownership the long deeds that are indispensable before the
simplest transaction can be accomplished. Instead of that delay we
are told that a mortgage in Adelaide can be effected in fifteen
minutes and released in five.
This has not been accomplished without radical changes in the
laws of real property, changes so great as almost to extinguish the
difference between real and personal property. In the first place the
titles are indefeasable, from which arises the necessity of taking the
land from the real owner and giving it to the registered owner if he
is not the same person. This will, however, rarely be felt as a great
hardship, as it will seldom occur in a case in which the real owner
is aware of his rights. It will act chiefly in diminishing the wind-
fall when he discovers his legal claim. Another very material
change in the law is with regard to settled estates. The trustees of
any estate may sell it without the necessity of the purchaser
inquiring whether the trust deed gave them that power. There is,
however, full protection given against a breach of trust, if parties
beneficially interested will avail themselves of it. In the first place
there is the supervision of the Registrar, who must examine into
the powers of trustees. If he allow them to exceed their powers
the assurance fund is liable. By inserting the words “no sur-
vivorships ” in the instruments constituting the trust, the trustees
are incompetent to deal with the estate until other trustees are
appointed in place of any of the original trustees who may be absent
or dead. Caveats can also be filed by any person who has an
interest in the trust by which means the trustees are restrained from
dealing with the estate in any manner until the caveat is withdrawn
by the caveator or by order of a judge.
South Australia cannot always expect to obtain a registrar who will
show the same judgment as Mr. Torrens displays in guiding his
own hobby of indefeasable titles. The principal check on forgery
of deeds in that colony is the sagacity of the registrar. When the
egistrar happens not to be sagacious this will be a very inefficient


check. There has been no check adopted there so vigilant and
untiring as the one they have abolished, the interest of the purchaser,
and they can never expect to create so good a one by law.
These are the outlines of the South Australian system. All the
checks, forms, &c., by which it is worked are fully explained by Mr.
Torrens in the pamphlet published a few months ago, to which any
person desirous of further information must be referred. It has,
however, this defect, it has introduced a new system of conveyancing
and great alterations in the law of real property without getting rid
of the old. The greatest part of their land is still held under the
same laws, under which we hold our own, and only a small portion
under the new law, though this part is always increasing both
from applications to have land brought under the system and
through fresh alienations from the Crown. We ought to attempt
to obtain their advantages without the evil of a double system, and
one of these systems so bad as not to possess an advocate in this
colony. This, however, is not the place to discuss in what manner
this can be accomplished.
The information about the New Zealand form of registration that
I have been able to acquire is not nearly so full as with regard to
the South Australian. It is limited to a series of letters by Mr.
Kelly, published in The Argus sth and 7th April, 1858, and the
Registration Act itself.
This system Mr. Kelly calls the numerical system, from the fact
that all deeds are numbered from one upwards to thousands and if
necessary to millions. Mr. Kelly’s description of this system is very
concise.
The Crown grant we will assume assures a good title to John
Adams, of the property described therein, which instrument also
contains a complete plan with all the boundary lines and the extent
of each faithfully delineated thereon. When this deed is presented
for registration, the registrar brings at once into requisition the first
essential in registration, that of assigning to it a new designation , by
which it is ever after distinguished from every other property. This
designation is the number which in consecutive order he endorses in
large figures on the back of it, and which is never again repeated by
him on any other deed. This number is entered at once in the book
of consecutive numbers, which book directs to the title-page which is
now opened for it. This page is headed with the number, endorsed by
the registrar upon the Crown grant, and all entries are made upon
it in the order described in my last letter, viz. : The Crown grant
will be registered upon the first line with sufficient descriptions, and


a faithful and complete plan of the property assured in this instru-
ment will he delineated below, and on one side of it the grantee’s
name will be written. As soon now as the grantee disposes of his
interest in this property, the second great essential in registration
(unprovided for by any other system) is immediately brought into
operation. The conveyancer employed to draw out the new deed of
transfer will now insert in the body of it the number which gave
possession of the property to the grantee. This number, through the
book of consecutive numbers, will direct the registrar at once to the
title-page assigned to this property, where, after he has newly
numbered it, he enters it under the Crown grant, provided that,
upon examination of the title-page, he is satisfied that the vendor
had a right to the property which he alienates, and that the same is
described and delineated in every particular after the description of
the property exhibited upon this page. Through 100 subsequent
transfers of the property the same rule will be rigidly observed ; that
is, every deed presented for registration will receive a new number,
following consecutively the last endorsation, and on every sale of the
same property the number endorsed on the deed which gave
possession to the vendor will be inserted in the body of the new
deed. By this means all the instruments relating to the same property
are kept united together as links upon the same chain, and titles are
preserved good through successive transfers. The property itself
must also in every particular be described and delineated after the
plan assigned to it upon the title-page. In all instances where sub-
divisions are dealt with, new title-pages will be assigned to such,
with references to and from the original, and the same laws which
regulated the disposal of the former will be adhered to in the latter,
except so far as relates to the plans, when the rules provided for the
regulation of subdivided properties will be strictly carried out.
This system has, according to Mr. Torrens failed, and now there
is a system of registration in operation unathorised by law. With
regard to this, I am sorry to say that I have been unable to learn
the cause of the alteration; but I think it is not difficult to show
the weak point in which the system is most likely to have been
found faulty,—that is, the numerical denomination of the deeds.
Mr. Kelly says : “ the registrar brings at once into requisition the
first essential in registration, that of assigning to it a new designation
by which it is for ever distinguished from every other property.”
This new designation is simply a number ; but why should the old
designation be abandoned ? The property had a distinct appellation
given to it in the Crown grant, which is much superior to the one


bestowed by the registrar. Allotment 7of Block 10, Melbourne, is
as distinct a designation as No. 5,431 is, and has the advantage of
containing a great deal of information. By the New Zealand plan,
if you know the number it is easy to find the land ; but apparently
the difficulty of the converse problem of finding the number by
knowing the land was foreseen, and a provision made in the Act for
those cases in which it was found insuperable. This provision is
that if the number of the deed by which a seller holds his land
cannot be ascertained, it is lawful to insert any of the numbers of
the previous instruments relating to the property that can be ascer-
tained ; or in case of a total failure, to insert no number at all. The
object of the New Zealand Act with regard to the registration in
deeds was not only to obtain what we, with our inconvenient system,
may obtain by an expensive search, the knowledge of all deeds that
will have a prior claim to the conveyance that may be now executed.
It is also intended to show how all rights relating to the estate
are held, and what proceedings have taken place that may in any
way alter the position of the nominal owner as far as the particular
estate is concerned. To accomplish this it is necessary to have some
change in the law regarding real property, and it is declared that no
judgment, decree, acceptance of office, inquisition, bankruptcy, insol-
vency, or private ordinance, shall be valid against a purchaser for
valuable consideration, unless the same judgment, &c., is registered
on the folio, containing the description of the estate. The registrar
is also bound to see that the person signing the deed has power to
do so. Thus, if an estate is granted to A, and A then conveys it to
B, and a conveyance is presented for registration, signed by C, the
registrar must refuse this conveyance until C can show how he is
entitled to touch B’s estate. C must show that he is executor,
assignee, &c., for B, before the conveyance can be registered. It is
also the law that deeds cannot be delivered, in the legal sense of the
term, before they are registered, that is, until registration they are
still in the custody and the property of the person that conveys the
estate. The registrar is also bound to compare the description of the
land in the deed to be registered with that given in the register, and
if there is any variation to reject the deed. The New Zealand system
of registration relates only to land of which the Crown grants were
issued subsequently to its coming into operation, consequently we
cannot expect to find, at least the writer of this has failed to find,
in it any solution to part of that problem that it will be necessary to
solve in Victoria. It had no retrospective action. We have to
discover a remedy for the state of confusion in which the titles to


property in this colony has been already reduced, and not till that
has been done can we learn anything from our neighbours in the
east. In the west, over the South Australian boundary, they had
the same difficulties to contend with as we have now. The system
adopted there is faulty in many respects, principally that it is not
comprehensive enough to embrace all cases, on which account it has
been found necessary to have two separate systems of registration
and conveyancing working side by side; it also leaves a large pro-
portion of the titles unaffected, though most of these may be brought
under the Act if the proprietors wish to do it. The changes in the
real property law are so great, that many proprietors will, no doubt,
be cautious before they try the experiment now being tested in
Adelaide. The experiment has not yet been made; it only began
about eighteen months ago, and the same number of years will elapse
before we can see all the effects of this great change of law. At
present there are two important and expensive lawsuits going on in
Melbourne, with regard to transactions in land, that were unim-
peached for fifteen or twenty years. Will the South Australian
system after that lapse of time show in a clear and simple way all
the transactions concerning such properties. The South Australian
system is deficient as a record of the history of land, which of
itself is a curious history, in many cases showing nearly as many
ups and downs in the value of property as of the men that have
owned it.
In Victoria it will be necessary to attend to two different objects.
We must try if it is not possible to arrange the titles as already
registered in a more convenient form, and then make a law to prevent
them again getting into a state of confusion.
That any plan of registration should obviate all the faults of title
and all the mistakes that have been committed, either by the holders
of land or by their solicitors, is hardly to be expected ; but if we
can show in a clear and simple manner all transactions that have
apparently taken place with each piece of land since it was sold by
Government, we will have made one great step in remedying the
confusion in which we are at present involved. The writer of this
is of opinion that the following plan will accomplish this, and in
principle it is the same as that adopted in New Zealand :
1. A series of books should be provided of the description that
may be thought most convenient, and each book should be dedicated
to a particular district either of town or country.
2. Every Crown grant should be entered on a separate folio,
showing the Government designation bestowed on the allotment, the


name of the purchaser, amount of purchase-money, and the bounda-
ries as specified in the Crown grant.
3. Whenever this parcel of land is dealt with as a whole, either
by selling, mortgaging, settling, or by releasing a mortgage, the parti-
culars of such sale, &c., as are generally contained in the present
memorials for the purpose of registration, should be fully set forth
immediately below the description of the Crown grant.
4. When a part only of an estate is conveyed, all the particulars
of such a sale should be mentioned, the name of the purchaser,
amount of purchase-money, description of the particular lot, and the
number of another folio, the use of which will be explained in
No. 5.
5. Upon a sub-division of any allotment, a separate folio should
be allotted to each lot. At the head of the page there would
be the Government name of the original allotment, and the
number of the folio on which the transactions relating to the whole
of the original lot are recorded, and then the names of the seller and
purchaser of this particular sub-lot, with a proper description of it.
Underneath this there would be shown every transaction relating to
this sub-lot, and to any sub-division of it. In the event of a second
division, it would be of course necessary to assign a separate folio to
each of the lots of the second sub-division. Great assistance would
be obtained from having plans of the ground drawn on each page,
especially as an illustration of the mode of sub-division of the various
sections. There would also be necessarily required some simple
index, as a reference to the folio in which the transactions in each
section were recorded.
This system would be voluminous in the same meaning of the
expression as is applicable to the books of our banks. A banker’s
cash-book contains everything relating to his transactions with his
customers. With this he is not satisfied, but gives himself a great
deal of trouble arranging these items in a ledger, where they can be
easily referred to, and the state of each customer’s account ascertained
at a glance. We have been satisfied with a register that at most is
no better than the cash-book. We must insist on our cash-book
being posted into ledgers before we can learn easily the ownership of
land. The transactions in land are numerous and extensive, and
they cannot be reduced in number. Our register must on that
account be large, but it may be properly arranged and made as simple
for reference as the banker's ledger has become. There are, however,
many things that might be done to reduce the bulk of the register.
One very obvious mode of accomplishing this is to assign only one


folio to two or more contiguous allotments when the same person
became the purchaser. It is high time that Government should
allow a single grant to be issued for a whole block, instead of insisting
on the purchaser having four, ten, or twenty Crown grants for a piece
of land around which he may put a ring fence. In looking over the
plans of the land advertised by Government for sale, we find in the
first chart examined that section 9, parish of Narrawong, is to be
sold at Portland, on the 10th of October, in ten allotments. There
are two roads intersecting these, but 1,2, and 3 join each other ;
then the next block contains 4,5, 6, and 7 ; in a third block are
8,9, and 10. If this piece of land is purchased by one individual,
there seems no assignable reason for refusing to issue a grant for the
whole, or at most three grants, one for each block; but, unfortu-
nately, Government is more apt to assign their own custom than to
give a reason for continuing the custom. The supposed purchaser
would be required to accept ten grants for this piece of land, con-
taining thirty-nine acres of suburban land, attached to a township in
which there has not been made even a commencement in building,—
one for every Government allotment. If the evil stopped here, as
the additional expense unnecessarily incurred would only be £8 10s.,
it might be borne ; but whenever the land is resold, mortgaged, or
in any way mentioned in a deed, it becomes necessary to particularise
each separate allotment. This is one reason for the great length of
our conveyances. Some times it happens that the evil is still greater ;
the annoyance is most perplexing if the purchaser of the contiguous
allotments determines to cut the ground up without reference to the
separate grants that he holds. In one private township it has been
determined to make roads diagonally through three sections of land.
Of course these roads form the principal frontages to the small allot-
ments into which this piece of land has been divided, and which
will often embrace land alienated by different Crown grants. This
custom of the Government offices should at once be stopped.
Having now arrived at the period when all the information con-
tained in the registry office has been tabulated and arranged in a
manner to facilitate inquiries with respect to past transactions in
land, there are many alterations that would be necessary to prevent
similar confusion in the future.
One thing that must be done is to shorten the conveyances, and
substitute a counterpart of the conveyances for the very equivocal
instrument that now passes under the name of the memorial. This
memorial is not the least of the absurdities of our system ; it does
not prove that the conveyor had any right to convey the property ;


it does not prove that he even signed the conveyance. It is not
necessary that the memorial should be signed by the seller or mort-
gagee, it is simply an affidavit that a deed shown in the registry
office purports to be a sale or mortgage from A to B of a particular
piece of land. The person who swears to the truth of the memorial
does not necessarily know anything about the property conveyed, or
about the signatures to the deed. The memorial cannot therefore
be even accepted as evidence that there ever was such a deed as it
apparently relates to in existence. The memorials are, however,
generally signed by the seller or mortgagor, though it does not alter
their character if they are signed by the purchaser or mortgagee, and
are equally admissable into the registry office ; they are, in fact,
only the means of securing a prior claim to a deed over any other
that has not been registered. The ownership of the land must be
learned from the deeds themselves. If, however, deeds are made as
short as the memorials, there is no reason why the purchaser of the
ground should not hold one, and a counterpart be filed in the regis-
tration office.
Lord St. Leonards, in his “ Handybook,” says :
“ The attempt to shorten conveyances by legislative enactment
has been proved to be hopeless ; it must be left to the good sense
and honor of the conveyancers ; for if you were to render it unlawful
to adopt any other than a prescribed form of grant, yet a long deed
might always be made by unnecessary recitals of the previous title.”
Perhaps it may be too much to expect that we can put a stop to
all unnecessary amplifications of deeds by legislative enactment, but
it does not follow that we should force our conveyancers to use a
very long form. The greater part of our deeds is occupied with the
explanation of the short words buy and sell, or mortgage ; it does
not seem very difficult to define the meaning of these words by act
of Parliament once for all. If we did that our conveyancers would
have fair play, and the interest of their clients would force them,
even against their wish, to curtail their deeds. A solicitor who
unnecessarily extended his deeds would soon discover that he had
no deeds to draw. Lord St. Leonard’s estimate of the character of
the branch of the legal profession to which he did not belong is
unjust and ungenerous, it is made use of to hide his own reluctance
to a liberal reform of the laws of conveyancing.*
* Solicitor# sometimes perplex the title to properties in order to inflame their own
bills of cost. In one instance that has come under the writer’s notice, where land
was sold by A to 13, on credit, the solicitor transferred the land from A to B, B
executed a mortgage to A for the purchase money and A had to sign a release of that
mortgage. These are, however, the exceptional cases.


There is no want of short forms to choose from; there are
the South Australian forms, those of Lord Campbell, and
Judge Barry; but there is also a very short one in force in this
colony, though I do not suppose that it has been used, by which the
various Dictrict Road Boards can obtain the transfer of any land
they may require for roads. This form is enacted in the Imperial
Act, the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, which has been
extended to this colony by our Road Act. The astonishment of any
solicitor who should be requested by a Road Board to draw out a
conveyance of land that is shorter than an ordinary memorial would
be more easily imagined than described. This is one of the tilings
“ that may happen to an attorney in Victoria.” The registrar should
also be empowered to refuse any deed if it was not apparent that
the grantor had a right to deal with the land. No deed of an
executor, for instance, should be registered without a notice of his
being the executor of the registered proprietor. No variations in the
description of the land would be allowed. I can show sales of land
in Melbourne that have been registered where the land sold was in
a different street from the land conveyed. The registrar has
no means at present of objecting to any memorial, however gross
a mistake it may contain, nor is it part of his duty to do so.
Before the register would show from whom land could be bought
with perfect safety, it would also be necessary to make a law de-
claring all judgments, decrees, suits, acceptances of office, inquisitions,
insolvencies, or private ordinances void, as against purchasers for
valuable consideration, until they are registered against the land ;
and also to declare that conveyances by the heir-at-law, or by execu-
tors empowered by a will that is revoked by a subsequent will that
is perhaps both unknown and unregistered, should be valid to pur-
chasers for valuable consideration.
There is another simple change of law that could not possibly
hurt any body and which would at once cure the defects in most of
our bad titles. This is simply to declare that all Crown grants
should take effect from the day the land was sold, and not from the
day on which the grant was signed. The number of titles that have
been blistered by the oversight of obtaining conveyances from the
original purchasers of the land before the issue of the Crown grant
is quite amazing. This is not so common now, but in the specu-
lative years of 1839 and 1840 it was a very common proceeding, from
the great delay that took place at that date in issuing the Crown
grants, sometimes amounting to two or three years. Nearly the
whole of the important suburb of Richmond was held by these de-


fective titles. Many properties there have now good titles, acquired
by subsequent deeds in corroboration, the expense of which has been
very great. In one instance I have heard of the original grantee, or
his attorney, having refused to sign the deeds presented unless there
is presented at the same time a trifling gratuity of fifty pounds. To
this imposition the proprietors are obliged to submit, as the grantee
is out of the jurisdiction of our courts. They have only the choice
of bad titles, or submitting to this extortion.
The purchaser of a piece of this allotment has declared that his
loss through this flaw in the title amounted to as much as five hundred
pounds. His land only cost originally ten pounds, and he thought
that it was unnecessary to go to much expense in obtaining a full
title for such a small purchase. In the course of time, however, it
became, partly from the increased value of ground near Melbourne,
and partly from houses being built upon it, worth above five thousand
pounds, when it was judicious to obtain a good title instead of only
one of the best holding titles, and his loss, arising solely from the
land having been conveyed before the issue of the Crown grant,
amounted to that large sum. This might have been saved by an act
declaring that Crown grants should be considered as dated on the
day the land was sold. This is one example of the losses that have
occurred through a matter of form, not of substance. The expense
of the deeds in corroboration was alone two hundred and fifty pounds,
the other two hundred and fifty was lost by not being able to give a
good title for a house that he sold.
There is another change in our law that is absolutely required to
prevent the most gross injustice. I allude to the law that ordains
all fixtures to belong to the land. It is not, however, my intention
to discuss this question in its most ordinary operation, where it
affects men in their relations of tenants and landlords, but in those
exceptional cases where people have had undisputed possession of the
ground for years and, under the impression that they were the right-
ful owners of it, have expended large sums of money in buildings or
other improvements. The case still pending in our courts of Weire
and others v. Staunton, is an example of this sort. Mr. Staunton
claims the land in dispute through the possessors of it for a period
of about twenty years, people who have built expensive houses and
shops, laying out large sums of money, amounting to tens of
thousands, in the full belief that the land was theirs. Mr. Weire
discovers, or thinks that he has discovered, that the land is the
property of his wife and her sisters, the three daughters of Batman,
the pioneer of Victoria. And if he substantiates his claim the law


will give the heiresses not only the land in the state it was when the
possession was usurped, but also the houses that Mr. Staunton has
built with his own money. There are three ways in which an in-
justice of this sort could be remedied.
1. By limiting the real owner to the compensation of the price of
the land at the time the mistake occurred. This is the Adelaide
system ; under it Mr. Weire would not recover more than the sum
that the land would have realized in 1838.
2. By giving the real owner the value of the land at the time of
the commencement of the action. The value of the land to be
assessed with reference to the state in which it was when taken
possession of by mistake, or, —
3. By restoring the land to the real owner and making him pay
for all improvements that have been made by the person in posses-
sion. It might, perhaps, be preferable to allow the real owner to
elect between the second and third modes.
If these changes are not thought sufficient, then we may still have
a better system of registration than the Adelaide one, upon which
may be engrafted as many changes of the law as may be deemed
requisite. We have only to add to what has already been proposed
the Adelaide Board of Commission with their solicitors to examine
the titles to land and then, instead of cancelling the old deeds and
issuing fresh titles, it would be necessary only for the registrar to
certify in the registry that the title was assured, and to declare by
law that these assured titles were indefeasible. If this was done of
course it would be impossible to give the real owner of the land the
option of receiving it back on payment for the buildings that have
been erected by the person who has been in possession under the
impression of being the rightful owner.*
The principal objection that will be raised to such a scheme of
registration as is proposed in this pamphlet will be that it is too
cumbrous. If, however, the object is of the greatest importance to
all holders of land, such an objection must have no weight unless
there is a system proposed that can accomplish all that is required
in a more simple manner. Such a system has not yet been laid
before the colony. The system of registration now proposed, or
something similar to it, has been in operation for some time in New
Zealand; but there the registrar had not to cope with by-gone trans-
actions, and these are the transactions that will create the difficulty
in introducing a better mode of procedure in this colony. The
* We could only give him the value of the land at the time the mistake originated,
or at the time the action was raised.


South Australian system certainly will keep existing titles in a
smaller compass than any system of registration by books. The ob-
jections to that, independently of the gr«at change in the real
property law, necessarily introduced along with it, is that it fails to
exhibit a histoxy of the land from the time of its alienation from the
Crown. The existing titles there may be kept in a small compass,
but the cancelled deeds and titles must soon swell to an enormous
mass, the classification of which is wholely unprovided for by law.
Whether it will work well as a system of registration, will be deter-
mined some twenty years hence, when such cases as A’Beckett v.
Robinson and Wei re v. Staunton have had time to be matured and
acquire the full importance that belongs to a good chancery suit. 11
is not the existing titles that threaten to ruin the Adelaide system of
registration, the danger lies in the mass of cancelled titles.
The time in which the system of registration here proposed could
be brought into full operation would depend entirely on the energy
of the registrar and the means that the parliament places at his dis-
posal, The means which he should have at his command must, of
course, be commensurate to the work to be performed, and little
restriction should be put upon him. The great point is to have
existing titles reduced into order in as short a time as possible.
The time required for arranging the titles to Melbourne property
would be considerable, as it would be necessary to investigate and
classify the transactions for the last twenty-two years ; but there is
no reason why the country districts, in which most of the land has
been alienated within the last two or three years, should not be pro-
ceeded with at the same time. Many of our counties might, in two
or three months, have registers in such a state that the registrar
might begin to refuse the registration of deeds that were informal,
either from a variation in the description of the land, or where the
title of the maker of the deed was not shown by the register. Even
in the case of Melbourne, the register might be put into order during
the next year, and the year 1861 might find us with as good a
register as the imperfect machinery that has hitherto been in
operation can afibrd us. When we have such a register the progress
would be immense. A few minutes would be sufficient to conduct a
search, with as great accuracy as is insured under the present system
by a search that occupies sometimes six months, at a cost of above
three hundred pounds. This would be the proper time for declaring
that no purchaser, for valuable consideration, should suffer from any
judgment, recognizance, inquisition of office, order of insolvency, &c.,
unless such judgment, &c., was registered against the land itself. If


we return to the account given by Judge Barry, formerly quoted, of
the process necessary to a complete search at present, we will see
how much we would gain. Judge Barry says,—“ The searches at
present are in the registry of the Supreme Court, to see that all
deeds have been properly attested and executed, and receipts for
money given, and that the parcels are properly described, the parties
correctly named, the dower of married women barred, that trustees
have executed their trusts properly, and that all the proper formal-
ities have been complied with.” Most of this information cannot be
obtained from the registry, this includes not only a search, but also
an examination of all the deeds. If the register was put in the form
that is recommended, it would show, in a single page or in two, in
the event of the land having been subdivided, all the deeds relating
to the land, and also all the inaccuracies in the description of the
parcels. The rest of the information is contained only in the deeds.
Judge Barry proceeds in his account: —“ Should a question of heir-
ship arise, it is necessary to examine next the Registrar-General’s
Office, and pursue inquiries as to relationships, absent persons, &c.”
It is proposed to make these inquiries shorter in future by making
conveyances of the heir-at-law, or executors acting on a will that may
be afterwards discovered to have been revoked, binding when granted
for valuable consideration, but it would be necessary to prevent the
registration of such deeds if there was a probability of an adverse
claim being set up. This would be effected by registering a caveat
against all dealings with the land.
It is necessary further, according to Judge Barry, to search the
Sheriff’s office for writs affecting the property, the office of the
Supreme Court for judgments, the office of the Clerk of the Crown
for Crown deeds and recognizances, and it may further be necessary
to search the Supreme Court, and Courts of Quarter Sessions for
recognizances and other liabilities which may possibly affect the
person or estate of the vendor. All these searches are unnecessary
in New Zealand and South Australia in the case of freed lands. In
New Zealand they are simply declared void as far as they affect the
land, unless the judgments, &c., are registered against the land.
This is the most proper course to take. If a creditor is satisfied
with the personal security of his debtor why should he get paid
at the expense of a man who has purchased the estate in
ignorance of the claim, at a time, too, when perhaps the creditor
was not aware that the estate belonged to his debtor. All that can
be asked for with justice is leave to register the claim as soon as the
claimant is aware that he has a lien on the land ; if he does not


choose to take this trouble, he only loses what he might have secured
by greater diligence. Or if a judge releases a prisoner from knowing
that he possess a house, is it proper that a person who has subse-
quently purchased that house from the prisoner should be called
upon to surrender that house to the Government ? If the Govern-
ment officers are so careless as not to register the claim, the public,
who have allowed themselves to be served by inefficient officers, are
the legitimate sufferers, and ought to suffer. They now suffer more
than such occasional losses by the insecurity of their titles, and by
the very heavy legal expenses to which they are necessarily sub-
jected under the present laws. In South Australia they have gone
still further ; they have provided no machinery for the registration
of such claims.
In this colony we should insist, first, on having our register put
into such a condition as to enable searches to be made with little
difficulty, and then to have as great an improvement on our laws
relating to real property as it is possible. Such a register would be
an elastic institution that would do good without these changes, and
might also be made to embrace the whole scope of the South
Australian system ; containing the whole of that system, and still
having size and capacity to shield the owners of land that cannot be
benefited by their laws from expense and annoyance in determining
the ownership of land. Such a register would show us all our
transactions in land, and would accommodate itself to any change in
real property law that might be determined on. Let us have a
proper register, and then we can debate how far we can improve the
property laws.
W. FAIRFAX & CO,, GENERAL PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.


KDdDISS AH® IPAIIIPMILSTO
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
W. FAIRFAX & CO., MELBOURNE STEAM PRESS,
78, COLLINS STREET EAST, next door above The Argus office.
ALMANAC for 1859, printed in colors, containing the usual calendar information
Sixpence.
BE MEN. A Sermon by the Rev. THOMAS BINNEY. Demy Bvo. Price Is.
BRADSHAW’S GUIDE TO VICTORIA. Published first day of each month,
with Map. This Work contains all kinds of information, alike useful both to the Visitor and
Resident. Compiled by W. FAIRFAX. Demy 12m0., 132 pages. Price 6d.
CARTER’S RECEIPT BOOKS, RENT RECEIPT BOOKS, &c.
CAUSES OF THE DISEASES OF CHILDREN, with a comparative Table of
Infantile Mortality in the Australian Colonies. By J. WILLIAM MACEENNA, L.M.S.
Demy Bvo. Price Is. 6d.
CRICKETER'S GUIDE. Edited by W. FAIRFAX. Demy 12mo. Price 2s. 6d.
CRICKETER’S SCORING BOOK. Newly compiled.
CHURCH AND STATE. By Rev. Dr. CAIRNS. Demy Bvo., 28 pages. Price Is.
ELAIOPATHY. Lecture by W. HOBBS, Moreton Bay. Price 6d.
HANDBOOK TO AUSTRALASIA, including all the Colonies, with a brief History.
Also a Map. Compiled by W. FAIRFAX. Demy 12mo , cloth, gilt. Price 10s., per post, 12s.
INDEX TO FELLOW’S ACT. Price 6s.
LAW FORMS in great variety.
PRINCIPLES OF REPRESENTATION. By EDWARD WILSON. Demy Bvo.
Price Is.
PRIZE ESSAY ON EIGHT HOURS’ QUESTION. By J. A. ALDWELL. Demy
Bvo. Price Is.
RULES OF THE VICE-ADMIRALTY COURT. Price Is.
THE LAND BILL, A Letter from an OLD COLONIST, not a Squatter. Price Is.
TRAVELS WITH DR. LEICHHARDT IN AUSTRALIA. Demy 12m0., 216
pages. Price 2s. 6d.
VICTORIAN HANSARD.—Debates of both Houses. Demy Bvo., One Shilling per
sheet of 16 pages. Sessions 1., 11., and 111. now published, three volumes.
WHAT ARE WE DRIVING AT ? A few Remarks about Gold. Price Is.
Books and Pamphlets Printed by Steam Flatten Machine.


