

REMARKS
UPON
THE LATEST OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS
RELATING TO
NEW ZEALAND:
(ORDERED, BY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, TO BE PRINTED,
FEBRUARY 7, 1838:)
IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
BY JOHN BEECHAM.


London: —Printed by James Nichols, 46, Hoxton-Square.


CONTENTS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS RELATING
TO NEW ZEALAND, REMARKED UPON IN THIS
LETTER
1. Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir R. Bourke, K. C. 8., to Lord
Glenelg, dated Government House, Sydney, 9th September, 183/.
2. Enclosure (A.) —Letter from Captain W. Hobson, to His Excellency
Lieutenant-General Sir Richard Bourke, K. C. 8., Governor, dated
His Majesty's Ship Rattlesnake, Port Jackson, Sth August, 1837.
3. Enclosure (B.) —A List of all the Ships which have visited the Bay of
Islands during the Six Months ending 3lst December, 1836, with a
Summary for the whole Year.
4. Enclosure (C.) —Letter from James Busby, Esq., British Resident at
New Zealand, to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary of New-South
Wales, dated British Residency, Bay of Islands, 1 6th June, 1837.
5. Enclosure (D.) —Letter from James Busby, Esq., British Resident, New
Zealand, to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary of New-South
Wales, dated British Residency, Bay of Islands, 13 th July, 1837.
A 2




REMARKS,
&c.
My dear Friend,
I have examined the Official Despatches respecting New
Zealand recently laid before Parliament, with especial reference
to the intimation which you gave me that the New-Zealand
-Association would, it was expected, endeavour to derive from
those documents an argument in favour of their scheme of
Colonization. The first despatch of Mr. Busby, having been
pointed out by you as that on which it was probable great
stress would be laid, has particularly engaged my attention;
but I confess that I am unable to discover by what mode of
reasoning this despatch, any more than the others which
accompany it, can be made to serve the cause of the Asso-
ciation.
The investigation to which, on a former occasion, I sub-
jected their proposals, led me to the conclusion, that a private
trading Company, who are to carry on their operations chiefly
by means of borrowed money, cannot furnish probable evidence,
that, however benevolent may be their wishes, they will have
either time or means at their command for the accomplishment
of the arduous task of raising the New Zealanders to the
enjoyment of the blessings of a Christian and civilized State.
If (as I have reason to know, many who are competent judges
believe to be the case,) this conclusion has been satisfactorily
established, then the only remaining recommendation of the As-
sociation’s plan to philanthropic individuals who make the wel


fare of the New Zealanders the primary object of their solicitude
is, that it is intended as a remedy for a peculiar state of things
which has long been deplored. The Missionaries have painfully
to witness the evils inflicted by white men on these interesting
islanders ; those injuries constituted the question respecting
New Zealand which was investigated by the late Parliamentary
Select Committee on Aborigines, and to provide against which,
they suggested a plan in their Report submitted to the House
of Commons; and the interference which the Missionary-
Societies have solicited from Her Majesty’s Government has
been sought for the very purpose of putting an end to this
same class of evils. Of the occasion afforded by the agitation
of this question, the Association have taken advantage; and
claim the support of those who are anxious to secure protection
for the New Zealanders, on the ground that one of their
principal objects in proposing to colonize New Zealand is,
“ to repress the crimes of British visitors and settlers, and
likewise to prevent the further emigration of convict refugees,
and other desperate vagabonds.” This part of their plan
has been as clearly exposed as that which relates to the pro-
posed civilization of the New Zealanders; but as the evils
referred to yet exist, and loudly call for redress, it may still
have an appearance of plausibility with some who see no
other or more effectual remedy.
The question then for consideration is—Whether the plan
of the Association, as proposing to deliver the New Zea-
landers from the wrongs and injuries which they are now
suffering from British visitors and settlers, and runaway
convicts, receives any recommendation or support from the
despatch of Mr. Busby, and the other accompanying docu-
ments. Now, I think it will be obvious to every reflecting
person, that Mr. Busby cannot be introduced as the advocate
of the Association, unless it should appear that he Jays
principal stress on those evils which they propose to remove,
and urges, moreover, the adoption of a measure similar at least
in principle to that of the Association. But is this the case ?


To save the trouble of referring to the Parliamentary Papers, I
will quote what he says on the subject of the evils resulting to
the New Zealanders, from their intercourse with white men :
“ It would, in relation to the subject on which I intend to enter
in this despatch, be an interesting and important question, did
there exist means of bringing it to a satisfactory solution, How far
this depopulation of the country, which has at least been rapid in
proportion to the increase of its intercourse with the whites, was
originated by the latter, and may justly he chargeable to them.
My own opinion is, that all the apparent causes which are in opera-
tion are quite inadequate to account for the rapid disappearance of
the people.
“ The introduction of fire-arms is alleged as one cause, hut there
seems good reason to doubt whether their wars were less san-
guinary before fire-arms were introduced. The use of intoxicating
liquors and tobacco are less questionable evils; and though their
direct influence cannot, I think, be stated as at all remarkable, they
are, in all probability, the original causes of diseases with which
their immmediate connexion is not apparent.
“ Venereal diseases are another means of undermining the consti-
tution of the multitudes who, in one shape or other, are subjected
to them : and besides these sources of disease and death, the abuse
of the females who are sent by their masters or relations on board
ships, and the murder of the fruits of this intercourse, which is
believed by those likely to be best informed to be of frequent
occurrence, are undoubtedly powerful checks to increase, and ought
to be largely allowed for in estimating the causes which are in
operation for the depopulation of the country. But, on the other
hand, it must not be lost sight of that the mortality has not been
confined to those who have been the victims of violence, or Avho
have been exposed to the effects of vices or diseases of foreign
origin. Disease and death prevail even amongst those natives who,
by their adherence to the Missionaries, have received only benefits
from English connexions; and even the very children who are
reared under the care of the Missionaries are swept off in a ratio
which promises, at no very distant period, to leave the country des-
titute of a single aboriginal inhabitant.
“ The natives are perfectly sensible of this decrease; and when
they contrast their own condition with that of the English families,
amongst whom the marriages have been prolific in a very extraor-
dinary degree of a most healthy progeny, they conclude that the
God of the English is removing the aboriginal inhabitants to make


room for them ; and it appears to me that this impression has pro-
duced amongst them a very general recklessness and indifference
to life.”
With reference to this exposition of his views, Mr. Busby
adds, that he has thus, as impartially as he could, stated
both sides of the question, and that he does “not concur in
opinion with those who charge altogether upon their inter-
course with British subjects, directly or indirectly, the present
miserable condition of the New Zealanders.'”
In commenting upon this passage, I would request you
particularly to notice that the writer distinguishes between
the condition of the natives as affected by the vicious conduct of
white men, and their circumstances in those cases where they
derive only benefits from their English connexions; and that,
strange as it may appear, he does in reality take the most gloomy
view of the condition of the New Zealanders, where the
influence of our countrymen is solely employed in endeavours
to promote their welfare. It may be presumed that the
Association will not think that this description can prove
helpful to them. If it be true “ that all the apparent causes
which are in operation, are quite inadequate to account for
the rapid disappearance of the people ; ” and that the natives
are doomed, by some mysterious decree of Heaven, rapidly
to waste away without any visible cause, in the presence of
white men who have gone among them with no other view than
to do them good; the only course by which our Government
or Parliament could hope to meet the case, would be, not to
found a Colony, but to banish henceforth every white man,
good as well as bad, from the shores of New Zealand.
The only part of this description which could possibly be
made to strengthen the cause of the Association, is that
which relates to the vicious conduct of our countrymen ;
and I think you will agree with me, that, so far from presenting
a more alarming picture, Mr. Busby does not place those
evils in so strong a light as that in which we have previously
regarded them. Every statement which he makes upon this


subject, has its drawback. If be admits that “ the introduc-
tion of fire-arms is alleged as one cause ” of “ the rapid dis-
appearance of the people,” he also maintains that “ there seems
good reason to doubt whether their wars “ were less sanguinary
before fire-arms were introduced.” If he allows that “ the
use of intoxicating liquors and tobacco ” “ are, in all proba-
bility, the original causes of diseases with which their
immediate connexion is not apparent,” on the other hand he
says, “ their direct influence cannot, I think, be stated as at
all remarkable.” He gives it as his opinion, that diseases
resulting from the vicious intercourse of white people with
the natives “ ought to be largely allowed for in estimating the
causes which are in operation for the depopulation of the
country; ” but he qualifies this by the assertion, “ that the
mortality has not been confined to those who have been the
victims of violence, or who have been exposed to the effects
of vices or diseases of foreign origin,”—and that disease and
death prevail to a still more fearful extent among those natives
who derive nothing but benefits from their English connexions.
On the alleged rapid depopulation of New Zealand generally,
and especially the mortality which is stated to take place
among the natives under the care of the Missionaries, I shall
not fail to remark; but for the present I confine myself to
the class of evils which more particularly occupies the attention
of Mr. Busby, simply for the purpose of showing that his
description of the effect of the vicious conduct of white men
does not even come up to the views which were substantiated
before the Aborigines’ Committee, nor by any means
equal to that which is given in the book published by the
Association.
The leading topic in Mr. Busby’s despatch is obviously
the misery which the New Zealanders inflict upon themselves
by their own internal wars. The fact is, that the native
wars form the principal subject of all the despatches comprised
in this collection of papers. The occasion of their being
written was the breaking out of a war between two of the


principal tribes near the Bay of Islands. The first solicitude
evinced by the writers in relation to this war has for its object,
more especially, the protection of British subjects against
the natives ; and the measure recommended by Mr. Busby,
as a permanent provision for the existing state of things, is
framed with especial reference to the native wars. Thus, in
the first of these despatches, Sir Richard Bourke informs
Lord Glenelg, that, “in consequence of a war breaking out
between two tribes near the Bay of Islands,” he had requested
“ Captain Hobson, commanding His Majesty’s ship Rattle-
snake, an experienced and judicious officer, to repair to New
Zealand to afford British subjects resident there, and to British
shipping, such protection as might be required.” In the
second despatch, Captain Hobson reports to the Governor his
proceedings at New Zealand, for the accomplishment of this
primary object, and the places which he had visited for the
purpose of affording protection to the British against the
violence of the natives. In the next paper, Mr. Busby,
taking up the same subject, adverts with satisfaction to the
measures adopted by Captain Hobson, but expresses, notwith-
standing, great apprehension respecting the probable results
of the war. He remarks :
“ Although the visit of His Majesty’s ship Rattlesnake at this
juncture is peculiarly important, as making it appear to the natives
that a vigilant guardianship is maintained over His Majesty’s
subjects who are settled here, and that assistance is never at
a great distance, should it he required; yet it is impossible to
look to the continuance of this contest without the most serious
alarm.”
Mr. Busby further mentions several reasons for the solici-
tude which he thus expressed respecting the future, and then
proceeds to the consideration of some permanent remedy for
the evils which afflict New Zealand. This was a subject to
which, it appears, the attention of the Governor had been
previously directed. Lord Glenelg had announced to him an
intention of resuming a measure ‘ for the parliamentary regula


tion of the intercourse between British subjects and New Zea-
land;'” and he informs his Lordship that he had proposed to
Captain Hobson to make known to him, on his return from the
mission on which he was sent, “ the opinions which his obser-
vation, whilst there, might lead him to form upon the present
state of New Zealand, and the means of securing, with the
least possible overt interference , the common interests of the
natives, and of the British settled amongst them.'” It appears,
moreover, that the Governor had communicated with Mr.
Busby on the same subject, and had mentioned to him the
proposed Act of Parliament. In reply, Mr. Busby expresses
himself to the following effect:—
“ Under these circumstances,” (circumstances connected with the
war and arising out of the prospect of its continuance,) “his Excel-
lency will be prepared for my entire concurrence in his opinon that
any additional expenditure, with the view of giving increased effi-
ciency to my office as at present constituted, would be altogether
fruitless; nor would the Act of Parliament to which his Excellency
refers, if the powers it was intended to impart should be limited to
the controlling of British subjects, be of much service, in the state
to which the affairs of this country have arrived. What is wanted
is a paramount authority, supported by a force adequate to secure
the efficiency of its measures.
“ Without the establishment of such an authority by some
civilized State, I cannot, after a full consideration of every circum-
stance connected with the actual condition of this people, see the
least prospect of any permanent peace being established amongst
them whilst there remains a stronger man to murder his weaker
neighbour. There are few persons so insignificant as not to have it
in their power, at any time, to plunge the country into war. The
crime of an individual involves his most distant connexions, as each
of them is a legitimate object of retaliation to the connexions of the
injured party. It is in vain to represent to them that the criminal
alone should suffer ; their answer is ready, and it is perfectly con-
sistent with the dictates of natural justice, namely, that his tribe
will not surrender him to suffer for his crime, and by standing up
in his defence they have become participators in it; -while, on the
other hand, provided the criminal he not a slave, his connexions are
never without a grievance, more or less ancient, which they bring
forward as a justification of his crime. Thus, by every attempt to


administer the law of retaliation—the rude justice of nature—the
breach is made wider. New deaths involve more distant con-
nexions. Tribe after tribe becomes a party to the contest; and
peace, or rather an intermission of murders, can only be procured
when one of the parties becomes too weak to continue the contest,
or when the loss on both sides happens to be so nearly balanced,
that neither party has an advantage over the other.
“In this way has the depopulation of the country been going on,
till district after district has become void of its inhabitatants, and the
population is, even now, but a remnant of what it was in the
memory of some European residents.”
From this passage it is obvious, that the Governor had
dwelt upon two schemes for meeting the existing state of
things in New Zealand. The first was to strengthen the posi-
tion of Mr. Busby, with the view of giving increased efficiency
to his office, of which the Governor did not approve; the
second was the Act of Parliament, of which Lord Glenelg had
made mention ; and the reason which Mr. Busby assigns for
his conclusion, that neither of these plans would meet the case,
is worthy of special remark. The principal object of his own
appointment was to protect the natives from the aggressions
of British subjects , and he appears to have understood that the
leading design of the proposed Act of Parliament was somewhat
similar; but he tells the Governor, that this will not “be
of much service in the state to which the affairs of the country
have arrived,” and that what is especially needed is the intro-
duction of “ a permanent authority,” which should reconcile the
differences among the natives, and put an end to their devas-
tating internal wars.
This being the character of Mr. Busby’s despatch, how it
can be made to subserve the cause of the New-Zealand Asso-
ciation, I cannot conceive. They dwell upon the evils
inflicted on the New Zealanders by “ British visitors and
settlers ,” and “ the emigration of convict refugees , and other
desperate vagabonds ;” and they tell the public that the repres-
sion of those evils is “ one of the main grounds on which
they have built their plan for colonizing New Zealand ;”


whereas Mr. Busby insists especially upon the native wars ,
and emphatically declares, that a measure framed merely for
controlling British subjects , and 'protecting the natives
from the consequences of their ill conduct , will not by
any means meet the case; and argues that the remedy
particularly needed is, a measure that shall have for its
primary design to put an end to the internal wars , and
thus prevent the New Zealanders from destroying each
other.
Under this view of Mr. Busby’s despatch, I think I am
warranted in concluding, that it only serves to furnish addi-
tional evidence that the Association have not proposed the
remedy required by the existing state of things in New Zea-
land. If Mr. Busby has not dwelt so forcibly upon the evils
introduced among the New Zealanders by British subjects, he
has called attention to others of a most affecting character;
and has thus shown that the case is more complex and difficult
than many persons had been previously led to imagine. I
must here, however, remark that I cannot altogether agree
with this gentleman in his statements respecting the alleged
rapid decrease of the native population. lam still doubtful
whether the vicious conduct of the whites has as yet produced
any considerable or very sensible diminution of the native
inhabitants; and I am of opinion that the native wars,
although their destructive tendency is unquestionable, are not
now actually effecting such a decrease in the number of the
inhabitants as Mr. Busby imagines. Let us glance at the
calculations which have been made respecting the population
of New Zealand. This, as you are aware, has been variously
estimated; but Murray, in his standard work, “ The Ency-
clopaedia of Geography,” adopts the calculation of Nicholas.
On referring to the Narrative of that gentleman, I find him
expressing himself to this effect:—“Doctor Foster, who has
computed the population of the different islands in the South
Seas, has fixed that of New Zealand, through the whole
extent, at one hundred thousand souls ; but though I conceive


this estimate to be fully equal to the number of the inhabit-
ants, yet I will suppose them at present one hundred and fifty
thousand.” It thus appears that although the writer, in
order to place in the strongest light the argument he was
pursuing, was disposed to admit that the population might
amount to one hundred and fifty thousand persons; yet he
believed that the number of native inhabitants throughout the
whole extent of New Zealand did not actually amount to more
than one hundred thousand souls. Here, then, we have the
calculation, adopted by Murray, of what was the entire popu-
lation of New Zealand in the year 1814, a period when the
visits of British vessels to those shores were only of rare
occurrence. For a computation of the number of native inha-
bitants which the Northern Island now contains, I shall give
that which has been furnished by the Bev. W. Williams of the
Church Missionary Society. On adding together his estimates
of the number of natives in the several districts, it will be
found that he makes the native population of the Northern
Island alone to amount to one hundred and five thousand
four hundred persons. If these calculations are to be relied
upon, it follows that the aggregate of the population is perhaps
nearly equal to what it was twenty years ago. I shall only
further remark, that Mr. Williams having, after twelve years’
residence among them, obtained a somewhat intimate knowledge
of the people; and having, moreover, made this calculation
on independent grounds, without any reference to the present
inquiry, must be regarded as an authority fully entitled to a
hearing upon the subject.
Mr. Busby has evidently overlooked some important con-
siderations, tending greatly to qualify the sweeping state-
ments which he has made. He has truly described the savage
character of the native wars; but he has not adverted to the
meliorating effects of Christianity. Where that is not felt, the
wars are as sanguinary and destructive as formerly ; but the
influence of the Christian natives is now so great that they are
enabled very considerably to check the course of war, or


mitigate the severity of its character. With regard to the
alleged decrease in the number of the natives at the Mission
Stations, Mr. Busby has equally avoided all reference to some
important facts. He makes no mention of an epidemic, to
which the Missionaries at the Bay of Islands have latterly
alluded, and which had proved fatal to many of the natives
under their care, as well as to others; but this ought to be
taken into the account in an inquiry respecting the mortality
occurring at the Mission Stations, otherwise we may be in
danger of adopting a wrong conclusion. Mr. Busby has also
lost sight of the consideration, that the transition-state from
barbarism to civilization is not favourable to the health of
Aboriginal people. The Chippeway Chief from Upper
Canada, to whom I referred on a former occasion, has informed
me, in a conversation on this subject, that his people, who
had embraced Christianity, suffered much while they were in
a half-civilized condition, —that the blending together of some
of their old, roving habits with the customs of civilized society,
learned from their Christian teachers, introduced among them
consumption and other maladies; which, for a time, so fully
counterbalanced the effects of other beneficial causes, that it
has only been within the last two or three years that the
population at his settlement has begun to increase. That the
transition-state should generally be attended with similar un-
favourable circumstances, is what all who regard the subject
with a philosophic eye would be led to expect. After barbarous
people have adopted European clothing, and enjoyed some of
the comforts of civilized life, they cannot, in the nature of
things, expose themselves to the weather, and sleep upon the
ground in wet clothes, according to their former course of
living, without injury to their health. I have reason to believe,
that the effects of such imprudence are experienced among
the natives of New Zealand who have embraced Christianity,
and are making some advances towards civilization. One of
our Missionaries at the Hokianga, in a letter received within
the last few days, thus glances at the subject:—


“ The daughter of one of our most respectable Chiefs,
named Thomas Walker, (after Thomas Walker, Esq., of Stockton-*
upon-Tees, the friend of Missions,) has been ill for some time; and
we fear she will not recover. She was a fine, healthy, robust
young woman; and was lately married to an interesting young
Chief, named William: but her illness was brought on by sleeping
in damp clothes upon the ground ; and we fear consumption will
be the consequence of her imprudence. Chiefs and their people
remain in their wet clothes for some time; and we have had to
entreat them to change, to avoid sickness and death. CoUghs are
very common at this time, brought on by cold and exposure.”
It may thus be easily conceived, that that portion of the
native population of New Zealand now under the care of the
Missionaries, which is at this very juncture passing through
the transition-state from barbarous life to civilization, may
not appear to be in so healthy and thriving a condition (more
especially as they have been visited by an epidemic) as the
Missionaries themselves, and their families, whose constitutions
have not been subjected to the severe test of passing from one
mode of life, to another the very reverse. But that there is
any such rapid decrease taking place in the number of the
Christian natives as Mr. Busby imagines, I cannot by any
means admit, in the absence of the data necessary to estab-
lish such a conclusion. I can easily make excuse for the
tone of despondency in which he indulges. Considering his
circumstances, —that he has been left without adequate sup-
port or means to carry the benevolent object of his appoint-
ment into effect, and that he has had to contemplate the evils
which prevail around him, without the ability effectually to
prevent or control them, —it is not to be that he
should be led to indulge in gloomy views, and to make the
dark shades of the picture which he draws deeper than the
circumstances of the case do really warrant.
While, however, I cannot adopt the conclusion, that the
depopulation of New Zealand is going on at so fearful a rate as
the description of Mr. Busby would seem to intimate, that
gentleman’s despatch, with those of the Governor, and Captain
Hobson, do certainly afford a more comprehensive view of the


state of things in New Zealand than has usually been pre-
sented to the public; and tend to impress the mind more
deeply with the complexity and difficulty of the question
respecting a suitable remedy. The evils which afflict New
Zealand may be classed under three heads
Those which are inflicted upon the natives by British
subjects , must first be noticed. With this part of the question,
a degree of familiarity has been obtained, by means of the in-
quiry instituted by the Parliamentary Aborigines’ Committee.
That the wrongs which the New Zealanders suffer from our coun-
trymen are great, and that some preventive measure is indis-
pensably necessary, cannot be doubted ; more especially as the
probability exists, that the native wars will be aggravated by
the increasing number of British residents. Captain Hobson,
while he agrees with Mr. Busby, that the wars of the New
Zealanders are fast depopulating their beautiful country, and
also maintains it to be the duty of Government * to protect our
countrymen from the violence of the hostile natives; at the
same time shows, that, as the number of British residents has
been so rapidly augmented, the danger has consequently
increased that the irregular conduct of the lower order of the
settlers will tend to promote war, by inflaming “ the natural
turbulence of the native population,” “which heretofore the
great and powerful influence of the Missionaries has done much
to check.”
In the next place, the injuries which are done to the New
Zealanders by Americans and other foreigners come under
review. The official return of vessels which visited the Bay of
Islandsan the year 1836, furnished by Mr. Busby, and printed
with the despatches, states that out of one hundred and fifty-
one reported, ninety-three only were English and Colonial
vessels; the remainder were American and other foreign ships,
—namely, fifty-four American, three French, and one Tahitian.
And the last half-year’s return, I have been informed, shows
that the number of American vessels visiting New Zealand
was very nearly equal to that of English. Now, as the con-
B


duct of the American seamen is not superior to that of our
own, the evils which the natives suffer from that class of
visitants become a very prominent feature in this painful and
perplexing case.
Lastly. The misery in which the New Zealanders involve
themselves hy their own internal wars , as described in the
documents now under consideration, is a subject calculated
deeply to affect the benevolent mind, and demands very special
consideration.
The inquiry which now naturally arises is, What is to be
done to meet this complex state of things ? What is the
remedy for these various and complicated evils ? This is a
question of very difficult solution; and it is a much more easy
task to show what will not meet the case, than to point out the
course which ought to be pursued. Since the publication of
these despatches, we have had at least four distinct plans
before us; and although I do not undertake to say that any
of the four will fully meet the existing emergency, you will
allow me to occupy a few minutes of your time in comparing
their various pretensions.
1. Colonization is proposed as a remedy. “Send out
emigrants,” say the New-Zealand Association, “and found a
colony.” How this scheme should meet the case, I was unable
to discover when I published my examination of their propo-
sals ; but its utter insufficiency has been clearly proved to me
by the despatches now put into our hands.
To protect the New Zealanders from British visitors and
settlers , the Association tell us, is one of their main objects:
but how does it yet appear that they will be able to accomplish
even this ? They might, to some extent, “ repress the crimes
of the British ” within the Colony which they propose to
establish; but it is most probable, that the more vicious cha-
racters would generally retire beyond the boundary of the


Colony, and thus withdraw themselves from its direct control.
For the purpose of dealing with those who may thus be placed
without the jurisdiction of the Colony, the Association, how-
ever, propose that treaties shall be made with the native
Chiefs, to aid in bringing to justice such British subjects as
may injure and oppress them. This is plausible enough; but
I wish to be informed how a private trading Company,
who avowedly have “ purposes of their own to serve,” can
possibly give a guarantee, that they will be able to devote
either time or means to the accomplishment of such an object.
Should they, according to their first proposal, form their settle-
ment in the Southern Island, how is it to be expected that they
can keep a vigilant watch over the whole of the Northern
Island—along the many hundreds of miles of coast beyond
their own territory,—and that they will maintain throughout
this whole extent the apparatus necessary for suppressing, in con-
junction with the native Chiefs, the crimes of British subjects ?
I can easily conceive that a Government-arrangement, formed
on high public principles, solely for the accomplishment of such
a purpose, might be made to answer; but I cannot believe, until
I see it done, that a trading Company, with whom this object,
according to their own showing, would be only a secondary
consideration, could pay sufficient attention to it. Unless
human nature and the course of things in New Zealand be
very different from what they are on this side of the globe, it
would certainly happen, that the commercial interests of the
Association, and the interests of the natives as jeoparded by
British subjects, would sometimes interfere with each other;
and their own commercial interests, as being confessedly their
primary care, wmuld engross the attention of the Association,
to the neglect of the endangered interests of the natives.
Were the proposals of the Association to be sanctioned by
Parliament, and a Colony to be established, I should there-
fore expect, that all the New Zealanders beyond its limits
would, notwithstanding, be left, as now, to endure the wrongs
inflicted upon them by British subjects. After a time, the
b 2


Association would have to confess, that they could not prevent
this; and their failure would be urged as a reason why the
Colony should be extended so as to embrace those localities
where our vicious countrymen might be carrying on their
depredations, and thus bring them effectually under colonial
jurisdiction. In this way, for the avowed purpose of pro-
tecting the natives from oppression, the whole tendency of
the plan of the Association would ere long be worked out,
and New Zealand be wholly reduced to the condition of a
British province. To say nothing of the probability, that some
of the emigrants who might be sent out to form the Colony
would be found quite as ready to embrace every opportunity
of injuring the natives as many of our vicious countrymen
who are already there, (for it would be absurd to argue upon
the supposition that the proposed Colony should be formed
exclusively of virtuous and benevolent persons,) it is, as I
think, most obvious, that the Association will fail to accom-
plish that which has constituted one of the main recommend-
ations of their plan to the philanthropist, and will not be able
to protect the New Zealanders from the violence and wrongs
of British subjects, except by pushing out their plan of Colo-
nization to such an extent as would make the remedy worse
than the disease.
If then the scheme of Colonization is not likely to meet
this part of the case, how will it afford protection to the natives
from Americans and other foreigners ? What have the
Association proposed in order to remedy the evils originating
in the vicious conduct of those visitants, —evils which have
evidently occupied the attention of our Government for several
years, and which, it now appears, have so considerably in-
creased as to be only less than the mischief resulting from the
improper conduct of our own countrymen ? The Association
do not so much as recognise this important feature of the New-
Zealand case. They have absolutely nothing to offer upon
the subject. It would follow, of course, that they would be
able to control the Americans within the Colony, should one


be formed: but they would have no right to interfere with
them beyond its limits; and for any thing that the Association
could do, the natives, without the boundaries of the Colony,
would continue to suffer as much as ever from the Americans
and other foreigners. Were a settlement once formed by the
Association, their inability to deal with this class of persons would
soon be clearly demonstrated, and a new argument would pro-
bably be derived from this very consideration in favour of the
extension of their plan. We should shortly hear of the neces-
sity of colonizing the whole of New Zealand, for this, among
other reasons, —that the natives might be rescued out of the
hands of the Americans.
But, to proceed : How is Colonization calculated to prove a
preventive to the native wars , —that class of evils on which
such principal stress is laid in the despatches under review,
and more especially in the despatch of Mr. Busby ? Could the
Association impart Christianity and civilization to the New
Zealanders, they would thereby put an end to the internal wars
which originate so great an amount of suffering; but unless
they adopt a very different plan of procedure from that
which they have already published, and exhibit an array of
means vastly superior to those on which they have heretofore
dwelt, we may safely conclude that their proposed civilizing
process would not terminate the wars of New Zealand. It may
then be argued, that the Association will not accomplish this
desirable object in any way; for, separate from their general
plan of civilization, they offer nothing specific to meet this part
of the case. It is to be feared, indeed, that the native wars
may be increased, rather than diminished, by their scheme of
Colonization. Captain Hobson dwells upon the danger result-
ing from an increase in the number of licentious white people ;
and it is not unlikely that some of the emigrants whom the
Association might send out would be as disposed to quarrel with
the natives, and provoke them to war, as any of our country-
men who are already there. Disputes between the natives and
Colonists would probably be more serious in their consequences


than those in which the natives and the present settlers
become involved. Mr. Coates has well remarked, that if an
Englishman now offend the natives, they destroy his property,
and perhaps force him to fly for his life, and there the matter
ends; but if the Englishman were a Colonist, this would not
be the case. Did he belong to a Colony having its “ militia,”
“ regulars,” and a “ marine,” it might be deemed necessary
to avenge his cause; and the consequences might prove very
serious. A case in point occurs to me, which so clearly illus-
trates my meaning, that I shall give it at length from A Per-
sonal Narrative of Two Visits to New Zealand in His
Majesty's Ship Alligator , A.D. 1834, hy William Barret
Marshall , Surgeon , R.N.
“ March 12.—The anchor was weighed again this morning, and
the ship removed to an inner harbour, at the confluence of the
Waikadi and the Kaua-kaua rivers, it being deemed expedient to
bring her broadside to bear upon the Pa of a Chief named Pomare,
between whom and an English trader a dispute had arisen, the
decision of which was referred by the latter to the British Resi-
dent ; and the case, in that gentleman’s opinion, being one of law-
less rapine and unprovoked aggression on the part of the native,
who, in all the wild-spiritedness of a savage independence, laughed
Mr. Busby to scorn, and set his authority at defiance, the interven-
tion of Captain Lambert was sought, to obtain restitution of a large
schooner-rigged boat, which Pomare was said to withhold feloni-
ously from its rightful owner. The crew of the Alligator were got
under arms accordingly, the ship cleared for action, guns shotted,
and the pinnace fitted with a small howitzer, to recover, if neces-
sary, by force, what it was supposed had been procured by injustice.
In order, however, if practicable, to avert hostilities, an application
by letter and verbally was forwarded to the Rev. W. Williams,
urging him to seek an interview with the Chief, and endeavour to
effect an amicable adjustment of the difference. The letter and
message were no sooner delivered than complied with ; and the Rev.
W. Williams and Wyate set off for the Pa, which occupies a
strong position on the top of a height at the extremity of the penin-
sula, whose rocky base is laved by the twin rivers, until they unite
to empty their waters into the Bay of Islands, and in that vast
basin wed themselves as one river to the waves of the great Pacific
Ocean. After the lapse of about half an hour, a salute of two


guns, with which he has been enabled to strengthen his abode,
announced the setting off of the Chief. A little longer, and he
strode with the air of a Monarch along the quarter-deck of the
frigate, a tall and athletic young man, his eye scarcely deigning a
glance at ‘the pomp and circumstance of war,’ which met him
there. Being invited below, he hesitated, but it was only for a mo-
ment ; the next saw him descending into the cabin, with the same
undaunted air by which his previous bearing had been marked, and
he remained there in close conference for nearly two hours, at the
end of which Mr. Busby came on deck, apparently much pleased,
and confessedly glad to have discovered that Pomare, who by his
manners had prepossessed every one in his favour was not the
aggressor, but the aggrieved. The facts of the case as now ascer-
tained were these :—He had sold to an European trader, a quantity
of timber for exportation; the trader resold it before paying
for it himself, and decamped in the New Zealander’s debt, who,
finding the timber removed, the original purchaser gone away, and
the assignee of the purchase about to quit also, demanded payment
of the latter, and, being refused, retaliated by seizing on the
schooner. An equitable adjustment has been the consequence;
Pomare consenting to leave it with the Missionaries to fix the
amount due to him for his timber, and promising, on payment of
that amount, to give up the boat. The sum proved to be twenty
pounds sterling; and the hero of the day took his departure, but not
before he had stipulated for a complimentary salute similar to that
with which he had greeted the British flag. The successful issue
of this affair confirms the testimony of Mr. Ciindon to the salutary
influence possessed by the Missionaries over the minds of the
natives; and exhibits somewhat of the mode by which it has been
acquired, namely the due administration of justice between man
and man, without respect of persons, in the cases submitted to their
arbitration. And the circumstances under which Pomare consented
to visit the ship when he did, illustrate very forcibly the strength of
his confidence in the Ministers of peace, and the greatness of his
distrust in the good faith of those whom he was to meet on board :
he could only be prevailed on to trust his person in the hands of
the King’s officers by W. Williams offering to make the Mission
families and property at Paihia the guarantees of his safety, and
placing them at the disposal of his tribe, as hostages and security
for the good faith he was to experience at our hands.”
A fact like this speaks volumes. Here is the case of an
Englishman, who had so completely misled the British Resi-
dent, as to make him believe that he had been seriously injured


by a native Chief, who in reality was only seeking his right;
and had it not been for the wise precaution of engaging the
Missionary to act the part of mediator before His Majesty’s ship
should open her destructive fire, the injured Chief and his people
might have been involved in one common destruction. What
had so nearly happened in this instance, would probably soon
occur, should a Colony be founded; and we might expect to
hear of such and such a Chief and his people having been
severely chastised for the injuries which they had inflicted on
individual Colonists, when, if the truth could be ascertained,
those alleged injuries, as in the case now quoted, would probably
be found to have been only retributive visitations in self-defence.
I shall not dwell longer on the proposed plan for colonizing
New Zealand, but pass to the consideration of the other
measures which have been suggested, by remarking, that if
Mr. Busby’s despatch has strengthened any one of my pre-
vious convictions more than the rest, it is the # conclusion, that
the plans proposed by the Association are altogether inadequate
to meet the existing state of things in New Zealand.
2. The plan of Mr. Busby is to take New Zealand
under British Protection. “What is wanted,” he says,
“ is a paramount authority, supported by a force adequate to
secure the efficiency of its measures.” “Without the estab-
lishment of such authority by some civilized State, I cannot,
after a full consideration of every circumstance connected with
the actual condition of this people, see the least prospect of
any permanent peace being established among them.” Mr.
Busby further states, that, in his judgment, “ unless the
country should be taken under the efficient protection of
Great Britain, or some other foreign power should interfere,”
the natives will go on destroying each other; the British will
continue to suffer the accumulating evils of a permanent
anarchy; and that the nature of their pursuits, the distance of
their habitations, and, above all, the character of the majority of
them, would prevent them from making common cause against


the natives with any prospect of promoting general security.
He then proceeds as follows to develope his plan:—
“ I have in former communications detailed so fully the relative si-
tuation of the British and the natives, and the frequent causes of con-
tention existing between them, that I will forbear to enter upon the
subject in the present despatch. For the same reason I will avoid
any reference to the importance of British interests, and the neces-
sity for their protection, irrespective of the condition either of the
natives, or of the British who have actually settled in their country.
But I will proceed at once to submit the outline of a plan of
government, which I humbly venture to think would give as great
a degree of peace and security to all classes of persons in this coun-
try, as is enjoyed by the inhabitants of the majority even of civil-
ized States.
“ The plan which I would now more fully submit was suggested
in my despatch 26th of January, 1836, No. 85. It is founded
upon the principle of a protecting State, administering in chief the
affairs of another state in trust for the inhabitants, as sanctioned by
the treaty of Paris, in the instance of Great Britain and the lonian
Islands, and as applied, I believe, in various instances, on the bor-
ders of our Indian possessions.
a All my experience, subsequent to the date of that suggestion,
has strengthened my belief that the principle is peculiarly appli-
cable to this country; and that the details could be arranged with
a degree both of efficiency and economy which at first sight might
appear far from probable.
« The Chiefs who were parties to the Articles of Confederation
and Declaration of Independence, in October, 1835, together with
those who have subsequently adhered to it, include, with very few
exceptions, the whole of the Chiefs of influence in the northern
parts of the island, and the adhesion of the remainder could at any
time be procured.
“ Whatever acts approaching to acts of sovereignty or govern-
ment have been exercised in the country, have been exercised by
these Chiefs in their individual capacity as relates to their own
people, and in their collective capacity as relates to their negotia-
tions with the British Government, —the only Government with
which the Chiefs or people of New Zealand have had any relations of
a diplomatic character. Their flag has also been formally recognised
by the British Government as the flag of an independent State.
“ The Articles of Confederation having centralized the powers of
sovereignty exercised both de jure and de facto by the several
Chiefs, and having established and declared the basis of a constitu


tion of government founded upon the union of those powers, I
cannot, I think, greatly err in assuming that the congress of Chiefs,
the depositing the powers of the State as declared by its constitu-
tion, is competent to become a party to a treaty with a foreign
power, and to avail itself of foreign assistance in reducing the
country under its authority to order; and, this principle being once
admitted, all difficulty appears to me to vanish.
“ The appearance of a detachment of British troops, in fulfilment
of a treaty with the confederated Chiefs, would not he a taking
possession of the country, but a means of strengthening the hands
of its native government; while, in return for this subsidiary force,
it might be stipulated that the British settlers should be subject to
the operation of no laws but such as should emanate from, or be
consented to, by their own Government, and exercised under the
control and directions of its officers; and that the revenues of the
country should be made applicable, in the first instance, to the
support of a civil government, to be established by the protecting
power, and the maintenance of the quota of troops stipulated for by
the treaty.
“ In theory and ostensibility, the government would be that of
the confederated Chiefs, but in reality it must necessarily be that of
the protecting power. The Chiefs would meet annually or oftener,
and nominally enact the laws proposed to them; but in truth the
present race of Chiefs could not be entrusted with any discretion
whatever in the adoption or rejection of any measure that might be
submitted to them, —moral principle, if it exist amongst them at all,
being too weak to withstand the temptation of the slightest personal
consideration. The congress would, in fact, be a school in which
the Chiefs would be instructed in the duties required of them, and
the authority confided to them as conservators of the peace in their
separate districts, to which they would also carry the knowledge of
the laws enacted during its sittings.
“ As conservators of the peace, a small salary would be given to
them ; and this, together with the distinction conferred by the
employment, would secure beyond all doubt the entire devotion of
the Chiefs to the wishes of the Resident. A medal containing the
name of each Chief, and of the district over which his authority
extended, would be another highly-esteemed distinction.
“To complete the means of establishing an entire control over
the population, it would be only necessary to establish a school in
each considerable village, with a schoolmaster paid in proportion to
the number of individuals he should have under his tuition during
the year. Schoolmasters already exist in many villages, and
could, without difficulty, soon be procured for the whole by the aid


of the Missionaries. An annual examination of these schools, and
a distribution of prizes of trivial value, would bring the whole
population under the supervision of the government; while a
periodical newspaper might, at the same that it conveyed the news
of the day, be made the means of instructing the natives in those
relative duties of the people and their rulers which are familiar to
all ranks of the population under established governments, but of
which the New Zealanders have scarcely as yet conceived an idea.
“So simple and primitive are the arrangements which, with
entire confidence in their efficiency, I would propose for the govern-
ment of the native population ; nor could the expense of these
arrangements, for several years at least, exceed £I,OOO a-year,
allotting a more considerable salary to certain leading Chiefs, to be
elected by the congress, with the sanction of the Resident, for the
purpose of acting with him as a native council and executive
authority, and providing also for the accession of more distant
tribes, who would hasten to join the confederation when its objects
should become understood, and whose adherence it is indeed, under
any circumstances, highly necessary to procure, as a bar to the
interference of any foreign power,
“ The influence of the government amongst the tribes south of
the present confederation would of course be more limited than
nearer to the seat of government. But there also the intercourse of
British subjects, and the evils for which they are responsible, are
less felt. As these extended, the occasion and the means would
arise for making the government efficient throughout the island.
But, even from the first, the existence of a power which would
claim the right of deciding disputes and maintaining peace, would
be most beneficially felt.”
This quotation contains the outline of the plan. In
enlarging upon it Mr. Busby dwells at some length on the
importance of securing the assistance of the Missionaries,
for the reason that without their concurrence and support
no measure which may be adopted can possibly succeed; he
calculates the number of troops which it would be necessary to
maintain, and shows how the expense of the entire system might
be met by a duty on shipping and certain articles of trade.
In this scheme, there is certainly much that is plausible.
It professes to recognise the national independence, and pro-
poses to meet the whole case, —to place British subjects and
other foreigners under control, and to repress the internal


wars, by raising up a native government, under the protection
of this country.
How far British legislation can contribute towards the form-
ation of an enlightened native government, which shall effect-
ually control the turbulence of the people, and repress their
destructive wars, is a question of great difficulty. Ido not
think that much can be done by this means directly to control
or restrain the heathen natives. Those who are well acquainted
with the character of the New Zealanders know, that their wars
are intimately connected with their superstitions, and that their
notions of religion impel them to revenge the insults and
injuries, real or imaginary, which one individual or tribe
receives from another. Until, then, their minds shall become
disenthralled from the tyrannizing influence of superstition
by the application of a higher power than a British Act of
Parliament, I should despair of any legislation on our part
being brought to bear directly upon the heathen natives so
as to repress their wars, or subdue the violence of their
natural character. But with the Christian natives something
might possibly be done. Few subjects occasion greater solici-
tude in the minds of Missionaries, whose labours among
uncivilized heathen tribes and nations have been attended
with success, than the introduction of a native government
suitable for a people emerging from Heathenism, who need
other laws than those which were originated by their former
ignorant and superstitious notions. It is desirable that Mis-
sionaries should not assume, to any considerable extent, the
character of politicians and legislators; and yet they deeply
feel the want of enlightened laws and government for the
people, whose religious character has been formed anew by
means of their teaching, and who are now anxious to devote
themselves to the pursuits of civilized life. The late
Aborigines’ Committee bestowed some attention on this
subject, and recommended it to the serious consideration
of Parliament; and if some judicious measures could be
devised for fostering an enlightened native government among


the Christian natives of New Zealand, an important object
would be accomplished. Their moral influence would thus
be brought to bear more effectually upon the population
in general, and their powerful mediation would be benefi-
cially employed in preventing and repressing the heathen
wars. This is no vague supposition, or extravagant expecta-
tion. I possess conclusive evidence that the very war which
is the subject of these recent despatches,—the contest which
was regarded of such importance as to render it necessary
to send a ship of war from the Colony for the protection
of British residents, —and which Mr. Busby, after the Rattle-
snake had returned to the Colony, still continued to contem-
plate with such gloomy apprehension, as almost to preclude
all hope of its termination until New Zealand should become
depopulated,—even this war was actually brought to an end
through the interference of the Christian natives. Captain
Hobson, as the sequel shows, formed a truer estimate than
Mr. Busby of the influence of Christianity in New Zealand.
In his despatch, he says :
“ The quarrel between the Bay of Islands’ tribes is supposed by
the best-informed to be in a fair train fox adjustment Nene, a
powerful Chief from HoJdanga , who has embraced Christianity, has
brought his tribe across the island with the full determination to
compel the contending parties to make peace ; and as he is known
to possess both courage and power to turn the scale on either side,
his mediation is not likely to be slighted...... The gentlemen of the
Mission maintain a constant intercourse between the parties, and
are received by both with the greatest respect. Their efforts to
promote peace are unremitting, and of late they have felt confident
of eventual success.”
Nor were they disappointed in their expectations. The
Rev. Nathaniel Turner, the principal Missionary at the
Wesleyan Station on the Hokianga , in a letter which now
lies before me, and which was written shortly after Captain
Hobson had left New Zealand, states the gratifying fact,
that the differences between the contending parties had
been adjusted, by the mediation of the Christian natives,


under the immediate care of himself and the other Mis-
sionaries at that Station. From this letter it appears, that
the Chief to whom Captain Hobson refers, in company
with others, applied to Mr. Turner and his colleague, Mr.
Whiteley, to accompany them to the contending parties; partly
on the ground, that the presence of their religious Teachers
would impose upon themselves a salutary restraint, and for the
reason, that their influence would be beneficially employed in
the endeavour to negotiate a peace. To this application the
Missionaries acceded; and, after an absence of ten days,
returned to their families with the unspeakable satisfaction, that
the war was brought to an end and peace happily restored.
Such a fact, as illustrative of the powerful influence of the
Christian New Zealanders, and of its beneficial effects in
repressing the desolating wars of their countrymen, requires
no comment. Nor is it necessary to enlarge further upon the
importance of affording them assistance in remodelling their
political regulations and government, and thus enabling them to
exert their influence more systematically and extensively upon
the affairs of New Zealand generally. But how this assistance
is to be afforded by British legislation, is the question. How-
ever plausible the plan which might be devised, so much would
depend upon its administration as to render its success
extremely problematical. To speak plainly, almost every thing
would depend upon the character of the persons who should be
selected to carry it into effect. When the question of extend-
ing the plan of Residency in the South Sea Islands was under
consideration in the Parliamentary Aborigines’ Committee,
I could not concur in recommending it on any other ground
than that the individuals who might be selected as Residents
should be possessed of those special qualifications which, in
my judgment, would be necessary to enable them to promote
the welfare of the natives ; and my remarks on that occasion
apply with still greater force upon this subject. If our
Government or Parliament should interpose for the purpose
of forming an improved native government for the Christian


part of the population, that interference must be made on
truly Christian principles, or it could not possibly succeed.
It is the teaching of the Missionaries which has produced
that important change in the views, character, and pursuits
of the people under their care which would encourage the
attempt to aid them in improving their political regulations:
and however unwilling the mere worldly politician may be to
admit such a conclusion, it must, notwithstanding, be maintained
on the principles of the truest philosophy, as well as those
which Christianity inculcates, that, in order to render probable
the success of any Parliamentary scheme which might be
adopted for the furtherance of this object, the scheme itself
must not only be framed in perfect harmony with those instruc-
tions of the religious teachers, which have made the New
Zealanders what they are ; but the individuals appointed to
carry it into effect must be persons whose own hearts and
lives are duly controlled and regulated by Christianity, and
who would act in friendly co-operation with the Missionaries
in endeavouring to work out the plan confided to their
management.
On the whole, I am disposed to conclude that the scheme
suggested by Mr. Busby would not answer. Nothwithstanding
that it has the recommendation of being a public measure; that
it proposes to meet, under every view, the existing state of
things in New Zealand; and moreover professes to make
recognition of its national independence;—still it is impossible
to divest one’s mind of the impression that, if through the
improper choice of agents, or for some other cause, the plan
should not work well, our proposed temporary direction of the
government of New Zealand for the benefit of the natives would
become a permanent assumption of the sovereign power, and
New Zealand would as certainly be brought into the condition
of a British province, as though the proposals of the Association
should be carried into full effect.


3. An Improved Plan of Residency, is that which
the Parliamentary Select Committee on Aborigines has
recommended. In considering the various schemes which
are now before us, I have carefully examined, for the sake
of comparison, the instructions given to Mr. Busby, on
his appointment as British Resident in New Zealand; and
have been greatly impressed with the enlightened views
which are developed in that document, and in the letter
addressed by Lord Goderich to the New-Zealand Chiefs,
explaining to them the reasons for Mr. Busby’s appointment.
As you may possibly not have those papers at hand, I subjoin
copies of both * for your reference. You will perceive that
the respected nobleman who originated the office of British
Resident evidently had the case of the New Zealanders fully
before him, and intended to make provision for protecting
the natives from the outrages committed against them, both
by British subjects and Americans; and that he also designed
to foster and give efficiency to an enlightened native Govern-
ment. After reading those documents, one is naturally led
to inquire, Could such an appointment have so completely
failed, had proper means been employed to carry it into effect ?
Probably, some will be disposed from Mr. Busby’s remarks
to ascribe his failure to the Missionaries ; but fairness requires
that the whole case should be properly understood before
condemnation be passed upon them. Their advocates may
very properly ask, Do the Missionaries “ assume ” too much,
in regarding themselves as “ guardians of the natives?”
Are they not recognised as such by the natives themselves ?
And is it not simply because the natives view them in this
light, that they are enabled to protect their own countrymen
from violence, and make New Zealand a safe residence for
Englishmen and other foreigners? The respectable gentle-
man, previously quoted, has borne conclusive testimony upon
this point. He was anxious, on his late visit to New
* See Appendix A. Page 4 7.


Zealand, to ascertain what was the character and conduct of
the Missionaries; and made several inquiries with this view*
which fully convinced him respecting the beneficial tendency
of the influence they exert. One of the settlers remarked to
him, “ But for the Missionaries, Sir, no Europeans could
live in this land.” “ Let even their greatest enemies say what
they may, all such are equally indebted with myself to the
general respect felt for the Missionaries, for the safety of their
lives and properties in time past. I'’ 1 '’ The settler further stated,
that his own place had been frequently surrounded, and his
personal safety threatened, by a host of armed natives; and
that at such times he had only to send a message to the Mis-
sion settlement, and procure the attendance of a Missionary,
who never failed by his mediation to divert the invaders from
their purpose, they being ashamed to perpetrate an outrage
in the presence of a Missionary. On these statements, the
inquiring traveller thus remarks :
“ Facts like these, witnessed too by a man like this, speak
volumes, and supply a text too intelligible to require any comment.
They prove the moral influence of the Missionaries beyond all pos-
sibility of doubt—they prove the beneficial purposes for which that
influence is employee!—and they prove too, that, but for the Mis-
sionaries, no settlers could have fixed themselves in New Zealand.
Commerce with it must have failed, and the trade in its produce
have been abandoned.”
All candid persons, I think, must admit, that—after the Mis-
sionaries have, at the risk of their own lives in the first instance,
settled among the New Zealanders, and, by a course of kind-
ness and disinterested benevolence, have gained such influence
as to enable them to secure protection and good treatment for
their countrymen who have followed them,—it would be very
ungracious on the part of any one, while enjoying the advan-
tages which have thus been obtained for him, to call in ques-
tion the right of the Missionaries to the title of guardians and
benefactors of the natives, when it is so certain that their
being recognised as such by the natives themselves is the true
cause of all the influence which they exert.
c


Once more The Missionaries do not aspire “to the
government of the country,” either in whole or in part; nei-
ther can I believe that they would in any circumstances “ con-
ceive it to be their duty to use their influence in opposition to
the measures ” of the British Resident, for the sake of embar-
rassing him; but surely the exercise of their own judgment
is not to be wholly denied to them. Mr. Busby admits that
“it is impossible that men could be found whose opinions
and sentiments in general are more in accordance than those
of the Missionaries and his own ; ” yet he complains, that, on
one occasion especially, they declined to co-operate with him
in promoting a measure which he deemed would be beneficial
to the natives. On all ordinary occasions, I doubt not,
whether they have exactly thought with Mr. Busby or not, he
has had their co-operation ; but the whole question is evidently
brought to this point,—whether they ought to co-operate with
the British Resident in the active furtherance of such measures
as they are convinced cannot fail to prove seriously detrimental
to the interests of the natives. This is really the question,
and will have such an important bearing upon the working of
whatever plan may henceforth be adopted by this country in
reference to New Zealand, that it ought to be fairly met
and settled. The question comes simply to this, whether, if
the British Resident should propose plans for the management
of the natives, which the Missionaries, from their thorough
knowledge of the native character, are confident cannot fail
to irritate them, excite collisions, and finally involve them in
suffering and loss, they are to be bound actively to forward
such plans ? Are they to be required to abuse the confidence
reposed in them by the natives, and use their influence in per-
suading the natives to accede to proposals, which they know
will eventually be destructive to their interests ? He would be
a bold individual who would dare to answer this question in
the affirmative. But, the very case specified by Mr. Busby
was, from his own statement, evidently one of this serious
character. He desired the Missionaries to use their influence


t° induce the Chiefs to take the opportunity afforded by the
delivery of the King’s message to petition His Majesty for
assistance in reducing their country to order , and establishing
in it an efficient Government .” It thus appears, from his
own words, that the Missionaries had not refused to assist
Mr. Busby in the discharge of the duties of that office to
which he had been appointed; but that his complaint against
them is, that they declined to use their influence with the
natives in persuading them to ask for some new appointment ,
some new plan , which, under the notion of reducing their
country to order , and establishing in it an efficient govern-
ment, the Missionaries no doubt foresaw would endanger the
national independence of the New Zealanders, and probably
reduce their country , ere long , to the condition of a British
Province.
I may here remark by the way, that this reference to the
Missionaries made by Mr. Busby has an untoward bearing on
the statements of the Association relative to their alleged views
and wishes. By the publication of letters, resolutions, peti-
tions, &c., which have emanated from the Missionaries, the
Association appear very solicitous to prove that the Mis-
sionaries are anxious for the adoption of some such colonizing
plan as is now proposed. That they are anxious that the
Europeans in New Zealand shall be placed under the restraints
of government, and that well-disposed British subjects, as well
as the Aborigines, may thus obtain protection from the
outrages and insults of the abandoned characters who infest
New Zealand, is sufficiently clear. The petition of the
Settlers and Missionaries, addressed to His late Majesty, had
this object in view. They state that “ when complaints have
been made to the British Resident of these acts of outrage,
he has expressed his deep regret that he has not yet been
furnished with authority and power to act, not even the
authority of a civil Magistrate to administer an affidavit; ”
they add, “ that it has been considered that the confederate
tribes of New Zealand were competent to enact laws for the
o 2


proper government of this land, whereby protection would be
afforded in all cases of necessity, but that experience evidently
shows that in the infant state of the country this cannot as
yet be accomplished or expected ; —and they therefore implore
His Majesty to afford, in some way or other, sufficient
protection to the well-disposed classes of the community,
against the aggressions and violence of lawless British
subjects. But that they have not contemplated, in any expres-
sion of their wishes, such an interference, for the accomplish-
ment of this object, as would bring the New Zealanders under
a foreign government, and reduce their country to a British
Colony, is morally certain from the complaint now made by
Mr. Busby—that they declined to further such measures as,
they evidently feared, would be followed by those disastrous
consequences.
But, to proceed :—While it appears that the Missionaries
did decline to promote some new plan of Mr. Busby’s, which
they apprehended would greatly militate against the interests
of the natives, no proof is offered that they have ever refused
to aid him in the performance of those duties which belong to
his office as British Resident. If, then, he has failed to
accomplish the object of his appointment, it has not been the
fault of the Missionaries. Neither does the failure appear
to have proceeded from any unwillingness on the part of the
native Chiefs to afford him due co-operation and assistance.
In reference to this point, Mr. Marshall, to whom I have
already referred, observes, —
“The recent decision of the Chiefs, on occasion of the attack
made on Mr. Busby’s house, proves their willingness to render that
‘ assistance and support,’ which His Majecty ‘ confidently expected ’
at their hands.”
The question then recurs: How is it that an office, origi-
nating in the spirit of such an enlightened policy, and which
was, in theory, well adapted to meet the whole of the
New-Zealand case, should have so completely failed; and
the British Resident be left to make such an humiliating


confession of his utter poWerlessness as that which I have
already quoted in his reply to the petitioners ? A remark in
the despatch of Captain Hobson reminds me of its having
been alleged that Mr. Busby has wanted support in other
quarters than those to which I have already referred. Capt.
Hobson says,
“I intended to have called at Entry Island and Marra but
the boisterous state of the weather prevented my anchoring. I stood
close in to both islands, and feel convinced that the very appear-
ance of a man-of-war in that quarter will have considerable weight,
from the terror in which we were held by the natives, in conse-
quence of the severe chastisement inflicted on them by the Alli-
gator, and the detachment of His Majesty’s fiftieth regiment, in
1835.”
And well the natives might view with terror another Bri-
tish ship of war, if the testimony of Mr. Marshall, who
witnessed the severe chastisement mentioned by Captain Hob-
son, is to be depended upon. That Gentleman, on his return
to this country, published his Book, as he tells us, principally
for the purpose of bearing his testimony against the wrongs
then inflicted upon the Cape-Egmont tribes to whom Captain
Hobson refers. On that painful transaction, I shall, at present?
offer no comment. I refer you to the Extracts which I give
in an Appendix,* to enable you to understand the case; and
confine myself to the points for the sake of which I am led, by
Captain Hobson’s remark, to select the case for the purpose
of illustration. The matters of complaint alleged by Mr.
Marshall are, that—on the application of an individual who had
been shipwrecked near Cape Egmont, and who stated that some
of his companions had been murdered by the natives, and his
wife and boy detained by them, —the Alligator had been sent
from the Colony, and that, instead of upholding the authority
of Mr. Busby by making him the medium of application to the
offending tribe, Mr. Busby was not at all consulted, nor applied
to for an interpreter, or for any assistance in the way of mediation
or inquiry; but the work of destruction was commenced and
* See Appendix B. Page 52.


prosecuted in circumstances which certainly furnish the pre-
sumption that, if such an inquiry had previously been instituted
in this case, as, on the first visit of the Alligator, in the case of
Pomare, it might have appeared that the Cape-Egmont tribes
were not so blameable as had been represented.
I shall not dwell longer upon this topic. In referring to it,
I have no personal feeling to indulge. I entertain no other
sentiments towards Mr. Busby than those of respect; and the
satisfactory manner in which the enlightened views of Lord
Goderich are embodied in the instructions given to Mr. Busby
by the Governor of New South Wales, has tended to pre-
possess me in his Excellency’s favour. But as there has
been such an eagerness manifested by the Association to
magnify the failure of the British Resident, apparently in
order to make Avay for the introduction of their own plans ;
and as Mr. Busby’s despatch may seem, on a superficial view,
to throw the blame of that failure on the Missionaries; —it
becomes a duty to call attention to the fact, that it has been
publicly alleged that the British Resident in New Zealand
has not been duly supported by the Colonial Authorities, on
whom he was especially dependent for means to enable him
to sustain the influence , and perform the functions , of his
important office. Whether this has been the case or not, I
undertake not to decide; but I must say that, pondering well
the instructions given to the British Resident, I cannot
conceive why his failure should have been so complete, had he
been supported according to the intentions of the noble Lord
by whom the office was instituted. And I cannot relinquish
the hope, that such a plan of Improved Residency as has now
been proposed by the Select Committee on Aborigines
might answer the end contemplated, and apply a remedy, so
far as British legislation can meet the case, to the existing evils
in New-Zealand society.
4. One more measure remains for brief consideration. It is
a system of factories, as proposed by Captain Hobson.


The recommendation of this scheme is, that it appears as well
calculated “to repress the crimes of British visitants and
settlers 11 as that of the Association, and contemplates what theirs
does not, the fostering of a native Government; while at the
same time it is free from some of the great objections to which
the plan of the Association is liable. The Association argue,
that the New Zealanders are suffering from the English, who
treat them ill, and propose to remedy the evil by sending out a
Colony; that is, by increasing the number of Englishmen,
many of whom will perhaps behave as improperly as those who
are there already. Captain Hobson goes upon the principle of
placing under the restraints of government the English whom
he finds now settled in New Zealand. Their number may
possibly increase ; but he does not, like the Association, make it
an essential part of his plan to secure that increase.
Similar to this plan is Mr. Busby 1 s second proposition. He
thinks that when it becomes known how great a proportion of
the lands in New Zealand is already in the hands of British
subjects, “ His Majesty may be advised to grant a charter of
Government to the Colony of British subjects who are estab-
lished in it, leaving the natives in the full possession of their
abstract rights, so far as they have not conceded them to the
Colonists, and providing only against their suffering injustice at
the hands of the latter. 11 This, like Captain Hobson's mea-
sure, possesses the recommendation of simply providing, that
the English who are already in New Zealand shall be
brought under the control of government; and this is really
a great recommendation, if so large a portion of New Zealand
as Mr. Busby speaks of has already passed into the hands of
English settlers. He says :
“If I am rightly informed, the whole coast from Cape Bult,
including the noble harbour of the Bay of Islands, and extending as
far as Whin gar oa, forty miles to the northward of the bay, has, with
trivial exceptions, passed from the possession of the natives into
that of British subjects Most of the valuable forests in
the interior have changed their ownership ; and on the western
coast, an extensive territory is also claimed by British subjects.”


If this be the actual state of things—if the forests and lands
of New Zealand have to so great an extent become the
property of our countrymen, it would be extremely undesirable
to increase their number, by sending out a large body of
emigrants to form a new Colony.
I must, however, hasten to a close. The conclusion which
I have been led to adopt, after a careful perusal of the
Despatches published by order of Parliament, is twofold :
First. I am more fully convinced than ever of the utter
inadequacy of the plan proposed by the Association to remedy
the evils which afflict New Zealand. Any one of the measures
which have passed under review has stronger recommendations,
and is liable to fewer objections, than theirs.
Secondly. My conviction, that the case of New Zealand
cannot be met by any mercantile speculation whatever, is
greatly strengthened. The complexity and difficulty of the
question are such, and so much delicacy and care in the man-
agement of it are necessarily required ; that it will be impossible
for any private commercial company to deal with it effectually.
The case of New Zealand can only be met by a Government-
measure, to be entrusted, as to its execution, to public officers
whose sole business it shall be to carry it into full effect; and
it is due to our national character, that the question should be
taken up and determined on high public grounds, apart from
all considerations dictated by a narrow-minded and selfish
policy. Only let justice first be secured for the New Zea-
landers, and I doubt not that measures will afterwards easily
be devised for promoting a healthful commerce between them
and this country.
I remain,
My dear friend,
Yours very sincerely,
JOHN BEECHAM.
February 2 6th, 1838.


POSTSCRIPT.
Just as I was concluding this letter, I received a copy of a
pamphlet entitled, “ The Latest Official Documents relating
to New Zealand , with Introductory Observations , by Samuel
Hinds , D.D., Vicar of Yard ley, Herts., and one of the Com-
mittee of the New-Zealand Association .” From this produc-
tion I learn that your apprehension was well-founded, and that
the Association are endeavouring to make those despatches
subservient to their own purposes. My former publication is
honoured with a notice. The Reverend Doctor attempts to
break the force of my arguments, and animadverts upon the
tone of writing which Mr. Coates and myself have adopted.
I shall not go at length again into the question. 1 had
no party-purpose to promote; but endeavoured, at least,
honestly and impartially to examine the proposals of the
Association: and the manner in which my publication
has been noticed by a considerable portion of the public
press encourages me to hope that I have not in realit) r ,
any more than in intention, transgressed the rules of honour-
able controversy. I shall add no more on the general question.
By the decision of the candid public, I am willing to abide;
and shall merely notice further two or three points for the
sake of explanation.
1. Dr. Hinds cannot conceive how it is possible that the
presence of such a Colony as they propose to form in New
Zealand should, as I have shown would probably be the case,
prove a hinderance to the Missionaries in their work of Chris-
tianizing the natives. My principal argument is, that when the
natives should see their lands and forests, their harbours and
facilities for commerce, rapidly passing into the hands of the
Colonists, suspicions would be awakened in their minds that the
Missionaries themselves had proved their betrayers, and invited
their countrymen to follow them and take possession of the
land. I allude to this point, not for the purpose of re-arguing
it, but to show that it was not mere hypothetical reasoning
in which I thus indulged. The fact is, that this very suspi


cion was artfully excited in the minds of the New-Zcahuid
Chiefs who invited the first Missionaries that visited their
shores. Mr. Nicholas, to whom I have already referred as
accompanying the Rev. Samuel Marsden and the first Mis-
sionaries to New Zealand, gives an interesting account of
the difficulty which arose after they got out to sea, in con-
sequence of the suspicions which had been infused into the
minds of the Chiefs who had brought them. And as this
statement so fully illustrates the danger to which I adverted,
and shows so clearly that the New-Zealand Chiefs are dis-
posed to view with jealousy any schemes for despoiling them
of their lands and rights, I subjoin it in an Appendix. 4
2. In replying to Mr. Coates, Mr. Wakefield animadverted
upon that gentleman’s remark, that gain or mercantile profit
was the leading object of the Association ; and appeared to
think, that he had shown the incorrectness of such remark by
referring to that part of the plan which provides that the
affairs of the Association shall be managed by a Committee,
who are to have no pecuniary interest in the undertaking.
This did not appear to me to be any answer to Mr. Coates;
and I consequently argued upon the same principle respecting
the solicitude or distrust which must naturally be cherished,
respecting the philanthropic professions of persons who are
avowedly associated together for mercantile purposes. To
this Dr. Hinds refers, as “a mis-statement ” which ought not
to be persisted in; and says, “It is asserted both by Mr.
Coates and Mr. Beecham, that the administrators of the
Colony are to have some pecuniary interest in it.” Indeed
I have not yet said any such thing. In the very passage
which the Reverend Gentleman quotes, I remark, “If the
Association were a number of gentlemen, united together on
the same principle as that on which Missionary Societies are
based, having no purposes of their own, but aiming solely
to promote the welfare of the natives, their arguments in
favour of Colonization, as the only remedy for the evils
* See Appendix C. Page 56.


inflicted by our countrymen upon the New Zealanders, would
deserve most serious consideration.'” In thus speaking of the
Association , I referred to it in the same sense as to the
Missionary Societies. By the Missionary Societies, I did not
mean merely their respective Committees of Management, but
literally and truly the Societies themselves. In like manner,
I had no particular reference to the Committee or Adminis-
trators of the Association: I spoke of the Association itself.
Now, does Dr. Hinds really mean to say, that I have made any
“ mis-statement ” in representing the Association itself as
avowedly formed for mercantile purposes ? Will he deny
that the Association itself —the persons who are to find
the money for carrying on the undertaking—do not merely
calculate on deriving from it pecuniary profit, but do make
the mercantile part of their plan the leading object , and
give to philanthropy only a secondary place ? I have
read with care the book published by the Association ex-
planatory of their “Principles, Objects, and Plans,'” and
certainly understand this to be the case. They do not
commence, by enlarging upon the necessity of exertions
for imparting to the New Zealanders the blessings of
Christianity and civilization, and then state that they have
determined to found a Colony merely for the purpose of ac-
complishing this philanthropic object. No: this is not the
order of the book. The first chapter commences with Colo-
nization, and it is dwelt upon as the source of national
greatness and wealth. The argument runs thus, —“ Ships,
colonies, commerce! It is to these that England is chiefly
indebted for her pre-eminent wealth, and even for the greatness
of her domestic numbers. The old fashion of colonizing was,
therefore, a very good one for this country.”* They next
proceed to sketch out what I may call the mercantile part of
their plan ; and it is not until we reach the following chapter,
that we hear anything of the philanthropy of their scheme.
* The British Colonization of New Zealand, page 4.


Then we find it referred to in such language as the follow-
ing : “ This, however, is not a plan of mere colonization; it
lias for its object, to civilize as well as to colonize. 1 ’ Now if
all this does not show that the mercantile projects of the Asso-
ciation occupy the first place in their plan, and their civilizing
objects only the second , I know not what language means.
But if I understand aright the Association’s own statements, then
is my former reasoning sound and unobjectionable. Though
it should prove correct, that the Managing Committee or
“Administrators’ are to have no pecuniary interest in the
undertaking, yet they will of course be bound to conduct the
affairs of the Association according to these fundamental princi-
ples ; and thus, even with a disinterested Managing Committee,
it will necessarily follow that they will have to look first at
the mercantile part of the plan, and to subordinate to this the
philanthropy of the undertaking: and it will moreover follow,
that when the mercantile interests of the Association shall clash
with the interests of the natives, (and clash they inevitably
will, if the voice of experience is to be heeded,) the mercantile
interests will naturally preponderate, and the interests of the
natives, being subordinate in the plan, will, in consequence,
suffer. Sound philosophy teaches, that the stronger principle
must ever triumph over the weaker; and it is thus to be con-
cluded, that in this case the leading , and, consequently, the
stronger principle of mercantile interest will prevail over the
secondary and weaker principle of philanthropy.
One word, however, respecting the disinterestedness of the
Managing Committee or Administrators. Supposing that they
shall have no direct pecuniary interest in the undertaking,
they will have a great amount of patronage in their hands;
and it cannot be supposed to imply the most distant reflection
upon the honour of those gentlemen, to advert to the fact
that patronage has important advantages connected with it.
And I will give Dr. Hinds the opportunity of saying whether
there be any truth in the statement so confidently made, that
one at least of the Managing Committee has long been the


proprietor of extensive landed property in New Zealand; for
so long as this is understood to be the case, it appears difficult
to determine the precise meaning which the Association, Mr.
Wakefield, and Dr. Hinds, intend to convey, when they say
that “ the Administrators of the Colony are to have no pecu-
niary interest in it. 1-1
3. If, however, I have made no “ mis-statement 11 in my
former publication on this subject, Dr. Hinds has certainly
greatly mis-stated my meaning on another point. Referring
to their proposal respecting the appointment of a Bishop,
be says, “ It seems, indeed, to have been almost converted
into an occasion for reproach,'” “ ‘ What,’ 11 it is said, “ 4 can
a Bishop do? Must he not depend on the Societies estab-
lished in this country to furnish his means and his instru-
ments? 1 '” And this question is given in inverted commas as
though it were a quotation from my pamphlet. I am sure
Dr. Hinds is incapable of intentional misrepresentation; but
if he will turn again to the pamphlet, he will discover that
I have said nothing like this. I have put no such question:
and my argument goes upon the principle, not that the Bishop
could do nothing, as he must depend upon others for means
and instruments* but that the Association do not mean to
provide out of their own funds for the instruction of the
natives; and, to prove this, I quote their own words respecting
the appointment of a Bishop, to show that they , not the
Bishop , were depending on the Societies established in this
country to furnish the means and the instruments for instruct-
ing the natives. I refer to this mis-statement , because
Dr. Hinds, unintentionally I am fully prepared to believe,
has done me the injustice of representing me as capable of
viewing with something worse than indifference the labours
of a Christian Bishop.
4. I shall only briefly advert to one more point. Dr.
Hinds does not approve of the reference in my concluding
appeal to the distracted affairs of Canada, and remarks that
“to point to the disasters of individuals or of nations, and


authoritatively to pronounce that they are judgments and
signs from heaven, is surely a presumptuous use of the doc-
trine of Divine Providence.” I think with the Reverend
Gentleman, that to regard the disasters of individuals as
judgments from heaven would be presumptuous in a high
degree. But to endeavour to derive admonitions from God’s
providential dealings with nations , is quite another thing.
Many Divines who have been the ornaments of the Church
to which Dr. Hinds belongs, as well as sound theologians of
all orthodox communions, have argued that, as the Sovereign
Judge will not, at the future general judgment of mankind,
then deal with men collectively, but individually; it follows
that his displeasure at those public sins which men commit in
their collective or national character is generally indicated with
sufficient clearness in his providential dealings with them as
nations: and it is further understood, that one great end of
those Scripture Histories which describe the judgments of
Heaven against guilty nations is, to furnish an illustration of
that rule of retribution which he applies to them in His
providential administration of the affairs of our world. That
a hasty and presumptuous application of this rule is not to
be made in any particular case, I readily admit: but if the
avenging visitations of the Almighty upon the sinful nations
of antiquity have been expressly recorded for our admonition
and warning ; and if it be a duty which Christ has recognised
and enforced upon his people, that they should observe and
study “ the signs of the times; ” then must I conclude that
when a nation has been employed, during successive gene-
rations, in carrying out a system of Colonization which has
invariably involved the hapless Aborigines in suffering and
ruin,—that nation will do well to pause and think upon its
ways, when such unnatural contests and troubles arise in its
Colonies, as have just passed under review in Canada, and
will act wisely and scripturally by listening to the admonitory
lesson, and resolving from henceforth “to cease to do evil,
and learn to do well.”


APPENDIX.
APPENDIX A. PAGE 32.
I.
LORD VISCOUNT GODERICH, ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL SECRETARIES
OF STATE TO HIS MAJESTY THE KING OP GREAT BRITAIN, TO
THE CHIEFS OF NEW ZEALAND.
“ Friends,
“ I am commanded by the King to acknowledge the receipt of
the letter which you addressed to His Majesty, and which you
entrusted to the Missionaries to forward to England.
“ The King is much gratified to find that the cause for alarm,
which appears to have existed at the time when your letter was
written, has entirely passed away ; and he trusts that no circum-
stances may occur in future to interrupt the internal tranquillity of
New Zealand, which is so necessary to the maintenance of a close
commercial intercourse between its inhabitants and those of Great
Britain.
“The King is sorry for the injuries which you inform him that
the people of New Zealand have suffered from some of his subjects.
But he will do all in his power to prevent the recurrence of such
outrages, and to punish the perpetrators of them according to the
laws of their country, whenever they can be apprehended and
brought to trial; and the King hopes, that mutual good-will and
confidence will exist between the people of both countries.
“ In order to afford better protection to all classes, both natives
of the islands of New Zealand, and British subjects who may pro-
ceed, or be already established, there for purposes of* trade, the
King has sent the bearer of this letter, James Busby, Esq., to reside
amongst you as His Majesty’s Resident, whose duties will be to
investigate all complaints which may be made to him.
“ It will also be his endeavour to prevent the arrival among you
of men who have been guilty of crimes in their own country, and
who may effect their escape from the place to which they may have
been banished, as likewise to apprehend such persons of this
description as may be found at present at large.
“ In return for the anxious desire which will be manifested by the
British Resident, to afford his protection to the inhabitants of New


Zealand, against any acts of outrage which may be attempted
against them by British subjects, it is confidently expected by His
Majesty, that on your parts you will render to the Resident that
assistance and support which is calculated to promote the object of
his appointment, and to extend to your country all the benefits
which it is capable of receiving from its friendship and alliance
with Great Britain. I am,
“ Your friend,
“ GODERICH.
“ Colonial Office, Downing-street,
“ 14th June, 1832.”
ii.
INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNOR OP NEW SOUTH WALES, TO
JAMES BUSBY ESQ., BRITISH RESIDENT AT NEW ZEALAND,
DATED APRIL 13tH, 1833.
(extract.)
“To check as much as possible the enormities complained of,
and to give encouragement and protection to the well-disposed
settlers and traders from Great Britain and this Colony, it has been
thought proper to appoint a British subject to reside at New Zea-
land, in an accredited character, whose principal and most import-
ant duty it will be to conciliate the good-will of the native Chiefs,
and establish upon a permanent basis that good understanding and
confidence which it is important to the interests of Great Britain
and of this Colony to perpetuate.
“ It may not be easy to lay down any certain rules by which this
desirable object is to be accomplished; but it is expected, by the
skilful use of those powers which educated man possesses over the
wild or half-civilized savage, jan influence may be gained by which
the authority and strength of the New-Zealand Chiefs will be
arranged on the side of the Resident for the maintenance of tran-
quillity throughout the islands.
“ It will be fitting that you explain to the Chiefs the object of
your mission, and the anxious desire of His Majesty to suppress by
your means the disorders of which they complain; you will also
announce your intention of remaining among them, and will claim
the protection and privilege which you will tell them are accorded
in Europe and America to British subjects holding in foreign States
situations similar to yours. You will find it convenient to manage
this conference by means of the Missionaries, to whom you will be
furnished with credentials, and with whom you are recommended


to communicate freely upon the objects of } 7 our appointment, and
the measures you should adopt in treating with the Chiefs.
“ The knowledge which the Missionaries have obtained of the
language, manners, and customs of the natives may become of ser-
vice to you.
“ Assuming, however, that your reception will be as favourable
as has been anticipated, I will endeavour to explain to you the
manner of proceeding, by which I am of opinion you may best
succeed in effecting the object of your mission; you will at the
same time understand that the information I have been able to
obtain respecting New Zealand, is too imperfect to allow of my
presenting you with anything more than a general outline for your
guidance, leaving it for your discretion to take such further mea-
sures as shall at any time seem needful to arrest British subjects
offending against British or Colonial laws in New Zealand.
“By the 9th of George IV. chap. 83, sec. 4th, the Supreme
Court in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s-Land have power
to inquire of, hear, and determine all offences committed in New
Zealand by the master and crew of any British ship or vessel, or
by any British subject living there : and all persons convicted of
such offences may be punished as if the offence had been committed
in England. The law having thus given the Court the power to
hear and determine offences, it follows as a necessary incident, that
it has the power of bringing before it any person against whom any
indictment should be found or information filed for any offences
within its jurisdiction.
“ I would here observe that I can propose no other means by
which you can secure the offender than the procuring his apprehen-
sion and delivery on board some British ship for conveyance to this
country by means of the native Chiefs, with whom you shall be in
communication. It is well known that amongst those Europeans
who are leading a wandering and irregular life at New Zealand, are
to be found transported felons and offenders escaped from this
colony and Van Diemen s-Land. It is desirable that opportunities
for the apprehension and transmission of those convicts to either
Colony should be promptly embraced.
“ The Chiefs are, it is said, well acquainted with the descriptions
of the different Europeans residing in their country, and will be
found able and willing to point out and secure at a convenient time
those whom they know to be fugitives from the Australian colo-
nies. You will be furnished from the office of the principal Super-
intendent with the names and descriptions of those convicts from
New South Wales who are known or suspected to be concealed in
the islands of New Zealand, and you will use your own discretion
n


as to the fittest time for causing the apprehension and removal of
such as may be within your reach, or are guilty of any offence
against the peace and tranquillity of the country. You will of
course take every precaution to avoid the apprehension of a free
person in mistake for a convict, as an action for damages would
probably follow the commission of such an error. This Govern-
ment will indeed he disposed to save you harmless in all such cases
where becoming circumspection has been used.
“When any of His Majesty’s ships are off the coast, you will
request the Commander to receive the convicts or other persons
arrested by your means for conveyance to this place.
“ I would further observe, that, by means of the information
which you are likely to receive from the Chiefs, you may become
acquainted with the criminal projects of Europeans before their
execution, and by a timely interference you may be able altogether
to prevent their mischievous designs or render them abortive.
“In the character which you hold, you will be justified in
addressing any British subject, to warn him of the danger to which
he may be exposed by embarking or persevering in any undertak-
ing of a criminal or doubtful character.
“ In the manner I have now described, and by proceedings of a
similar character, it may be possible to repress the enormities which
have heretofore been perpetrated by British subjects at New
Zealand.
“It may also happen that this salutary control will not affect
British subjects only, but that the knowledge of there being a func-
tionary stationed in New Zealand, through whom offences com-
mitted by the subjects of any other State against the people of that
country will be made known to the British Government, and
through that Government to the other European and American
powers, may induce the subjects of those powers to adopt a less
licentious conduct towards the New Zealanders and other inhabit-
ants of the South-Sea Islands.
“ There is still another form in which the influence, it is hoped,
the British Resident may obtain over the minds of the New-Zealand
Chiefs, may be even more beneficially exhibited. It is by your
official moderation, the evils of intestine war between rival Chiefs
or hostile tribes may be avoided, and their differences peaceably
and permanently composed.
“It is also possible that at your suggestion, and by the aid of
your counsels, some approach may be made by the natives towards
a settled form of Government; and that by the establishment of
some system of jurisprudence among them, their Courts may be
made to claim the cognizance of all crimes committed within their


territory, and thus may the offending subjects of whatever State be
brought to justice by a less circuitous and more efficient process
than by any which I have been able to point out.
“ If in addition to the benefits which the British Missionaries are
conferring on those Islanders by imparting the inestimable blessings
of Christian knowledge, and a pure system of morals, the New
Zealanders should obtain, through the means of a British function-
ary, the institution of courts of justice, established upon a simple
and comprehensive basis, some sufficient compensation would seem
to be rendered for the injuries heretofore inflicted by our delinquent
countrymen.
“ Having thus explained to you generally the course of proceed-
ing by which I think your residence in New Zealand may be made
conducive to the suppression of the enormities which British
subjects and those of other States have been in the habit of commit-
ting in these islands, I have only further to observe, that it will
be your duty to assist by every means in your power the commer-
cial relation of Great Britain and her colonies with New Zealand.
It would indeed be desirable that you become the medium of all
communication between the New-Zealand Chiefs and the masters
of British or colonial vessels frequenting the coasts, and the mer-
chants and settlers established in the islands. This arrangement
will probably grow out of your residence in the country, and you
should keep it in view as an important object. You will be pleased
to forward by every opportunity a shipping report, setting forth the
names, masters, number of crew, tonnage, and countries, of vessels
arriving at the Bay of Islands or other ports of New Zealand
whence you can obtain coi'rect accounts, with the caigoes of such
vessels, their objects in touching at New Zealand, as far as you are
informed, and any other particulars concerning them that may be
worthy of notice.
«I beg to call your attention to the strange and barbarous traffic
in human heads, which certainly did exist to some extent, but
which lam given to understand is now nearly abandoned. Should
it be found to continue or revive, some legislative enactment may
be necessary to prohibit in this Colony the crime and disgrace of
participating in so brutalizing a commerce.
“ Having already mentioned the assistance which I anticipate
you will receive from the Missionaries, I have now only to impress
on you the duty of a cordial co-operation with them in the great
objects of their solicitude—the extension of Christian knowledge
throughout the islands, and the consequent improvement in the
habits and morals of the people.
“ Signed RICHARD BOURKE.”
d 2


APPENDIX B., PAGE 37.
EXTRACTS FROM A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF TWO VISITS TO NEW
ZEALAND, IN HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP ALLIGATOR, A. D. 1834; BY
WILLIAM BARRETT MARSHALL, SURGEON, ASSISTANT SURGEON
R.N., LONDON, 1836.
I.
What are the instructions of tlie British. Resident at New
Zealand, I have not been able to ascertain. All that it has been
in my power to learn of his duties, has been gathered from a letter
of introduction from Yiscount Goderich to the Chiefs of New
Zealand, of which he was the bearer. What is the character of
his authority, or what the extent of his powers, I am altogether
ignorant of. He receives his appointment from the Home Govern-
ment, and his salary from the Colonial Treasury of New South
Wales. Lord Goderich’s letter, and Mr. Busby’s address to the
Chiefs on his appointment, will be appended to this Narrative,
and found to breathe a kind and gracious spirit towards the inha-
bitants. Time will more fully develope, and in language of a
more definite character, the nature of the Resident’s duties, and
the benefits reciprocated between the natives and their British and
Australian visitors, in consequence of his settlement in the coun-
try. There can be no doubt, in the meanwhile, that the presence
of an English gentleman of intelligence, possessing an official
sanction, and an independent salary, and instructed generally to
afford protection equally to all classes, whether natives or foreigners;
to prevent the influx into a country, just emerging from the dark-
ness of heathenism into the light of Christianity and civilization,
“ of men who have been guilty of crimes in their own country,
and Avho may effect their escape from the place to which they may
have been banished,” and “ whose duties will be to investigate
all complaints which may be made to him,” must, unless coun-
teracted by local and other opposition, operate beneficially upon
the general interests of New Zealand. In order, however, to the
efficiency of such a person he must not be introduced to the Chiefs
by a recommendatory letter from one of His Majesty’s principal
Secretaries of State, and be at the same time treated with contumely
by any person to whom his Majesty may confide the government
of either of his Majesty’s Australian Colonies. It must not be
enumerated among his duties in a letter from the throne, the inves-
tigation of all complaints which may be made to him, if the
government of New South Wales be competent to decide upon
any ex parte statement against the natives, without reference to


him at all ; and without investigation of any kind, to act upon
that decision, and threaten the natives with not only “ the destruc-
tion of all their vessels, houses, and settlements near the coast,’’
hut in very deed to put that tyrannical threat into literal execu-
tion in three cases with the sanguinary accompaniment of an
unnecessary sacrifice of human life. Unless there be an extension
of the principles of international law to all our intercourse with
New Zealand, the erection of that country into a British Residency
is an act of inexplicable policy at best, and the appointment of
a British Resident, ostensibly to “ foster and maintain ” a “ friendly
feeling between the King’s subjects and the native inhabitants;”
to prevent, as much as possible, the recurrence of those “ misun-
derstandings and quarrels,” as Mr. Busby minces what outspeaking
truth would call robberies and murders; robberies the most bare-
faced ! and murders the most wanton !—to give a greater assurance
of safety and just dealing between both countries in their com-
mercial intercourse with each other, is, to say the least of it, per-
fectly useless. Unless the executive government of our Australian
Colonies be instructed to do justly, and to love mercy, and
compelled to take counsel with Mr. Busby, and grant a hearing
to the New Zealanders when complained of, as well as to the
parties who complain of them, His Majesty’s representative may
be effectually superseded by a figure of stone or wood, set up as
an effigy to scare the vultures who would prey upon New Zealand ;
and the colonial treasury might transfer the amount of his income
towards defraying the incidental expenses of a military expedition
against the innocent as well as the guilty portion of the inhabit-
ants. (Pages 55—58.)
ii.
In the preceding narrative, I have endeavoured to relate events
in the exact order of their occurrence; leaving facts to speak for
and principally solicitous of putting facts on record;
for all facts are not true, seeing that some things are said to be
facts, that never had an existence at all, except in the imagination
of the narrator, or in the credulity of the retailer. And some facts
are so stated, as to be what Dr. Cullen calls false facts, either, by
the omission of something that happened, which, if added, would
alter their character; or by the addition of something that never
happened, which, from being added to that which did happen,
changes truth into falsehood; the one producing the effect of wrong
perspective, the other of faulty colouring, or distortive caricature.
In reviewing the whole affair, it is impossible, however, to close


one’s eyes upon the errors of judgment which attended our expe-
dition, any more than upon the complete success by which its
operations were rewarded.
The first question which obtrudes itself is obviously this : Why
was His Majesty’s Ship Alligator, assisted by a detachment of
soldiers, sent to New Zealand to act at all against the natives,
without reference to, or the counsel of, His Majesty’s accredited
representative in that country ? And this too in the teeth of the
Secretary of State’s official letter to the Chiefs, introducing Mr.
Busby, concerning whom Lord Goderich writes thus :—“ In order
to afford better protection to all classes, both natives of the Islands
of New Zealand, and British subjects who may proceed or he already
established there for purposes of trade, the King has sent the
hearer of this letter, James Bushy, Esq., to reside amongst you
as His Majesty’s Resident, whose duties will he to investigate all
complaints which may he made to him” fyc.
Again, it cannot fail to he matter of deep surprise, as it ought
ever to be a subject of sincere regret, that the expedition, when
sent, was so inadequately provided with interpreters. Mr. Bat-
teshy’s only knowledge of the tongue in which he was appointed to
communicate on a question of life and death, had been acquired
on Kororarika Beach; while his qualifications for the delicate office
of an interpreter, both moral and literary, had been obtained while
filling the somewhat different situation of a retail spirit-seller and
a marker of billiards at the same place ! !
Thirdly. Having a Resident in their country; having provided
the people with a flag; having paid national honours to that flag as
the standard of an independent nation, albeit a nation of savages;
ought we not in our national capacity to have respect to the laws
and usages of the New Zealanders, for they are indisputably not
without laws of their own, and usages of which they exact the
observance among themselves ? and prior to making a peremptory
demand for the release of their, it might he, lawful prisoners, and
that, too, without the ransom they affirmed themselves entitled to ;
a demand becoming well our power, hut of very doubtful propriety
if taken in connection with our right to make it, and to make it
too at the point of the bayonet; ought not some negotiation to
have been entered into ; some inquiry to have been made, as to the
right of those natives, agreeably to their own laws, to demand such
ransom, even when too weak to enforce its payment ? “’Tis well
to have the giant’s power , hut tyrannous to use it like a giant.”
The British Resident ought to have been applied to, to become
the organ of communication between the Government of New South
Wales and the New Zealanders at Cape Egmont. A competent inter-


preter of unimpeachable veracity, might have been obtained, either
from Mr. Busby’s own immediate neighbourhood, Paihia, or from the
settlement of the Wesleyan Mission at Hokianga; and, if not for
the ungracious, undutiful, and hardly loyal purpose of acting under
the Kings authority, in direct contradiction of the King’s word
pledged to the Chiefs of New Zealand, a purpose which I am far
from attributing to the Colonial Government of Neiv South Wales
it is difficult to understand why there was nothing like inquiry or
preliminary negotiation, unless the ex parte statement of John
Guard be inquiry, respecting the particulars attending the loss of
the Harriet, seeing that such inquiry might have elicited some truth
necessary to be known, and that such negotiation might have placed
any ulterior proceedings, however severe, upon the sure basis of
justice and moderation. In Lord Goderich’s letter, before cited the
natives are led to expect as much : why their right to it, founded
upon the promise contained in that letter, should have been so
recklessly thrown out of sight altogether, let the local government
answer to God and their own conscience; to their King and the
country at large they are responsible for involving the national
faith in suspicion, and bringing distrust upon the royal word, by a
proceeding utterly at variance with a declaration like this : “ The
King is sorry for the injuries which you (the native Chiefs,) inform
him that the people of New Zealand have suffered from some of his
subjects. But he will do all in his power to prevent the recurrence
of such outrages, and to punish the perpetrators of them according
to the laws of their country, whenever they can be apprehended
and brought to trial; and the King hopes that mutual good-will and
confidence will exist between the people of both countries.”
Of the errors committed in the execution of the affair, I have
occasionally made mention in the course of my narrative. They
consisted, mainly, in exacting too much from the natives, and
yielding too little; in acting rather according to momentary im-
pulses, than upon a set of fixed principles; in treating the New
Zealanders as savages, and forgetting that they were, notwithstanding
men; in inflicting wrong upon them, and making no reparation’
while suffering neither actual nor imaginary wrong from them,
without inflicting summary vengeance, (Pages 234-237.)


APPENDIX C., PAGE 42.
EXTRACT FROM A NARRATIVE OP A VOYAGE TO NEW ZEALAND,
PERFORMED IN THE YEARS 1814 AND 1815, IN COMPANY
WITH THE REV. SAMUEL MARSDEN, PRINCIPAL CHAPLAIN OP
NEW SOUTH WALES. BY JOHN LIDDIARD NICHOLAS, ESQ.
LONDON, 1817-
The wind being E.S.E., and a strong gale blowing directly into
tbe harbour, we were detained a whole week in Watson’s Bay;
and though we made several attempts to get out, we were unable
to effect it, as the ship was too clumsily built to sail against the
slightest opposition of the weather. During the time we were thus
detained, we had the mortification to find the Chiefs, (on whose
good faith the safety and success of the expedition were to depend,)
gloomy, sullen, and reserved. This strange alteration was particu-
larly observable in Duaterra, who, on all former occasions, was
lively and communicative. He appeared quite dejected ; a kind of
morose melancholy overspread his countenance, and it entirely lost
that vivacious animation which it used to display before. The
two other Chiefs were equally dull; but the symptoms w T ere not-so
evident as those which he betrayed, for in his face the agitated
workings of his soul were clearly perceptible, while his dark brow,
knitting itself into indignant frowns, showed us, too plainly, the
violence of some internal passion. Surprised and disconcerted at
this total change, we knew not to what we should attribute it. The
presents they had received, which, to them, were of considerable
value, and calculated to enhance their importance among their
countrymen, were distributed with a strict impartiality, and a par-
ticular regard to afford satisfaction to all -without creating the least
jealousy in any. Yet as this was extremely difficult, on account of
their being capricious in their choice, and apt to consider the merest
trifle as a distinguished preference shown to some one of them
above another, we imagined this unusual alteration in their beha-
viour might have proceeded from some false notion of this kind.
There was no other apparent motive for it that we could perceive,
as they had always expressed a desire that we should visit their
country, and establish a settlement of our people among them.
But this was not the true cause ; and, to our very great surprise and
alarm, it was one which of all others we could least suppose, a
jealousy and distrust of the Missionary establishment, which, from
some wicked misrepresentations, they regarded as ruinous to the
independence of their country, and fatal to their own influence,
while not only their liberties, but even their lives, would be com


promised by it. Duaterra, after some hesitation, gave this as the
true reason of the change in his own manner, and in that of his
companions; and told us plainly, he regretted from his heart the
encouragement he had given us to go to his country, as he was
informed by a gentleman at Sydney, that the Missionaries then
going would shortly introduce a much greater number, and thus, in
gome time, become so powerful, as to possess themselves of the
whole island, and either destroy the natives, or reduce them to
slavery. The gentleman, he said, desirous to convince him of the
truth of this assertion, bid him look at the conduct of our country-
men in New South Wales, where, on their first arrival, they despoiled
the inhabitants of all their possessions, and shot the greater number
of them with a merciless cruelty; while, in some few years, the
whole race of that once happy people would be entirely extinct.
This diabolical reasoning succeeded but too well in awakening all
the fears and suspicions of Duaterra, who communicated his appre-
hensions to the other Chiefs, and with them appeared suddenly
changed in the manner I have described. Dismayed by the effects
of this infamous calumny, we knew not how to act; our hopes of
success were entirely built on the protection to be afforded by
the Chiefs, which now, it appeared, we could have no reason to
expect; otherwise, how could a few defenceless families possibly
think of residing among a nation of hostile savages, or venture, for
a moment, to believe themselves secure ? To proceed, while the
Chiefs entertained such unfavourable impressions respecting us,
would be madness; and to be obliged to return, after we had made
all the necessary preparations, which caused a very weighty expense,
would be provoking in the extreme. However, we were soon
happily relieved from this state of anxious perplexity. Mr. Marsden,
after assuring Duaterra that the Missionaries were prompted by no
motives either of ambition or avarice to visit his country, but, on
the contrary, were actuated by the most disinterested and benevolent
solicitude for the happiness of the New Zealanders, told him he
would soon convince him of his own and their sincerity, by instantly
ordering the vessel to return to Sydney Cove, where the Mission-
aries and their families should be landed, and never more think of
holding any intercourse with his country. This argument produced
an instantaneous effect on the mind of the Chief; whose zeal for
the civilization of his people nothing but so abominable a decep-
tion as was practised upon him could counteract, and who now,
convinced of his error in supposing Mr. Marsden capable of deluding
him, besought that gentleman, with the most anxious entreaties,
to proceed ; while he re-assured the Missionaries of his protection
and fidelity. He did not, however, vouch for the good faith of his


companions, who had not the same opportunities as himself of
forming an estimate of our character, or knowing the value of our
enlightened superiority. On the contrary, he thought that, from
the misrepresentations they had heard, they might be prompted
to acts of violence on getting to their country, and, for this
reason, advised Mr. Marsden to establish the settlement in the
Bay of Islands, where he and his tribe could easily protect it. Mr.
Marsden, highly gratified at having undeceived him, readily promised
to comply with his wishes, and Duaterra immediately resumed all
his usual good humour. (Yol i., pages 39-43.)
THE EHD.
London :—Printed by James Nichols, 46, Hoxton-Square.




