

REMARKS
ON
Federal Finance.
BY
J. T. WALKER
(Fellow of the Institute of Bankers, London)
A Delegate to the People’s Federal
Convention at Bathurst, 1896;
And one of the Representatives of New
South Wales in the Australasian
Federal Convention, 1897-1898.
Sydney:
Hennessey, Harper & Co., Ltd., 30 Hunter Street.
1898.




REMARKS
ON
Federal Finance.
BY
J. T. WALKER
('Fellow of the Institute of Bankers, London)
A Delegate to the People’s Federal
Convention at Bathurst, 1896;
And one of the Representatives of New
South Wales in the Australasian
Federal Convention, 1897-1898.




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
At the present critical stage of the Federation question in New South
Wales, it is thought judicious to reprint the accompanying short articles
on Federal Finance, written by request for the Australian Federalist.
As far as they go, the articles are a deliberate expression of the
writer’s views after giving grave consideration to the whole subject. In
connection with them, attention may perhaps also be drawn to articles
on Federal Finance, which appeared in the Brisbane Courier and Queens-
lander, June, 1897, reprinted in pamphlet form.
It will be particularly interesting and instructive to study the
report to be issued by the Commission that has just been appointed by
the Government of New South Wales to look into the conflicting state-
ments respecting prospective Federal finances, put before the public by
supporters and opponents respectively, of the draft bill to constitute the
Commonwealth of Australia. The Commission is admittedly composed
of able men—men capable of rising above party or preconceived pre-
judices, and of taking a broad and patriotic view of the whole question.
It is hoped by many that they will not hesitate to draw special attention
to the great advantages the Commonwealth will possess over any indi-
vidual State in regard to borrowing on the London and other money
markets, and in effecting conversion and consolidation of existing public
indebtedness. In this connection, is it too much to expect that the
Commission will report that, in their unbiassed judgment, before the
Commonwealth has existed many years, its stock (say, “ Australian Con-
sois”) will, not improbably, be included m the list of authorised “Trust
Securities in the United Kingdom, and will then, as an investment, rank
next to securities guaranteed by the British Government? In time, the
saving to be thus effected in annual charge for interest, will, of itself


enable the Federal Government, and, through it, the States to have great
relief from existing burdens —such relief doubtless taking the form of a
substantial reduction in the tariff. A saving of one per cent, per
annum interest on .£180,000,000 indebtedness (including Queensland)
would mean a reduction of £1,800,000 a year. Of course, it must be
admitted that would take time to accomplish, but it is in the future
and the difference between 3§ per cent., the present average rate, and
2§ per cent., the anticipated prospective rate, if the Federal stock is
included in “ Trust Securities,” suggests its feasibility. This aspect of
the question of Federation has apparently not had due prominence
given to it in recent discussions.
J. T. WALKER.
Eosemont, Woollahra,
Sydney, 2nd May, 1898.


Federal pinanee.
(BY J. T. WALKER.)
TO one who endeavours to take a commonsense view of Finance in
connection with the proposed Commonwealth, it is extremely
puzzling to notice the widely divergent views held by men who
on most questions would be in accord. In the ordinary affairs of
life an amalgamation of several businesses ought to conduce to economy,
but, apparently, when it is proposed that the Australian Colonies shall
transfer certain services to a new but joint control, estimates of all kinds
are sprung upon us to show that further extravagance will be the result,
and without any corresponding advantages.
Chapter IY. of the Bill to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia
deals specially with Finance and Trade. Let us glance briefly at some of
its provisions to see if it is not possible to show that the framers of that
measure have devised a scheme of finance that, like mercy, will be “ twice
blessed ” —blessed to him that gives—the State, and to him that takes,
that is, the Commonwealth.
On the establishment of the Commonwealth, the collection and
the control of duties and customs and excise, and the control of the
bounties pass to the Executive Government. Until uniform duties of
Customs are imposed, Clause 89 provides how the money received shall
be treated, namely :
1. Each State shall be credited with revenues therein collected by
the Commonwealth.
2. Each State shall be debited with —
(a) Expenditure incurred therein solely for maintenance or
continuance, as at the time of transfer, of any
Department transferred.
(b) The proportion of the State, according to population, in
the other expenditure of the Commonwealth.
3. The Commonwealth shall pay to each State, month by month,
the balance owing.
Surely, so far, there is nothing very difficult to understand. Each
State is only to be debited with the loss (if any) on services transferred,


which it would have to bear at any rate, and with its per capita pro-
portion of the new, or “original,” expenditure. At this point it may be
mentioned that the new expenditure is estimated (as referred to here-
after) at a sum not exceeding «£300,000 per annum for the whole Common-
wealth, of which, on a population basis, the Colony of New South Wales
would have to contribute a trifle less than £ 125,000, or, say, Is. per
inhabitant. This, therefore, is what Federation will cost the great
Colony of New South Wales, but against which.it is hoped, there will be
a considerable reduction, of which more anon.
Within two years of the establishment of the new Government,
uniform duties of Customs must be imposed, and to insure that each
State shall, if possible, be treated thoroughly equitably, a system of
book-keeping has been devised for a period of five years, so that each
State shall be credited with duties collected on goods consumed within
its borders, and, as previously outlined, be debited with its due propor-
tion of expenditure. One of the objects of this book-keeping is to
obtain reliable information as to the incidence of the uniform tariff, so
that, at the end of the five years, the Parliament, from statistics
obtained, may be in a position to devise a scheme of distribution in the
future that shall be “ fair ”or equitable. It is easy to see that, without
reliable data, any scheme proposed would be more or less open to objec-
tion on the score of unfairness, and indeed that can be easily understood
when we remember that there are the following factors to be considered :
Ist. Where the uniform tariff is higher than the tariff previously
existing, the relative consumption of dutiable goods will be
less per unit of population than before.
2nd. Where the uniform tariff is lower than the tariff previously
existing, the relative consumption of dutiable goods will be
greater per unit of population than before.
3rd. Intercolonial freetrade (which commences with the introduc-
tion of the uniform tariff) will, it is believed, tend to largely
increase the consumption of locally manufactured or locally
produced articles, and will to some extent, undoubtedly affect
the relative consumption of foreign goods per unit of
population.
Now as to the alleged difficulties of following the goods to their
destination, it is evident that, whilst existing State tariffs continue,
statistics of trade across the borders will be readily obtainable from
Customs entries. Surely the cessation of border duties will be a great
relief, even if the importers and exporters are still required to furnish
returns. It is suggested that, for the first year after the establishment
of uniform duties, returns shall continue to be furnished for all goods
passing from one State to another, and, for the next four years, that
returns shall only be furnished of unbroken bulk goods. The idea is
that the statistics of broken bulk goods for the first year after the


institution of the uniform tariff will give fairly reliable data of the
course and volume of trade of such broken parcels, and that thereon
approximate calculations and adjustments may be made for the subse-
quent four years, allowing, if need be, for increase of population. We
must remember that each Colony or State has already its Statistical
Department, whether so-called or not, and that the bookkeeping, so much
objected to by many, will really be most serviceable to the statisticians
After the establishment of intercolonial freetrade neither importers nor
exporters will have any object to gain by supplying false returns. The
following quotation explains the modus operandi :—
“ All that will be required will be for exporters to prepare invoices
in triplicate, one copy for the Customs Department in their own State,
one for the house to whom the goods are consigned, and one copy to be
sent by the importing house after receipt of the goods to the Customs
Department in their State. The invoices would show the value of goods
on which duty had been paid and the amount of such duty paid; the
remainder of the work simply means bookkeeping entries in the Customs
Department. No border Customs officers, and consequently no vexatious
examination of goods. We fail to see any justification for the loud
protestations against “ this hateful system of bookkeeping.”
There is special provision for the Parliament of Western Australia
to impose duties of Customs on goods not originally imported from
beyond the Commonwealth passing into that Colony during the first five
years of the uniform tariff, but such duties shall not exceed during the
second, third, fourth and fifth of such years, respectively, four-fifths,
three-fifths, two-fiths, and one-fifth of the uniform duties. This means
that, in the case of Western Australia, intercolonial freetrade may be
postponed for five years, but it is evident the loss will fall on the inhabitants
of that colony, as it will be out of their pockets the extra duties will
come. Without some such provision, Western Australia could not afford
to federate, and, in like manner, without the bookkeeping provision,
neither New South Wales nor Western Australia, nor Queensland if she
comes in, could afford to go into partnership with the other States
owing to the much higher importation and consumption of dutiable
goods, on a population basis.
We now come to consider Sir Edward Braddon’s clause, which pro-
vides that from the net revenue from duties of Customs and Excise not
more than one-fourth shall be applied annually towards the expenditure
of the Commonwealth. The remaining three-fourths shall be paid to
the several States, or, and this may prove very important, shall he applied
towards the payment of interest on debts of the general States taken over
by the Commonwealth. This clause by freetraders has been pronounced
a “ blot ” on the Bill, as it appears to necessitate the adoption of,
possibly, a needlessly high tariff. The object of its insertion was to give
a quasi-guarantee to the States that their finances would not be unduly


disturbed by a material alteration on existing tariffs. As pointed out
afterwards by the Premier of New South Wales, it is actually a less
objectionable proviso than one providing for a minimum fixed sum to be
returned annually to each State as at one time suggested. Should,
however, the Federal Treasurer require more than £1 ,500,000, which
would be his one-fourth of the .£6,000,000 tariff, he would not unnaturally
argue that it would be better for him to levy a direct tax for what he
required, and the whole of which would come to the Federal Treasury,
than to increase indirect taxation when it would only yield him 5/- in
the £. For instance, by direct taxation he could raise an additional
■£loo,ooo without a further burden on tax-pavers than that amount,
whereas if he relied on Customs duties, he would require to increase
them by £400,000 before he could appropriate £IOO,OOO for Federal
purposes. It is clear that the temptation to the Treasurer would be to
adopt that course which would take the less sum out of the pockets of
the tax-payer. It may be asked, where comes in the necessity for such
a large sum as £1,500,000 when, apparently, £300,000 is the estimated
annual cost of establishing the Commonwealth. The explanation is that
the Finance Committee at the Adelaide Session of the Convention, had
tables prepared showing existing annual outlay on services to be
transferred (including interest on buildings, etc., to be taken over),
namely ... ... ... ... ... ... •• • ■• ■ £2,842,100
Less, Revenue expected from these services .. ... 1,755,400
1,086,700
Add margin... ... ... ... ... ... 163,300
£1,250,000
We call this £1,200,000 by reducing the margin to £113,000, and,
by adding the £300,000 “ original ” expenditure of the Commonwealth,
we have the £1,500,000, which is one-fourth of the £6,000,000 tariff so
frequently mentioned in connection with this question. All the figures
quoted are on the supposition that Queensland will join the Federation,
so that, if she remains outside, there will be some considerable reduction
in the calculation. In connection with the £300,000, for instance,
provision is made for six additional Senators and 12 additional Members
of the House of Representatives —the latter certainly in excess of
Queensland’s present requirements —together amounting to £7,200. Here
again a margin has been allowed of £54,175 after a liberal estimate of
£52,540 for “ Public buildings to be constructed (interest and mainte-
nance).” Taking all these matters into account, it is evident the
estimate of £300,000 for new Federal expenditure is a liberal one. Of
this sum the share of New South Wales will amount in round numbers
to £125,000 against which, however, considerable savings should easily


be effected, e.g., in the amalgamation of the Customs, Post and Telegraph
Departments, &c. Surely if 60 (or, at first, 64) Members of the House
of Representatives suffice for the Federal Parliament, it is reasonable to
suppose a like number should suffice for our own Legislative Assembly.
At present we allow ,£3OO a year for 125 members, equal to =£37,500 a
year. As local members’ duties after Federation will be greatly curtailed,
and the Session may with advantage be reduced to three months in each
year, surely an honorarium of <£2oo for each member would be ample.
Sixty members at <£2oo each would mean <£12,000, which, subtracted
from <£37,500, means a saving of ,£25 500 a year. Many argue this is
impracticable, as members will not reduce their own allowances. Surely
the electors have the matter in their own hands, and, if they do not
avail themselves of their power, they must not lay the blame on the
Commonwealth. Is there any reason why one Postmaster-General and
one Agent-General should not suffice for the whole of Australia in place
of six of each class as at present P Again, would it be necessary to have
both an Attorney-General and a Minister for Justice in New South
Wales after the new state of affairs came into existence ?
It will be remembered that Sir Edward Braddon s Clause gave
permission to apply three-fourths of the Customs revenue towards pay-
ing interest on the State debts should they be taken over by the
Commonwealth. The Federal Treasurer is not likely to leave this power
long in abeyance, as Clause 104 gives the Parliament power to take over
the whole or a portion of the State debts, in the latter case according to
the respective numbers of their people. Should either a portion or the
whole debts be taken over, the States have to indemnify the Common-
wealth, and if the surplus of the revenue, due to any State, is
insufficient to pay the interest, then the deficiency has to be
paid by the State concerned. To get over this difficulty and to
expedite the conversion and consolidation of the debts, it is suggested
that each State shall hypothecate to the Commonwealth a portion
of its railway revenue to supplement its share of the Customs duties.
This would probably be a reducing quantity from year to year
as population increased. It is known that once the colonies
are federated the credit of the Commonwealth will be so great
that it could borrow on more favourable terms than any individual
State. The prospective gains are very considerable, and if in time,
Australian Consuls are admitted into authorised Trust Securities
in the United Kingdom, it is not improbable a 2| per cent, stock may
even be issuable at par. In the meantime, the average issuing rate of
interest on existing Australian Government stock is, speaking roundly,
about 3f per cent. In the case of New South Wales, each one-quarter
per cent, saved on £60,000,000 of public indebtedness means a saving of
£150,000 a year. Under such circumstances, it is evident the cost of
Federation to the Mother Colony, so far from being a pecuniary loss,


promises to become a pecuniary gain, and an increasing one from year to
year as loans mature. It is also evident that there is mucn to be said in
favor of each State borrowing through the Commonwealth, which, so
long as the State indemnity was good, would be perfectly feasible.
The only remaining points time permits to refer to are these :
1. On what basis will the surplus be divided after five years’
experience of a uniform tariff ?
2. What course is New South Wales to take if the Federal tariff
gives her more revenue than she requires ?
3. What course is a colony to pursue when her share of the surplus
is insufficient for Treasury requirements ?
To answer these questions seriatim ;
1. If the data obtained show that certain abnormal features have
disappeared, and that each State contributes approximately
the same per head, then a distribution per capita should at
once be instituted, and book-keeping come to an end.
On the other hand, if the data show that the contributions still
vary considerably, but are undoubtedly approaching nearer to one
another, a further extension of book-keeping might be desirable, or else
a sliding scale might be adopted on the lines suggested in the Adelaide
Convention.
2. Undoubtedly the Parliament of New South Wales should insist
on a corresponding reduction in other sources of income, direct
taxation or otherwise.
3. The Colony shall require to increase the direct taxation. This
is only reasonable, because by abolishment of border or other
duties so much more money is left in the pockets of the
taxpayers.
To sum up the whole matter, an alteration in the incidence of taxa-
tion cannot fairly be called an increased burden on the body politic, and
should, therefore, be submitted to with a good grace in,consideration of
the benefits accruing through the welding together of the peoples, mostly
of British origin, into an Australian Nation under the British Crown.
Notwithstanding what may be said to the contrary, it is the fact that the
bond fide annual cost of Federation is not likely to exceed <£300,000 a year,
of which the share of New South Wales should be within £ 126,000, and
that ere long should disappear entirely.
It is not surprising that many people begii. to think the Federal financial
problem is insoluble, and that the best way out of the difficulty is to
trust the Federal Parliament to do what is right and equitable after obtaining
data from a five years’ experience of the incidence of a uniform tariff and
intercolonial freetrade. There are others, however, who still cling to the
foolish idea that certain statisticians and writers on finance—occasionally,
but mistakenly, called “financial experts”—are able, with the help
of statistics pertaining to a different state of affairs, to evolve out of


their inner consciousness financial schemes superior to anything that
Parliamentarians could be expected to devise seven years hence; that is,
with the added experience of a two years’ transitional period, and of a five
years’ uniform tariff! Surely it is only necessary to mention this mistaken
idea to remove sad misgivings at present prevalent in the minds of not a
few. If any person cares to glance hack seven years, say to 1891, and to
imagine that financial experts at that time could have devised financial
arrangements for 1898, he will be able to see how futile it will be for
those of us now living in 1898 to forecast events in 1905. Let us be honest.
The lion at present in the path of Federation, from a financial point of
view, is the want of confidence in New South Wales in the honesty
of her Parliament and of the Federal Parliament. For argument’s
sake let it be granted that New South Wales will contribute 40 per cent,
of the Federal customs and excise revenue, and that the tariff will be one to
yield £6,500,000. Forty per cent, of that would be £2,600,000, which we
shall also admit will yield our Treasurer £1,000,090 at least in excess of
his requirements. What is he to do with it ? Surely he ought to
abolish in the meantime land and income taxes, terminate the present
pernicious system of treating proceeds of land sales as revenue, and devote
the remainder to the relief of burdens, or to granting endowments to
municipalities and local Government bodies, to a reduction in developmental
railway rates, &c., &c. “Not at all,” say the wise men; “most of the
125 members of the Assembly, judging by past experience, would, as
did the Assyrian, “come down like the wolf on the fold,” and
would insist upon a scramble to placate “ their constituents, and, of
course merely incidentally, secure themselves in their Parliamentary
positions.” Surely the electors have the remedy in their own hands,
and, whether they rise to the occasion or not, do not let them, at all
events, blame the Federal Parliament, whose supreme duty it will be to
weld the Commonwealth into a compact whole on principles of equity,
and with as little disarrangement of State finances as is compatible with
safety to the body politic whose interests they represent, and of course
ought to guard.
To return to our starting point. It is refreshing to find that our
quondam advocate for Federation, the Daily Telegraph, actually, on the
11th April, expressed itself thus Throughout our calculations upon
Federal finance, we never took Mr. Coghlan’s method of arriving at the
proportions in which the various States might be expected to contribute
towards the tariff, because there would eventually be a fallacy in al
such calculations, which Mr. Pulsford has urged strongly against Mr.
Coghlan, though strangely he appears to overlook the fact that it also
applies to his own figures with equal force.”
Recognising the fallacy alluded to, we have given in our adhesion to
the book-keeping system for a limited time as the fairest way of ascertaining
how the Federal surplus should be distributed, because under Clause
87, at least three-fourths of the revenue from Customs and excise must be


returned to the States, and, unless the distribution is thoroughly equitable,
a very unhappy state of affairs would hi bound to exist.
We are persuaded that so fir from £1,750.000 being required)
as alleged by Mr. Cnghlan, to cover loss on Transferred Services and
for new Federal expenditure, the previous estimate of £1,550,000 is
much more than ample, as we shall proceed to show. At the Adelaide
Session of the Convention, figures arrived at by the original Finance Com-
mittee were on the basis that six colonies including Queensland, would join
the Federation, and on that supposition, after allowing liberal margins [e g.,
Defence £750,000—£584,612=£165,388, and other contingencies £163,300
plus £54,175) the aggregate provision asked was “Probable Expenditure
for Services taken over ” £1,250,000, and “Probable new Federal Expendi-
ture ” £300,000. Relative to new expenditure, it is interesting to note
that, under the Draft Bill of 1891, Sir Samuel Griffith estimated that
£230,000 should suffice for the six colonies, which included remunera-
tion for 48 Senators at £SOO and 115 Members in the House of
Representatives at £soo—together £81,500, as against 36 Senators and
76 Representatives at £4OO each, together £44,800, in the Adelaide scheme
The new Finance Committee at Melbourne were so anxious to make
very ample provision for unforeseen contingencies, that they practically
adopted the Adelaide recommendations for six colonies as applicable to five
colonies only, hut withont attempting to make any specific provisions for
bringing about uniformity in postal charges or minutely allocating the
provision. On 18th February Sir George Turner laid on the table a Return
to the order of Dr. Quick, giving the latest statistics in connection with
the Services and Works to be transferred from the five States to the
Commonwealth, some particulars of which may be summarised as follows :
Annual expenditure on services to he transferred .. £2,729,736
Annual Revenue (excepting from Customs and Excise) 1,834,744
Net Expenditure chargeable to the Commonwealth .. £894,992
If to this £894,992 be added for Contingencies £355,008, we have the
recommendation of £1,250,000.
Surely the increase for Contingencies ought to go a long way to satisfy
the public that the estimate has not been a cheese-paring one. It may
be remembered that, allowing £56,479 for interest on cost of Fortifications,
&c., the outlay on Defence in the five colonies only amounted, by the Returns,
to £469,693, for which Mr. Coghlan, however, considers the provision of
£750,000 recommended at Adelaide is insufficient—in fact he thinks if
the military authorities were consulted they would probably suggest
£1,250,000.
Some time since a leading Sydney paper desired to know what provision
did the Finance Committee make for interest <>n value of properties passing
to the Commonwealth under clause 85 of the Bill. In the £2,729,736
above mentioned, no less than £305,786 represents interest, which means


that upwards of £10,000,000 of debt will be assumed by the Commonwealth
in exchange for properties acquired or to be acquired by it. The probable
new Federal expenditure estimated at £300,000, provides for interest on
cost of new buildings and maintenance thereof .. .. £52,540
Margin for contingencies (£54,175 + £7,200) .. •• 01,375
£113,915
The actual expenditure may be summarised thus
Cost. Margin. Total.
/«) Transferred Services ... . £694,992 £355,008 ... £1,250,000
(b) New Federal Expenditure ... 186,085 113,915 ... 300,000
£1,081.077 £468,923 £1,550,000
As there will only be 30 Senators and 64 Representatives to be pro-
vided for, at .£4OO a year, the annual charge in connection therewith
will not exceed £37,600. It may also be noted that, as by clause 71 of
the Bill, the Parliament can invest State Courts with Federal juris-
diction, the cost of the Federal Judiciary is not likely to exceeed the
provision recommended ; in fact, for some years, the Federal High
Court is not likely to consist of more than a Chief Justice and two or
three Justices. Possibly it may not be amiss to mention that, financi-
ally, the Post and Telegraph Department appears thus:
Outlay, including interest (179,455) £1,846,833
T . 1,654,322
Less, income ... ••• ••• ••• ’ ’
Deficiency ... ••• ••• £192,511
The loss, exclusive of interest, is apparently only £13,056.
As the Constitution can be amended from time to time, if it is
found, after some experience, that the finances of any State or States
require special consideration not provided for in the Constitution, the
necessary powers will doubtless be obtained. The writer more than
once advocated special consideration to be given to Tasmania, as it
seemed to him that it would be better for the other States to grant
temporary subsidies rather than to increase the Federal tariff merely
to meet the exigencies of any particular State. It is hoped, however,
that the mining industry will deve op so satisfactorily in lasmania
that her revenue will continue to show great elasticity. Should any of
the States find it necessary to exercise greater economies than are at
present practised, it is believed that the remark “ retrenchment has
been carried on as far as practicable ” is scarcely justified. Why not
continue to reduce the number and remuneration of the members of the
State Legislatures ? So far, in this colony, the idea seems to be
spreading that it would be wisdom to reduce the membership of the


Legislative Assembly to 60, and probably the other colonies think
similarly. On establishment of the Commonwealth, doubtless one
Agent-General will suffice in place of five, and not a few Ministerial
portfolios could with advantage be combined as in the earlier and, as
many think, the better days of Responsible Government.
We look with approval on the appointment by the Government of
a Local Commission of independent men to report on the financial
proposals, and the conflicting statistics so sedulously put before the
public of this colony. We believe, at the same time, that any Commission
appointed will admit that it is practically impossible to prognosticate what
an unframed tariff will produce, or what will its incidence be under totally
different circumstances than at present exist, and with intercolonial freetrade
as an additional disturbing factor.
Looking to the future, we indulge in the hope that by conversion and
consolidation of the debts, and possibly through the great economies to be
effected by a federalisation of the railways, considerable relief from financial
burdens will be obtained, but we in this, as in other matters, believe in
“ hastening slowly.”
At the end of the five years’ uniform tariff Western Australia will have
survived the special treatment granted to her under the Constitution, and
she, with New South Wales and Queensland —whom we still expect to
have with us—will represent the larger revenue-yielding States. The
financial problem is a difficult one to solve satisfactorily, but, judging by
the experience of older Federations, we need not be down-hearted.
One of the many advantages of Federation will be that we shall have a
Commonwealth Statistical Department to which we can refer without the
trouble of reconciling conflicting statistics made up at different periods of
time from different standpoints, and, therefore, occasionally overlapping.
South Australia will probably ere long offer to the Commonwealth the
control of the Northern Territory, which in time will become a State. The
transfer will relieve the South Australian finances to the extent of £60,000
a year, but the responsibility should be accepted without demur.
In connection with the Federal capital, there should be at least 100
square miles of country, so that by the sale or lease of town allotments and
suburban sections a considerable income may in time be forthcoming.
All things considered, the establishment of the Commonwealth will in
time be practically a pecuniary gain to the people through economies
effected by the amalgamation of departments, the increased intercourse
through the removal of barriers to intercolonial trade, a more efficient system
of defence, reduction of interest on public indebtedness (itself more than
sufficient to defray the initial cost of maintaining the Federal Government),
and, which is really of more importance than financial gains, there will be
the moral gain attached to a wider citizenship and the growth of nationhood
under the Crown.


Apparently there is not the slightest chance of our ever getting Aus-
tralian Government stocks included in “Trust Securit es ” in the United
Kingdom until Federation is an accomplished fact. “The Outlook,” of
sth March, says :
“A Federation of the Australian indebtedness is, in our judgment,
distinctly desirable, while its practicability should be increased by the fact
that the entire revenues and resources of Australasia, if concentrated under
one Government, should he ample to enable that Government to prepare a
scheme of such a nature as to ensure its complete success.”
Finally, we once more repeat that the initial cost of establishing the
Commonwealth should not exceed £125,000 a year to New South Wales,
and proportionately less if Queensland joins the Federation. Latest
advices from Queensland point to her almost certain accession, if New South
Wales accepts the Constitution on Referendum Day, June 3rd, 1898.




