

REMARKS
UPON
THE TREATMENT
OF
CONVICTS AND TRANSPORTATION;
WITH SUGGESTION’S FOR THE
SUPPRESSION OF CRIME.
BY THE REV. W. C. OSBORN,
CHAPLAIN OF THE GAOL, BATH.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY ROBERT K. BURT, HOLBORN HILL, CITY.
1864.


CRIME HAS BEEN DOMINANT, AND WHO IS
TO BE BLAMED?
Most serious crimes have in late years been committed in our laud: indi-
viduals have been the victims, and the country has been disgraced. The
number of prisoners in custody, the aggregate of offences committed, the
amount of public money expended upon the detection and punishment of
crime, combined with the loss of private property and personal security, have
been sufficient to create a panic in our social relations. A remedy, a change,
is demanded by the public. Thus attention is drawn to a subject hitherto
unpopular and repulsive, and it is to be hoped that the causes of crime, the
treatment of criminals, both while in custody and at liberty, will be discussed
w ith sound judgment and unbiassed opinions, and be followed with Christian
and enlightened polic} 7 ', coupled with decided measures. If the convicts have
more and better food than they require, let the dietary tables be examined
and amended. If the granting of tickets-of-leave and licenses to persons sen-
tenced to penal servitude promote crime, let them be revoked. But if the
hue-and-cry against the feeding and early discharge of the convicts be con-
sidered by reasonable and well-informed men on this subject only slight
matters of detail in the great question of suppressing crime, let inquiries be
instituted, until the great agencies inciting, causing, compelling the com-
mission of offences against the laws—even until some powerful and efficient
measures for counteracting them —are discovered. It must be borne in mind
that most of the gaols of the country are conducted on the separate system
of prison discipline, under which those in custody are allowed to have no
communication with each other, and very little with the outer world. The
diet for short-time prisoners, such as commitments not exceeding two or three
weeks, is little else but bread and gruel; and for those detained a few
months, an increased quantity of bread, with an occasional change in food;
but when the periods are prolonged, the scale increases to what is considered
adequate to their work and position while undergoing their sentences. The
visiting justices can at any time refer the subject of diet to the consideration
of the Horae Secretary, who can have no reason to oppose their wishes, or be
influenced by any other motive than a proper administration of the laws of
justice and humanity. The Legislature has, moreover, vested in the medical
officers of gaols an almost absolute control over the diet of prisoners, as they
are held responsible for the ordinary health of the gaols under their care. They
can order beer, wine, spirits, meat, and any nourishment or stimulants they
may think proper ; and any disregard of duties in their special department
would be as culpable as any negligent custody of prisoners by the governors
of gaols.
The subject of diet requires a wise treatment, especially as the public


press and a British jury holding an inquest over any case of serious disre-
gard of the health and lives of convicts would not fail to discharge their
duties in reprobating any misconduct of a gaol medical official. Neither the
Legislature nor the people will tolerate with impunity a repetition of the
cruelties which have been, in the main, truthfully depicted in the popular
novel, “Never too late to Mend.” Who, then, is to blame for the real or
supposed failure of our penal system ? Has the letter or spirit of the Acts
of Parliament referring to the treatment of convicts been disregarded ? Have
the directors, with the late Sir Joshua Jebb at their head, forgotten the
deterrent or reformatory object of punishment? Have they been careless
custodiers or speculative philanthropists P Have they permitted the notion,
prevalent in some quarters, that to make a man industrious he should be
kept in idleness; or have they neglected to apply convict labour to useful,
improving, and public advantage? An imperfect acquaintance with the rules
and pursuits at our great penal establishments is sufficient to answer satis-
factorily these questions. The task of these gentlemen has been a difficult
one, with about 10,000 persons on their hands. Acts of Parliament have
guided them in some respects ; while the public interests, humane and even
educational and religious considerations have influenced them in others. No
public inquiry, no scrutiny of their proceedings, have they to fear. It will be
found that they have sometimes gone beyond the limits of their official duties
in giving advice to convicts on their liberation, and in this will be seen what
they would have done if their authority could have been extended and exer-
cised extra muros. They have in some cases withheld for a time a portion of
the gratuities belonging to the convicts, until applications have been made for
them by parochial clergy on behalf of those liberated; and in others they
have transferred the money in their hands to societies whose special objects
are to aid and emigrate discharged prisoners. They have been aware of the
great difficulties in the path of the deserving and persevering, as well as of
the weakness of the law in restraining the vicious and incorrigible freed
convict.
In truth, it has been for some years past the labour market and public
feeling versus ticket-of-leave ; and the reformation of convicts and the verdict
has been against the latter, while the costs have fallen on the former. The
issue has been to the advantage of neither party, but rather to the injury of
both. It has transpired in this action of the many against the few, that the
country do not want these persons, and that society is most unwilling to
receive them back again into her favour after they have been punished by the
rigour of the law. The colonists also have expressed plainly the same feel-
ings by refusing to receive them as convicts; and the Emigration Commis-
sioners, wanting chiefly agricultural labourers and steady ones, have closed
their doors against all persons of bad character. Hence discharged prisoners
have had the greatest difficulties placed in their way. Their absorption into
the classes of industrial life has been opposed both at home and abroad.
Our large and daily increasing population have also contributed to make our
island a vast prison-house. The disgraced classes cannot escape. If they
are patient under suffering, and proof against temptation, they may per-
chance get some occupation in the scramble of life ; but if they cannot bear a
hungry belly, if they cannot resist evil like martyrs, their situation is almost


hopeless. No one will employ them. Indeed, while persons wanting work
are abundant who have not been within the precincts of a gaol, they cannot
reasonably expect it. Hence they have presented to them the choice of three
evils : the union-house, the gaol, and starvation ; and to avoid the first and
last, they often run the risk of the second.
This is, and has been for years, our state. This is the real cause of the
present condition of our criminal population. Discharged prisoners are more
in bondage when liberated, and endure greater hardships than those which
can be inflicted on them in any gaol or penal settlement under a civilized
Government. They are expected to make bricks without straw; to get an
honest livelihood without the wages of industrial labour. Thousands would
gladly return to gaol within four-and-twenty hours after leaving it if the
commission of crime and its detection were not necessary to qualify them for
State protection and support. And it is not the prison food, nor its dietary
tables, that attract them; it is poverty, scorn, temptation, necessity, that
drive them thither, “ Give us work, give us wages, give ug. emigration,
they cry, but cry in vain. Sympathy for the adult offender! There is none,
or certainly very little, in our land. “ I have been told a thousand times,
says an old offender, “ to go and get work ; but it was never said to me
during twenty years, while in and out of prison, * I’ll give you work.
Hence I have cost the country some two thousand pounds, and expect to cost
a great deal more yet. I was sent to gaol for two months, when a boy, for
stealing a loaf of bread, and no one cared for me. I walked to the seaports,
but in vain. I tramped, sorefooted, thousands of miles when I was a lad, in
order to get honest employment, but it didn’t answer. I was tempted to
steal. I stole; I was imprisoned ; I was sent to Bermuda. I have learnt
the trade of a professional thief, and now I intend to follow it. I believe all
philanthropy to be a mockery, and religion to be a delusion ; and I care nei-
ther for God nor man. The gaol, penal servitude, and the gallows, are all the
same to me.” Hence, we would ask, is there no accessory to this man s
criminal life ? Need we be astonished if garrotters abound, or that midnight
ruffians rudely disturb our slumbers, or at the failure of the ticket-of-leave
system? How could it be otherwise P There has been no provision made for
these persons obtaining an honest livelihood. There have been no facilities
afforded them for emigration. Although we have colonies containing untold
acres requiring cultivation, we have kept hundreds of thousands of poor at
home in the agonies of poverty, in the slavery of crime, and in articulo
mortis physical and mental. It is not enough to brandish and strike home
the civil sword ; there must be justice, humanity, and common-sense in the
treatment of our convicts. Without these, severity becomes tyranny, and
tyranny begets madness. “It is useless,” said the late Sir Joshua Jebb,
“ for either the men or the women to form good resolutions in prison if they
become outcasts on discharge.” “ Let any one,” he further observes,
“ attempt to realize their position, without friends and without the means of
employment. What are they to do ? It is a vital question.”


TRANSPORTATION.
Theeh is a period, still in the memory of most of us, when several of our
colonies received annually some thousands of our population under sentence
of transportation. The dangerous classes of our country supplied the myriads
that filled our gaols. Association in our prisons carried on that education
in crime which had been commenced in our streets and alleys, while our
hulks, convict-ships, and penal settlements completed the system which en-
lightened persons in our days would he glad to blot out of the pages of English
history. The great number of criminal offenders sentenced in those days to
seven, ten, and fifteen years’ transportation, the cruelties and immoralities of
the floating dungeons in our harbours, the nameless horrors of the convict-
ships that were overladen with iniquity, and the Pandemonia of New South
Wales, Norfolk Island, and Bermuda, perfected a penal treatment of crimi-
nals in which a Sodom and Gomorrah might have gloried. Still there are
individuals in our Christian land, persons in ignorance of the past, who advo-
cate a return to transportation as a suitable punishment and as a convenient
way of disposing of our convicts. There are also some persons who, possess-
ing a modicum of information on the subject, and abhorring the past system
of transportation, think it possible to impose such restrictions, and apply such
improvements to it, that it might be renewed so as to confer mutual advan-
tages upon ourselves and our colonies. There are, however, but few inha-
bitants of our distant possessions of this opinion, except among the colonists
of Western Australia. They, it appears, are anxious to receive a small
number of our convicts every year, under certain conditions. They do not
wish either to have the worst of our criminals, or that the importation of con-
victs should be greater than that of free emigrants. They, on the other hand,
desire that there should be an equal number of females sent; and in order to
meet this difficulty it is suggested that Irish girls, who are said to be not
unwilling to marry ticket-of-leave prisoners, should be emigrated in equal
numbers. The legislature of that colony has passed an Act forbidding the
free settlers to use opprobrious language towards the convicts, from which
circumstance, as well as from others, it is clear that they wish the latter to
have equal protection and liberty, as soon as possible after their arrival, to
that of the former, except in being under the surveillance of the police for a
short period. Transportation, however, under any circumstances, would oblige
this country to fit out convict ships, pay the cost of passage, supply a regi-
ment of soldiers, and incur all the expenses of a penal settlement. A governor,
a military commandant, chaplains, surgeons, and a civil staff, would be neces-
sary, as well as the erection of barracks and prisons. This would lead to the
opening of public works, making roads into the interior, clearing of wood, and
other expensive operations. Having bad a considerable amount of experience
in such undertakings, our country could no doubt accomplish all that is
desired in such respects, but when achieved what advantages would the
mother-country derive ? She might thus expend millions of money, as she
has done in past generations. She might attend to all the scruples of the


Western Australians, and. assist them in preparing tlieir colony for free
emigrants, and ignore the wishes of the great majority of their countrymen
who have combined together against the future admission of convicts, and
then submit to relinquish the practice at the first request of its discontinuance.
Ic is very natural that the W estern Australians should offer to receive some
of our convicts; the soil of the Swan River settlement is much less fertile,
and its resources are not so great as those of Adelaide or other Australian
colonies, and on this account free emigrants prefer these parts of their con-
tinent. Hence as labourers are much wanted by the Western Australians,
they would be fortunate if the British public should decide upon thus sup-
plyiflg them. But before doing so, it is hoped there will be some good reasons
assigned, and some great necessity in our social condition for resuming trans-
portation. It must, however, be remembered that its deterrent character
under the old system had ceased long before it was relinquished. Many of
our convicts sought it, and even demanded it when it formed a part of their
sentences. How much more would they do so now, since the transportation
proposed is only penal emigration to a part of the globe that is El Dorado
itself in the minds of our labouring classes. Hence the advocates for deterrent
punishments must not in future number transportation among them. The
public, also, would do well to consider its value as a reformatory agency.
Hitherto it has been found extremely depraving to the convicts themselves,
as well as demoralizing to the soldiers, sailors, and emigrants that had any
connection with them. The evidence on transportation given before Sir
William Molesworth’s Committee in 1837, and before the Committees of the
Lords and Commons in 1856, would, even on a cursory perusal, dispel all
idea as to its reformatory tendency, if such should be entertained. But its
reintroduction is sought for by some on account of the security which might
be enjoyed by us through the removal of those from our country who break
the laws and disturb our peace. This, however, cannot be sanctioned if it
injures infant colonies, to the disregard of the old legal maxim, Sic utere tuo
ut alienum non Icedas. The colonies are not ours for mere selfish purposes,
and much less for occupation by those whom we would banish from our land
because we cannot govern or reform them. The difficulties, then, in the way
of a renewal of transportation are, in truth, insurmountable, and to attempt
to overcome them is undesirable, as it would provoke great opposition from
the colonies generally, and would entail heavy and permanent expenses upon
ourselves, without producing any adequate advantages, or any results which
would not be better, as well as more cheaply obtained, by punitive, reforma-
tory, and preventive measures at home. If “ education is the cheap defence
of nations,” then the best policeman is the schoolmaster, and too much atten-
tion cannot be given to the diffusion of knowledge, especially among the
rising generation. Earnestly we hope that ere long no child in this country
will be allowed to grow up in ignorance and vice, much less be numbered
among our criminals. And as labour is not only a social necessity, but a
Divine ordinance, every attention should be given by the State to its supply.
A want of honest employments must pauperize and deprave the working
classes. If our own land cannot furnish such occupations in sufficient abun-
dance they must be sought for in other portions of the empire. For supply,
ing these it would be a national blessing if some well-regulated system of


emigration was established, as, like education, it might be employed not only
as a preventive of crime, but as a reformatory measure. Whenever any of
our youth fall into a criminal course, traceable in part to the want of occupa-
tion, no better means for arresting their progress in crime has or can be
devised than useful and active labour. A very large proportion of those who
swell our criminal statistics owe their entrance upon a vicious course to desti-
tution and demoralizing idleness, w hile three-fourths of those who now relapse
into the commission of crime might be reclaimed if, after their isolation and
instruction in our gaols, they were assisted in obtaining honest employment,
either at home or in our colonies abroad. This would greatly conduce to the
repression of crime in its earliest stages, and convert tens of thousands of our
discharged prisoners into useful, industrious labourers. By the employment
of such-like means we feel assured, in a few years, there would be compara-
tively but a small number left for other and more stringent measures. More-
over, the existence of a door of escape from poverty, wretchedness, and crime,
would justify a severer course being pursued with those who should be unwil-
ling to avail themselves of the proffered deliverance and blessing, and prefer
a criminal life. Even the more serious offenders, after longer terms of impri-
sonment, might, after probation in employment on public works, followed by
three or six months entire liberty under sureties or a local magisterial license,
be allowed to spend their gratuities on their emigration. Thus a great
deal of the crime in our land might be prevented, criminals reformed, trans-
portation become unnecessary, and the welfare of all parties be respected and
advanced.
SUGGESTIONS FOR THE FURTHER
SUPPRESSION OF CRIME.
Facilities should be given, and encouragement afforded, to persons dis-
charged from gaol, in their efforts to follow an honest and industrious life;
while there should be insurmountable obstacles, certain and immediate
punishment, in the way of those taking a contrary course.
A knowledge of the history of our criminals, particularly of professional
thieves, burglars, garrotters, &c., and inspection over their conduct after dis-
charged from gaol, combined w ith the power of offering them assistance in an
honest course, would lead to rational and efficient measures being taken to
suppress their crimes.
The visiting justices of gaols should have the power of making a most
searching inquiry into the antecedents of any prisoner; and refusal by any
prisoner to assist with correct information as to name, usual place of abode,
and previous pursuits, should render him liable to be punished as a rogue
and vagabond.
The visiting justices of gaols should have the power of demanding bail of
any prisoner previous to discharge from gaol, and of any person within their
jurisdiction, as justices of the peace, who has been during the previous two
years in penal servitude. The bail might be accepted from two respectable


householders, from the secretary or agent of a certified discharged prisoners’
aid society, or from two magistrates. Regulations for the observance of dis-
charged prisoners under such bail should be made by the local magistrates,
subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
The visiting justices should have the power of affording employment to
discharged prisoners, and of furthering their emigration, if deserved and
found necessary, to a distant portion of the kingdom, or to a British colony.
Discharged prisoners forfeiting bail, or being refused it by the magistrates,
should be liable to a recommittal to gaol for three months; and if, after that
period, they are without bail, and the magistrates refuse it on the ground of
recent bad conduct, such persons should be reported to the Secretary of
State, who should be empowered to place them on public works for two or
three years.
Discharged prisoners, in destitution and without employment, should be
allowed to put themselves under magistrates’ bail.
As prisoners in association forget their offences, their degradation, and their
punishment; as they school and embolden each in crime ; as they thus become
infidels in religion, rebels against the laws, and sworn enemies to the well-
being of society—all association among “ convicts ” and other prisoners
should be prohibited. If this were done it would be necessary to lessen the
amount of time spent in continuous separate confinement to a maximum of
nine or twelve months; and at the expiration of this period a ticket-of-leave
might be granted under magisterial bail. If this probation is forfeited, then
imprisonment should again be inflicted. More good might be expected to
attend this course than the infliction of any long period of penal servitude,
accompanied and followed by the wisest measures to fit prisoners, prior to
discharge, for ordinary life.
A few gaols in different parts of the country should be devoted to prisoners
sentenced to periods greater than six months, or even three months, in which
there should be one uniform system of strict and judicious treatment.
Above all things the Gospel must be preached to prisoners in the gaol
chapel, in the prison cell, and wherever set at liberty. Our enlightened prison
discipline has done much, and will do much, in civilizing the great body of
offenders against the laws; and punishment may deter them and others from
the commission of crime ; but “ he which converteth the sinner from the error
of his vay shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.”
Our gaols contain thousands of prisoners who ought to be at large; while
there are thousands of persons at large who ought to be in custody. The
former, by harsh laws, or by a severe administration of justice, are driven
into the criminal classes ; while the latter, through the want of measures re-
straining their conduct and preventing their crimes, are encouraged to con-
tinue in them.
