

The President,—The Society must appreciate highly any communication
upon physical geography from so eminent an authority as Sir John Herschel.
On this occasion he shows that this projection presents a more accurate repre-
sentation of the world in one sphere than any other stereographic projection.
It is not only more accurate than that of Mercator, but is, he suggests, more
correct than the ingenious projection prepared by our associate Col. James,
with which you may now compare it,
(The diagrams prepared by Sir John Herschel and those of Col. James were
then exhibited to the Meetipg.)
The Third Paper road was :
3. Remarks on the Isthmus of Suez, with Special Reference to the proposed
Canal. By Commander Bedford Pim, r.n., f.r.g.s.
During a visit to Egypt in December last, my attention was forcibly
drawn to a subject that has for the past few years engaged a con-
siderable amount of public interest —the cutting a canal across the
Isthmus of Suez.
While in Cairo I had the advantage of making the acquaintance
of gentlemen well qualified, both from local and professional know-
ledge, to form a dispassionate opinion on this much-vexed question,
and I now propose to review the subject in its various bearings, so
as to enable the Society to form an independent judgment of its
merits.
I shall begin with describing the geographical position and phy-
sical features of the country, then detail the attempts of the Ancients
at canalization, and conclude with a narration of the vaiious plans
and projects which have been proposed in modern times.
Egypt, of which the Isthmus of Suez is a component part, lies
between the 29th and 33rd degrees of E. long., and in both these
meridians is bounded by sandy deserts. On the north is the
Mediterranean, in the 31st parallel of north latitude, while to
the south of parallel 23° is the boundary line. On the south-east
the waters of the Bed Sea wash the coast and form the roadstead
of Suez, whence to Pelusium, namely the “ Isthmus, ’ the dis-
tance is only 65 geographical or 74 statute miles; Suez being
situated in 29° 58' 37" N. lat., Tineh, the ancient Pelusium, in
31° 3' 37" N. lat.
The northern or Mediterranean coast presents a barren appear-
ance, and consists of low sandy hillocks and swamps. Except-
ing Alexandria, no sort of harbour for vessels of any size exists.
The water in the vicinity of the land is shallow, the bottom shelv-
ing very gradually towards the beach, especially so in the Bay of
Tineh or Pelusium, where the depth of 25 feet averages a distance


from the shore of more than 3 miles. The current has a constant
easterly set, the velocity of which is much influenced by the strength
of the wind. The tides have a very inconsiderable rise and fall,
and are more or less dependent on the winds ; the maximum height
ever recorded being only 2 feet 8 inches.
The prevailing winds are westerly and north-westerly in July,
August, and September, and continue to blow very much in the
same direction, with the exception of an occasional gale from the
south-west, until March; the southerly winds then prevail until
June, during which month easterly winds with thick weather and
northers at night may be expected. Thus, during the greater
part of the year westerly and north-westerly winds cause a constant
swell and surf to roll into the exposed Bay of Pelusium, which is
open to sixteen points of the compass; and, when to this is added
the extreme lowness of the coast, without a single feature by which
any part can be recognized, some idea may be formed of the difficulty
and danger of the navigation.
The south-east or Red Sea coast-line is also extremely arid and
sandy, but unlike the Mediterranean shores, which are flat, parts of
it, such as Gebel Awebel and Gebel Attaka, may be called mountain-
ous. In the immediate vicinity of Suez the land is low, and the
roadstead encumbered with shoals and sandbanks, the latter of con-
siderable extent, jutting far into the sea, and susceptible of move-
ment in heavy winds.
The harbour of Suez is only accessible to the small native coasters,
and even the roadstead has only a depth of 25 feet at about 3 miles
from the quay. The currents in the Red Sea are influenced by the
winds, and according to their strength attain a velocity of from 15
to 20 miles in the 24 hours. The tides have a much greater rise
and fall than in the Mediterranean, the maximum height being 7 feet
2 inches, and the minimum observed 2 feet, showing a difference of
4 feet 6 inches between the highest tide of the Mediterranean and
that of the Red Sea. The prevailing winds from March to Novem-
ber are northerly, but during the remaining three months, December,
January, and February, southerly winds blow, though by no means
steadily. This law is subject to some variation down to the Red
Sea, but as a general rule it holds good as far as the straits of Babel
Mandeb. The Red Sea runs about north-west and south-east 1308
miles from Suez to Aden, with a varying breadth of from 30 to
200 miles. The navigation is rendered very unsafe by the numerous
rocks, shoals, and coral banks which fringe the shore on either side,
but the centre is deep and free from any dangers ; this has been
abundantly proved by the steamers of the Peninsular and Oriental


Company, which have navigated that part of the sea for many years
without accident. On the other hand, sailing ships beating against
the northerly wind are obliged to approach the shore on either side,
and often become hopelessly involved in the perils just alluded to:
in fact, the average loss of shipping during the last year was 1 in
10 —not clumsy colliers, but fine ships, English and American,
some of them upwards of 1000 tons.
Of 12 vessels which have lately reached the port of Suez from
Aden, the average passage has been 52 days, which is rapid to what
it used to be, and is the result of employing first-class ships. The
passages from England to Alexandria and from Aden to Suez are the
most tedious in the world ; the first averages 55 miles per day, the
latter 25 miles, while other ocean routes average 100; therefore, in
making a comparison, the distance between England and Egypt
must be multiplied by 2 at least, and between Suez and Aden by
4. Thus it is certain that neither in the Eed Sea nor the Mediter-
ranean navigation can safety or certainty of passage be looked for by
sailing ships, and the captain of a merchant ship would think twice
before he adopted such a route.
The physical features of Egypt are unique; it has been well
named the “ Eiver Land.” In its pristine state it was doubt-
less a complete desert, but the Nile, overtopping its banks, flooded
the sandy surface, and, depositing its rich alluvium, soon reclaimed
by its fertilizing effect a large portion of the adjacent wilderness.
The Nile has a total length of 1320 miles from source to mouth,
but taking the windings into consideration it is nearly twice as
long—viz. 2240 miles. The depth is most irregular: 50, 60, and
even 70 feet often occur; but shoals, stretching from bank to bank,
and having only 2 or 3 feet water on them, are frequently met with,
so that the river is not navigable for vessels larger than our Thames
boats. At nearly 100 miles from the sea the waters divide into the
Damietta and Eosetta branches, and form the far-famed Delta,
which is an immense triangular plain, well cultivated by means of
a most elaborate and pains-taking system of irrigation. It has been
calculated that the Nile valley, as far as the apex of the Delta,
averages a breadth of about 7 miles ; namely, in the widest part
10 or 11, and in the narrowest 2 miles across, being, as already
observed, entirely due to the alluvium deposited at each high Nile
to the depth of 0 • 004 inches, and which, according to Eeynault, in
his ‘ Memoires sur I’Egypte,’ contains 11 water, 9 carbon, 6 oxide of
iron, 4 silica, 4 carbonate of magnesia, 18 carbonate of lime, 48
alumina = 100,
Besides the amount of alluvium deposited, millions of tons are
179
PIM ON THE ISTHMUS OF SUEZ.
April 11, 1859.]


annually discharged into the Mediterranean, and meet an east-going
current which carries the mass towards the Bay of Pelusium. The
effect of this mud-carrying current would be to silt up any harbour
or channel which came in its way. A striking instance of the
quantity of mud discharged by the Nile is related in Dr. Clarke’s
‘ Travels.’ He says :
“ July 1 6th. —This day, being Sunday, we accompanied Captain
Culverhouse, H.M.S. Romulus, to the gun-room, to dine with his
officers, according to his weekly custom; as we were sitting down
to dinner the voice of a sailor employed in heaving the lead was
suddenly heard calling ‘ half four.’ The captain starting up reached
the deck in an instant, and almost as quickly putting the ship in
stays she wont about. Every seaman on board thought she would
be stranded. As she came about, the surface of the water exhibited
a thick black mud. This extended so widely that the appearance
resembled an island, at the same time no land was really visible,
not even from the mast-head, nor was there any notice of such a
shallow in any chart on board. The fact is (as we learnt afterwards)
that a stream of mud, extending for many leagues off the mouths of
the Nile, exists in a moveable deposit on the coast of Egypt.”
During the periodical overflow of the Nile, its waters attain in
Upper Egypt the height of from 30 to 35 feet; at Cairo about 23
feet; and in the northern part of the Delta only 4 feet. It begins
to rise at Cairo about the beginning of July, increases during 100
days till the middle of October, then subsides, and arrives at its
lowest point near the end of April. During the period of inunda-
tion the current is very powerful, so much so that fresh water may
be skimmed off the surface two or three miles at sea. The average
force of the current throughout the year may be considered 2i miles
per hour. The minimum discharge has been estimated at 54,000,000
cubic feet of water per hour. The amount of alluvium deposit is
0-004 inches. At the mouth of both the Damietta and Eosetta
branches there is a bar in the form of a horse-shoe, with an average
depth of 5 feet water. During high Nile the great velocity of
the stream drives this bar some distance to seaward, but, as the
strength of the current diminishes, it returns to its original position
in the old form.
The entire supply of sweet water for the whole of Egypt is de-
rived from the Nile; there are wells, it is true, dug in the sands,
but the water they contain is generally salt, and even under the
most favourable circumstances brackish.
The stratification of Lower Egypt belongs entirely to the tertiary
formation.


The eastern longitudinal Talus of the Libyan Desert, forming the
western boundary line of the Nile Yalley, is composed of parallel
layers of more or less argillaceous and arenaceous limestone, alter-
nating with beds of shale of variable thickness, the dryness of the
soil imparting hardness to the layers of clay. On the eastern side
of the valley, the part we have to do with, the surface consists of
loose sand. Sand-hills of some height frequently occur, and the sand
on these hills is so extremely fine that it is put in motion by a very
slight wind, and wells 7 or 8 feet deep are filled up in one storm.
The highest part of the isthmus is about 40 feet, and is near the
Bitter Lake Basin, which is 37 feet below the level of the sea.
There are several depressions covered with salt, into one of which
(that is to say Lake Timsah) the Nile during inundations some-
times finds its way. The basin of Lake Timsah is 2 feet below the
level of the Bed Sea.
To the northward nothing but flat sand-plains present themselves
as far as Lake Mensalah, which bears the character of a quicksand,
and, consequently, is dangerous to travel near. Below the surface
of the isthmus, at a mean depth of 13 feet, water is met with, and
most probably the subsoil would partake very much of the “ quick”
character of Lake Mensalah.
Such a soil as that just described would be difficult enough to
excavate, the sand having a tendency to fall in as fast as thrown
out; and when the watery subsoil is reached, how much greater
would be the difficulty!—in fact it is problematical if a cutting could
be made at all. Then, as regards Lake Mensalah, no one can tell
to what depth the walls must be sunk before the excavations could
be commenced.
It would seem that when Egypt (780 b.c.) had attained a maritime
supremacy, and its commerce began to extend to Arabia and India,
the project naturally arose of opening out an easy mode of access to
the Nile by means of a canal connecting that river with the Bed Sea.
According to Strabo, Pliny, and Aristotle, the attempt to cut a canal
to the Bed Sea was first made by Sesostris, about the time of the
Trojan war, B.c. 1184. This canal, however, appears to have been
intended for irrigating purposes only. Herodotus informs us that
the work was commenced in the reign of Nico, b.c. 600, who failed
to accomplish his object in consequence of being warned against it
by an oracle. The next attempt was made during the Persian
occupation by Darius, who is said to have cut from the Bitter Lakes
to the sea, but no account can be found of the opening of this canal ;
indeed Aristotle asserts that the work was stopped in consequence
of the different level of the Bed Sea.


Ptolemy Philadelphus, b.c. 254, has the credit of completing this
great undertaking ; but lam of opinion, after a careful examination
of the ground, that it was not by cutting a canal, but rather by the
construction of a good road, the remains of which are very distinct,
and over which, no doubt, the “ ships of the Desert,” as the camels
are called in the Arabian language, passed to and fro. The am-
biguity of this phrase has most probably led to the belief of a ship-
canal through the Desert—a mistake easily made by writers who de-
pended on the viva voce statements of the natives. The Caliph Omar
removed the point of junction from Bubastis, higher up the Nile, by
which means he obtained 6 feet more rise, and, consequently, the
navigation of the canal was much prolonged; before that time it
had only been navigable two months in the year.
Besides the usefulness of this canal as a means of transit, vast
tracts of desert were reclaimed .by its fertilising influence, and
flourishing cities sprung up on its banks and decayed on its dis-
appearance, the ruins of which are still to be seen. Its original
course was as follows:—Commencing at Bubastis, on the Pelusiac
or eastern arm of the Nile, now completely filled up, it was con-
ducted to Lake Timsah on the Crocodile Lakes, and thence to the
Bitter Lakes, where, as I said before, I suspect the canal ended.
The cutting was altogether about 60 miles, averaging a breadth of
150 feet and a depth of 20 feet.
This circuitous communication was probably preferred both for
local and political reasons, but, unfortunately, there is no informa-
tion regarding the effect this great undertaking produced on the
commercial prosperity of the country. Under the Eomans it was
little used, but the Saracens found it of importance in their commu-
nication with Mecca. It is probable that the great amount of time
and labour required to keep the canal in working order, and the
fact that, in practice, the primitive mode of transit by caravan was
cheaper and better adapted to the requirements of the country, were
the reasons it so repeatedly fell into disuse. With some little trouble
the extent and direction of both road and canal can still be made
out.
I have now given as brief an account as possible of the geogra-
phical and physical features of Lower Egypt, and the attempts
made by the ancients to unite the Mediterranean and Bed Sea.
Certainly, both natural causes and the antecedents of the country
seem to sound a note of warning against the idea of canalization.
Indeed, the geographical position of the isthmus, its exposed and
dangerous northern coast, as well as barren and impracticable soil,
offer obstacles of so grave a nature to the successful accomplishment


Via Suez.
Via Cape.
Miles.
Miles.
Constantinople..
.. .. 5,400 .. ..
18,300
Trieste
.. .. 7,020 .. ..
17,880
Marseilles
.. .. 7,122 .. ..
16,950
Cadiz
.. .. 6,672 .. ..
15,600
London
.. .. 9,300 .. ..
17,850
of such a project that, if ever carried out, the other marvels of Egypt
would dwindle into insignificance before it.
Every one must be struck with the grandeur of the idea of dividing
two continents so as to enable large ships to proceed direct from the
ports of Europe to ports of the East. The realization of such an
idea would certainly be quite in accordance with the spirit of an
age in which so much has been done to annihilate time and space ;
and, doubtless, neither talent, energy, nor wealth would be wanting
to make the attempt, could even a chance of success be shown.
At the close of the last century the great Napoleon attempted to
conquer the “ Land of Egypt,” then, as now, the key to our Indian
Empire; and he was convinced that the permanent possession of
that land was the key to universal empire. The measures adopted
by him to retain it in his grasp were worthy his genius. To him is
due the conception of the canalization of the Isthmus of Suez, and
he argued, if a direct means of communication with India could'be
effected, not even England, with all her wealth and manufacturing
powers, could compete commercially with Marseilles, or any of the
Italian, Greek, or Austrian ports of the Mediterranean, each of
which would have the advantage of being nearly half the voyage in
advance of this country, as the following table will show :
Distances to Bombay.
No doubt the attempt to unite the two seas would have been made
had Napoleon been left in quiet possession of the country, but the
British, in those old-fashioned days, strongly objected to the occu-
pation of a road to their possessions, and therefore summarily ejected
the French from Egypt. The idea of joining the Mediterranean and
Ked Sea by means of a canal received, as already observed, its first
impulse from the great Napoleon, and, since that period, various
plans have been devised to carry out such an undertaking, all of
them, however, based on the result of the levellings of the French
Savans in 1799, who reported that the Mediterranean was 30 feet
below the level of the Eed Sea at Suez. It appears to have been a
received opinion of the ancients that a difference of level must exist
between any two neighbouring seas.
The Egyptians no doubt assumed a difference of level, which was
VOL. 111. Q


the more extraordinary as they were such excellent hydraulic engi-
neers : even the French fell into the same error; in short, such a
notion prevailed until very lately :—for instance, the Mediterranean
was conceived to be higher than the Atlantic; the Euxine as
much as 40 feet above the iEgean; and, still more strange, the gulfs
of Egina and Corinth were supposed to have a-very great difference
of level. Even as late as the commencement of this century few
dared call this theory in question, but it is worth noting that La-
place and Fourier came to the conclusion that a difference of level
was impossible.
In the present day it is received as an axiom that no matter how
narrow the separation between the two seas, both of them belong
essentially to that vast expanse of ocean, and are therefore subject
to the same levelling law.
This fact was not proved till 1846: in that year M. Talabot, an
eminent engineer, M. de Negrelli, an Austrian, and Mr. Eobert Ste-
phenson entered into a formal agreement to share the labour and cost
of a preliminary investigation, with a view to test the practicability
of a project suggested to M. Talabot by Linant Bey, a French engi-
neer, resident many years in Egypt,—namely, cutting a canal across
the Isthmus of Suez.
A corps of scientific engineers was accordingly sent out, and
reported in January, 1847, that, after the most careful series of levels,
they had ascertained beyond question that no difference of level
whatever existed between the two seas, and that consequently a
canal, capable of being scoured by the waters of either sea, was im-
practicable, especially as both may be said to be nearly tideless.
The arrangements made by the three gentlemen just named were
as follows :—M. Talabot was to superintend the levelling operations,
M. de Negrelli to undertake the hydrographical inspection of the
Bay of Tineh or Pelusium, while Mr, Robert Stephenson examined
the Red Sea outlet of the proposed canal in the vicinity of Suez.
Circumstances prevented Messrs. Talabot and N egrelli from visit-
ing Egypt, although they were represented by carefully selected
employees, but Mr. R. Stephenson made a personal inspection of the
ground, and thoroughly mastered all the scientific and technical
details of the project. The result of these admirable arrangements
was a complete exhaustive survey of the locality, which led to the
unanimous conviction that the construction of a direct canal between
Suez and Tineh was a difficulty insurmountable.
A comprehensive report of these proceedings was drawn up by
M. Talabot, and is one of the most lucid documents ever written on
the subject. The evidence just detailed appeared so conclusive that


all idea of joining the two seas by an open cut was abandoned. It
may be interesting to state that the cost of the investigation
amounted to no less a sum than 4500/., which was paid by the
gentlemen I have named, to whom doubtless the credit is due of
setting at rest the much-vexed question of difference of level be-
tween the Mediterranean and Eed Sea. Since 1847 the Isthmus
has been twice re-levelled, each time with the same result as at
first.
For several years the Suez Canal project remained closed and
abandoned, but the idea of overcoming a barrier apparently so in-
significant as the Isthmus was not permitted to rest. M. Talabot
himself suggested a plan by which he hoped to lessen some of the
difficulties. Messrs. Barrault likewise submitted proposals, and
both these projects I shall briefly detail.
M. Talabot proposed to start from a point about 6 miles below
Suez, where deep water is found near the shore; to follow the
“ Ouadee Toumilat,” and proceed to within a short distance of Cairo,
to cross the Nile above the Barrage without making use of the stream
itself; thence to take the direction of Alexandria, where the canal
would terminate in the old harbour. The length of the canal would
be about 250 miles, breadth 328 feet, and depth 26 feet, and it would
be fed from the Kile.
M. Talabot proposed to cross the Nile by an aqueduct, the surface
of the water in which was to be raised 40 feet above the level of the
high water of the Nile, and 60 feet above the low water level. It
was to be 3500 feet in length, and reached by four locks at each end,
by which the summit level could be attained by the largest ships.
This aqueduct would indeed be one of the wonders of the world.
M. Talabot was quite alive to the difficulties of the scheme, but he
offers the proposal as preferable to a direct canal from Suez to
Pelusium.
The plan of Messrs. Barrault is to proceed from Suez to Lake
Mensalah in a direct line, then to turn in a direction parallel to the
sea for a distance of more than 100 miles, into the new harbour at
Alexandria. Instead of crossing the Nile above the Barrage, it will
be seen that they prefer carrying their canal across the mouths of
the Damietta and Kosetta branches. Neither of these schemes offers
a solution of the problem, for independently of the enormous expense
and many engineering difficulties frankly admitted by the projectors,
local and political causes present such serious impediments as to be
of themselves decisive against either proposal.
In spite of the conclusions arrived at, after the most careful inves-
tigations of the eminent engineers mentioned above, that the direct
Q 2


canal from Suez to Tineh was impracticable, the project has been
again revived.
M. Lesseps, a gentleman who formerly held a diplomatic appoint-
ment in Egypt, has taken up the question with an energy and zeal
worthy of success.
In November, 1854, he presented to Said Pasha, the present
Viceroy of Egypt, a memorial on the subject, which sets forth;—
“ That the utility of a navigable canal joining the Mediterranean
and Eed Sea has always been recognised.
“ That Napoleon when leaving Egypt said, * It is an important
affair ; it is not now in my power to accomplish it, but the Turkish
Government will perhaps one day owe its preservation and its glory
to the execution of this project.’
“ That the moment has now arrived to realise Napoleon’s pre-
diction.
“ That M. Lepere (50 years ago), Linant Bey, Gallici Bey, and
Maugel Bey, agree in the possibility of a direct cutting.
“ That the cost of the canal of Suez is not out of proportion with
the utility and profits of this important work, which would curtail
by more than one half the distance of India from the principal
countries of Europe and America.
“ That the pilgrimage to Mecca will henceforth be assured and
facilitated to all Mussulmans; an immense impulse given to steam
navigation and to distant voyages; the countries on the coasts of the
Eed Sea and the Gulf of Persia, the eastern coast of Africa, India,
the kingdom of Siam, Cochin China, Japan, the vast Empire of China
with its more than 300,000,000 of inhabitants, the Philippine Islands,
Australia and that immense archipelago towards which the emigra-
tion from old Europe is directed, brought nearer by nearly 3000
leagues to the Mediterranean Sea and the north of Europe,—such are
the sudden and immediate effects of cutting through the Isthmus of
Suez.
“ That the yearly European and American traffic round Cape
Horn and the Cape of Good Hope is 6,000,000 tons, and the world’s
commerce would realize 6,000,000?. annually by sending the ships
via the Gulf of Arabia.
“ That if only 3,000,000 tons passed through the canal, there
would be an annual produce of 1,200,000?. by collecting 10 francs
per ton.
“ That the political advantages are equally incontestable. To
England—mistress of Gibraltar, Malta, the lonian Islands, Aden,
important stations on the east coast of Africa, India, Singapore, and
Australia; to France ; to Germany,—for Prince Mettemich and


Baron de Bmck have long seen tliat in the question lay the aggran-
dizement of Trieste and Venice ; to Russia, United States, Spain,
Holland, all the towns of Italy, and ports and islands of Greece.”
In consequence of the above representations the present Viceroy
of Egypt, Said Pasha, granted a firman of concession to M. Lesseps,
subject of course to the approval of the Sultan. M. Lesseps’ first
step was to cause MM. Linant Bey and Mangel Bey to examine
the ground, and submit to him a plan of operations and an estimate
of expenses. Their report, which formed the groundwork of future
proceedings, may be briefly summed up as follows :
The canal starts from the eastern portion of the Gulf of Suez : it
traverses, taking a direction almost due north, about 15£ miles,
which separate Suez from the basin of the Bitter Lakes. It traverses
also these lakes unembanked, and from the northern extremity of
the Bitter Lakes it proceeds, cutting through the plateau of Serapeum
towards Lake Timsah. This lake it also traverses, and, winding
round the plateau of El Guisr, it skirts the eastern border of Lake
Mensalah, and falls into the inner part of the Bay of Pelusium,
whence it is prolonged into the sea until it reaches a depth of 24
feet. The width proposed was 330 feet, and the minimum depth 21
feet below low water of the Mediterranean. The locks, two in
number, were to be 330 feet long, 70 feet broad, with a minimum
depth of 21 feet. The estimated cost for the entire undertaking
amounts to 162,550,000 francs, or about 6,500,00(W. sterling, and it
was calculated that six years would be required for the completion
of the work. It has been proposed to modify this plan by removing
the point of junction with the Mediterranean 18 miles to the west-
ward, and to do away with the locks altogether; the canal will
therefore be 92 miles in length without a single lock. M. Lesseps
now proceeded to make his scheme public, and followed up that act
by appointing in the name of the Pasha an international commission,
composed of 13 gentlemen well qualified to give an opinion on the
subject. The different countries were represented as follows:
England, 4; France, 4 ; Holland, 1 ; Germany, 2 ; Spain, 1; Italy, I.
Their published report, which is an extremely able document, con-
firms that of MM. Linant Bey and Maugel Bey in every essential
particular, but does not mention the mode of constructing the ship
canal, or supplying it with water, and not a word is said of the
difference of opinion which existed among the members. A differ-
ence of opinion, however, did exist, and one of no mean im-
portance, inasmuch as one party pronounced in favour of M.
Lesseps’ scheme, while the other declared it impossible to dredge
or cut a channel through Lake Mensalah at a depth of 24 feet


below the Mediterranean, and thence across the Isthmus of Suez
to the Eed Sea. M. Lesseps, however, was naturally anxious to
insure unanimity at Alexandria, and himself suggested that every
word relating to the mode of construction and supplying with
water should he omitted in the report and reserved for discus-
sion in Europe, At the discussion the majority of the commission
voted in favour of the open cut without locks; the minority proposed
another plan, which might be considered feasible, while they re-
garded the open cut as impracticable : their project is to construct
a ship canal in nearly a direct line between Suez and Port Said, the
level of top water throughout the whole length (93 miles) to be 23
feet above the low water of the Mediterranean Sea; the embankment
to be carried into the deep water of the sea at each extremity, so as
to avoid the necessity of dredging, and the locks to be constructed
similar to the sea lock of the Caledonian Canal. The canal to be
supplied with water from the Nile, at a point below the Barrage
suitable for that purpose.
This, then, is the present condition of the scheme ; opinions are
divided as to its practicability, and M. Lesseps now only waits the
formal permission of the Sultan and the Pasha of Egypt to commence
operations. I shall now endeavour, as briefly as possible, divesting
the question of all technicalities, to show cause why the cutting a
canal across the Isthmus of Suez is a hopeless undertaking.
Commencing with the Mediterranean outlet of the proposed canal,
viz. Port Said, we find that a harbour has to be built which is in
itself a colossal work; the piers composing which would aggregate
at the very least seven miles in total length, of an uniform depth,
certainly not under thirty feet, with parapets and lighthouses of
considerable height.
The material for the rubble-work alone can only be obtained at a
distance of a hundred miles, while the stone for the finishing-work
is much farther off, in the islands of the Mediterranean ; thus, then,
the building operations would assume gigantic proportions. To
bring a case in point familiar to all, this part of the undertaking
would demand twice the labour and material required for the con-
struction of the Breakwater at Plymouth. But when, in addition
to this, it is known that the site of the proposed harbour is on an
exposed and shallow coast, subject to violent gales, a lee-shore a
great part of the year, and with the bottom of the sea uncertain as
a foundation for the piers; and, lastly, when it is borne in mind
that the well-known prevailing mud-carrying current must soon silt
up the entrance and channel, and that dredging can only be re-
sorted to under favourable circumstances, the most unthinking must


see that the success of this undertaking is involved in the greatest
uncertainty. Before leaving this part of the subject, I will briefly
allude to the cost of such a work. Take the Breakwater at Plymouth
for example, which cost 1,500,000/., and was twenty-eight years in
finishing: surely a work of twice its magnitude and labouring under
much greater disadvantages would cost twice as much ; but, instead
of the estimate of Port Said being 3,000,000/., it is only put down at
842,362/. in M, Lesseps’ scheme. We now come to the canal itself,
an open cut without locks, of 92 miles in length. To dredge such
a cut 26 feet below low water of the Mediterranean has been pro-
nounced impracticable by the very highest authority.
I shall not touch on the technical points of objection, but merely
ask you to picture to yourselves the cutting a trench 92 miles in
length, 330 feet broad, and 26 feet below the low-water level of the
Mediterranean; for though it is true that certain depressions occur
on the route, viz. Lakes Timsah and the Bitter Lakes, yet one is
only two feet below the Mediterranean, and the other would require
embankments; and when the cutting through the elevated ground
is taken into calculation, it will be quite evident that the gain is
balanced by the loss. The mere labour of such a work is enor-
mous ; but when the nature of the soil is considered, it indeed
assumes a hopeless appearance; the sand to an average depth of 13
feet might be removed, but at that depth water is met with. Lake
Mensalah has the character of being like a quicksand, and most
probably the entire subsoil will prove more or loss the same. Yet
for this gigantic undertaking the estimate is only 3,500,000/.
As a check to this estimate, I will remind you of the dimen-
sions and cost of the Caledonian Canal, one of the largest ship
canals in the world: its cuttings are about 25 miles, its depth
15 feet, width 50 feet, and cost about 1,000,000/. The Suez Canal
in actual length only is nearly four times as long, but when the
breadth and depth are considered it cannot be calculated at less
than eight times the size. To be within the mark in making a
comparison of cost, always supposing no greater difficulties than
those met with in the construction of the Caledonian Canal, I
consider 6,000,000/. the least sum that can be required.
We now arrive at the Eed Sea outlet of the canal, viz. the Port
of Suez, and here again difficulties are met with. Piers of scarcely
less aggregate length are proposed, which traverse a sandshoal;
lighthouses, &c., have to be constructed; but as the material is
close at hand, these difficulties may be overcome ; the estimate,
however, of 345,982/. 9s. Id. seems out of proportion to the nature


of the works, and, judging by the cost of similar undertakings,
1,500,000?. would at least be required.
Thus it appears that, supposing only ordinary difficulties occur,
the sum of 10,500,000?. would be requisite for the mere construction
of Port Said, 92 miles of canal, and Port Suez, M. Lesseps himself
fixed the contingent work and other expenditure at 3,600,000?.,
therefore the grand total for works would amount to 14,000,000?, ;
when, however, the serious obstacles I have detailed, and which
will inevitably be met with, are taken into consideration, it must
be evident that the 14,000,000?. I have named may be increased ad
infinitum; in fact, from the outset the utmost uncertainty regarding
expenses must prevail. At first sight it seems difficult to under-
stand how such a small estimate as 8,000,000?. could have been
supposed sufficient. But it is probable that Messrs. Linant Bey
and Maugel Bey have been dealing with forced labour, and the
expenditure of money of which no account has been given. This
forced labour is slavery in its worst form. The Fellahs are com-
pelled to leave their homes at the will of the Pasha : the Mamau-
dieh is a melancholy instance of this ; 20,000 of the workmen are
said to have perished during its construction. Males of all ages,
from children ten years old and upwards to old age, are taken from
their native villages and made to work. I have myself often seen
the poor wretches in gangs of hundreds, surrounded by overseers
with sticks, whose duty it was to beat any symptoms of laziness out
of them. The Fellahs naturally look upon the canal scheme as the
certain grave of thousands; they know the locality is entirely
destitute of water, and they have vividly in remembrance the late
disasters in the vicinity of Suez, when so many of their numbers
perished. The Fellahs, it is true, make excellent navvies—witness
the railway they have constructed; hut in that instance they entered
into the spirit of the work and appreciated its importance, in proof
of which they lately volunteered to make the embankment, if the
rails were provided, from the main line to Samanhour, and also to
Zagazig, both of which branch lines are now in course of construc-
tion, and when finished will open up the richest part of the Delta,
Having now disposed of the question of practicability, let us
examine whether, under different circumstances, the Suez Canal
would have been a paying concern. The facts lam about to quote
are of the latest date, and have been in the kindest manner furnished
by the Peninsular and Oriental Company and the Board of Trade.
In the first place, the distance from England to the East Indies
(say Calcutta, for instance) is 13,000 miles via the Cape of Good


Hope"; while, by way of Gibraltar, through the proposed canal, and
down the Eed Sea, the distance is 8000, showing a difference of
6000 miles in favour of the canal route. This is apparently a great
gain; but, upon reference to the difficult navigation of both the
Mediterranean and Eed Sea, it will be found that the average
passage of twenty fine ships last year to Alexandria was 54 miles
per day, and of twelve ships to Suez 25 miles per day. Now a
small average, by way of the Cape of Good Hope, is 130 miles per
day; therefore, basing the length of voyage on that calculation,
the distance from England to Calcutta by way of Suez would be
16,000 miles, without taking into consideration the length of the
canal or the delay in passing through it. This is conclusive as
showing that the voyage round the Cape of Good Hope can be made
in a shorter time than by the proposed canal, to say nothing of the
dangers of the Eed Sea, which occasion the loss of one ship in-ten
traversing its waters. We will now glance at the financial pros-
pects. The arrivals in the United Kingdom of English and foreign
vessels from ports of the East Indies, by way of the Cape of Good
Hope, amounted last year to 718,992 tons. Supposing, all these
ships used the canal, the revenue, at 10 francs per ton, would not
amount to 300,000?. per annum, not quite 4 per cent, on the low
estimate of 8,000,000?.; but, as shown above, the canal route would
never be chosen by sailing ships ; and, as the transport of goods of
little value compared with their bulk must, from the small stowage
in steamers, be forwarded in sailing vessels, therefore a very large
number will ever continue to make the voyage round the Cape of
Good Hope, even if the canal were completed. As the proportion
of sailing-vessels to steamers in England is 13 to 1, the largest steam
mercantile marine in the world, it will be seen at a glance how few
vessels there will be calculated to benefit by the proposed canal.
Eeviewing all the circumstances I have detailed, it seems clear
that the direct open cut from Pelusium to Suez is impracticable;
that any canal would be useless except for steamers; that the pro-
portion of that class of vessel is so small that the tolls collected
upon the whole number would not maintain the proposed gigantic
works; and, finally, that the opening of a direct cut across the
Isthmus of Suez would be merely adding 100 miles to the delays
and difficulties of Mediterranean and Eed Sea navigation.
While I have not hesitated to denounce the union of the two seas
by a direct cut across the Isthmus of Suez as hopeless and impracti-
cable, I have not lost sight of the necessity of diminishing by every
possible means the time occupied in the voyage between the mother
country and her colonies. The importance of maintaining a rapid


means of communication with India has been abundantly demon-
strated by the late stirring events in that country, and, although it
is true that the “ Overland Route ” is indeed a stride in the right
direction, and calculated 1 believe to maintain a supremacy over
any other route, yet it is still in its infancy. At Alexandria itself,
for instance, difficulties and delays are met with in consequence of
the harbour being open to the prevailing winds, which often blow
with great violence.
The management of the railway from Alexandria to Cairo is most
faulty, while the continuation of the line to Suez is positively
dangerous, and the roadstead at that terminus inconvenient and
tedious for the transhipment of goods and passengers; but, before
entering more fully on that subject, I will briefly detail the rise
and progress of the present mode of transit from Europe to the
East Indies.
Very early in the present century attention was directed towards
an overland route to India, but it was not until 1823 that any
movement of consequence was made. Certain members of the
Indian Government proposed to the home authorities to forward
mails and passengers by way of the Eed Sea, across the Isthmus of
Suez, and thence through France or by sea to England; but this
proposition did not meet with favour.
After allowing the above proposal to germinate for three years
it was again brought forward, but still did not produce fruit. The
Government advanced a host of objections against the plan, and it
is doubtful how long this state of affairs might have lasted had not
an individual cut the Gordian knot. In 1827 Lieutenant Waghorn,
K.N., turned his attention to the establishment of a “steam com-
munication between our Eastern possessions and their mother-
country, England,” and to his exertions is mainly due the present
overland route. Years elapsed before its practicability was ac-
knowledged : Lieutenant Waghom was obliged to test his plan by
repeated journeys to and fro, at his own risk and expense, and in
the teeth of a determined opposition. A parliamentary committee
condemned the project, and the Chairman of the India Company
declared “ that they required no steam to the East at all.” Never-
theless, Lieutenant Waghorn at last succeeded in making the feasi-
bility of his route to India apparent to the meanest capacities. The
following despatch, sent by the Indian Government in September,
1836, will show the estimation in which a comparatively rapid
means of communication with the mother-country was held in
India:—
“We beg to offer to your Honourable Court our congratulations


on the rapidity with which your wishes have of late been conveyed
to all parts of your Indian possessions. The three last overland
mails have brought despatches from London to Bombay in 58, 45,
and 64 days, and those intended for Calcutta have been forwarded
in 10 days. We have witnessed the energetic impulse this early
intelligence has given to the mercantile interest, and the unbounded
satisfaction it has diffused throughout all classes of the community.
It is, indeed, undeniable that a quick interchange of information is
of the first advantage in commerce, and in the conduct of all public
business; while it is equally true that its effect on the minds of
those who serve the Honourable Company long and faithfully in
this distant land, is to deprive the painful feeling of separation
from their homes and country of half its bitterness. We beg respect-
fully to press these reflections on the notice of your Honourable
Court, with our earnest prayer that you will, ere long, grant* to
India the much desired boon of frequent and regular communication
with Europe by the employment of a sufficient number of steam-
vessels for that purpose.” —Porter s Progress of the Nation, p. 320.
The “Overland Eoute” being an established fact, attention was
soon directed towards its improvement, which has since been surely,
though slowly, progressing. At first, the mails from India to Suez
were brought by the ships of the East India Company, but in
1841 a contract was made with the Peninsular and Oriental Com-
pany, and since that period no expense or exertion has been
spared by them to exceed even the terms of their contract. The
next improvement which superseded the tedious and painful journey
by Nile-boat, van, and camel, was the completion of a railway, first
from Alexandria to Cairo, and then from Cairo to Suez.
This great work has considerably shortened the journey, and,
what is more, has found favour even in the eyes of the ignorant
Mohammedan inhabitants. It will be interesting to detail briefly
the history of these two railways, for, though they form one great
line, yet the one is as different from the other as it is possible to
conceive.
The construction of the line from Alexandria to Cairo was
undertaken by Mr. Eobert Stephenson; it was commenced on the
9th of February, 1852; reached the Nile at Kafr Azzayat, exactly
half-way between Alexandria and Cairo, on the 4th of July, 1854 ;
and finally entered Cairo on the Ist of December, 1855, having
been three years ten months in completing.
There are eight stations; the line is perfectly level the whole
way, with only one cutting through the mound of a deserted village,
and its entire length is 131 miles. Iron sleepers are used, supported


on bells of the same metal, a plan adopted by Mr. Stephenson,
as admirably adapted to sustain the rails on the peculiar soil of
Egypt.
The difficulty in crossing the Nile was obviated by means of a
steam ferry, the striking peculiarity of which arises from the neces-
sity to adapt the floor and rails to the exact level of the railway at
each side, under the extreme variation of level to which the waters
of the Nile are subject. By an ingenious mechanical contrivance,
the platform is raised or depressed as the waters of the Nile require,
and this, together with an exact adjustment of the rails and the
most perfect facility of access to and egress from the framework, is
ingeniously provided for. The entire cost of this ferry amounted
to 16,000/.
A handsome iron bridge, which will supersede the ferry, is in
course of construction, under the direction of Mr. Eouse, c.E., and
will be opened for traffic in June next.
The entire cost of the railway-works from Alexandria to Cairo is
under 1,000,000/., or less than 7500/. per mile. At present, the
time occupied in the journey from Alexandria to Cairo is seven
hours, but when the bridge at Kafr Azzayat is opened to traffic a
great reduction will take place.
The completion of this half of the transit line was hailed with
great rejoicing; every difficulty had been triumphantly grappled
with: the native Fellahs, owing to excellent arrangements made
for their comfort and welfare, had escaped the disasters usually
attendant upon the construction of public works in Egypt, and,
what is more, so thoroughly understood the utility of the work they
were employed upon that, as already mentioned, they actually
volunteered to make the embankments for two branch lines, one of
which was completed in a year, and will open up the richest part
of the Delta. It is the Pasha’s intention to employ no one but
Arabs upon these branch lines.
It now remained to perfect the transit route by a railway to Suez,
and the obvious course the line should take was indicated, viz., to
branch off from Benha, by way of Zagazig, through the Ouadee
Toumilat (Land of Goshen) and past the Bitter Lakes to Suez,
This route possessed two great advantages—a level country the
whole way, and the means of obtaining abundance of water. It
was, however, urged upon the Pasha that the English had enjoyed
the emoluments resulting from the construction of the first half of
the railway, and, therefore, to the French the remaining half ought
to be devoted; accordingly, the continuation of the line to Suez
was intrusted to a French engineer, M. Mouchelet. This gentleman


evidently did not consider tlie route I have just alluded to as the
best, for he has carried his line from Cairo due east over the Desert,
straight to Suez. Although several cuttings had to he made, no
great difficulty was experienced except from the total absence of
water, until reaching Gebel Awebel; but after passing that elevated
ridge the obstacles met with in the descent to Suez became most
serious, the curves which have been made are astonishing, requiring
extreme caution to travel over safely, and instead of 90 or 100
miles, the line has in consequence attained a length of 130 miles.
Much danger is incurred and unnecessary loss of time occasioned,
there is daily expectation of a fearful accident, and last, though not
least, owing to the lack of water, the train mileage for water traffic
will always be five-elevenths of the train mileage for all other
traffic, which will add immensely to the expense of working the
line.
Dreadful disasters have taken place in consequence of the want of
water, hundreds of Fellahs unable to obtain it have been seized
with a panic, and missing their way to the Ouadee Toumilat in
search of it, have perished miserably in the Desert. The line from
Cairo to Suez was completed on the 7th of December, 1858. It is
difficult to make an estimate of the cost, but it cannot be put down
at less than 10,000 Z. per mile.
The time occupied on the journey from Cairo to Suez is from
6 to 8 or 9 hours, but the great expenses of working and the risk
render it probable that the line will only be used as a temporary
means of conveyance. We will now consider the means by which
so desirable an end as shortening the road to India may be accom-
plished.
A passenger leaving Southampton by the “ Overland Eoute,” on
the 4th of the month, arrives at Alexandria on the 17th. He leaves
Suez on the 19th, and arrives at Aden on the 25th; thus, including
the 2 days crossing the Isthmus, he is 21 days on the road from
Southampton to Aden. Now it is most desirable that the passage
of the Eed Sea should be shortened, and I propose to do it by con-
tinuing the railway along the banks of the Nile as far as Assouan,
and thence across the country to Berenice; the total line from
Alexandria to Berenice would be 690 miles. At present the journey
by railway is 260 miles, and the question is simply whether the
remaining 430 can be better performed by steamboat or by rail.
Every one who has travelled on the Eed Sea knows full well the
suffering occasioned by the intense heat. The inconvenience of the
Port of Suez is also well known, the steamers being obliged to lie
at least 3 miles off the landing-place. Suez itself is simply a large


inn in the midst of the Desert, of use only as an entrepot for
goods.
The delays and difficulties met with on the present line from Cairo
to Suez have already been alluded to.
Regarding the present proposition of a railroad from Alexandria
to Berenice, if the speed of only 20 miles per hour was maintained,
the journey could be performed in 35 hours ; add to which 12 hours’
rest at Thebes, and it will be seen that the entire passage will only
occupy the same time now taken up between Alexandria and Suez :
that is to say, the steamer will arrive as usual on the 17th, and the
mails and passengers will be at Berenice, which is one third of the
way down the Bed Sea, instead of at Suez by the 19th, thus saving
two clear days in our communications with India.
At Berenice there is a good and safe harbour, with sufficient
water to allow the largest steamers to come alongside, and quays made
for that purpose; therefore passengers, mails,'and cargo could be
transferred without the least difficulty or delay from railway to
steamer.
The advantages are therefore a gain of two days in time, one
third of the Red Sea passage avoided, and a convenient harbour at
the end of the line, instead of the miserable Port of Suez.
The time of transit might still further be reduced by the con-
struction of a pier at Alexandria, alongside which the steamers
might go in all weathers, and thus avoid the usual delays.
The above advantages apply only to the improvement of the
present Overland Route, but Egypt and the entire commercial
world would share largely in the benefits of such improvements.
For instance, the entire Nile Valley belonging to Egypt would be
opened up, and a high road formed conducting to the heart of Africa,
the inexhaustible riches of which country remain yet untouched.
Finally, the port of Berenice would be admirably situated for
developing the Red Sea trade, which is at present slumbering for
want of such an entrepot.*
The maintenance of our Indian empire in its integrity is of vast
importance, and nothing can so surely consolidate the rule of the
mother country as a speedy means of communication with her
possessions.
Shortening the route to India by two days is, doubtless, a great
gain; and, as the time is past when the authorities can assert that
“they require no steam to the East at all,” it is to be hoped that
* Sir Gardner Wilkinson differs entirely from these views, and says that the
“ Port of Berenice has long since been filled up with sand, and has only a small
quantity of water in it, even at high tide.”— Ed.


the attention of those most interested in the matter will he given to
the attainment of so desirable an object.
The President. —We have known Captain Pim on various occasions. We
recollect him as the gallant Arctic officer who offered to go in search of
Franklin across Siberia, and we have known him, indeed, in various expe-
ditions in search of our lost friend and his companions. Again, he is the indi-
vidual who walked across that great mass of ice to Banks Land, to rescue
M‘Clure and his companions; for, had not Captain Pim performed that
journey, Sir Robert M‘Clure might never have revisited this country. We
farther, know that Captain Pim distinguished himself in the Baltic and in
the late war in China, in which he was severely wounded and honourably won
his promotion, and now he appears before us as a geographical statist. The
paper has a very modest title, but it embraces a variety of important topics.
He has analysed the,different lines of route across Egypt, whether by railroad
or canal, and has laid before us a plan of his own. Ido not pretend to
compare the merits of these various plans, but I am bound to say that Captain
Pim has ably developed the observations and deductions of our very dis-
tinguished associate Mr. Robert Stephenson, whose surveys in Egypt are well
known to geographers, and the public, and who in his last visit was accom-
panied by the author of this memoir.
General W. Monteith, f,r.g.s. —lt is great presumption in me to offer an
opinion regarding a great work after the statement made by the able engineer who
has lately been engaged expressly in the examination of the proposed Suez Canal.
It has always been a subject which I had taken great interest in, and I was
convinced of its practicability till I heard from Mr. Stephenson that no differ-
ence existed between the levels of the Red Sea and Mediterranean, which I
had understood would afford a sufficient current to keep the Canal open.
That not being the case, I at once ceased to consider the work practicable, so
as to allow large vessels to pass through either loaded or empty. Excavating
a canal of any dimensions might be accomplished, but it Would lead to no
result when it came out on a shallow coast, which would render the Canal
inaccessible. It appears from history that at two different periods a com-
munication did exist, and on both occasions the Canal did not go direct to the
sea, hut joined the Nile; hut neither was intended or required for large
vessels. This 1 think offers no considerable difficulty even at present. I have
three times been at Suez, and on one occasion I visited a wall or embank-
ment about three miles from Suez (to the east), which was said to have been
built by a sultan of Egypt, to shut up the mouth of the canal, to prevent an
Arab invasion. Whether this is correct or not Ido not pretend to say. The
question of a great ship canal is I think set at rest from the deposits left by
the Nile to the east of Alexandria. But a small canal, joining one of the
branches of that river, though it would not answer as a great point of
transit for the world in general, would be a vast advantage to Egypt and
the small vessels navigating the Mediterranean, but be certainly no advantage
to the trade of England. Any plan which does not include bringing water to
Suez will be imperfect, whether by canal or railway, as proposed by Mr.
Stephenson. I again apologise for offering an opinion in presence of several
so much better able to judge.
Mr. George Rennie, f,r.g.s. —As one of those who dissent somewhat from
the opinions of Captain Pim regarding the canal, perhaps I may be allowed to
look at the subject in an engineering point of view. I have read the state-
ments of M. Lesseps, and I find nothing in them to justify the assertion that
the canal is impracticable. In the first place, that canal is on the most direct
line between Suez and the Mediterranean, and, with one or two small excep-
tions, it is nearly upon the level. Next, with regard to the alleged unfavour-


able character of the soil, what says M. Lesseps, and what say the borings
taken by the Commission ? They show a light coat of sand, and below that
clay—the very article wanted for the canal. Then, as to the probability of
the canal filling up by the flowing of the sand, M. Lesseps and the Commis-
sion found the remains of a Roman camp, and a camp of considerable anti-
quity, also the vestiges of the ancient canal of the Pharaohs, none of which
works have been covered by the shifting sands of the desert. As to the
expense of the harbours of Pelusium and Suez, the Plymouth Breakwater
had been quoted as the datum for the probable cost of the piers at those
harbours; but the case did not hold, as the Breakwater at Plymouth was
an isolated Breakwater built in the sea, in which every stone had to be taken
out in barges and deposited. The cost of that work was about 190/. per foot
run. But the Portland Breakwater, of a similar area of section, consisting
of jetties of stone projected from the shore, cost only 150/. per foot lineal.
The Marseilles Breakwater, also of a similar area of section, built partly
of stone and partly of be ton or concrete, cost only 80/. per foot lineal; and, as
this was the system proposed for the piers of the harbours of Pelusium and
Suez, the cost would be less than one half of the Plymouth Breakwater,
the circumstances being different in both cases.
The cost of the piers at Pelusium, one 3800 metres in length, the other
2700 metres in length, would, if carried out as proposed, not exceed
2,000,000/!., while the piers at Suez, of 2700 metres and 2500 metres in
length respectively, would be proportionately less, or say 4,000,000/. for the
harbours and 4,000,000/. for the canal, making 8,000,000/., as estimated. ;But,
supposing the cost of the whole project to exceed that sura, the object to be
accomplished is worth it.
The greatest objection that I have heard is the report of Captain Spratt as to
the formation of the Delta of the Nile. He states that the winds prevail from
the north-west, and set in such a current upon the Pelusium shore, together
with the muddy bottom, as to make it untenable for vessels to anchor in
those roads. He also states that the piers would run out into she mud brought
to the eastward by the current from the Nile, and thus render the works next
to impracticable.* There are always two statements of a case, and I hold
in my hand a pamphlet entitled ‘ Observations on the Bay of Pelusium,’
by Captain Philigret,f who commanded a corvette in the service of the
Viceroy of Egypt, and anchored it in that very bay for the purpose of testing
in every respect the objections of Captain Spratt; and the results are totally
at variance with what has been stated against the bay of Pelusium, —that, on
the contrary, the anchorage is good, and that the bottom is sandy, and con-
tinues so to a depth of 10 metres or 32 feet. With regard to the question of
distance, M. Lesseps shows that it is not more than half the distance that it is
by the Cape route ; and he states that he is quite satisfied that a toll of ten
francs per ton upon ships passing through is quite enough to pay the interest
of the capital. Part of Captain Pirn’s argument was founded upon the
dangerous navigation of the Bed Sea. But the time is coming when sailing-
ship's will be superseded by steam-ships, and the interests of the commercial
world will tell you how advantageous it is to take a steam-ship directly
through the canal, and convey its unbroken bulk all the way to Bombay
or Cafcutta, instead of having to take the cargo out of the ship at Alexandria,
land it, carry it across to Suez on the railway, and ship it again on the
Red Sea. Ido not pretend to know anything of the commercial part of the
* The International Commission propose that the Pelusium entrance should be
placedS2o miles nearer to the Nile, and thus to shorten the piers.
t Observations Hydrographiques dans la Baie de Peluse, par M. le Capitaine
Philigret, Commander of his Highness the Viceroy’s steam frigate Feez Djahd.


question. I take these statements of M. Lesseps, and I find his scheme has
met with unanimous approval at Liverpool, Leeds, Manchester, Glasgow,
Dublin, and all the great commercial towns of England. Again, I cannot
understand why this project should be pronounced impracticable after it has
undergone the investigations of a Commission consisting of the first autho-
rities in Europe. It is not likely these men would compromise their cha-
racters by asserting the possibility of a scheme which is now declared by the
author of this paper to be impossible. I therefore think that simply as
an engineering question the statements of Captain Pim, as to the imprac-
ticability of that canal, are at variance with the facts stated by M. Lesseps
and verified by the Commission.
Mr. S. Sidney said, —The question was one which could not he settled
without the consent of England. British exports and imports in the port of
Alexandria averaged nearly 4,000,000/., or more than those of all the other
nations trading there put together. British passengers paid for transit across
the Isthmus upwards of 200,000/. per annum. British merchandise and
specie were sent across here to the value of upwards of 28,000,000/. England
is the only country that received duty free the whole produce of Egypt—grain,
pulse, and cotton. Egypt was the road to India, The “ gate of our house ”
old Mehemed Ali called it, and the Isthmus “ the key of our gate.”
It did not require arguments to prove that if it were possible to cut a real
Bosphorus across the Isthmus, through which our great ships could sail
or steam without interruption, it would he an enormous advantage to our
commerce, putting out of sight the political and military consideration that
it would be an additional strait for us to watch and defend.
But, if a deep and open Bosphorus would be a commercial advantage,
a shallow ditch, open only to flat-bottomed boats, useless for trade, but avail-
able for the coup de main of an invading army, was a thing to be resisted with
all our strength. The piercing of the Isthmus of Suez was essentially a geo-
graphical question, and therefore eminently fitted to be discussed by the
Society. It was not new; it had been discussed for sixty years, and, accord-
ing to all the reliable evidence, it was impracticable. He also (Mr. Sidney)
was prepared, but would not add to the picture drawn by his friend Captain
Pim, of the Mediterranean, driven by north-eastern winds for nine months of
the year on the long, low, flat, shallow, surf-beaten shores of the Delta; for
ages on ages barren, treeless, devoid of every kind of material needed for con-
struction by an engineer. But, in reference to the scheme of running out on
the soft sand of the Pelusium shore two stone breakwaters of a united length
of between six and seven miles, every stone to be brought either by sea from
Valencia in Spain, or from Rhodes in Egypt, or 90 miles inland, with neither
railroad nor common road for conveyance, he would remind the Society that
at Plymouth, with stone close at hand, a breakwater mile had taken
twenty-eight years to construct, and cost 1,500,000/. sterling; Cherbourg,
miles, had cost 3,000,000/.; Portland, years in progress, was still proceed-
ing bit by bit. And these works were executed with all the advantages of
labour, fuel, food, and all the appliances of machinery to be had close at hand
for money. At Pelusium every labourer, every ounce of food, every stick,
every stone would have to be imported, and money loved not either labour or
time. But, leaving the difficulties of founding a port on a delta to be dealt
with by engineers, leaving them to treat of the Sisyphyan task of dredging a
deep channel in a soft flat, in the face of a never-ceasing current, he would
step on shore and tell them what was the experience of the celebrated Frank-
Egyptian engineers in cutting canals through such swamps as Lake Mero-
zalah—the swamp through which was proposed to dredge twenty-five feet
below the level of the Mediterranean. .They say, in their Avant Propos,
reporting to the Viceroy:—“lt appears to them impossible to maintain iu
VOL. 111. R


proper repair a canal, the bottom of which was below the line of low water in
the Nile, otherwise than by an enormous expenditure ; and even if incurring
this cost, it was uncertain whether the desired result would be obtained. In
all cases where an attempt has been made to dig a canal below the low-water
level, and more especially on the outskirts of the desert, in the Ghattat-Bey,
for instance, it invariably happens that at about the level of low water a bed of
loose sand is met with, as was the case at Masteroud on the Zafranieh. This
constitutes an enormous difficulty and a source of expense, of which it is
hardly possible to form any previous estimate. When even it is not sought to
obtain any great depth below the level, o'so metre (1' 7i") for instance,
annual dredgings of a really formidable nature are required. Thus in the
Ghattat-Bey, the labour of 30,000 or 40,000 men is required for the space of a
month to clear out the feeder at the point of junction; in the Chibin, from
20,000 to 30,000 men are employed; and from 15,000 to 20,000 for the
Chercaouieh. In the case of the Moeze, all attempt to dredge it has been
given up. To justify the withdrawal of so considerable a number of hands
from the ordinary employments of agriculture, nothing short of absolute
necessity can be admitted—a great damage to the resources of the country is
thus occasioned, and so serious a result should, if possible, be avoided.”
But it was not given to every one interested in this question to visit Egypt,
to travel on foot or by camel over the disputed land, and see the sands, the
swamps, and the flat Pelusian shores with their own eyes. The general
public must form their opinion on evidence, and not by the number but the
quality and the qualifications of the witnesses. The feasibility of the route
originally rested on the theory of the Bed Sea being thirty feet above the
Mediterranean, and thus affording a headwater sluicing power to wash out a
channel and keep a clear way through the artificial harbour proposed to be
built at Pelusium. While that theory prevailed in 1835, General Chesney in
1843, Captain Vetch, and Mr. Anderson, of the Post-office, a successful mer-
chant, but no engineer, all three supported the proposal for cutting through
the Isthmus. But, as Captain Pirn had related in 1847, M. Talabot, Mr.
Robert Stephenson, and Mr. Negrelli, an Austrian engineer, having contem-
plated embarking in an undertaking for cutting a canal between the two seas,
began by examining and levelling the route. Then, before this exact exami-
nation, the myth of the Red Sea headwaters disappeared, and the scheme of the
canal naturally disappeared with it. M. Negrelli appeared convinced, for he
was silent for nine years ; M. Talabot printed a report, in which he exhausted
every branch of the subject in an historical, geographical, and engineering
point of view, and decided that the idea of a salt-water canal, since proposed
by M. de Lesseps, was an absolute absurdity. And it was his (Mr. Sidney’s)
firm opinion that, if M. Talabot’s work had been circulated in a popular form
in the three leading European languages, the project of the Isthmus of Suez
Bosphorus would long since have been consigned to the limbo of unfortunate
projects. In 1851 Mr, Stephenson, before the Institute of Civil Engineers,
publicly pronounced the canal scheme impracticable.
In 1856 the Suez Bosphorus scheme was again examined by two of the
International Commissioners, Mr, M‘Clean, who was living, and his (Mr.
Sidney’s) late lamented friend Mr. Rendel, one of the Presidents of the
Institute of Civil Engineers, Consulting Engineer to the Admiralty, and
Engineer of several Breakwaters and Harbours of Refuge. Mr. M'Clean
visited Egypt, and, conjointly with Mr. Rendel, prepared a detailed report on
the Lesseps plan, and concluded in the following words as to the harbour of
Said :—•“ No dredging can take place until a temporary harbour has been con-
structed, as it is a lee shore for nine months of the year. There will be no
breakwater to keep the channel open ; on the contrary, there will be a gradual
flow into the canal, which will tend to form a new beach in the harbour and


canal. There will be no certainty that the work will ever be finished. It will
altogether depend on contingencies, over which the engineer has no control,
and which cannot he estimated. Therefore the construction (under M.
Lesseps’ system) may he regarded as impracticable.”
Thus, then, in 1847, a French, an English, and an Italian-Austrian engineer
abandoned the scheme as impossible when they discovered the mistake on
which Napoleon’s scheme was founded; and thus in 1856 M‘Clean and
Eendel, after mature examination, fortified by the local evidence of the
Egyptian engineers, agreed with Talabot and Stephenson. But Mr. Stephen-
son was present, and would doubtless give the result of his repeated personal
examinations. He would speak with all the force of high scientific acquire-
ments and more than thirty years’ labour on public works on lands, on rivers,
and on seas, the greatest, the most novel, extraordinary, and successful that
had ever been attempted in ancient or modern times.
Mr. Daniel A. Lange, f.r.g.s. —The discussion this evening on the sub-
ject of the Suez Canal cannot fail to he of the highest importance, as express-
ing in how far the feelings and opinions of Captain Pim and some Fellows of
this enlightened Society are in accord with the Academy of Science in Paris,
and other eminent engineers, on the subject of the Suez Canal. Appreciating
as I do the full weight and learning which is brought to hear upon all questions
submitted to its discussion, and aware also of the interest, I may almost say
excitement, which is felt in Europe on all matters connected with it, I hope
the few observations I have to make may not he considered unworthy of your
consideration. There is one point I would rather not have touched upon—
it is the engineering question. lam aware that there has been much warm
feeling and controversy about the different opinions held by the engineers;
hut it is one which, having been gone into this evening, I cannot well pass
over, and as Mr. Stephenson is here, he will correct me if I fall into any
unintentional misstatements. I have no wish to entangle myself in any
scientific controversy between the eminent engineers who now take part in
this discussion, and will leave to those competent to deal with such matters
the task of enlightening the public on this important question; but, for the
benefit of the uninitiated and those who may not have had time or inclination
to wade through the different opinions held by opposite parties, I have deemed
it not ill-timed to place the point at issue as simply and clearly as I can before
you. Mr. Robert Stephenson holds the opinion—and, whether rightly or
wrongly, it is not for me to decide—that after it had been ascertained beyond
a doubt that no difference of level existed between the Mediterranean and the
Red Seas, the project for cutting a canal through the Isthmus of Suez became
impracticable. On the other hand, engineers of equal eminence state just the
reverse, and view the non-existence of any difference in the level between the
two seas as the very circumstance which will render its construction perfectly
feasible. Now the question arises, who is right ? And you will have to deal
with the evidence before you. You must either pin your faith to one or other
party, and make your choice between the opinion held by Mr. Robert Stephen-
son and that held by other engineers. Either Mr. Stephenson is right and
they are wrong, or their collective opinions are of greater value than that of
Mr. Stephenson. You will have to judge for yourselves, and my object in
bringing this matter before you is, with an earnest desire for truth, to endea-
vour to state, as impartially as possible, the full value of the evidence with
which you have to deal. The lateness of the evening prevents me from en-
tering fully into the objections raised, and which have been so ably met by
Mr. Rennie ; but I wish to hand in the following condensed statement of the
opinions already alluded to,* and I think I cannot do better than refer to
* See p. 203.


the “ Report” itself of the “International Scientific Commission,” copies of
which, together with an atlas showing the configurations of the Isthmus, have
been presented to the Society. From these elaborate works it will be seen
that every possible contingency likely to occur, and every objection likely to
he raised, has been fully anticipated and met. I may farther mention that,
since the period of its publication, increased labour and study has been de-
voted to this important undertaking; that specimens of the borings along
the whole track through which the canal will have to be made can be seen
at the Geological Museum at Paris, I beg it will be distinctly understood by
the present meeting that, although I represent the Company in this country,
I have not taken part in this discussion with the object of making proselytes
with a view of engaging their financial co-operation. The time for this has
passed, and the list for subscriptions was closed on the 30th of November last
year. The capital subscribed, and the amount of calls required, have been
paid up. I think this statement due to myself in order to dispel any notions,
which I do not believe exist here, that I have entered into this discussion
with any other motives than to endeavour, however inefficiently, to refute on
purely scientific grounds the arguments which have been put forward against
the execution of the canal. In conclusion, I can only say that I believe
all arguments respecting the feasibility of the undertaking have been placed
beyond the pale of controversy; nevertheless 1 shall be happy at all times to
afford any information which it is in my power to give to this Society. I
consider that we have now arrived at the time for practical operations. Mr.
Ferdinand de Lesseps, accompanied by the contractor of the works and a
staff of engineers, is at present in Egypt, employed in staking out the ground
through which the canal will have to be cut. Ship-loads of timber and other
materials have already left the port of Marseilles for Egypt, and all the pre-
liminary steps are being taken for commencing the works; and I earnestly
trust that, before six years have elapsed, this great problem, which has occu-
pied the minds of men for centuries, may be finally and successfully solved
for the benefit of all nations.
Me. Robeet Stephenson, m.p,, f.e.g.s, —l entered this room with a firm
determination to avoid all controversial points, and with a sincere intention of
conveying to you the impressions I received as to the physical geography of
the country, after having twice walked over it, which 1 conceive render the
completion and maintenance of this undertaking absolutely beyond the power of
man. Now, the most remarkable statement I ever heard of was the one urged
just now, that there being no difference of level between the two seas really
rendered the thing more practicable than ever. Negrelli, Talabot, and I were
induced to begin the investigation, from its being stated as a positive fact that
there was a difference of 30 feet in the level—a circumstance which would
have offered the only chance of the scheme being practicable. Now, we hear
to-night that there is no difference of level at all, and that this makes it more
practicable than ever. Can you conceive anything more absurd ? I cannot.
1 was astonished at the assertion of my friend Mr. George Rennie as to the
breakwater at Pelusiura, and comparing it with the Portland breakwater.
Why, at Portland the stones are carried out from the shore and thrown into
the sea; but at Pelusium there is no shore, and all the stones must be brought
a hundred miles. Is there any comparison between a breakwater at Portland
and a breakwater in the Mediterranean on a lee-shore, where there is no stone
and no foundation whatever ? It is nothing but the silt of the Nile. The
Nile brings down millions of tons of mud, and in course of time had thus
formed the delta at its mouth. This delta has protruded itself a long way
into the sea, owing to the contrary action of the current of the Nile and its
branches on one side, and of the current of the Mediterranean along the shores
of Africa on the other. The moment, then, that you construct a harbour at


Port Said, and project piers out into the sea, you immediately arrest the course
of the mud, and you will never be able to keep the port open. It is the most
extraordinary thing in the world to project two jetties into an open sea on a
lee-shore, which has for almost three-parts of the year a north-west wind
blowing upon it. A steamer even, in a rough sea, dare not enter between two
piers 300 feet apart; there is no seaman, except in fine weather, who would
venture to approach such a place. To render it at all accessible and safe, there
must be a harbour of refuge made, and we know from experience in our own
country what a large question this would open up. Really, the physical diffi-
culties are as I believe insurmountable. Supposing the harbour were made, it
must be a mere mud trap. The current carried the mud of the Nile in an
easterly direction, and if you erect a harbour of refuge, which means a quiescent
harbour, it will become a mud trap. That is the peculiarity of all deltas.
I believe it to be nearly true, if not absolutely true, that there is no large
harbour in the world maintained on the delta of a large river. I know the
delta of the Rhone, the delta of the Po, and the delta of the Danube, and I
know the delta of the Nile. They are all alike incapable of maintaining a
harbour of refuge, or even a good harbour of entrance ; the harbour would
absolutely be filled up in a few years. And with respect to the canal itself,
now that it is proved there is no difference of level, it would really remain a
stagnant ditch, and must ever remain so. Whoever has travelled over that
district, and seen the moving sands, must see that it would be necessary to
dredge, not only the harbour, but the canal itself.
Mb. Lange’s Statement. See p. 201.
“ The very existence of Holland depends upon the ertgineering skill dis-
played in works of this description, and M. Conrad, after devoting a whole life-
time to them, holds under the Dutch Government the office of chief engineer of
the Water Staat. Surely the opinion of such a man must be of value, and we
are naturally curious to ascertain what views this gentleman entertains as to
the feasibility of making the canal. It appears that M. Conrad, after bestowing
more than two months of his valuable time to a very elaborate personal survey
of the entire tract, returned from Egypt with views diametrically opposite to
those expressed by Mr. Stephenson, and considers the non-existence of any
difference of level between the two seas as a circumstance which will greatly
facilitate its construction, and render it easy of execution. But if there could
exist any wavering or hesitation in the mind of the public, I apprehend that
the opinion of another engineer, not less eminent than M. Conrad, would in a
great measure tend to remove it. lam alluding to M. de Negrelli, who holds
the highest functions in Austria as an engineer. M. de Negrelli shares uncon-
ditionally the views held by M. Conrad. But the evidence does not end here;
we have on record the opinion of Signor Paleocapa, Minister of Public Works in
the kingdom of Sardinia, whose experience in the construction of jetties and
canals leaves no doubt as to the value of his testimony.
“ But lest all this should not be considered sufficient, the opinion of M.
Lentze, Chief Engineer of the Works of the Vistula, backed by that of the late
M. Lieusson, Hydrographical Engineer to the Imperial Marine of France,
endorsed by M. Renaud, Inspector-General and member of the Council for
Ponts et Chaussees of France, and supported by M. Rigault deGenouilly, Rear-
Admiral of the Imperial Marine of France, and Captain Tan res, of the Imperial
Marine, and member of the Council of the Admiralty of France, will, I think,
in the opinion of this impartial tribunal, be considered sufficient to induce
you to pause ere you surrender judgment to the views entertained by Mr*
Stephenson, in opposition to those shared by the eminent engineers I have
mentioned*


“ The opinions of the late Mr. Rendel and Mr, M‘Clean are opposed to Mr.
Robert Stephenson’s plan.
“ Messrs. Rendel and M‘Clean proposed to construct a ship canal in nearly
a direct line between Suez and Port Said. The level of top-water throughout
the whole length (93 miles) to be 23 feet above low-water of the Medi-
terranean Sea. The embankment to be carried into the deep water of the sea
at each extremity, so as to avoid the necessity of dredging, and the locks to be
constructed similar to the sea lock of the Caledonian Canal. Mr. George
Rennie considers the cutting of the canal, as proposed by the engineers of the
International Commission, perfectly practicable. It will therefore be seen
that there exists in this country a great variety of opinion as to the precise
mode in which the cutting should be effected.
“ Captain Pirn alluded in his paper to the great mortality caused by the
making of the Mahmoudieh Canal, with what I considered questionable
policy, seeing that if the argument holds good against the canal, it must neces-
sarily do so with equal force against his own plan for a railway ; but lest the
example he has so prominently brought forward should cause the construction
of canals or railways in Egypt to be viewed with disfavour, I willingly, in
our joint justification, come forward with a few facts which, I hope, will effec-
tually tend to dispel the fears his paper may have engendered on these points,
and I shall do so with reference to the very Mahmoudieh Canal in question.
“ On the 10th of April, 1856, 115,000 men commenced the work of cleans-
ing, and the canal was re-opened for navigation on the sth of May. The
cleansing of the great Mahmoudieh Canal has been accomplished in less than
three weeks. For some time back it had been getting choked up with mud,
and although the traffic upon it was extremely active, it was becoming some-
what difficult. It was reported that his Highness the Viceroy would appear
personally on the scene of action ; and the work, confided to almost innumer-
able multitudes, was carried through with marvellous rapidity. Neverthe-
less the canal is not under twenty leagues in length and very wide ; but the
work had been systematically apportioned, and each working party was
allowed to withdraw as soon as the portion of the task assigned to it was
completed. The food, moreover, was good, and all passed off for the best.
“ There was no less than 3,000,000 of cubic metres of muddy sediment to
remove from the bed of the canal, which used to form a carriage road, 10
metres in breadth, between Alexandria and the Nile. The work had to be
completed in haste in order that the workmen might return to their villages
and reap the harvest, which becomes ripe towards the end of April, The time
to be taken up in the work was accordingly fixed at one month, and the number
of workmen to be employed at 67,000. The governors of the various provinces,
appreciating the necessity for saving time, supplied more than 100,000 work-
men, who had to be prevented from working through the night.
“ The work was completed in twenty-two days, notwithstanding the number
of subterraneous springs, and the difficult nature of the material to be dealt
with, and notwithstanding, moreover, the falling in of a considerable part of
the walls of the canal. The great Mahmoudieh Canal may be looked upon as
an entirely new work from its increased width and greater draught of water,
and the excellent road running beside it.
“ Although the task came quite unexpectedly, and the workmen toiled with
ardour in the midst of water and mud, the number of sick did not amount to
more than five in a thousand, and the workmen were always well supplied
with necessaries, a circumstance which forms a striking contrast with what
occurred at the first digging of the canal, when more than 20,000 men perished
through the deficiency of provisions, water, and proper tools, and the unskilful
distribution of the work.
“ The Fellahs possess a positive talent for all descriptions of earthwork ; for


centuries past they have displayed this peculiar aptitude, and there is a good
reason for it, for without canals Egypt would be nothing, and neglect of them
would condemn her to barrenness, poverty, and famine. No Europeans
could get through work of this description in such a climate. Although
they are stronger and better skilled than the Fellahs, it is an undoubted and
established fact that a European population could not continue to exist here ;
the first generation of foreign settlers manage to adapt themselves tolerably
well at first, but they languish in the end, the second becomes very nearly
exhausted, and the third dies out altogether. This is an incontestable fact.
“ Captain Pirn states ‘ that towards the Bay of Pelusium the depth of 25
feet of water extends for a distance of more than three miles from the shore.
That the prevailing winds, exposure of the Bay of Pelusium, the lowness of
the coast, and the absence of land-marks, increase the danger of navigation.’
“ ‘ That the quantity of alluvium carried by the easterly current in the
Mediterranean, towards the Bay of Pelusium, would have the effect of choking
up any harbour or channel which might be made.’
“ Now I beg to observe that in 1857 the Commission of Engineers fixed the
outlet of the canal at 28j kilometres (17 miles furlongs) westward of the
point adopted in the project; the shore being there less exposed to the pre-
vailing winds, while it is steeper, and projects farther towards the open sea.
Nearer to the n.w., in the Bay of Dibeh, and under the point of Damietta,
a vessel could not right herself by a n.e. wind. Moreover, the length of the
canal would be uselessly extended. The projection formed by the shore
opposite Said, between the Bays of Pelusium and Dibeh, evidently offers the
most favourable site ; it will be easy to stand out, whatever wind is blowing,
and a vessel caught suddenly in a gale of wind from the offing, at this part of
the coast, can always right herself and get out into the open sea again.
“ The local winds are extremely regular, and the anchorage on the coast of
Egypt is better than any one to be found throughout the entire coast of Syria,
which is directly exposed to the prevailing winds from the n.w., whereas the
Egyptian coast is partially sheltered from them. The holding ground is every-
where excellent.
“ M. Larousse, during his sojourn in the roadstead of the Bay of Pelusium,
frequently observed the ship’s position at intervals, and found no difference,
although it had been blowing all night. If it were desired to bring a vessel to
anchor previous to entering the canal, there would be no fear of her dragging
her anchors. The native coasters declare that in rough weather they easily
obtain shelter eastward of Damietta, in the very locality where the canal is to
terminate. It should, moreover, be remarked, that previous to the establish-
ment of Austrian and French companies for steam navigation, the coasting
vessels engaged in what was called the Caravan Trade, on the coast of Egypt
and Syria, frequently sought shelter in the western part of the Gulf of Pelu-
sium. This is sufficient proof that these coasts are far from being so formidable
as they were imagined to be in the absence of any positive knowledge of the
facts ; and it may be taken for certain that a vessel, sheltered from the w.n.w.
winds, could keep her moorings with long cables during all weathers in water
of 12 metres (39 feet) depth.
“ In farther confirmation of these facts, I beg to call the attention of the
meeting to the report of Captain Philigret, entitled ‘ Observations Hydro-
graphiques dans la Baie de Peluse.’ Captain Philigret was purposely stationed
on board a corvette, belonging to his Highness the Viceroy of Egypt, during
three of the worst months in the year, in the Bay of Pelusium, in order to
ascertain the safety of this roadstead and make observations respecting the
winds and currents.
“ At Port Said the western or northern jetty would be 3500 metres (3827
yards) long, in order to reach a depth of 10 metres (32 feet). That on the


eastern or southern side would only be extended to a depth of B'so metres
(28 feet). Its length would be 2500 metres (2734 yards). Their general direc-
tion will he from s.w. J s. to n.e. \ n., and the extremity of one will be
slightly deflected, so that the tangent of the two heads should lie exactly s.s.w.
and n.n.e., and be exactly 1000 metres in length (10934 yards).
“ Subsequent investigations have, however, induced the engineers to dis-
pense in a great measure with the length of these jetties, the nature of the
sand being sufficiently firm to admit of dredging operations being successfully
performed.
“ By this means a sheltered roadstead, or outer port, would be formed, em-
bracing a superficies of 40 hectares (98 acres), perfectly sheltered from the N.w.
winds which prevail along this coast, and bring with them the greatest part of
the storms. Vessels will be enabled to enter in all weathers, which is the
essential point; and there will, besides, be a sort of inner road formed by the
roadstead between the jetties. The length of this roadstead will be 1800
metres (19684 yards), measuring from the extremity of the southern jetty, by
400 metres (4374 yards). This would form an additional space of 72 hectares
(177 acres 3 roods), in which vessels would find shelter and smooth water.
“ With regard to what Captain Pirn states as to the mud of the Nile, I
have to say that is a question to which the attention of the engineers was directed
with more than usual care. One fact is perfectly certain, no traces of mud are
to be found along the shore, and the sand upon it is as pure as it is fine. T his
sand extends along the bottom, without any admixture, to a depth ranging
from Bto 9 metres (26 to 294 feet). The mud does not commence until
beyond this range, and it is only at a depth of 10 metres (32 feet 8 inches)
that pure mud is found, and from thence it stretches out to an indefinite
distance in the depths of the Mediterranean. Though here and there a few
patches of mud may occur at a less depth, they are of insignificant dimensions,
not exceeding 10 to 15 metres (32 to 49 feet) in diameter, and 0'25 to o‘4o
metres (10 to 15 inches) in thickness. Such deposits are recent and superficial,
and have not been subjected to the effects of a storm ; they are of purely
accidental occurrence, and the first gale of wind from the north would entirely
disperse them.”
Eleventh Meeting, May 9th, 1859.
Sir RODERICK I. MURCHISON, President, in the Chair.
Presentations. — Capt. C. C. Chesney, r.e. ; Capt. K. R. Murchison ;
Consul W. T. Pritchard; and E. Rawdon Power, Esq.; were presented
upon their election.
Elections. — L. C. Bailey, r.n. ; R. Fisher, m.d. ; and John Reeve,
Esqrs.; were elected Fellows.
Exhibitions. —Several Maps and Plans of fortified towns, &c., in
Italy, presented by the Government of Rome ; and Maps of United
States Harbour Improvements on Lake Michigan; were exhibited.
The Papers read were :
1. Notes on the Lower Danube. By Major Stokes, r.e.
Communicated by Capt. R. Collinson, r.n., f.r.g.s.
The “ lower” portion of the Danube begins at the Iron Gates, and
has an entirely different character to that of its upper course. It
