

p .
iifn
REMARKS
THE LATEST OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS
RELATING TO
NEW ZEALAND:
(ORDERED, BY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, TO BE PRINTED,
FEBRUARY 7, 1838 :)
A NOTICE OF A PAMPHLET BY SAMUEL HINDS, D.D.,
VICAR OF YARDLEV, HERTS.
AND ONE OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NEW-ZEALAKD ASSOCIATION.
IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
JOHN BEECH AM.
SECOND EDITION.
LONDON:
lIATCHARDS, PICCADILLY; SEELEYS, FLEET STREET;
HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO., AND JOHN MASON,
PATERNOSTER ROW.
Price Is. 6d.


London -Printed by James Nichols, 46, Hoxton-Square,


CONTENTS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS RELATING
TO NEW ZEALAND, REMARKED UPON IN THIS
LETTER;—
1. Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir R. Bourke, K. C.8., to Lord
Glenelg, dated Government House, Sydney, 9th September, 1837-
2. Enclosure (A.) —Letter from Captain W. Hobson, to His Excellency
Lieutenant-General Sir Richard Bourke, K.C.8., Governor, dated
His Majesty's Ship Rattlesnake, Port Jackson, Bth August, 1837-
3. Enclosure (B.) —A List of all the Ships which have visited the Bay of
Islands during the Six Months ending 31 st December, 1836, with a
Summary for the whole Year.
4. Enclosure (C.) —Letter from James Busby, Esq., British Resident at
New Zealand, to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary of New-South
Wales, dated British Residency, Bay of Islands, 1 6th June, 1837.
5. Enclosure (D.) —Letter from James Busby, Esq., British Resident, New
Zealand, to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary of New-South
Wales, dated British Residency, Bay of Islands, 13 th July, 1837.


ADVERTISEMENT.
These Remarks were, in the first instance, printed
for private distribution!, but are now, on the recom-
mendation of those tto whose judgment the Writer
defers, placed within thie reach of all who are ready to
use their influence in promoting a safe and philanthro-
pic measure for removiing the evils which some of our
own countrymen, as well as others, have inflicted upon
the New Zealanders, without exposing them to the
risk which would be incurred by an attempt at
Colonization.


REMARKS,
My dear Friend,
I have examined the Official Despatches respect-
ing New Zealand recently laid before Parliament, with
especial reference to the intimation which you gave
me, that the New-Zealand Association would, it was
expected, endeavour to derive from those documents
an argument in favour of their scheme of Colonization.
The first despatch of Mr. Busby, having been pointed
out by you as that on which it was probable great
stress would be laid, has particularly engaged my
attention ; but I confess that I am unable to discover
by what mode of reasoning this despatch, any more
than the others which accompany it, can be made to
serve the cause of the Association.
The investigation to which, on a former occasion, I
subjected their proposals led me to the conclusion,
that a Colonization-Company, who are to carry on
their operations chiefly by means of borrowed money,
cannot furnish probable evidence, that, however bene-
volent may be their wishes, they will have either time
or means at their command for the accomplishment of
the arduous task of raising the New Zealanders to the
enjoyment of the blessings of a Christian and civil-
ized state. If (as, I have reason to know, many who
are competent judges believe to be the case) this con-


elusion has been satisfactorily established, then the
only remaining recommendation of the Association’s
plan to philanthropic individuals, who make the wel-
fare of the New Zealanders the primary object of their
solicitude, is, that it is intended as a remedy for a
peculiar state of things which has long been deplored.
The Missionaries have painfully to witness the evils
inflicted by white men on these interesting islanders ;
those injuries constituted the question respecting New
Zealand which was investigated by the late Parlia-
mentary Select Committee on Aborigines, and to pro-
vide against which they suggested a plan in their
Report submitted to the House of Commons ; and the
interference which the Missionary Societies have soli-
cited from Her Majesty’s Government has been
sought for the very purpose of putting an end to this
same class of evils. Of the occasion afforded by the
agitation of this question, the Association have taken
advantage; and claim the support of those who are
anxious to secure protection for the New Zealanders,
on the ground that one of their principal objects in
proposing to colonize New Zealand is, “to repress the
crimes of British visitors and settlers, and likewise to
prevent the further emigration of convict refugees, and
other desperate vagabonds.” This part of their plan
has been as clearly exposed as that which relates to
the proposed civilization! of the New Zealanders ; but
as the evils referred to yet exist, and loudly call for
redress, it may still have; an appearance of plausibility
with some who see no ottiher or more effectual remedy.
The question then for consideration is—Whether
the plan of the Association, as proposing to deliver the
New Zealanders from tihe wrongs and injuries which
they are now suffering from British visitors and set-
tlers, and runaway convicts, receives any recommend-


ation or support from the despatch of Mr. Busby, and
the other accompanying documents. Now, I think it
will be obvious to every reflecting person, that Mr.
Bushy cannot be introduced as the advocate of the
Association, unless it should appear that he lays prin-
cipal stress on those evils which they propose to
remove, and urges, moreover, the adoption of a mea-
sure similar, at least, in principle, to that of the
Association. But is this the case ? To save the
trouble of referring to the Parliamentary Papers, I will
quote what he says on the subject of the evils resulting
to the New Zealanders from their intercourse with
white men:—
“ It would, in relation to the subject on which I intend to enter
in this despatch, he an interesting and important question, did
there exist means of bringing it to a satisfactory solution, How far
this depopulation of the country, which has at least been rapid in
proportion to the increase of its intercourse with the whites, was
originated by the latter, and may justly be chargeable to them.
My own opinion is, that all the apparent causes which are in opera-
tion are quite inadequate to account for the rapid disappearance of
the people.
“ The introduction of fire-arms is alleged as one cause, but there
seems good reason to doubt whether their wars were less san-
guinary before fire-arms were introduced. The use of intoxicating
liquors and tobacco are less questionable evils; and though their
direct influence cannot, I think, be stated as at all remarkable, they
are, in all probability, the original causes of diseases with which
their immmediate connexion is not apparent.
“ Yenereal diseases are another means of undermining the consti-
tution of the multitudes who, in one shape or other, are subjected
to them : and besides these sources of disease and death, the abuse
of the females who are sent by their masters or relations on board
ships, and the murder of the fruits of this intercourse, which is
believed by those likely to be best informed to be of frequent
occurrence, are undoubtedly powerful checks to increase, and ought
to be largely allowed for in estimating the causes which are in
operation for the depopulation of the country. But, on the other
hand, it must not be lost sight of that the mortality has not been


confined to those who hawe been the victims of violence, or who
have been exposed to thee effects of vices or diseases of foreign
origin. Disease and deatln prevail even amongst those natives who,
by their adherence to the Missionaries, have received only benefits
from English connexions ;; and even the very children who are
reared under the care of tthe Missionaries are swept off in a ratio
which promises, at no very distant period, to leave the country des-
titute of a single aboriginal! inhabitant.
“ The natives are perfectly sensible of this decrease ; and when
they contrast their own comdition with that of the English families,
amongst whom the marriages have been prolific in a very extraor-
dinary degree of a most Ihealthy progeny, they conclude that the
God of the English is rennoving the aboriginal inhabitants to make
room for them ; and it apptears to me that this impression has pro-
duced amongst them a verry general recklessness and indifference
to life.”
With reference to this exposition of his views, Mr.
Bushy adds, that he has thus, as impartially as he
could, stated both sidles of the question, and that he
does “ not concur in opinion with those who charge
altogether upon their intercourse with British subjects,
directly or indirectly, the present miserable condition
of the New Zealanders.”
In commenting upon this passage, I would request
you particularly to notice, that the writer distinguishes
between the condition of the natives, as affected by the
vicious conduct of white men, and their circum-
stances in those cases where they derive only benefits
from their English connexions; and that, strange as it
may appear, he does in reality take the most discourag-
ing view of the condition of the New Zealanders, where
the influence of our countrymen is solely employed in
endeavours to promote their welfare. It may be pre-
sumed that the Association will not think that this
description can prove helpful to them. If it be true,
that “ all the apparent causes which are in operation,
are quite inadequate to account for the rapid dis-


appearance of the people; ” and that the natives are
doomed, by some mysterious decree of Heaven,
rapidly to waste away without any visible cause, in the
presence of white men, who have gone among them
with no other view than to do them good; the only
course by which our Government or Parliament could
hope to meet the case would be, not to found a
Colony, but to banish henceforth every white man,
good as well as bad, from the shores of New Zealand.
The only part of this description which could possi-
bly he made to strengthen the cause of the Association
is that which relates to the vicious conduct of our
countrymen; and I think you will agree with me,
that, so far from presenting a more alarming picture,
Mr. Busby does not place those evils in so strong a
light as that in which we have previously regarded
them. Every statement which he makes upon this
subject has its drawback. If he admits that “the
introduction of fire-arms is alleged as one cause of
the rapid disappearance of the people,” he also main-
tains, that “ there seems good reason to doubt whether
their wars were less sanguinary before fire-arms were
introduced.” If he allows, that “ the use of intoxicat-
ing liquors and tobacco” is, “in all probability,
the original causes of diseases with which their
immediate connexion is not apparent,” on the other
hand he says, “ their direct influence cannot, I think,
be stated as at all remarkable.” He gives it as his
opinion, that diseases resulting from the vicious inter-
course of white people with the natives “ ought to be
largely allowed for in estimating the causes which are
in operation for the depopulation of the country ; ”
but he qualifies this by the assertion, that “ the mor-
tality has not been confined to those who have hjeen
the victims of violence, or who have been exposed to


the effects of vices or diseases of foreign origin,”—and
that disease and death prevail to a still more fearful
extent among those natives who derive nothing but
benefits from their English connexions. On the
alleged rapid depopulation of New Zealand generally,
and especially the mortality which is stated to take
place among the natives under the care of the Mis-
sionaries, I shall not fail to remark ; hut for the pre-
sent I confine myself to the class of evils which more
particularly occupies the attention of Mr. Busby, sim-
ply for the purpose of showing that his description of
the effect of the vicious conduct of white men does not
even come up to tire views which were substantiated
before the Aborigines’ Committee, nor by any means
equals that which is- given in the book published by
the Association.
The leading topuc in Mr. Busby’s despatch is ob-
viously the misery which the New Zealanders inflict
upon themselves by their own internal wars. The fact
is, that the native wars form the principal subject of
all the despatches comprised in this collection of
papers. The occasion of their being written was the
breaking out of a war between two of the principal
tribes near the Bay of Islands. The first solicitude
evinced by the writers in relation to this war has for its
object, more especially, the protection of British sub-
jects against the natives ; and the measure recom-
mended by Mr. Busby, as a permanent provision for
the existing state of things, is framed with especial
reference to the native wars. Thus, in the first of
these despatches, Sir Richard Bourke informs Lord
Glenelg, that, “in consequence of a war breaking out
between two tribes near the Bay of Islands,” he had
requested Captain Hobson, commanding His Majesty’s
ship Rattlesnake, an experienced and judicious officer,


to repair to New Zealand, to afford British subjects
resident there, and to British shipping, such protection
as might be required.” In the second despatch, Cap-
tain Hobson reports to the Governor his proceedings
at New Zealand, for the accomplishment of this pri-
mary object, and the places which he had visited for
the purpose of affording protection to the British
against the violence of the natives. In the next
paper, Mr. Busby, taking up the same subject, adverts
with satisfaction to the measures adopted by Captain
Hobson, but expresses, notwithstanding, great appre-
hension respecting the probable results of the war. He
remarks: —
“Although the visit of Ilis Majesty’s ship Rattlesnake at this
juncture is peculiarly important, as making it appear to the natives
that a vigilant guardianship is maintained over His Majesty’s
subjects who are settled here, and that assistance is never at
a great distance, should it be required; yet it is impossible to
look to the continuance of this contest without the most serious
alarm.”
Mr. Busby further mentions several reasons for the
solicitude which he thus expressed respecting the
future, and then proceeds to the consideration of some
permanent remedy for the evils which afflict New Zea-
land. This was a subject to which, it appears, the
attention of the Governor had been previously directed.
Lord Glenelg had announced to him an intention of
resuming a measure “ for the parliamentary regulation
of the intercourse between British subjects and New
Zealand;” and he informs his Lordship that he had
proposed to Captain Hobson to make known to him,
on his return from the mission on which he was sent,
“ the opinions which his observation, whilst there,
might lead him to form upon the present state of New
Zealand, and the means of securing, with the least pos-


sible overt interference, the common interests of the
natives, and of the British settled amongst them.” It
appears, moreover, that the Governor had communi-
cated with Mr. Busby on the same subject, and had
mentioned to him the proposed Act of Parliament.
In reply, Mr. Busby expresses himself to the following
effect: —
“ Under these circumstances,” (circumstances connected with the
war and arising out of the prospect of its continuance,) “ his Excel-
lency will be prepared for my entire concurrence in his opinion that
any additional expenditure, with the view of giving increased effi-
ciency to my office as at present constituted, would be altogether
fruitless ; nor would the Act of Parliament to which his Excellency
refers, if the powers it was intended to impart should be limited to
the controlling of Britisln subjects, be of much service, in the state
to which the affairs of thiis country have arrived. What is wanted
is a paramount supported by a force adequate to secure
the efficiency of its measuires.
“ Without the establishment of such an authority by some
civilized State, I cannot, aifter a full consideration of every circum-
stance connected with tlhe actual condition of this people, see the
least prospect of any permranent peace being established amongst
them whilst there remains a stronger man to murder his weaker
neighbour. There are few persons so insignificant as not to have it
in their power, at any time, to plunge the country into war. The
crime of an individual involves his most distant connexions, as each
of them is a legitimate object of retaliation to the connexions of the
injured party. It is in vain to represent to them that the criminal
alone should suffer; their answer is ready, and it is perfectly con-
sistent with the dictates of natural justice, namely, that his tribe
will not surrender him to suffer for his crime, and by standing up
in his defence they have become participators in it ; while, on the
other hand, provided the criminal be not a slave, his connexions are
never without a grievance, more or less ancient, which they bring
forward as a justification of his crime. Thus, by every attempt to
administer the law of retaliation—the rude justice of nature—the
breach is made wider. New deaths involve more distant con-
nexions. Tribe after tribe becomes a party to the contest; and
peace, or rather an intermission of murders, can only he procured
when one of the parties becomes too weak to continue the contest,


or when the loss on both sides happens to h»e so nearly balanced,
that neither party has an advantage over the either.
“In this way has the depopulation of the coauntry been going on,
till district after district has become void of itss inhabitants, and the
population is, even now, but a remnant of what it was in the
memory of some European residents.”
From this passage it is obvious, tlhat the Governor
had dwelt upon two schemes for meeting the existing
state of things in New Zealand. The first was to
strengthen the position of Mr. Busby, with the view
of giving increased efficiency to his otffice, of which the
Governor did not approve; the sec@nd was the Act
of Parliament, of which Lord Glenelg; had made men-
tion : and the reason which Mr. Busby assigns for his
conclusion, that neither of these planss would meet the
case, is worthy of special remark. The principal
object of his own appointment was to protect the
natives from the aggressions of British subjects, and
he appears to have understood that the leading design
of the proposed Act of Parliament! was somewhat
similar; but he tells the Governor, ithis will not “be
of much service in the state to which the affairs of the
country have arrived,” and that wlhat is especially
needed is the introduction of “ a permanent autho-
rity,” which should reconcile the differences among the
natives, and put an end to their devastating internal
wars.
This being the character of Mr. Busby’s despatch,
how it can be made to subserve the cause of the New-
Zealand Association, I cannot conceiive. They dwell
upon the evils inflicted on the New Zealanders by
“ British visitors and settlers,” and “ ithe emigration of
convict refugees, and other desperate ivagabonds; ” and
they tell the public that the repression! of those evils is
“one of the main grounds on which they have built


their plan for colonizing New Zealand:” whereas
Mr. Busby insists especially upon the native wars, and
emphatically declares, that a measure framed merely
for controlling British subjects, and protecting the
natives from the consequence of their ill conduct, will
not by any means meet the case ; and argues that the
remedy particularly needed is, a measure that shall
have for its primary object to put an end to the inter-
nal wars, and thus prevent the New Zealanders from
destroying each other.
Under this view of Mr. Busby’s despatch, I think I
am warranted in concluding, that it only serves to fur-
nish additional evidence that the Association have not
proposed the remedy required by the existing state of
things in New Zealand. If Mr. Busby has not dwelt
so forcibly upon tfihe evils introduced among the New
Zealanders by Brittish subjects, he has called attention
to others of a mo>st affecting character; and has thus
shown that the case is more complex and difficult than
many persons had been previously led to imagine. I
must here, however, remark that I cannot altogether
agree with this gentleman in his statements respecting
the alleged rapid decrease of the native population. I
am still doubtful whether the vicious conduct of the
whites has as yet produced any considerable or very
sensible diminution of the native inhabitants; and I
am of opinion that the native wars, although their
destructive tendency is unquestionable, are not now
actually effecting such a decrease in the number of the
inhabitants as Air. Busby imagines. Let us glance at
the calculations which have been made respecting the
population of New Zealand. This, as you are aware ;
has been variously estimated; but Murray, in his
standard work, “The Encyclopaedia of Geography,”
adopts the calculation of Nicholas. On referring to


the Narrative of that gentleman, H find him expressing
himself to this effect“ Doctor Foster, who has
computed the population of the diifferent islands in the
South Seas, has fixed that of Mew Zealand, through
the whole extent, at one hundred thousand souls ; hut
though I conceive this estimate to be fully equal to
the number of the inhabitants, yett I will suppose them
at present one hundred and fifty thousand.” It thus
appears that although the writer,, in order to place in
the strongest light the argument Ihe was pursuing, was
disposed to admit that the population might amount to
one hundred and fifty thousand persons; yet he be-
lieved that the number of native inhabitants through-
out the whole extent of New Zealand did not actu-
ally amount to more than one hundred thousand.
Here, then, we have the calculation, adopted by Mur-
ray, of what was the entire population of New Zealand
in the year 1814, a period when the visits of British
vessels to those shores were only of rare occurrence.
For a computation of the number of native inhabitants
which the Northern Island now contains, I shall give
that which has been furnished by the Rev. W. Wil-
liams of the Church Missionary Society. On adding
together his estimates of the number of natives in the
several districts, it will be found that he makes the
native population of the Northern Island alone to
amount to one hundred and five thousand four hun-
dred persons. If these calculations are to be relied
upon, it follows that the aggregate of the population is
equal at least to what it was twenty year’s ago. I shall
only further remark, that Mr. Williams—having, after-
twelve years’ residence among them, obtained a some-
what intimate knowledge of the people; and having,
moreover, made this calculation on independent
grounds, without any reference to the present inquiry


—must be regarded as an authority fully entitled to
a hearing upon the subject.
Mr. Busby has evidently overlooked some important
considerations, tending greatly to qualify the sweeping
statements which he has made. He has truly described
the savage character of the native wars; but he has
not adverted to the meliorating effects of Christianity.
Where that is not felt, the wars are as sanguinary and
destructive as formerly; but the influence of the
Christian natives is now so great that they are enabled
very considerably to check the course of war, or
mitigate the severity of its character. With regard to
the alleged decrease in the number of the natives at
the Mission Stations, it may be remarked, that the
transition-state fromi barbarism to civilization is not
favourable to the htealth of Aboriginal people. The
Chippeway Chief fnom Upper Canada, to whom I
referred on a formeir occasion, has informed me, in a
conversation on this subject, that his people, who had
embraced Christianity, suffered much while they
were in a half-civilized condition, —that the blend-
ing together of some of their old roving habits with
the customs of civilized society, learned from their
Christian teachers, introduced among them consumption
and other maladies ; which, for a time, so fully coun-
terbalanced the effects of other beneficial causes, that
it has been only within the last two or three years that
the population at his settlement has begun to increase.
That the transition-state should generally be attended
with similar unfavourable circumstances, is what all
who regard the subject with a philosophic eye would
be led to expect. After barbarous people have adopted
European clothing, and enjoyed some of the comforts
of civilized life, they cannot, in the nature of things,
expose themselves to the weather, and sleep upon the


ground in wet clothes, according to tiheir former course
of living, without injury to their healtlh. There is reason
to believe, that the effects of such imprudence are ex-
perienced among the natives of Mew Zealand who
have embraced Christianity, and aire making some
advances towards civilization. One of our Mission-
aries at the Hokianga, in a letter received within the
last few days, thus glances at the subject:—
“ The daughter of one of our most respeectable Chiefs, named
None, or Thomas Walker, (after Thomas Walkcer, Esq., of Stockton-
upon-Tees, the friend of Missions,) has been illl for some time ; and
we fear she will not recover. She was a ifine, healthy, robust
young woman; and was lately married to am interesting young
Chief, named William : but her illness was brrought on by sleeping
in damp clothes upon the ground; and we ffear consumption will
be the consequence of her imprudence. Chiiefs and their people
remain in their wet clothes for some time; and we have had to
entreat them to change, to avoid sickness and death. Coughs are
very common at this time, brought on by cold amd exposure.”
It is, therefore, no more than reflecting persons
would expect to hear, that that portion of the
native population of New Zealand now under the care
of the Missionaries, which is at this wery juncture in
the transition-state from barbarous life to civiliza-
tion, do not appear to be in so healthy and thriv-
ing a condition as the Missionaries themselves, and
their families, whose constitutions have not been sub-
jected to the severe test of passing from one mode of
life, to another the very reverse. But there is a fact
mentioned by both the Church and Wesleyan Mission-
aries, which of itself sufficiently accounts for the
“ disease and death ” among the Christian natives to
which Mr. Busby refers. Mr. Woon, writing from the
Hokianga, thus adverts to it:—
“ Could you associate with the natives as we ;are called to asso-
ciate with them at this time, September 20th„ 1837, you would


weep oyer their distresses. An influenza which affects the head
and chest is spreading on every hand, and hundreds are looking to
the Missionaries for medicine and nourishment. The Mission
families are all more or less affected.”
This was written only a few weeks after the date of
Mr. Busby’s Despatch, and had he stated that the
“ disease and death ” among the Christian natives
resulted from an occasional visitation —an epidemic to
which our own and other civilized countries are sub-
ject, there would not have been any necessity to resolve
the whole into some mysterious decree of Heaven
for effecting the destruction of the Aborigines of New
Zealand.
It is easy, however, to make excuse for the tone of
despondency in which Mr. Bushy indulges. Consider-
ing his circumstancces, —that he has been left without
adequate support ®r means to carry the benevolent ob-
ject of his appointiment into effect, and that he has had to
contemplate the ewils which prevail around him, without
the ability effectually to prevent or control them,—it is
not to be wondered at that he should be led to indulge
in gloomy views, and to make the dark shades of the
picture which he draws deeper than the circumstances
of the case do really warrant.
While, however, I cannot adopt the conclusion, that
the depopulation of New Zealand is going on at so
fearful a rate as the description of Mr. Busby would
seem to intimate, that gentleman’s despatch, with those
of the Governor and Captain Hobson, does certainly
afford a more comprehensive view of the state of things
in New Zealand than has usually been presented to the
public; and tends to impress the mind more deeply
with the complexity and difficulty of the question
respecting a suitable remedy. The evils which afflict
New Zealand may be classed under three heads :


Those which are inflicted upam the natives by British
subjects , must first be noticed. With this part of the
question, a degree of familiarity has been obtained, by
means of the inquiry instituted! by the Parliamentary
Aborigines’ Committee. That the wrongs which the
New Zealanders suffer from oinv countrymen are great,
and that some preventive meaasure is indispensably
necessary, cannot be doubted; more especially as the
probability exists, that the natiive wars will be aggra-
vated by the increasing numbeir of British residents.
Captain Hobson, while he dwtells on the effect of
the wars of the New Zealamders in devastating
their beautiful country, and also) maintains it to be the
duty of Government to protect our countrymen from
the violence of the hostile natives ; at the same time
shows, that, as the number of British residents has been
so considerably augmented, the danger has consequently
increased; that the irregular conduct of the lower order
of the settlers will tend to promote war, by inflaming
“ the natural turbulence of the native population,”
“which heretofore the great and powerful influence of
the Missionaries has done much to check.”
In the next place, the injuries which are done to the
New Zealanders by Americans and other foreigners
come under review. The official return of vessels
which visited the Bay of Islands in the year 1836,
furnished by Mr. Busby, and printed with the des-
patches, states that out of one hundred and fifty-one
reported, ninety-three only were English and Colonial
vessels; the remainder were A merican and other
foreign ships,-—namely, fifty-four American, three
French, and one Tahitian. And the last half-year’s
return, I have been informed, shows that fhe number
of American vessels visiting New/ Zealand was very
nearly equal to that of English. Now, as the conduct


of the American seamen is not superior to that of bur
own, the evils which the natives suffer from that class
of visitants become a very prominent feature in this
painful and perplexing case.
Lastly. The misery in which the New Zealanders
involve themselves by their own internal tears, as de-
scribed in the documents now under consideration, is
a subject calculated deeply to affect the benevolent
mind, and demands very special consideration.
The inquiry which now naturally arises is, What is
to be done to meet this complex state of things P What
is the remedy for these various and complicated evils ?
This is a question of very difficult solution ; and it is a
much more easy hask to show what will not meet the
case, than to poimt out the course which ought to be
pursued. Since (the publication of these despatches,
we have had at leaast four distinct plans before us ; and
although I do not undertake to say that any of the four
will fully meet the; existing emergency, you will allow
me to occupy a few minutes o'f your time in comparing
their various pretensions.
1. Colonization is proposed as a remedy. “Send
out emigrants,” say the New-Zealand Association,
“ and found a colony.” How this scheme should meet
the case, I was unable to discover when I published
my examination of their proposals ; but its utter insuf-
ficiency has been clearly proved to me by the
despatches now put into our hands.
To protect the New Zealanders from British visitors
and settlers, the Association tell us, is one of their main
objects: but how does it yet appear that they will be
able to accomplish even this P They might, to some


extent, “ repress the crimes of tlhe British within the
Colony which they propose to establish; hut it is most
probable, that the more vicicous characters would
generally retire beyond the bomndary of the Colony,
and thus withdraw themselves frcom its direct control.
For the purpose of dealing witlh those who may be
placed without the jurisdiction of the Colony, the
Association, however, propose t that treaties shall be
made with the native Chiefs, tco aid in bringing to
justice such British subjects ais may injure and
oppress them. This is plausible enough ; but I wish
to he informed how a Colonizaition Company, who
avowedly have “purposes of their own to serve,” can
possibly give a guarantee, that they will be able to
devote either time or means to the accomplishment
of such an object. Should they, according to their
first proposal, form their settlement in the Southern
Island, how is it to be expected that they could keep
a vigilant watch over the whole of the Northern Island
—along the many hundreds of miles of coast beyond
their own territory,-—and that thxey would maintain
throughout this whole extent the aipparatus necessary
for suppressing, in conjunction witlh the native Chiefs,
(he crimes of British subjects ? It may easily be
conceived that a Government-arnrangement, formed
on high public principles, solely fcbr the accomplish-
ment of such a purpose, might bee made to answer ;
but I cannot believe, until I see! it done, that a
Company, with whom this object, according to their
own showing, would be only a secondary consideration,
could pay sufficient attention to itt. Unless human
nature and the course of things ini New Zealand be
very different from what they are om this side of the
globe, it would certainly happen, thiat the commercial
interests of the Association, and thie interests of the


natives as jeoparded by British subjects, would some-
times interfere with each other; and their own
commercial interests, as being confessedly their
primary care, would engross the attention of the
Association, to the neglect of the endangered interests
of the natives. Were the proposals of the Association
to be sanctioned by Parliament, and a Colony to be
established, I should therefore expect, that all the
New Zealanders beyond its limits would, notwithstand-
ing, be left, as now, to endure the wrongs inflicted
upon them hy British subjects. After a time, the
Association would have to confess, that they could not
prevent this ; and their failure would be urged as a
reason why the Colony should be extended so as to
embrace those localities where our vicious countrymen
might be carrying on their depredations, and thus
bring them effectmally under colonial jurisdiction. In
this way, for the ostensible purpose of protecting the
natives from oppression, the whole tendency of the
plan of the Association would ere long be worked out,
and New Zealand be wholly reduced to the condition
of a British dependency. To say nothing of the
probability, that some of the emigrants who might be
sent out to form the Colony would be found quite as
ready to embrace every opportunity of injuring the
natives as many of our vicious countrymen who are
already there, (for it would be absurd to argue upon
the supposition that the proposed Colony should be
formed exclusively of virtuous and benevolent
persons,) it is, as I think, most obvious, that the
Association will fail to accomplish that which has
constituted one of the main recommendations of their
plan to the philanthropist, and will not be able to
protect the New Zealanders from the violence and in-
justice of British subjects, except by pushing out their


plan of Colonization to such an (extent as would make
the remedy worse than the disease.
If then the scheme of Colonization is not likely to
meet this part of the case, how wiill it alford protection
to the natives from Americans amd other foreigners ?
What have the Association proposed in order to
remedy the evils originating in thie vicious conduct of
those visitants,—evils which have' evidently occupied
the attention of our Government ffor several years, and
which, it now appears, have so considerably increased
as to he only less than the mischieif resulting from the
improper conduct of our own countrymen? The
Association do not so much as recognise this impor-
tant feature of the New-Zealand case. They have
absolutely nothing to offer upon the subject. It
would follow, of course, that they would be able to
control the Americans within the Colony, should one
be formed: but they would have no right to interfere
with them beyond its limits ; and for any thing that
the Association could do, the natives, without the
boundaries of the Colony, would continue to suffer as
much as ever from the Americans amd other foreigners.
Were a settlement once formed biy the Association,
their inability to deal with this class; of persons would
soon be clearly demonstrated, andl a new argument
would probably he derived from thus very considera-
tion in favour of the extension off their plan. We
should shortly hear of the necessity of colonizing the
whole of New Zealand, for this amiong other reasons,
—that the natives might be rescued' out of the hands
of the Americans.
But, to proceed : How is Colonizattion calculated to
prove a preventive to the native wairs, —that class of
evils on which such principal strosss is laid in the
despatches under review, and more especially in the


despatch of Mr. Busby? Could the Association
impart Christianity and civilization to the New
Zealanders, they would thereby put an end to the
internal wars which originate so great an amount of
suffering ; but unless they adopt a very different plan
of procedure from that which they have already
published, and exhibit an array of means vastly
superior to those on which they have heretofore dwelt,
we may safely conclude that their proposed civilizing
process would not terminate the wars of New Zealand.
It may then be argued, that the Association will not
accomplish this desirable object in any way; for,
separate from their general plan of civilization, they
offer nothing specific to meet this part of the case. It
is to he feared, indeed, that the native wars may be
increased, rather tlhan diminished, by their scheme of
Colonization. Ciaptain Hobson dwells upon the
danger resulting ifrom an increase in the number of
o o
licentious white ptcople ; and it is not unlikely that
some of the emigrants whom the Association might
send out would he as disposed to quarrel with the
natives, and provoke them to war, as any of our coun-
trymen who are already there. Disputes between
the natives and Colonists would probably he more
serious in their consequences than those in which the
natives and the present settlers become involved. Mr.
Coates has well remarked, that if an Englishman now
offends the natives, they destroy his property, and
perhaps force him to fly for his life, and there the
matter ends ; but if the Englishman were a Colonist,
this would not be the case. Did he belong to a
Colony having its “ militia,” “ regulars,” and a
“ marine,” it might be deemed necessary to avenge
his cause ; and the consequences might prove very
serious. A case in point occurs to me, which so


clearly illustrates my meaning, tthat I shall give it at
length from A Personal Nurraitive of Two Visits to
New Zealand in His Majestty’s Ship Alligator,
A.D. 1834, hy William Batrret Marshall, Sur-
geon, R.N.
“ March 12.—The anchor was weighedd again this morning, and
the ship removed to an inner harbour^ - , at the confluence of the
Waikadi and the Kaua-kaua rivers, it bbeing deemed expedient to
bring her broadside to bear upon the Fa < of a Chief named Pomare,
between whom and an English trader ; a dispute had arisen, the
decision of which was referred by the Matter to the British Resi-
dent ; and the case, in that gentleman’s (opinion, being one of law-
less rapine and unprovoked aggression om the part of the native,
who, in all the wild-spiritedness of a savmge independence, laughed
Mr. Busby to scorn, and set his authority at defiance, the interven-
tion of Captain Lambert w r as sought, to olbtain restitution of a large
schooner-rigged boat, which Pomare was said to withhold feloni-
ously from its rightful owner. The crew of the Alligator were got
under arms accordingly, the ship clearedl for action, guns shotted,
and the pinnace fitted with a small howiitzer, to recover, if neces-
sary, by force, what it was supposed had bieen procured by injustice.
In order, however, if practicable, to avert hostilities, an application
by letter and verbally was forwarded too the Rev. W. Williams,
urging him to seek an interview with thee Chief, and endeavour to
effect an amicable adjustment of the dififference. The letter and
message were no sooner delivered than coimplied with; and the Rev.
W. Williams and Wyate set off for tine Pa, which occupies a
strong position on the top of a height at tine extremity of the penin-
sula, whose rocky base is laved by the twiin rivers, until they unite
to empty their waters into the Bay of Islands, and in that vast
basin wed themselves as one river to the waves of the great Pacific
Ocean. After the lapse of about half an hour, a salute of two
guns, with which he has been enabled to strengthen his abode,
announced the setting off of the Chief. A little longer, and he
strode with the air of a Monarch along the quarter-deck of the
frigate, a tall and athletic young man, his eye scarcely deigning a
glance at ‘ the pomp and circumstance of war,’ which met him
there. Being invited below, he hesitated, but it was only for a mo-
ment ; the next saw him descending into the cabin, with the same
undaunted air by which his previous bearing had been marked, and
he remained there in close conference for nearly two hours; at the


end of which Mr. Busby came on deck, apparently much pleased,
and confessedly glad to have discovered that Pomare, who by his
manners had prepossessed every one in his favour, was not the
aggressor, hut the aggrieved. The facts of the case as now ascer-
tained were these :—He had sold to an European trader, a quantity
of timber for exportation; the trader resold it before paying
for it himself, and decamped in the New Zealander’s debt, who,
finding the timber removed, the original purchaser gone away, and
the assignee of the purchase about to quit also, demanded payment
of the latter, and, being refused, retaliated by seizing on the
schooner. An equitable adjustment has been the consequence ;
Pomare consenting to leave it with the Missionaries to fix the
amount due to him for his timber, and promising, on payment of
that amount, to give up the boat. The sum proved to be twenty
pounds sterling ; and the hero of the day took his departure, but not
before he had stipulated for a complimentary salute similar to that
with which he had greeted the British flag. The successful issue
of this affair confirms the testimony of Mr. Clindon to the salutary
influence possessed bjv the Missionaries over the minds of the
natives; and exhibits smmewhat of the mode by which it has been
acquired ; namely, the due administration of justice between man
and man, without respect of persons, in the cases submitted to their
arbitration. And the circumstances under which Pomare consented
to visit the ship when he did, illustrate very forcibly the strength of
his confidence in the Ministers of peace, and the greatness of his
distrust in the good faith of those whom he was to meet on board :
he could only be prevailed on to trust his person in the hands of
the King’s officers by W. Williams offering to make the Mission
families and property at Paihia the guarantees of his safety, and
placing them at the disposal of his tribe, as hostages and security
for the good faith he was to experience at our hands.”
A fact like this speaks volumes. Here is the case
of an Englishman, who had so completely misled the
British Resident, as to make him believe that he had
been seriously injured by a native Chief, who in reality
was only seeking his right; and had it not been for
the wise precaution of engaging the Missionary to act
the part of mediator before His Majesty’s ship should
open its destructive fire, the injured Chief and his
people might have been involved in one common


destruction. What had so neairly happened in this
instance, would doubtless soon oaccur, should a Colony
be founded ; and we might exfpect to hear of such
and such a Chief and his people 1 , having been severely
chastised for the injuries whichi they had inflicted on
individual Colonists, when, if thee truth could be ascer-
tained, those alleged injuries, as in the case now
quoted, would probably be foumd to have been only
retributive visitations in self-defence.
I shall not dwell longer on tthe proposed plan for
colonizing New Zealand, but pass to the consideration
of the other measures which have been suggested, by
remarking, that if Mr. Busby’s despatch has strength-
ened any one of my previous convictions more than
the rest, it is the conclusion, that the plans proposed
by the Association are altogether inadequate to meet
the existing state of things in New Zealand.
2. The plan of Mr. Busby is to take New Zealand
under British Protection. £t What is wanted,” he
says, “is a paramount authority, supported by a force
adequate to secure the efficienccy of its measures.”
“ Without the establishment of smeh authority by some
civilized State, I cannot, after a full consideration of
every circumstance connected with the actual con-
dition of this people, see the least prospect of any
permanent peace being established among them.”'
Mr. Busby further states, that, in his judgment,,
“ unless the country should be taken under the
efficient protection of Great Britian, or some other
foreign power should interfere,” the natives will go on
destroying each other ; that the British will continue
to suffer the accumulating evils of a permanent
anarchy; and that the nature of their pursuits, the
distance of their habitations, and, above all, the


character of the majority of them, would prevent them
from making common cause against the natives with
any prospect of promoting general security. He then
proceeds as follows to develope his plan :
“ I have in former communications detailed so fully the relative
situation of the British and the natives, and the frequent causes of
contention existing between them, that I will forbear to enter upon
the subject in the present despatch. For the same reason I will avoid
any reference to the importance of British interests, and the neces-
sity for their protection, irrespective of the condition either of the
natives, or of the British who have actually settled in their country.
But I will proceed at once to submit the outline of a plan of
government, which I humbly venture to think would give as great
a degree of peace and security to all classes of persons in this cotrn-
try, as is enjoyed by the inhabitants of the majority even of civil-
ized States.
“ The plan which I wcnuld now more fully submit was suggested
in my despatch 26th of January, 1836, No. 85. It is founded
upon the principle of a protecting State, administering in chief the
affairs of another State in; trust for the inhabitants, as sanctioned by
the treaty of Paris, in thee instance of Great Britain and the lonian
Islands, and as applied, I believe, in various instances, on the bor-
ders of our Indian possessions.
“ All my experience, subsequent to the date of that suggestion,
has strengthened my belief that the principle is peculiarly appli-
cable to this country ; and that the details could be arranged with
a degree both of efficiency and economy which at first sight might
appear far from probable.
“ The Chiefs who were parties to the Articles of Confederation
and Declaration of Independence, in October, 1835, together with
those who have subsequently adhered to it, include, with very few
exceptions, the whole of the Chiefs of influence in the northern
parts of the island, and the adhesion of the remainder could at any
time be procured.
« Whatever acts approaching to acts of sovereignty or govern-
ment have been exercised in the country, have been exercised by
these Chiefs in their individual capacity as relates to their own
people, and in their collective capacity as relates to their negotia-
tions with the British Government, —the only Government with
which the Chiefs or people of New Zealand have had any rela-
tions of a diplomatic character. Their flag has also been formally


recognised by the British Government as tlhe flag of an independent
State.
“ The Articles of Confederation having ccentralized the powers of
sovereignty exercised both dc jure and ede facto by the several
Chiefs, and having established and declaredd the basis of a constitu-
tion of government founded upon the umiion of those powers, I
cannot, I think, greatly err in assuming thant the congress of Chiefs,
the depository of the powers of the State as ( declared by its constitu-
tion, is competent to become a party to i a treaty with a foreign
power, and to avail itself of foreign assistance in reducing the
country under its authority to order ; and, tthis principle being once
admitted, all difficulty appears to me to varnish.
“ The appearance of a detachment of Brittish troops, in fulfilment
of a treaty with the confederated Chiefs, would not be a taking
possession of the country, but a means of strengthening the hands
of its native government; while, in return ifor this subsidiary force,
it might be stipulated that the British settllers should be subject to
the operation of no laws but such as shouild emanate from, or be
consented to, by their own Government, amd exercised under the
control and directions of its officers ; and tchat the revenues of the
country should be made applicable, in th(B first instance, to the
support of a civil government, to be establlished by the protecting
power, and the maintenance of the quota of" troops stipulated for by
the treaty.
“In theory and ostensibility, the govermment would be that of
the confederated Chiefs, but in reality it musst necessarily be that of
the protecting power. The Chiefs would nueet annually or oftener,
and nominally enact the laws proposed to tShem; but in truth the
present race of Chiefs could not be entrusted with any discretion
whatever in the adoption or rejection of any measure that might be
submitted to them, —moral principle, if it exist amongst them at all,
being too weak to withstand the temptation of the slightest personal
consideration. The congress would, in fact, be a school in which
the Chiefs would be instructed in the duties required of them, and
the authority confided to them as conservators of the peace in their
separate districts, to which they would also carry the knowdedge of
the laws enacted during its sittings.
“ As conservators of the peace, a small salary would be given to
them ; and this, together with the distinction conferred by the
employment, would secure beyond all doubt the entire devotion of
the Chiefs to the wishes of the Resident. A medal containing the
name of each Chief, and of the district over which his authority
extended, -would be another highly-esteemed distinction.


“lo complete thee means of establishing an entire control over
the population, it would be only necessary to establish a school in
each considerable villlage, with a schoolmaster paid in proportion to
the number of individuals he should have under his tuition during
the year. Schoolmiasters already exist in many villages, and
could, without difficmlty, soon be procured for the whole by the aid
of the Missionaries. An annual examination of these schools, and
a distribution of prizes of trivial value, would bring the whole
population under the supervision of the government; while a period-
ical newspaper might, at the same time that it conveyed the news
of the day, be made the means of instructing the natives in those
relative duties of tike people and their rulers which are familiar to
all ranks of the population under established governments, but of
which the New /Zealanders have scarcely as yet conceived an
idea.
“So simple andl primitive are the arrangements which, with
■entire confidence im their efficiency, I would propose for the govern-
ment of the natives population ; nor could the expense of these
arrangements, for several years at least, exceed £l,OOO a-year,
allotting a more coiinsiderable salary to certain leading Chiefs, to be
elected by the conggress, with the sanction of the Resident, for the
purpose of actingg with him as a native council and executive
authority, and prcoviding also for the accession of more distant
tribes, who would hasten to join the confederation when its objects
should become uncderstood, and whose adherence it is indeed, under
any circumstances;, highly necessary to procure, as a bar to the
interference of any foreign power.
u The influence of the government amongst the tribes south of
.the present confederation would of course be more limited than
nearer to the seat of government. But there also the intercourse of
British subjects, and the evils for which they are responsible, are
less felt. As these extended, the occasion and the means would
arise for making the government efficient throughout the island.
But, even from the first, the existence of a power which would
claim the right of deciding disputes and maintaining peace, would
■be most beneficially felt.”
This quotation contains the outline of the plan. In
enlarging upon it Mr. Busby dwells at some length on
the importance of securing the assistance of the
Missionaries, for the reason that without their concur-
rence and support no measure which may be adopted


can possibly succeed; he calculattes the number of
troops which it would be necessarjy to maintain, and
shows how the expense of the entirre system might be
met by a duty on shipping and < certain articles of
trade.
In this scheme, there is certaiinly much that is
plausible. It professes to recogmise the national
independence, and proposes to meett the whole case,- —
to place British subjects and otherr foreigners under
control, and to repress the internail wars, by raising
up a native government, under the; protection of this
country.
How far British legislation can (contribute towards
the formation of an enlightened mative government,
which shall effectually control the turbulence of the
people, and repress their destructive wars, is a ques-
tion of great difficulty. Ido not think that much can
be done by this means directly to control or restrain
the heathen natives. Those who aore well acquainted
with the character of the New Zeallanders know, that
their wars are intimately connected! with their super-
stitions, and that their notions of reeligion impel them
to revenge the insults and injuries, real or imaginary,
which one individual or tribe receiives from another.
Until, then, their minds shall become disenthralled
from the tyrannizing influence of superstition by the
application of a higher power than a British Act of
Parliament, I should despair of any legislation on our
part being brought to bear directly upon the hea-
then natives, so as to repress their wars, or subdue
the violence of their natural character. But with the
Christian natives something might possibly be done.
Few subjects occasion greater solicitude in the minds
of Missionaries, whose labours among uncivilized
heathen tribes and nations have been attended with


success, than the introduction of a native government
suitable for a people emerging from Heathenism, who
need other laws than those which were originated by
their former ignorant and superstitious notions. It is
desirable that Missionaries should not assume, to any
considerable extent, the character of politicians and
legislators; and yet they deeply feel the want of
enlightened laws and government for the people,
whose religious character has been formed anew by
means of their teaching, and who are now anxious to
devote themselves to the pursuits of civilized life.
The late Aborigines’ Committee bestowed some
attention on this subject, and recommended it to the
serious consideration of Parliament; and if some
judicious measures could be devised for fostering an
enlightened native government among the Christian
natives of New Zealand, an important object would be
accomplished. Their moral influence would thus be
brought to bear more effectually upon the population
in general, and their powerful mediation would be
beneficially employed in preventing and repressing the
heathen wars. This is no vague supposition, or
extravagant expectation. I possess conclusive evi-
dence that the very war which is the subject of
these recent despatches,—the contest which was
regarded of such importance as to render it necessary
to send a ship of war from the Colony for the pro-
tection of British residents, —and which Mr. Busby,
after the Rattlesnake had returned to the Colony, still
continued to contemplate with such alarming apprehen-
sions, as almost precluded the hope of its termination
until New Zealand should become depopulated,—even
this war was actually brought to an end through the
interference of the Christian natives. Captain Hobson,
as the sequel shows, formed a truer estimate than Mr.


Busby of the influence of Christiamity in New Zealand.
In his despatch, he says :
“ The quarrel between the Bay of Islannds’ tribes is supposed by
the best-informed to be in a fair train four adjustment Nknb, a
powerful Chief from Hokianga, who has ecmbraced Christianity, has
brought his tribe across the island with t the full determination to
compel the contending parties to make peaace ; and as he is known
to possess both courage and power to turn i the scale on either side,
his mediation is not likely to be slighted The gentlemen of the
Mission maintain a constant intercourse bbetween the parties, and
are received by both with the greatest r(respect. Their efforts to
promote peace are unremitting, and of latee they have felt confident
of eventual success,”
Nor were they disappointed in their expectations.
The Rev. Nathaniel Turner, the principal Missionary
at the Wesleyan Station on the Hokianga, in a letter
which now lies before me, written shortly after
Captain Hobson had left New Zealand, states
the gratifying fact, that the differences between
the contending parties had been adjusted, by the
mediation of the Christian natives, under the imme-
diate care of himself and the other Missionaries at that
Station. From this letter it appears, that the Chief to
whom Captain Hobson refers, in company with others,
applied to Mr. Turner and his colleague, Mr. Whiteley,
to accompany them to the contending parties ; partly on
the ground, that the presence of their religious teachers
would impose upon themselves a salutary restraint,
and partly for the reason, that their influence would
be beneficially emplojmd in the endeavour to negotiate
a peace. To this application the Missionaries acceded ;
and, after an absence of ten days, returned to their
families with the unspeakable satisfaction, that the war
was brought to an end and peace happily restored.*
Such a fact, as illustrative of the powerful influence
* See Appendix A. Page 64.


of the Christiaan New Zealanders, and of its beneficial
effects in repressing the desolating wars of their coun-
trymen, requires no comment. Nor is it necessary to
enlarge further upon the importance of rendering
them assistance in remodelling their laws and
government, and thus enabling them to exert their
influence more systematically and extensively upon the
affairs of New Zealand generally. But how this assist-
ance is to be afforded by British legislation, is the
question. However plausible the plan which might be
devised, so much would depend upon its administra-
tion as to render its success extremely problematical.
To speak plainly, almost every thing would depend
upon the character of the persons who should be
selected to carry it into effect. When the question of
extending the plan of Residency in the South-Sea
Islands was umder consideration in the Parliamentary
Aborigines’ Comnnittee, I could not concur in recom-
mending it on any other ground than that the indivi-
duals who might be appointed as Residents should be
possessed of those special qualifications which, in my
judgment, would be necessary to enable them to pro-
mote the welfare of the natives ; and my remarks on
that occasion apply with still greater force upon this
subject. If our Government or Parliament should
interpose for the purpose of forming a suitable
native government for the Christian part of the popu-
lation, that interference must be made on truly Chris-
tian principles, or it could not possibly succeed. It is the
teaching of the Missionaries which has produced that
important change in the views, character, and pursuits
of the people under their care which would encourage
the attempt to aid them in improving their political
regulations : and, however unwilling the mere worldly
politician may be to admit such a conclusion, it must,


notwithstanding, be maintained on the principles of
the truest philosophy, as well am those which Chris-
tianity inculcates, that, in order to> render probable the
success of any Parliamentary schteme which might be
adopted for the furtherance of thiis object, the scheme
itself must not only be framed in harmony with
those instructions of the religious teachers which have
made the New Zealanders what tlueyare ; but the indi-
viduals appointed to carry it into effect must be per-
sons whose own hearts and lives are duly controlled
and regulated by Christianity, amd who would act in
friendly co-operation with the Missionaries in endea-
vouring to work out the plan comfided to their ma-
nagement.
On the whole, I am disposed t® conclude that the
scheme suggested by Mr. Busby would not answer.
Though it has the recommendation of being a
public measure ; though it prop®ses to meet, under
every view, the existing state of tlhings in New Zea-
land ; and professes, moreover, to make recogni-
tion of its national independencee; still it is im-
possible to divest one’s mind of tliie impression, that,
if, through the improper choice of aagents, or for some
other cause, the plan should not wwork well, our pro-
posed temporary direction of the government for the
benefit of the natives would become a permanent
assumption of the sovereign power, and New Zealand
would as certainly be brought into the condition of a
British Colony, as though the proposals of the Asso-
ciation should be carried into full effect.
3. An Improved Plan oe Residency is that which
the Parliamentary Select Committee on Aborigines has
recommended. In considering the various schemes
which are now before us, I have carefully examined,


for the sake <of comparison, the instructions given to
Mr. Busby, om his appointment as British Resident in
New Zealand ; and have been greatly impressed with
the enlightemed views which are developed in that
document, and in the letter addressed by Lord Gode-
rich to the New-Zealand Chiefs, explaining to them
the reasons for Mr. Busby’s appointment. As you
may possibly not have those papers at hand, I subjoin
copies of both * for your reference. You will perceive
that the respected nobleman who originated the office
of British Resident, evidently had the case of the New
Zealanders fiully before him, and intended to make
provision foir protecting them from the outrages
committed against them, both by British subjects and
Americans; rand that he also designed to foster and
give efficienocy to an enlightened native Government.
After reading; those documents, one is naturally led to
inquire, Coulld such an appointment have so com-
pletely failedl, had proper means been employed to
carry it into (effect ? Probably some will be disposed,
from Mr. Busby’s remarks, to ascribe his failure to the
Missionaries ; but fairness requires that the whole case
should be properly understood before condemnation be
passed upon them. Their advocates may very pro-
perly ask, Do the Missionaries “ assume ” too much,
in regarding themselves as “ guardians of the na-
tives ? ” Are they not recognised as such by the
natives themselves P And is it not simply because the
natives view them in this light, that they are enabled to
protect their own countrymen from violence, and make
New Zealand a safe residence for Englishmen and other
foreigners P The respectable gentleman, previously
quoted, (Air. Marshall,) has borne conclusive testimony
* See Appendix B. Page 65.


upon tins point. He was anxiousq on his late visit to
New Zealand, to ascertain what wais the character and
conduct of the Missionaries ; and made several inqui-
ries with this view, which fully comvinced him respect-
ing the beneficial tendency of the influence they
exert. One of the settlers remarkked to him, “ But for
the Missionaries, Sir, no Europeans could live in this
land.” “ Let even their greatestt enemies say what
they may, all such are equally indebted, with myself, to
I lie general respect felt for the Missionaries, for the
safety of their lives and properties iin time past.” The
settler further stated, that his own place had been fre-
quently surrounded, and his personal safety threat-
ened, by a host of armed natives ; and that at such
times he had only to send a message to the Mission
settlement, and procure the attendance of a Mission-
ary, who never failed by his mediation to divert the
invaders from their purpose, they being ashamed to
perpetrate an outrage in the presence of a Missionary.
On these statements, the inquiring traveller thus re-
marks :
“ Facts like these, witnessed too by a man like this, speak
volumes, and supply a text too intelligible to require any comment.
They prove the moral influence of the Missionaries beyond all pos-
sibility of doubt—they prove the beneficial purposes for which that
influence is employed—and they prove too, that, but for the Mis-
sionaries, no settlers could have fixed themselves in New Zealand.
Commerce with it must have failed, and the trade in its produce
have been abandoned.”
All candid persons, I think, must admit, that, —after
the Missionaries have, at the risk of their own lives, in
the first instance, settled among the New Zealanders,
and, by a course of kindness and disinterested benevo-
lence, have gained such influence as to enable them to
secure protection and good treatment for their coun*>


trymen who have followed them, —it would be very
ungracious on the part of any one, while enjoying the
advantages which have thus been obtained for him, to
call in question the right of the Missionaries to the
title of guardians and benefactors of the natives, when
it is so certain that their being recognised as such by
the natives themselves is the true cause of all the
influence which they possess.
Once more The Missionaries do not aspire to
“ the government of the country,” either in whole or in
part; neither can I believe that they would in any cir-
cumstances “ conceive it to be their duty to use their
influence in opposition to the measures” of the British
Resident, for the sake of embarrassing him: but surely
the exercise of their own judgment is not to be wholly
denied to them. Mr. Busby admits that “it is impos-
sible that men (could be found whose opinions and
sentiments in gemeral are more in accordance than
those of the Missionaries and his own ; ” yet he com-
plains, that, on one occasion especially, they declined
to co-operate with him in promoting a measure which
he deemed would be beneficial to the natives. On all
ordinary occasions, I doubt not, whether they have
exactly thought with Mr. Busby or not, he has had
their co-operation; but the whole question is evi-
dently brought to this point,—whether they ought to
co-operate with the British Resident in the active fur-
therance of such measures as they are convinced can-
not fail to prove seriously detrimental to the interests
of the natives P This is really the question, and will
have such an important bearing upon the working of
whatever plan may henceforth be adopted by this
country in reference to New Zealand, that it ought to
be fairly met and settled. The question comes simply
to this, whether, if the British Resident should propose


plans for the management of tlhe natives, which the
Missionaries, from their thoromgh knowledge of the
native character, are confident (cannot fail to irritate
them, excite collisions, and finally involve them in
suffering and loss, they are to he hound actively to
forward such plans ? It is the faict, that the Christian
natives look to their religious tesachers for direction in
all their affairs. They do nothimg of moment without
consulting the Missionaries : andl are the Missionaries
to be required to abuse the confidence thus reposed in
them, and use their influence in persuading their peo-
ple to accede to proposals, which they know will event-
ually prove injurious to them? He would he a hold
individual who would dare to amswer this question in
the affirmative. But the very cease specified by Mr.
Bushy was, from his own statement, evidently one of
this serious character. He desired the Missionaries to
use their influence “to induce the Chiefs to take the
opportunity afforded by the delivery of the King’s
message, to petition His Majesty for assistance in
reducing their country to order, and establishing in it
an efficient government.” It thins appears, from his
own words, that the Missionaries had not refused to
assist Mr. Busby in the dischargee of the duties of that
office to which he had been appointed; but that his
complaint against them is, that they declined to use
their influence with the natives in persuading them to
ask for some new appointment, some new plan, which,
under the notion of reducing their country to order,
and establishing in it an efficient government, the Mis-
sionaries no doubt foresaw would endanger the national
independence of the New Zealanders, and probably
reduce their country, ere long, to the condition of a
British Dependency.
I may here remark by the way, that this reference


to the Missionaries, made by Mr. Busby, has an unto-
ward bearing con the statements of the Association
relative to theiir alleged views and wishes. By the
publication of betters, resolutions, petitions, Ac., which
have emanated from the Missionaries, the Association
appear very solicitous to prove that the Missionaries
ask for some such colonizing plan as is now pro-
posed. That tlhey are anxious that the Europeans
in New Zealand shall he placed under the restraints
of government, and that well-disposed British sub-
jects, as well ;as the Aborigines, may thus obtain
protection from the outrages and insults of the aban-
doned characteirs who infest New Zealand, is suf-
ficiently clear. The petition of the Settlers and Mis-
sionaries, addressed to His late Majesty, had this
object in view. They state that “when complaints
have been made to the British Resident of these acts
of outrage, he bias expressed his deep regret that he
has not yet been furnished with authority and power to
act, not even tine authority of a civil Magistrate to
administer an affidavit; ”■—they add, “ that it has been
considered that ithe confederate tribes of New Zealand
were competent tto enact laws for the proper govern-
ment of this band, whereby protection would be
afforded in all caises of necessity; but that experience
evidently shows tthat in the infant state of the country
this cannot as ytet be accomplished or expected;”—
and they therefore implore His Majesty to afford, in
some way or otheer, sufficient 'protection to the well-dis-
posed classes of the community, against the aggres-
sions and violemce of lawless British subjects. But
that they have naff contemplated, in any expression of
their wishes, suclii an interference, for the accomplish-
ment of this object, as would bring the New Zealand-
ers under a foreign government, and reduce their


■country to a British Colony, is imorally certain from
the complaint now made by Mr.. Busby —that they
declined to further such measures as, they evidently
feared, would be followed by Ihoste disastrous conse-
quences.
But, to proceed: —"While it appoears that the Mis-
sionaries did decline to promote ssome new plan, no
proof is offered that they have ewer refused to aid
Mr. Busby in the performance of those duties which
belong to his office as British Resiident. If, then, he
has failed to accomplish the objetet of his appoint-
ment, it has not been the fault off the Missionaries.
Neither does the failure appear tto have proceeded
from any unwillingness on the part off the native Chiefs
to afford him due co-operation amd assistance. In
reference to this point, Mr. Marshall observes
“The recent decision of the Chiefs, on weeasion of the attack
made on Mr. Bushy’s house, proves their willingness to render that
‘ assistance and support,’ which His Majesty “ confidently expected ’
at their hands.”
’l'he question then recurs: How is it that an office,
originating in the spirit of such an enulightened policy,
and which was, in theory, well ad app ted to meet the
whole of the New-Zealand case, shouuld have so com-
pletely failed; and the British Resident be left to
make such an humiliating confession (of his utter pow-
erlessness as that which 1 have alreaady quoted in his
reply to the petitioners P A remark in the despatch
of Captain Hobson reminds me of its having been
alleged that Mr. Busby has wanted ssupport in other
quarters than those to which I have ; already referred.
Captain Hobson says, —
“I intended to have called at Entry Island and Marra but
the boisterous state of the weather prevented my: anchoring. I stood


close in to both islands, and feel convinced that the very appear-
ance of a man-of-wair in that quarter will have considerable weight,
from Ike terror in which we were held hy the natives, in conse-
quence of the sevene chastisement inflicted on them by the Alli-
gator, and the detachment of His Majesty’s fiftieth regiment, in
1835.”
And well the natives might view with terror another
British ship of war, if the testimony of Mr. Marshall,
who witnessed the severe chastisement mentioned by
Captain Hobson, is to be depended upon. That Gen-
tleman, on his return to this country, published his
Book, as he tells us, principally for the purpose of
bearing his testimony against the wrongs then inflicted
upon the Cape-Egmont tribes to whom Captain Hob-
son refers. On that painful transaction, I shall, at
present, offer no> comment. I refer you to the Extracts
which I give in am Appendix,* to enable you to under-
stand the case ; and confine myself to the points for
the sake of whiich I am led, by Captain Hobson’s
remark, to seleict it for the purpose of illustration.
The matters off complaint alleged by Mr. Marshall
are, that, —on the application of an individual who
had been shipwrecked near Cape-Egmont, and who
stated that some of his companions had been murdered
by the natives, and his wife and boy detained by them,
-—the Alligator had been sent from the Colony, and
that, instead of upholding the authority of Mr. Busby
by making him the medium of application to the
offending tribe, Mr. Busby was not at all consulted,
nor applied to for an interpreter, or for any assistance
in the way of mediation or inquiry; but the work of
destruction was commenced and prosecuted in circum-
stances which certainly furnish the presumption that,
if such an inquiry had previously been instituted in
* See Appendix C. Page 70.


(his case, as, on the iirst visit <of the Alligator, in
the case of Pomare, it might hawe appeared that the
Cape-Egmont tribes were not sso blamable as had
been represented.
I shall not dwell longer upon thiss topic. In referring
to it, I have no personal feeling to i indulge. I entertain
no other sentiments towards Mr. Busby than those of
respect; and the satisfactory mannner in which the en-
lightened views of Lord Goderich ; are embodied in the
instructions given to Mr. Busby Iby the Governor of
New South Wales, has tended to ] prepossess me in his
Excellency’s favour. But as therre has been such an
eagerness manifested by the Association to magnify the
failure of the British Resident, apparently in order to
make way for the introduction of ttheir own plans; and
as Mr. Busby’s despatch may seerm, on a superficial
view, to throw the blame of that failure on the Mis-
sionaries ; —it becomes a duty to call attention to the
fact, that it has been publicly alleged that the British
Resident in New Zealand has not beten duly supported by
the Colonial Authorities, on whom Hie was especially de-
pendent for means to enable him tossustain the influence,
and perform the functions, of hhis important office.
Whether (his has been the case or mot, I undertake not
to decide ; but I must say that, pondering well the
instructions given to the British Resident, I cannot
conceive why his failure should hawe been so complete,
had he been supported according; to the intentions
of the noble Lord by whom the olffice was instituted.
And I cannot relinquish the hope, 1 , that such a plan
of Improved Residency as has now been proposed by
the Select Committee on Aborigines might answer the
end contemplated, and apply a rremedy, so far as
British legislation can meet the erase, to the existing
evils in New-Zealand society.


4. One more measure remains for brief consideration.
It is a system of FACTORIES, as proposed by Captain
Hobson. The recommendation of this scheme is, that
it appears as well calculated “ to repress the crimes of
British visitants and settlers ” as that of the Associa-
tion, and contemplates, what theirs does not, the fos-
tering of a native Government; while at the same time
it is free from some of the great objections to which
the plan of the Association is liable. The Association
argue that the New Zealanders are suffering from the
English, who treat them ill, and propose to remedy
the evil by sending out a Colony; that is, by increasing
the number of Englishmen, many of whom will perhaps
behave as improperly as those who are there already.
Captain Hobson goes upon the principle of placing-
under the restraints of government the English whom
he finds now setthed in New Zealand. Their number
may possibly increiase; but he does not, like the Asso-
ciation, make it an essential part of his plan to secure
that increase.
Similar to this plan is Mr. Busby’s second propo-
sition. He thinks that when it becomes known how
great a proportion of the lands in New Zealand is
already in the hands of British subjects, “His Majesty
may be advised to grant a charter of Government to
the Colony of British subjects who are established in
it, leaving the natives in the full possession of their
abstract rights, so far as they have not conceded them
them to the Colonists, and providing only against their
suffering injustice at the hands of the latter.” This,
like Captain Hobson’s measure, possesses the recom-
mendation of simply providing, that the English who
are already in New Zealand shall be brought under
the control of government; and this is really a great
recommendation, if so large a portion of New Zealand


as Mr. Busby spooks of lias already passed into the
hands of English settlers. He sajvs, —
“If I am rightly informed, the whole < coast from Cape Bult,
including the noble harbour of the Bay of Hslands, and extending as
far as Wangaroa, forty miles to the northwaard of the bay, has, with
trivial exceptions, passed from the possesssion of the natives into
that of British subjects Most oft the valuable forests in
the interior have changed their ownership ; and on the western
coast, an extensive territory is also claimed by British subjects.
If this he the actual state of thiingsif the forests
and lands of New Zealand have too so great an extent
become the property of our countxrymen, it would he
extremely undesirable to increase' their number, by
sending out a large body of emigrants to form a new
Colony.
I must, however, hasten to a close. The conclusion
which I have been led to adopt, after a careful perusal
of the Despatches published by order of Parliament, is
two-fold: —
First. lam more fully convinced than ever ol the
utter inadequacy of the plan proposed by the Associa-
tion to remedy the evils which afflict New Zealand.
Any one of the measures which have passed under
review has stronger recommendations, and is liable to
fewer objections, than theirs.
Secondly. My conviction, that the case of New
Zealand would not be met by any mercantile specula-
tion whatever, is greatly strengthened. The complexity
and difficulty of the question are such, and so much
delicacy and care in the management ol it are neces-
sarily required; that it will be impossible for any
commercial company, however its affairs might be ad-
ministered, to deal with it effectually. Ihe peculiar
state of things in New Zealand can only be provided


for by a Government-measure, to bo entrusted, as to
its execution, to» public officers whose sole business it
shall be to carry it into full effect; and it is due to our
national character, that the question should be taken
up and determined on high public grounds, apart from
all considerations dictated by a narrow-minded and
selfish policy. Only let justice first be secured for
the New Zealanders, and I doubt not that measures
will afterwards easily be devised for promoting a health-
ful commerce between them and this country.
I remain,
My dear friend,
Yours very sincerely,
JOHN BEECHAM.
February 26 th„ 1838.


POSTSCRIPT.
Just as I was concluding this letter, I received a copy
of a pamphlet entitled, “ The Latest Official Docu-
ments relating to New Zealand, with Introductory Ob-
servations, by Samuel Hinds, D.D., Vicar of Yardley,
Herts., and one of the Committee of the New-Zealand
Association From this production I learn that your
apprehension was well-founded, and that the Association
are endeavouring to make those despatches subservient
to their own purposes. Dr. Hinds gives them at length,
and from thence argues generally the necessity which
exists for Colonization ; but as he does not attempt to
explain how this proposed remedy is to meet every
part of the New-Zealand case, there is nothing in his
observations relating to the despatches which calls for
additional remark. I shall not go again at length into
the general question in reply to the reverend Doctor s
animadversions on my former publication, as well as
that of Mr. Coates. I had no party purpose to pro-
mote, but endeavoured, at least, honestly and impar-
tially, on public grounds, to examine the proposals ol
the Association ; and the manner in which my remarks
have been noticed by the periodical press encourages
me to hope, that I have not in reality, any more than
in intention, transgressed the rules of honourable con-
troversy. By the decision of the candid public I am
willing to abide ; and shall merely dwell on a few par-
ticulars for the sake of explanation.
1. Dr. Hinds cannot conceive how it is possible that
the presence of such a Colony as they propose to form
in New Zealand should, as I have shown would probably


be the case, pirove a hinderance to the Missionaries in
their work of Christianizing the natives. “ That religion
and morality should be actually exposed to danger
from it, this,” he says, “does seem to be inexplicable.”
As I was prevented, by the great number of topics
which I had to notice, from enlarging in my former
pamphlet on this view of the subject, a few additional
remarks, for the purpose of explaining more fully the
grounds of our apprehension, may not be unnecessary.
We haA r e stated our fears, that, were a Colony formed
in New Zealand, the Missionaries might become involved
in the disputes which would probabty arise respecting
the sale of lands ; and that the feelings created by such
disputes in the minds of the natives would indispose
them to listen to the instructions of the Missionaries.
In thus expressing ourselves, we were not indulging
mere chimericsal fears. In the course of the very last
year only, seweral of our native teachers, and others,
have been shod, and the very existence of our principal
Station at Mangungu endangered, by a dispute which
had arisen in consequence of one party having sold a
tract of land to which the other laid claim. What has
thus so recently happened might, and, we think, pro-
bably would, happen again. The Association may
calculate that they could introduce such regulations
respecting the purchase of land, as would prevent dis-
putes ; but those who are best acquainted with the
tenure on which the New Zealanders hold their land,
are of opinion that it would be a task of much more
than ordinary difficulty for any Colonial Court or
authority to harmonize the various claims which many
parties are often found to have on the same property.
Nothing would be more easy than for the Colonial
Courts to pronounce many of those claims frivolous
and unfounded ; but would the parties who, according


to New-Zealand law, or custom, might urge them
rightfully, be willing to renounce them on the
decision of the Colonial Courts? Unless we can be
assured of this, we must still indulge the apprehension,
that, were a Colony formed, such disputes would again
occur as that which so recently nearly led to the
destruction of our Mission on the Holdanga.
We have further expressed our fears, that when the
natives should see their lands and forests, their har-
bours and facilities for commerce, rapidly passing into
the hands of the Colonists, suspicions would be awak-
ened in their minds that the Missionaries themselves
had proved their betrayers, and invited their own peo-
ple to come and possess themselves of the country.
And neither, in this instance, were we indulging in
conjecture, but were repeating the lessons of sober
experience. It is a fact, that a suspicion of this
kind was actually excited in the minds of the New-
Zealand Chiefs who invited and accompanied the first
Missionaries that visited their shores. They were
made to believe by some one, before they embarked
at Sydney, that the Missionaries would lead the way
for their countrymen to follow and take possession of
the land. Mr. Nicholas, to whom I have already
referred, as accompanying the Rev. Samuel Marsden
and the first Missionaries to New Zealand, states, that,
for some time, the conduct of the Chiefs under the
influence of this persuasion was such as to induce
Mr. Marsden to propose to turn back to Sydney, and
abandon the project of commencing a Mission at New
Zealand. Nor is this the only case to which we can
refer. Very recently, a Chief in the neighbourhood
of the Hokianga, refused to sell the Missionaries a
plot of ground for the erection of suitable Mission pre-
mises ; lest, if he should begin to selll land, he might


be tempted, as others of his countrymen had been, to
part with so much as to injure himself and his people :
and all the arguments which Mr. Turner, the Mission-
ary, could employ, were not sufficient to move the
Chief from his purpose. He was willing that the
Missionary should re-purchase a piece of land which
had formerly been sold to a European, “ before,” as the
Chief said, “their eyes were opened;” but he would
not sell any of his own. It is, therefore, not without
good reason we apprehend that injurious suspicions
against the Missionaries would be excited in the minds
of the natives, by purchases of land made on so large
a scale as is proposed by the Association. By the
way, it may be remarked, that this latter fact has a
very important bearing on the general question of colo-
nizing New Zeadand. It shows that the natives are
getting “their eyes opened” as to the consequences
which must resullt from the sale of their possessions; and
that they will not be found so willing as the Associa-
tion anticipate, to make any further extensive transfer.
If they are now manifesting a jealousy lest the Mis-
sionaries, whom they hail as their best friends—as
benefactors who have gone among them for no other
purpose than to do them good—lest even they should
obtain any considerable portion of land, how much
more unwilling will they be to dispose of large quanti-
ties to any other description of persons whatever!
Once more : The obstruction to Missionary labours
arising out of the evil example of many of our coun-
trymen and other white persons, is of itself sufficient to
awaken the most serious apprehensions respecting the
formation of a Colony. This is the most formidable
obstacle with which the Missionaries have to contend
in the islands of the South Sea generally. The Mis-
sionaries in New Zealand complain loudly of it. One


of them, writing from the Hokuanga, on the Ist of
June, last year, says, “ The religiious public at home
are perhaps in a great measure igniorant of the trials to
which Missionaries are exposed!, from the wicked
example of white people, who sediuce the natives into
sin, and thus frustrate the exertidons of the Mission-
aries.” In another communicattion, written a few
weeks previously, he remarks : “ A wicked New
Zealander will turn on one sometiimes, when reproved,
and say, in reference to our own (countrymen, ‘ Physi-
cian, heal thyself.’ ” He furtheor adds :—“ I could
write facts which would make a imodest person blush
for our countrymen. This shouldl not be concealed,
but made known to the friends otf the Heathen, that
they may be acquainted with the stumbling-blocks in
the way of the diffusion of Christianity?’’
Such is the strain in which the Missionaries write
upon this subject. It remains to be seen whether the
formation of a Colony would not, in all probability,
increase this obstruction to Missionary exertions,
rather than remove it. I would ask, Do the Associa-
tion intend to put down immorality? They pro-
pose to protect the natives in their persons and
property from the violence and injustice of our
countrymen; but will they protect them from the
ruinous example of the licentious and immoral con-
duct of the whites ? Will the colonial laws be so
framed as to repress immorality more effectually than
the laws of our own country P To what an awful
extent sabbath-breaking, profane swearing, intem-
perance, debauchery, and such like vices are practised
among ourselves with impunity, is matter of general
observation; and I see no reason whatever to con-
clude, that the colonial laws will be stricter than our own
against that immorality which does* not immediately


disturb the public peace. Suppose, then, the establish-
ment of a Colony should succeed far better than I antici-
pate in shielding the natives from violent outrage, they
would, notwithstanding, remain exposed as now to the
corrupting influence of that immoral example which so
many of our countrymen place before their eyes. But
this would not be all. Things in this respect would
not remain as they are. The hinderances to Mission-
ary endeavours arising out of the bad example of our
countrymen would, if we are to judge from experience,
be increased by a Colony. The Missionary whom I
have already quoted is well acquainted with all our
Missions in the South Seas, and he thus states the
result of his personal observation : —“ It is a lamentable
fact, that where European society increases, there is in
proportion also a laxiity of morals among the Heathen
with whom they reside.” We are not, then, indulging
in unreasonable alanm, when we express our apprehen-
sions, that the inflmence of a Colony would probably
counteract Missionary teaching, and injure the morals
of the natives. This has hitherto been the effect of an
increase of European society in the islands of the
South Sea; and what guarantee have we that the
same effect will not follow the formation of a Colony
in New Zealand ? We know what class of persons do
actually emigrate to our Colonies. We see that they
are not by any means all truly religious persons ; and
I see no reason to conclude, that, after the utmost
care which might be taken in their selection, the ave-
rage character of the Colonists who should go out to
New Zealand would be better than the average cha-
racter of the parent community at home. It would
then, as I think, inevitably follow, that the evil exam-
ples which our countrymen now unhappily furnish to
the New Zealanders would be very considerably multi-


filled on the arrival of the new Coldonists. Many of
them would, no doubt, be persons who, a although just and
upright in their dealings, would, by tltheir open immo-
rality, or neglect of religion, and worMdly-mindedness,
increase the difficulties of the Missidonaries, in their
endeavours to spread Christianity araoong the natives.
Nor would their pernicious examplee be sufficiently
counterbalanced by the good conducct of the better
class of Colonists. The presence of tithe most virtuous
Colony which could be formed is not meeded to aid the
Missionaries in their undertaking. All they want
is, to be protected from the intrusicms of their own
lawless countrymen, and other whites, and to be
allowed to prosecute their work of philanthropy with-
out hinderance or interruption.
These remarks are made with reference to the Colo-
nization of New Zealand generally ; for, although Dr.
Hinds says, “ It has been proposed to fix on a site for
the Colony somewhere in the Southern Island, in the
neighbourhood of Cook’s Strait,” there are, in the
official publications of the Association, strong indica-
tions of an intention to commence in the Northern
Island, in the vicinity of the Missionary Stations.
Should, however, the Association be allowed to plant a
Colony on the Southern Island, in Cook’s Straits, they
would even there be almost in immediate contact with
the Wesleyan Missionaries; for there is reason to
expect, that ere this they may have commenced a
Mission at Taranake, at the opposite side of Cook’s
Straits, in the Northern Island. And were they to
commence in the Southern Island, would they remain
there, and not seek to occupy the “ million of acres”
which, according to one of their own number, they
already have at their disposal at the Hokianga and the
Hay of Thames, in the very centre of the Missions of


both the Church and Wesleyan Missionary Societies ?
It would be easy to enlarge on this subject; hut perhaps
enough has been advanced to show that the danger to
which the cause of “religion and morality” would be
exposed by the introduction of a Colony into New
Zealand is not a subject so “ inexplicable as Dr.
Hinds imagines.
2. In replying to Mr. Coates, Mr. Wakefield ani-
madverted upon that gentleman’s remark,—that gain
or mercantile profit was the leading object of the
Association; and appeared to think, that he had
shown the incorrectness of such remark by referring to
that part of the plan which provides that the affairs of
the Association shall be managed by a Committee, who
are to have no pecuniary interest in the undertaking.
This did not appear to me to be any answer to Mr.
Coates ; and 1 consequently argued upon the same
principle respecting the solicitude or distrust which
must naturally bee cherished respecting the philanthro-
pic professions of persons who are avowedly associated
together for mercantile purposes. To this Dr. Hinds
refers, as “ a mis-statement ,” which ought not to be
persisted in; and says, “It is asserted both by Mr.
Coates and Mr. Beecham, that the administrators of
the Colony are to have some pecuniary interest in it.
Indeed, I have not yet said any such thing. In the
very passage which the Reverend Gentleman quotes, I
remark, “ If the Association were a number of gentle-
men, united together on the same principle as that on
which Missionary Societies are based, having no pur-
poses of their own, but aiming solely to promote the
welfare of the natives, their arguments in favour of
Colonization, as the only remedy for the evils inflicted
by our countrymen upon the New Zealandeis, would
deserve most serious consideration. In thus speak-


mg of the Association, I referred to it in the same
sense as to the Missionary Societies. By the Mission-
ary Societies I did not mean merely their respective
Committees of Management, but literally and truly the
Societies themselves. In like manner, I had no parti-
cular reference to the Committee or Administrators of
the Association: I spoke of the Association itself.
Now, does Dr. Hinds really mean to say, that I have
made any “ mis-statement f in representing the Asso-
ciation itself as avowedly formed for mercantile pur-
poses ? Will he deny that the Association, with the
persons who are to find the money for carrying on
the undertaking, do not merely calculate on deriving
from it pecuniary profit, but make the mercantile part
of their plan the leading object, and give to philan-
thropy only a secondary place ? I have read with
care the book published by the Association, explana-
tory of their “ Principles, Objects, and Plans,” and
certainly understand this to be the case. They do not
commence by enlarging upon the necessity of exer-
tions for imparting to the New Zealanders the bless-
ings of Christianity and civilization, and then state
that they have determined to found a Colony solely
for the purpose of accomplishing this philanthropic
object. No: this is not the order of the book. The
first chapter commences with Colonization, and it is
dwelt upon as the source of national greatness and
wealth. The argument runs thus,—“ Ships, Colonies,
Commerce! It is to these that England is chiefly
indebted for her pre-eminent wealth, and even for the
greatness of her domestic numbers. The old fashion
of colonizing was, therefore, a very good one for this
country.” * They next proceed to sketch out what I
* “The British Colonization of New Ztealand,” page 4.


may call the mercantile part of their plan ; and it is
not until we reach the following chapter that we hear
any thing of the philanthropy of their scheme. Then
we find it referred to in such language as the follow-
ing : “ This, however, is not a plan of mere Colo-
nization: it has for its object to civilize as well as to
colonize.” Now, if all this does not show that the
mercantile projects of the Association occupy the first
place in their plan, and their civilizing objects only the
second, I know not what language means. But if I
understand aright the Association’s own statements,
then is my former reasoning sound and unobjection-
able. Though it should prove correct, that the
Managing Committee or “ Administrators ” are to have
no pecuniary interest in the undertaking, yet they will,
of course, be biound to conduct the affairs of the Colo-
ny according to these fundamental principles; and
thus, even witlh a disinterested Managing Committee
it will necessairily follow that they will have to look
first at the mejrcantile part of their plan, and to subor-
dinate to this ■ the philanthropy of the undertaking:
and it will moreover follow that when the mercantile
interests of the Colony shall clash with the interests of
the natives, (and clash they inevitably will, if the voice
of experience is to be heeded,) the mercantile interests
will naturally preponderate, and the interests of the
natives, being subordinate in the plan, will, in conse-
quence, suffer. Sound philosophy teaches, that the
stronger principle must ever triumph over the weak-
er ; and it is thus to be concluded, that in this case
the leading and, consequently, the stronger principle
of mercantile interest will prevail over the secondary
and weaker principle of philanthropy.
I am aware that this explanation will prove unsatis-
factory to the Association, who appear unwilling that


objections to the proposed Coblony should in any way
bo directed .against themselves. Another of its mem-
bers, who has read these “ Renmarks,” in the first im-
pression, pronounces me “ probfoundly in error,” and
expresses his astonishment that. I should so thoroughly
misunderstand the nature of thhe Association and their
plan. He states, that they are not a private trading
Company,—they are only a ttemporary Association,
formed for a public purpose, iin which they seek no
advantage for themselves over any other of Her Ma-
jesty’s subjects ; —that they hawe acted provisionally,
for the purpose of collecting information about New
Zealand, and of devising a plan for its Colonization; —
that if this plan be adopted by Parliament, the New-
Zealand Association, having done all that it proposed,
will ipso facto expire ; —and that there will remain a
Board of Commissioners responsible to the Crown and
Parliament, tied down by an Act of Parliament more
sweeping and stringent in favour of the Aborigines
than any thing ever before dreamed of, —a purely
Government measure, without any trading characteris-
tic whatever, acting under an Act of Parliament and
through a Board of Commissioners, Ac. Be it so;
but at present, he will admit, this Board of Commis-
sioners, and the Colony which they are to manage, have
no separate existence: the whole concern is as yet
included in and represented by the Association. Now,
although my objection lies against the proposed Colony,
yet as the Association are the only persons before the
public, and include in their own body the elements of
the future Colony, in order to make myself understood
by the general reader, I argue against the Association
as the representative of the Colony,—in fact, the Colony
itself in embryo : and lam Justified in this by the
Association themselves. In their “ Statement of the


Objects of the New-Zealand Association,” at page 8,
they say, —
“ In order to carry these views into effect, a Bill has been prepared,
which will he submitted to His Majesty’s Government and the legis-
lature, as soon as the Association shall he satisfied that the indispen-
sable funds will he forthcoming when required. It is thought
desirable that the greater part of such funds should be advanced by
persons intending to emigrate, and therefore most deeply interested
in the success of the undertaking. The foundation, in short, of the
whole measure must be a body of intending settlers possessed of a
sufficient capital for carrying their own purposes into effect. A
considerable number of such persons have already joined the Asso-
ciation : they invite others to co-operate with them.”
What can be plainer than this ? The Association
thus explicitly identify with themselves the persons
who are to compose the Colony: “A considerable
number of intending settlers,” they say, “ have already
joined the Associattion,” and they invite others to imi-
tate the example. From their own “ Statement it is
thus evident that Ithey who now object to the formation
of a Colony must, in order to make themselves intelligi-
ble, speak of and deal with the Association as represent-
ing the projected Colony. When the Association shall
cease to exist, and a Colony shall be actually formed,
the “Colony” and its “Administrators,” or “Board
of Commissioners,” will then be before the public, and
can be dealt with in their own proper and distinctive
character. But even then the same objections which
are now urged against the Association will lie against
the Colony, whatever may be the character of the
Board of Commissioners, or the principles of their
Administration. It is the Colony proposed to be
planted in New Zealand, and not the character of its
Administration in this country, to which we object.
What we dread is, not so much the “ Board of
Commissioners ” in London, as that which the


Association represent to be the foundation of the
whole measure, that body of intending settlers pos-
sessed of a sufficient capital for carrying their own
purposes into etfect, who are to go and fix them-
selves in New Zealand; and who, for the reason
(fiat they have advanced the greater part of the indis-
pensable funds , will be most deeply interested in the
success of the undertaking. This is the thing we
fear. We are afraid that the Colonists who have em-
barked their capital, perhaps their worldly all, in the
undertaking, will be so intent on carrying their own
purposes into etfect, that it will not be in the power of
the most virtuous and public-spirited Board of Com-
missioners, on this side of the globe, effectually to
watch over the rights, and promote the interests, of
the Aborigines.
I have entered into this explanation, in order that we
may not dispute about words. I must, once for all, say
to Dr. Hinds, and to his friend whom I have last quoted,
(hat when I speak of the Association, I neither intend
the future Administrators of the Colony, nor refer to
the temporary character of the present Association. The
“intending settlers” being, as yet, “joined” to, and
one with, the Association; and one of its most distin-
guished members having long been a large landed
proprietor in New Zealand, and another appearing as a
candidate for the Governorship of the Colony; I inva-
riably contemplate the Association in its collective
capacity, and speak of it as the only existing repre-
sentative of the Colony, indeed, the embryo Colony
itself.
3. If, however, I have made no “ mis-statement”
respecting the future “Administrators” of the Colony,
on another point Dr. Hinds has certainly greatly mis-
stated my meaning. Referring to their proposal


respecting the appointment of a Bishop, he says, “ It
Seems, indeed, to have been almost converted into an
occasion for reproach.” “ * What, it is said, “ ‘ can
a Bishop do ? Must he not depend on the Societies
established in this country to furnish his means and
his instruments ?’ ” And this question is given in
inverted commas as though it were a quotation from
my pamphlet. I am sure Dr. Hinds is incapable of
intentional misrepresentation ; but if he will turn
again to the pamphlet, he will discover that I have
said nothing like this. I have put no such question :
and my argument goes upon the principle, not that the
Bishop could do nothing, as he must depend upon
others for means and instruments, but that the Associ-
ation do not mean to make provision out of the
funds of the Colomy for the instruction of the natives ;
and, to prove this,, I quote their own words respecting
the appointment off a Bishop, to show that they, not
the Bishop, were dlepending on the Societies established
in this country to furnish the means and the instru-
ments for instructing the natives. I refer to this mis-
statement, because I am unwilling to be thought capa-
ble of viewing with indifference, or something worse,
the zealous labours of a Christian Bishop.
4. I would briefly advert to one more point. Dr,
Hinds does not approve of the reference, in my con-
cluding appeal, to the distracted affairs of Canada; and
remarks, that “to point to the disasters of individuals
or of nations, and authoritatively to pronounce that
they are judgments and signs from heaven, is surely a
presumptuous use of the doctrine of Divine Provi-
dence.” I think with the Reverend Gentleman, that
to regard the disasters of individuals as judgments
from heaven would be presumptuous in a high degree,
But the consideration of God’s providential dealings


with nations, is quite another thing. Many divines
who have been the ornaments of the church to which
Dr. Hinds belongs, as well as sound theologians of all
orthodox communions, have argued, that as the Sove-
reign Judge will |not, at the future general judgment
of mankind, deal with men collectively, but individu-
ally; his displeasure at those public sins which men
commit in their collective or national character is
generally indicated in the present life, in his providen-
tial dealings with them as nations: and it is further
understood, that one great end of those Scripture his-
tories which describe the judgments of Heaven against
guilty nations is, to furnish an illustration of that rule
of retribution which he applies to them in His provi-
dential administration of the alfairs of our world.
That a hasty and presumptuous application of this
rule is not to be made in any particular case, I readily
admit. But if the avenging visitations of the Almighty
upon the sinful nations of antiquity have been ex-
pressly recorded for our admonition and warning ; and
if it be a duty which Christ has recognised and en-
forced upon his people, that they should observe and
study “the signs of the times then must I conclude
that when a nation has been employed, during success-
ive generations, in carrying out a system of Coloniza-
tion which has invariably involved the hapless Abori-
gines in suffering and ruin,—that nation will do well
to pause and think upon its ways, when such unna-
tural contests and troubles arise in its Colonies, as
have just passed under review in Canada, and will act
wisely and scripturally by listening to the admonitory
lesson, and resolving, from henceforth, “ to cease to
do evil, and learn to do well.”


In conclusion, I would observe, that my apprehen-
sions respecting the proposed Colonization of New
Zealand have been greatly strengthened within the last
few weeks. At the date of the latest communications
from that country, it appears that the natives are
already beginning to show considerable jealousy re-
specting the advances made by the whites. A Baron
de Thierry, who, some years ago, purchased forty
thousand acres of land at the Hokianga, for thirty-
six axes, (!) had recently arrived with a number of
attendants, to take possession of it, and exercise his
alleged sovereign rights ; but the Chiefs peremptorily
rejected his claims both to the land and to the sove-
reignty. The natives, generally, who had formerly
parted with their lands to English purchasers, it is
stated, are now saying, “We have eaten the tobacco,
and worn out tlhe blankets, we received for our land;
and now we havce nothing left.” It is further said, that
three or four olf the principal Chiefs, of whom Nene,
whose influence, it has been seen, was sufficient to put
an end to the recent alarming war near the Bay of
Islands, was one, were proposing to retire towards the
north, on account of the encroachments which the
English are making upon the lands in the neighbour-
hood of the Hokianga and elsewhere. In this state of
things, it must be obvious that the introduction of a
Colony would be a hazardous experiment. Were the
feeling of jealousy and alarm which is already evinced
by the New Zealanders to receive such additional
excitement as could not fail to be occasioned by the
arrival of a few ships filled with emigrants, it can
scarcely be doubted, that, at a period much earlier
than we at first anticipated, a crisis would arrive sucli
as cannot be contemplated by the friends of humanity
without the most serious alarm.


Let every one now ponder well the circumstances
in which it is proposed to colonize New Zealand. It
is not yet three years since the New Zealanders made
a formal declaration of their national independence.*
In the same year that this was announced, (1835,) the
British Government recognised their independence,
and gave them a flag. How easily they may be influ-
enced practically to assert their independence, appears
from the reception which they have given to the Baron
de Thierry; how reluctant they will be to make any
extensive surrender of their lands may be concluded
from the dissatisfaction which they are already mani-
festing with respect to the encroachments of the
English! And yet, alike regardless of the danger
which must attend the experiment, and of our plighted
national faith to maintain the independence of New
Zealand, the Association are calling upon the Govern-
ment, the Legislature, and the public, to support a
measure which has for its object to alienate, on a large
scale, the lands and sovereign rights of the New Zea-
landers, and to reduce them to the condition of British
subjects.
* See Appendix D. Page 74.


APPENDIX.
APPENDIX A. PAGE 33.
EXTRACT OP A LETTER FROM THE REV. NATHANIEL TURNER, DATED
MANGUNGU, HOKIANGA, JULY 26TH, 1837-*
There have been very serious disturbances amongst the natives
for some months past, not only at a distance to the southward, but
amongst our immediate neighbours in the Bay of Islands, and the
adjacent tribes ; but I am happy to say, that their differences are
now adjusted, and that peace is again restored. It is also grati-
fying to me to inform you, that, in effecting this restoration, the
Christian natives under our immediate care have been the princi-
pal instruments. We were successful in using our influence to
prevent their joinimg either party, to destroy each other; and in
this they nobly withstood every temptation. But when a favourable
opportunity offered for successful mediation, the principal Chiefs
came to us, and expressed a wish to go over in a body as peace-
makers, at the sarnie time requesting myself and Mr. Whiteley to
accompany them; —assigning as a reason, that we should not only
assist them in accomplishing their object, but be the instruments of
withholding themselves from evil. MV e could not but approve of their
proposition, and accompanied them accordingly ; and though it kept
us ten days from our families and regular engagements at home, we
returned thankful to the Giver of all good that the demon of discord
was again banished from our neighbours, and peace and harmony
restored.
In the affair alluded to, the Christian natives have given us and
the world decisive proof that Christianity has effected a considera-
ble change amongst them; for, had this occurred a few years ago,
there was scarcely a man among them who would not have joined
one or the other of the contending parties, and clamoured for Ins
brother’s blood. The latest accounts we have received from the
southward state, that peace is restored there also, where war had
been raging dreadfully for many months.
• Copied from tlie Missionary Notices, for the month of May 1838, pubUsheJ
by the Committee of the Wesleyan Missionary Society ;in which number will be
found a lengthened account of the successful exertions of the Missionaries to restrain
their own people from engaging in the war, and in promoting by their means.
general peace.


APPENDIX B. PAGE 36.
LORD VISCOUNT GODERICH, ONE OP THE PRINCIPAL SECRETARIES
OF STATE TO HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, TO
THE CHIEFS OF NEW ZEALAND.
“ Friends,
“ I am commanded by the King to acknowledge the receipt of
the letter which you addressed to His Majesty, and which you
entrusted to the Missionaries to forward to England.
“ The King is much gratified to find that the cause for alarm,
which appears to have existed at the time when your letter was
written, has entirely passed away ; and he trusts that no circum-
stances may occur in future to interrupt the internal tranquillity of
New Zealand, which is so necessary to the maintenance of a close
commercial intercourse between its inhabitants and those of Great
Britain.
“ The King is sorry for the injuries which you inform him that
the people of New Zealand have suffered from some of his subjects.
But ho will do all in his power to prevent the recurrence of such
outrages, and to punish the perpetrators of them according to the
laws of their country, whenever they can he apprehended and
brought to trial s and the King hopes, that mutual good-will and
confidence will exist between the people of both countries.
“ In order to afford better protection to all classes, both natives
of the islands of New Zealand, and British subjects who may pro-
cced, or be already established, there for purposes of trade, the
King has sent the bearer of this letter, James Busby, Esq., to reside
amongst you as His Majesty’s Resident, whose duties will be to
investigate all complaints which may be made to him.
“ 11 will also be his endeavour to prevent the arrival among you
of men who have been guilty of crimes in their own country, and
who may effect their escape from the place to which they may have
been banished, as likewise to apprehend such persons of this
ihsi rlplion as may be found at present at large .
“ In return for the anxious desire which will be manifested by the
British Resident, to afford his protection to the imhahitants of New
Zealand, against any acts of outrage which nnay be attempted
against them by British subjects, it is confidently expected by His
Majesty, that on your parts you will render to the Resident that
assistance and support which is calculated to proomotc the object of


his appointment, and to;i extend to your country all the benefits
which it is capable of Deceiving from its friendship and alliance
with Great Britain. I aim,
“ Your friend,
“GODERICH.
“ Colonial Office, Downiing-street,
14th June, 1032.”
INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNOR OP NEW SOUTH WALES, TO
JAMES BUSBY, ESCR., BRITISH RESIDENT AT NEW ZEALAND,
DATED ABRIL 13TIIJ, 1838.
(extract.)
“To check as muclu as possible the enormities complained of,
and to give encourageunent and protection to the well-disposed
settlers and traders froinn Great Britain and this Colony, it has been
thought proper to appoiiint a British subject to reside at New Zea-
land, in an accredited ehharaoter, whoso principal and most import-
ant duty it will he to cconciliate the good-will of the native Chiefs,
and establish upon a poermanent basis that good understanding and
confidence which it is important to the interests of Great Britain
and of this Colony to pperpetuate.
“ It may not be easyr to lay down any certain rules by which this
desirable object is to l:he accomplished; but it is expected, by the
skilful use of those powers which educated man possesses over the
wild or half-civilized ssavage, an influence may be gained by which
the authority and steength of the New-Zealand Chiefs will be
arranged on the side off the Resident, for the maintenance of tran-
quillity throughout thee islands.
“It will be fitting that you explain to the Chiefs the object of
your mission, and the ; anxious desire of His Majesty to suppress by
ymr means the disonders of which they complain ; you will also
announce your intentiion of remaining among them, and will claim
the protection and priivilege which you will tell them arc accorded
in Europe and Americca to British subjects holding in foreign States
situations similar to ytours. You will find it convenient to manage
this conference by meaans of the Missionaries, to whom you will be
furnished with credentials, and with whom you are recommended
to communicate freeljy upon the objects of your appointment, and
the measures you shouild adopt in treating with the Chiefs.
“ The knowledge wvhich the Missionaries have obtained of the


language, manners, and customs of the nnativos may become of ser-
vice to you.
“ Assuming, however, that your rcccpption will be as favourable
as lias been anticipated, I will endeaverour to explain to you the
manner of proceeding, by which I am of opinion you may best
succeed in effecting the object of your mission; you will at the
same time understand that the informaation I have been able to
obtain respecting New Zealand, is too i imperfect to allow of my
presenting you with anything more thana a general outline for your
guidance, leaving it for your discretion to take such further mea-
sures as shall at any time seem needful I to arrest British subjects
offending against British or Colonial laws s in New Zealand.
“By the 9th of George IV. chap. 833, sec. 4th, the Supreme
Court in New South Wales and Van Di)iemen’s-Land have power
to inquire of, hear, and determine all ofiffences committed in New
Zealand by the master and crew of any British ship or vessel, or
by any British subject living there : andd all persons convicted of
such offences may bo punished as if the oflffence had been committed
in England. The law having thus glveni the Court the power to
hear and determine offences, it follows as a necessary incident, that
it has the power of bringing before it any person against whom any
indictment should be found or informatiion filed for any offences
within its jurisdiction.
“ 1 would here observe that I can propposc no other means by
which you can secure the offender than time procuring his apprelien-
sion, and delivery on board some British shhip for conveyance to this
country, by means of the native Chiefs, wivith whom you shall be in
communication. It is well known that a amongst those Europeans
who are leading a wandering and irregularir life at New Zealand, are
to be found transported felons and offemnders escaped from this
colony and Van Diemen’s-Land. It is detcsirablo that opportunities
for the apprehension and transmission off those convicts to either
Colony should bo promptly embraced.
“ The Chiefs are, it is said, well acquainted with the descriptions
of the different Europeans residing in tltheir country, and will be
found able and willing to point out and scccure at a convenient time
those whom they know to be fugitives fr’rom the Australian colo-
nies. You will be furnished from the offitce of the principal Super-
intendent with the names and descriptioms of those convicts from
New South Wales who are known or suspiected to be concealed in
the islands of New Zealand, and you will use your own discretion
as to the fittest time for causing the apprehension and removal of
such as may be within your reach, or are guilty of any offence


against the peace and tranquillity of the country. You will of
course take every precaution to avoid the apprehension of a free
person in mistake for a convict, as an action for damages would
probably follow the commission of such an error. This Govern-
ment will indeed he disposed to save you harmless in all such cases
where becoming circumspection has been used.
“When any of His Majesty's ships are oft’ the coast, you will
request the Commander to receive the convicts or other persons
arrested by your means for conveyance to this place.
“ I would further observe, that, by means of the information
which you are likely to receive from the Chiefs, you may become
acquainted with the criminal projects of Europeans before their
execution, and by a timely interference you may be able altogether
to prevent their mischievous designs or render them abortive.
“In the character which you hold, you will be justified in
addressing any British subject, to warn him of the danger to which
he may be exposed by embarking or persevering in any undertak-
ing of a criminal or doubtful character.
“ In the manner I have now described, and by proceedings of a
similar character, it may be possible to repress the enormities which
have heretofore been perpettrated by British subjects at New
Zealand.
“It may also happen that this salutary control will not affect
British subjects only, but that the knowledge of there being a func-
tionary stationed in New Zealand, through whom offences com-
mitted by the subjects of any other State against the people of that
country will be made known to the British Government, and
through that Government to the other European and American
powers, may induce the subjects of those powers to adopt a less
licentious conduct towards the New Zealanders and other inhabit-
ants of the South-Sea Islands,
■ “ There is still another form in which the influence, it is hoped,
the British Resident may obtain over the minds of the New-Zealand
Chiefs, may be even more beneficially exhibited. It is by your
official moderation, the evils of intestine war between rival Chiefs
or hostile tribes may be avoided, and their differences peaceably
and permanently composed.
“It is also possible that at your suggestion, and by the aid of
your counsels, some approach may be made by the natives towards
a settled form of Government ; and that by the establishment of
some system of jurisprudence among them, their Courts may be
made to claim the cognizance of all crimes committed within their
territory, and thus may the offending subjects of whatever State be


brought to justice by a less circuitoums and more efficient process
than by any which I have been able too point out.
“ If in addition to the benefits whiclrh the British Missionaries are
conferring on those Islanders by impartrting the inestimable blessings
of Christian knowledge, and a pure ; system of morals, the New
Zealanders should obtain, through the 3 means of a British function-
ary, the institution of courts of justices, established upon a simple
and comprehensive basis, some sufficicnnt compensation would seem
to be rendered for the injuries herctoforue inflicted by our delinquent
countrymen.
“ Having thus explained to you gcnacrally the course of proceed-
ing by which I think your residence in a New Zealand may be made
conducive to the suppression of thee enormities which British
subjects and those of other States have I bcen in the habit of commit-
ting in these islands, I have only furtthcr to observe, that it will
be your duty to assist by every means bin your power the commer-
cial relation of Great Britain and her ccolonios with New Zealand.
It would indeed be desirable that you become the medium of all
communication between the New-Zcakland Chiefs and the masters
of British or colonial vessels frequentinag the coasts, and the mer-
chants and settlers established in the iislands. This arrangement
will probably grow out of your residence in the country, and you
should keep it in view as an important olbject. You will be pleased
to forward by every opportunity a shippiing report, setting forth the
names, masters, number of crew, and countries, of vessels
arriving at the Bay of Islands or othcer ports of New Zealand
whence you can obtain correct accounts*, with the cargoes of such
vessels, their objects in touching at New Zealand, as far as you are-
informed, and any other particulars concerning them that may be
worthy of notice.
“ I beg to call your attention to the strange and barbarous traffic
in human heads, which certainly did exist to some extent, but
which lam given to understand is now nearly abandoned. Should
it be found to continue or revive, some legislative enactment may
be necessary to prohibit in this Colony the crime and disgrace of
participating in so brutalizing a commerce.
“Having already mentioned the assistance which I anticipate
you will receive from the Missionaries, I lhave now only to impress
on you the duty of a cordial co-operationn with them in the great
objects of their solicitude—the extensionn of Christian knowledge
throughout the islands, and the consequuent improvement in the
habits and morals of the people.
“ Signed RBICTIAKD BOUBKE"


APPENDIX C. PAGE 42.
EXTRACTS FROM A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OP TWO VISITS TO NEW
ZEALAND, IN Ills MAJESTY’S SHIP ALLIGATOR, A.D. 1834 ; BY
WILLIAM BARRETT MARSHALL, SURGEON, ASSISTANT SURGEON
R.N., LONDON, 1836.
What are the instructions of the British Resident at New
Zealand, I have not been able to ascertain. All that it has been
in my power to learn of his duties, has been gathered from a letter
of introduction from Viscount Goderich to the Chiefs of New
Zealand, of which he was the bearer. What is the character of
his authority, or what the extent of his powers, I am altogether
ignorant of. He receives his appointment from the Home Govern-
ment, and his salary from the Colonial Treasury of New South
Wales. Lord Goderich’s letter, and Mr. Busby’s address to the
Chiefs on his appointment, will be appended to this Narrative,
and found to breathe a kind and gracious spirit towards the inha-
bitants. Time will more fully develope, and in language of a
more definite character, the natture of the Resident’s duties, and
the benefits reciprocated between! the natives and their British and
Australian visitors, in consequemce of his settlement in the coun-
try. There can be no doubt, in the meanwhile, that the presence
of an English gentleman of intelligence, possessing an official
sanction, and an independent salary, and instructed generally to
afford protection equally to all classes, whether natives or foreigners;
to prevent the influx into a country, just emerging from the dark-
ness of Heathenism into the light of Christianity and civilization,
“ of men who have been guilty of crimes in their own
and who may effect their escape from the place to which they may
have been banished,” and “ whose duties will be to investigate
all complaints which may be made to him,” must, unless coun-
teracted by local and other opposition, operate beneficially upon
the general interests of New Zealand. In order, however, to the
efficiency of such a person, he must not be introduced to the Chiefs
by a recommendatory letter from one of His Majesty’s principal
Secretaries of State, and be at the same time treated with contumely
by any person to whom his Majesty may confide the government
of either of his Majesty’s Australian Colonies. It must not be
enumerated among his duties in a letter from the throne, the inves-
tigation of all complaints which may be made to him, if the
government of New South Wales be competent to decide upon


any ex parte statement against the natives, without reference to
him at all; and, without investigatioon of any kind, to act upon
that decision, and threaten the natives s with not only “ the destruc-
tion of all their vessels, houses, and I settlements near the coast,’
but in very deed to put that tyrannidcal threat into literal execu-
tion in three cases with the sanguiiinary accompaniment of an
unnecessary sacrifice of human life. lUnless there be an extension
of the principles of international lawv to all our intercourse with
New Zealand, the erection of that counntry into a British Residency
is an act of inexplicable policy at bocst, and the appointment ot
a British Resident, ostensibly to “ fosterr and maintain ” a “ friendly
feeling between the King’s subjects annd the native inhabitants;
to prevent, as much as possible, the reccurrcnce of those “ misun-
derstandings and quarrels,” as Mr. Busbby minces what outspeaking
truth would call “robberies and murderss;” robberies the most bare-
faced ! and murders the most wanton ! to give a greater assurance
of safety and just dealing between bofath countries in their com-
mercial intercourse with each other, is, to say the least of it, per-
fectly useless. Unless the executive gowvcrnincnt of our Australian
Colonies be instructed to do justly, and to love mercy, and
compelled to take counsel with Mr. Buusby, and grant a hearing
to the New Zealanders when complaiuncd of, as well as to the
parties who complain of them, Ills Maajcsty’s representative may
be effectually superseded by a figure of stone or wood, set up as
an effigy to scare the vultures who would I prey upon Now Zealand ;
and the colonial treasury might transfer • the amount of his income
towards defraying the incidental expensees of a military expedition
against the innocent as well as the guillty portion of the inhabit-
ants. (Pages 55 —58.)
In the preceding narrative, I have endleavoured to relate events
in the exact order of their occurrence; Heaving facts to speak fo r
themselves, and principally solicitous of putting facts on record ;
for all facts arc not true, seeing that some things arc said to be
facts, that never had an existence at all, except in the imagination
of the narrator, or in the credulity of the retailer. And some facts
are so stated, as to be what Dr. Cullen calls false facts, either, by
the omission of something that happened, which, if added, would
alter their character; or by the addition of something that never
happened, which, from being added to that which did happen,
changes truth into falsehood; the one producing the effect of wrong


perspective, the other of faulty colouring, or distortive caricature.
In reviewing the whole affair, it is impossible, however, to close
one’s eyes upon the errors of judgment which attended our expe-
dition, any more than upon the complete success by which its
operations were rewarded.
The first question which obtrudes itself is obviously this ; Why
was His Majesty’s Ship Alligator, assisted by a detachment of
soldiers, Sent to New Zealand to act at all against the natives,
without reference to, or the counsel of, His Majesty’s accredited
representative in that country ? And this too in the teeth of the
Secretary of State’s official letter to the Chiefs, introducing Mr.
Busby, concerning whom Lord Goderich writes thus :—“ In order
to afford better protection to all classes, both natives of the Islands
of New Zealand, and British subjects who may proceed or be already
established there for purposes of trade, the King has sent the
bearer of this letter, James Busby, Esq., to reside amongst you
as His Majesty’s Resident, whose duties will he to investigate all
complaints which may be made to him” fyc.
Again, it cannot fail to be matter of deep surprise, as it ought
ever to be a subject of sincere regret, that the expedition, when
sent, was so inadequately provided with interpreters. Mr. Bat-
■tesby’s only knowledge of the tongue in which he was appointed to
communicate on a question of life and death, had been acquired
on Kororarika Beach; while his qualifications for the delicate office
of an interpreter, both moral and literary, had been obtained while
filling the somewhat different situation of a retail spirit-seller and
a marker of billiards at the same place !!
Thirdly. Having a Resident in their country; having provided
the people with a flag ; having paid national honours to' that flag as
the standard of an independent nation, albeit a nation of savages;
ought we not in our national capacity to have respect to the laws
and usages of the New Zealanders, for they are indisputably not
without laws of their own, and usages of which they exact the
observance among themselves ? and prior to making a peremptory
demand for the release of their, it might be, lawful prisoners, and
that, too, without the ransom they affirmed themselves entitled to ;
a demand becoming well our power, but of very doubtful propriety
if taken in connection with our right to make it, and to make it
too at the point of the bayonet; ought not some negotiation to
have been entered into ; some inquiry to have been made, as to the
right of those natives, agreeably to their own laws, to demand such
ransom, even when too weak to enforce its payment ? 11 lis well
to have the giatit’s power , but tyrannous to use it like a giant.


The British Resident ought to havoe been applied to, to become
the organ of communication between tlhe Government of New South
Wales and the New Zealanders at Capoc Egmont. A competent inter-
preter, of unimpeachable veracity, migght have been obtained, either
from Mr. Busby’s own immediate neighbourhood, Paihia, or from the
settlement of the Wesleyan Mission aat Hokianga; and, if not for
the ungracious, undutiful, and hardly Idoyal purpose of acting under
the King’s authority, in direct contradiction of the King’s word,
pledged to the Chiefs of New Zealandd, a purpose which I am far
from attributing to the Colonial Governnment of New South Wales,
it is difficult to understand why there was nothing like inquiry or
preliminary negotiation, unless the e.vx parte statement of John
Guard be inquiry, respecting the partiticulars attending the loss ot
the Harriet, seeing that such inquiry mijight have elicited some truth
necessary to be known, and that such noegotiation might have placed
any ulterior proceedings, however sevenre, upon the sure basis ot
Justice and moderation. In Lord Godtrrich’s letter, before cited, the
natives are led to expect as much ; why •• their right to it, founded
upon the promise contained in that blotter, should have been so
recklessly thrown out of sight let the local government
answer to God and their own consciennce; to their King and the
country at large they are responsible 1 for involving the national
faith in suspicion, and bringing distrusts! upon the royal word, by a
proceeding utterly at variance with a decclaration like this :—“ The
King is sorry for the injuries which you ((the native Chiefs,) inform
him that the people of New Zealand havee suffered from some of his
subjects. But he will do all in his powerr to prevent the recurrence
of such outrages, and to punish the perpetrators of them according
to the laws of their country, whenever tfhey can be apprehended
and brought to trial; and the King hopes tthat mutual good-will and
confidence will exist between the people oif both countries.”
Of the eiTors committed in the executtion of the affair, I have
occasionally made mention in the course of my narrative. They
consisted, mainly, in exacting too muclh from the natives, and
yielding too little; in acting rather acccwrding to momentary' im-
pulses, than upon a set of fixed principles; in treating the New
Zealanders as savages, and forgetting that they were, notwithstanding*
men; in inflicting wrong upon them, amd making no reparation,
while suffering neither actual nor imaginary wrong from them.,
without inflicting summary vengeance. (Pages 234-237')


APPENDIX I>. PAGE 63.
DECLARATION OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF NEW ZEALAND.
1. AYe the Hereditary Chiefs and Heads of the tribes of the
northern parts of New Zealand, being assembled at AYaitangi in
the Bay of Islands, on this 28th day of October 1835, declare the
independence of our country, which is hereby constituted and de-
clared to be an independent State, under the designation of “ The
United Tribes of New Zealand.”
2. All sovereign power and authority within the territories of the
United Tribes of New Zealand is hereby declared to reside entirely
and exclusively in the Hereditary Chiefs and Heads of Tribes in
their collective capacity; who also declare that they will not allow
any legislative authority separate from themselves in their collective
capacity to exist, nor any function of Government to be exercised
within the said territories, unless by persons appointed by them?
and acting under the authority of laws regularly enacted by them
in Congress assembled.
3. The Hereditary Chiefs and Heads of Tribes agree to meet in
Congress at AYaitangi in the autumn of each year for the purpose
of framing laws for the dispensation of justice, the preservation of
peace and good order, and the regulation of trade; and they cor-
dially invite the southern tribes to lay aside their private animosities,
and to consult the safety and welfare of our common country, by
joining the Confederation of the United Tribes.
4. They also agree to send a copy of this Declaration to His
Majesty the King of England, to thank him for his acknowledg-
ment of their flag : and in return for the friendship and protection
they have shown, and are prepared to show, to such of his sub-
jects as have settled in their country, or resorted to its shores for
the purposes of trade, they entreat that he will continue to be the
parent of their infant state, and that he will become its protector
from all attempts upon its independence.
Agreed to unanimously, on this 28th day of October, 1835, in the
presence of His Britannic Majesty’s Resident.
[[Here follow the signatures or marks of thirty-five hereditary
Chiefs and Heads of tribes, which form a fair representation of the
tribes of New Zealand, from the North Cape to the latitude of the
river Thames.^


ENGLISH WITNESSES,
Signed Henry Williams, Missionary, C. M. S.
George Clarke, Cl. M. S.
-Tames C. Clendon,, Merchant,
Gilbert Mair, Meibchant.
I certify that the above is a corrects copy of the Declaration of
the Chiefs, according to the translation! of Missionaries who have
resided ten years and upwards in the country; and it is transmitted
to His Most Gracious Majesty the King of Kngland at the
unanimous request of the Chiefs.
Signed James Busby,
British IRcsident at New Zealand.
THE END.
London I— Printed by James Niehols, 46, Hoxton-Square.
