









REMARKS
IN FAVOUR OF A
CENTRAL FORT
HOBSON’S BAY.
X ->V
MELBOURNE:
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
COLLINS STREET EAST.




REMARKS
o*ri
‘1,1^3.
In the various schemes which have been entertained for
the defence of Port Philip, or rather in the various modifica-
tions of that general scheme which have suggested themselves
to the Defence Commissions, appointed at different periods
to report upon the subject, a remarkable unanimity will be
found to prevail upon the importance of a defensive work in
the centre of Hobson’s Bay. All agree that certain works
should be maintained on or in proximity to the shores of
Sandridge and Williamstown ; and wherever a difference of
opinion exists, it will be found to be confined more to matters
of detail as to the number and character of these works,
rather than to the abandonment or defence of certain positions,
and, in like manner with regard to a spot in the centre of the
Bay, where the waters shoal in a remarkable manner, the im-
portance of the position is recognised on all hands, three
different propositions having been entertained for its defence,
namely—a floating battery, a pile battery, and a stone fort.
It might be fairly assumed, from so general a recognition of
its fitness for the purpose, that some preliminary steps, at least,
had been taken to test its applicability if not to render it availa-
ble for defensive purposes; so far, however, is this from being
the case, that we believe no borings have been taken, nor has
any authorised examination of the site been made up to the
present time.
This state of indecision upon the occupation of one of the
most important, if not the most important, of any of the
points of defence within Port Philip Heads, is much to be re-
gretted, since no practical benefit can be expected from the
expenditure already incurred in the construction of shore bat-
teries until it is supplemented by a work in the position
indicated.
It is true that the question of coast defences may be con-
sidered as in a transition state from the first introduction of


armour plating to ships of war to the present time, and to
this circumstance, no doubt, as also perhaps to the absence of
any definite information as to the amount of public money
likely to be appropriated for defensive purposes, is due the
various opinions offered upon the character of a central work.
The question is still, therefore, an open one, for as these
several suggestions emanated from gentlemen whose professional
standing entitled their opinions to every thoughtful considera-
tion ; so no Government would be likely to accept the respon-
sibility of deciding a purely practical question upon which
those best qualified to judge appeared to differ ; —and yet the
question is one which imperatively calls for a decision ; orders
have been sent to England for a number of the heavy rifled
ordnance ; and while, it is true, that if the colony is provided
with a number of these guns, it will have advanced a long
way towards protecting itself from attack, —yet it is equally
true, that the effective use of these expensive implements of
war will be considerably impaired, if the country neglects
providing the means of placing them in the most advantageous
positions. In this respect the shoal in the centre of the Bay
is second to no other position in importance ; and, in advocat-
ing the construction of a fort in that locality, it is proposed to
bring to the consideration of the subject such facts as are
within our reach, collected in a great measure from the various
able reports which have already appeared upon the subject, in
order to assist that portion of the public which takes an in-
terest in these matters to a right understanding of the
question, with the view of preventing useless expenditure, and
the adoption of a system of defence best suited to the means
and requirements of the colony.
In considering the question, it is necessary to keep in view
the dangers to be provided against, these are —the destruction
of the shipping in the Bay, and the bombardment of Mel-
bourne by an enemy’s ships.
In the earlier stages of the discussion upon our defences,
the question as to whether Hobson’s Bay or Port Philip Heads
were the proper positions to defend was fully considered, when
it was generally conceded that the construction of defensive
works at the heads was altogether secondary in importance to
the defence of Hobson’s Bay. It is not intended to enter upon
that discussion here, further than for the purpose of showing


that the objections raised against the Heads as the piincipal
points of defence, will apply with almost equal force to any
system for Hobson’s Bay which omits a defensive work on the
shoal.
Points Lonsdale and Nepean are about 3,900 yards apart,
but by reason of their being the most prominent features of that
locality, almost surrounded by a great expanse of waters, they
look nearer, and are thus calculated to impress the mind with
a conviction of their adaptibility for defensive purposes, since
any hostile vessel intent on entering the Bay must pass be-
tween them, and in so doing continue for a certain limited
period within range of any guns placed upon them.
The main objection to making the heads the principal
point of defence was based upon the fact, that however
powerful such batteries might be, they could not render it im-
possible for an enemy to pass through,—and if Melbourne
were weakly defended, an inducement would be offered to a
a daring officer to make the attempt. If, then, experienced
naval and military officers have expressed an opinion that an
active enemy would not hesitate to run the gauntlet past forts
and batteries at the Heads, under such circumstances, it may
be fairly asked—what means do we contemplate providing for
checking his advance to the anchorage ground in Hobson’s Bay,
where the shores are even further apart and the batteries upon
them necessarily so much weaker.
If the reader will refer to the accompanying map of Hob-
son’s Bay, he will observe a circular black dot placed nearly
central upon it; this dot indicates the position of the shoal
referred to, over which there is ten feet of water at low tide,
—it is distant about 2,200 yards from the adjacent shores of
Sandridge and Williamstown, the whole distance from shore
to shore being about 4,400 yards, measured in a straight line
from Point Gellibrand, and passing through the shoal to the
opposite shore of Emerald Hill. From this latter point the
shore recedes in a north-westerly direction to the Sandridge
Pier ; upon this strip of beach are four batteries capable of
mounting seventeen guns, which it will be observed, as viewed
from seawards, are considerably to the rear of the shoal. On
the Williamstown side are four batteries capable of mounting
twenty-eight guns. Now, it is to be particularly noted here
that from the shoal to the Sandridge or Emerald Hill beach


the water first deepens for a very short distance from ten to
thirteen feet, and then gradually shoals up to the beach, so
that a passage on the east side of the shoal would be very
dangerous for any vessel drawing thirteen feet of water, and
impracticable for one of greater draught ; and, indeed, upon
an emergency, as in war time, there would be no difficulty in
rendering this portion of the Bay impassable for any descrip-
tion of vessel.
On the west of the shoal, however, it is altogether different, —
close into its edge, as it were, there is twenty-five feet of water,
and from that to within about 250 yards of the Williamstown
beach it varies from thirty to eighteen feet in depth,—the
passage, therefore, between the shoal and Williamstown may be
considered —as it really is—the channel for all vessels passing
into the Sandridge piers and the anchorage ground. Now,
the limit of the effective range of a sixty-eight pounder is
2,000 yards, and that Jimit is defined on the chart by circular
arcs, drawn from the right and left batteries on the opposite
shores ; the black dotted lines represent the cofitour of the
channels, with their respective depths marked upon them in
feet. By a glance at the map it will be seen that the effective
force of a projectile thrown from any of the sixty-eight
pounders on the Sandridge side, and directed towards the
shoal, or anywhere in advance of it, will spend itself about
half way between the twelve feet and eighteen feet soundings,
or in about from fourteen to fifteen feet of water ; in other
words, it could not damage any vessel that kept to the
eighteen feet soundings, unless, after passing the shoal, she
directed her course towards the Sandridge pier,—a course
which it is scarcely unnecessary to remark, no enemy need
adopt. < .
Again, the batteries on the Williamstown side—omitting for
a moment the battery on the break-water pier—while sweep-
ing over a space seawards of two thousand yards radius, fail
to cross the fire of the Sandridge batteries, excepting in the
immediate neighbourhood of the shoal. The guns on the pier
battery may be said to tie or cross the fire from the opposite
shores.
From this it will be seen that if a vessel was bent upon
making for the anchorage ground, and steered a middle course,
skirting the shoal in order to keep at the safest possible dis-


tance from the guns on the adjacent shores, she would be un-
touched —that is to say to any injurious extent by the fire
from the right batteries at Williamstown, and the left bat-
teries at Sandridge, and would come within range of the
extreme left and right of those positions for a very short
period of time ; practically, however, instead of following the
bendings of the channel, as indicated by the dotted lines on
the chart, a vessel would take a straight course, keeping a
little closer to the Williamstown shore, in which case the resist-
ance offered by the Sandridge batteries would be feeble, if
not altogether ineffective, and she would merely have to pass
two batteries on the Williamstown side, at a distance of about
1500 yards which could not bring more than ten guns to bear
upon her at a time, and this, too, for an exceedingly limited
period.
One of the most serious objections to constructing expen-
sive works at the Heads was based upon the calculation, that
a vessel steaming at the rate of fourteen knots an hour would
be only twenty minutes under fire. In the present case, if a
vessel were moving at the very moderate rate of eight knots
an hour she would be out of the range in ten minutes. Once
past the head of the breakwater pier, the guns in the batteries
could not touch her, as they are masked by the pier in that
direction ; those in the pier battery cannot be trained to the
rear, and even if that were practicable they could only fire upon
her at the risk of inflicting serious damage upon our own
shipping. ConsicFering, therefore, the very limited period
that a vessel would be under fire, and that fire too of the
most feeble character, it would be idle to disguise the fact,
that in the present state of our defences, Hobson’s Bay would
be completely at the mercy of any privateer that chose to
pay it a visit.
It may probably help the reader to a clearer view of the
subject of ranges to state that among naval men from 400 to
500 yards has heretofore been considered a good fighting
range. And, further, that in the attack on New Orleans, the
Federal gun boats succeeded in passing, with comparatively
little injury to themselves, between forts 1000 yards apart,
and such was the impression created in the public mind at
home by the success of that attack, that the Government had
to abandon the Spithead forts, then in course of construction.


Such, then, is the present state of the defences for Hobson’s
Bay, and although by substituting rifled guns for the old
68-pounders, the space swept by the fire from the batteries
would be extended, and the fire itself more accurate and
effective, it is obvious that the utility of these guns would be
greatly impaired by their being removed upwards of two
thousand yards from the scene of action. Let us suppose,
for a moment, that a point of land or promontory run out
from the St. Kilda beach, and approached within 2000 yards
of Point Gellibrand, enclosing a natural harbour within its
arms, such points or headlands would be recognised without
question as the most suitable positions for defensive works ;
and yet rightly looked upon, such natural advantages are
within our reach, only one of them happens to be ten feet
under water, and we are as slow to take advantage of it as if
the difficulties presented by a submersion of ten feet were
insurmountable.
It may be urged that if forts 1000 yards apart on the
Mississippi failed to protect New Orleans from a Federal
squadron, and if the fortifications for Spithead were stopped
chiefly upon the grounds that they would have a mid-
range of 1000 yards —the objections should apply with
equal force to any fort in the Bay which would give a mid-
range of about the same extent. The cases, however, are not
parallel; the objection might have some force applied to works
at the Heads, for instance, but scarcely here. If our defences
are designed with any practical object, it is to protect the
shipping in the Bay, and to prevent the bombardment of
Melbourne ; for this purpose the shoal becomes the key of
the whole position, and should be defended at any cost. By
occupying it, the width of the channel is reduced one-half,
compelling any vessel attempting to force the passage to come
under the direct and concentrated fire from the guns of the
Williamstown batteries, besides that of the guns of the fort,
and by thus contracting the passage most likely to be
threatened, makes it feasible and quite within the resources of
the colony to add to its strength in time of war by the aid of
such extemporaneous floating defences as the occasion might
call forth, so as to render it impassable to a hostile vessel.
In the the attack on New Orleans the Federal gunboats,
taking advantage of an injury sustained by a boom thrown


across the river, steamed past the forts by night, while the
latter were annoyed by a heavy bombardment from the fleet;
indeed, the Federal squadron, which was both powerful and
numerous —consisting of frigates, corvettes, and a large
number of heavily-armed gunboats and well appointed mortar
boats, were for five or six days in the vicinity, during which
time they kept up a constant fire upon the two forts, which
impeded their progress. It is scarcely necessary to remark
that it has never been contemplated to incur the enormous
expenditure requisite to protect Melbourne from an attack of
so formidable a character. As there is no inducement to an
enemy to occupy the place in force, we are only liable to a
flying visit from two or three hostile frigates at most, whose
stay in our waters would be of short duration, and the object
of our defences is to beat off all such predatory attacks.
The dispute arising out of the Bpithead forts was of a
totally different character. England, in case of war with any
maritime power, owing to her insular position, has some
hundreds of miles of coast to defend, and to protect her
interests, as well as to maintain her supremacy, it is necessary
that she should avail herself of those improvements in attack
and defence which modern science and skill are every year
developing. And it was a wise course on the part of the
British Government to pause before committing the country
to an expenditure of something like twelve millions of money
in the construction of forts, which an enemy determined on
effecting a landing could have avoided. It was said with
reason, “ If we are to expend so large a sum of money for
our defences, instead of constructing forts that may never be
called upon to fire a shot, let us have ironclads and floating
batteries that can move to any threatened point, and fight
the foe face to face before he can attempt a landing.”
We are disposed to lay some stress upon this relation of a
bygone dispute, because we believe, whether right or wrong,
that to a misapprehension of the facts may be traced the pre-
judice with which the construction of stone fortifications has
heretofore been regarded in this colony. It should be borne in
mind that if the British Government have hesitated in erecting
an additional number of expensive forts, they have never refused
the funds for protecting important military positions, and for
strengthening the arsenals of the country ; and it is a signifi-


cant fact that notwithstanding the improvements made during
the past ten years in rifled ordnance, no alterations have been
made in permanent fortifications to meet them, beyond an
extra thickening of walls and parapets, and the protecting of
embrasures with iron shields ; nor is it too much to say that if
the interests at stake in Melbourne were exclusively Imperial,
no apprehension of the approach of a period when stone forts
should become obsolete would deter the Home Government
from securing a position of so much importance as this shoal
with a permanent work of defence.
The expediency of procuring a swift partially-plated steam-
ship has on several occasions been strongly urged upon the
Colonial Go v ernment. That such a vessel would prove a valu able
auxiliary to our defences will be readily admitted. The duties
she would have to perform in time of war, as assigned to her
by the officers making the recommendation, would be to pre-
vent an enemy that had succeeded in running past the works
at the Heads, advancing or taking up a position among the
merchantmen in the Bay, and if opposed by a more powerful
frigate, or outnumbered, to keep up a running fight; but then
the question arises—Where is such a fight to terminate ? for
owing to the conformation of the shores of Hobson’s Bay there
is not a point in the whole line of defended coast where she
could take up a favourable position to check the advance of
an enemy ; the nearest approach to any shelter of the kind is
the pier battery at Williamstown ; but it would be injudicious,
to say the least of it, to draw the fire of a moderate-sized
frigate upon a work of so faulty construction as the pier-
battery; a single broadside tvould probably be sufficient to
turn the parapet of this work completely over upon the guns
and men behind it. The proper shelter for our colonial war
steamer in such circumstances would be under cover of the
guns of a central fort, where she could materially assist in
arresting the advance of the enemy.
Having so far considered the necessity that exists for the
occupation of the shoal with a defensive work, it remains to
be seen what advantages, if any, that a stone fort possesses
over the rival proposals of a floating battery and a pile
battery.
There were three objections urged against the construction
of a stone fort —first, the expense ; second, the uncertainty as


to the best mode of protecting seacoast defences against
rifled ordnance ; and third, the difficulty of manning the guns.
In order to ascertain what forfce lies in the first of these ob-
jections it will be necessary to examine it in relation to the
cost of the alternative proposals.
In one of the earlier schemes advanced for the defence of
Hobson’s Bay a floating battery was proposed to occupy the
position under consideration ; its cost was roughly estimated at
£BO,OOO. There is, however, considerable difficulty in fur-
nishing estimates for works of this nature when a number of
important points are left undecided. The size, machinery,
extent, and weight of armour plating are all important
elements in the cost of such an arm of defence, A moderate
sized shot-proof floating battery, fitted with machinery, would
probably cost from £70,000 to £90,000, and the annual
maintenance of such a battery in working order would certainly
not be less than £5OOO. The favour which this proposition of a
floating battery met with at the time it was first mooted may be
in some measure attributed to the idea then prevalent that there
would be no difficulty in obtaining the hull of one of the old
men-of-war, upon making our wants known to the Imperial
Government. That a vessel of this class might be very useful
as a training ship is at once conceded, but her utility as a
block-ship is not so apparent; the efficiency of a block-ship
would be much impaired if it were wanting in steampporerw r er ;
moreover, the “ wooden walls of old England” were never in-
tended to carry armour plating, and the extensive alterations
which such a ship would have to undergo in fitting her up as
a block-ship could only be done at such an outlay as would
cancel any advantages derived from our receiving the hull as a
gift. v
A pile-battery—that is to say, a battery fixed upon a
strong staging of piles and beams, and mounting twelve guns—
might be erected at a cost of about £6OOO. It would, how-
ever, be exceedingly rash to risk either guns or men in so
exposed a position as the centre of the bay upon a staging of
this kind without an armour plated parapet, which, if con-
structed upon the principle of any of the modern targets, with
five or six inch iron, would add £25,000 or £30,000 to the
cost of the battery. Works of this character, however, are of
a very perishable nature, owing to the gradual but sure


ravages of the teredo on the piles and the shrinkage and decay
of the other timbers, so that it can scarcely be considered
groundless to fear that such a work, after standing ten or
twelve years, might yield to the first broadside of an enemy’s
frigate. There is another objection equally fatal to such a
structure, namely, the difficulty of obtaining a secure shell-
proof cover for powder magazines. An isolated work of this
size and character would require considerable magazine accom-
modation, which it would be utterly impracticable to secure
from an enemy’s fire, except at such an outlay as would go
far to equalize the first cost of this perishable work with one
of a more enduring character.
Although no borings have been taken to ascertain the
character of the ground or bottom in the vicinity of the shoal,
there is reason to believe that no serious engineering diffi-
culties need be apprehended ; and calculating upon having
some twelve or thirteen feet of water (high water) to contend
with, it is estimated that a fort of masonry capable of mount-
ing twelve guns might be built for £70,000, and even allow-
ing a wide margin for unforeseen difficulties in such a situation
it certainly would not exceed £BO,OOO,
For a fort such as is here recommended the material may
be said to be at hand ; in the neighbourhood of Williamstown
and the Saltwater River there is abundance of bluestone
suitable for the foundations. The granite with which it ought
to be cased can be conveyed by water at a reasonable rate;
and should the cost of an unproductive work of this character
operate against its being undertaken, it is worthy of considera-
tion how far it would be advisable to employ prisoners upon
it. In carrying up the foundations to low water level very
little skilled labour would be required, and even if so much
were done by prison labour a considerable saving might be
effected.
A work of this character would last for generations to
come, whilst the annual cost of its maintenance need not
exceed £2OO. It will, therefore, compare favourably with a
floating battery, which would probably cost as much at the
outset, and require some thousands annually for its main-
tenance, besides being a more perishable description of work,
and having the disadvantage of unstable platforms for the
guns, since it must always be affected by the swell in the bay.


That the centre of the Bay has been neglected up
to the present time may in a great measure be attri-
buted to the second objection, viz. ; —The uncertainty
as to whether iron or masonry will eventually prove
the better cover for men and guns in sea coast
defences. It seems, however, scarcely consistent to take
exception to a work in the first instance on the score of its
expense ; and then to raise a second objection, a due atten-
tion to which would involve a far heavier outlay,—for it
cannot be that we are delaying these works on the
expectation of the discovery of some cheap mode of
defence which will answer our purposes equally well.
The contest between rifled ordnance and armour plating
which has been carried on so vigorously in England
for some years back tends in the very opposite direc-
tion. No sooner is some ponderous gun turned out with
the confident hope that its shot will smash through all ob-
stacles, than straightway an iron target is invented capable of
resisting it: and if we are waiting for the termination of this
contest, with the view of eventually availing ourselves of its
results, we may make up our minds to an expenditure such as
has not yet been contemplated for the defences of the colony,—
an expenditure which would probably far exceed our means.
We have been advised over and over again that
this colony has little to fear for years to come from
powerful and heavily armed men of war ; and it can
be readily imagined in case of a war between Great
Britain and any of the other maritime powers, that
vessels costing from £200,000 to £300,000 each, will have
more important duties assigned to them than to risk a voyage
of some thousands of miles in the hope of levying contribu-
tions on Melbourne. The attacks we have to provide against
are from privateers and small ships of war ; and the question
appears to be simply—what is the best and most economical
means of protecting ourselves against such attacks.
There is a rough rule in military engineering which indi-
cates that an inch in thickness of iron is equal to a foot of
masonry ; and, assuming this as even a rude approximation to
the truth, it is obvious that a stone wall ten feet thick will
afford a more secure covering for artillery than a parapet of
six-inch iron, with the usual complement of wood backing;


and if a parapet of six-inch iron raised upon stone founda-
tions, and provided with the necessary magazine accommoda-
tions, costs as much, or nearly as much, as a stone fort—the
walls of which are ten feet thick ; there can be no doubt as
to the advantages, whether from a military or financial point of
view, being altogether on the side of the fort. If, on the
other hand, it is contemplated to have parapets, protected with
armour plating of ten or twelve inch iron, the expense, as
already stated, will be something enormous, and the construc-
tion of our defences be postponed to some indefinite period,
since it is not at all certain where a sufficient quantity of such
plates are to be procured.
The third objection against a central fort is the difficulty of
manning it.
That it would be a waste of public money to construct a
larger number of forts and batteries than could be efficiently
worked by whatever force the colony possessed, is at once
admitted. The truth of the objection in the abstract cannot
be denied, but clearly it can have no force as regards the
central fort, if its position is recognised as one of the most
important in the Bay. The argument may be a very cogent
one for giving up some of the works contemplated for the
Heads, or even for abandoning those batteries on the Sand-
ridge shore, which are 2,000 yards in rear of the shoal, but
ought not to have the slightest weight in considering the
defence of a position pronounced by all naval and military
authorities to be of the greatest importance. A fort mounting
twelve heavy rifled guns, if fully manned, would, give employ-
ment to 180 men, —and if we were hard pressed for men, even
half that number would be serviceable, as it is not probable
that the whole of the guns would require to be worked at the
same time, nor is it unreasonable to hope that the casualties
in a work of this kind, during an engagement of a few hours,
would be reduced to a minimum.
To sum up the preceding remarks in a few words, it has
been attempted to show—
-Ist. That the present batteries at Williamstown and Sand-
ridge are utterly inefficient to protect the shipping in the
Bay, and to prevent the bombardment of Melbourne.
2nd. That in order to attain these ends, it is absolutely
essential to construct a defensive work on the Shoal, and


3rd. That a stone fort is the most efficient, and ultimately
the most economical, work that can be placed there.
If we have succeeded in impressing the reader with the
importance of the position and the necessity for occupying it
as the key to the defences of Hobson’s Bay, he will probably
concur in the regret that it was not included among the defensive
works first undertaken in the colony. With a permanent
fort, mounting twelve heavy Armstrong guns, in the centre of
the Bay, we might feel a confidence not warranted in the
present state of our defences; and however willing the
Legislature might be in time of war to grant supplies for its
construction, a work of this character cannot be had at a few
hours’ notice—while the places of the shore batteries —if it is
considered desirable to extend that system —could be supplied
with the help of a hundred or so of navvies in the course of a
few days.
Wilson and Mackinnon, Printers, 78, Collina-street East.






