

fh%r* X
REMARKS
“NOTES
PUBLISHED POE THE NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT,”
JANUARY, 1861,
AND ON
MR. RICHMOND’S MEMORANDUM
THE TARANAKI QUESTION,
DECEMBER, 1860.
SIR W. MARTIN, D. C. L.
DATE CHIEF JUSTICE OF NEW ZEALAND.
LONDON:
W. H. DALTON, BOOKSELLER TO THE QUEEN,
28 COCKSPUR STREET.




PREFACE.
Upon the publication of my Remarks on the
Taranaki Question, a large body of “ Notes,” chal-
lenging' the accuracy of many of the statements
therein.made, were published “for the New Zealand
Government.” Seeing- that these “Notes” avowedly
expressed the views of the local authorities, it ap-
peared to me that they ought not to pass without
notice. But the publication of these official “Notes”
was followed shortly after by a Notification in the
New Zealand Gazette (25 Jan. 1861) deprecating
public criticism on the conduct and policy of the
Government, in the following terms :
“ The Governor fulty recognises the right of every
British subject freely to discuss, criticise, and cen-
sure the acts of the Government, and, when the
danger now threatening has passed away, he does
not desire to see that right restricted.
“ There are, however, occasions when the unre-
strained use of such a right becomes manifestly
dangerous to the community, and he feels it his
duty to state that such an occasion now exists in
this Colony.”
As a copy of this official Notification has been
specially addressed to me by the direction of His
Excellency the Governor, I understand it to be the


desire of the New Zealand Government that their
“Notes” shall not be made the subject of public
criticism. In deference, therefore, to their wish, I
abstain for the present from giving publicity within
the Colony to the following pages.
The Remarks on the Government ‘ Notes’and on
Mr. Richmond’s c Memorandum ’ have been made as
brief as possible. Those statements only have been
commented on, which appeared likely to mislead the
reader as to some material point. Man}’ minor
assertions and inferences, which I believe to be
incorrect and unsound, have been passed over-
either in the belief that their irrelevancy to the main
question will be observed by a careful reader, or
from an apprehension that the length and com-
plexity of our Colonial documents may render them
unreadable at home. Of course I pass over those
assertions, as to which the evidence set forth in my
original remarks appears to me to have anticipated
and negatived all that is now urged in the c Notes ’
and in the f Memorandum.’ I refer particularly to
the statements made in the latter documents as to
the nature and grounds of the present quarrel, as to
the alleged connection of that quarrel, in its origin,
with some land-league or with the Waikato King
movement, as to the cession by Waikato, &c. I
wish to avoid any repetition of what has been
already said. In some cases the point relied on by
the Government recurs in several Notes or in several
passages of the Memorandum ; in such cases I have


noticed the point in connection with that passage,
in which it seemed to be most prominent. I believe
there is no assertion or argument concerning the
substance of the question, either in the Notes or in
the Memorandum, which is not directly met in these
Remarks.
I adopt the references as I find them in the
Notes, that is to say, “page 27” means the Note
headed u page 27,” and referring to the 27th page
of the “ Taranaki Question.”
W. M.
Taurarua,
Feb. 1861




REMARKS
NOTES PUBLISHED POE THE
NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT.
* Page 5. Note 2.
Mb. Busby’s statement is cited as if it were
entirely opposed to mine. In reality, the only dif-
ference between us is as to the origin of the rules:
a question upon which it is unnecessary to enter.
To shew this I set out the whole paragraph, of
which only the first sentence is cited in the Note :
u I have no hesitation in savino- that the rules
•/ ~
“ which Sir W. Martin lays down, as established
u by a singular concurrence of the best evidence, are
“ not rules of native origin. That they have been
u c generally accepted and acted upon by the natives ’
u in the later periods of their dealings in respect to
“ lands, Ido not dispute; but they are natural and
“ necessary deductions from the proceedings to which
u our own countrymen had recourse, in order to oh-
“ tain an equitable title to the lands which they
“ purchased from the natives. It is not more than
a twenty-five or thirty years since the' natives first
“ began to look upon land as an object of ex-
“ changeable value.”— (Mr. Busby, page 7.)
* These references are made to the pages of the London
edition of “ The Taranaki Question,” by Sir W. Martin.


In page 8, Mr. Busby again carries back the
existence of those rules to a time previous to the
foundation of the colony.
u In fine, the result of my experience during the
“ seven years in which I held office, was a conviction
11 that the natives had no idea of property in land,
u such as exists in the minds of the people where it
“ has been the subject of legislation. And that the
“ rules which Sir W. Martin lavs down, were not
“ rules established by natives, but suggested by the
“ precautions adopted by our own countrymen in
“ order to obtain a title which could not be justly
“ disputed.”
These admissions are quite sufficient. Indeed
there is no real contradiction between Mr. Busby
and myself as to the existence of rights of property
among’ the natives. The difference is in the sense
given to the word “ right.” Mr. Busby uses the
word in the legal sense, as that which has a cor-
responding remedy, and is supported by some law.
He says in page 5 :
“ In these remarks we have only to do with the
u rights of property, as they are necessarily understood
u by jurists and statesmen, implying corresponding
“ obligations to respect such rights. In this sense
a I do not hesitate to say that, so far as we can
u trace their history, there is no evidence of the
u New Zealanders ever having possessed any rights,
u with the exception of those which were’created by
u the Treaty of Waita ngi. Of u hat use is it, practi-
“ cally, for a man to say I possess a right to inf


11 property, when there is no law to define the obli-
“ g'ations which are created by such a right or
c ‘ government with power to administer the law.
“ supposing l it to have existed ? New Zealand was,
“ in an emphatic sense, a country Avithout a law and
u without a prince.”
I use the term for that which was acknoAvledged
and warranted by custom , though there was no law
in our sense to uphold it.
I subjoin a passage from a speech delivered by
Mr. Dillon Bell in the House of Representatives,
3rd of August, 1860 :
“ We know how at the great original migration
“ the occupants of the first canoes took possession of
“ the land; Ave know hoAv it became subdivided as
11 the tribes increased, and the hapu branched off'
“ from the iwi ; we know hoAV particular and distinct
“ titles arose as land Avas subdued by cultivation, as
“ hunting' grounds Avere claimed for catching- the
u rat, as Aveirs Avere erected in the streams, or as
“ numberless other special acts of ownership were
u exercised ; we know how these distinct titles still
“ merged in the tribal title , and did not destroy it:
u these are customs universally recognized, lying
‘ c (as I said) at the foundation of native tenure
“ throughout the islands.”— ( New Zealander, Aug.
8 th, 1860.)
It may be well to say that I have neA r er intended
to uphold the tribal or communal right as a good
thing in itself. I assert it only as a fact Avhich now


exists and which has existed from time imme-
morial. It was the only way in which the tribal
form of society could be kept up. For to alienate
land to a stranger, was to alienate to one who might
any day become an enemy. The whole tribe there-
fore was interested in the matter for the sake of its
own independence. It was something like what we
call an Alien Law. Afterwards when the Pakeha
came, it acquired a new meaning, but one of scarcely
less practical importance to them. It is a question
of great moment to them, whether a single man or
a few men may, without the consent of their fellows,
introduce into the midst of their cultivations an
ineligible neighbour whose cattle may range over
their unfenced land, or who in a variety of other
ways may injure or annoy the rest of the community.
Nor would the social evil be less. Such a principle
would be fertile of quarrels. It would offer an
opportunity to ill-disposed man to gratify
private resentment, and to embroil his tribe with the
Pakeha. In this very case there are indications of
something of this kind.
It is for the interest of both races that individual
rights should be substituted for the right of the
Community, as far as possible. But this can only
be effected by rational means, not by mere force.
Page G, Note 1, axm Page 7, Note 2.
It is asserted in this Note that when the captives
and the persons who had voluntarily migrated to


other places began to return to Taranaki, those
families which remained in the new places where
they had settled, were never admitted to exercise
authority over those who returned, in the disposal
by the latter of their own land. It is also asserted,
that for the* last eighteen years it has been acknow-
ledged among’st themselves that even a family of
four people were free to dispose of or to retain their
propert} 7 . In page 7, Note 2, this is asserted
broadly as applying to the whole tribe. It is said
to have been an acknowledged usage among the
JVgati awa that their separate families had separate
rights of alienation.
It is believed that these assertions are incapable
of proof. They are directly contradictory to Mr. Mc-
Lean’s statement, 17th December, 1844, (Taranaki
Question, page 19,) and also to Mr. McLean’s prac-
tice. For, upon the principle now alleged, the visits
to Queen Charlotte Sound and Wellington were un-
necessary.
So extraordinary an exception to the general rule
should have been property proved, before force was
resorted to.
Page 13, Note 1.
It is believed that the practice of the Land Claim
Commissioners was the following’-They travelled
throughout the country, investigating each claim on
the spot. The persons whose names appeared on
each Deed as sellers were examined j and the bound-
aries of the land were then publicly pointed out. If


this was done without opposition, it was assumed
that the Community at large assented. The Note
itself states, that there were cases where the tribe or
hapu did object.
Page 14, Note 2.
Thinking it not unlikely that the word “ Com-
munity ” would be objected to as novel, I fell back
upon the terms ordinarily employed, and used the
words “tribe” and “tribal” in the ordinary way,
as opposed to “individual.” It would no doubt
tend to clearness to use the word “ Community ”
*/
throughout, to indicate the separate societies into
which the Maori population is broken up.
Page 15, Note 2.
The assertion here referred to is made on the
authority of the following statement made by Mr.
Forsaith, (formerly of the Native Department,) in
his place in the House of Representatives, on the
9th August, 1860:-—“ Now it was a well-known
“ fact, that W. King and that section of the Ngati
“ ama tribe whom he represented were never dispos-
sessed by the Waikatos. As a proof of this, he
“ would mention a fact which his honourable friend
“ the Member for the Wallace County would con-
“firm. About the year 1842, Te Pakaru, a Wai
“ kato Chief who had taken part in the invasion of
“ Taranaki, proceeded to the Waitara for the pur-
“pose of taking possession, and had actually com-
“ menced felling timber for the purpose of preparing
“ ground for cultivation. William King, who had


“not then returned from Waikanae to the home of
“ his fathers, sent a deputation to pana Te Pakaru,
“i.e. to warn him off. Te Pakaru, conscious that
“ his position was not tenable, g'ave up the attempt,
“and returned to Waikato.” —( New Zealander,
August 15, 1860.)
Page 18, Note 1.
Sir George Grey opposed for a time the return of
William King’ and his party to the Waitara, seeing
the complication that would arise out of such return.
When he found that they were bent upon doing that
which they had the clearest right to do, he assented
to that which he could not prevent. No doubt he
desired to prevent their settling on the South bank
of the Waitara. Whether William King made any
promise, and if so, what were the circumstances and
terms of the promise, I know not.
But it should be remembered that the blame
(whatever it may be) of disregarding Governor
Grey’s wishes is not to be confined to William King’.
Teira returned with William King and settled also
on the South bank.
This Note refers to the Note on page 92. In the
latter we find a statement, proceeding from persons
who must have been acquainted with the facts, that
“W. Kingi being the head Chief of all Waitara,
“ on both sides of it, it was for himself to choose and
“ to say on which side he was to reside.”
Page 20.
I had heard of such a permission as is here al-


leged, but the extent or terms of it I did not know,
and do not know even now. At every point the
same defect makes itself apparent, the lack of a
proper investigation of the facts of the case. The
point intended to be noticed is this, that William
King was driven off land which he was actually oc-
cujjying at the time.
Page 25.
The first sentence of this Note mis-states my pro-
position under the form of admitting it. The pro-
position in the Note is, that the Native cultivators
and occupiers of the block could make a title with-
out the consent of tthe whole tribe. Advantage is
taken of the ambiguiity of the word “ tribe,” here, as
commonly used to indicate that Community or
Society of which thee cultivators and occupiers were
members. My real j meaning is put out of doubt by
the next sentence of the text, in which the Govern-
ment view is expresseed in other words, viz. : —“ That
u if Teira’s right exxisted at all, it was of necessity
“an absolute right/” and “that it was the purpose
“of the Governmenit to disregard all claims but
“ those of the individual holders.”
In this Note a passage is set forth which purports
to be a part of Governor Fitzroy’s speech of 3rd
Aug’. 1844. It is prooduced in order to explain away
the natural meaning- of the words used by himself
in his official statement to the Home Government.
In fact, the passages set forth is no part of that
speech. It is taken from a sort of Leading Article


in the Maori Gazette, published at Auckland, 2nd
September, 1844. In the same number of the
Gazette (pp. 46-47) the speech itself is set forth.
Then follows a brief notice of other speakers ; then
another address without a name, to the absentee
owners, urging l them to go to the nearest teacher or
protector, to register their names and claims to land,
so that, if they should not be disposed to sell, and
their masters should he willing- to manumit them,
they might return to their own places.
In page 48 commences the before-mentioned
Leading Article, reviewing and commending the
Governor’s proceedings at Taranaki, contrasting 1 the
English and French modes of Colonization, and
ending by enlarging on divers passages of Scripture.
From this Article the words cited in the Note are
translated. They appear to apply to the Town
Block which Governor Fitzroy insisted on retaining,
whilst he was content to recall the settlers from other
parts of the District. When a block is to be ceded,
of course the marking out of individual holding’s
becomes necessary in order that the payment may be
apportioned. But before it comes to this stage of
the business, the Community must have already
assented to the Cession. The contrast which runs
throughout the words of Governor Fitzroy and the
comments thereon, is not a contrast between the
individual right and that of the Community, but a
contrast between the rights of the owners on the
spot and those of the absentees.


The source of the whole difficulty which Governor
Fitzroy found at Taranaki was this: the persons
who were on the spot at the time of the arrival of
the New Zealand Company’s agent, desiring’ to
secure the presence and protection of the Pakeha,
had sold a tract of land without the assent of the
absentee owners. This fact furnishes the key to all
that Governor Fitzroy said. He expressed his
desire to avoid the recurrence of such an evil, and
all his suggestions pointed that way.
I have thought it necessary to explain this docu-
ment, to guard against misconception. But in fact
Governor Fitzroy’s remarks did not apply to the
Waitara at all. It is admitted that the people of
that district had nothing to do with the sale to the
New Zealand Company. (T. Q. p. 20. )
The connection of the argument in the text is
missed in the Note. It is therefore necessary to
re-state it briefly. The letter to William King cited
in page 26, and Mr. McLean’s notice in page 28,
both expressed the new principle quite Mr.
McLean says, “You know that every man has a
“right (of doing as he pleases) with his portion,
“ and no man may interfere to prevent his exercise
“of this right as respects his portions, for the
“ thought respecting his own is with himself” These
declarations were made to a man, with whom the
Government had been long’ dealing’ as with one
whose consent was necessary to the alienation of


land at the Waitara. The new declaration forced
him to assert his right in the letter set forth in page
33, and to state the ground of his right, namely,
that the land belonged to the whole Community.
I notice that in the third column in this Note, the
beginning only of the above sentence of Mr. Mc-
Lean is given, and the conclusion of the very same
sentence (distinguished above by Italics) is omitted.
Page 27.
The important subject of the feuds referred to in
this Note is reserved for consideration in connection
with the Note on page 90.
The ambiguity of the word u tribe ” has been
admitted. I did not intend to assert that William
King is the Chief of the whole tribe of the Ngati
awa. He is certainly the Chief of that section of
the Ngati awa to which the Waitara belongs.
Before leaving this branch of the subject, I sub-
join an extract from a speech delivered by Mr.
Dillon Bell, in the House off Representatives, 3rd
August, 1800 ;— u Towards thie end of 1839, Colonel
“ Wakefield (the Company’s agent) arrived in New
“Zealand, and among other places went toWai-
“ kanae, where Wiremu Kingi, even at that time an
“ intelligent and enterprising man, took great interest
“ in the Colonel’s proceedings, and accompanied him
«in the ship Tory on a visit to the Ngati awa Chiefs
“of Queen Charlotte Sound, to buy land. It was
«on that occasion that Wiremu Kingi signed the


“ deed ol which so much has been said • hut for my
u part I never attached much importance to his sig-
nature except as it may he held to bar his indi-
“ vidual right. About this time the Ngapuhi and
u Waikato tribes determined on manumitting their
“ slaves taken in war, and almost simultaneously
u with the introduction of European Settlers into
u Taranaki, numbers of the Ngati arva captives re-
“ turned to their ancient location; while those who
“belonged to the first migration followed their
“example, and also began to come up from the
“ South in small detached parties. Wiremu Kingi
“and his father remained at Waikanae, hut accord-
u ing to Maori lam mere equally entitled to reclaim
“ their old p>ossessions at Taranaki when they should;
“ return. I need not remind the House of the dis-
“ putes which immediately followed the return of
“ the Ngati ama , in the first years of the settlement,
“ nor how they and the English settlers contested
“ the possession of the soil; still less need 1 remind
“them that in 1844 Mr. Spain, the Queen’s Coin-
“ missioner for investigating and determining titles
“to land, held his Court at Taranaki, and decided
“that the Company was entitled to a grant of
“ 60,000 acres : or that Governor Fitzroy disallowed
“ that decision, on the ground of its setting’ aside
“ the claims of unreturned captives and absentees.
“ I do not believe that Governor Fitzroy meant ab-
solutely to annul the Company’s purchase; I think
“ it is clear he intended that compensation should be


“ given to the absentees as they came in, not that
“they should have all the land back. But whatever
u he may have thought, there was never a doubt on
“ my mind that the natives understood his decision
t( practically to he a recognition of their ownership)
u and a giving hack of the land.” — (New Zealander ,
Bth August, I 860.)
Another circumstance should be noticed. Various
points are relied on from time to time in support of
the Government case : at one time the Waikato
Invasion; at another, the Cession to Governor
Hobson j at another, Governor Grey’s policy; and
so forth. Each of these taken singly, supposing it
to have the effect ascribed to it, would set aside
Teira’s title as much as William King’s: yet, in
some way or other out of the combination or conflict
of all, Teira emerges as “ rightful owner,” as “ un-
disputed owner,” whilst the rights of the Com-
munity and of the Chief have been lost. The
result of this view is that Teira reappears with a
title not worse, nor just as good, but far better than
it would have been if none of these adverse circum-
stances had existed. For he is now conceived to
possess a power of alienation, even without the con-
sent of the Community to which he belongs.
It was not sufficiently considered how little the
arbitrary severance, made by the Government theory,
between the rights of the individual holder and those
of the Community and the Chief, could be expected
to commend itself to the people of the Waitara. The


Waikato invasion is the point from which Mr. Mc-
Lean dates the alleged change in the Eules of
Tenure at Taranaki, the commencement of the ex-
ceptional state of things in that district. If the
individual holders were not affected by all that had
passed from the Waikato invasion downwards, how
could the Community and the Chief regard them-
selves as deprived of their old rights by those same
events ?
Page 31.
Surely it is not meant that all publications are to
be condemned, except those which approve of the
course taken by the Government. In a Dependenc}*,
it is possible that the policy pursued b} r the Govern-
ment of the Dependency may tend to counteract, or
even to defeat, the policy of the Imperial Govern-
ment. If that is deliberately believed to be the
case, is every man to be censured who expresses that
belief, with due caution and regard to circum-
stances ?
The Debates in the House of Representatives in
August, 1860, made it notorious throughout the
country that there was a great difference of opinion
amongst the Colonists themselves as to the proceed-
ings of the Government. I believe that notoriety
to have had a most wholesome effect in checkins* the
spread of the war. The Natives were thereby en-
couraged to believe that what was done at the
Waitara was not the doing* of thePakeha as a race,
and would not be approved by the Queen,


My remarks on the Taranaki Question were put
forth in the beginning of December, after hostilities
had continued for nine months.
As to the declarations of the Governor referred
to in this Note, it is to be remarked that, with the
Natives, words weigh little against deeds.
It does not jet appear whether the assurance
conveyed to the Bishop of New Zealand respecting
the e< lawful rights of Chief and Tribe ” has ever
been circulated amongst the leading Native Chiefs.
Pages 34, 85, 36.
There can be no doubt as to the duty of a citizen
to communicate to the Government information
which he may derive from any private source,
respecting- matters which seriously affect the public
interest or public peace. I do not enter into the
circumstances here referred to. The reasons for
Archdeacon Hadfield’s conduct have already been
publicly explained by himself.
One thing- however should be said. It is a most
unfortunate state of thing’s when a Government
allows itself to depend on such sources of informa-
tion, and omits to take the proper means of obtain-
ing information for itself. And in this particular
case, it should in fairness be asked, whether the as-
sertion of right and the expression of determination
to hold the Waitara, contained in these letters to
Archdeacon Hadfield, had not been already conveyed
directly to the Governor by W. King ?
There appears to be a misconception as to the


object for which these letters are cited. That object
is not to prove any specific facts; but to shew the
general facts that there were claims, and what was
the nature of those claims. By the aid of the pri-
vate documents, the writer gropes his way to some
notion of the state of things. He endeavours to
ascertain, as well as he can, what the Government
ought to have ascertained fully and accurately.
Had a proper inquiry been instituted by the Govern
ment, the use of all these letters would have been
superseded.
The consideration! of this object will explain the
omission of the letter of July 27. That letter indi-
cates nothing as to the special nature of the claim
made by William King-; whilst it contains a story
about Mr. Parris, which I could only reg'ard as
unfounded or greattly exaggerated and distorted.
At the same time 3 I had experience enough of
rumours in this lamd, to find no difficulty in be-
lieving that such reports had reached William King
and had been credited by him.
PWGEs 38, 39, 40.
The second letter appears to me to prove nothing
more than that tine writer foresaw, what others
ought to have foreseen, namely, that the employ-
ment of soldiers woudd end in bloodshed.
A remark towardis the end of the Note makes it
necessary for me t© add, that when these letters
came to my hands, the time had long passed when


they could have been of any practical use to the
Government.
Page 49, Note 2.
It was never intended to he alleged that William
King is the Chief of the whole JVgati awa tribe. He
is certainly the chief of the Community to which the
Waitara belongs.
Page 51.
What is meant is, that plain issues are raised
even upon these documents. Those issues would
have been raised more plainly still, if a proper
inquiry had been instituted by the Government.
Page 55.
No complaint is made againsst the Land Purchase
Department j nor any question raised as to its
efficiency, whilst kept within tlhe bounds of its pro-
per functions. If there is no diispute between buyer
and seller, there is nothing tto decide. What is
maintained is this, that when ;a dispute exists, the
decision of the Land Purchase Department (in this
particular case the decision of Mr. Parris) is not
sufficient. It is not sufficient tto bind the rights of
the Queen’s subjects, or to justify the use of military
force against the Queen’s subjects.
With a view to remove a misconception which
seems to prevail at Home, I motice an important
statement in this Note, by Avlhich it appears that
nearly 30,000,000 acres of land! have already been
acquired for the Crown in this (Colony. The British
population is estimated at between 60 and 70,000.


Page 60.
It is by no means the case, that “ the accusations
of not instituting’ ai proper investigation, after all,
resolve themselves iinto the charge that no investi-
gation was made att Waikanae.” The case of Wai-
kanae was dwelt om because it was an admitted fact
that no investigation did take place there. The
cases of Queen Clnarlotte’s Sound and Wellington
were passed over nnore lightly, for want of informa-
tion ■ and that reaison was expressly given. It is
now clear that the wery gravest doubts exist as to
the assent of the Naltives at Queen Charlotte’s Sound.
Mr. McLean himseilf, on his examination before the
House of Representatives, produced a letter, dated
April 10, 1859, written to him by one of those
Natives. The letter stated that the names of cer-
tain persons had been signed without their authority,
and intimated that the transaction, if it went on,
would issue in fighting. (See Mr. McLean’s Evi-
dence, Pap. E. No. 4, page 23.)
Page 64.
If any reasonable doubt could remain as to the
meaning of the words used by Wi Tako, it would
be removed by the following fact.
A short time back, when the excitement arose
about the native man found dead near Patu mahoe,
some of the people on the Waikato river notified
their intention of visiting the spot, and there making
inquiry for themselves as to the cause of the death.
Ihaka of Pukaki (between Auckland and Waikato)


resisted their interference. Ini the course of a dis-
cussion on this subject, which took place at Pukaki,
lhaka twice used the words “ Wo matou tenei he
the very phrase of Wi Tako. They were taken
down at the time by a gentleman thoroughly ac-
quainted with the Maori langmage. Nothing’ cer-
tainly could be farther from Iliiaka’s meaning than
to charge himself and his peoples with any wrong- or
fault in the matter. All that ihe meant was, that
the thing which had gone wrong’ was his own affair,
and that their neighbours ouight not to meddle
with it.
It is to be regretted that the original words of
Paora’s speech, referred to in this Note, are not
given.
Page 67, Notei 2.
The admission here made of the desirableness of
the establishment of some tribumal for settling ques-
tions of Native tenure and custom, is so far satisfac-
tory. The difficulties in the way of doing this
appears to be over-estimated. All would depend
on the constitution of the Court, and on the order
and course of our proceedings with a view to the
establishment of it. For the creation of a Court for
determining land questions is not the first point to
be aimed at. This subject will be discussed more
fully in connection with Note, page 90.
What the reasons were which induced the Legis-
lature of the Colony to agree to the Declaration
in Section 8, I do not know. That they had


nothing; to do with the point here suggested (namely,
that the territorial rights of the Natives stand upon
Treaty, and therefore that questions between the
Government and the Natives belong to the Governor
and not to any Court) is shown by the words of
the Declaration itself; which apply, not to questions
between the Government and the Natives, or between
English Colonists and the Natives, but to questions
l C affecting the Title or right of occupancy of the
Aboriginal Natives, as amongst themselves *” The
point here referred to as to the Treaty and its
consequences, will be more fully considered below
in reference to Mr. Richmond’s Memorandum.
As to Lord Carnarvon’s Despatch, is it intended
to be inferred that, whereas the British Government
was not to he expected to support by military force
the decision of the Governor in Council, under the
Native Territorial Rights Bill, that Government
was to he expected to support by military force
the result of Mr. Parris’ inquiry ? His Lordship’s
Despatch should rather have suggested, that the
full and proper investigation, which we claim as due
of right to the Native subjects of the Crown, was
no less needed for the protection of the English
Colonists and of the tax-paying public of England.
Page 83.
In this Note it is said that the order of things,
which the Governor disturbed, was the desperate
feud then prevailing 1 at New Plymouth.


It should be remembered that tlhere was no feud
subsisting- between William King- mnd Teira. We
learn from Mr. Parris that (< after tthis offer for sale
Teira associated with William Kimg' the same as
before, but never let the subject west.” He states
also that “ they never had recourse to harsh mea-
sures after the public offer of tlhe land to His
Excellency the Governor, but on tlhe contrary tried
to work upon Teira by acts of kindlness.” (E. No.
8 A. p. 2.)
Mr. Parris is here speaking- of peaceful relations
subsisting- between William King- sand Teira before
the neg-otiations for peace between the Taranaki
tribes began, that is to say, whilst tthe feud was still
subsisting- between William King- amd other parties.
Then came the neg-otiations which Ibrought the feud
to an end. Peace had continued for about half a
year Avhen the Governor made the military demon-
stration at the Waitara.
Page 87.
In this Note it is asserted that “ nearly twelve
months of patient investigation ” were expended on
this case. Now Teira’s offer was made on the Bth
day of March, 1859, and the first instalment was
paid on the 29th November, 1859. The whole
investigation then lay between those two dates.
We are also told that Mr. Parris’ u inquiry was pro-
longed till the close of the year 1859; not from any
doubt that existed as to the title, but in the hope
that the opposing party might be brought to reason.”
(Pap. E, No. 3, p. 21.)


A portion of time then, which we have no means
of defining-, is to be interposed between the time
when all doubt had ceased as to the title, and the
20th of November. Moreover, Mr. Parris hiraselt
states that his inquiry was intermitted for two
months, lest he should interfere with the neo-otia-
tions for peace then pending- between the Tribes.
(Pap. E, No. 3a, p. 2.) What portion of the re-
sidue was actually employed on this particular busi-
ness, it is impossible to ascertain, as there are no
Minutes of his proceeding's.
Yet in the Despatch to His Grace the Duke of
Newcastle, dated 228th of June, 18(50, it is stated
that u nine months were occupied by persons con-
stantly eng-ag-ed in carefully considering- and investi-
gating- this particular title.” And now we are told
that u nearly twelve months of patient investigation”
were spent upon it.
I notice this, not because the matter in itself is of
great moment; for the value of an investigation
depends much more on the nature and method of it
than on the length of time employed • but as an
instance of a looseness of statement much to he re-
gretted in official documents.
Page 88.
This Note furnishes a remarkable instance of a
practical fallacy which pervades these Notes. These
so-called “ rules” and “ decisions” were in fact
merely plans of proceeding or schemes of policy.
They might be very beneficial, if they could be car-


ried out, but they had no binding- effect or authority
whatever. To induce the Natives to yield up tracts
of land and accept compensation for them, was in
many cases very proper ; and Mr. Clarke and the
officers of his department often had influence enough
with the Natives to obtain their assent. But no one
was bound by those transactions, (except the persons
who were actually parties to them.
Wh at is here called Governor Grey’s decision was
no decision at all in any proper sense. Governor
Grey found himself in the midst of those difficulties
which followed upon that act of Governor Fitzroy,
which has been expressly admitted by the present
Governor to have been both just and politic. {Pari,
Pap. July, 1800, p. 177.)
Governor Grey did not directly irnpug-n the pro-
ceeding- of his predecessor, but he felt the practical
inconveniences which followed upon it. To escape
them, he attempted an intermediate and singular
policy. The titles of the returned owners were not
to be acknowledged in words by the Government,
but their claims were to be boug-ht, if they were dis-
posed to sell, at a rate not exceeding Is an acre.
It is idle to quote this policy of Governor Grey as
an authority or precedent for the present proceed-
ings. That policy has been entirely abandoned by
the present Governor. The titles of the individual
cultivators, which Governor Grey would not directly
acknowledge, have been in this very transaction
(not to go further back) fully acknowledged by the
present Government. Teira and his companions


have been recognized as u rightful owners/’ as “ un-
disputed owners.” (E. No. 3, p. 22.) And as to
the price, have the present sellers received no more
than Is 6d an acre?
Page 90.
This Note opens a subject of the utmost import-
ance, and one which needs a fuller discussion. It
is most true that feuds productive of many crimes
raged among- tllie tribes in the neighbourhood of
New Plymouth,, for five years, from August, 1854,
till July, 1859, ipeace being finally made in Septem-
ber, 1869.
Here, and elsewhere in these Notes, it seems to
be taken as a consequence of that state of things,
that the proceedings of the Government at the Wai-
tara were justified. It is implied that there was
something in those proceedings tending to put an
end to that state of things : or else, that with a
people capable of such crimes, all legal and rational
modes of dealing were out of the question. There-
fore I do not content myself with saying- (what
indeed would be a sufficient answer to this Note)
namely, that these feuds and crimes and our inabi-
lity to prevent or punish them, furnish no reason
why a full and proper inquiry should not have been
made into Teira’s title to sell; such an inquiry being
demanded at once by justice to the Natives, and by
due regard to the interests of our own people in the
Colony and in England.
These feuds commenced when Rawiri Waiaua,


encouraged In’ the local Land Purchase Commis-
sioner, attempted to sell a piece of land in violation,
as it appears, of the tribal right. (T. Q. p. 189.)
The result of this was the crime described in page
115. The Government did not interfere to punish
that crime, or to suppress, by military force, the
atrocities which followed it. It was apprehended
that interference on our part would lead to a war of
which the limits, the cost, and the effects, could not
be estimated. It w r as seen also that it would he ex-
tremely difficult to prevent our motives from being
misunderstood. Many feuds and private wars in diffe-
rent parts of the country had passed without notice.
If we interfered in this case, it was likely to be
thought that we did so, not so much on account of
the crime which Katatore had committed as on ac-
count of the land which Rawiri desired to sell. So
the Government confined itself to protecting- the
settlers, and endeavouring by such means as were
practicable to check or mitigate those feuds.
The difficulty of the case became still greater
when Katatore was murdered. That crime was
committed on the Queen’s land, on a public road
within the settlement. It was a murder of revenge,
not directly connected with any piece of land. Still
the Government refrained from interfering, beyond
issuing a Proclamation in the following- month,
February, 1868. That Proclamation was not in
such general terms as stated in this Note, that is to
say, “warning all the Natives that this anarchy
would no longer be tolerated.” It only warned


them against assembling- with arms within the boun-
daries of a certain district. The Proclamation was
accompanied by an official comment in the Maori
Messenger , which, after explaining- the reasons of our
non-interference, proceeded thus :
“ While indulging- this hope, we are startled by
u the news of another and more frightful murder
“ Blood is spilt on land which the Queen
e< has granted. This cannot be allowed to pass in
“ silence. The Governor has therefore spoken his
“ word. He still says, c I shall not interfere. Both
u parties are doing wrong, but it is not my present
u intention to employ force against either while they
“ keep outside the limits of the English settlement,
“ but I will allow neither to come armed within
“ these limits, I will not permit fighting in my pre-
“ sence.’ ” I do not know whether this limited
proclamation has been, as is alleged in the Note,
‘ openty violated.’
The effect of this state of things on the Natives
may be gathered from the following letter :
March. 4, 1858, Waitara.*
To Eiwai, Xiripata, Wiremu Tamihana, Apa, Ture, Wiri,
Tei, and Hohepa, to you all, Greeting to you. My friends, my
fathers, listen. Here we are involved in warfare, that is to say,
in grievous, murderous, cannibal, bloodthirsty calamity—in this
very grievous calamity. Listen. Ton are probably imagining
that we are going blindly to work. It is not so, but we are
proceeding on a clear course. "What makes it clear is this,
that as far as regards the reference to the Governor, that has
* Tor this translation I am indebted to the same gentlemen
as before.


been clone. As for murder, we have no intemtion of murdering.
We leave murder to Ihaia and Nikorima;. Our Chiefs will
act in broad daylight, and indeed they are accting now in broad
daylight. As regards the reference to the (Q-overnor, that has
been made by the Chiefs. You have alreadly heard that Wai-
tere (Katatore) was lulled on the ninth day of the month of
January. We had to wait till February for the G-overnor’s
answer. The answer came, that the Governor could take no
steps in the matter, but let there be another murder, then the
Governor would consent. Hence our Chiefs concluded that
the course taken by the Governor was wrong, because, this is
Ihaia’s second murder. The words of the former Governor are
not attended to now, for steps were taken in the case of the
quarrel with Eangihaeata at the Hutt—on that occasion,
promptly. In the case of this murder no steps are taken. As
he was killed in the midst of the settlers, so now should any
man belonging to Ihaia be found in the house of a settler in
the town he will be killed there, because this is not as it should
be. And now all the pas are surrounded, Te Karaka, Pukerito,
and Otehetehe. The pa which we attacked was Pukerito, we
got close under the outworks. Those of our party who were
killed in the attack on the pa, were Hehe Nga nohoanga, Ta-
mati Tuainane, and Te One. These were from Waitara. Ta-
mati Takua from Wai***, Maihi from Tapuirau, Heta from te
Kawau. These were killed. Of the people of the place Eruini
Mangania, Hakaraia Repo, Te Kawhaki Haenga were wounded.
Wi Te One mihi was killed in the light at Te Ika moana. He
was shot by Te Kepa Hanawerangia.
I cannot tell all. Enough.
Erom Eitatoka Te Iwa.
It seems that the letter from the Governor, re-
ferred to above, has not jet been printed.
Now what view of the Queen’s Sovereignty could
the Natives acquire under these circumstances? I
do not censure the Government, but I ask for a fair
consideration of the facts. Instead of throwing the


whole blame upon the Natives, let us rather look
upon that state of things as the common calamity
of both races. Let us not keep back the fact that
in the origin of these evils we also had a share, and
that they were aggravated by injudicious acts and
by violent language on the part of some of our own
people. No greater misfortune could have befallen
the Natives than to see that the Government was
powerless, and so to be driven back into their old
barbarism. It would have been the greatest bless-
ing for both races, if it had been possible from the
beginning to follow up and punish every act of
bloodshed. The manifest benefit, flowing from the
action of the Queen’s Sovereignty, would have re-
conciled the Natives to the action of that Sovereignty
in other ways. But every consideration which had
made it unwise and inexpedient to interfere against
crime, made it still more unwise and inexpedient to
interfere in a question of land.
The feuds at last wore themselves out and peace
was made. A few months after that, the Colonial
Government employed military force at the Waitara.
The power which had not protected life or property,
came forward to take possession of land. What I
assert is, that no course could have been more un
fortunate than this, no course less likety to effect the
great object of establishing practically the Queen’s
Sovereignty throughout this island. We did not
interfere even when we should have been sure of a
strong body of allies; when the instinctive sense of
justice and retribution for crime would have been in


our favour, on the spot and throughout the island.
When the feuds and crimes had ceased, we began to
employ military force, and that in a case wholly un-
connected with crime. So we did all in our power
to confirm the evil notion, already widely spread
among the Natives, that we care for nothing hut to
get their land.
We often hear strong language used about what
is called a defiance of the Queen’s Sovereignty. It
were better for both races if we set ourselves dispas-
sionately to consider what we have done towards
commending that Sovereignty, towards showing the
value and benefit of it. In what lio-ht must the
O
case appear to them ? The Queen’s power has not
saved their lives or property, but it takes possession
of their land. It appears to them not as a protector
but as an invader; not as a stayer of bloodshed, but
as itself a shedder of blood. We have taken the
course which tends not to advance, but to hinder,
our great object. We have begun at the wrong
end.
I do not mean to say that the Queen’s Sovereignty
could be imposed wholly from without, even by a
Government regarded with confidence by the Native
population. We must act on tine principle, which
has been of late so often enunciated and so often for-
gotten, that the Natives are to be governed through
themselves; but we can only effemt our great object
by proceeding in the right order. We must invert
the whole course of our proceedings. We must be-
gin by suppressing bloodshed andl crime, and so ad-


vance in minor matters. The next Native Confer-
ence will furnish an opening- for our efforts towards
securing- that great end.
Our present mode of proceeding provokes resist-
ance. Let us proceed in the proper order, and we
shall find support in all parts of the country.
We boast of omr superiority, and especially of our
skill in government. Let us prove our skill, by
commending rather than discrediting’ the object we
have in view. The Natives have been repelled from
that to which thiey ought to have been attracted by
the strongest seinse of their own interest.
Many and wery intelligent men amongst them
are now drawn towards the King party most unwil-
lingly. They know and say, that the chiefs of that
party possess neither the knowledge nor the means
needed for elevating their race, and rescuing- them
from the evils of their present condition. Yet they
turn to them as a protection against a power, which
they fear and cannot trust.
When the present evils shall have ceased, and
confidence shall have been restored by a fair investi-
gation of their grievances, and by an earnest practical
effort to provide for them the institutions, and secure
the social benefits, they so greatly need and desire,
the combination which is now opposed to our au-
thority will disappear like a mist, and the Native
race will regard the Sovereignty of the Queen as a
boon and a privilege.
THE END.


REMARKS
MR. RICHMOND’S MEMORANDUM.
Paragraph 6.
In the four propositions here stated as conveying
the substance of my remarks, there are some inaccu-
racies. In th ejfirst, Mr. Richmond speaks of e< the
territory of the Ngati area in Taranaki,” and of the
rio-ht of “ the whole tribe I have intended all
along to speak of the community to which the Wai-
tara belongs, and of the communal right. In the
second, William King is described as “ principal
Chief of the Ngati ama ” I regard him, not as
chief of the whole tribe, but as chief of the Waitara.
In proposition four , it is given as my opinion that
the Governor was not justified in taking possession
“ without the Judgment of a Court of Law.” What
I maintain is, that the Governor was not justified
in taking possession without the decision of some
competent and independent tribunal.
Par. 9.
The assertions here made cannot be admitted.
The quarrel is in its origin an.d nature a land quar-
rel. To the Maories, it is nott even now a question
of Sovereignty in Mr. Richmcond’s sense. I believe


there are very few (if amy) amongst them, who think
it possible or desirablle to overthrow the Queen’s
Sovereignity and to establish one of their own. To
them it is an intensely practical matter. The people
of the Waitara resisted because they saw the sol-
diers take possession of the land. That which draws
others into the quarrel is the belief that if the
present proceeding- of the Government shall succeed,
the like will be attempted elsewhere, and they will
have no security for their lands or their lives. There
can be no clear understanding- of the present state
of affairs unless we distinguish between two thing’s
which are often confounded in official papers, the
British Government and the Colonial Government.
Even yet the great mass of the Native poimlatiorl
is disposed to trust to the justice of the British
Government, but I fear there are few who are dis-
posed to trust to the justice of the present Colonial
Government.
Pae. 21, 22, 28, 24.
It is here asserted that “ Mr. Spain’s Award
was a solemn judicial determination,” and also that
“Governor Fitzroy had no authority to reverse Mr.
Spain’s determination.”
Mr. Spam’s powers were such as he received
under his Commission from Her Majesty and under
the “ Land Claims Ordinances” of the Coloiy, It
is plain that the Commission by itself could not give
him power conclusively- to bind persons and lands j


the Legislature only could giwe such power. ' Now
the powers which the Legislature really did give,
were only such powers as weres requisite for a proper
investigation. The result of the inquiry was to be
reported to the Governor. Mr. Spain made no
such claim for himself as is now made for him. In
his Despatch to Governor Fitzroy, 12th June, 1844,
he says, “ I delivered my judgment in the presence
of a considerable number of Natives, as well as
Europeans; but wherein I have most carefully ex-
plained that the same is subject to confirmation hy
your Excellency, and cannot he carried into effect
without your approval.” (E. No. 2, p. 8.) Accord-
ingly Governor Fitzroy, acting 1 on the advice of the
officer who was then responsible for Native Affairs,
refused to confirm it.
Respecting Governor Fitzwoy’s disallowance of
Mr. Spain’s award, it may Ibe well to notice that
the present Governor has reccorded his opinion in
the clearest terms ( Desp . Now. 19, 1855):
a Mr, Commissioner Spain i was sent to enquire
into these claims, and with ccertain exceptions de-
clared in favour of the Newv Zealand Company’s
purchase. His decision was, 1 however, overruled by
Governor Fitzroy, who requuired all lands to be
returned to the Natives, exccept those in which it
could be proved that the whoole of the owners had
been, or were, willing to sell tlthem.
“ This just decision, whichh also proved to be a
very politic one, pi’evented thee New Zealand Com*


pany from fulfilling' its engagements with the Set-
tlers, and caused great dissatisfaction and in some
cases distress.” {Pari. Fap. July, 1800, p. 177.)
Mr. Richmond remarks that my citation in italics
(T. Q. p. 17) is not the whole of the sentence;
which is quite correct. But it is the whole of that
which concerns the people of the Waitara and the
present question. The only claimants with whom
Governor Fitzroy had to do, were the persons con-
cerned in the sale of 1840. The people of the
Waitara had nothing to do with that sale. (T. Q.
p. 19.)
It is also said that “ Governor Fitzroy never con-
templated and never admitted the assertion of the
tribal claim.” It is true that nothing is said here
about the tribal claim. The reason is, that the
question which Governor Fitzroy had to settle, was
not a question between individuals and the com-
munity, but between residents and absentees.
Pae. 24.
Of this so-called Address of Governor Fitzroy I
have spoken above (p. 10). The four passages here
thrown together, as if they were all parts of that
Address, are taken from three distinct documents :
the first and second from the Address j the third
from the Notice to the Absentees; the Jourth from
what I have called the Leading Article in the
Maori Gazette of 2nd Seeptember, 1844,
The drift of the thind passage is obscured by
Mr. Richmond’s departiure from the translation


(itself defective) put forth by tine Government in the
Appendix to the Memorandum), page 24. The
words “ men of Taranaki,” meaning the absentees,
have become u men at Taranaldi.”
Before leaving this subject off Governor Fitzroy’s
alleged plans and words, I will state again briefly
the fallacy which pervades Mr. Eichmond’s reason-
ing- on this subject.
Governor Fitzroy had before his mind two classes
of people : Ist, those who had been parties to the
sale to the New Zealand Company’s agent in 1840;
and 2ndly, those who had not been parties to that
sale. To this latter class belong the people of the
Waitara.
As to the former class, he insisted on certain
terms. Their act had led the Pakeha to form a
settlement. The Governor therefore was not con-
tent to abandon that settlement. The Pakeha must
retain all that really belonged to the sellers. The
absentees should do what they pleased, either keep
or sell.
As to the latter class, the Governor recognized
their claims in all their integrity. Mr. Bell has
told us (above p. 18) how the Natives understood
that.
The fallacy of Mr. Richmond's argument is this,
that he treats the terras insisteed on in reference to
the first class, as being the meiasure and limit of the
rights recognized as belonging; - to the second class.


Pah. 32.
What is called by Mr. Richmond the first Coun-
ter-proposition, and which is here taken to have been
established, runs counter, not to what I have really
maintained, but to what I am assumed to have
maintained. My proposition as to the rule of Native
Tenure is, that the individual holder is a member of
a Community, and that the consent of the Com-
munity is necessary to the alienation of the land ;
and that in every purchase it is one of the mat-
ters of fact to be ascertained, what the Com-
munity is in that particular case. This proposition,
so far from being- disproved, is in fact admitted in
express terms in Mr. Richmond’s last parag-raph;
where Mr. McLean is cited as saying-, “ The whole
of the purchases previously made at Taranaki had
been effected on the same principle as the present
one from Te Teira, namely, that of acquiring- the
land from the different clans and suh-divisions of
clans which came in from time to time to offer it.”
Mr. McLean admits the rule; but there is nothing-
to shew' that in this particular case that rule wms
carried out. There is nothing- to shew' that the
rig-ht of the Community was ever investigated at
all. Nor is there any w'ay of reconciling- the rule
so admitted by Mr. McLean with the direct and
express denial, on the part of the Government, of
everything- but the individual right, throug-hout the
proceedings at the Waitaira.


Here I leave the question o)f the exception alleged
to exist at Taranaki, and tine novel assertions that
have been made on the subject since the proceedings
at the Waitura. Those assertions have been directly
denied by a number of members of the Ngati nwa.
In reference to Mr. McLean’s statements before
the House of Representatives (Q. 58, 69) they say,
“ We, of this Ngati ana , now hear for the first time
of those modes of proceeding u we have never
heard of this custom all these years. We now hear
of it for the first time in this answer.” ( New Zealand
Spectator , Jan. 2, 1861.) See above, p. 7.
I now notice the stages by which men have
advanced to the new theory.
In 1853, Mr. Charles Brown, one of the oldest
settlers in the Province of Taranaki, was elected
Superintendent, the first umder the Constitution
Act. Whilst a candidate for- the office, he put for-
ward his views on the Land question in the following-
words ; — u I look forward wiith hope that the time
is not far distant when the Government will buy no
land and have none to sell, and that its office will
then he confined to extinguishing the collective titles
of tribes , and giving individual titles , available for
sale” ( Taranaki Herald , 18 May, 1863.)
In accordance with this view, Mr. Superintendent
Brown addressed to the Colomial Secretary the fol-
lowing letter, dated 6th Marclh, 1854:
“ Sib, — A recent purchase having,'been effected by Mr. Com-
missioner McLean of a tract of landd in this Province, I beg to
draw the attention of his Excclleucyy the Officer administering


the Government, to the peculiar features of this purchase, as
bearing in the most important manner on the relations of the
two races.
“ Mr. McLean did me the honour to request my opinion on
the offer of the land in question, at what he considered a high
price, and in which it was proposed to exclude all but a few
pah reserves, securing to the Natives the pre-emptive right of
purchase of 2000 acres at 10s per acre, each Native to purchase
separately and possess a separate Crown Title for his property.
“As an opportunity of introducing a principle so beneficial
to the Native race, breaking up the common rights which cripple
their individual energies, and giving them separate rights xviih
Crown Titles, might not occur for a long time, I expressed the
opinion, which I hope will meet with the approval of his Excel-
lency, that the introduction of such a principle was 'worth attain-
ing at any cost , whether as regarded the Province individually,
or its benefit as an illustration to the whole Native race. I have
no hesitation in anticipating that the adoption of the principle
by any Native tribe, will convert the members of it into settlers
and citizens fully as valuable as the European population,”
{Southern Gross, Nov. 2, 1860.)
In another letter to the Colonial Secretary, dated
26th September, 1860, Mr. Brown stated that the
plan proposed in 1854 had been carried out, and
that “the owners of these individual holdings are
the most loyal, peaceable, and industrious Natives
in the Province, as well as the best neighbours the
settlers in the district could wish for.” It will be
seen that Mr. Brown had no notion of any difference,
as to the communal right, between Taranaki and
other parts of the island.
Thus Mr. Brown sought to effect a good object
by fair and reasonable mieans. This was the first
stage.


The second stage was when the Provincial Council
at Taranaki presented theiir Memorial to both
Houses of Assembly in 18558, urging “that the
Government should compel am equitable division of
such common land among thee respective claimants,
on the petition of a certain proportion of them.”
The third stage was when thee Government, instead
of seeking to remove by propoer means the difficulty
presented by the communal ri-ight, assumed it to have
been removed, and denied or i ignored every right ex-
cept that of the individual hoblder.
Pah. 388.
As to the assertions in thhe former part of this
Paragraph, I leave them to I be judged of according
to the evidence. As to the last assertion, the ex-
planation is given in the text.t, p. 4, Par. 4.
Par. 40 to o 67.
11l conformity with the ] principles stated in the
outset, I refrain from enteriiing minutely into these
paragraphs relating to the ““ points in dispute ” be-
tween the Government andd the Native claimants.
They contain many stateraennts which I believe to be
incorrect, to be supported b'yy very infirm evidence,
and to be capable of being iimpugned by better evi-
dence, but I avoid raising ' minor and immaterial
issues which, after all, we are not in a position to
decide. Our complaint andl grievance is this; that
these points cannot be ascertained until the Govern-
ment shall do in the end, wlhat it ought to have done


in the beginning, that is to say, institute a proper
inquiry into the foots of the case.
Pae. 70, 71.
Every one knows with how much caution it is
necessary to regard statements made after the foct
by persons concerned in justifying what has been
done. The statements here cited from Mr. McLean
are no exception to the general rule. Ido not wish
to examine them narrowly. I only ask that the
strong assertions here maide be compared with the
evidence set forth in my teext. Beyond this I con-
fine myself to three particiular points : Ist, Mr. Mc-
Lean here justifies the proceedings of Mr. Parris in
the most unqualified language, in the face of the
foct that Mr. Parris had not obeyed the express in-
structions of Mr. McLean himself, which required
him to visit the absentee claimants personally : 2nd,
the numerous and frivolous claims made by persons
who seek to share in the purchase money—which
claims are themselves the produce and effect of the
secret system of land purchasing—are urged as
reasons against the employment of that open and
legitimate mode of inquiry, which would prevent or
destroy them : 3rd, the grave doubts affecting the
transaction at Queen Charlotte’s Sound are passed
over without notice.
Pae. 73 to 83.
Here, on the subject of the “ Investigation,” the
same course is taken by Mr. Richmond as before,


with reference to the “ Points sin dispute.” Scraps
and fragments of doubtful assertions and unsifted
evidence are produced by MVTr. Richmond, and we
are asked to accept them as -> a substitute for that
proper inquiry which was denmanded by every con-
sideration of justice and exppedienc}'. Unproved
allegations and uncertain inferences cannot be al-
lowed to take its place. The 3 defect of inquiry can
only be supplied by a proper inquiry hereafter. The
web, which Mr. Richmond bias woven, is too weak
to bear the weight of a civil war.
One passage only 1 think it necessary to notice:
It is as follows (Par. 82); a Where unrepresented
claimants are known, or believed, to exist, the
Government makes inquiry on the spot; as was done
in the present case at Queen Charlotte’s Sound, and
at Wellington. But where (as in the case of the
Waikanae Natives) there is no reason to believe in
the existence of valid claimss, no local investigation
is instituted. The Waikanate claimants (for whom
the Rev. Riwai te Aim acts as Secretary) ought to
have come forward. They admit that they were
aware of the negotiation at the time when the first
instalment was paid in Noveember, 1859.”
On the contrary, there wras very good reason to
believe in the existence of vaUid claims at Waikanae.
It was notorious that people 3 closely connected with
the Waitara were still at W aikanae. At a distance
of 200 miles, they received mo notice at all from the


Commissioner of his proceeding's. They hear of
them for the first time, when the inquiry was con-
cluded and the first instalment paid. This mode of
dealing' with absent owners is now justified ; a Na-
tive Minister regards it as sufficient. If this be
sufficient, what can be insufficient ? Do we shew
our superiority and our civilization by this con-
temptuous disregard of common justice ?
Pab. 98.
Here is the main proposition on which Mr. Rich-
mond relies ; “ Inlaw, as well as in fact, their terri-
torial rights and obligations are not subject to the
interpretation of our Courts. These rights stand
upon Treaty, of which the Crown itself is, rightfully,
the sole interpreter.” The practical consequence is
drawn in Par. 121: “If the Governor had jurisdic-
tion, he was justified in asserting it in the only
practicable mode, viz., by force; in other words the
Governor being of right, sole judge of questions re-
specting Native Territorial rights, was justified in
enforcing his jurisdiction in the only practicable
mode, viz., by military occupation
I have argued that the people of the Waitara,
being subjects of the Crown, have not been dealt
with as subjects of the Crown. Mr. Richmond an-
swers by saying, they are not subjects of the Crown :
they have had all they are entitled to.
The fallacy of Mr. Richmond’s argument is ob-
vious. A Treaty in the ordinary sense is a com-


pact between two independent rotations, independent
before the Treaty was made, amid independent after
it was made. Such a Treaty is i not within the juris-
diction of the Courts of either nnation. For an in-
dependent nation cannot be bouund by the decision
of the Courts of another nation. . Disputes therefore
between independent nations, respecting 1 the mean-
ingl of a Treaty, must be decbided by force or by
arbitration. Of late even Sovereign powers have
inclined to the latter mode. But the Treaty of
Waitang-i is of a different kind. The parties thereto
were independent before, but mot after. It is an
express article of the Treaty tthat one party shall
thereby become subject to tlhe other j that the
Maories shall become subject to the Queen, and
shall receive the protection due to subjects. “ Her
Majesty the Queen of England extends to the
Natives of New Zealand Her Itoyal protection,
and imparts to them all the rights and privileges of
British Subjects.”
It may not be easy to find an exact counterpart
to the Treaty of Waitang-i: but there is a consi-
derable analogy between it and the Charters and
other instruments, by which Princes at various
times have granted rights and franchises to their
people. Whether the rights of the subject have
been, as in Europe for the most part, doled out by
Charters wrung from unwilling hands, or given
freely and at once, as in this cease, makes no differ-
ence as to the nature and effeett of the compact; the


only difference is one of degree, and not of kind.
Now in such cases it has not been left to the Prince
to put his own construction upon the Charter; but
the franchises of the people have been expounded
and maintained by tribunals independent of the
Prince.
It is not meant, that the whole complex body of
English Law was at once to be applied to the Na-
tives ; but it is meant, that the plain and funda-
mental principles of English Law became applicable
at once; that the Natives became at once entitled
to the essential rights of British subjects. Amongst
those rights surely are the following:—that life
shall not be taken without a fair trial; that land
shall not be taken without a fair trial. “ The rio-hts
O
and privileges of British subjects ” must mean at
any rate the opposite to despotism. The proceed-
ings of the Government at the Waitara were pure
despotism.
Mr. Eichmond has entirely overlooked the conse-
quences of his theory ; namely, that if the Treaty
of Waitangi be (as his argument assumes it to be) a
Treaty in the ordinary sense, then the right of in-
terpreting and enforcing the Treaty must belong
not to one party, but to both equally; that the Na-
tives are at liberty to resort to force in support of
their view, as much as the Governor in support of
his; and that they cannot be charged with rebel-
lion, if they do so.
However little the theoretical value of Mr. Eich-


raond’s doctrine may be, it is; a significant and re-
markable fact that such a docttrine is put forth. It is
remarkable as bearing on the position, which I have
maintained, that the Natives rat the Waitara, being
British subjects, hate not boeen treated as British
subjects. Had it been possiiible to shew that they
have been treated as British saubjects, Mr. Richmond
would hardly have had recourrse to a doctrine which
denies them to be British ; subjects at all, which
repudiates the assurances giveen by word and deed
in a vast variety of ways durfing twenty years, and
which puts the Natives in the i same position in which
they would have stood, had (the Treat} r never been
made. It should be noticed a;ilso, what that is which
is now clothed with the namee and dignity of “ the
Crown.” “The Crown itselff (says Mr. Richmond)
is the sole interpreter of thhe Treaty.” {Par. 98.)
It might be inferred then too be the duty of the
Governor to provide for the; Crown the means of
interpreting, to ascertain allll the facts, to submit
them to the Home Governmaent, and to act upon
their decision. But Mr. Riclmmond requires nothing
of the kind. In Par. 121 hhe applies the general
principle to the particular casse of the Waitara, and
attempts thereby to justify tthe proceedings of the
Government in this particular (question. This enables
us to understand what Mr. Rlichmond means, when
he says that the Crown is thee sole interpreter of the
Treaty. The Crown then, in Mr. Richmond’s sense,
does not mean the Queen cor the Government of


England. They had never authorized, they did not
understand, they had no means of understanding,
what the Colonial Government was doino- at the
Waitara. That which Mr. Richmond calls by the
name of “ the Crown ” is in fact the Governor of the
Colony, acting in a manner vitally concerning the
interests of the Natives and the honour of the Crown,
without any special authority or instruction from the
Crown, with the concurrence and on the advice of
persons who represent neither the Natives nor the
Crown. Let us reduce the general proposition a
little further. The Governor judging in this par-
ticular case is simply and in fact Mr. Parris. The
largeness of the general proposition narrows itself
down practically to these dimensions. The majesty
of the Royal word and the largeness of the national
undertaking issue in the decision of an Assistant
Land Purchase Commissioner.
In May, 1857, the present Ministers recorded
their opinion on the policy to be pursued in Native
matters : they said, u As to the ultimate end to which
the British Government in these Islands is bound
to shape its Native policy, there can be no difference
of opinion. Successive Governors have promised,
in the name of the British Crown, that the Colonists
and the Maories should form but one people, under
one equal law : and no effort must be spared to re-
deem this pledge.” (T. Q.jj- 108.) In December,
1860, a theory is boldly put forward by one of those
Ministers which, if England were capable of adopt-


ing- it, would render the fulfillment of those promises
absolutely and for ever imposssible : a theory accord-
ing- to which the Native popmlation must submit to
be aliens on their own soil j tto bear the pressure of
our dominion, but not to recceive the protection of
the Law or the privileges of TEnglish subjects. Thus,
whilst professing- to aim at rraising- and preserving
thi§ race, and bring-ing- them into a peaceful union
with ourselves, we uphold andl prescribe a course of
action which must provoke thaem to the most deter-
mined resistance to our authority, and can only end
in the failure of our undertaking, in discredit to our-
selves, and in ruin to them.
Pae. 100..
I ag-ree with Mr. Richmond! that “ at the present
moment the desideratum is to hiring the Maories with-
in the pale of the law.” My complaint is, that the
Colonial Government have so pproceeded as to render
the object more difficult of attainment than it was
before. (See above, pp. 29-3(0.)
Pae. 103.
The Land Claims Courts were not cited by me
u as instances of the satisfactory working- of a juris-
diction over Native Territorial Mights.” They have
no such jurisdiction. They were referred to as
shewing that the Colonial Legislature had again
and again created Courts of Inquiry possessing
powers and means for ascertaining facts, which Mr.
Parris did not possess.


Par. 107 to 110.
In these paragraphs Mr. Richmond dwells on the
difficulty of bringing’ dishonest or contumacious
debtors of the Native race within the reach of our
Civil Courts. The existence of such a class of
persons furnishes no evidence against the disposition
of the large majority to obey law. Few nations
would be content to "have defendants in actions
of debt set up as their (c representative men.”
Amongst the Maories, as elsewhere, the general
character of the people may be more fairl} r esti-
mated from the large majority who fulfil their con-
tract without legal compulsion than from the mi-
nority, against whom the process of the Courts is
resorted to.
Par. 138.
I have asserted that the persons invited to the
Kohimarama Conference were, with few exceptions,
such as were known to be friendly to the Govern-
ment. When Mr. Dillon Bell urged in the House
of Representatives (August 17, 1860), the necessity
of carefully considering the nature and constitution
of the Conference proposed for 1861, he said that
the Conference just held could not be regarded as
of a representative character, for only those chiefs
had been invited who were known to be friendly.
No member questioned that statement. Mr. Rich-
mond said it would be the object of the Government


to give to the next Conference as much of a repre-
sentative character as possiblle.
Though I cite Mr. Bell tas asserting’ the same
O cj
thing-, my knowledge of thee fact is derived from
independent sources.
Pab. 1411,
The purpose of the last 50 1 pages of the pamphlet
was not solely, as Mr. Ricchmond suggests, “to
enforce the necessity of a juist and honest policy.”
The chief purpose was to sheow, what have been the
fruits of the existing mode of managing Native
Affairs. Nominally, Native Affairs are committed
to a Governor responsible tco the Crown. But, in
fact, the Governor possesses no substantial power,
and cannot obtain such power, except upon such
terms as may be imposed by persons who represent
neither the Crown nor the Matives. Pie may pro-
pose plans, but he can do littlle beyond that. There
is, under existing circumstancces, no security for the
establishment of any complete and consistent plan
for solving the Native difficulty, much less for
steadily carrying out such a i plan for a reasonable
length of time. *
The last Session has shewn us, that there are
among the Colonists men cappable of taking a just
and comprehensive view of tlhe relations of the two
races. But thought and laboour were stimulated bv
the war. The same amount oof interest and exertion
cannot be expected under ordiinary circumstances.


purpose was to shew that the existing' system
of management has issued in alternate fits of neglect
and of intimidation, of non-government and of mis-
governrnent; and thereby to suggest that the same
mode of management, if continued, will only lead to
a recurrence of the same deplorable results.
THE END.
