

REMARKS
ON THE
PROVINCIAL SYNOD
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
His Powers and Work
BY
TWO OF ITS MEMBERS.
REPRINTED FROM THE “AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN.”
JUNE, 1879.
Sgtmeg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1879.




No. I.
In the address which the late Bishop of Newcastle delivered
to the Synod of that Diocese in the year 1876 he thus speaks :
J have already mentioned that it was intended to hold a session
of our Provincial Synod this year, but that idea has been now
abandoned. I received a letter on Monday, April 24, from the
Bishop of Sydney, announcing that the Provincial Synod would
not meet this year. This postponement of the Provincial Synod
is, I consider, very wise and judicious, because the Provincial
Synod, which met only last year, appointed a committee con-
sisting of Bishops and Representatives, in which the Bishop of
Sydney and myself represented the House of Bishops, and Canon
Selwyn and the Rev. W. S. Wilson were the Representatives on
behalf of our own Diocese ; and the members of this committee
have been taking great pains to prepare three very important
measures to be laid before each Diocesan Synod first, and then
with their approval to be made subjects of joint reference to the
next Provincial Synod.
The drawing up of the first and most important of these three
measures —“ The Draft Bill for the Incorporation of the Church
of England ,” to be laid before Parliament—was committed to
Canon Selwyn, and I must say, not to praise him, but for the
credit of our Diocese, that the work committed to bim has been
executed with great care and great ability ; while the drawing
up of the second measure (an Ordinance to be passed, as we hope,
by the next Provincial Synod, after full deliberation), is an Ordi-
nance regulating the election and powers of Churchwardens, to
supersede the old Church Temporalities’ Act, and was committed
to the Rev. H. A. Palmer ; and the drawing up of the third
measure—an Ordinance to provide a Tribunal for all the Dioceses
in New South Wales—was committed to the Rev. Canon Hulton
King.
The first and second of these measures, and now also the third,
as approved by the committee appointed by the late Provincial
Synod, have been printed, and will be laid before you, and I


THE PROVINCIAL SYNOD.
The following Remarks appeared originally in the Australian
Churchman and they are now reprinted and circulated amongst the
members of the Church in the hope that they may throw some light upon
questions of great importance to the well being of the Church.
Although the Provincial Synod has been in existence for nine years, it
cannot be said that its position or work is yet satisfactorily settled: and
the writer is glad therefore to have the opportunity of calling attention to
the well weighed conclusions of the late Bishop of Newcastle, which will be
found in the following pages.




think it a very great advantage that we shall have two sessions
of Synod f6r their consideration, namely, our present session and
our session next year. And it is very desirable that we should
give these measures as much consideration as our time will admit
this session—leaving them to be finally approved and proposed
for reference by us in as perfect a form as possible at our next
session, after a year’s interval.
I must not detain you long on the subject of these measures,
the two most important will be brought before you, and be passed
through the ordeal of committee this session, and I will only
allude briefly to two points in the first measure, and to one point
in the second measure, and then say a few words as to the spirit
in which we should try to pass them.
Ist. In a previous Synod Address in 1873, I said, on the subject
of having power to alter our constitutions. (Report p. 15).
“ With respect to the revision of our Church Constitution, or
what we, in this Diocese, would much prefer, the obtaining from
the Parliament once for all the power to alter our constitutions
by our own action in our Provincial Synod, without requiring the
sanction of Parliament for every separate alteration, I said in my
address last year (in 1872). ‘ This power has been granted by
the English Government to the Irish Church. It can, therefore,
with such a precedent to guide them, scarcely be refused to us
by the Legislature of this Colony ; and whatever difference of
opinion may exist in the Synods of the various Dioceses respect-
ing the immediate revision of our Church Temporalities Act, or
an early revision of our Constitutions, surely every Synod will
agree that it is most desirable to obtain from the Legislature this
power as soon as possible.’ ”
At the beginning of the last clause of the Draft Act of Incor-
poration to be laid before you, this power of altering our own
Constitutions is asked for in these words : “ The Constitutions of
the said Church, as recorded in the Supreme Court, shall not be
altered, except by Ordinance of the Provincial Synod ; ” imply-
ing, therefore, that the Constitutions may be altered by such a
course ; and it is well that you should also have your attention
drawn to the following words in the same clause (6) —“ And no
alteration whatever of the 27th Constitution shall be made, ex-
cept so far as may be necessary to enable the said Synod to make
the liturgy and formularies applicable to the colony of New South
Wales.” Observe these words ; they are, in my opinion, ultra-
conservative ; but I am quite willing to agree to them, knowing
how very timid—how very frightened—many members of our
Church are with regard to any—the slightest possible alteration
of our Liturgy. Before any alteration can be made in any one
Constitution, the proposed alteration must come before every
Diocesan Synod—must there be so far approved as to be made a


subject of joint reference to the Provincial Synod, where it must
be fully discussed in the House of Representatives and in the
House of Bishops, and. then be passed—if it be passed—by their
united sanction. This necessary course might be considered suffi-
ciently conservative against undue alteration in anything ; but
by the 27th constitution, “ No rule, ordinance, or determination
of any Diocesan or Provincial Synod shall make any alterations
in the articles, liturgy, or formularies of the Church, except in
conformity with any alteration which may be made therein by
any competent authority of the Church of England in the United
Kingdom.” Here we bind ourselves not to alter a single word
in any prayer which has not been previously altered by due au-
thority in England ; but there are a few long prayers which are
usually called State prayers—as the prayer for the Governor, and
for Parliament, which have never been sanctioned by the Church
in England in the form we use them, and respecting which no
alteration is ever likely to be made, or can possibly be made by
the Church in England ; and on this point alone we ask for per-
mission that the Provincial Synod may alter these two or three
prayers, and change their present words and form, if it be con-
sidered desirable, into another form, as into suffrages in the
Litany.
I trust you will, therefore, all understand the strong conserva-
tive power which will still attach to our Constitutions, and es-
pecially to the 27th Constitution, if Parliament is willing to pass
the Draft Bill of Incorporation into an Act.
One word with regard to the second measure—the Ordinance
proposed to be passed in our Provincial Synod “ to determine the
election of Churchwardens, and to regulate their powers.”
In our last Provincial Synod, in August, 1875, the House of
Bishops sent down the following message to the House of Rep-
resentatives :
“ The House of Bishops are of opinion that, taking Mr. Gordon’s
trust deed as a basis for an Ordinance, it might, with some amend-
ments and additions, provide for all those matters connected with
a Church which are provided for in the Church Act, i.e. in the old
Church Temporalities Act, 8, Will. 4, No. 5.
“ A Tribunal Ordinance also, applicable to all the Dioceses of
New South Wales, might be prepared ; and this with some further
provisions in respect to parsonages and glebes, would include all
the subjects contained in the Church Act.
“ If these suggestions meet with the approval of the House of
Representatives, the House of Bishops propose that a Committee
formed of Representatives of the different Dioceses should be
appointed to meet the Bishops, and confer on these subjects.”


The House of Representatives approved of these suggestions ;
and a Committee of the Provincial Synod was formed, consisting
of the Bishop of Sydney and myself, as representatives of the
House of Bishops, with sundry Clergymen and laymen to represent
the House of Representatives; and from this Committee have
proceeded the three measures which I have mentioned, two of
which are printed, and will be laid before you, namely—(l.) The
Draft Bill of Incorporation ; and (2.) The ordinance to regulate
the election and powers of Churchwardens. I have made already
some remarks as to the strong conservative tendency of the first
of these measures, and will add a very few words respecting the
second.
Many of you may remember that Mr. Gordon’s trust deed, the
schedule of which is the basis of this second measure, i.e. the
election and power of Churchwardens—was very strongly op-
posed by a large body of the Clergy in the Sydney Diocesan Synod,
the defect of Mr. Gordon’s schedule being in their opinion this—
that too little power or consideration was given to the licensed
Clergyman of the parish, and too much to the Churchwardens.
The Bishop of Sydney and myself very carefully went through
this second measure, as drawn up by the Rev. H. A. Palmer,
before it was laid before the appointed committee of the Pro-
vincial Synod, and we both felt that in the proposed ordinance
too much consideration and authority was given to the Clergyman
of the parish and too little to the Churchwardens. We therefore
proposed in the Provincial Synod committee, several little amend-
ments which were accepted and passed, and which in my opinion,
have made the proposed ordinance now to be laid before you,
much more perfect than it was at first.
Let me now turn to the second and last point connected with
these three measures, namely,—the spirit in which we should
endeavour to deal with them.
I do not like to allude to past differences in the action of our
separate Dioceses unless a valuable lesson can be drawn from
them —unless we ourselves may be thus influenced to follow a
wise precedent, which, to our great credit, we then set.
In our Synod Report for 1869, p. 13, are these remarks :
“ A General Conference of the Dioceses of Sydney, Newcastle,
and Goulburn, was convened in April, 1866.”
“ To this General Conference the Representatives of the Sydney
Diocese came with their own Diocesan Constitutions, which they
had pledged themselves not to alter, and not to allow others to
alter, and which did not contain a single clause respecting a Pro-
vincial Synod.
“ The Representatives of our Diocese of Newcastle went to
this General Conference, carrying with them a draft constitution,
which was almost word for word the same as the approved Synod


Bill of 1860, and, therefore, containing all the clauses of that
Synod Bill respecting a Provincial Synod, and this constitution
was named by us “ Draft Constitution,” to show that every clause,
and every word of it might be discussed and altered.
“ The Synod of the Diocese of Groulburn had followed the
example of the Sydney Synod in drawing up Constitutions for
their own Diocese alone, without any clauses on the subject of a
Provincial Synod, and the Representatives of that Diocese came
to the General Conference, pledged, like the Representatives of
the Sydney Diocese, to allow of no alteration, in their Diocesan
Constitution.”
“ I remind you of these differences in the proceedings of the
three Dioceses of Sydney, Newcastle, and Goulburn in the year
1866, to influence you to pursue the same wise, generous course
in dealing with the three measures now to be discussed, and re-
ferred to the next Provincial Synod, as you dealt with the Con-
stitutions prepared by you to be brought before the General Con-
ference in 1866. It will not be necessary or desirable for us to
pass these measures, however much we may approve of them,
but to propose them in the proper form of draft measures as a
Draft Bill and Draft Ordinances to be subjects of reference to
the next Provincial Synod—giving our Representatives full power
to agree to any amendments which may be proposed in Provin-
cial Synod, with the hope that the Synods of the other Dioceses
will now act in the same spirit.
No. 11.
In continuation of the subject of the Provincial Synod and its
work at its forthcoming session, I now invite the attention of the
members of the Church to the position which we at present
occupy ; I mean the position in which we are placed in consequence
of the Statute 8 William IV. No. 5 being still in full force, while at
the same time we have obtained from Parliament our Church
Property Act, with its 31 Constitutions attached. It will, of
course, be known to all that it is by virtue of these Constitutions
that we have now been for some years past meeting in our Pro-
vincial and Diocesan Synods : but while in our various Diocesan
Synods a considerable amount of very useful work has been done,
it is evident that our Provincial Synod has hitherto been barren
of all practical results. It has met three times in nine years, and
can shew nothing that it has done for the Church. If this state
of things is to continue, it would be certainly better that it should
be abolished once for all, and not continue to cause a waste of
time and energy which could be better employed. But it cannot
be abolished. These Constitutions under which it exists are
unalterable ; at least by the Church; and however unworkable


they may be, we have induced the Legislature to bind them upon
us, even to their least provision. It should also be noted that in
certain cases where at first sight it would appear that power to
act is given by them, such power is expressly taken away as to
dealing with all those matters which are provided for under the
Act 8 William IV. No. 5.
Until, therefore, that Act is repealed, the Church cannot be said
to be at liberty to regulate its own affairs, even under the Con-
stitutions. Thus in two distinct ways the Church finds itself
hampered—lt cannot in any direction go beyond the Consti-
tutions, nor alter them, if found unworkable ; and it cannot fully
do what the Constitutions, taken alone, would allow it to do,
because of the existence of a Statute, against which the Consti-
tutions are powerless.
Is it unreasonable, therefore, that many Churchmen should have
come to the opinion, first that the Church by its duly constituted
Synods should have power to alter from time to time such of its
Constitutions as, not being fundamental and essential, are found
to be unsuitable to its circumstances ? And secondly, that any
old statutes which occupy the ground intended to be covered by
the Constitutions, and by the Church’s own action under them,
should be repealed ? That the Legislature would refuse to grant
these two requests, if only the Church would unitedly ask it to do
so, is not for one moment to be believed. What, then, is it which
hinders the Church from unitedly, through its Provincial Synod,
asking for this liberty of action ? It is one of the objects of
these papers to bring this out clearly. Not that the writer is able
to do so, but he hopes that those who take a view of these impor-
tant questions opposite to his own, will shew their fellow Church-
men clearly on what they ground their opinions. For this cer-
tainly has not yet been done ; and no answer whatever has been
given to the well-weighed conclusions arrived at by the late
Bishop of Newcastle in 1876.
These conclusions were—lst, that the Church should have
power to alter its Constitutions, not being fundamental : and
2nd, that as soon as the Church by its own Ordinances had covered
all the ground occupied by the present Church Act, it should be re-
pealed, due regard being had to all existing Trusts. To these two
points, I invite the attention of my fellow Churchmen. They are, I
submit, of very real practical importance to the working of tire
Church. They can only be settled by and through the action
of the Provincial Synod. It alone can approach the Legislature,
as representing the Chui'ch. To it alone would the Legislature
listen, and it would not listen to it unless it could be shewn that
it had obtained the general concurrence of the Church in all its
dioceses.


I proceed, then, in a little greater detail to shew why the Con-
stitutions should be alterable by the Church itself. It might be
sufficient to say that some at least of them are unworkable. I
will instance only here those under which the Provincial Synod
itself meets. It is so constituted that, as experience shews, it
can do nothing that is of any practical value. Clearly it is a
weakness, not a strength, to the Church, and should be abolished
or reformed. Again, the Constitutions make provision for minute
petty details, instead of dealing only with matters that are of
fundamental importance to the being and status of the Church.
For instance, they provide for a system of voting in a way which
brings about this quite unlooked-for result, that when an equal
number of Dioceses are represented in any session, and they are
squally divided in opinion, the President by having a casting
vote, has the whole weight of a Diocese given to him alone.
Again, these Constitutions are witnesses themselves to their own
unwisdom ; for two opposite courses under precisely similar
circumstances cannot both be best. Goulburn and Newcastle are
directed to follow one course in the event of the vacancy of the
See, Sydney another. Here is merely the expression of the
ephemeral opinion of one or two leaders in these Dioceses,
choosing different modes of action, and is this to be fastened on
these Dioceses for ever ? Is there to be by Statute no possibility
ef coming to a common mode of action after experience has
shewn which is the best ? It would be tedious to give further
instances by which to shew that these Constitutions are not
fitted to endure in their present form. It can be only but a
question of time when the Church will have to go to the Legis-
lature to be relieved from them—to be allowed, that is, to relieve
herself from them, as experience shows how they can be best
altered and improved.
With regard to the second point, I am quite prepared to admit
that it would be unwise to ask for the repeal of the present
Church Act 8 William IV. No. 5 until we have provided something
in its place ; and what this should be, as to its details, may very
fairly be open to debate—but in my opinion it cannot for one
moment be open to debate, that having made due provision, such
provision as experience dictates, and present circumstances require,
the Church should have her path cleared so as to allow her de-
liberately prepared Ordinances to come into operation. This is
what now cannot take place. Ordinances may be prepared to
deal with the appointment of Churchwardens, or the building of
churches and parsonages, or the regulation of glebes or other
properties, but so far as these are already dealt with under the
old Act, the new Ordinances will be invalid. The Draft Trust
Deed so carefnlly prepared by Mr. Alexander Gordon appears to
lie under this serious defect that it must be entirely inoperative


so long as the Church Act endures, unless indeed it can be shewn
that 8 William IV. No. 5 has now come after all to be a mere set of
regulations having no validity whatever other than what may be
voluntarily attributed to it by those who like it, as well as of very
little inconvenience to those who do not, and being such a mere
brutum fulmen should be put out of the way. In point of fact,
there is hardly a parish in the Colony that pays any regard to it
as a whole ; some observe one part, some another, and some
ignore it altogether. It will be admitted, I think, that this is
not a desirable state of things.
These are some of the reasons that weigh with me and
others in following the course of action which we advocate. We
want our laws to be the genuine expression of our united and
matured opinions ; we want them to be readily adapted to vary-
ing circumstances ; we want them to be binding on all every-
where. These results can only be be obtained through and by
the continuous action of the Church itself. Let every safeguard
be provided against sudden and rash changes. Let an absolute
bar be provided, if so desired, against any changes that might
threaten to sever or endanger the ties that bind us to our Mother
Church ; but short of the severance of these ties there can be no
healthy vigorous life for our Church in these colonies until it can
with perfect freedom adapt itself to every want and meet every
requirement, as it arises.
No. 111.
The purpose sought in this series of papers to be attained is,
as I understand it, to show reason why the Provincial Synod to
be assembled this year, should take in hand the work sketched
out for it by the committee appointed at the last session. The
shape in which that work is presented to it is,—lst. A draft of
an act to effect the incorporation of the Church, and to repeal
such portion of the Church Temporalities Act, as render inopera-
tive the powers recognized in the Church Property Act, as inher-
ent in the Church under the constitutions. 2ndly. Draft Ordin-
ances, to take the place of these repealed provisions of the Church
Act, for regulating the appointment of churchwardens and
trustees, and for the due security of Church lands, parsonages
and schools, and for the establishment of tribunals. The drafts
will no doubt be brought before the members of the Church soon
and it is unnecessary now to go into their details, until the ante-
cedent question be answered, Why it is necessary to bring these
matters before the Provincial Synod at all. They can only be
brought before that Synod by a joint reference from all the five
Dioceses of New South Wales, and hence the necessity for the
subject being clearly understood in each of these dioceses before-
hand.


1. The Incorporation of the Church has been thought necessary
from the uncertainty surrounding the present vesting of Church
property. The Bishops holding letters patent were by their
operation each a corporation sole, but it is extremely doubtful
whether their successors in the respective sees not holding letters
patent stand in the same position, while Bishops appointed to
new sees without letters patent are Trustees only as private in-
dividuals. Provision must therefore be made for the permanent
security of all properties vested in them. Whether in effecting
this, the body corporate to be formed shall consist of the whole
Church, with a Representative Council, (as the draft act now
prepared provides), or of the Bishops, or of separate bodies for
each Diocese, is a matter for fair discussion, but as the question
relates to the whole colony alike, that discussion can only properly
take in a Synod in which the whole colony is represented. The
relations of the Legislature with the Church have been hitherto
with the Church as a whole throughout the colony, and not with
the Church in the Diocese of Sydney or of Newcastle, or of
Goulburn, and even, if desirable, it is highly improbable that it
would now deal with them as detached Dioceses. The Church
has its strength as “the Church of England,” one body, under
one general form of law, and it would be a grievous blow to its
influence if its unity in the eye of the Legislature were to be
broken up. To the members of the Church themselves their
Church unity must always be of far more consequence than their
separate Diocesan interests, and for the sake of this unity a
watch—even a jealous watch —must be kept over the demands
of each Diocese by their brother Churchmen. But if without
consultation or co-operation with other Dioceses, a change in the
law may be demanded by any one for itself, this watchfulness
can only be exercised in the Halls of the Legislature, and thus
Parliament, of whose character and capacity for such functions
at present the less said the better, would be made the judge of
the Church’s own affairs. Such a course has only once, to my
knowledge, been attempted, when in ’65 the Diocese of Sydney
sought to obtain its own Synod Bill, when even the intimation of
opposition from another Diocese, on the broad ground that such
separate Legislation was injurious to the general interests of the
Church, led to the abandonment of the attempt. It would in-
deed be a solecism in Colonial Legislation, if a body which the
Legislature had always recognized to be one, and still claimed to
be one, should cut itself up into sections in seeking new legisla-
tion. The necessity for obtaining such an Act as is now proposed
may not have presented itself equally forcibly to all the Dioceses,
but if it be seriously recognized by even a small portion of them,
the subject ought to be referred to the only body in which the
whole are represented, that the decision arrived at may be the


verdict of the Church as a body, whether that decision be favour-
able to such application or not.
The same argument applies to the repeal of the Church Act.
Even if one diocese only felt that its interests were injuriously
affected by its provisions (and it cannot be called unreasonable
to believe that such may be the case with an Act designed to
meet circumstances so different as those which existed in 1838),
it is the duty of all the other dioceses to afford opportunity for
a full discussion and just settlement of the question, by its refer-
ence to the Provincial Synod.
In preceding papers the desirability has been dealt with of
providing in this Act for the Constitutions being unalterable, ex-
cept under certain conditions. It is unnecessary again to dwell
on this matter, except to meet one objection which has been
taken. The Constitutions are looked upon as the terms of a
contract between the dioceses, and the refusal of any one diocese
to join in referring this question is justified on the ground that it
has a right to stand upon these precise terms if it chooses. It is
admitted that there is a very great difference in the fundamental
importance of the several Constitutions, that there are imperfec-
tions, and even unwise provisions, in them (as e.g. where in the
Provincial Synod the casting vote of the President has the same
value as the vote of a diocese), but notwithstanding, say our
opponents,'the contract has been entered upon, and we choose to
regard it as unalterable, and therefore refuse to submit it to
arbitration. Now, in the first place, it is not proposed to submit
it to arbitration to a third party, but to reconsideration by the
consenting parties to it; and in the next place, out of the five
parties affected by it (the five dioceses of New South Wales),
only three were parties to its original enactment, while the other
two are compelled to accept its terms with all their incongruities
and limitations, nolentes volentes. There is nothing unreasonable,
nothing dangerous to the future welfare of the Church, in asking
the Legislature to recognize that the liberty to deal with her own
affairs, already recognized in the sanction given to the Constitu-
tions drawn up in the exercise of that liberty, is inherent in the
Church still. Apart from the obvious desirability of avoiding
the necessity of again appealing to Parliament for power to amend
the Constitutions, there is a distinct and grave propriety in such
a power being recognized in an Act which in other respects may
be looked upon as completing the legal security required by the
Church, and sweeping away the last of the legislation bonds by
which, in her supposed dependence upon the State, the Church
was bound. If the objection be still urged that the possession
of this power to amend opens the door to the possibility of a
revolution in the Church by reckless changes in the Constitutions,
it is sufficient to repeat again the answer given by the late Bishop


of Newcastle, that the safeguards remaining in the hands of the
Synods are exactly those which they at present possess, and have
lost none of their sufficiency by the recognition of the Legislature
of what it could never, when asked for logically or consistently,
deny. In asking for this power, it may or it may not be desirable
to make unalterable more than the one (27th) Constitution now
stereotyped, but that is a matter of detail for after consideration.
2. The preparation for consideration by the Provincial Synod,
of ordinances covering the ground occupied by the Provisions of
the Church Act, may be discussed on other grounds, as it involves
the question, whether the Diocesan or the Provincial Synod be
the proper constitutional body from which such legislation of the
Church for herself should proceed. It is well known that there
are opposing theories on this point. One side holds that the
Diocese is the unit of Church or Synodical action, and that it has
a right to deal independently with all subjects relating to its own
organisation. This has often been shown to be a novel doctrine
peculiar to these colonies, unsanctioned by the practice of the
Church in ancient or modern times, and especially unauthorized
by the historical precedents or present condition of the Church
of England. It can at best lay claim only to whatever consider-
ation is due to an untried theory. The other side maintains that
apart from precedent and experience, the unity of the Church,
and its preservation from narrowness or extreme tendencies, are
better secured by regarding the Provincial Synod as the proper
body to enact ordinances in all matters in which the several dio-
ceses have a common and identical interest. The one would be
willing to see the prevailing tone of Churchmanship, even the
individual views of the Bishop in each diocese, stamped upon its
regulations, even though excesses might thus be covered, and
thus to impress narrowness and party conclusions on the dioceses
of the Church, here in one direction and there in another. The
other desires to see all traces of difference obliterated, and the
same featurss of combined moderation and comprehensiveness
traced upon the Church in her Synodical action here as distinguish
the position of the Church at home, and with this desire promotes
Provincial rather than Diocesan action. As in the body politic
individuals have often to suffer some abridgment of their own
individual liberty, in conforming to laws made for the good of
the whole, so would it doubtless be in the Church ; but no greater
sacrifice is demanded of the Diocese in subordinating itself to the
Province, than is required of the congregation in subordinating
itself to the Diocese, and the Church of England has not yet gone
the length of Congregationalism, although in those Dioceses where
Diocesanism exists some steps have been taken in that direction.
Happily, however, it is quite unnecessary to decide this con-
troversy before determining whether the ordinances for the


appointment of Churchwardens &c., or the establishment of
tribunals be submitted to the Provincial Synod. It is possible
to deal with them on a special ground. The matters to which
they refer are covered by the Church Temporalities Act, and if
the repeal of that Act or a part of it is to be sought, the body
seeking for it must be satisfied that provision is made for all
matters and things coming under it. It would be dangerous to
leave a break of unknown extent between the old legislation and
the new, —to leave in a state of anarchy any Diocese, by sweep-
ing away its former safeguard before a substitute was provided.
The state is the guardian of the rights of the members of every
religious community, and it was in that capacity that it legislated
for the Church in the Church Act. When it restores to the
Church’s own own hands the power to provide for the exercise
of their rights by her own machinery, it must be satisfied that no
loss has been sustained. There are no radical differences in the
circumstances of the different Dioceses which would necessitate
different treatment being applied to each, and although unifor-
mity be not essential, there can be little question that where no
strong reason exists to the contrary, it is desirable. It is surely
reasonable to depreciate such diversity as would lead to the
Churchman changing his Church laws if he travels from Sydney
to Bathurst, or from Maitland to Tamworth. For uniformity of
provision for the establishment of tribunals a great deal more
may be urged. The measure of the offence is often determined
by the nature of the tribunal in which it is judged. While the
standards of the doctrine and discipline of the Church remain
the same, it is quite conceivable that there may be such adversity
in the character of tribunals, or in the mode of their proceedings
as practically to put Dioceses on a different footing. The liberty
of the individual clergyman is not a matter of interest to the
Diocese to which he belongs only, but to the whole Church, laity
as well as clergy ; and the whole Church, therefore, is interested
in the chaiactei of the tiibunal, and the form of proceeding before
it, under which any one clergyman may be tried, It may be
replied that the subject should then be dealt with by the General
Synod of all the Dioceses ; but here again we are met by limita-
tions placed upon its action, inasmuch as no determination passed
by it is binding, until it has been adopted by the Diocesan Synod.
There is much, doubtless, to be said in favour of all legislation
in those higher matters which affect generally the welfare of the
Church being left to the General Synod ; but although that argu-
ment may hold good against the Provincial Synod proceeding to
legislate, it has no weight against the proposal to refer the sub-
ject, seeing that by that course alone can it be generally discussed.
This question will probably be discussed, however, in later papers.


It is not irrelevant to the present object to call attention to the
reference made by some of the Dioceses of the definition of the
position and status of the Metropolitan. It is well-known that
beyond the limits of the colony, in Melbourne and Adelaide, his
jurisdiction as Metropolitan is called in question, and those
present will not have forgotten the ridicule with which Mr.
Charles Campbell treated the proposal, in the Constitution of the
General Synod, to create the Bishop of Sydney “ Primate for the
purpose of this Constitution.” If the Provincial Synod of New
South Wales is a sham as a Synod, and is merely a body of re-
ference for disputed matters, it is rather difficult to see what
reality there can be in his Lordship’s relation of Metropolitan,
even to that Province. But much remains to be done to clear up
the whole question of the powers of Synods, and every thought-
ful contribution to its solution must be deeply interesting to the
Church.
No. IV.
What work can the Provincial Synod, as at present constituted
do for the Church ? It will probably be admitted by all without
dispute that in and through the Provincial Synod alone can the
Church find any point of contact with the State. Not only ought
the State to be unwilling to grant, but the Provincial Synod ought
even jealously to watch that it does not grant any request what-
ever to the Church which does not come through itself. It alone
should claim to be the recognized organ of the Church throughout
the whole Province, it being understood that in this connexion
the Province is strictly conterminous with the Colony. Now it
will probably be conceded by all that at this present time there is
a work of the greatest practical importance which the Legislature,
and the Legislature alone, is able to do for the Church ; but only
able or willing to do provided it is set in motion by the whole
Church, which again, as has been said, can only be recognized in
its Provincial Synod. The work that is meant is the “ Incorpora-
tion of the Church ” for the purpose of enabling it to hold and
deal with property. Formerly under Letters Patent, and still
therefore to a certain extent in those Dioceses where the Bishops
hold these Letters Patent, the Bishop of the Diocese being by
them created a Corporation Sole, could hold the Church’s property ;
but as the issue of Letters Patent has ceased, in no case can this
power be transmitted to future Bishops. The Church therefore
needs such a power to be given to it collectively, and this is one
of the objects sought to be obtained by the Draft Bill of Incor-
poration which has been prepared by direction of the last Provin-
cial Synod, and which will be brought before the next one for its
consideration. Into the details of this measure it is not the pur-


pose of the writer at present to enter. They may be or they may
not be well adapted for the purpose in view : but the purpose
itself is one which is of the utmost importance, and if the Pro-
vincial Synod can only succeed in embodying and carrying into
effect the will of the Church upon the subject, it will have effec-
ted a most useful work. Such an Act of Incorporation making
provision for the tenure, and at the same time for the Diocesan
management, of all property, would set upon a simple and secure
basis a matter which at the present time is intricate and insecure
in the highest degree.
Now, it is obvious that this is a matter upon which no diocesan
Synod can go by itself to the legislature to ask for legislation :
it ought not to do so, if it could, and it is not likely the legislature
would listen to it, if it did. But the Provincial Synod itself can
only do so, if it shall have had the subject referred to it by all
the diocesan Synods : so that it should be understood that, as at
present constituted, the least and most foolish of all the dioceses
can, if it think fit, fetter the action of the wisest and largest.
It is just as if the voters of one of the least and most ill-informed
of all the counties of the colonies could for all time prevent the
passing of some measure of paramount importance to the colony
at large. Surely this ought not to be the principle upon which
church legislation is to proceed, and it is not to be wondered at,
if, while it prevails, church affairs will remain in a most unsatis-
factory state. For my part, I had rather see even bad legislation,
which would be only temporary, proceeding upon sound principles,
than legislation, which certainly could be only good for a little
time, proceeding upon principles thoroughly bad. I would
greatly prefer to see the diocesan Synod made subservient here,
as in every other section of the church without exception, to the
Provincial Synod, and the diocesan element eliminated from.it,
so that the Provincial Synod by its own simple majorities could
legislate on all matters properly coming under its cognizance.
I can only attribute the apparent unwillingness of the Sydney
diocese to allow to the provincial Synod any real power to act,
from a fear lest other dioceses should thereby be enabled to force
their views it. But surely this is an unworthy fear, and would
be well dispelled even by such a concession on the part of the
smaller dioceses as I have spoken of above. At any rate, as
matters stand at present, whatever may be the real cause, useful
legislation is almost entirely prevented. And if it is difficult for
the Provincial Synod to work now, this difficulty, it may be ex-
pected,. it even ought to be hoped, will increase year by year.
For if it is difficult with only five dioceses to get them to unite
in referring for legislation any subject to the Provincial Synod,
what will it he when there are, as we may hope there one day
will be, ten such dioceses, from every one of which consent must


be obtained before the Provincial Synod can legislate ? Here
certainly we have an arrangement for legislation unique in the
history of nations or the church. It would be wrong to its pro-
moters to think that they meant that their work should not work,
but they certainly must choose between this, or the having made
a terrible mistake as to what would work or would not work. How-
ever, it remains that if all the existing dioceses can be prevailed
upon to refer this matter of the Incorporation of the church to
the Provincial Synod it will be able, even as at present constituted,
to legislate thereon, and to present to Parliament whatever Bill
it may ayprove of to carry out this work. It may be supposed
that if thus presented to Parliament, it will not there be rejected :
and once having succeeded in doing some useful work for the
church, we may hope to see the church at large more willing to
trust and to use it, and that the restrictions which now hamper
its action, unheard of hitherto in the history of the church, may
eventually be removed.
But I proceed to consider, secondly—What other work is there
which the Provincial Synod can do for the Church ?
It can pass its own ordinances without recourse to Parliament,
upon all those matters which shall be jointly referred to it by all
the Diocesan Synods : and these ordinances, so far as property is
concerned, will be binding upon all the members of the church.
More than this, it can pass ordinances upon any matter referred
to it by any one Diocesan Synod to be binding upon the members
of the Church in that diocese alone : but it would appear that
this mode of action is hampered by this proviso, that the matter
so referred must have been in dispute between the particular
diocesan Synod and its Bishop, and it must have been legislated
on by the diocesan Synod and vetoed by the Bishop. This very
seriously and injuriously limits the usefulness of the Provincial
Synod. If it was not for this, very peculiar arrangement, it
might have by degrees come to be the practice of the various
Diocesan Synods, singly to refer matters for legislation to the
Provincial Synod, which then might have been able in turn and
by degrees to pass ordinances similar in spirit, if not in letter, for
ail the dioceses. It is to be feared that no step in this direction
is likely to be taken now. Failing reference then of any par-
ticular subject from all the dioceses, and failing reference of
any diocesan ordinance that has been vetoed by the Bishop of
the diocese, the Provincial Synod can take up any subject it
pleases, can frame an ordinance thereon, and can submit that
ordinance to all the diocesan Synods for their approval. It is in
the exercise of this power that at the present time it has, by a
committee appointed at its last session in 1875, prepared two
ordinances which are to be presented to it at its approaching
session in July next. I purposely avoid entering into the details


of either of these ordinances. I name them only as an ordinance
for “regulating the election and defining the powers of church-
wardens,” and one “ for constituting a tribunal for the administra-
tion of ecclesiastical discipline.” These, if passed by it, will have
to be sent to all the diocesan Synods, which in their turn will
have the power to accept, amend or reject them, a process in the
carrying out of which, it is not difficult to see that complications
innumerable may arise. It must be confessed that it is almost
beyond hope that five diocesan Synods, unable to be influenced
by each other’s arguments, can within any reasonable time be
brought to a common agreement, so that the legislation of the
Provincial Synod may become a fact.
This then is the only work which the Provincial Synod, as at
present constituted, can do. These are the difficulties under
which it is to be accomplished ; and it is only when it shall have
succeeded in accomplishing this work that it would be in a
position to go to the legislature, and ask for a qualified repeal
of the Act 8 William IV. No. 5. It will be instructive to consider
what Melbourne and Brisbane have done with this same Act, under
whose provisions they also were, but from which years ago Mel-
bourne at least freed itself to its very great gain. I propose to
insert the Draft Act of Incorporation and the two ordinances to
which reference has been made, inasmuch as although they seem
to have been intended by the Provincial Synod to be laid before
the diocesan Synods, yet many members of those Synods have
not even yet had their attention particularly directed to them ;
and although they are to be found in the report of the Sydney
Synod for 1876, yet in other dioceses where they have not thus
been published they are not easily to be obtained.
No. v.
The last paper was devoted to shewing what work the Provin-
cial Synod could do, even under the limitations which have been
imposed upon it. In the present one it is intended to shew how
far this work has been prepared, and in what it consists. With
this view copies of the “ Draft Act of Incorporation of the
Church,” together with a “ Draft Ordinance to Constitute Tribu-
nals for the Administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline,” and
another for the “ Election of Churchwardens,” will be given.
These have been drawn up by a Committee of the Provincial
Synod appointed at its last session ; and although they _ have
never yet, of course, come before the Provincial Synod itself,
yet without any irregularity, and indeed from the necessity of
the case, may be brought before the members of the church at
large, and especially before the members of the various Diocesan
warden,- and ouch mooting ohall bo oonduotod, ao far ao oironiß'


Synods, in order that they may be thoroughly understood by
them. Ordinarily, of course, it would seem that such a course of
bringing under the notice of inferior bodies the work that was to
be carried out and completed by the superior body, would be
altogether reversing the proper order of things ; but, unfortu-
nately, in this case the superior body is only so in name; and
nothing whatever can be done by it, unless it is first of all
assented to by the bodies nominally inferior—that is, the Diocesan
Synods. It is with this view, apparently, as feeling that there
can be, by it, no legislation until it is positively asked for by the
church at large, that the Provincial Synod in its resolutions on
these subjects, speaks of them as “ to be submitted to the Diocesan
Synods.”
So exceedingly imperfect, however, is the organization of the
Provincial Synod, and so powerless is it to obtain, in any regular
formal manner, any consideration for its work on the part of the
Diocesan Synods, that it is more than likely that these drafts have
never yet been brought under the notice of all the Diocesan
Synods ; and, indeed, there appears to be no provision for such a
proceeding. The constitutions speak of matters to be referred to
the Provincial Synod by the Diocesan Synods ; but nowhere speak
of matters being referred from the Provincial Synod to the
Diocesan Synods ; and yet by this means alone can there be any
prospect whatever of the Provincial Synod, as at present consti-
tuted, ever being able to legislate for the church at large. It
may be that the chief promoters of these constitutions desired
deliberately to fetter the Provincial Synod. They may certainly
be congratulated on having effected their purpose, if it was their
purpose ; but it is to be hoped that other counsels will yet pre-
vail, and that we shall not be doomed always to see our church,
unlike any other sister church in the world, almost compelled to
isolate itself in its various dioceses in this colony by such legisla-
tion as this.
The following is one of the drafts referred to above.
A Bill intituled An Act to Incorporate the Members of the
Church of England in New South "Wales and to make further
Provision for the Management of the Property thereof.
March, 1876.
Whereas it is necessary for the purpose of carrying into effect
the powers granted under the Act 30th Victoria, intituled “An
Act to enable the members of the United Church of England and
Ireland in New South Wales to manage the property of the said
Church ” that a Body Corporate be created in which the property


of the said church real and personal may be vested, subject to
certain provisions and trusts hereinafter contained :
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty
by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly of New South Wales in Parliament
assembled and by authority of the same as follows :
Clause I.—The Church in the Colony of New South Wales
heretofore styled in Acts of the Legislature the United Church of
England and Ireland shall henceforth be styled and designated
the Church of England : and the terms “ United Church of Eng-
land and Ireland” in any Statute Deed grant constitution
synodical proceedings or document of any kind shall be taken to
mean the said church herein styled and designated the Church of
England.
Clause lI.—So much of the Statute 8 William IV. No. 5 and
21 Victoria No. 4 as is inconsistent with the full exercise
of the powers given conferred and recognized by the Statute 30
Victoria intituled “An Act to enable the members of the United
Church of England and Ireland in New South Wales to manage
the property of the said Church ” shall be and is hereby repealed.
Clause lll.—The members of the Church of England within
the Colony of New South Wales shall for the purposes of this
Act be a Body Corporate under the name of “ the Church of
England and shall by such name have perpetual succession
and a common seal and be capable in law of sueing and being
sued and of purchasing holding and alienating land and of
exercising all such corporate functions and doing and suffering
all such acts and things as may be necessary for the well being
of the property of the church and for the effectual management
thereof.
Clause IV.—The Council of such Body Corporate shall consist
in the first place of all Bishops of the Dioceses of the Church of
England in New South Wales together with one clerical and two
lay members to be elected by and for each Diocesan Synod and
the validity of the Acts of such Council shall not be affected or
impaired by any failure on the part of the Dioceses to elect the
aforesaid members or by any informality or irregularity in the
election of such members such Council shall in and for all such
acts and matters and things as by law may be done or suffered
by the said Body Corporate be the sole Representative thereof
and all acts and proceedings of such Council shall be deemed to
be the acts and proceedings of the Body Corporate : Provided
that in and for the execution of any trusts attaching to any lands
or other property of any kind vested in such Body Corporate it
shall be lawful for the said Council to appoint under its common


seal such person or persons if any as may be nominated for such
purposes by the Synods of the Dioceses wherein such lands or
other properties are situate or if any such are not so nominated
then any persons they may think fit who may thereby and there-
upon be empowered to exercise all or any of the powers or to
perform any of the duties of such Body Corporate in respect of
such trusts : Provided also that in and for the execution of any
trusts vested in the Council attaching to the properties of the
several dioceses or of the parishes or districts situate therein the
Council and its agents shall be subject to the rules and ordinances
of the synod of such diocese in that behalf. The Provincial
Synod shall have power to make from time to time such rules
and regulations as it shall think fit touching the number and
mode of appointment of members of such Council and to fix the
quorum thereof.
Clause Y. —All property real or personal belonging to the
Church of England for or on behalf of the said Church shall
with the consent of the Trustees if any henceforth be vested in
the Body Corporate and all Trustees shall be and are hereby
empowered to transfer such trusts to the said Body Corporate
and the said Body Corporate shall hold all property vested in it
subject to the trusts attaching thereto provided nevertheless
that from and after the passing of this Act all property hereby
vested in the said Body Corporate shall cease to be affected by
or held subject to any of the provisions of the Act 8 William
IV. No. 5.
Clause Vl.—'The Constitutions of the said Church as recorded
in the Supreme Court shall not be altered except by Ordinance
of the Provincial Synod and no alteration whatever of the 27th
Constitution shall be made except so far as may be necessary
to enable the said Synod to make the Liturgy and Formularies
applicable to the Colony of New South Wales : And if at any
time any alterations in the said Constitutions shall be made as
herein provided such alterations shall not take effect until a
copy of the said Constitutions so altered shall have been
recorded in the Supreme Court and the same or a duly certified
copy thereof shall be evidence of the said Constitutions.
The following are copies of the drafts referred to in our last
article on this subject. , . .
Proposed Ordinance for constituting tribunals for the Adminis-
tration of ecclesiastical discipline in the dioceses of the
church of England in New South Wales.
Whereas it is expedient to establish tribunals for the trial of
offences by Clergymen licensed by Bishops within the diocese or
New South Wales and also for the trial of offences by lay oifice-
bearars and by trustees within the diocese of Newcastle and other


dioceses other than the dioceses of Sydney and Goulbum holding
office under any act of council or ordinance or Constitution for
the management of the united church of England and Ireland
within the colony of New South Wales and the property thereof
The Provincial Synod of New South Wales in pursuance of the
powers in that behalf conferred upon it by the 24th section of
the constitutions for the management and good government of
the united church of England and Ireland within the colony of
New South Wales ordains and rules as follows :
1. Any clergymen charged with maintaining any doctrine con-
trary to the authorised teaching of the church of England as con-
tained in any of the XXXIX Articles of religion the Book of
Common Prayer or the form and manner of making ordaining and
consecrating bishops priests and deacons or charged with the
commission of any of the offences specified in the schedule here-
unto annexed and any lay office-bearer or trustee within the
diocese of Newcastle or within any other dioceses (the diocese of
Sydney and Goulburn excepted as provided for by the 18th and
20th sections of the constitutions) charged with immorality neg-
lect of duty or breach of trust such clergymen or lay office-bearer
or trustee may be proceeded against under the provisions of this
ordinance and any clergymen being found guilty of any such
offence shall be suspended by the bishop for such term as to the
bishop shall seem fit from performing all and every act and func-
tion appertaining to the ministry or have his license withdrawn
and any lay office-bearer or trustee being found guilty of any
such offence shall be suspended or dismissed from his office at
the discretion of the bishop.
2. At every session of the Synod of every diocese not more
than twelve nor fewer than six clergymen and the like number of
laymen being respectively members of the synod shall be elected
by the members of the Synod then present either by ballot or
otherwise as they shall determine to be a panel of triers for the
purposes of this ordinance and such panel of triers shall continue
in office until a fresh panel shall be elected.
3. Any person or persons amenable to the provisions of this
ordinance may be charged with an offence either by the bishop of
his own mere motion or by any person making a complaint to the
bishop such complaint being in writing and signed by the person
making the same and if in the opinion of the bishop there is
sufficient ground for such charge and that the matter is of suffi-
cient importance to warrant such proceeding the bishop shall
cause to be served on the accused a copy of the charge.
4. If the clergyman shall admit the charge and thereupon sub-
mit himself without any further proceedings to such judgment
and sentence as the bishop shall think fit to pronounce the bishop
shall deal with the case accordingly.


5. If the accused shall not so submit himself as hereinbefore
mentioned then the bishop shall cause to be issued and to be
served on the accused a citation in writing under the episcopal
seal calling upon him to appear before the tribunal constituted
under this Ordinance to try the matter of such charge on a day
therein named being not less than fourteen days after the service
of such citation and at a place and hour to be specified in such
citation. And the bishop may at any time after any such charge
shall have been made and pending the trial of the accused sus-
pend the accused from the exercise of his functions or any of
them without however depriving him during such suspension of
any stipend attached to the exercise of such functions.
6. The tribunal before which the accused shall be so cited to
appear as hereinbefore mentioned shall be constituted of a Presi-
dent who shall be the bishop of the diocese or a commissary
specially appointed by him in writing or at the bishop’s desire a
barrister or attorney of the Supreme Court to be appointed by the
standing committee of the synod or by the diocesan council as
the case may be and one-fourth of the panel of triers elected as
aforesaid in equal numbers of clergymen and laymen selected in
manner following that is to say : immediatedly after the citation
shall have so issued as hereinbefore mentioned and before service
of the same on the accused the standing committee of the synod
or the diocesan council as the case may be shall select by lot
from such of the panel of triers elected as aforesaid as shall be
resident in the colony and capable of acting one-half the panel
of triers in equal number of clergy and laymen the names of
whom shall be served on the accused together with the citation
and the aecused shall out of the names so served on him select
one-fourth of the panel in equal numbers of clergymen and lay-
men to be members of tribunal of triers and in default of the ac-
cused notifying in writing his selection to the president of the
tribunal within ten days after service on him of the citation the
president shall select one-fourth of the panel of triers as afore-
said clergymen and laymen by lot out of such names Provided
always that if any of the triers so selected as members of the
tribunal shall fail to be in attendauce when required the president
may in the place of such person choose by lot from the panel of
triers elected as aforesaid another pefson of the same order to be
a member of the said tribunal And the president or commissary
may postpone or adjourn the trial as occasion may require.
7. Should the accused refuse or neglect to appear either in
person or by counsel or agent in obedience to the citation so is-
sued and served on him as hereinbefore mentioned the tribunal
may proceed to hear and determine the case in his absence.
8. In any case in which the bishop may deem it necessary he
may instead of pronouncing sentence grant to the accused a new


trial and thereupon a fresh tribunal shall be constituted for the
purpose of such new trial in the same manner as hereinbefore
prescribed for the constitution of the first tribunal.
9. In any case in which three-fourths of the triers shall find
the accused guilty the bishop shall give notice in writing to the
accused of the time and place when and where he will be required
to appear and should he so desire state his reasons why sentence
should not be pronounced against him and shall after having
heard such statements as the accused may offer or failing his
appearing or making any such statement proceed to pass sentence
accordingly Provided that an appeal may be made to the Appel-
late tribunal as allowed under determination No. 2. of the general
synod.
10. No charge shall be entertained under or in pursuance of
this ordinance for or in respect of any offence committed or
alleged to have been committed unless a copy of such charge
shall have been served upon the accused as hereinbefore directed
within two years after the commission of the alleged offence.
Provided always that whenever any such charge shall be made in
respect of any offence of which a conviction shall have been ob-
tained in any court of competent jurisdiction such charge may
be entertained if a copy of the charge shall have been so served
as aforesaid at any time within six calendar months after such
conviction although more than one year shall have elapsed since
the commission of the offence in respect of which such charge
shall be made.
11. This ordinance may be cited as the “ tribunal ordinance
of 1876.”
Offences referred to in clause one of tribunal ordinance :
Unchastity, drunkenness, habitual and wilful neglect of minis-
terial duty after special admonition in writing by the bishop
with reference thereto, insolvency or failure to pay just debts
without sufficient excuse for such insolvency or failure, any of-
fence punishable by law being sinful in itself, conduct disgrace-
ful to a clergyman and productive of scandal and evil report.
Ordinance for determining the'mode of election of churchwardens
and defining and regulating their powers.
1• _ The bishop of the diocese may, if he shall see fit, on the
application of the promoters of the erection of any church, cause
a meeting of subscribers to the erection of such church to be held
in such manner and at such time and place as to him may seem
expedient, and such meeting shall elect two of their number,
being males and of the age of 21 years, to act as churchwardens
until the Easter Tuesday next ensuing after the church shall have
been completed and consecrated or licensed. Provided that if no


such election shall take place the bishop may appoint any two
subscribers qualified as aforesaid to act as such ad interim church-
wardens.
2. The licensed clergyman of every cure, or the officiating
minister thereof, shall, by notice in such way as he may deem
best, and stating the time and place of meeting, convene a meet-
ing of the members of the church of the age of 21 years, being
males, and subscribers of not less than 10s. to church funds, and
residents within his parish or district, to be held in the vestry of
the church, or in some other convenient place on Easter Tuesday
in every year, or within a week of such day, for the purpose of
receiving the accounts of the churchwardens for the past year,
electing churchwardens for the ensuing year, and for other
business connected with the church ; and such meeting shall be
called and known as the annual vestry meeting of the church, and
every person so convened, who shall sign a declaration to the
effect that he is a member of the church of England, shall be
qualified to vote and take part in the proceedings of such meeting.
3. As soon as the said licensed clergyman or officiating minister
and five other persons being qualified as aforesaid shall be present,
the meeting shall be held to be duly constituted, and may pro-
ceed to business ; but if the meeting shall not be constituted as
aforesaid within half-an-hour after the time appointed for the
meeting, then the meeting shall stand adjourned for seven days,
the place and time chosen for the adjourned meeting being the
same as those for which the first meeting was convened. And as
soon as at such adjourned meeting five persons duly qualified as
hereinbefore mentioned shall be present the meeting shall be held
to be duly constituted, and may proceed to business ; but if it
shall not be so constituted within half-an-hour of the time ap-
pointed, the meeting shall be treated as a lapsed meeting. Pro-
vided that any meeting once duly constituted may from time to
time be adjourned to such time and place as the meeting may
determine, and such adjourned meeting shall be treated as a duly
constituted meeting, and as a continuation of the original meeting.
4. At such meeting or adjourned meeting, and at all other
vestry meetings, the clergyman licensed to officiate in the church,
or the clergyman authorised to officiate therein, shall, if present,
act as chairman of the meeting, and in the case of his absence the
meeting shall, before proceeding to business, elect its own chair-
man.
5. At such meeting, or adjourned meeting, the licensed or
officiating minister shall appoint or signify in writing the appoint-
ment of one person, being a male of the age of twenty-one years,
being a member of the church of England and a communicant,
to act as churchwarden until the annual vestry meeting next
ensuing ; and two other persons duly qualified as aforesaid shall


be chosen by a majority of the persons present at such meeting
to act as churchwardens for the same period. And the three
persons so appointed and elected as aforesaid shall execute the
office of churchwardens, and any act done by them, or the majority
of them as churchwardens, shall be taken and deemed as the act
of the churchwardens of the church.
6. If in consequence of the meeting becoming a lapsed meeting,
or from any other cause any failure shall occur to appoint or
elect the three persons, or anv of them hereinbefore mentioned,
then the incumbent, or officiating minister who convened the
meeting, shall forthwith communicate such failure to the bishop,
and the bishop or his commissary duly authorised shall appoint
such person or persons qualified as aforesaid as he may deem best
to act as churchwarden or churchwardens until the annual vestry
meeting next ensuing, and if any dispute shall at any time arise
regarding the appointment or election of any churchwarden, the
same shall be referred to the bishop or commissary, who shall
after enquiry conducted in such manner as he may prescribe
make such order touching the same as to him shall’appear ex-
pedient.
7. Whenever any person appointed a churchwarden by the
incumbent shall die, resign, or become by insolvency, lunacy, or
otherwise disqualified or incapable to act during the period for
which he was so appointed, then, and in every such case, the
person having the right to appoint as hereinbefore mentioned
shall as soon as may be practicable appoint a person duly qualified
to be a churchwarden until the annual vestry meeting next
ensuing, in the place of the person so dying, resigning, or becom-
ing disqualified or incapable to act as hereinbefore mentioned.
8. Whenever any person elected as a churchwarden shall die,
resign, or become disqualified or incapable to act as hereinbefore
mentioned, during the period for which he was so elected as
aforesaid, the incumbent, or officiating minister shall, within 30
days after the occurence of such vacancy, by notice stating the
time and place of meeting, convene a meeting of members of the
church qualified as aforesaid, for the purpose of electing a church-
warden, and such meeting shall be conducted, as far as circum-
stances will admit, in a manner similar to the annual vestry
meeting of the church ; and at such meeting, or at any adjourn-
ment thereof which may take place, the persons present qualified
as aforesaid shall elect a person duly qualified as aforesaid to be
a churchwarden until the annual vestry meeting next ensuing, in
the place of the churchwarden who has so died, resigned, or
become disqualified or incapable to act as aforesaid.
9. If from any cause whatever a vacancy occurring in the
number of churchwardens appointed or elected as hereinbefore
mentioned shall not be filled up as hereinafter provided, it shall


be lawful for the bishop or his commissary, duly authorized, if
he shall think so fit, to appoint a churchwarden to act until the
next annual vestry meeting, in the place of the churchwarden
whose death, resignation, disqualification, or other incapacity
has occasioned the said vacancy.
10. The churchwardens so appointed and elected as aforesaid
shall have the general charge of and control over all property and
monies belonging to the church of which the charge or control is
not otherwise vested or provided for, and the churchwardens shall
have also the general control and superintendence of all matters
connected with the arrangement of seats in the church, and in the
case of any of the seats being let shall make agreements with
persons for the letting to them of such seats for such term within
the year of office of the churchwardens as they may deem proper,
and the churchwardens shall collect all such seat rents and other
monies payable on account of the church.
11. The churchwardens shall apply all monies received on
account of the church for the following purposes—that is to say,
in providing all things necessary for the due celebration of divine
service, and the administration of the sacraments, according to
the usages of the church of England, including the payment of
so much of the stipend of the clergyman officiating in the church
as may not have been otherwise provided for, and the salaries of
all lay persons holding any office in or about the church, in pro-
viding relief for the poor of the parish or district, in keeping the
church, parsonage, and school—when the property of the church
—and the premises attached thereto in repair, in liquidating any
portion of debt on the church, parsonage, or school, and if there
shall remain any surplus, it shall be applied and expended in such
manner as may be determined by an annual vestry meeting of
the church.
12. At every annual vestry meeting of the church, the retiring
churchwardens, or one of them, shall exhibit a book containing
fair and correct accounts of all monies received and expended by
them as churchwardens, and the accounts shall be certified by the
churchwardens subscribing their names thereto ; and the said
account book, and all vouchers for payment, together with such
balance as shall appear by the accounts to be remaining in the
hands of the retiring churchwardens shall be by them, or one of
them, delivered to the new churchwardens or one of them. Pro-
vided always that at every such meeting two or more persons
may, if the meeting so determine, be appointed to audit the
accounts of the retiring churchwardens, and the new churchwar-
dens may cause the accounts of the retired churchwardens either
as presented to the said meeting or when audited, as the case may
be, to be printed for distribution among the occupiers of seats in
the church.


13. The churchwardens of the church, or a majority of them,
may at any time and from time to time, with the sanction of the
annual vestry meeting of the church, vary any arrangement
existing with regard to the seats in the church being rented or
free. Provided that 14 days’ notice of intention to propose such
a change shall have been given by them. Provided also that of
the seats of the church, at least one-fourth thereof shall always
be free. And the churchwardens, or a majority of them, may
also, with the like sanction, increase or reduce the rent which shall
have been previously fixed for seats in the church. Provided that
such increase and reduction as the case may be shall not com-
mence until the expiration of the time for which any seats to
which it applies shall have been previously let.
14. The church, after it has been consecrated, shall not be used
without the express sanction of the bishop for any other purpose
than the celebration of divine worship, the administration of the
sacraments, or the performance of the rites and ordinances of the
church of England, and no person except the bishop shall be
allowed to perform any clerical office in the church, whether con-
secrated or licensed, except with the consent of the clergyman
licensed to officiate in the said church and of the bishop. Provided
always that in case there shall not be a clergyman so licensed as
aforesaid, the consent of the bishop only shall be necessary.
15. The clergyman licensed to officiate in the church shall have
free access and admission into the church at all such times as he
may think fit, and may celebrate divine service, administer the
sacraments, and perform all other rites and ordinances of the
church of England therein without any hindrance from the
churchwardens or any other person whomsoever, and shall for
such purposes have keys of the church, and such officiating
minister shall and may during such times as aforesaid freely have,
use, possess, and enjoy the minister’s dwelling house, garden,
appurtenances, and glebe, belonging to such church, or receive,
have, and take the rents, profits, and issues, and every part thereof
respectively. Provided always that in case the license of such
clergyman shall be withdrawn in accordance with the 19th Con-
stitution, he shall thereupon ipso facto forfeit and be absolutely
deprived of all and singular his rights in or respecting the church
aforesaid, and shall thenceforth if attempting to exercise any
such right be deemed a trespasser therein.
16. All the paid lay officers of the church, except the organist,
shall from time to time be appointed and removed from office by
the churchwardens, and the organist, if any, shall from time to
time be appointed and removed from office by the clergyman
licensed to officiate in the church ; and the salaries of all paid lay
officers shall be fixed and sanctioned at an annual vestry meeting
of the church.


17. It shall be lawful for the Churchwardens, with the consent
of the Clergyman licensed to officiate in the Church and with the
sanction of the Bishop, to permit any monument to be placed in
any part of the Church upon payment to the Churchwardens of
such charges and subject to such regulations with reference to
obtaining the consent of the Bishop by a faculty or otherwise as
the Bishop shall sanction and prescribe. And it shall be lawful
for the person so placing such monument as aforesaid, and his
heirs, executors, and administrators to maintain and keep up the
same to be for his and their sole and separate use.
18. It shall not be lawful to make any alteration in the fabric
or internal arrangement of the Church when consecrated, without
the sanction of the Bishop, and upon such terms and conditions
as the Bishop may from time to time on that behalf prescribe.
Draft Ordinance to make provision for building and maintaining
Churches, Parsonages, and Schools, and for the manage-
ment of Glebes and Burial Grounds.
Whereas it is necessary to make provision for the building and
maintaining of Churches, Parsonages, and Schools, and for regu-
lating the management of Glebes and Burial Grounds, be it there-
fore ordained by the Provincial Synod of New South Wales as
follows: —
All Church lands to be conveyed to the Body Corporate.
Clause I.—Whenever any person or persons shall be desirous
of erecting any Church, Parsonage or School, or other building
for the use of the members of the Church of England, or shall be
desirous of providing for the use of the members of the said
Church any Glebe or Burial Ground, they shall, by one or more
of their number, make application to the Agents of the Body Cor-
porate duly constituted in that behalf for the Diocese in which
such building or land is situate. And if the said Agents shall
give their consent, then the parties so applying shall cause to be
conveyed to the Body Corporate, under such one or other of the
forms of Trust contained in the schedule hereto annexed as. may
be applicable, or under such other special Trust as may be mu-
tually agreed upon, the lands or buildings so desired to be con-
veyed.
Consecration of Church.
Clause 11. —Every building erected as a Church on a site ves-
ted in the Body Corporate shall, so soon as it is completed, and
upon its being provided with all things requisite for the celebra-


tion of Divine Service, be consecrated or licensed by the Bishop
of the Diocese in which it is situate, in such form and manner as
to him shall seem convenient.
Note. —lt is to be observed that some clauses already contained in
the preceding Draft Ordinances are re-inserted here as being more in
place—and it may be added that while these sheets have been passing
through the Press, the Committee of the Provincial Synod have recon-
sidered the Draft Incorporation Bill, and will present it to the Provin-
cial Synod in a form considerably altered and in which they trust it
will meet with general approval.
Church not to be used except for the celebration of Divine Worship,
unless with express sanction of Bishop.
Clause lll.—The Church after it has been consecrated shall
not be used without the express sanction of the Bishop for any
other purpose than the celebration of Divine Worship, the admin-
istration of the Sacraments, or the performance of the Bites and
Ordinances of the Church of England ; and no person except
the Bishop shall be allowed to perform any clerical office in the
Church, whether consecrated or licensed, except with the consent
of the Clergyman licensed to officiate in the said Church and of
the Bishop. Provided always that in case there shall not be a
Clergyman so licensed as aforesaid the consent of the Bishop
only shall be necessary.
No Minister to officiate unless duly licensed.
Clause IV.—No person shall be or shall be received as Chap-
lain or Minister or permitted, suffered, or allowed to sing or say
the Common or Open Prayer or to minister the Sacraments, or to
preach any Sermon in any Church vested in the Body Corporate
unless he be first approved, and thereunto licensed by the Bishop
of the Diocese, or (in case the see be vacant) by the guardian of
the Spiritualities under his seal, in such form and manner as to
the said Bishop may seem fit.
Rights of licensed Clergymen.
Clause V.—The Clergyman duly licensed to officiate in any
Church vested in the Body Corporate, so long as he shall be so
licensed, shall have free access and admission into such Church
at all times as he shall think fit, and may celebrate Divine Service,
administer the Sacraments, and perform all other Bites and Ordin-
ances of the Church of England therein, without any hindrance
from the agents of the Body Corporate, or any other person whom-
soever, and shall for such purposes have keys of the Church ;
and such officiating Minister shall and may during such times as
aforesaid freely have, use, possess, and enjoy the Minister’s dwel-
ling-house, garden, appurtenances, and except as hereinafter pro-
vided, the Glebe belonging to such Church ; and receive have,


and take the rents, profits, and issues, and every part thereof
respectively. Provided always that in case the license of such
Clergyman be withdrawn in accordance with the sentence of any
competent tribunal, he shall thereupon ipso facto forfeit and be
absolutely deprived of all and singular his rights in or respec-
ting the Church, Parsonage, School, Glebe, or appurtenances
thereof as aforesaid, and shall thenceforth, if attempting to exer-
cise any such rights, be deemed a trespasser therein.
Where any Glebe shall be capable, by improvement, of producing
more than £l5O per annum the Body Corporate, by their
Agents, may, upon that sum being secured to the officiating
Minister, apply the residue in building and endowing other
Churches.
Clause VI. —Whenever and as often as it shall happen that
the Glebe land belonging to any Church vested in the Body Cor-
porate, not being in possession or occupation of any Clergyman
licensed to officiate in such Church, or with the consent of the
Clergyman being in such possession or occupation, may be im-
proved by building upon the same or otherwise, so as to admit a
greater yearly profit being derived therefrom than the sum of
£l5O, and security be given for payment to the Clergyman who
shall next be licensed to officiate in such Church, and also to the
present officiating Clergyman, if any, so consenting as aforesaid
of the said sum of £l5O annually, it shall and may be lawful for
the Body Corporate by their agents, with the further consent in
writing of the Bishop of the Diocese, to enter into and upon the said
Glebe land, and to let the same upon leases for any term not exceed-
ing ninety-nine years, reserving the rents, issues, and profits thereof
to the said Body Corporate for the time being, who shall and may
receive and apply the said rents, issues, and profits upon the
trust in the first place to pay to the officiating Minister of the
said Church the full sum of £l5O yearly, as and for an allowance
for the said Glebe ; and in the next place, with the consent of
the Bishop, to apply the same, or any part thereof, in or towards
building or enlarging a Church or Churches of the parish or
place to which such Glebe land is annexed, or a residence for
the Clergyman of the same if it be necessary ; and afterwards in
or towards building or enlarging a Church in any other place in
the same township or district, and in the payment of a stipend of
£IOO yearly to the officiating Minister for the time being of the
last mentioned Church ; and as often as the rents, issues, and
profits of any such Glebe land so let by the Body Corporate will
admit thereof upon trust, with the consent of the Bishop, in
manner aforesaid, to apply the same in or towards the building
of other such Churches and houses of residence for Clergymen,
and endowing the officiating Ministers thereof respectively to the


extent of £IOO yearly as aforesaid. Provided nevertheless that
in cases where the residence appropriated for the Clergyman
licensed to officiate in any Church shall be situate upon the Glebe
pertaining-to the same, it shall and may be lawful for the Body
Corporate, and they are hereby required, to reserve any portion of
such Glebe not exceeding one fifth of the whole, which shall be
approved by the Bishop, to be appropriated to the personal use
and occupation of the said Clergyman, in addition to the sum of
£l5O per annum to be secured to him as aforesaid from the rents
and proceeds of such Glebe.
Monuments.
Clause VII.—It shall be lawful for the Churchwardens, with
the consent of the Clergyman licensed to officiate in the Church,
and with the sanction of the Bishop, to permit any monument to
be placed in any part of the Church upon payment to the Church-
wardens of such charges, and subject to such regulations with
reference to obtaining the consent of the Bishop, by a faculty or
otherwise as the Bishop shall sanction and prescribe. And it
shall be lawful for the person so placing such monument as
aforesaid and his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns to
maintain and keep up the same to and for his and their sole and
separate use.
Alterations.
Clause VIII.—It shall not be lawful to make any alteration in
the fabric or internal arrangement of the Church when conse-
crated without the sanction of the Bishop and upon such terms
and conditions as the Bishop may from time to time on that be-
half prescribe.
Burial Grounds.
Clause IX.—Whenever any land shall have been conveyed to
the Body Corporate for the purpose of being used as a Burial
Ground, it shall, as soon as conveniently may be, be duly conse-
crated by the Bishop of the Diocese or by some one acting on his
behalf and according to such form as may be by him directed,
and shall be placed under the charge of the Incumbent of the
Parish in which it is situated, or such other person or persons as
the Body Corporate may appoint; and thenceforth it shall not
be used for any other purpose than for the Burial of the dead,
according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England.
Monuments and Vaults in Burial Ground.
Clause X.—The Officiating Minister, duly licensed as aforesaid,
and the Churchwardens for tbe time being of any Church vested
in the Body Corporate, may with the sanction of the Bishop


permit any monuments to be erected or placed in such parts as
they may deem convenient of the enclosed ground about such
Church or in the Burial Ground belonging thereto, or vaults to
be dug or made in the said Burial Ground upon the payment to
the said Churchwardens, for such permission, by the person or
persons desiring to erect or place any monument in the enclosed
ground about the Church or in the said Burial Ground, or to dig
and make any vault in the said Burial Ground, of such charges
as may from time to time be determined by the Synod of the
Diocese in which such Burial Ground is situate.
School Buildings.
Clause Xl.—All School Buildings and land attached thereto,
held by the Body Corporate, shall, unless held under Special
Trusts, be under the control of the Clergyman duly licensed by
the Bishop to the parish in which such building or lands are
situate, and they shall not be used without the consent of the
Bishop and the Clergyman for any other purposes than those
declared in the Trust Deed thereof.
Note. —lt will be observed that several of the Clauses of the above
Ordinance have already appeared in the Ordinance for the Election of
Churchwardens. They have been transferred to this Ordinance as
more properly belonging to it; and it may be added that while these
sheets have been passing through the press the Committee have recon-
sidered and it is believed much improved, the proposed Act for the
Incorporation of the Church.






