

REMINISCENCES






REMINISCENCES
OF THE
EARLY DAYS OF
THE WIMMERA
BY
THE LATE SAMUEL CARTER.




THE LATE MR. SAMUEL CARTER




INTRODUCTORY.
Dear Reader,
These Reminiscences were written
and intended to be published during my
father's lifetime , but his death came before
it could be accomplished.
The facts are just as he stated them.
This little booklet is now sent out in
memory of him who showed the same brave
spirit during his long suffering illness at
the close of his life, as he did in those
early pioneering days, of which he loved to
talk.
NINA J. CARTER.
Glen is la,
29th Sept., 1911.




REMINISCENCES.
At the request of a large number of friends
I have endeavoured to write some reminis-
cences of the early days of the Wimmera, and
our experiences amongst the blacks.
Time and civilisation are fast effacing the
old landmarks, and there are so few of the
native tribes left, that it may be of interest to
the younger generation to read the history of
those by-gone days; and also to know what
hardships the old pioneers of the colony had
to go through, and what determination was
required for the opening up of the country.
We left Tasmania in 1838, taking three
weeks to come to Melbourne, as the passage
was very rough.
One amusing incident of the voyage is
clearly impressed on my memory. Most of
the passengers suffered severely from sea-
sickness, owing to the stormy weather. One
man had eight tons of apples on board, and
we offered him ten shillings for a case, al-
though, in Tasmania, apples at the time were
selling ten for a penny.
He refused to sell, so that night the sailors
smashed a number of his boxes, and the next
morning the deck was strewn with fruit.
On arrival in Melbourne my father,
Charles Carter, got the appointment from


Governor Latrobe of laying out the road to
Sandridge, which is now Port Melbourne, and
also for making the breakwater across the
Yarra, to keep the salt water from mixing
with the fresh.
Melbourne was supplied at that time with
water from the Yarra, by means of water
carts.
During the making of the road to Sand-
ridge, there was a riot amongst the emigrants
for higher wages, and Captain Lonsdale was
forced to read the Riot Act, and the wages
were reduced in consequence; married men
who had been receiving 30/- per week only
receiving £l, and single men’s wages were
reduced from £1 to 15/-. So they gained
nothing by the disturbance.
There were about, 2000 men at the work,
and they lived in tents on Emerald Hill, now
called South Melbourne.
The Government wished them to push out
into the country, and settle on the land, so,
after the road contract was finished, they
were disbanded.
The Melbourne of to-day, with its beauti-
fully laid-out streets and fine buildings, is
not recognisable with the Melbourne of yes-
terday ; when ?heoaks and gum trees
flourished in all their native grandeur on every
little hillock about the town, and bright
feathered flocks of parrots and birds sang
their songs amongst the branches.
The present site of Scots Church was con-
sidered quite out in the bush at the time of


which I write, also the Catholic Church in
Elizabeth-street.
A big gum tree, a relict of the past, was
left growing beside the Catholic Chapel in
Elizabeth-street for many years; but I believe
it is now removed.
A small rise, covered with sheoaks, called
Bateman’s Hill, became the site of Spencer
Street Station.
Another rise, not far off, was called the
Flagstaff; here Celey, a squatter, and some
of his men, who were killed by the blacks,
were buried.
Bullock drays were the chief mode of con-
veyance, as there were very few horses.
Not many of the present generation, used
to the luxury of trams and motors, would
care to go back fifty or sixty years to this
humble way of travelling.
Many a stylish wedding party had no other
means of getting to Melbourne to be married;
and 1 have seen teams bogged in the middle of
Collins-street, which seems hard to realise in
these days.
There was no bridge over the Yarra;
people were punted across, the punt being
large enough to carry a fair sized dray; and
there was also a ferry boat.
The old cemetery was just at the top of
Elizabeth-street; also the sheep and cattle
yards.
When we fir<t came to Melbourne we lived
in Flinders Lane for a time, then moved into


Roach’s Terrace, which is now part of
Bourke-street.
After finishing the road, my father entered
into a contract with a man named Hull to
ship a large quantity of wattle bark to Eng-
land —about 400 or 500 tons.
He engaged a number of men, and we
shifted to the other side of the Yarra, between
Victoria Bridge and the Yarra Falls.
Wattle was very plentiful, and he made a
good deal of money out of the contract.
He bought teams of bullocks for carting
the bark into Melbourne from James Mun-
tham Darlot.
When the wattle contract was finished, he
made arrangements with Mr. Darlot to come
up country, and take up a station for him,
the date being May, 1842.
We were two years in Melbourne, and two
years on the Yarra.
When we left Melbourne we had two teams
of bullocks, and 400 head of cattle, 70 or 80
of which belonged to Mr. Ellerman, and the
remainder to Mr. Darlot.
Ellerman was a young man of 16, and Dar-
lot was about the same age.
We came through Keilor after leaving Mel-
bourne, and then through the Black Forest
on to the Loddon. Here we picked up Mr.
Ellerman’s cattle.
From the Loddon we made our way to the
Ampitheatre Station, which belonged to Par-
son Irving, and was managed by Mr. John
Robertson.


We were only able to travel two or three
miles a day; some days not even so far
owing to the bogginess of the country, as
there were no hard-beaten tracks.
, From the Ampitheatre we crossed to De
Cameron’s Station, and then on by Crowlands
to Woodlands and Lexington Stations. Lex-
ington was then owned by Mr. Wills, who
was afterwards killed in Queensland by the
blacks. He was the father of Tom Wills the
cricketer.
from Lexington we travelled by Mucbilly,
a place near Hall’s Gap, on the Little Wim-
mera Mr. Rose, the owner, had just come
Dack from taking up Rosebrook for a heifer
station when we arrived, a number of the
squatters preferring the timbered country for
stations. Leaving the family at Mucbilly
my father and I took all the bullocks and
lightest dray, and followed the cattle, which
were on ahead.
The country was in a dreadful stats, and
we were constantly unloading, and when
near Ledcourt my father was bogged almost
to the waist whilst carrying a bag of flour
from the dray.
He told me afterwards that he would never
have got out had not a blackfellow come to
his assistance.
Ledcourt Station in those days belonged to
a Sydney firm, and was managed by a man
named Sheppard.
After spelling the bullocks a day there, we
went on to an out-station, called the Four
Post, on the Big Wimmera.


When we left the Four Post we struck
Major Mitchell’s track, and followed the
Wimmera down to what is known as Longer-
nong.
Major Mitchell had passed this way some
two or three years before, but the prints of
the wheels were still quite plain.
Mr. Ellerman and Mr. Darlot both thought
that it was needless to go further searching
for country; they were both in favour of
taking up a station at Longernong. My
father, however, was not of the same opinion;
he thought the country too flat. So, taking a
week’s supply of food, he and Mr. Henry
Darlot (a nephew) went on an exploring
expedition.
They followed the Wimmera down to Lake
Hindmarsh, and came back by Mount Ara-
piles, finally deciding on North Brighton as a
suitable place of settlement. Dooen was the
native name for this piece of country.
We shifted the cattle and rest of our be-
longings from Longerenong to North Brigh-
ton on the 10th August, 1842.
On the Sunday following we went in search
of a crossing over the river, in order that we
might take up land on both sides.
When we had gone a little distance from
the camp, we saw two blacks on the opposite
side of the river. They did not at first see
us, but, when they did, they picked up their
spears, evidently intending to throw them.
Mr. Ellerman pointed his gun at them, and
one black got behind the other. He wished


to fire, as his gun was only loaded with small
shot; but we would not let him, thinking it
was best to try and get on friendly terms
with the natives.
We had a blackfellow at the camp called
Callaghan, a native of the district, and he
coo-eed to the two blacks, and told them in
his own language that we did not wish to
hurt them.
He talked for a long time, and finally
coaxed them to come to the river’s edge op-
posite our camp.
1 hey told him we were the first white men
they had ever seen. They had seen the track
of Major Mitchell’s dray, and were very
frightened, as they could see no end to it. The
wheel tracks they took for the footprints of
the white man, and the bullock tracks for
those of the white women.
Through the interpreter, they gave us a
great deal of information; told us where we
could ford the river; also get pine logs to
build a house.
When the blackfellow Callaghan had
shown his native friends how to open and shut
a couple of pocket knives, we tied these in a
handkerchief, together with some bread and
meat, and threw the bundle across the water
to them.
They seemed very pleased, but would not
look at the contents in our presence.
Callaghan impressed the fact on them that
the white people meant no harm. We did not


see any more natives for some days, but were
always on the watch.
We went in search of the pine logs they
spoke of, suitable for stockyards, huts, etc.
Their information proved to be correct, so we
cut down a number of beautiful trees, straight
as a rush, and carted them to our camping
place.
When this was done, our next move was to
build a fortified hut; and, leaving my father
to plan out the building of it, Mr. Ellerman,
Callaghan and myself started back to Muc-
billy Station for the rest of our family and
loading.
By this time the country had dried up con-
siderably, so our task of travelling was much
easier. It took us about a week to reach
Mucbilly. We reloaded the drays, and, with
the family, set out on our return journey to
North Brighton, taking almost the same time
to get back.
We found on our return that the hut was
nearly built, the roof being made of box
bark, cut for the purpose. It was planned in
such a way that we could shoot from all
sides through port holes, with sliding doors.
After firing, each port hole could be closed at
once by means of the sliding doors —thus
preventing the blacks from throwing spears
through.
When the hut was finished, we made stock-
yards for the cattle, and our next move was to
break in cows. So far, we had been living on
bread, or rather damper, and meat, without
luxuries of any kind.


When the cow-bails were made, we put up
a very high post, with pegs all the way to the
top, and my daily task was to climb this pole
and keep a strict look-out for natives. We
always kept a double-barrelled gun by our
side, to be ready at a minute’s notice if at-
tacked.
The blacks grew very bold when they found
the white people did not intend to kill them.
Mr. I). C. Simpson took up Glenisla Sta-
tion about the same time as we took up North
Brighton. Ihe natives used to steal his sheep
and bring them over to the Wimmera to eat
them, firing the country in between to avoid
their tracks being seen.
The squatters often formed parties to shoot
down the blacks, as it was a fight for life in
many cases. Ihe natives never sought re-
venge, but would shoot down any poor fellow
they came across, whether ha had injured
them or not.
Once they tasted mutton, they would use
any means in their power to obtain it, either
by stealing the sheep out of tha yards, or by
driving away a whole flock, if they got the
chance.
As there was no police protection in those
days, the squatters had to protect themselves
as bast they could. It was never safe to move
from the house without a double-barrelled
gun, as the natives might sneak on you at
any moment.
I hey caught dingoes as puppies, and
tamed them, using them for hunting, and I


have seen as many as three in one camp.
These dingoes were very frightened of a
white man, and would hide at once if one
appeared.
Soon after settling at North Brighton we
gave a bullock to the blacks, and they had a
big corroboree. Some 300 or 400 assembled
to enjoy the feast. A party of our friends
went down to look on, but, not liking their
sullen attitude, soon came away. Whenever
a tribe appeared, a good watch was kept night
and day until they went away, as they were
treacherous, and not to be trusted.
A few nights after this corroboree, two black
boys came to our house, and said the mob in-
tended to kill us all, and take all we possessed.
My father, who was a very strong, determined
looking man. took the boys inside the forti-
fied hut, fastened the door, and lit the slush
lamp. Then, going into a little gun room he
had made, brought out all the firearms. Pick-
ing them up one by one, he then showed the
boys how the blacks would be shot by point-
ing the guns through the gun holes, and as
quickly drawing them in and replacing the
slides.
He made them understand he would shoot
everyone that came to the place, but also
told them he would not harm them provided
they left us alone.
The natives were very much afraid, as they
knew him to be a crack shot. These same
boys had seen him shoot twelve ducks out of
thirteen in one shot with a long musket, the
ducks being in a line on a log in the river.


After explaining everything, my father
opened a big shutter to let in some light, at
the same time giving them some bread and
meat. He impressed the fact upon them that
he was not afraid of anyone, and they could
tell it to the rest of the mob.
Whilst he was putting away the firearms,
the two boys jumped through the window,
and disappeared as if by magic.
The night before the river was one blaze
of native fires for miles; but after the dis-
appearance of these boys there wasn’t a fire to
be seen anywhere; so evidently the warning
had taken effect. Strict watch was kept night
and day for a week afterwards, but the blacks
never returned.
Jim Crow, the king of this tribe, some time
after had his knee fractured through fighting
with other natives. We allowed him to camp
close to the place, and dressed his wound
every day till it healed.
He was very pleased at the treatment he
received at our hands, and showed his grati-
tude later on in the year by saving our lives.
The blacks were very much afraid of cattle,
and when we first came to the Wimmera we
discovered a bullock left by Major Mitchell.
They were afraid to go out on the open plain
where this animal was, as it used to
charge them. During the day the
bullock stayed on a little plain where there
was only one tree, and always waited till
dark before going for a drink to the river,
returning again to the plain for safety. When


our cattle arrived it was some time before it
would take up with them, and seemed to pre-
fer being alone.
When we had been in the Wimmera a few
months our tea and sugar ran out, so we had
to live on milk for six months, which was
anything hut nice.
One cannot realise at the present time of
easy telephone communication, good postal
arrangements and railways what trials the
old pioneers had to face in order to bring the
country into a state of civilisation. In those
early days of hardship and danger one had to
face peril at almost every turn, and a hold
front was often the only source of protection.
To show fear would have meant death in
many cases.
And yet in spite of it all we were happy
and contented, ready to face whatever came
in our way with brave hearts; and what we
couldn’t get we simply had to do without.
When Jim Crow made friends with us, we
used to allow a few of the friendly natives to
stay about, as they would always inform us
as to the movements of the mob. In this
way we obtained a good deal of information,
and knew when it was best to journey out for
food supplies.
Hearing from the friendly blacks that the
coast was clear to get away, we decided to go
for some goods, which had been sent as far
as Charlotte Plains, on the Loddon—a jour-
ney of about 150 miles—-not an easy under-
taking.


The treacherous natives preferred the sheep
to cattle runs —sheep were always more easily
obtained then cattle.
Knowing that the blacks were a good dis-
tance off, my father and I, leaving the rest of
the party to protect the homestead, started off
for Charlotte Plains.
I was only nine years old at the time, but
had been brought up to fear nothing.
With six bullocks and a light dray, we set
out on our journey, and made good progress,
as it was summer time. Nothing of any im-
portance happened till we returned with the
supplies on board as far as the Four Post
Station, about thirty miles from home. Prior
to our arrival at the Four Post the blacks had
stolen about 200 sheep, taking them in the
direction we were to travel the next day.
As there was such a big tribe, the shepherds
were frightened to follow, and allowed them
to take the sheep away without offering any
resistance.
Word had been sent to the homestead for
a party to follow them, but no one had ar-
rived whilst we were there. We decided to
push on, and risk the consequences, which
we knew might be serious.
We had travelled fourteen or fifteen miles
when we saw the smoke of their camps, about
a quarter of a mile off.
We were now in a forest of thick box timber,
and the reader can imagine the wildness of
the scene. No settlements, no civilisation of


any kind near, no help from anywhere should
we need it—nothing but a wild bush track
through a forest of timber, with the blue sky
above, and the screeching of parrots to break
the stillness as they flew from tree to tree,
and hundreds of native fires not far off to
warn us of the danger which lay ahead. We
did not stop, nor did we even speak, thinking
that if we went on very quietly the blacks
might not notice us, as they had such a feast
of mutton to take up their attention.
Alas! Our hopes were not to be realised,
for, to our dismay, we heard bloodthirsty
yells from hundreds of voices across the river,
and knew we had been seen.
We beckoned them off, trying to make them
understand we did not want them, and one
can imagine we tried to make our meaning
very clear, seeing our lives lay hanging in the
balance.
They consulted amongst themselves, and
the readers of this narrative will understand
that those seconds were not productive of
happiness to the solitary man and little boy
who stood waiting their decision. Memory
takes me back over the long years between,
and in a flash I can see again the whole scene
before me, and feel the sickening dread which
crept round my heart as I watched those
natives swim across the river with their spears
and waddies.
We decided to go on quietly, pretending not
to notice their movements, until they had
formed a half-circle round us, and we were
hemmed in on all sides.


My father asked my advice what was best
to do, and, boy though I was, I implored him
not to shoot, knowing only too well that had
he done so they would certainly have speared
us to death.
On my advice he laid the gun on the top of
the dray, and the blacks, who were in the act
of throwing their spears, at once put them
down, and walked up to us.
One talks of hair standing on end, and
creeps down the back, but it takes a thrilling
experience of this kind to make one fully
understand what it means.
Here we were surrounded by a mob of
about 200 savage faces, peering at us from all
quarters, and yet we dared not move for fear
our meaning might be misconstrued, and, as
boldly as possible under the circumstances,
we looked death in the face.
The bullocks in the dray were so frightened
that the chains and yokes rattled on them.
One blackfellow pulled off a bag of sugar,
and the mob began to eat it.
To my horror a huge native, with wild,
glaring eyes, and fiendish expression, walked
up to my father, and seized him by the coat,
digging his great fingers almost into the
flesh, and, raising his waddy, was in the act
of striking him on the head.
My heart beat frantically with terror, but,
as if by magic, the king, Jim Crow, whom I
have mentioned before, called out, “Mellegig
white man; Mellegig white man” (which
meant that the white man had been very
good).


At his words the blackfellow let go his
hold, and we both shook hands with Jim
Crow.
We made him understand that if they only
left us alone we would Jdll a bullock at the
station for them.
Some of the younger blacks who had seen
me before gave me to understand that as soon
as the wild fellows of the tribe had eaten the
sugar, they would follow us again.
We had a pound or two of tobacco with us
which the shepherds of the Four Post had
given us to take to a friend of theirs at North
Brighton.
This we gave to Jim Crow, who put the
remainder of the sugar on the dray and told
us to go on.
We showed as friendly and bold a face as
possible, and did as we were told.
The tribe sat down and began to eat the
sugar whilst we departed as quietly as pos-
sible, but needless to say as soon as we were
out of sight we raced for our lives.
Once out on the plain we could see the
blacks doing their best to catch up to us.
We were about fourteen miles from the
home station, and never will I forget that run
for life.
There was no need to urge the bullocks on,
fear lent them wings and they raced till their
tongues lolled out.
We took it in turn to run beside them, and
when they showed signs of slackening their


speed we urged the poor brutes on as best
we could.
A run for life along a good metalled road
of to-day would be no laughing matter, but
what it was then, through the wild bush, feel-
ing that every minute the blacks might gain
on us, only one who has been through it can
know.
We raced for seven miles and crossed the
Yarrambeac Creek, now called Longernong,
and had a straight run to the station.
However, our speed was too much for the
tribe, although a dozen or so of the younger
ones held on till we came in sight of home,
and then disappeared.
My father’s intention was to shoot the first
one who caught up to us. Had he done so
this narrative would probably never have been
written, as the result would have meant death
for both of us.
We arrived at North Brighton without fur-
ther adventures, and found all well, no blacks
being seen at the station at all during our
absence.
Everyone was delighted and thankful to
see us back, and also to get the food supplies,
especially the tea and sugar, which were
thought great luxuries.
Whilst we were away on this journey Mr.
De Cameron wanted my father to come and
manage his cattle run, as they were going wild
from want of attention, but he would not take
the position.


After a while the blacks gradually began
to get friendly, and a number of lubras and
boys camped near the homestead on the banks
of the river. They lived chiefly on a small
rat (which used to burrow in the clay banks),
and they ate a root like a raddish called a
yam. These things formed the chief food of
the women and children.
When the river got low the blackfellows
would wade into the water and stir up the
mud at the bottom, thus bringing the fish to
the surface for air. They would then put
their hands underneath the fish and throw
them on to the bank.
Of course this method of catching them
would only be done when the river was low.
Kangaroo and emu were very plentiful, also
dingoes and wild turkeys, and the natives
used to snare the latter, as they were fond of
them.
I have seen a black man trying for two
hours before he caught one of these birds.
He dodged about with a spear and a long
reed on the end of it. To the end of the reed
he tied a small bird with a loop of string for
snaring, the other end of which came back
to his hand so as he could pull the noose
tight when the turkey put its head through.
The string was made of native flax, twisted
together. In one hand he carried a large
bough, and in the other the snare.
Every time the turkey pecked at anything
on the ground the blackfellow would take a


step or two nearer, always dangling the bird
before the turkey. It took him fully three
hours to snare it, for whenever the turkey
looked up the native kept perfectly still.
However, once the bird put its head through
the noose, he lost no time in securing his
prey.
And no doubt he enjoyed his meal much
better for having had so much difficulty in
getting it.
Wild dingoes were also thought a great
luxury. Mr. Ellerman had a kangaroo dog
which used to kill these animals, and when
he came home after looking to the cattle, the
blacks would call to see if he had killed any
dingoes during his ride.
If his answer were yes, they would follow
the horse’s tracks till they found the dead
dog, then bring it home and have a great
feast.
They would dig a hole in the sand, make
a big fire till the sand got very hot, then put
the dingo on the sand and fire, cover it up,
and make another fire on top and leave it till
they thought it was cooked.
None of the young men (those who had
no whiskers) or lubras were allowed to eat
any of the meat. I have known Mr. Eller-
man’s dog to kill six dingoes in a week and
the natives went out for everyone, greatly de-
lighted with the week’s work.
A number of the blacks had only one eye,
having lost the other through shamfights.
They would take sides and get bundles of


bulrushes and reeds and spear these at one
another. This was a great game amongst the
boys.
They always painted themselves with red
and white clay before a corroboree, and tied
small boughs with string to their legs.
The lubras would double up a kangaroo
skin and use it as a drum for beating time,
and sing a weird sort of song at the same
time—something to this effect: —
“A-lip-maliah and a-ling-a ling a-ling.”
It had some reference to the sky, clouds
and lightning.
The men also made a burring noise whilst
going through the performance.
The corroboree lasted two or three hours,
and as a rule many of the men got very ex-
cited towards the end, especially if they had
had a good feast beforehand. They used to
make a kind of sweet intoxicating drink from
honeysuckle apples by soaking them in water.
This they called “Beeo,” and were very fond
of it.
We had now been settled at North Brigh-
ton for about six months, and so far had seen
no other white men.
Mr. Dugald McPherson was the next
squatter to come to the Wimmera; he
brought sheep with him, and when he got as
far as Longernong he left the shepherds and
came on to North Brighton. We were de-
lighted to know we were going to have a
neighbour and made him very welcome.


We advised him to settle on the Yarram-
beac Creek, now Longernong, as he had ex-
plored most of the country round, and that
seemed the most suitable for wool-growing.
He took our advice, and with his partner,
Mr. Taylor, founded Longernong station.
The next arrivals to the district were Splatt
and Pynsent, who did not like the plain coun-
try, so they went further south and settled
on the Norton Creek, founding Wonwondah
Station. We now had neighbours on the
south side.
Soon after this John Wilson (a brother of
Sir Samuel Wilson) came to the Wimmera
with a flock of sheep.
He got permission from Pynsent and Har-
lot to run them on a portion of their pro-
perties. This afterwards became Walmer
Station.
Leaving his sheep there with the shepherds
for some time, he went to Geelong to see
Captain Fynes, the Commissioner of Crown
Lands, about taking up a property.
Captain Fynes gave him a run in between
Pynsent, and Harlot, considering they had too
much country.
In those days whatever the Commissioner
said was law, he had more power than the
Minister of I.ands has at the present time.
This property was called Walmer, and his
brother Charlie lived there for years as
manager for Wilson Bros.


Eayley and Hamilton were the next squat-
ters to arrive, taking up country at Dimboola,
but were ruined by the natives constantly
spearing their sheep.
The country was now beginning to get
more settled, and we began to think of taking
up a station on our own account.
My father’s first intention had been to look
for country near Mt. Gambier, but by this
time it was all gone.
Of course we had taken up North Brigh-
ton for Mr. Darlot.
Eventually we secured some land at Brim-
spring, not going further south.
When first settled we only had cattle, but
we afterwards bought a flock of sheep from
a man named Henry, and I used to shepherd
them.
About this time an old captain came up
from Melbourne to teach us.
1 had school at night when I was not
grinding wheat, but my sisters and brothers
were taught in the day as well.
Bunging the mill was a great item in the
daily tasks of those olden days, and hard
work it was, too, but it had to be done or
else go without bread.
I remember on one occasion the last of the
flour was done before the wheat crop was
ripe, and matters looked serious. We walked
round the crop paddock, found a little patch
that was almost ripe, cut it, made it into flour,
and baked the same night.


A verse of an old song comes to my mind
now concerning the bunging of the mill,
which tends to show it was not an easy task—
“l’d sooner be a sapling
And live on Mt. Rouse Hill,
I han I’d hire me to a squatter
Who has to bung the mill.”
Dingoes were very plentiful in those days,
so shepherding was an absolute necessity, and
we had great difficulty in keeping these
animals from getting at the sheep, although
we made dog-proof yards—that is a stubb
fence.
My brother William and I made a watch
box and hurdle fences.
Ihe watch-box was a small house with
handles at each side, so it could be shifted
about, and it was large enough for two
people to sleep in. To keep the dingoes off
we rigged a bullock bell on one side of the
yards and had a string from it into the watch-
box. If we heard the sheep rush about dur-
ing the night we pulled the string of the bell
and that would rouse the tame dogs and
frighten the dingoes away.
Our nights were very often disturbed, but
we were young, and it was good to be out
under the stars, and the free open life made
strong men of us later on. What sleep we
did have was sound and good.
As time went on we had a good number of
sheep, and the adjoining neighbours were in-
clined to be jealous of our prosperity.


They kept impounding our flocks thinking
we had no capital to enter law suits against
them.
in this, however, they were slightly mis-
taken, as we took the cases to Melbourne and
got £250 damages on the first and £SOO on
the second, and the right of all the country
claimed by us.
As in most cases of law we got very little
out of it on the whole, but it ended all ex-
citement over the land question, as our
neighbours saw the errors of their ways and
left us alone.
A year or so later 1 bought Rosebrook
station from Mr. Jervis. None of the country
was divided at this time so we set to work
and fenced in the property, thus being able
to turn out sheep without shepherds.
Once when my father and brother William
had gone to Melbourne on busings a big mob
of blacks suddenly appeared and camped
about 300 yards from the house.
Some of the lubras came crying to my
mother, telling her as well as they were able
that they were very sorry but the mob had
decided to kill us all.
I was only a boy, but had been left in charge
of the family, and did my best to put on a
brave face and quieten their fears.
After a consultation we decided that my
mother should dress up in my father’s clothes
and show herself to the natives.
She did this, and taking a double-barrelled
gun, bravely walked out in view of the tribe,


pointing her gun up in the trees and fired as
if at birds. I followed her. picking up hits
of bark, etc., off the ground as if she had
shot something.
After firing two or three shots she went
back to the house and put on her ordinary
dress, whilst I went purposely past the blacks’
camp whistling as if searching for the cows.
The blacks called out “Name big one Mas-
ter,” and I told them in a lordly way that the
big one master had come up from Melbourne.
They always thought the owner of the pro-
perty lived in Melbourne. Of course my ob-
ject in passing their camp was to solicit this
question, and give them information to
frighten them if possible.
They had very exaggerated ideas of the
master of the property, thinking he was very
powerful and could do wonderful things,
which was just as well.
Some of the lubras came to the house later
on, but my mother ordered them off very
angrily, and our joy can be imagined when
during the afternoon we saw them packing
up and then finally disappearing altogether.
Had we shown fear there isn’t the slightest
doubt we should have all been killed.
“Necessity is the mother of invention,” they
say, and it is surprising what hardships one
can go through and what trials live down if
one has to do it, and there is no way out.
In those days there were very few horses,
and verv often journeys had to be made on
foot.


Important business had cropped up concern-
ing our land necessitating a trip to Mel-
bourne. My father could not leave the run
at the time, so it lay with me to go in his
place.
We only had two horses; one of these had
a sore back and the other was needed for work,
so I had to walk.
Off I started one sunny morning with the
farewells of my family ringing in my ears,
and a few provisions tied in a handkerchief
to last until I came to the next place of settle-
ment, or could stop a night with a friendly
squatter, and when I couldn’t to make my bed
under a gum tree. 1 did the trip to Melbourne
and back in eleven days, walking sixty miles
the last day. How long the miles seemed
when nearing home, but I was young and
strong, and my spirit urged me on to finish
the journey. So I arrived at Brimspring at
eleven o’clock that night, greatly to the sur-
prise of my family, who wondered where in
the world I had come from.
When the country began to get settled and
prosperity grew apace, the next source of
annoyance to the settlers came in the shape
of bushrangers.
These armed men paraded the country, tak-
ing all that lay before them if they possibly
could. Coming suddenly on people who were
quite unprepared in many cases, it was use-
less to stand the risk of being shot dead, so
often there was nothing for it but to sub-
mit quietly with the best grace possible.


Lawless men as they were, they would have
thought nothing of putting a bullet through
the head of a fellow-creature who was at a
disadvantage, and in their power, supposing
he refused to do their bidding.
The Rutherford brothers were the first
squatters to be stuck up, as far as we knew, in
our district.
They owned a station on the Richardson,
near what is now known as the Warranook
estate.
One bright afternoon three spruce-looking
men on well-groomed horses rode up to the
homestead. Mr. George Rutherford and some
of his men, thinking they were visitors, went
forward to meet them as they dismounted.
Judge their surprise when they were all
covered by pistols and told if they dared call
out or make a fuss they were dead men.
Seeing it was useless to resist Mr. Ruther-
ford and his employees remained quietly
where they were. The bushrangers coolly
ordered them into the dining-room of the
house, locked the door, and two of the party
kept guard outside ready to shoot the first
man who resisted or tried to get out.
The third bushranger went in search of Mr.
Willie Rutherford, who was digging in the
garden, and quite unconscious of what had
taken place. Presenting the pistol at Mr.
Rutherford the bushranger ordered him to
come back to the house, but he, not being of
the same turn of mind, and a very powerful


man into the bargain, closed with his adver-
sary and knocked him down.
He then made off to sea what was going
on elsewhere; the bushranger fired but missed
aim.
On arriving at the homestead Mr. Ruther-
ford found two more of the gang. Taking
them by surprise he promptly knocked both
down, jumped over them and sprang to his
bedroom door, which was locked, but he
quickly burst it open.
The two bushrangers fired at him as he
did so, but luckily missed aim.
A leaded pistol lay on his dressing table,
quick as lightning he jumped through his
window and rushed to tha front door, intend-
ing to nab these men in their own trap.
Seeing he was armed and not wishing for
a second encounter with such a Hercules, they
bolted in such a hurry that one man caught
half of his coat on the garden fence and tore
it off.
'This trophy Mr. Willie Rutherford bore in
triumph to the prisoners in the diningroom,
who were delighted at the turn things had
taken.
I went to the place a few days later and
saw the five slugs which had been fired at
Mr. Willie Rutherford, sticking in the wood-
work of the house. He told me he could have
shot any 0113 of them, but was afraid the other
two would turn knowing his pistol was empty,
and of course he had no idea where his brother
George and the rest of the station hands were.


One of these bushrangers got such a fright
that he gave up the business afterwards. I
used to go over to this station every year to
help break in horses, as 1 was very fond of
riding buck jumpers, and they were only too
glad of assistance.
These same bushrangers went on to Murra
Murra and stuck up Mr. John Robertson,
taking horses, saddles and clothing.
From there they went on to Harrow and
stuck up the Dwyers and Whittakers.
At Mr. Whittaker’s place one outlaw went
in search of the son, who could be seen in a
paddock, a little distance from the house,
whilst the other stayed at the homestead.
On entering the house he found to his sur-
prise that the inmates were not going to be
taken without a struggle.
Mr. Whittaker, though an old man, pluckily
picked up an old gun and snapped it twice.
The gun was not loaded, and Miss Whittaker
with great presence of mind, slipped behind
the outlaw, threw up his arm and pulled the
pistol out of his hand.
Mr. Whittaker and his brave daughter then
took their prisoner and securely tied him down.
The other man was easily taken on his arrival
with the son.
They were sent to Portland, tried for all
the robberies, and got fourteen years.
After the trial they were shut up in the
Warrnambool jail, but escaped and came back
to the Victoria Ranges.


Once more our part of the country was in
a state of wild excitement, and the police
warned us to keep a strict watch for them,
which we did all night.
The following morning, on going out about
daylight, 1 saw a man come within sight of
our house, and then turn away as if trying
to avoid being seen.
I quickly gave warning to my father and
brother, but the man having caught sight of
me in the meantime made off into the bush.
. M y brother and I overtook and stopped
him, and my father, on coming up, asked him
several questions. As he could not answer
these satisfactorily, he was told he would
have to wait till the police came.
Leaving this man in my father’s charge we
\\ ent in search of the others we felt sure were
not far off. We had gone no distance when we
heard a shot fired, and made for the sound.
We found our prisoner had run away, but
we quickly overtook him, and after a short
tussle, had him bound.
We brought him to the homestead and I
was left in charge all day.
He was securely fastened hand and foot
as we thought, then a deal table was put
between us and a loaded pistol at my hand,
and there we sat opposite each other all day.
The time seemed to me like weeks and years
rolled into one enormous whole, for I felt if
I took my eyes off the prisoner for a second
that he was ready to pounce on me.


We had sent post haste for the police, and
when they arrived we found that the man had
been sitting with loosened hands all the time.
Having very small hands he had cleverly
slipped his bonds, and as he himself said, had
I given him the slightest show, he would have
made short work of me. And no doubt he
would.
That night a policeman was padlocked to
him, and in spite of this the sergeant was
afraid he would get away, so to make things
doubly secure, we also padlocked the prisoner
to a post.
He was taken to Melbourne, but on the way
up the Yarra, slipped his irons and got right
away, never being heard of again.
The other two were never caught either.
Some years after we had another experience
with Captain Melville and his men, all notori-
ous bushrangers.
We were going to Geelong with wool. Men
being scarce in those days, one either had to
do the carting themselves or lose money on
the waste of time in getting the wool away.
We had reached the Fiery Creek Plains,
generally voting a carrier’s life a pretty dull
one, when something occurred to break the
monotony and put us on our mettle.
Three men rode over the plains towards us,
and we knew by the look of them that they
were bushrangers. We were not prepared,
and would certainly have been taken very
easily, but luckily for us a heavy thunder-
storm came on which probably saved our lives.


As soon as they rode off (owing to the
fierceness of the storm) we made up our minds
to camp. Getting out our firearms we made
everything secure in case of an attack, but
dawn found us still unmolested.
As soon as we started on the road the same
three men again overtook us, but this time we
were all prepared to fire on a given signal
from my father, who was driving in a buggy,
and was thus able to keep a strict watch on
their movements.
One felt one’s muscles stiffen, and our hands
tightened on our guns as we trudged along,
keenly alert to every movetnent of the men
who rode silently beside us.
On we trudged, every moment tense with
hidden excitement, and yet no signal came.
Then they rode ahead and held a consulta-
tion. After the consultation they came back
on opposite sides of the road, and one of
them asked my brother whose wool it was.
“Now, boys, be ready, they mean business
this time,” spoke my father, in a low voice,
as the bushrangers returned a second time.
On they came with hard-set faces like hawks
ready to pounce on a quarry, and yet they
seemed undecided, looking at one another as
if asking what each one thought.
At length, not liking the look of our de-
termined faces and guns, two of them rode
away. The third kept beside me, pretending
to rub up tobacco. He was so close that as
he rubbed his hands together I could easily
see there was nothing in them.


1 think his reason for doing this was to
find out if our guns were capped.
At length, seeing we were fully prepared
for a battle, he too rode off without harming
us in any way.
We had only gone five miles when we met
a man who had been stuck up, losing £4O
and his revolver. Had he resisted he would
have lost his life.
This gang robbed everyone else they met
along the road, and at Rokewood stuck up 1 7
teams, taking all the drivers possessed.
I smile as I hear the younger generation
talk of the long country drives and tiring
journeys by rail, they little know the meaning
of their talk as compared with those olden
times.
Ah! well things have changed, and still the
world wags on.
To return to our reminiscences: Captain
Melville was at last caught, and was found
one morning by one of the warders, hanged
in the hulks at Williamstown.
Times became more settled. Things were
flourishing all over the country, and we
bought Glenisla, then North Brighton, and
years later we purchased Walmer Station.
I lived at Glenisla, and was Black Pro-
tector for many years, the Government send-
ing me stores and clothing for them.
I learnt a good deal of their language, and
though not able to speak it fluently, could
understand when they were talking to one
another.


The following are a few words which may
be of interest. The spelling of them is rather
difficult, and I am afraid I have forgotten
a great deal, as it is so long since I saw
any black people:—
Kangaroo Coora
Emu Gower
Wallaby Bitte-Werap
McKenzie Falls . . . . Mee-Koonongwerap
(The meaning of this is black fish can’t get
any higher up the river).
Wild Dog Wilker
Black Duck Wee-rap
Kangaroo Camp Burry Gurry
Wood Duck Pierp Pierp
Grass Duck Wootchuck
Native Cat Beerek
Kangaroo Rat Pot Chook
A Rogue Blackfellow Binnyweeok
Lubra Blockkilweerney
Turkey Kilorberchin
Crane Duckuckermunda
Thunder Munda
Lightning Weringweringa
Black Snake Woolernert
Tiger Snake Curnell
Lighter Snake Watchong
Jew Lizard Kan
Stumpy Lizard Wallup
Big Water Murtacotchin
What is it! Nungu
Tomahawk Gatum Gatum
Boomerang Gatum Gatum
Quick Warrawee
To get a bucket of water Manahah Kercotchin
’Possum Walay


Flying Squirrel Toin
Rain Walla Walla
Blanket Mucca Mucca
One Knip
Two Bullich
Three Kiup Bullich
Four Bullichy Bullich
Five Kiup Munya
Six Munya by Kiup
Seven Bullichy Munya
Gum trees Pieel
She oak tree Goolert
Honeysuckle Woorak
Big swamp Whoolpoer or Dooen
Big water Cherapool
Wattle Book Book
Star Dirt
Spear thrower Woomera
A thing used to fight with Mulka
Spear Pe—el
Tittle Hill Bepcha
Fire We
Rosebrook Station Bugum Bugum
Sheep Jumbug
Horse Kum Kum and Yarramum
Two small swamps at Brimspring and Won-
wondoh Stations Chucklcalapert
Wonwondahwechuck
House Murtook and Mi Mi
Big mountain Wartook
Small house or camp . . . . Picininny Mi Mi
Gross-cut saw Del del Cook
Song about clouds, etc. . . A-lip-maliah and
A-ling a ling a-ling


The aboriginals, taken on the whole, were
a lazy, wandering race, never staying long in
one place. In very olden times, before the
arrival of the whites, they congregated in
large numbers at a rock in the Victoria Ranges
near Glenisla. This rock is still marked with
native pictures and signs, though rather dis-
figured by white people writing names over the
stone.
They counted time by moons and would
draw strokes on the rock representing the
number of moons they had been there.
There were also rough sketches of kan-
garoo and emu, and figures, but these have
almost been covered 'by the writing of white
people, who have had picnic parties to the
rock.
The aboriginal drawings were done in red
ochre, mixed with opossum fat. This com-
bination made a kind of paint, which has re-
sisted the ravages of time and weather, and
but for the disfigurement by the whites, the
writings are as clear as the day they were
painted on the stone.
Some of the black men worked very well
and others were lazy and good-for-nothing
fellows.
When the Government called them into the
Mission Station, one married black man re-
fused to leave my station, and 1 always found
him a faithful, manly servant.
The natives had curious ways of burying
their dead. Some buried their friends in the
trees and others in the ground, putting two
cross sticks over the grave, and would hang


a billy in between them. The idea being that
the dead would have some food ready if ever
they came to life.
An old lubra lived to be 100 years old at
(llenisla, when D. C. Simpson owned the pro-
pety. Her hair was snow white, and she also
had a long white beard.
When she died we made a coffin for her, and
were going to bury her, but her relatives
wished the body to be near her own people.
We gave it to them, but afterwards found
that they first broke an arm and a leg, then
buried the coffin and placed the body in a
tree about a mile from the spot.
A married couple lived at Rosebrook when
Mr. Rose owned the station, and they had
one little girl of two years old.
One afternoon the child was missing, and
an old blackfellow named Jack (native name
Rinneyweeok) was missing too. Everyone
on the place turned out to search for the child,
amongst the number being some blacks who
were camped near the homestead.
One of these natives tracked the old black-
fellow up the mountains, and made him give
up the child, telling him if he did not do so
he would be shot.
After any wrong-doing this old blackfellow
would disappear for six months till he thought
everything was forgotten.
I once took a young blackfellow to Gee-
long as driver of a wool team, and he caused
great amusement on the way down, shooting
turkeys.


In those days the railway went no further
than Geelong, and when this native saw the
engine he thought they made it go along by
talking to it, and also asked me if it were
smoking tobacco.
I took him to a circus, and he was so de-
lighted with it that he wished to join the
company, and I had hard work to get him
away.
In olden days many of the hands, such as
shepherds and shearers, led such a lonely life
in the bush that they often went wrong in
their minds —balmy as we used to call it.
I knew of a man who lived twenty years
in the Black Ranges. He would go away in
the spring months, and earn money as a
shearer, and then return to spend the rest of
the year in caves in the mountains, probably
fossicking for gold and living on station sheep
which he caught in a little yard built for the
purpose.
Our boundary fence ran into these moun-
tains, and a native blackfellow on the run
had charge of it. One day he came home in
a state of wild excitement, saying he had dis-
covered the haunts of a wild man who must
be living in the hills. On going out the next
day I found this information to be correct,
but the man had evidently gone away for the
shearing season, and left his house cave
securely locked up as he thought. There was
a huge boulder at the mouth of the cave, and
how he had managed to put it there was a
puzzle to both the blackfellow and myself, as
it was too heavy for us to roll away.


Calling some men who were fixing the fence
not far away, we removed the stone and gained
an entrance.
Here we found dried mutton and sheep-
skins, proving he had been killing station
sheep; also several tins of black sand, evid-
ently the result of fossicking for gold.
About six months afterwards T sent the
same blackfellow out to this place, and he
discovered that the wild man was living in
a fresh cave, and had also made another
brush yard for catching sheep.
On hearing this T got a policeman to go
with the blackfellow and search the moun-
tains.
He found the cave, and pretended to be
lost, and asked the way to Glenisla.
The policeman’s object was to entice the
man away from the cave as he could see a
double-barrelled gun just inside the entrance.
As soon as he came outside the policeman
walked in, and seeing some mutton hanging
up asked where and how it came there; also
letting the fact out that he was a servant of
the law. Seeing he had been found out, the
wild man made a dash for liberty, and would
no doubt have got it if he had had on a strong
pair of boots. As he was only wearing an
old pair of slippers, he fell, and the police-
man nabbed him, and there was a struggle.
The man tried to get out his knife, but the
blackfellow seeing what would happen, rushed
to the policeman’s assistance, and he was
soon secured.


He was taken to Balmoral Court and
fined £l6 for having stolen mutton in his
possession. The storekeeper then paid the fine
for him, saying he always thought he was an
honest man. He had always paid regularly
for goods bought from the store.
The wild man returned to the mountains
and sought out another cave to live in.
Some years later this was discovered, and
about the same time a man answering his des-
cription was found dead in the Mallee. Evid-
ently he had wandered off on a shearing ex-
pedition, and had dropped dead in the bush.
Bull-shooting was a great sport in by-gone
days, and many an exciting chase and hair-
breadth escape we have had over it.
On one occasion we were mustering cattle
in the hills, and had only taken one rifle with
us, as they were rather heavy to carry.
During the day we came across a very wild
bull, which I disabled and this made him very
savage. We had a blackfellow with us who
was a splendid shot, and he suggested climb-
ing a tree near the bull and trying to shoot
him from there.
Before he reached the tree the bull charged,
and he had barely time to reach a place of
safety in the branches, the rifle having been
dropped at the foot.
The bull watched the tree the whole day,
not one of our manoeuvres to attract his atten-
tion being of any use. We were a good dis-
tance from the station, so were not able to
go back for another rifle.


When nearly sundown we told the black-
fellow we thought we would have to leave
him there all night, but he begged us so hard
not to do so, saying he would be dead in the
morning if we left him.
As a last resource I rode up very close to
the bull and let him almost charge the horse,
and by doing this coaxed him away frcm the
tree. The blackfellow very quickly jumped
down, picked up the rifle, and got to a safe
distance, and we then shot the animal.
At another time the shearers at Glenisla
were anxious to see some sport of this kind,
so I told them if there were any delay of
shearing through wet weather f would go with
them for a bull chase in the hills.
There was a paddock at the foot of the
hills, with a high fence, and one day a black-
fellow who was mustering near saw four bulls
in it.
He quietly went round and put up the slip
panels, so that they couldn’t get out.
There was great excitement amongst the
men when he came home with the news. I
wished to go with them as I knew the advan-
ture would probably not be without some risk
of life. As it turned out I had to leave home
for a day, and the shearers took it on them-
selves to go on the expedition without me,
taking all the firearms they could find.
On arriving at the paddock they foolishly
thought they could safely venture out in the
open to shoot, but soon found to their dismay
it was a risky game.


The bulls, infuriated by the shots, and at
the disturbance of their peace, charged the
mob. Twenty men scrambled on to a dry tree
for safety, whilst the rest ran for the fence.
One poor fellow was not quick enough, and
was almost killed, being tossed in the air by
a savage bull. He would have been gored to
death only another man with a shot gun tired
in the animal’s face, thus blinding him, and
giving his unfortunate mate time to get out
of harm’s way. The poor fellow was six
months in a hospital, so paid dearly for his
adventure.
The same bull, mad with pain and rage then
charged the tree on which the twenty men
were hanging, and ran his horn into the wood,
breaking off three or four inches of it. The
tree swayed backwards and forwards and the
onlookers from the fence expected every
minute to see their mates tumbling pell mell
on top of the bull.
Excitement ran high for a short time, but
finally the shearers from the outside shot three
of the animals, and the fourth one charged
the fence and got away.
I was rather amused to hear the different
stories on my return home, and every man
seemed satisfied to leave bull-shooting alone
for the future, only too thankful no one had
been killed.
Oh! those sunny days of long ago, when
our hopes and energies were high with the full
tide of glorious life surging through our veins.


How blue the hills seem and how sweetlv
the wattle scents the air as I look back across
the stretch of years on those spring days, and
in fancy am once more chasing cattle through
the scrub.
How I loved to ride a fiery horse and be
in the saddle from dawn till dark, returning
heme to sleep the refreshing sleep of a tired
child.
What good feeling existed between master
and men? No labour troubles, no strikes, no
bowlings for shorter hours and less work.
So if we had not all the advantages of to-
day. at least we were snared many of the
worries and inconveniences.
The Coleraine Steeplechase w-as the big rac-
ing event of the vear amongst the Western
District squatters in the early days. It was
the biggest steeplechase in the colony at that
time.
The stake was £lOO, and we had to book
our rooms at the hotels weeks before, and even
then there would be three and four in a room.
“On the fields of Col’raine there’ll be labour
in vain
Before the Great Western is ended ;
The nags will have toil’d and the silks will
be soil’d,
And the rails will require to be mended.”
So runs Gordon’s poem about the great
■-went, and how plainly T can see his face ; also
Wily Trainor, Josh and Joe Pearson, and a
bo c t of other friends who congregated there
each year.


I can remember the time when Gordon rode
Modesty (a gray mare, bought from Watson).
What excitement there was over the race,
and only one old horse, named Vandykj got
over the fences, none of the others would face
the crowd. Billy Trainor was riding Long
Bow, but he got hung up on one of the rails.
I always liked Gordon very much, and many
a pleasant evening we have spent together,
talking horses and boxing.
He was a fearless rider, and though short-
sighted, would tackle anything. He was never
successful in winning the Coleraine .Steeple-
chase, but made some noble attempts.
The last time he rode in the race he was on
a horse called Cadger, but jumped the wrong
side of the flag. Billy Trainor, who was also
in the race, told Gordon what he had done,
and his reply was, “I know I have, but I’ll
be first in or break my neck.”
After it was over he gave the clothing to
Trainor, saying he would never ride again.
And now my reminiscences draw to a close;
perhaps I have rambled on too long.
But ah! those old times are sweet to look
back on now. There are not many of the
old squatters left, and times are changing so
quickly that soon the old land marks will be
effaced altogether.
If a dip into the past of early Victorian
history and a few yarns about the poor old
blacks and bushrangers have been of any in-
terest to my readers, then my tales have not
been told in vain, and so I say Adieu.


Norman Bros., Printers ,
60-62 Elizabeth Street.






