



THE
BOOK
DEPOT
135
Casttereagh Street
SYDNEY


REMINISCENCES OF ALEXANDER BERRY


ALEXANDER BERRY


REMINISCENCES
OF
ALEXANDER BERRY.
With Portrait and Illustrations
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, Ltd.
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1912


Printed by
W. C. Penfold & Co., 183 Pitt Street, Sydney
For Private Circulation


CONTENTS
Introduction v ii-
Chapter I.—Birth and Early Training .. I
Chapter ll.—First Voyage to Australia .. 10
Chapter lll.—Voyage to New Zealand .. 27
Chapter IV.—Adventures with Natives .. 41
Chapter V.—ln Captivity at Fiji .. .. 66
Chapter Vl.—Massacre and Shipwreck .. 93
Chapter VII. —Adventures in Spanish Waters 123
Chapter VIII. —The Return to London .. .. 153
Chapter IX.—Second and Third Voyages to
Australia .. .. .. .. 17 1
Chapter X.—Retirement from Activity .. 184


INTRODUCTION
MR. ALEXANDER BERRY.
On Wednesday, 17th September, 1873, a
colonist who had nearly completed the ninety-
second year of his life, and who had been
known in New South Wales for sixty-five
years, closed his career in this world. The
removal of one who was for a long time an
active member of this community, and whose
enterprise and large possessions have caused
his name to be familiar to the people, naturally
awakens a desire to learn something of his
earlier days.
Alexander Berry, one of a numerous family,
was born in Fifeshire, Scotland, on the 30th
November, 1781. He was sent to school at
Cupar, the country town, where among his
schoolfellows were Sir David Wilkie and Lord
Campbell. After leaving school he went to
St. Andrews University, and thence to the
University of Edinburgh, where he passed
through a course of study in preparation for
the medical profession. Having obtained an
appointment in the service of the East India


Company, he went out to India, and spent
some years in that country. Then entering
upon mercantile enterprise he visited Australia,
New Zealand, and several islands in the Pacific.
In the year 1808 he first came to Port Jackson,
as owner of the ship “ City of Edinburgh.”
In the latter part of 1809 he visited the coast
of New Zealand in order to procure a cargo of
spars for the Cape of Good Hope. In Decem-
ber of that year, while he was at anchor in the
Bay of Islands, some Maoris whose confidence
he had gained on a former visit came to him,
and told him that a British ship had been taken
by the natives at Whangaroa, a spot about
twenty miles to the north-west of the Bay.
He resolved to proceed to Whangaroa, to
ascertain the fate of the crew, and if there were
any survivors to attempt their rescue, and as
soon as he had completed his cargo and made
arrangements for the protection of the ship, he
set out with three armed boats for the scene
of the disaster. Bad weather compelled him
to return without reaching Whangaroa. But
he was not a man to yield in the face of
difficulties and dangers.
In his own narrative of the event he says:—
“ Having recruited my strength and spirits, I
was shocked at the ideal of leaving my country-


men in the hands of the savages, and deter-
mined to make a second attempt. We had this
time better weather and reached the harbour
without any difficulty.” The vessel whose
captain and crew had been killed in Whan-
garoa harbour was the “ Boyd,” Captain
Thompson. She sailed from the Thames on
the 10th March, 1809, with convicts, and
arrived at Port Jackson on the 14th August.
From this port she sailed to New Zealand for
a cargo of timber.
Captain Berry, in a letter to her owner, Mr.
George Brown, thus relates the issue of that
unfortunate voyage: —“ We found the wreck of
the “ Boyd ” in shoal water at the top of the
harbour, a most melancholy picture of wanton
mischief. The natives had cut her cables and
towed her up the harbour, till she had
grounded, and then set her on fire and burnt
her to the water’s edge. In her hold were
seen the remains of the cargo, coals, salted
seals, skins, and planks. Her guns, iron
standards, &c., were lying on the top, having
fallen in when the decks were consumed.”
The history of the attack and massacre, as
related to him by one of the survivors, was as
follows:—“ The ship was taken the third
morning after her arrival The captain, it


appears, had been rather too hasty in
resenting some slight theft. Early in the
morning the ship was surrounded by a great
number of canoes, and many of the natives
gradually insinuated themselves on board.
Tippahee, a chief of the Bay of Islands, who
had been twice at Port Jackson, also arrived.
Tippahee went into the cabin, and after
paying his respects to the captain, begged a
little bread for his men; but the captain
received him rather slightingly and desired
him to go away and not trouble him at present,
as he was busy. The proud old savage (who
had been a constant guest at the Governor’s
table in Port Jackson) was highly offended at
his treatment, immediately left the cabin, and
after stamping a few minutes on the deck,
went into his canoe. After breakfast the
captain went ashore with four hands, and no
other arms but his fowling piece. From the
account of the savages, as soon as he landed,
they rushed upon him; he had only time to fire
his piece, and it killed a child. As soon as the
captain left the ship, Tippahee, who remained
alongside in his canoe, went again on board.
A number of the sailors were repairing sails
on the quarter deck, and the remainder were
carelessly dispersed about the decks, and fifty


of the natives were sitting on the deck. In a
moment they all started up and each knocked
his man on the head, a few ran wounded
below, four or five escaped up the rigging;
and in a few seconds the savages had
possession of the ship. The boy Davidson
escaped into the hold, where he lay concealed
for several days, till they were fairly glutted
with human blood, when they spared his life.”
A woman and two infant children were also
spared. The woman described to Captain
Berry the manner in which, after being spared
by Tippahee on board the ship and sent
ashore, she was a second time saved from
being murdered. “As soon as she landed a
number of men started up, and marched
towards her with their patoo-patoos; a number
of women ran screaming betwixt them,
covered her with their clothes; and by their
tears and entreaties saved her life.”
The natives spoke freely of the massacre of
Captain Thompson and his men, evidently
regarding it as a most heroic exploit, in the
same way as a party of British tars look back
with pleasure to some successful attempt
against an enemy’s ship of superior force.
They readily mentioned the name of the ship
and captain and the number of men and guns.


When asked the reason of the attack, they
replied, “ Because the captain was a bad
man.” On enquiring what he had done, they
answered that, one of their chiefs having
secreted a carpenter’s axe beneath his clothes,
the theft was detected before he left the ship,
in consequence of which the captain tied him
to the capstan, where he left him for several
hours, and threatened to flog him. On being
told that the conduct of the chief merited the
treatment he received, they replied that any
indignity offered to a chief was never forgiven.
“ I then,” continues Captain Berry,
“ enquired if there were any survivors, to which
they readily replied in the affirmative, mention-
ing their names with great familiarity and even
with an appearance of kindness and sympathy.
They were then informed that we had come to
Whangaroa for the purpose of delivering the
captives. I then pointed to my men and their
muskets on the one hand, and to the heaps of
axes on the other, bidding them take their
choice, and either deliver the captives
peaceably, when they should be paid for their
ransom, or I would otherwise attack them.
The chief, after a moment’s hesitation,
replied, with great quickness, that trading was


better than fighting; then give us axes and you
shall have your prisoners.”
After considerable delay, and repeated
trials to the patience and courage of Captain
Berry and his party, the captives were
given up to them. The woman and her infant
child and the boy Davidson were first
restored. With greater difficulty they after-
wards prevailed on the natives to hand over to
them the infant daughter of Mr. Commissary
Broughton. Two chiefs, who were before
acquainted with Captain Berry, Metenangha
and Towaki, assisted him by their influence in
recovering the captives.
The “ City of Edinburgh ” left New Zealand
in January, 1810, for the Cape; but they
had a perilous voyage, being driven among
the ice of the southern ocean; and after
finding shelter under Terra del Fuego,
they sailed to Valparaiso, and reached that
port in May following. Thence they passed
on to Lima, where the boy Davidson shipped
for England in the “ Archduke Charles.” The
woman died at Callao; her child was kindly
taken care of by a Spaniard and the little
daughter of Commissary Broughton was
nursed with great tenderness by a Spanish
lady, Signora Rico. Captain Berry had some


difficulty in inducing these kind persons to
give up the children; but in course of time
they were sent to Sydney, and reached this
port in safety.
After this voyage Mr. Berry resolved to
settle in New South Wales; and entered into
business with Mr. Edward Wollstonecraft.
He married the sister of this gentleman, Miss
Elizabeth Wollstonecraft. In the year 1820,
in company with Lieutenant Johnston, he ex-
plored a large and rich tract of country in the
valley of the Shoalhaven River, of which the
government of the day made him a free grant.
It was a splendid estate; and as he was the
first to perceive its value he had the oppor-
tunity of turning it to profitable purposes.
Shortly after obtaining possession of this
grant, he came to the conclusion that the
Shoalhaven, which was shut off from the
sea by a sand bar, might be made open to
navigation by cutting a dyke from its channel
into the Crookhaven which runs into the sea
about seven miles further south. The project
seemed to many a sheer impossibility. But
Mr. Berry had the sagacity to discern its
feasibility and the resolution to persevere in
carrying it out. He obtained a large number
of assigned servants and had the dyke cut,


in the year 1825, thereby conferring a great
advantage upon the country.
In 1832 his partner, Mr. Wollstonecraft died
in Sydney. In 1845 he lost his wife, who died
at the age of 63, leaving no children. Mrs.
Berry and her brother were both buried in
St. Leonards cemetery.
Mr. Berry was one of the nominee members
of the Legislative Council, when there was
only one House. And when the new Con-
stitution came into effect on the 13th May,
1856, he was appointed by the Donaldson
Government a member of the Upper House.
He retained this position till May, 1861.
In politics he took a conservative view of
affairs; and looked with strong disapproval
°n the innovations of parliamentary and
municipal democracy. In private life he was
a hearty and steadfast friend to those who
came within the circle of his favour. —Extract
from obituary notice in the Town and Country
Journal, September 27, 1873.
The reminiscences and autobiography so
Spiritedly written by Mr. Berry in extreme old
a ß e conclude abruptly. At the last line are
the words: “6th April, 1872, A. 8.,” probably
the date when Mr. Berry, under the pressure
°f increasing infirmities, laid aside the pen;


although the manuscript bears, here and there,
marks of revision which were probably added
subsequently during the last few months of
his life.


CHAPTER I.
Early History—Studies Medicine and Surgery-
Surgeon on board an East Indiaman —The “Lord
Hawkesbury”—Military Floggings in 1803 —Wreck
of a Regiment—Quits the East India Service in
Disgust Enters upon Mercantile Life—Voyage
to the Cape—lgnorance in the Mercantile Marine
Seventy Years Ago—Berry teaches himself Navi-
gation—What made Sir Thomas Brisbane an
Astronomer—Berry arrives at the Cape of Good
Hope—Blackstone’s Commentaries and Conser-
vatism.
I was born (during a terrible snow storm)
in Fifeshire, Scotland, on the 30th of Novem-
ber, 1781, and having received my early educa-
tion at the Grammar School of Cupar, Fife, I
afterwards proceeded in due course to the
University of St. Andrews. Having deter-
mined to adopt the study of medicine, I
became, during the vacations, a pupil of Dr.
Gowan, the principal physician of Cupar; a
gentleman who had an interest in an apothe-
cary’s shop, where I first acquired some
knowledge of pharmacy, chemistry, and
anatomy; but I completed my medical educa-
tion at the University of Edinburgh.
Delighted with the accounts of the naval
B


victories of Nelson, Duncan, and others, 1 deter-
mined to enter the navy, and therefore only
passed for a surgeon. But I requested the
examiners to give me a certificate of the status
I was qualified to hold in the navy, and they
gave me a certificate that I was qualified to
hold the office of first surgeon’s mate in a first-
rate ship of the line. On my return home I
found my father rather opposed to my inten-
tions, though he, nevertheless, readily provided
the necessary outfit; but, when I was on the
point of leaving, he used so many arguments
against my views that I reluctantly yielded
to his wishes, and for some months devoted
myself to private study. By-and-bye the
Peace of Amiens took place, and I then
renounced for ever my intention of entering
the navy.
After some time I was informed that I might
be appointed as surgeon’s mate of an Indiaman
bound to China; and accepting it at once, I
immediately proceeded to London, furnished
with a few letters of introduction and a letter
of credit. Relations of the chief officer of the
ship were friends of my father, and that, per-
haps, influenced him a good deal on this
occasion. The surgeon had already made four
voyages to India, and was much respected.


To me he always behaved like a brother. In
those days the surgeons and officers of the
Indiamen were all traders, and were allowed
by the company a certain tonnage. Generally
speaking, they all became mercantile men.
Fortunately for me, I, on this occasion, only
availed myself of my credit to a limited extent
and merely purchased dollars to take to China.
On our arrival in that country the market was
found to be very bad, and all those who took
out large investments suffered severe losses.
On my return from China I was appointed
surgeon of the company’s ship “ Lord Hawkes-
bury ”; and, on this occasion, I availed myself
of my opportunities, and took a considerable
investment to India, which I sold to good
advantage. The "Lord Llawkesbury” carried
out a large detachment of the 17th Regiment;
—I think, including women and children, 300
individuals, besides the ship’s crew.
At that time I was an enthusiast in my pro-
fession as a medical man, although I clearly
saw that my success in life must depend on
commerce. I had heard of some ships having
oiade a voyage to India and back without any
deaths, and I therefore determined, if possible,
that the same should be the case with the
Lord Hawkesburv.”


I was so far successful that no deaths
occurred during the outward voyage, and of
the military I landed more than I took on
board, three embryo soldiers having been born
on the passage; and although the ship was
detained ten months in India no deaths
occurred amongst the crew.
I was on good terms with the military, both
men and officers. The only disagreeable
thing on board was the constant floggings; and
I was responsible that the men who were so
punished were not flogged to death. I made
it a sort of rule for my own guidance that the
poor fellows, at the worst, should never have
more than one-half of the punishment to which
they were sentenced.
Towards the end of the voyage, when all
hands were more or less infected with
scorbutic symptoms, I could not permit any
severe flogging, lest the back might mortify;
and on one occasion, an old offender having
been brought up for punishment, I observed
on his body, when he was stripped, certain
scorbutic marks.
After the soldier had received a moderate
punishment, I addressed the Colonel, and said
that it would be unsafe to give that man any
more punishment.


The Colonel replied (rather harshly), ‘‘if
we are to trifle with these fellows in that way,
we shall have to punish them every clay in our
lives;” and then he turned away on his heel
and walked toward the cuddy.
I stepped up alongside of him, and coolly
said, “ Colonel Stoven, I have nothing what-
ever to do with the expediency of punishment;
my only duty in this case is to give a medical
opinion, and if that man gets any more
punishment I am not answerable for the
consequences.”
He very ungraciously ordered the man to be
released, and said that he was very sorry that
he could not give him any more punishment,
but would bear it in mind when he committed
another offence.
Before leaving Madras for England our ship
received on board the wreck of a regiment,
which had been in the Battle of Assaye (under
Sir Arthur Wellesley), where they had buried
seventeen officers in one grave, and where only
two officers were not wounded. The men
were generally invalids. One of them died
the next day, another a day or two afterwards,
and numbers of them died during the voyage.
I was almost broken-hearted about it, and felt
ashamed to have to report their deaths to the


commanding officer of the ship. My old
college chum, the Rev. George Walker, told
me some time afterwards that he had met
several of the poor fellows who did get home in
a ferry boat, passing from Leith to Fife, and
heard one of them entertaining the other
passengers about their adventures in India.
The man said that they had come home in the
“ Lord Hawkesbury.” “ Then,” said Mr.
Walker, “ You must know Mr. Berry, the
surgeon.”
” That I do, indeed,” replied the man, “ and
a very good man he was!”
I was pleased to hear that the way in which
I had performed my duties had been thus
appreciated. These frequent deaths, however,
disgusted me with my profession; and yet I
believe, after all, that only one of the seamen
of the original crew died on the voyage home:
he was, moreover, an old man, and died of
the scurvy.
The immediate consequence of the disgust
that I thus conceived for my profession was
that I resolved to abandon medicine, and to
devote myself to commerce; and, accordingly,
instead of continuing in my hybrid position
in the East India Company Service, I engaged
in a commercial adventure to the Cape of


Good Hope, which had then recently been
taken from the Dutch.
Although well versed in general geography,
I had never given much attention to naviga-
tion while in the India Service. But I soon
perceived it had now become desirable that
I should make it a matter of some study, I
found that the captain of the ship bound for
the Cape only depended on his dead reckoning
and meridian observation of the sun. It so
happened in the course of the voyage we
spoke a Portuguese ship, and on the mate
going on board to ascertain what longitude
we were then in, he was informed that we were
more than five degrees wrong, and that they
had taken a lunar observation the day before.
I thereupon naturally asked the captain
why he did not take lunar observations, and
he replied that, although he had been a pupil
of Norie’s—a teacher of navigation—he was
unable to work them.
I asked him whether he had a sextant on
board; saying that, if he had, I had no doubt
but that I could contrive to work the desired
problems.
The captain replied that he had a sextant,
but that it was not a good one.
I requested to see it; and on examination


I found the glasses out of adjustment. I told
the captain that if he would allow me to try,
I would endeavour to put the glasses right.
He replied simply—“ Work your will upon
it;” which I did.
I took it to pieces, cleaned it, and succeeded
in putting all the glasses into adjustment.
As the sun and moon were then in distance,
I said: “ VVe must now attempt to take a lunar
observation, and 1 shall take the distance.”
I thereupon worked the observation, and
found that it exactly coincided with what the
Portuguese had told us, and I took observa-
tions for the next two days, and finding that
they all coincided, I from that time forward
always took lunar observations.
Sir Thomas Brisbane afterwards informed
me it arose from a similar occurrence that he
became an astronomer. He said he had been
sent out to the West Indies in a ship where
the captain was ignorant of navigation, and
that the vessel, having met with foul winds,
was driven near the coast of Africa. The
captain did not know the position of the ship,
and Sir Thomas (in dismay at the emergency)
taught himself navigation there and then, and
so navigated the ship safe to her destination.
By help of lunar observation in our case


also, no harm happened through the incom-
petence of the captain. We made the Cape of
Good Hope to a mile —perhaps I should rather
say we came straight into Table Bay.
Having here mentioned how I taught myself
navigation, I may perhaps add that, before
leaving London, I provided myself with
certain law books on commercial affairs, which
I also studied during the voyage. These
works were Chitty on Bills, Abbott on
Shipping, Parks on Insurance, and Blackstone’s
Commentaries—the constant study of which,
unfortunately, made me a “ Conservative.”


CHAPTER II.
Voyage from Cape to N. S. Wales with provisions—
Captain Berry arrives at Port Dalrymple,
Hobart Town, and Sydney—Arbitrary and
Ridiculous Conduct of an Historical Character
—Government House Courtesies of “Bounty”
Bligh—Freedom of Trade in the Good Old
Times of this “Great Colony”—Grand Inquisi-
tion—A Cask of Wine and a Dinner—Queer
Notions of Courts and Common Justice —A
Governor in a Quandary—ln full uniform, and
under a feather bed—“ Bounty ” Bligh Deposed
—Captain Berry accepts a Charter-party to re-
move the Free Settlers from Norfolk Island to
Tasmania.
Some time after my arrival at the Cape it
came to my knowledge that there was much
distress in the colony of New South Wales
from a want of provisions, occasioned by a
great flood on the Hawkesbury, which had
destroyed the crops of the settlers. I there-
fore agreed with a Mr. Shortt to take a cargo
of provisions, &c., on joint account, to New
South Wales. To enable us to do so, it was
necessary for us to purchase a prize ship,
which we did, and named her the “ City of
Edinburgh.” There were no ships then to
charter at the Cape, as all the English shipping


had gone to the River Plate, on account of
the expedition of Sir Home Popham to capture
that colony. I believe that we left False Bay
on the 4th September, 1807. A day or two
after sailing we spoke an English frigate,
which was commanded by a son of Sir Thomas
Trowbridge, then in search of his father, who
perished in the “Blenheim,” on his voyage from
Bombay to the Cape of Good Hope. They
told us that they had experienced very stormy
weather. We also experienced a succession
of storms, and lost our main and mizen masts,
on (as I think) the night of the 16th of
September. The rest of the voyage was
performed under jury masts, and we reached
Port Dalrymple in safety. This settlement
Was then in charge of Colonel W. Paterson, of
the New South Wales Regiment. It was in
a state of destitution, and they were subsisting
chiefly on the flesh of kangaroos, which they
caught in the bush. The arrival of a vessel
with provisions was therefore a god-send to
them. I made no attempt to avail myself of
their necessities; but, on the contrary, readily
sold them all the provisions they required, at
fair and reasonable terms, and I think that Mr.
the Commissary, purchased nearly one-
half of the provisions I had on board. During


my stay at Port Dalrymple several gentlemen
arrived overland, and informed me that Hobart
Town was in the same state of destitution as
Port Dalrymple, and recommended me to
proceed there with the remainder of my pro-
visions. Shortly after a small Government
vessel arrived at Port Dalrymple, called the
“Estramina,” the master of which informed me
that provisions were not needed in Sydney;
and I therefore determined to proceed to
Hobart Town. Under these circumstances I
made a list of all the letters in my possession
for parties in Sydney, and delivered them to
the master of the “ Estramina ” to take to
Sydney; and I took the precaution to request
him to sign the list, which he did.
One of the officers of the colony sent me an
order to ship on board the “Estramina” a cask
of spirits for Sydney on his account, but this
I declined to do, because the “Estramina” was
a Government vessel. Upon my refusal to do
so, this gentleman sent on board the “Estram-
ina,” from his own house, a cask of spirits,
which he had purchased of me. (I shall say
more of this hereafter).
Before leaving Port Dalrymple I had a
conversation with Colonel Paterson, wherein
he recommended me to proceed direct to


Sydney, before going to Hobart Town. But
I told him that such a step would be equally
injurious to myself and to the settlement at
Hobart Town, which was then in distress for
provisions.
I, accordingly, proceeded direct to Hobart
Town, and found the report of the destitution
there to be correct —the Commissary
purchasing all that I had to spare. Indeed, he
told me that he would have been glad to have
purchased more.
Before leaving Hobart Town I procured two
hardwood spars for the ship, which I carried
on the deck to Sydney. Hobart Town, I may
here observe, was founded by Colonel Collins,
who then governed that part of the colony.
At both of these settlements I made some
sales to individuals, but they were, compara-
tively speaking, of no large amount.
I have no recollection of the exact dates
when I arrived at or left these two settlements,
but I remember that I arrived at Port Jackson
on the 13th day of January, 1808. It was, I
remember, very hot, and I had exposed myself
to the sun all day. On the arrival of the ship
I felt very sick and feverish, and was obliged
to go to bed.


Some time after the captain of the ship
came into my room, and informed me that he
had received a peremptory order from
Governor Bligh to go ashore immediately, and
hoped that I would accompany him. I told
him that he ought to have been quite able to
see that I was unable to do so, and that I
had a severe attack of vomiting. By-and-bye
the captain returned, and informed me that
Governor Bligh had received him in the most
ferocious manner, and had accused him of
destroying a letter which he affirmed that
Captain Pattison had been instructed to deliver
to him by a Captain Findlay at the Cape of
Good Hope, and, further, that he (Bligh)
would hang him for the same.
The facts of the case were these: One of the
mates of our ship had proved a drunkard, and
had behaved so badly at Port Dalrymple and
the Derwent that it was necessary to suspend
him. This person, immediately on the arrival
of the ship in Sydney, dispatched a letter to
Governor Bligh, informing him that Captain
Pattison had destroyed a letter addressed to
him.
A Captain Findlay at the Cape had been
appointed Port Captain, and with this man
Captain Pattison had had some misunder


standing. When the “City of Edinburgh” was
preparing to sail from the Cape Captain Find
lay sent a letter to Pattison addressed to
Governor Bligh. Pattison came to me and
said that he did not think that he ought to
take charge of a letter from Findlay to
Governor Bligh. I replied, “Oh nonsense:
bring the letter to me, and I will take charge
of it.” I believe that the mate must have heard
part of this conversation, and had come to the
conclusion that Pattison had destroyed the
letter. Pattison told Bligh that I had taken
charge of all the letters- —had written out a
list of them which had been signed by the
master of the “ Estramina,” and that he would
go on board and get the list. I gave him the
list, which, on being compared with the list
of letters delivered to the harbour-master, was
found to be correct. But what was singular
was this—it turned out that the very letter
erroneously supposed to have been destroyed
actually contained a commission as Com-
modore for Governor Bligh. Thus poor
Pattison narrowly escaped being hanged by
Governor Bligh. And I dare say, if it had not
been for the precautions I had taken, Bligh
would have hanged him. Governor Bligh now
asked Pattison why the “ supercargo ” had not


called on him. Pattison replied that I was
unwell; whereupon Bligh said, “Tell him to
come ashore to-morrow, that I may see what
sort of a fellow he is.”
The mate who wrote the letter to Bligh
broke his neck while jumping over a fence,
thirteen days afterwards; on the very day that
Bligh was put under arrest.
I was informed that on the arrival of the
“Estramina” in Sydney, there was a great row
about the cask of spirits which she had
brought, and they wished the captain to prove
that I had put it on board; but he deposed that
it was sent from the shore, and that I had had
nothing to do with it.
I called next day on Governor Bligh. He
took me into a darkened room. As I consid-
ered myself aggrieved from the row he had
made about the letters, I immediately alluded
to that subject. He replied: “ I acquit you of
that, but it is a very discreditable thing to see
ships arriving with the captains in hot water
with my officers!”
He also said, “ You have used this great
colony very ill in giving those paltry fellows
of Dalrymple and Hobart Town the pick of
your cargo.”
I replied that I had only sold them chiefly


provisions, which they greatly needed, and
which were not required in Sydney.
He said, “ You ought to have come to
Sydney first, and have afterwards gone there.”
I replied, that would have been very
injurious to my interests, and called his
attention to the fact that this vessel was cleared
out for “ Port Dalrymple and Sydney.”
He said, “ Why did you go to Hobart Town
when Colonel Paterson ordered you to go to
Sydney.”
I replied that Colonel Paterson did not order
me to go to Sydney—that he had no power to
do so; but that he had recommended me to go
on to Sydney before going to Hobart Town.
Of course, Colonel Paterson must have
written to Bligh that he had advised me to go
to Sydney.
Bligh replied: “ Oh, I see how it is. I could
sit down and tell you the whole conversation
which took place between you. He knew your
grandfather, or you know his grandmother.”
I assured His Excellency that I knew
nothing of Colonel Paterson’s grandfather or
any of his family.
He did not reply. But he took up a shell
from one of the tables, walked away, and put
it on another; and I heard him mutter to him-
c


self, “ This fellow does not treat me with
common respect.”
I bowed to him, and said: “I wish Your
Excellency good morning ” —and I walked out
of the room. But I had not got half-way
down to what is now Macquarie-place, before
an orderly came after me and said that the
Governor wished to see me again. So I
returned.
He received me with more civility than he
did the first time, but soon relapsed into his
former style, and reiterated his remark “ That
I had used this great colony very ill,” and
that I had sold spirits to those fellows.”
I replied, that I had not sold any except
upon a written permit from the Lieutenant-
Governor, which I considered was a sufficient
warrant for what I had done.
He said that he would “ do nothing for me,”
—although I had not asked him for anything
—and said that provided I did not obey his
port regulations he would treat me with great
severity.
I replied: “ If Your Excellency will have the
goodness to give me a copy of your port
regulations, I shall obey them; and I wish
Your Excellency good morning.”
I had not got half-way down to the site of


Macquarie-place when the same orderly again
overtook me, and said, “ The Governor wants
to see you again.”
This time, besides the Governor, 1 found
three gentlemen in the room, to wit, Mr.
Atkins (the Judge-Advocate), Mr. Robert
Campbell, of the Wharf (who was the
Harbour Master), and Mr. Commissary
Palmer.
On this occasion Governor Bligh made what
he, doubtless, considered a gracious speech.
He said that in former times many bad things
had been done in the colony, but that they
were determined to prevent all such things in
future, and would enact such just and equitable
regulations as would tend to induce captains
of ships and supercargoes to bring their ships
and cargoes to Sydney.
After this preamble, he asked me whom I
had been speaking to since my arrival, and the
nature of the conversation.
I replied that I was a perfect stranger to all
the people, and that I had only spoken to two
individuals, namely, Mr. John Macarthur and
Mr. Simeon Lord.
The mention of Mr. Macarthur’s name
seemed to make a startling impression upon
these magnates.


Bligh then asked what was the nature of
the conversation that I had with Macarthur.
It was very unimportant, and I told him at
once.
He then asked what was the conversation
that I had with Lord.
I told him that Lord said that he would
either purchase my cargo or act as my agent.
Bligh then turned to Mr. Atkins and said,
“ Have you any questions to ask Mr. Berry?”
Atkins replied, “ No, if that was the only
conversation which he has had.”
I nodded assent, and so took my leave of this
inquisitorial tribunal.
Dr. Harris had, I was informed, been
Harbour-master, but Bligh had quarrelled wth
him, and had appointed Mr. Robert Campbell
in his stead.
Indeed it was a common report that Bligh
wished to give Mr. Campbell a monopoly of
the trade of the colony.
I afterwards called on Campbell to arrange
about the landing of my cargo. He then told
me that His Excellency had given him orders
that my wine should be put into his stores, and
that he (the Governor) would not allow me
to sell it at a higher price than three shillings


per gallon. lam pretty sure that was the
price.
I told Campbell that I had no objection to
put the wine into his stores, but that I could
not afford to sell it at the price he mentioned.
I had originally intended to have acted as
my own agent in the sale of the cargo, but the
arbitrary conduct of Bligh induced me to
change my mind, and I employed Lord as my
agent. In those days there was hardly any
choice.
Some days after Major Johnston sent me an
order to supply him with a cask of wine for the
anniversay dinner of the New South Wales
Corps or Regiment. I replied that I regretted
that I could not sell him any wine, because
Governor Bligh had limited me to a price, at
which I could not afford to sell. He replied:
“ Send the wine, and we will satisfy you.”
I sent him a cask, and begged him to accept
it as a present, since I could not compromise
myself by selling any wine. Of course they
invited me to dinner, but I slipt away very
early. I was then a temperance man, and a
quasi teetotaler, upon medical principles.
Major Johnston had a fall from his horse on
his way home from the dinner, and sustained
some injury.


I believe that there was no lawyer then in
the colony except a notorious attorney who
had been transported on account of something
about a fly, and he was Bligh’s adviser. I
did not then know his history; and meeting
him at the house of Lord, I complained of the
flies (which were very troublesome) and said,
“Do the flies ever annoy you much?’’ I
noticed that he seemed rather disconcerted.
Afterwards he began to discourse of “ John
Macarthur’s case,” of which (of course) I
knew nothing. He said that they had been
able to verify so many delinquencies or crimes
against him as would have subjected him “at
home ” to a good flogging, and to several
years’ imprisonment, but that he did not know
what the punishment might be in this colony!
The day of the trial came on, and I attended.
Mr. Atkins, the Judge Advocate, first swore
in the military officers, who constituted the
Court, and the senior officer then tendered the
book to Atkins to swear him in. Mr. Mac-
arthur protested against Atkins sitting on his
trial, as he was his old and inveterate enemy.
He was very bitter against Atkins, but he
produced some legal precedents to justify
his protest.
When Macarthur had ended Atkins immedi


ately said: “ I commit John Macarthur to the
common gaol.”
Captain Kemp said: “ I will not allow you
to do so, and unless you conduct yourself with
more propriety, I shall commit you.”
Atkins thereupon hastily left the Court, and
I left it too.
Afterwards I learned that they then wrote
to the Governor to nominate some one else
instead of Atkins, and there was a report
current that Bligh had abolished the existing
Court, and had established a new one of three
or four members, of which he was president;
that all cases were to be tried summarily before
this Court, from whose decisions there was to
be no appeal; and this state of things was to
remain until his Majesty’s pleasure should be
known. It was also rumoured that Bligh had
sent a summons to the members of the old
Court to appear before the new one, and stand
their trial for sedition.
Next morning Macarthur was committed
to gaol by the chief constable.
Governor Bligh had ordered Major Johnston
to come to Sydney. In answer to this John-
ston apologised, saying that he was unable
to come on account of the injuries he had
lately received, through the fall from his horse.


Bligh thereupon sent him another message,
the effect of which was, that if he did not
come he would appoint some one else to do
his duty. On the next day Johnston arrived
in the barrack-square, and soon after sent an
order to the gaoler to liberate John Macarthur
—all the soldiers being, by the major’s orders,
drawn up in military array in the square.
After some time Johnston dispatched four
officers to Government House to announce to
Governor Bligh that he was coming to arrest
him. In the meantime Governor Bligh had
invited some of his partisans to dinner, chiefly
(I believe) the members of his new Court.
One of the party told me afterwards that
Atkins was particularly uneasy, and that, as
soon as he had dispatched his dinner, he left
the table with a view to examining the state
of affairs in Barrack-square. He returned
thence in great trepidation and said, “ There is
a great movement in Barrack-square, and the
military are all under arms.”
Bligh said, “ Surely they dare not attack my
person?”
To which Atkins replied, “ I have no doubt
but that they will.”
Bligh poured out a glass of wine, and rising
(with great trepidation) said, “ The Health


of the King!” He then drank off the wine,
and left the table.
He went and dressed himself in his naval
uniform, and fastened his dirk by his side, that
he might impress his assailants with awe.
When, however, he looked out at the warlike
array coming towards him his heart failed
him, and he hid himself under a feather bed.
On his discovery, in that place of concealment,
it was found that the uniform which Nelson
and Duncan had worn with so much honour,
was befouled with white feathers!
I never saw Bligh after this event, except
at a distance, when he was walking in his
gardens, accompanied, I think, by a guard;
but I heard many things of him in England,
from an officer who had sailed under him,
which were greatly to his disadvantage.
The Government of New South Wales had
received orders from home to remove the
settlers of Norfolk Island to the River
Derwent, in Tasmania; but from want of
shipping they had only been able to remove a
few of them. Therefore, as there was no
cargo "at New South Wales to take back to
the Cape of Good Hope, I offered to remove a
shipload of the settlers to the Derwent, pro-
vided they would supply me with a cargo of


sawn timber. They accepted my offer and
John Macarthur wrote out the charter-party.
It was to this effect—that they chartered the
ship at a certain rate per month, to be paid for
not in money but in timber according to a
schedule at a certain rate. But Macarthur
put in the charter-party a penalty of two
thousand pounds, if either party did not fulfil
the stipulated contract —that is, if I did not
perform the voyage, or if they did not employ
me to do so.
It took me a long time to refit the ship in a
place like Sydney in those days; so that the
voyage was from necessity performed in the
winter season; when the ship was frequently
driven away from the island for weeks at a
time. Captain Piper was the commandant,
and treated me with great hospitality, sending
on board a pilot, from whom he procured a
certificate that every exertion had been made
by the master and officers; and that the delay
in loading the ship arose entirely from bad,
stormy weather, during which the ship
sustained considerable damage. Notwith-
standing all which, I completed the voyage
successfully, and delivered all the settlers and
their effects safely in Hobart Town.


CHAPTER III.
Continuation of events subsequent to Captain A.
Berry’s second arrival at Sydney after the
voyage to Norfolk Island—Major Foveaux,
Acting-Governor at Sydney—Arrangements
made by the Colonial Government for payment
of Berry’s Services, and the inconvenience to
which he is thereby subjected—Voyage to New
Zealand for freight of ship—Arrival of the “City
of Edinburgh ” at the Bay of Islands—lnter-
views with Maori chiefs Tarra, Tupe, and others
—Proceeds to repair the ship—Takes up his
quarters ashore and forms a camp—Threatened
with an attack from hostile natives in the
absence of the friendly chief.
On my return to Sydney, after my voyage
to Norfolk Island and thence to Van Diemen’s
Land, I found Commodore Bligh yet residing
at Government House, and still under arrest,
but that Major Foveaux was now the Acting-
Governor. He had been Commandant at
Norfolk Island at the time that the orders
came out from England to evacuate that place.
On the receipt of those orders he had
immediately proceeded to Sydney, and (as I
was informed) was then recommended by
Oovernor King at once to proceed to England


in order to prevent the evacuation from being
carried into effect. The order for the evacua-
tion of Norfolk Island was due to Captain
Hunter, who had lost his ship (the “ Sirius ”)
off that island; where he was afterwards
detained for many months, before he had an
opportunity of returning to Sydney. This had
naturally given Captain Hunter a dislike to
the place, and had caused him to advise that
its occupation should be abandoned. Major
Foveaux, however, gave such a favourable
report of the island that the authorities at
home ordered him immediately to return to
Sydney, with the understanding that—pro-
vided the evacuation had not been proceeded
with, beyond a certain extent —all further pro-
ceedings in that direction should be desisted
from, and that he should resume the govern-
ment of the same. On the arrival of Major
Foveaux at New South Wales, he found that
my expedition had been fatal to his expecta-
tions, and he, therefore, assumed the
government of New South Wales as the senior
officer to Major Johnston. Having assumed
the government, instead of continuing the
preparation of the timber for the freight of
my ship, this officer gave directions that all
the timber which ,was then ready for me should


be employed in the erection of new barracks
for the soldiers.
When I demanded payment for the services
I had rendered the Government, Major
Foveaux replied that I had been so long on
the voyage that the ship was supposed to be
lost, and that it had consequently appeared
useless to provide any more timber. He said,
however, that there was a quantity of timber
in the dockyard, and that if I would accept
that as payment in full, he would allow me to
take it; if not, that he would forfeit the
penalty, and give me a bill for two thousand
pounds on the Treasury. I pointed out to him
that the penalty had nothing to do with the
freight, after it had been fairly earned; and
that I had only undertaken the voyage upon
the express condition that the freight was to
be paid in timber, as a return cargo to the
Cape. But I told him, as I found he had not
provided the timber, that I would accept the
amount of freight due to me in money.
Major Foveaux refused this, saying, “ No;
I will give you the two thousand pounds.”
I wrote to him that I must decline to accept
that, and that I should appeal to the Home
Government. And thus after labouring hard
to procure a cargo to the Cape, I was left in


a sad dilemma, for I could not think of going
round Cape Horn in an empty ship.
Eventually, I was induced to make a voyage
to the Fiji Islands, in hopes of procuring a
cargo of sandal wood.
It was a singular thing that during all this
time I had no opportunity of making any
remittances to England, or to the Cape of
Good Hope. There had not been a single
ship by which I could send. Some time after
my first arrival, a small vessel loaded with
Cape produce had arrived, consigned to Mr.
Robert Campbell, and this ship was, I heard,
for sale. I thereupon sent for the captain,
and offered to purchase her, for the purpose
of sending her back to the Cape, but he told
me that he had already agreed to sell her to
Mr. Campbell. I was consequently compelled
to leave all my letters and remittances for the
Cape and for London, at Sydney, in duplicate
—to be forwarded by the first opportunity
that should offer.
When I came to settle with Mr. Lord, I
found that he could only pay me by bills on
his agent in London, to whom he had con-
signed large quantities of seal skins. I there-
fore enclosed Lord’s bills to my agent in
London, as well as the papers which related


to the Norfolk Island freight, but with
instructions, after paying my liabilities in
London, to send the balance to Mr. Shortt at
the Cape. To Shortt himself I sent all the
Treasury bills which 1 had procured in
Tasmania. I believe, indeed, that the nominal
amounts of the Treasury bills and Lord’s
bills were nearly the same. There was— as I
have intimated —no ship to take any letters or
remittances either to the Cape or to England,
and I therefore left everything in duplicate
in the hands of Mr. Lord to send by the first
opportunity. My enclosures contained the
first and second of the bills, and the third I
took with me.
I intended to call at New Zealand for spars
for the ship, and this coming to the knowledge
of Governor Bligh he sent to me to request
that I would take to the Bay of Islands a son
of Tippahee—a young man of the name of
Motara, who had made a voyage to England,
where he had been treated with hospitality,
and (as he said) had been introduced to King
George the Third. Lord also asked me to
take down to New Zealand a native of the
Bay of Islands, named Metatau, who had been
brought to Sydney in one of his ships. I
consented to take them both, and treated both


with great kindness, Motara being allowed to
dine at my table.
On the arrival of the ship at the Bay of
Islands, she anchored at Tippuna, the residence
of Tippahee—the chief whom I expected to be
able to provide me with spars. As Motara
was dressed like a gentleman, his relatives
received him with great rejoicing. His father
seemed friendly, but I found there were no
spars in his district, and ascertained that such
as I wanted could only be procured in an
adjoining district from a chief named Tupe.
I therefore determined to visit that chief, who
lived at some considerable distance.
With this intention I started from Tippuna,
but although I left that locality at an early
hour, it was late in the afternoon before I
reached Kowa Kowa—the residence of Tupe.
The natives crowded round me in the most
friendly manner; and when I asked for Tupe,
a venerable old chief, blind in one eye,
advanced towards the boat; the other natives
making way for him. He seized me by the
collar with both hands, and after the manner
of his people greeted me by joining his nose
to mine. This mode of salutation was, at first,
rather startling. I asked if he was Tupe?
He said: “ No, lam Tarra. Tupe will be here


directly.” Poor Tupe had, I found, a few
European clothes, and wished to appear as
respectable as possible to a stranger. At
length he appeared in European garb. The
natives as he came made way for him, and
called out, “This is Tupe!”
I advanced towards him, but instead of
joining noses, he took off his hat, made me a
bow, and shook hands. I told Tupe that I
wanted spars for my ship, and asked him
if he could supply them? He said: “Oh yes,”
I then told him that the ship was at Tippuna,
and asked him if he would accompany me on
board as it was getting late? He stepped at
once into my boat, where my fowling piece
was lying on the stern-sheets. He seized the
gun, and asking if it were loaded, he examined
-the pan and immediately discharged it. I
almost suspected treachery, and ordered the
men to keep their muskets in their hands.
But Tupe was one of nature’s gentlemen, and
had only discharged the gun to show that he
was well acquainted with the use of firearms.
On the passage he constantly ordered the
sailors to pull stronger. Other parts of his
conversation were very amusing. He asked
me how many wives King George had, to
which I replied that he had only one. “ Your
D


king then,” said he, “ must be a poor fellow
compared with Tippahee, the chief of Tippuna,
who has four wives.” I asked him how many
he had. He replied, dryly, “ Only one.”
“ Well, Tupe,” I said, “ You must be as poor a
fellow as King George.” “ Oh,” replied Tupe,
“ when there are more wives than one, there is
never any peace in the house.” On our arrival
at the ship some refreshment was put on the
table, and Tupe sat down and partook of it,
but was very moderate both in eating and
drinking; and when I offered to help him to
some more, he said, “ No, more, I thank you,
sir,” politely enough.
Next day Tupe steered my ship into Koro-
rarika, and proved himself to be an excellent
pilot. He knew the depth of the water every-
where, and also every sunken rock in the
harbour. I suppose he must have acquired
his knowledge from fishing with hook and line.
Next day he conducted me in a boat to the
spar district, which was on the banks of a
creek, several miles beyond Kowa Kowa.
There I found a large quantity of old dry
spars in the forest. These I launched into
the river, and brought them down in a raft,
and made arrangements for new spars.
The ship had always leaked more or less ever


since we left the Cape, but I had never thought
it was dangerous. I found, however, that it
had increased very much on the passage from
Sydney to New Zealand, and I therefore
thought it would be advisable to endeavour to
stop the leak in Kororarika Bay. At first I
was almost afraid to communicate this to the
captain, officers, and men, as New Zealand
was a land of savages; but when I mentioned
my intentions they were all much pleased with
it, and I then converted the dry spars into
stages for the men to work upon. I sent the
carpenters to caulk the top sides, and
immediately took measures to land and protect
the stores and provisions on the beach; and on
informing Tupe and Tarra of what I proposed,
they erected a very comfortable cottage for
my residence on the shore.
I had not decided on any plan for getting at
the bottom of the ship. Some of the officers
proposed to beach her, but to this I objected,
and relied upon being able to devise some plan
for getting her hove down. Soon after, when
I came on board, I found that they had given
the ship a “ list ” to one side, by rolling two
water casks to the lee side of the ship, and this
gave me the idea which led to the plan which
I adopted.


I told the mate that I would heave out the
keel of the ship by water casks attached to the
mast heads, but he thought that the
“bouncing,” or jerking necessary to raise full
water casks would endanger the masts. I
told him that my plan was different; that I
would hoist up empty water casks, and fill them
afterwards with buckets and funnels, and that
when it became necessary to right the ship, I
would empty the casks with a spigot. The
plan answered admirably. The ship was hove
down and righted, like a piece of clockwork.
The casks were attached to all three masts.
What a pity that this simple and easy way
of getting at a ship’s bottom did not occur to
Captain Cook, when he repaired his ship at
Endeavour River. It would have saved many
lives at Batavia.
I soon found that the repairing of the ship’s
bottom was a more arduous matter than I had
anticipated. The planking and timbers were
sound, but the vessel had been iron-fastened,
and then coppered. The builder had taken
every care to prevent the copper and iron from
coming in contact. The heads of the iron
spikes were punched into the planks, then
covered with putty, and the heads of the iron
bolts were covered with sheet lead; the bottom


of the ship being covered with tarred canvas
under the copper.
When the lead was removed the heads of
the bolts were found to be destroyed. The
iron spikes (each protected by a piece of
putty) were also found to be destroyed, and
the holes were filled up with black mud.
It was therefore necessary to refasten all
the planking of the bottom. It so happened
that a vessel from India, called the “ Hebe,”
had been wrecked by striking on a rock at the
entrance of Port Dalrymple; and shortly before
I left Sydney some person had brought up to
Port Jackson from Port Dalrymple a large
quantity of iron spikes, obtained from the
wreck of that vessel. All of these I had
purchased as articles of trade for the Fiji
Islands. These spikes—when passed through
the hands of the blacksmiths, were as good as
new ones, and were used to refasten the planks
of the ship. Three or four thousand hard-
wood treenails were also used to refasten the
bottom.
Some of the crew were able to saw timber,
and I employed them to saw inch sheathing
boards to sheath the bottom. About this time
a whaling ship arrived in the bay. From the
captain of this vessel I purchased a sufficiency


of oil to enable me to make up cheenam to put
between the planks of the ship’s bottom and
the sheathing, and I converted a large quantity
of shells into quicklime to make the cheenam.
I had no nails to fasten the sheathing to the
ship’s bottom, but there was a large quantity
of old iron hoops in the vessel, and these the
blacksmith converted into sheathing nails.
I succeeded in repairing the ship beyond
my most sanguine expectations, and when she
was righted she was found to be as tight as a
bottle. The repairs occupied about three
months; but then I had to depend upon my
own resources in a land of savages, and with
a motley crew it could not be expected that at
all times everything would go on smoothly.
Soon after commencing the repairs of the
ship, Tupe informed me that he heard a report
that a fleet of canoes intended to attack my
camp at Kororarika, and afterwards to take
the ship; but he assured me that he and his
tribe would assist me in repelling the attack.
I thanked Tupe for the information he gave,
but in reality I doubted its truth, as there was
great jealously between the different tribes. I
consequently did not take all the precaution
which I ought to have done, and I heard no
more of it. I remained on board the ship until


she was nearly on her broadside, when I went
and took up my residence ashore.
The first night I spent ashore I felt very
restless, perhaps from the novelty of my situa-
tion, and got out more than once to speak to
the sentinals and see that all was right. The
night was calm, and there was no sound to be
heard but the roar of the reef. Tupe had sent
two old muskets to be repaired by the black-
smith, and they had been put into my hut.
At daybreak Tupe came into the hut while I
was still in bed, shook hands with me, and took
away his muskets. He said he was going
away to his house at Kowa Kowa, but that he
would be back in two or three days. Some
time after, whilst I was still in bed, my Bengal
servant came into the room and set down on
the table a pot of hot water, for shaving
purposes. Having done so, he said coolly
and quietly, “ There is a fleet of canoes coming
round the point to attack us.”
I jumped out of bed, pulled on my trousers,
slipped on my coat, and, without stopping to
dress myself further, ran out of the hut. I
found every one on the alert, and armed; and
a number of them were discharging their
muskets. I ordered them to fire no more, as
the canoes were too distant for the shots to


take effect. One of the men told me that they
were firing to show the people in the canoes
that they were prepared to receive them, and
thought that this might perhaps induce them
to go away.


CHAPTER IV.
Battle of Kororarika —Defeat of the Natives—
Resumption of Friendly Relations—-Faithful
Conduct of the Chiei Tupe—Deserters and their
Punishment—Perilous Excursion into the Land
of the Enemy—Escape from Death and Danger
—The Devil in the Watch—Visit to the Friendly
Islands, Tongatabu and Namuka—Reminiscences
of Captain Cook —Tricks of Trade—Explorations
in Namuka, one of the Habais—The great Navi-
gator again—Taomal wants to go with his White
Friend—-" City of Edinburgh” sails away from
the Habais for Fiji.
At that time there were two cannons on the
beach, but they were not placed in working
order; and as I came out of my hut, I called
on the officer who had charge of the camp (a
’cute Yankee), and asked if these guns were
loaded. He said that they were not, and that
they had no cartridges made. “ Had he any
gunpowder?” “Yes,” he had plenty. “Why
then,” I asked him, “ did you not make cart-
ridges?” His excuse was, that he had not
been supplied with any cartridge paper. I
immediately ran back into my hut, seized my
stockings, and converted them into cartridges,


which were afterwards found to answer ex-
tremely well. During this interval, the hostile
fleet had been collecting into one body, and they
now began to move forward toward the camp.
I had never fired off a big gun before, but I
made shift to act as a gunner on this occasion.
I took the best aim that I could, but the shot
struck the water before it reached the canoes,
and rebounding, rose again a little further
away. At the very first discharge, there
seemed to be some confusion in the fleet, and
numbers of men were seen swimming in the
water, and several of the canoes were capsized.
I aimed with the second gun a little higher,
and the ball went slap over their heads. The
effect was electrical, for the whole fleet took
to flight. There were two boats on the beach,
and of these I at once availed myself. They
were launched in an instant, filled with men,
with muskets, and dispatched against the foe.
The hostile armament had retired beyond
Kororarika Point to hold a council of war.
As soon as the men in the boats came in sight
of the canoes they began to blaze away, and
thereupon the Maori warriors threw them-
selves into the water and swam ashore. My
men immediately took possession of the
canoes, and towed them into the bay, where all


were hauled up high and dry, beyond the
reach of the tide. I looked about me and saw
that there were many more natives on the
beach than usual, and I thought, and still
believe, that if the canoes had been successful
many of them would have joined those who
came to attack us. I think so because, after
all the enemy had disappeared, one of the
Maoris—a grim old warrior—rose and
addressed me thus:—
“ You have conquered Waraki.” Waraki
was the commander of the fleet of canoes. He
was the chief of “ Waitangi,” Anglice, the
Waterfall. I had never seen this chief. But
Metatau, the native I had brought from
Sydney, was in command of some of the
canoes belonging to Tippuna.
As I have already stated, Tupe had left me
early in the morning; and on his way home he
looked back and saw the canoes. He im-
mediately returned to the ship, gave them
warning of their danger, and went on board
to assist in defending the ship. The vessel
was then hove out and lying on her broadside.
Some weeks after, Motara paid me a visit.
He pretended to be very innocent of the attack
upon me, and said that two of his father’s
canoes, having been stolen by the bad people,


were then in my possession, and he therefore
begged that I would return them. 1 did not
believe one word that he said, but I felt really
sorry to see him so much altered, and suffering
from bronchitis. I gave him back the canoes,
and he died shortly afterwards. "Soon after-
wards others came with the same fictitious
tale, but I always returned the canoes. This
may appear very injudicious, but I considered
that they were so cowed by their abortive
attack that there was little danger of their
making any similar attempt; besides which I
was well aware that the construction of these
canoes was an affair of great labour to these
poor savages, and of great importance to them
for the purpose of fishing; and further, that I
was an intruder on their country for my own
personal advantage.
Some time subsequent to this, about ten or
a dozen of my crew—all Sydney men—came
to me one day and demanded that I should
increase their rations during the remainder of
my stay in New Zealand. I told them that
their demand was perfectly unreasonable, and
that I would not comply with it. “In that
case,” said the ringleader, “ we will do no more
work.” “If you act in this manner,” I replied,
“I will stop your rations altogether.” The


ringleader rejoined that they would “support
themselves by fishing, and get other food from
the natives.” And thus we parted.
Two or three days after —whilst I was
standing on the beach, in conversation with
Tupe and the captain—the ringleader passed
in front of us in a state of bravado. Having
gone past us, he launched a canoe which was
lying on the beach, and began to fish. Tupe
looked at him, and then launched another
canoe, paddled to him, and ordered him to
take the canoe ashore. The man refused, and
Tupe said, “ if you don’t go ashore instantly,
I shall capsize the canoe, and leave you to
swim for your life.” The fellow went ashore,
meekly enough, and the captain and I went to
the spot where they both landed. Tupe
addressed the man to this effect: —“You and
your comrades are bad men, and disobey your
officers, but I shall not countenance any such
doings in New Zealand. I will neither allow
you to fish in any of my canoes, nor will I
permit any of my people to give you any
food.”
At the commencement of this outbreak the
captain overhauled all the firearms, and
accidentally exploded some gunpowder, which
scorched him severely. He was therefore


irritable and cross. The man I had been allud-
ing to said something to him, and the captain
turned upon him very angrily, and stopped
him at once. I interfered and said, “ allow the
man to speak; I wish to hear what he says.
Perhaps he is not so bad as you think he is.”
The man said, “ Sir, I am glad to hear you say
so, and will convince you that what you say
is true. I will return to my duty, and will
prevail upon my comrades to do the same.”
Thus the mutinous strike was quashed—
mainly through the fidelity of Tupe.
Some time after this last affair was settled,
1 was informed one morning that the two
sentinals who guarded the encampment had
deserted with their muskets, being, of course,
decoyed away by the chiefs. I immediately
dispatched two boats with an officer in each,
their instructions being to bring Tippahee and
Waraki (the quondam commander of the fleet
which had attacked me) to my camp. They
arrived about breakfast time, and I invited
them both to breakfast. After breakfast I
entered upon the business of the day. I com-
plained to these two chiefs that some of their
subordinates had decoyed my two sentinals
away, and that if they were not brought back
to me I would take both of them away to


England, and would deliver them both to King
George. Tupe and Tarra attended the meeting,
and both were taciturn—never saying a word.
At last Tupe said, “ Will you take Tupe and
Tarra with you to England, as well as the
other chiefs?” Now I was quite sure that
Tupe must know perfectly well that I did not
suspect him, and I thought he was fishing for
a compliment. I therefore gave him an am-
biguous response—that if I took all the chiefs
of the Bay of Islands to England, I would take
Tupe and Tarra also. Tupe replied, “ That
may be European custom, but it is not New
Zealand custom. The New Zealanders never
punish their friends because their enemies
have injured them.” He then said, “ Give me
three days’ liberty, and I pledge myself to
bring in the two men. And even if I do not
succeed in recovering the men, I shall return
at the end of three days, and you may do with
me what you please.”
The venerable Tarra then arose and thus
addressed me: “ Tupe has spoken well; do
what Tupe says; I know that Tupe will keep
his word. Tarra will remain in the camp as
security for Tupe; and if Tupe does not keep
his promise, kill Tarra.” I was much vexed
at my foolish joke being taken thus seriously.


but I merely said —“ I accept Tupe’s proposal,
and have no doubt but that he will keep his
word.” Neither of the other chiefs said a
word, but looked very gloomy. They con-
sidered themselves my prisoners, but I kept
them under no restraint, and they always had
their meals at my table.
I thought that Commodore Waraki seemed
unwell and inquired into his case. He said
that a demon had entered into his body and
was gnawing his entrails. I told him that I
would give him something to expel the demon
if he liked to take it. He said that he wished
it very much. I gave him a few small doses
of calomel, whereby the demon was effectually
expelled. On my second visit to New
Zealand, I saw a strange chief one day seated
on the gangway. I asked him his name. He
said he was Waraki, and that he had visited
the ship in order to thank me for expelling the
demon which was devouring him.
Tupe returned, before the expiry of three
days, with the two deserters in custody, and
both in hempen handcuffs. One of them was
a native of Tahiti, and the other an Irishman,
of the name of McEwers, who was rather a
favourite.
I was puzzled what punishment to give to


the deserters, but ultimately sentenced the
Irishman to receive twelve lashes, to be laid
on by the Tahiti man, who laid it on so lightly
that a schoolboy might have received it with-
out wincing. After it was over, the Irishman
turned round and said, “ I am much obliged
to you for being so lenient with me; I have
acted like a fool, and deserved a much greater
punishment.” I was much pleased with
having got out of this dilemma, and there was
a fete at night, in which all the Maoris joined.
Amongst other things a mock English duel
was fought with pistols, when Tupe expressed
his abhorrence of such a barbarous practice.
Then they showed a dramatic Maori fight.
One man was slain, and all his party fled, the
victors making torches of the old tarred canvas
of the ship, and singing a song of victory. In
the meantime the little boys prepared the body
for roasting, and afterwards pretended to cut
it up with shells, and said: “ Who will have a
piece?” When the hymn was ended, the
chiefs looked round, and saw that the little
boys had let the cat out of the bag. The
chiefs were much ashamed, and immediately
that the fete was at an end, they left and hid
themselves in the dark. The case was this—
the chiefs had tried to persuade me that they
E


were no longer cannibals, and had now as
much abhorrence of the practice as any Euro-
pean. I sent home the two chiefs next
morning.
A few days before the ship was ready to
leave New Zealand, an old Maori lady called
upon me. She said that her husband had been a
great chief, but was dead; and that she was now
a poor widow, having a son whom she was
unable to bring up properly, and of whom she
wished me to take charge. He was a smart
little fellow, and his name was Taranui. I
looked at him, and asked if he was willing to
go; and his reply was, “ I wish it very much.”
There was a tailor on board, and I ordered the
man to make a suit of clothes for this Taranui.
He became a handy waiter at table, and a
great favourite with every one.
Some days after, as I was now idle, I went
to Waitangi, the nominal residence of Com-
modore Waraki, for the purpose of shooting
ducks. I took my fowling-piece, and gave
two muskets to the boy Taranui, who consid-
ering himself as my page, had asked to
accompany me. I found neither houses nor
cultivation nor any signs of inhabitants, and
the country was wholly unencumbered with
trees. I left the men at the boat, and walked


along the banks of the river for some distance.
At last Taranui said, “ Come back, this place
is dangerous ”; and he would go no farther
I told him to stop where he was, and that I
would go alone as I wanted to see the country.
“ Oh don’t,” says he, “ the place is not good.”
But I w'ent on, wandering along the banks of
the river for upwards of three miles, when I
found myself at the foot of a low conical hill.
Suddenly a smoke arose at the other side of
the hill. I looked behind me, and was very
much surprised to find that I had wandered
so far from my men. With some hesitation
I mounted the hill, and then I saw before me
about twenty or thirty men with fires, but no
houses. They did not see me for two or three
minutes. One of them at length saw me,
and pointed me out to others. The men then
all started up, seized their spears, and
advanced towards me. I immediately descen-
ded the hill and trotted away homewards. On
reaching the foot of the hill I looked back, and
saw them all running down the hill. I now
saw that my life depended on my legs, and I
ran as fast as I could. After a little time I
felt breathless and looked back, and I was
happy to see that they had not gained ground
upon me. I therefore determined not to run


so fast for fear of breaking down. After some
time I again got breathless, and looking back
again I saw that they were following at a
considerable distance from one another. The
battle of Horatii and the Curiatii occurred to
me, and I made up my mind that if any one
reached me I would turn round and shoot him
with my musket, and then charge the gun
when running. I felt assured that they
would be exhausted as I was, and I therefore
trotted away more gently. I became again
very breathless and looked backwards, and
this time I saw none of my pursuers—from
which I concluded that they had all broken
down. Soon after I saw little Taranui standing
in the same place where I had left him. I told
him to find my men and tell them to come
instantly; and the two men with their muskets
soon appeared, accompanied by two or three
natives. I told them how I had been hunted,
and that I was determined to overhaul the
hostile party. The fact is that I was ashamed
of having been obliged to turn my back upon
the natives.
On our way back I passed one of the
pursuers, lying on the banks of a creek, chafing
his legs; and I afterwards passed three or four
more at different distances. I did not even


speak to them. On reaching the encampment.
I found a number of men, most of whom re-
treated to some distance, but when they saw
there were only three white men they again
advanced towards us. I called to the men to
follow me, and, presenting my musket, ad-
vanced towards them. They thereupon took
to flight, and I followed them a little way, and
returned. On again arriving at the encamp-
ment, I found only two or three of the original
pursuers, but observed that my Maori
followers had opened all the native ovens,
where they had found a number of large fat
dogs roasting, and had put them on their
shoulders. I asked them what they intended
to do with the dogs; and they answered, “to
take them to the New Zealanders who are on
board ship.” I ordered them to return the
dogs to the ovens, and to cover them up again.
I then told the two or three natives that my
only object in visiting them was to purchase
some potatoes for the crew of the ship, and
that provided they had any potatoes to sell I
would purchase them. They produced several
basketfuls, and I told them to bring them
down to the boat and I would pay for them.
They shouldered the baskets and brought
them to the boat, where I paid for them. On


the way down they talked very sociably with
my Maoris.
And thus I escaped being barbecued in a
native oven.
When the ship was ready the anchors were
weighed, and we proceeded on our voyage.
Tupe and Tarra accompanied us to the heads.
After some time I was alarmed by a sudden
cry of terror from Tarra. I asked Tupe what
was the matter, he replied, “ Tarra is an old
fool; Captain Ceronie has dropped his watch
overboard. Tarra thinks that the watch is a
demon, or ‘ Etua.’ ” This Captain Ceronie
commanded a ship belonging to Simeon Lord,
and in the course of the voyage entered the
harbour of Whangaroa, where the natives
received him in a very friendly manner. He
was seen by the natives accidentally to drop
his watch into the harbour, and the night after
that he left the harbour without taking leave of
any one. This they thought—as they also con-
cluded the watch to be a demon —was a very
suspicious circumstance. Soon after the
epidemic afflicted these natives, which
occasioned a great mortality amongst them,
their principal chief being one of the victims.
“ Tarra,” said Tupe, “ thinks that Ceronie has
maliciously dropped a demon into the water


for the purpose of killing all the natives in
the Bay of Islands in the same way as he did
at Whangaroa. I vainly tried to convince
Tarra that a watch is no demon, but he
is such a superstitious old fool that he will nov
believe me.”
If my philosophical friend Tupe had visited
England at the present day, he would not have
made such harsh satirical remarks upon his
worthy colleague, for he would have seen lots
of grave Englishmen sitting round a table, and
compelling poor ghosts to obey their incanta-
tion, and to perform all manner of monkey
tricks.
On the voyage to the Fijis we sighted the
island of Tongatabu. We did not anchor,
but lay-to near the shore. The ship was soon
surroflnded with canoes, bringing refresh-
ments consisting of pigs, fowls, bread-fruit,
yams, cocoa%uts, &c. They also brought off
considerable quantities of sinnet, made of
cocoanut fibre, and a brisk trade commenced.
Some time after, two Tongese gentlemen came
on board, very clean, fat, and comely; their
flowing robes reminded me of Chinese man-
darins. They were invited into the cabin.
They informed me that they had been sent by
the great chief to invite me to come on shore,


and that if I had any fears they would remain
on board till my return. I expressed my
thanks but said that as the ship was not at
anchor, I could not leave her. They further
informed me that there had been a civil war in
Tonga, but that everything was now settled,
and that a new chief governed Tonga.
I could have gained nothing by landing, as
the canoes brought ample supplies of every-
thing the island produced. I made them some
presents which they accepted, and they
courteously left the ship. After having
purchased everything which the canoes had
brought, we proceeded on our voyage.
Next day we sighted the small island of
Anamuka (Namuka), here I determined to
anchor. On nearing the shore I got into a
boat to search for the best anchorage. A long
canoe came to the boat, and in this canoe there
was an elderly chief seated in the stern, and a
young man beside him. They told me that
this elderly person was Kino Kino Loa, the
chief of Anamuka, and that the young man was
his son Taomaal. Taomaal asked what I was
looking for in the boat, and I replied that I
was looking for a place to anchor the ship.
“ Follow me,” said the young chief, “ and I
will show you the place where the great chief


Toote (Captain Cook) anchored.” I made a
signal to the ship. It was about dinner time,
and I wanted them to come into my boat and
dine with me. They both did so, but the
elder chief first ordered his people to put a
large pig into the boat. After they were
seated alongside of me, Taomaal said, “ I wish
you to adopt me, and to become my friend.”
“ With great pleasure,” I replied, “ but hope
that you will adopt me too, and become my
friend also ”; and so we shook hands, by way
of confirming the contract. This conversation
was not exactly in these words; but that was
the purport of it.
There were plenty of fowls for dinner, and
although neither of these two gentlemen had
ever used a knife and fork before, they looked
to what we did, and managed to imitate us
wonderfully well.
As soon as dinner was finished, they all left
the table except Kino Kino Loa and myself,
who remained in conversation together.
When I came upon deck, some time after, I
found Taomaal under the hands of the barber,
who had already cut off his beautiful beard
with scissors, and was besmearing his face
with soap-suds. I was sorry for it, for it
spoiled his appearance. I told Kino Kino


Loa that I would accompany him ashore to
take a look at the island, and would come to-
morrow for the purpose of trading with his
people for provisions. On my way ashore,
Taomaal offered to give me the same house
to keep my boats in which his grandfather
had given to “ Toote.” I thanked him, and
said that I did not need it, but should like to
see it. On landing, he took me to see it.
It was a long, lofty structure, open at both
ends; and on entering it I was surprised to
see upwards of a hundred people sleeping in
hammocks suspended from the roof It was
still in good repair, but had many marks of
antiquity about it. When I returned to the
landing-place, Mrs. Taomaal, the wife of my
friend—a handsome young woman, but de-
cidedly fat, came up and accosted me. “ Give
me an alacoche,” said she. I said that I did
not know what an “ alacoche ” was. At length
I ascertained that an alacoche was a pair of
scissors to cut her hair. I told her that I
could bring her a pair to-morrow. I was then
surrounded by lots of females, all clamouring
for alacoches. Taomaal conductd me to the
boat, and I requested him to tell the ladies
that I would bring “ alacoches ” to-morrow.
Next day I came ashore with two boats that


I might trade with the natives, and of course
did not forget to bring alacoches for Mrs.
Taomaal and her friends. The two chiefs
received us on the beach. The captain had
accompanied me ashore, and I told him to
attend to the trading while I examined the
island. Taomaal attended me everywhere.
On my return I found a crowd of natives on
the beach, with plenty of produce. Kino
Kino Loa was seated at some distance in the
middle of his chiefs for the purpose of pre-
serving order.
I asked the captain how he succeeded with
the trading? “ Very well,” he said, “ and lam
buying cheaper than at Tonga.” I saw, how-
ever, that he had not purchased much, and had
been haggling with the natives about prices.
I told him to go away and amuse himself, and
that I would become the trader. I advanced
towards the traders. One of them offered me
something for barter; I gave him what he
asked. Another man started up and said,
“ Buy mine,” which I did. Numbers of others
started up, and there was a regular chorus
of “ Buy mine.” The purchases were laid in
several heaps, and as soon as I had made a
purchase I pointed out where the seller was to
lay it. An old woman offered me something


for sale, which I paid for, and pointed out to
her where to lay it, and then I turned round
to another trader. The beldame did not lay
down the article, but came round the other
side, and again held it out to me, so I paid for
it a second time.
Kino Kino Loa observed the transaction,
started to his feet, gave the old woman a
hearty slap on the face, and drove her out of
the market. The captain had sat down at the
side of a screen to avoid the heat. He had
two small steel pistols in his pocket. One of
the natives put his hand under the screen and
picked his pocket of one of them. This was
detected by a young native of the Fiji Islands,
whom we had brought down from Sydney,
and who was with the captain acting as
interpreter between him and the chiefs.
Through this man the captain stated his com-
plaint to the chief. The chief gravely heard
the complaint, took hold of the second pistol
which the captain held in his hand, and started
to his feet. The mob of people present were
silent. There was not a murmur to be heard.
Kino Kino Loa held out the pistol, and made
a very short address to them. A man arose
from the middle of the crowd and gave the
name of the thief who had stolen the pistol.


A poor trembling wretch arose and held out
the stolen pistol. The chief seized a cutlass
from the hand of the Fiji native, and rushed
toward the culprit. I then interposed, seized
the arm of the chief, and gently led him back
to his seat. And so the matter ended.
After having leaded the two boats with
produce I sent them away to the ship, and told
them to return with some more articles of
trade. I told Taomaal that I would like to
take a walk across the island, provided he
would accompany me. He agreed to do so,
but he first took me to see his house. It was
very clean and the floor was nicely matted.
I observed one of his servants chasing a large
pig in the yard of the house. The pig took
refuge in the house, and the servant threw his
club at it, hit it on the head, and killed it.
I asked Taomaal if his servant was angry with
the pig for defiling his parlour? Taomaal
smiled, and said thal the man had killed it for
the purpose of cooking it for dinner.
I walked across the island. The road was
a passable footpath, but although the soil was
rich I did not see much cultivation. On
reaching the shore he showed me the island of
Little Anamuka (Anamuka Ette), but I had
found that I had walked too fast for Taomaal.


The calves of his legs were cramped, and his
attendants vied with each other in chafing
them.
On my way back I passed a fortified village.
The fortification consisted of a double bamboo
stockade. The entrance gate was long and
crooked, and well supplied with bars. The
city was compactly built together, but the
streets were narrow and crooked; the inhabi-
tants were all absent at the market-place.
There was only one man that remained as a
warder. He asked me to take some refresh-
ments, and surprised me by the facility and
expedition with which he cooked a bread-fruit,
that I might eat it piping hot. I observed that
we were close to the lagoon in the centre of
the island. It resembled the crater of an old
volcano, but I had no time to examine it.
On arrival at the market-place, dinner was
ready. I ought to have called it picnic, as we
partook of it in the open air. The only animal
food produced was a large pig, cooked in a
native oven. The cooking was exquisite. I
do believe that Soyer himself could not have
cooked it so well. After dinner, a bowl of
kava was introduced. They first gave the
chief a cupful of it. The cup was made of a
green leaf. After he had emptied the cup he


tossed it away, and the attendant handed me
another. I had seen them preparing the kava,
and declined to drink it, but told the chief
that I would prefer some cocoanut milk,
which they immediately brought to me. They
drew my attention to a pineapple. It was too
green for use. The chief told me that they
had not brought it for the purpose of eating,
but to show it to me. He stated that it was
a present which “ Toote ” (Captain Cook) had
made them. I was delighted with the grati-
tude of these poor natives to our great naviga-
tor. During dinner, Kino Kino Loa addressed
me: “ My son, Taomaal wishes to accompany
you on your voyage; will you take him ?”
I heedlessly replied: “ With great pleasure;
I like him very much.”
After dinner I proceeded to the market, and
very soon cleared it, and loaded my two boats.
There was some trade left. I begged that the
chief would accept of it. He smiled, took it,
and calling his chiefs round him divided it
amongst them. I then parted with him, and
returned to the ship.
Next morning, the wind being fair, we
loosened the topsails, and began to heave up
the anchor. Taomaal came on baord to
remain (as he stated) another day. He said:


" You had a great deal of trouble yesterday,
but my father has made new market regula-
tions, and the market will be better supplied.”
I replied that I was much obliged to his father,
but that I had got sufficient supplies to last
the crew for a long time, and that if I took any
more they would be spoiled by keeping. He
said that yams would keep a long time if we
took care not to bruise them. At last he said.:
“ You promised yesterday to take me with
you in the ship, and I hope you will do so.”
I replied: “ I have been thinking' about it all
night, and I now think (although I would very
much like to take you), the voyage will be
long and dangerous, and you would be
exposed to many hardships. Besides, I
might not be able to send you to Anamuka.”
He said: “Do take me; I will risk it.” Much
more to the same purport passed between us.
I pointed out that the ship had drifted a long
way from the island, and that he ought to
leave it. He replied: “As you will not take
me, accept my club as a keepsake.” I gave him
something in return, and did not forget to give
him one of my best razors. This club was
lost when the ship sank in the middle of the
Atlantic. Thanks to God I did not take him.
Some of the natives came on board for the


A SKETCH OF SYDNEY COVE IN ABOUT 1820, FROM NEAR FORT MACQUARIE, BY ALEXANDER BERRY


purpose of visiting the Fiji Islands, but they
suffered much from sea sickness, and sorely
repented what they had done.


CHAPTER V.
Arrival at Fijian Group, Island of Vuna or Opuna,
&c.—Seizure by the Fijians—State of Captivity
—Friendly Hawaiian Wynew (Wainio) —Visit to
Wynew’s Acquaintance—Return to Prison in
which the Chief Prisoner takes the position of
Master—Bargain with the Barbarians—Fidelity
and Courage of Fijian Jimmy and McEwers the
Irishman—Guard of Honour to the Landing-
place—Triumphant Escape to the Ship—Reflec-
tions on the object of the Chief of Opuna in
taking them Prisoners—Navigation and Ship-
building of Modern Fijians compared with the
Correspondent Attainments of the Ancient
Greeks—Visit to Bau and Transactions there—
Suppression of a Dangerous Conspiracy.
On reaching the Fijian Group I first visited
the island of Opuna, now called Taviuni. The
chief of the island received us in a friendly
manner, and conducted us to his village,
which was situated on an eminence about half
a mile from the landing-place. He was a tall
elderly man, inclined to corpulency, and had
an immense scar on one of his flanks, which
must have been received by a wound from a
jagged spear. It was nearly dark when we
reached the village. He conducted us to one
of the best of the houses of the village, where


we passed the night I asked him if his
island produced sandalwood? He replied
“ Yes,” and showed us some pieces of the
wood. I told him to provide some of it, and
that I would return again and purchase it.
At peep of day we left the house, and one of
the men knocked with his stick at the walls
of the house where the chief lived. He came
to the door and begged us not to leave so
early. We, however, took leave of him, and
proceeded to the boat, and so immediately left
the island.
A native of Fiji, named “Jimmy,” whom
we had brought from Sydney, accompanied us
to Opuna. He said that he did not think
that Opuna produced any sandalwood, and
thought that the chief was deceiving me.
However, as the winds was baffling, and pre-
vented us from proceeding to Mbau, I
determined some days after, to pay another
visit to Opuna, for the purpose of satisfying
myself as to whether the island produced
sandalwood or not. We had built a large
decked-boat on board the vessel, and had
rigged it as a tender to cruise amongst the
islands. It was calm when I left the ship, and
I told the captain that, if it continued calm,
he might hoist her out, and put her under the


charge of Mr. Barton, the third mate. He did
so. It was quite dark when I reached the old
landing-place, but the natives had seen the
boat in the distance, and we found the chief
and a few natives waiting for us. They
received us in the same friendly manner as
before and conducted us, with torches, to their
village, and led us to the same house.
Next day, as there was no appearance of
sandalwood, I became convinced that they
had deceived me. I also observed some other
suspicious circumstances. I collected all my
men, and proceeded to the landing-place. On
arriving there I saw Barton, of the tender, and
asked him why he had come ashore. He said
that a canoe with some natives had come
alongside of him, and that they had told him
that I wanted him to come ashore. He did not
believe them as they had brought no written
order, and refused to go. They watched an
opportunity, and pushed him overboard, and
then picked him up and carried him ashore in
their canoe. My boat was hauled ashore on
the beach, and I found that the natives had
cunningly placd a pile of yams in the front of
her, as if for the purpose of trade, but actually
to prevent the boat from being launched into
the water.


I had, some time before, opened a young
cocoanut for the purpose of taking a drink,
and with the knife in my hand I stepped on
board a large war canoe which had been
placed on a low flat rock, at the landing-place.
By this time my people were all collected,
and one of them had commenced to remove
the yams. At this instant a powerful squat
Tonga man came upon the canoe, and thus
addressed me: “ Sa no no Turang,”—l was
displeased, and asked him what he meant.
He then said, “ Give me that knife.” At this
moment Barton called out, “ Look out.” I
turned round and saw that Barton was seized
by several natives. As soon as I turned my
back towards him the Tonga man seized me
and pinioned my arms behind my back.
Somehow or other I had hold of the knife by
the blade. The Tonga man seized the handle,
and I allowed him to take it, but having made
a sudden effort I also seized the handle, and
twisted it out of his hand. I now made an
effort to dig the knife into him, but he easily
avoided it. I saw a huge fellow, with an up-
lifted club, running to his assistance. I made
another ineffectual effort with the knife, but
observed that my Herculean assailant had
already reached the canoe. I made a sudden


effort and dashed myself and the Tonga man
from the canoe into the water. The beach
was sandy. I was a little stunned, but only
for an instant. I now found that the Tonga
man was on the top of me, but that both my
arms were free, and that I had still the knife in
my hand. In an instant we were both on our
legs struggling together. I seized the Tonga
man with one arm, and was on the point of
dispatching him with the knife, when my
Herculean assailant interposed, and, by
seizing my arm, succeeded in diverting the
blow. I had now two antagonists to deal
with instead of one, but somehow or other I
pushed them both aside. I was, at thfe
instant, like a stag at bay and equally
insensate. When I got out of the water, the
other natives retreated.
Barton called out to me, “ They have killed
no one yet; give them everything and perhaps
they will not kill any one.” I looked and saw
that all my people were pinioned by the
natives, and that one poor fellow was still
struggling to prevent them from carrying
away the bag with the: articles of trade. I
handed the bag to the natives, and then went
towards the chief and upbraided him for his
treachery and violence, and asked him what


was the cause of it. He said nothing. I saw
that all my men were completely cowed, and
that further resistance was out of the question;
I therefore agreed to go with them to the
village. Some of the chiefs began to cheer
me, and said, “ Sa vinaka turang”—which I
interpreted to mean, “ It is all right now.”
They took us to the old house where there
was an assemblage of the chiefs. One chief
after another came and asked me to allow
them to feel my arm. They pawed it all over
in the way I have seen a butcher feel a calf,
and I thought that they were feeling me in
order to ascertain whether I would be good
eating. But I observed that, although all my
men were fatter than I was, that they did not
feel any of them. I believe that the case was
this. They thought that I must be very
strong from the resistance which I had made.
After some time slices of yams were brought
in. One of my crew seized a piece, and I
scolded him for so doing. The chief said,
“Do not scold the men, it is intended for us
all.” An old priest (I suppose he was the
domestic chaplin of the chief) arose, and said
grace before eating. He spoke slowly,
gravely, and reverentially, but I did not like
the purport of the grace. He thanked the


Deity for this victory which they had achieved
and prayed that as the Deity had delivered the
little ship into their hands so he would be
graciously pleased to deliver the large ship
over to them.
After eating, a bowl of angona (kava) was
introduced, but the chief did not ask the white
men to drink of it. He handed me, however,
a large piece of the root of which it was made,
saying: “Take this, and make a bowl of
angona in your own way, and drink it with
your men.” I forgot to mention that soon
after I had arrived in the house the Tonga man
came towards me, and, in a jolly and trium-
phant manner, said, “ I was the man who took
you.” This roused my choler. I replied,
“ Yes, you were the man who seized me, but
you did not dare to do so while my face was
turned to you, but seized me when I had turned
my back towards you.” His countenance fell,
and he sneaked away, and never came near me
again. After a time all the chiefs (except
one) left the house. This one sat down
beside me. At length I became drowsy, and
lay down. The chief said, “ That is right,
Turang”; he then covered me with a mat, and
brought a wooden pillow for my head. He


then went away, but first carefully covered up
the door.
Next morning the great chief allowed me
to revisit the beach, and sent a young man
to accompany me. When I reached the beach
I found that they had brought ashore my
decked tender, and that a lot of men were busy
demolishing her. I sat down very much
depressed. My companion came and sat
down beside me. He appeared very
sympathetic; guarded me from the sun, and
prevented the flies from annoying me. My
mouth was parched. I said I was very thirsty.
He immediately ascended a tree, threw down
some cocoanuts, and gave me a drink. Soon
after the chief sent me a message to return to
the house. On reaching it I found it crowded
with natives, all squatted on the floor, and the
chiefs holding a durbar, or consultation. I
threaded my way through the crowd, and
seated myself near the chiefs. I observed my
men seated in the crowd, and saw one of them
crying bitterly. He was a native of Tahiti—
the individual who, when sentinal at Koro-
rarika Bay, had deserted with his musket. I
asked him what made him cry. He replied
that he had heard one of the natives say to
another, “ That these men had all come alive


into this house, but not one of them will go
alive out of it.” I said, “Do not cry for that;
none of the others are crying.”
A stranger now entered the house. There
was a buzz amongst the mob. He looked
round, and then came to the place where I
was seated and squatted down near my feet.
He then turned towards me, and said some-
thing in English which I did not hear distinctly.
He then asked the Tahitian man why he was
crying, and the Tahitian gave him the same
reply which he had given me. The stranger
said: “Do not cry for that; if they kill you
they shall kill me also.” I saw at once from
his short hair and his dress that, although the
stranger was a native of the Pacific, he was
not a Fijian.
Soon after a number of large baskets of
cooked yams and bread-fruit w'ere brought to
the door. The chief told me to take one of
the baskets and eat it with my men. My men
ate a little, and the contents of the basket
were devoured by the natives.
After this repast the chief allowed me to
take a walk with my new friend the stranger.
During the walk he told me that he was a
native of the Sandwich Islands (the Hawaiian
Islands); that he had first visited Sydney, and


had afterwards come to the Fiji Islands. He
told me that h$ had been living on a neigh-
bouring island when he received information
that the Chief of Opuna had captured a
number of white men, and that he had hurried
to Opuna in order to try and prevent the chief
from killing them. “ I will do whatever I can
to save you,” he said; “ but you must promise
to take me with you in the ship, for I am quite
tired of living amongst these savages.” I
replied that I would be very glad to take him
and asked his name. He said it was Wynew
(Wainio). During the walk he pointed out
a place at the side of the path where the grass
was stained, and where a cloth had been laid
over the stained grass. “ Look there,” he
said; “ a man was killed there very lately.”
Soon after, he pointed out a similar place
where another man had been killed. He then
said, “ How could you be such a fool as to
risk your life among such a set of savages?”
Soon after we reached a hill, with a steep
ascent, but with a well-trodden path. On
reaching the middle of the ascent two or three
wild looking savages, with uplifted clubs, came
came running down the hill. Their curly hair
was powdered with quick-lime, and their
bodies were begrimed with cocoanut oil, and


soot or powdered charcoal. As soon as they
recognised Wynew they returned with him.
There was a village at the top of the eminence,
and I was glad to see the ship at some miles
from the shore. Wynew then took me to the
best house in the village. The mistress of the
house was a Tongese lady. She received
Wynew in the most courteous manner. I
looked at her, and observed that she was a
woman of middle age, decently dressed in the
Tongese fashion. Her features were regular
and pleasing, and she had such a kind,
motherly look that she might have passed for
a European lady. I was surprised to meet
such a civilized lady amongst these savages.
She requested me to be seated, and ordered
some of her attendants to bring refreshments.
The lady told Wynew that a member of her
family was very sick. The house was divided
into two compartments by a curtain. Wynew
went behind this curtain, and addressing the
sick person inquired as to the health of the
invalid. I heard a female voice reply: “I am
very sick; I am dying.” “No, no,” said
Wynew, “ you will not die, you will recover.”
But the voice replied: “ I know I must die, for
I have lost all hope.” After some time I told
Wynew it was getting late, and that I wished


to go back. “ Well,” replied Wynew, “go
back by yourself; I shall follow you presently.
I wish to have some more conversation with
my friends.
On my return to the village of the chief, 1
found that all was quiet, and that the mob of
natives had dispersed. I then went to the
house where I had slept, and found the old
chief trimming the eaves of the house. I
entered into conversation with him, and
pointed out that the ship was approaching the
island; that the captain had certainly received
information that the chief had taken me
prisoner, and that he was a terrible fellow,
and would land with a large body of men to
deliver me, and that it would be better for
him to let me go. He looked ashamed, but
gave me no answer. At this moment Wynew
returned. He said to me: “ Talk no more to
that fellow; he will not let you go.” I now
felt that I had degraded myself by becoming a
supplicant to a savage. I braced myself up,
and said: “If you will not let me go, give me
a house to live in.” He replied: “I have
already given you this house.” A thousand
wild ideas presented themselves to my
imagination. Amongst other things I deter-
mined to become savage. I would go to


battle with the other savages, until some
opportunity offered itself of leaving the island;
and I consoled myself with the thought that,
even if they should kill me, they never did
torture their prisoners, but dispatched them at
once by a blow on the cranium.
I entered the house, Wynew followed, and
I began to act as master at once. There were
several natives seated on the floor, and, as I
supposed that the chief had sent them to be
my attendants, I ordered them to go to the
part of the house which is allotted to servants.
But Wynew slept alongside of me.
I slept soundly, and woke much refreshed.
I walked out and saw the ship near the island.
After some time the chief and his councillors
entered the house and held another consulta-
tion. I saw, however, at a glance that his
councillors were more hostile to me than the
chief himself.
After a while I asked the chief if he would
now let me go, as the ship was near to the
island. After some consultation he turned to
me and said, “ I will let you go if you will
give me a tombooa.” A tombooa is the native
(Fijian) name for the tooth of a sperm whale,
which I believe they consider to be a talisman.
I replied, “ Send a canoe with any young man


to the ship, and he will bring you a tombooa.”
This he immediately did. The man on reaching
the ship told the captain his errand. The
captain brought the tombooa, but the man
said he was afraid to go ashore again, and
refused to go. The captain then called
“Jimmy,” the native of Fiji, and asked him if
he would take the tombooa ashore. The man
immediately agreed, and went ashore in the
canoe. As soon as this affair became known
in the ship, McEwers, the Irish sailor, whom
I had slightly punished in New Zealand for
desertion, came to the captain and said: “It
is not safe to trust to a native; give me another
tombooa and send me ashore in a boat, and I
will take it to Mr. Berry.” He was im-
mediately sent ashore in a boat. On landing
there was a crowd of natives to whom he told
his errand, that he had brought a tombooa for
the great chief. The natives immediately
agreed to accompany him to the village.
When about half way up the hill the two who
were with him stopped short, and asked him
to show them the tombooa. He refused to do
so. They threatened to kill him. He said:
“ Kill me if you like; but I will not show you
the tombooa, for it is for the great chief.”
They said to one another: “He is a brave


fellow ”; and both of them cheered him, and
conducted him in safety to the village.
Jimmy the native arrived at the house first.
He came quietly to me, and handed me the
tombooa, wrapped in a piece of paper, which
I put in my pocket. Soon after I was surprised
to see McEwers boldly entering the house.
He called out with a stentorian voice: “Is
Mr. Berry here?” Some of them showed him
where I was sitting. All the chiefs stared at
him, but no one spoke. He then delivered me
the tombooa in a very consequential manner.
I took the other tombooa out of my pocket,
removed the piece of paper, and then addressed
the chief. I told him that he had promised to
liberate me and my men if I gave him a tom-
booa, and now that I had two splendid tom-
booas to give him I expected him to let me go.
His reply was: “ Let me see the tombooas.”
I handed them to him, and he gloated over
them with such eagerness that I believed he
had never possessed such a treasure before.
After some time I said, “ I suppose that I may
go now?” He gave me no answer, but con-
tinued gloating over the tombooas. I then
arose, and said, “I shall go.” He replied,
“You had better not; there are many armed
men in the bush.” I then said, “ You are a


great chief, but have not acted in the way
great chiefs ought to act; you have not kept
your word. You promised to liberate me if
I gave you a ‘ tombooa,’ I have given you two,
and you refuse to let me go. Therefore, give
me back the ‘tombooas’ ”; and I gently laid my
hands upon them, and put them into my
pocket. The chief looked abashed, but his
subordinates glared fiercely at me. In an
instant the durbar or council was at an end.
They all left the house, and only Barton and
myself were left. Barton was grievously
alarmed at my audacity.
A number of the lower classes now entered
the house, and asked me to show them the
“ tombooa.” I told them that they were
“ tabooed,” as they were intended for the
great chief; and they left me.
By-and-bye, the chief sent me a message
that he wished to see me. I left the house,
and found the crowd outside in a disorderly
state. The chief threw his mace of state with
all his force at the head of one of them. If it
had hit him, it certainly would have killed him,
but it missed him. He took another fellow by
the shoulders, lifted him up bodily, and gave
him a kick with his foot which threw him to a
considerable distance. He then came to me,
G


and said, “Go back to the house again
instantly.” On entering it I sate down, and
he did the same. He then said, “ Give me
the ‘ tombooas,’ and then depart instantly with
your men.” After collecting my men, I
requested the chief to send some of his sub-
ordinates to accompany me to the boat, as he
had told me that the bush was full of armed
men. He selected two or three men, and
Jimmy and YVynew chatted socially with them
on their way to the boat. The mention of
Jimmy’s name here brings another matter to
my recollection. When 1 left the house at
the request, or rather at the command of the
chief, I saw that he was conversing with
Jimmy. I afterwards asked Jimmy as to the
nature of the conversation. He replied that
the chief made many inquiries about the
number of men and muskets in the ship, and
why there was so much light in the ship all
night. Jimmy told him that the men were
employing themselves in preparing their
muskets, and that the blacksmiths had been
sharpening their cutlasses for the purpose of
attacking the island, and pointed out that a
large boat full of men was approaching the
island. It was upon this that he had sent for
me to speak to him. I have already mentioned


what took place, and how he had prevented
two of his people from assailing me.
On arriving at the beach, I found the path
crowded with natives —all armed with spears,
clubs, and bows and arrows. They all made
way for me, and some of them cheered me, and
said, “It is all right now.” The boat was
alongside of a flat rock, and commanded by
Ceronie. After the men had all entered the
boat, I stepped in also. All the crew of the
boat had their muskets in their hands.
Ceronie said: “ Shall I blaze away upon
them?” “Oh, no!” I said, “they have killed
nobody; and besides the chief has sent a body-
guard to conduct me in safety to the boat.”
I had reason to congratulate myself that I had
better luck than Ulysses when he fell into the
hands of the cannibal Polyphemus; who, after
devouring some of his men, would have
devoured him also, if Ulysses had not put out
his eye when he was asleep.
I now turned towards the island, and found
that every one of the crowd of natives had
disappeared. Although (as already men-
tioned) the natives had destroyed the decked
boat, the boat in which I had landed was lying
on the beach uninjured. Ceronie leaped ashore
for the purpose of launching it into the water,


but was unable to do so, as none of the men
ventured to follow him. I was afraid lest
some of the natives lurking in the bush might
shoot him with their arrows, and called him
to come back to the boat, which then returned
to the ship.
Many years after I became acquainted with
Captain Dillon, the gentleman who discovered
in Samoa the wreck of the ship “ La Perouse.”
He told me that he had visited the island of
Opuna after these occurrences. He asked the
natives what I had done to them to induce them
to make me and my men prisoners for the
purpose of killing us. They replied that it
was quite a mistake to suppose that they
intended to kill us. On the contrary, they
assured him that the chief had taken a fancy
to me, and had captured me for the purpose of
conferring upon me the honour of commanding
his forces when he went to war. After a calm
consideration of all the circumstances I feel
convinced that this was a true version of the
case. It was certainly a rough way of re-
cruiting his army, but was not more barbarous
than the practice of the British Government at
that time, who recruited their navy by the
“ press gang.” I believe also that he destroyed
the deck boat, not from a principle of wanton


mischief, but to prevent us from leaving the
island. And when the occurrences are recalled
to my recollection I always remembelr the
chief of Opuna with kindly feelings. I now
recollect that I asked Wynew what was the
character of the chief of Opuna, and whether
he was liked by his own people? To that
Wynew had replied: “He is very well liked
by his own people, but he is feared and hated
by his neighbours.”
As I have alluded to Ulysses I may add that
the Greeks in those days seemed to have been
hardly more civilized than the natives of the
Fiji Islands. Witness the barbarous conduct
of Achilles in dragging the dead body of his
brave enemy by the heels round the walls of
Troy.
They certainly were neither such good ship-
builders nor such skilful navigators as the
Fijians. The Fijian carpenters made better
ships than the Greeks, although they had only
stone tools, and had neither iron nor brass.
The ships of the Greeks could only sail with
a fair wind, and never willingly ventured out
of the sight of land. The Fijians could navi-
gate their ships by the stars or by the trade
winds, and their ships could lie within three
points of the wind, and could sail at the rate


of fifteen miles per hour with a good breeze —
a rate of sailing which hardly any of our
modern steamers are able to effect. It took
Ulysses ten years to reach Ithaca from Troy;
any Fijian would have accomplished the voyage
in ten days.
Neither do the Carthaginians seem to have
made any great improvement in shipbuilding
or in navigation; and although a very enter-
prising people, they also, it seems, never went
willingly out of sight of land. They discovered
the islands of the Cassiterides (Scilly Islands),
where they long enjoyed a monopoly of the
trade in tin, because they kept their discovery
a secret. They must have reached the Cas-
siterides by a long and circuitous route. After
passing the Straits of Gibraltar they must have
coasted along the shores of Spain and Portugal,
then have followed up the coast of Gaul until
they reached the Straits of Dover—where they
would see the white cliffs of Albion—and then
they must have crept along the Southern coast
of England until they reached the Land’s End.
On reaching the ship I gave Wynew (the
Hawaiian) a suit of clothes, and he took his
place among the sailors. On our way to
Mbau, we barely escaped some dangers, but
we arrived in safety. We found there several


ships in the harbour, all trading for sandal-
wood. The native Jimmy went on shore, and
I saw very little of him afterwards. After
some weeks all the ships took their departure
for India, and Ceronie took his passage in one
of them. It was easy to see that the sandal-
wood was nearly exhausted, as that brought
to us by the natives consisted chiefly of the
limbs of old trees which had been cut down
years ago. The sap of these limbs was
decayed, and roughly cut away by the natives;
but we trimmed and cleaned it with drawing
knives, and then weighed it and stowed it
away.
We found here (at Mbau), a number of
runaway sailors and convicts, who lived with
the natives, and I was told that they used to
go to war with the chiefs. I had little or no
intercourse with them. The principal part of
the sandalwood we obtained was from a place
named “Ilea” (Vatulele?), some miles to the
leeward, and I generally went there every
second or third day, always finding the natives
very civil. On the way to Ilea, I had to pass
a low flat island where the natives had estab-
lished a manufactory of pottery. I often
intended to land to ascertain if they used the
old potters’ wheel mentioned in Scripture, but


I never did so. The manufacture of this
pottery seemed to be a particular trade, and the
manufacturers seemed to subsist by selling it
to the other natives. The clay was evidently
artistically prepared, and the jars were well-
shaped and stood the fire very well. The
natives of the other Oceanic islands cooked
their food in ovens, but these people cooked it
in jars, steaming it with very little fire.
I had long seen a pile of fine sandalwood at
a house in Mbau, and one day I looked in at
the door of the house for the purpose of buying
it. A female voice addressed me — “ Come in,
Turang.” I entered, and saw the mistress of
the house seated between two large jars, with
a little fire under them, and some green leaves
stuffed into the neck of the jars to prevent the
steam from escaping. She was employed in
pounding something in a wooden mortar. She
said, “ Sit down, Turang, and rest yourself.
What can I do for you? Will you take any
refreshment?” I thanked her, and said that I
wished to buy the sandalwood at the door.
She replied, “ That is an affair of my husband
—my lord and master she called him—l never
interfere with such matters. I only attend
to my domestic duties.” I must say that she
seemed to conduct her cookery as artistically


as if she had been a pupil of Liebeg or Sover.
The people at Mbau gradually began to
bring sandalwood for sale more sparingly, and
I often saw in the evening great numbers of
them returning with their working tools from
their plantations. But the men of Ilea still
continued to bring it in.
Upon one occasion the captain went with
the boats to Ilea, and returned earlier than
usual, and I saw that one boat was empty.
He said that they had narrowly escaped being
killed. Upon inquiry I found that they had
had some disputes with the natives, and that
they became very furious, and made hostile
demonstrations and used many threatening
gestures. On this, as it appeared, all the
crew became panic-stricken and ran away to
the boats. Abdallah, one of the men (a brave
little Malay), told me that he arrived at the
place at the time when our people had became
panic-stricken, but that, as he saw the natives
were not following the runaways, he called
upon them to stop. They, however, would not
listen to him, and he thereupon slowly followed
them to the boat. I never could understand
the cause of this affair. These natives had been
particularly civil to me when I last visited
them.


Some days after, Wynew told me that he
was informed that all the natives of Ilea had
left their village, and that Ilea was completely
deserted. We had obtained about fifty tons
of sandalwood, and it seemed vain to expect
any more. But I resolved to visit the large
island of Viti Levu before taking my departure
from these islands. I fitted out two boats and
two crews of armed men. The captain was to
go in one of them, and I was to go in the
other, and I told Wynew that I would take
him with me. My intention was to leave the
ship in the evening that I might reach the
island of Viti Levu in the morning.
While about to step into the boat Wynew
came to me and said that he wished me to
give him a pair of warmer trousers. I told
him that it was a pity that he had not applied
to me sooner; that the captain was already in
the boat and had the key of the slop chest.
“ But,” I said, “ I will give you a pair of my
old trousers,” which I did and he went into
the boat with me. As soon as we were a short
distance from the ship he said: “Stop the boat,
I want to speak to you.” He said it was very
wrong for me and the captain both to leave the
ship together; that the white men who lived
ashore had entered into a conspiracy to take


the ship during my absence, and that they had
been tampering with some of the crew, and had
attempted to seduce him also —that he should
tell the chief of Viti Levu to take me into the
bush and then to kill me. He said that he
could not act in that way, as I had been kind
to him, and had given him the clothes he wore.
They had said that his clothes were worthless,
and that they would give him better; and he
added that this was the reason why he had
asked me to give him another pair of trousers.
We immediately returned on board. I made
some inquiries, and ascertained that three of
those fellows were then on board, and that
there had been heard some whispering between
them and some of the sailors, together with
some other circumstances.
I called the three men before me, and stated
to them the information which I had received,
without mentioning names. They were much
alarmed, but strongly denied ever having had
such intentions. I told them, as they had
committed no overt act, that I would not take
further proceedings, but that they must
immediately leave the ship and never come on
board again. They were only too glad to be
allowed to leave the ship so easily. I was
afterwards told that they subsequently


rendered themselves so obnoxious to the
natives that the latter killed them all.


CHAPTER VI.
Visit to the Southern Coast of Viti Levu—Friendly
Savages—Proposals for a Grand Cannibal Feast
—Negotiations for a supply of Sandalwood —
Short trip into the interior of Viti Levu—Cotton
Plants—Sail again for New Zealand—Arrival at
the Bay of Islands —Second attack on the Ship
repulsed—Completion of Cargo—Account of the
capture of the “Boyd,” and massacre of the crew
at Whangaroa—Episode of the semi-civilized
Taranui and his indignant Mamma—Particulars of
visit to the wreck of the “Boyd”—Rescue of the
four Survivors—Final departure from New
Zealand—Terrible storms during voyage across
the Southern Pacific —Terra-del-Fuego Awful
Position of the ship near the Straits of Magellan
—Dreadful storms again—Visit from the friendly
natives—Preservation Harbour—Mutiny, bad
weather, and short provisions—National court-
esies—Arrival at Concepcion—Valparaiso—The
‘‘ Astrea ” and its captain—Callao—Lima and its
people—Guayaquil—Voyage to Cadiz—Succes-
sion of bad weather—Ship founders in the
Atlantic, near the Azores.
On the next day I went with two boats to
visit Viti Levu; and on reaching the lee side
of the island I found that a coral reef prevented
my access to the land. We ran along the reef
until we saw some natives employed in gather


ing something on the dry reef. It being low
water we made signs to them to come to speak
to us; which they did. We asked them
whether there was any passage in the reef by
which we could approach the land. They
replied that there was a passage further on.
I held up something which I would give them
if they would come into the boat and show us
the passage. One of them immediately dived
into the surf and appeared in the smooth water
near the boat, and came on board. He was
a fine mild-looking young man. He sat down
beside me, and became as sociable and chatty
as if we had been old friends. By-and-by I
saw a gap in the high land. I asked him
whether there was not a river at that place?
He said “Yes”; that there was a large river
and that a large canoe from Tonga had arrived
there two or three days before, and that the
canoe was manned by about fifty men. They
said these men were “ fine fat fellows, and
would be good eating”; and further that, as
we had “ plenty of muskets, if we would assist
them to kill them we could eat them together.”
He said also that we could attack them at
night when they were asleep. I replied that
the Kai Papalagi ("white men) only carried
muskets to defend themselves, and not to kill


people, and that the white men did not eat
man’s flesh. He looked at me with surprise,
and said, “Is it true what you say? If it is
true, the Kai Papalagi must be great fools,
for man’s flesh is much better than pork.”
At length my man-eating friend conducted
the boat through a fine passage in a fine reef-
locked harbour, and we landed at a small
village. The chief of the village received us
in a quiet civil manner. I told him our errand,
and asked him if his country produced sandal-
wood. He replied there was plenty of sandal-
wood in the mountains. I asked him if he
would procure it for us, if we brought the ship
into his harbour, and told him we would pay
for it in tombooa and iron tools. He replied
that he would be glad to do so. And, by way
of propitiating him, I made him a present of
a tombooa, which he immediately hung at his
neck.
Before taking leave of him I requested him
to order his people to commence procuring the
sandalwood, and that I would return in a few
days with the ship. He promised to do so. And
in two or three days after the ship arrived in
safety at the newly discovered harbour.f On
t Probably the Whippy Harbour of the present day.


landing I found that they had only procured
about a ton of good sandalwood, for which I
paid a higher price than I used to give at
Mbau as an encouragement to the natives—
for which I was blamed by the captain. It
came in very slowly afterwards, which I attri-
buted to the distance the natives had to bring
it. I therefore resolved to visit the mountains,
in order to ascertain whether it abounded
there; and I requested the chief to give me a
guide. This he did, and with the guide there
was a band of armed men. I found the path
led over a long flat of barren worthless land,
with a few bushes on it here and there.
Amongst these bushes I found some cotton
plants, and, along with others, some plants of
yellow nankeen cotton, the ripe pods of which
I pocketed. After a time my people began to
complain of fatigue. One of them said to the
others, whilst he looked at me, “ Although Mr.
Berry always fatigues himself as much as any
of us, I have never heard him complain of being
tired,” I said nothing, but went on. Soon
after we met an old native armed with a club.
When he reached us he said something to the
guide, but I observed he trembled very much,
never having perhaps seen any white men
before. Soon afterwards the guide came up


to me and said, “ Turang, come back; I am
afraid to go any further.” I observed that
although we had walked perhaps seven or
eight miles, we were not half way to the
mountains. I returned to the ship. I now
saw that the country was so desolate, and so
thinly peopled, that it would be impossible for
them to bring me sandalwood in quantity,
even if it abounded in the mountains; and 1
resolved to leave these islands, to return to
New Zealand, and to fill up the ship with spars
for the Cape of Good Hope.
On reaching the North Cape of New
Zealand, I at first intended to enter the har-
bour of Whangaroa, from the favourable
account which Ceronie had given me of that
port. As soon as the New Zealanders on
board saw my intention, they requested me
not to go there, as they had heard that the
natives intended to attack the first ship which
came into the harbour, on account of the injury
which Ceronie had done them by dropping his
atua (the watch) into the harbour, which
had occasioned the death of so many of the
natives.
Although I had heard the same story at the
Bay of Islands, I doubted it, and thought that
it might have originated from native jealousy.
H


I, therefore, still proceeded towards Whan-
garoa, on which they all began to cry bitterly.
Fortunately, the winds became adverse for
entering that harbour. Ater struggling with
these winds for a day or two —which were fair
for the Bay of Islands —I changed my course
and entered that bay.
On again anchoring at Kororarika my old
.friends were delighted to see me; and Tupe and
Tarra promised to give me every assistance
in their power for loading the ship with spars.
Tupe piloted the ship some miles further to
a more convenient place for loading her.
In procuring the spars everything succeeded
in a way equal to my most sanguine wishes.
The chiefs, assisted by their people, cut down
the spars, and barked and squared the larger
ones for the sake of stowage, all hands
assisting to launch them into the water. They
were always regularly paid for their work
every Saturday night.
One day when I was on board the ship, the
captain of a whaler (accompanied by Tippahee,
whom I had not seen since the time when he
was my prisoner) came on board. He told
me that his object was to get some spars for
his ship from Tupe. I asked them into the
cabin, and gave them some refreshment. On


leaving, Tippahee asked me to give him a
bottle of porter to drink in the bush, and I did
so. I mention this on account of what
happened afterwards. I may add that Tippahee
could see the defenceless state of the ship at
this time, for nearly all of the men were
employed in the boats or in the bush.
Some time—perhaps a fortnight—after the
above event, I came upon deck early in the t
morning, for the purpose of making arrange-
ments for visiting the working party in the
bush. The sky looked very dark and
threatening, and the black clouds seemed to
denote a thunderstorm. I therefore deferred
my visit until the next day. The squall, or
thunderstorm, took place, and the sky cleared
up. The people on board consisted of myself,
the chief mate (an elderly man), my body-
servant (an Indian Portuguese), my little page
Taranui, the ship’s cook, two blacksmiths (one
of whom was a Chinaman), a carpenter (also
a Chinaman), and I think two other men.
In the afternoon I observed a large war
canoe full of men approaching the ship. I
examined and observed that the men were all
armed. Directions were at once given that
every man on board should be armed with
loaded muskets, and I took charge of the big


guns. One of them was already loaded with
ball, and I put into her a bag of shingles.l
The ship was anchored in a narrow place.
On the one side the bank consisted of a steep
precipice, and on the other side were some
low sandy beaches. The canoe came along
the steep bank, and when it came opposite the
ship it stopped there for some time. Then
the canoe began to approach the ship, and
one of the natives on board rose up and was
seen giving directions to his men how to
board. I succeeded in covering the canoe
with the cannon, and the Chinese blacksmith
brought me a piece of red hot iron from the
forge to fire it with. At this moment the tide
must have turned, for the ship swung round
and I lost my aim. I could now see that the
man who was standing up, directing the men
where to board, was my old acquaintance
Metatau, whom I had brought from Sydney,
and who afterwards had been one of the
leaders of the attack upon me at Kororarika.
A randon musket-shot was now fired.
Metatau immediately called out that he was
Mata Mata ( hit or wounded), and sat down.
The canoe took flight, and all the men
tPebbles.


landed on the beach, on the opposite side,
and ran into the bush. I have no recollection
what I did with the canoe, but I am sure I
did not allow it to be destroyed.
Some weeks after this affair, when I came
on deck one morning I found Tarra in earnest
conversation with some strangers, whom I
had never seen before. He came to me and
said, If you want anything which these
people have brought, buy it immediately and
send them away. I have something to tell
you.” I took this hint, and sent them away.
Tarra then told me that the natives of
Whangaroa had taken a large ship—that they
had killed and eaten all the crew, and
possessed themselves of all the muskets and
gunpowder in the ship —and that they were
preparing to come and attack me also.
” You,” said Tarra, “ must cease getting any
more timber, and withdraw your people from
the bush. Get them all on board, and then
leave New Zealand immediately. Until you
are able to go, I and Tupe and our men will
stay on board to protect the ship.”
I expressed my surprise at what Tarra
told me, but hoped it might be a false report.
A day or two after I went to the bush, and
asked Tupe if he had heard of such a report.


Tupe said that he had heard the report, but
that he did not believe it, and that it went in
at one ear and out at the other. I, therefore,
continued getting spars until the ship was
loaded. In the meantime fresh reports were
brought in by the other natives every day,
and many were so circumstantial that it
appeared impossible for these natives to have
invented them. I therefore determined to
go to Whangaroa as soon as the ship should
be loaded.
Some time before I heard the above report
my little page Taranui came to me and said
that he wished that I would give him my
permission to leave the ship for a week that
he might pay a visit to his mother, and that
I need not be afraid that he would run away
for he liked the ship very much. I told him
by all means to go and see his mother. He
went, and returned at the end of the week.
Some time after his return, while walking
the poop, I saw him in earnest conversation
with his mother. The purport of their con-
versation was as follows: His mother
entreated him to leave the ship, and go on
shore and reside with his own relations. He
replied: “ I like the ship very much, and
prefer it to living ashore.” His mother


replied that it would be more natural for him
to live amongst his own relations than
amongst strangers. He replied: "1 prefer
living among the pakeha (white men) to
living among the Maoris. The Maoris have
so many lontrou about them ( pediculi ).” His
mother replied: “ Shame, shame upon you,
Taranui, to talk in that way about your own
relations.” The old woman now opened her
clothing, showed him her breasts, and told
him that he seemed to have forgotten that
she had suckled him. I left the poop and
heard no more; making up my mind to leave
the lad to take his own course. For some
time he continued to wait at table as usual,
but I readily perceived that he was now very
unsettled, and some time after he left the
ship without saying good-bye to any one.
I made inquiry about him long afterwards,
and was informed that he went to sea in
another ship, and died in the course of the
voyage.
As already stated, I resolved to visit
Whangaroa after the ship was ready for sea.
On the first attempt a gale of wind compelled
me to turn back after nearly reaching the
harbour; but as the weather moderated. I
made a second attempt, and reached the port


in safety. On this occasion I was accom-
panied by my friend Metanangha. On arrival
I found a large ship lying in shallow water,
burnt to the water’s edge —and the bones
of the crew lying over the beach. By the
assistance of Metanangha, 1 succeeded in
recovering the few survivors, consisting of
a Mrs. Moseley, her female infant, the youngest
daughter of Mr. Commissary Broughton (who
is still alive and who married Mr. Throsby, of
Throsby Park), and a young man named
Davidson. Besides saving these persons, I
also, strange to say, recovered the duplicates
of the bills and other documents which I had
left with Mr. Lord for transmission to
England; and these proved to be the only
documents which reached their destination,
all my other papers and documents being lost
in my subsequent shipw r reck. Thus my enter-
prise was not a mere quixotic adventure to
save distressed damsels from the hands of
giants and ogres, but was attended with very
beneficial consequences to myself. They also
brought me one of the ship’s boats, which I
handed to Tarra, with a certificate to show
how it came into his possession. I also gave
Tarra a letter to show to any ship which might
arrive, giving an account of the capture of the


“ Boyd ” —for that was the name of the
vessel —and warning them not to admit too
many natives on board.
I recollect one night, when Metanangha
was stopping on board, he addressed me to
this effect, " You are too venturesome. You
walk about New Zealand alone and unarmed,
in the way you might do in Europe, and I have
often heard the natives say how easy it would
be on such occasions to kill you.” I certainly
was too reckless from over confidence, and
felt the truth of his remark.
After the ship was ready we took a final
departure from New Zealand, and sailed
therefrom (as I think) on the 26th of January,
1810. Prom what I had heard from some
ships I was in great hopes that my cargo of
spars would find a good market at the Cape
of Good Hope, for they were then much
wanted there for the British Navy. But fate
had not ordained that they should ever reach
the Cape.
The early part of the voyage was favourable,
but when we were near Cape Horn, we en-
countered a fearful storm, which blew our
sails to pieces. Some time after a heavy sea
struck the stern of the ship, and knocked away
the rudder, after which we lay like a hulk


upon the water at the mercy of the winds and
waves. For a fortnight we never saw the
sun, and did not know where we had drifted
to. We, however, contrived to construct a
makeshift rudder, and fastened it with ropes.
One afternoon the weather moderated, and
we saw that the colour of the water changed
—an indication that we were nearing land.
About sunset the sky cleared up for a few
minutes, and we saw the tops of the mountains
of Terra del Fuego, but could not see the
shore. About this time we found that the
pumps were choked, and that we could not
pump the ship. With much difficulty we got
the pumps on deck, where we cleaned them
and so reshipped them; but it was nearly
midnight before we could free the ship from
water. At this time we could not see the
land. I was so exhausted that I went into
my cabin, and threw myself upon my bed to
rest myself, when I immediately fell into a
deep sleep.
I awoke at the first dawn of the morning,
with a kind of deadly pressure on my chest,
and could not, at the moment, realize my
position. I found, however, that the ship
was steady and the water calm. I then
looked out of mv cabin window and saw some


birds on a small rock at some distance from
the ship. I started to my feet and went on
deck, when I found that the ship had drifted
during the night, into a bay on the coast of
Terra del Fuego, and that we were in the
midst of some islands.
The sky was cloudy, but the wind was
light; and at midday I was able to take an
observation of the sun, when I found that we
were about forty miles to the south of the
western entrance of the Straits of Magellan.
The land between us and these straits is called
Desolation Island by Cook. On sounding
we found no bottom, but continued advancing
all day in hopes of finding some place to
anchor the ship. Evening was approaching
and we could neither find shelter nor anchor-
age; at length we found bottom at thirty
fathoms; but it was merely a ridge of rock,
and after a few casts of the lead we could find
no bottom. Almost in a state of despair I
went into my cabin to compose myself.
There was a book lying on the table, I do not
recollect what book it was—perhaps “ John-
son’s Lives of the Poets.” I opened it
mechanically, and began to read it It was
to this effect; that both Charles I. and his
favourite Strafford were addicted to the Sortes


Virgilianae, and upon one occasion that both
of them tried them together, and both of
them obtained a true augury —that both of
them would be beheaded. But the book said
that some other people, instead of consulting
Virgil, used to consult the Bible. I said to
myself, “ I shall consult Virgil, although I
have no faith in such auguries ” —for drown-
ing men clutch at straws. On opening my
book-chest, I could not find Virgil, but I
readily found a Bible, and therefore consulted
it. The first part of the paragraph I con-
sidered too good for me, but it ended by
saying: “ Whatever thy hand findeth to do,
do it with all thy might, for there is neither
work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom,
in the grave whither thou goest.” This I
interpreted to denote that my safety must
depend upon my own exertions, and that I
ought to exert myself and not to despair. I
would not have mentioned this, if it had not
been for the circumstance that it afterwards
procured me the honour of a visit from the
Catholic Bishop of Guayaquil.
I returned to the deck quite composed, and
soon after, at nightfall, we dropped our
anchor in thirty fathoms, close to a barren
rocky island. The bottom was rocky, but we


hoped to be able to weigh it in the morning.
Next day it blew so strong that it was im-
possible to weigh anchor. A boat was, how-
ever, dispatched with an officer to endeavour
to discover some sheltered nook where we
might anchor the vessel.
The stormy weather continued for several
days, rendering it impossible, or dangerous,
to attempt to weigh the anchor. After some
days the mate returned and informed us that
he could find no safe anchorage, and had been
unable to return because the weather was so
stormy. He had only time to take some
refreshment when a sailor came and said,
“ The ship is adrift.” In those days ships
had only hempen cables, and the rocks had
cut the cables. The mate asked me what he
should do with the ship. I replied, “ Keep
her afloat.”
Here was the dismantled ship without
rudder or anchors, in the midst of an unknown
archipelago of islands in Terra del Fuego, one
of the most stormy and dreary countries in
the world.
For some days we drifted about at the
mercy of the tides and currents; but fortu-
nately the weather proved moderate, and at
length we were able to fasten the ship to the


rocks, although in a rather exposed situation.
Hitherto we had seen no signs of natives, but
one morning we observed some in several
canoes, made of bark. The head man rose
in one of the canoes, held up something white,
and approached the ship, calling out, “ Pick-
eray! Pickeray!” The canoes were ballasted
with some earth on which they had a fire.
The poor little shivering natives were clothed
with sealskins, fastened to their bodies in the
most artless and simple maner. They had
no food in their canoes, but some large
mussels which were plentiful on the rocks.
They struck fire with large lumps of copper
pyrites, and when asked where they got it,
they pointed to the mountains. I had no
chemical tests, but I roasted some of it and
afterwards put it in vinegar, which on being
applied to the blade of a knife covered it with
copper.
The mussels alluded to were very large,
but the outsides of the shells were generally
corroded, and were full of ill-coloured and ill-
shaped pearls.
These natives, after exchanging some pieces
of sealskin and other trifles with the sailors,
took their leave. The old native women were
the dealers, and they had plenty of tongue.


By-and-bye, I discovered a small, snug,
sheltered nook, where there was deep water,
close to a perpendicular rock; there being also
plenty of trees and a thick bush for about
two hundred yards above the high-water mark.
The vessel was immediately removed to this
shelter; and fortunante it was that we did so
remove her, for the same night a fearful gale
of wind took place, but we were so perfectly
secure that we did not feel a breath of it.
One day I went alone to the top of the
mountain. Above the narrow border of trees
there was nothing but rock; not a particle of
soil, and the rocks everywhere smoothed and
polished with the rains. There was neither
bird nor insect, nor any sign of animal life.
And as far as the eye could reach, the same'
picture of desolation presented itself.
In our sheltered nook we improved our
make-shift rudder, and repaired our sails, and
other damages, as far as our means permitted.
I had heard, from some ship in New
Zealand, that there had been a revolution in
Spain, and that England and Spain were now
friends; but this was doubtful, as I had seen
no newspaper. I had, however, read Lord
Byron’s narrative, who describes the kind re-
ception which the Chilians had given to him


and Captain Cheap after the wreck of the
“ Wager ” —one of Lord Anson’s fleet —and I
therefore determined, if possible, to take refuge
on the coast of Chile.
Fortunately, I had in my possession
Frezian’s “ Voyage to the West Coast of South
America ” translated by Dr. Halley. He was
a French officer of engineers, who had been
sent clandestinely by the French Government
to survey the Coast of Chile and Peru during
the war of succession, and his book contains
plans of the principal ports.
When leaving “ Preservation Harbour,” or
rather Nook, we had another visit from the
same tribe of Fuegians who had formerly
visited us. On getting out of our nook the
ship got entangled in a float of the ficus
giganteus, and some of the stems got between
the rudder and the stern post, and prevented
the motion of the ship. We sent a boat to
cut them away, and the poor natives came in
their canoes to assist us. They had no knives
to cut the stems, but they began to bite them
across with their teeth.
With some difficulty we got safely out of
the bay, and proceeded on our voyage to the
northward. It must have been about the
time of the autumnal equinox, and we experi-


CROW’S NEST HOUSE


enced a succession of storms; the winds being
generally from the north-east, with hazy
weather. This rendered our voyage very
tedious, and the storms repeatedly displaced
our make-shift rudder. From such a pro-
tracted voyage our provisions began to run
short, and I wished to reduce the rations; but
all hands opposed it so much that I was
obliged to succumb.
Some time after, most of the crew came ana
insisted that the ship should be run ashore on
the coast of Patagonia, and on my refusal
they refused to work any longer, and went
below. The officers and a few of the men
continued to work as usual, and the mutineers,
seeing this, returned to their duty next day.
Some days after this we experienced a
heavy gale from the north which displaced
our make-shift rudder. At this time the
weather was very hazy. Suddenly the wind
shifted to the south and cleared away the
haze, when we saw a ship (perhaps not more
than a quarter of a mile ahead of us) still
struggling with the northerly wind. We
hoisted the British flag, union down, and fired
a gun. She hoisted the Yankee flag, but im-
mediately the southerly wind reached her, she
braced round her yards and bore away with-
i


out speaking to us. On reaching the port of
Valparaiso, some days after, she told the
people that they would soon hear of the wreck
of an English vessel on the coast, as they had
seen one in great distress.
On arriving near Concepcion, I sent a boat
ashore to Talcahuano, which brought little
provisions; and I went myself to Zome, where
I purchased such provisions as the village
could supply, and some days after we reached
the harbour of Valparaiso.
Here we found the Spanish frigate
“Astrea,” commanded by Don Joaquin Toledo,
a lieutenant in the Spanish navy, which had
arrived there from Lima a day or two before.
Toledo and his first lieutenant, Eugenio
Cortez, immediately came on board, and as
we had neither anchor nor cables they lent us
what we wanted until we could be provided
for from the shore. There was no cable in
the place, but they made one for us. If it had
not been for the “ Astrea,” I do not know
what we could have done, for Valparaiso is an
open roadstead, and, as there was no quay, it
was necessary to land on the beach.
Don Joaquin gave us every assistance in his
power, and used all his influence with the
Government in our behalf. Our rudder was


provided with new brass pintles. We were,
however, directed by the Government to pro-
ceed to Lima, under convoy of the “ Astrea,”
as our necessary repairs were effected. And
Eugenio Cortez promised to introduce me to
Mr. Ferrer, a merchant in Lima, who became
my agent.
A day or two after my arrival the Yankee
captain addressed me. I asked him why he
would not stop and speak to us when we
hoisted a signal of distress? “I guess,” he
said, “ that I had been a long time from home,
and did not know whether there might not
have been war between England and America,
in which case, if you had been a man-of-war,
you might have taken me.” I replied, ‘‘ You
told the Spaniards that we were in such
distress that you expected we would be
wrecked on the coast. No matter, we have
arrived safe without your assistance. But
what has just been my case may be your case
hereafter, and you may be treated in the wav,
as a just punishment for your inhumanity.”
He looked abashed, pulled out his snuff-box,
and offered me a pinch, but I declared that I
never snuffed.
The Governor of Valparaiso examined me
on oath, and the captain and some of the men


respecting the voyage and destination of our
ship. The common people could hardly
understand how we could reach the west
coast of South America without coming round
Cape Horn, and entertained suspicions that
we might be a smuggler in disguise. There-
fore they examined all our trunks and boxes.
They were very much surprised to find that
I had such a large collection of books.
When I first arrived at New South Wales
the colony was on the eve of a revolution
from the tyranny of Bligh, and the same was
the case in Chile; it did not, however, take
place until some time after we left for Lima.
But the President of Chile sent to Lima, in
the “ Astrea,” some of the heads of the im-
pending revolution —the President of Chile
being subordinate to the Viceroy of Peru.
Don Joaquin Toledo received orders from the
President of Chile to convey us safely to
Lima; but as he knew there was no chance
of our attempting to escape, although we
weighed anchor and made sail at the same
time, the next morning he was not in sight,
and he reached Lima several days before us.
On our way to Lima we spoke an English
whaling vessel on the coast; and I purchased
a bale of slops for my people. A Mr. Moore,


the chief mate, came on board of the “ City
of Edinburgh,” and delivered them. He,
long after, commanded a vessel called the
“ Woodlark,” in the employment of Jones and
Walker. He was the father of Mr. Henry
Moore, the agent for the P. and O. Steam
Company.
Mr. Cortez on his arrival at Lima
immediately called on his friend Don Joaquin
Maria de Ferrer, who, on our arrival at Callao,
came on board next day and agreed to act as
my agent and protector.
A petition was sent to the Viceroy, giving
a detail of the voyage, and requesting him to
allow 'the cargo to be discharged and sold to
enable me to repair the ship. This the Vice-
roy very generously granted; but, unfortu-
nately, there was very little demand for spars
in Lima, and they proved unsaleable. But Mr.
Ferrer liberally supplied me with money to
enable me to have the ship repaired.
A second petition was then sent to the
Viceroy requesting him to allow the ship to
take a cargo from Lima to Cadiz, which Mr.
Ferrer agreed to furnish. To this also the
Viceroy agreed. But, unfortunately, a person
of the name of Verduga (who had built a
large ship) opposed it, as it would be contrary


not only to Spanish law, but contrary to his
interest. This gentleman was a member of
the municipality of Lima, and all the members
joined him in opposing me. Besides this,
there was a revolution in Chile, and a
rebellion in Upper Peru, and the Viceroy did
not like to oppose the municipality. But
after many months he acceded to my wishes,
during which time the expenses of the vessel
were absolutely “ eating her up.” On
arriving at Callao, Mrs. Moseley and her child
left the ship. As she was a Roman Catholic,
some charitable person received her into his
house; but she died there some months after.
A few days subsequent to my arrival at
Callao, as I saw that Betsy Broughton was ill
cared for, I asked Mr. Ferrer whether he
would get some decent person to take care of
her. He said that he would look out. Two
or three days after he came down in his calesa
and requested me to go to Lima with him,
and the little girl, as he had got a proper
person to take care of her. He took me to
a highly respectable house and introduced me
to a charming Spanish lady, who said that she
would be most happy to take charge of her.
On leaving the house I told Mr. Ferrer that
my object in speaking to him was that he


might get some decent person to take charge
of the child for hire. He replied, “ Never
mind.” He said the ladies in Lima were
generally rather bad, but that the lady to whom
he had introduced me was an exception; that
she was the wife of Don Gaspar Rico, the
manager of a large Madrid company, and
having no children of her own was delighted
with the idea of taking care of the little girl.
“But,” said he, “you must visit her every day
when you go to Lima, as otherwise the little
girl will forget you altogether.” After a little
time, Mr. and Mrs. Rico became so fond of
the little girl that Mr. Rico made me many
overtures to leave the child with them. But
I considered it my duty, if possible, to restore
her to her father. The girl herself would
have been much pleased to have been left with
her handsome mamma; and I was told by a
lady in Sydney that she wished I had left her
in Lima, and that for that reason she never
once paid me a visit when she came to
Sydney. It would have been a sad thing if
I had left her in Lima, for Don Gaspar Rico
died of hunger in the castle of Callao. Rico
belonged to the Loyalist party, which at
length took refuge in the castle, where they
were regularly starved out. A rat was there


sold for an ounce of gold! I do not know,
however, whether Mrs. Rico was along with
him.
Some time after my arrival at Callao, a
vessel called the “ Archduke Charles ”
arrived with a licensed cargo for Lima. On
her departure I sent to the owner of the ship
“Boyd” the log book of that illfated vessel,
and also a short account of her capture by
the natives of New Zealand, and how I
rescued the survivors. Constable (the Edin-
burgh publisher and bookseller), and Brown,
the owner of the “ Boyd,” were married to
two sisters; and Brown gave my letter to
Constable, who published it in his magazine.
I also sent my agent in London the “seconds”
of the bills which I received from Simeon
Lord, and which I had recovered from the
Maoris; and I likewise sent the duplicates of
the paper respecting my claim on the Govern-
ment on account of my Norfolk Island
voyage, which reached their destination in
safety, but years after they ought to have
reached London.
Having at last received permission to take
a cargo to Cadiz, consisting of copper and tin
for ballast, Peruvian bark, and some cacao,


the ship was dispatched to Guayaquil to com-
plete her cargo by filling up with cacao.
Mr. Toledo and Mr. Cortez went with me
as passengers to Cadiz. Having completed
our cargo at Guayaquil we made sail for
Cadiz.
In working out of the bay of Guayaquil the
vessel got ashore on the banks of Payana,
and I was obliged to return to Guayaquil to
discharge this cargo and repair the damage,
when it was necessary to heave the vessel
down.
We made sail a second time, and reached
Rio Janeiro in safety. After leaving Rio we
experienced a succession of storms, in con-
sequence of which the ship again began to
leak; and when we were near the Azores
Islands she became waterlogged, and began
to leak by the head, and we were obliged to
hoist out the long boat and abandon her.
As the weather was so stormy, and the ship
rolled so much, the long boat was so much
damaged by striking against the ship’s side
that it became necessary to lighten her by
throwing out everything she contained,
except a little biscuit and water. In this con-
fusion my box of papers was thrown over-
board also, so that I did not save a slip of


paper or any document of my long and
disastrous voyage—among other things the
“ thirds ” of Lord’s bills, and duplicates of the
papers respecting the claim on the Govern-
ment for the Norfolk Island freight.


CHAPTER VII.
The “City of Edinburgh” founders at sea—Narrow
escape of the survivors—Arrival at Graciosa —
Hospitable reception by the Captain Mor—
Manners of the people—Rambles over the Island
—Fast days protested against—Arrival at Ter-
ceira—Kindly received by the Consul—Practice
as a medico —A lady who has lost her voice
receives professional advice—Trajet from Ter-
ceira to St. Michael’s—Toledo and Berry sail for
Lisbon in the “ John ” —Brutal reception from
the British Consul—Sails in the “ Confianza ” for
Cadiz—Arrival at Cadiz—Soult bombards Cadiz,
but does not disturb the ancient mariner—
Business and business complications—Soult’s
fireworks—Yellow fever and epidemia—Long and
dangerous illness—Berry studies Spanish—
Leaves Cadiz for England in a small fruit ship
—Taken by a Yankee privateer—Robbed by the
officers—An engagement expected—Conducted
to the cabin below.
It was late in the afternoon before we left
the ship; which we did not do until the water
was nearly up to the lower deck. The stern
was up and the stem down at a considerable
angle. About that time there was a kind of
lull, but the wind increased to a gale as the
sun went down. This gale was from the
south-west, with a tremendous sea, and we


ran before it all night. The boat leaked very
much, and we sometimes shipped a sea, so
that the people were employed in throwing
out the water with buckets, old shoes, and
hats. Next morning this wind moderated,
and we availed ourselves of this to stop the
leak with pieces of lead or leather. About
noon we saw the tops of the mountains of
Fayal, or St. George, and we stood towards
them. But the wind soon shifted to the
north, and increased to a heavy gale, and we
were obliged to run before it, and kept
running to the north all the afternoon and all
night. At daylight the wind shifted to the
east, and we again ran before it. About noon
it cleared up, and we got a meridianal obser-
vation, by which we found that we were to
the north of the Azore Islands. At this nick
of time the wind shifted to the south, and we
again ran before it; and some hours after,
sighted the island of Graciosa. We saw a
village on the north coast of Graciosa, but did
not dare to approach it, because it was on the
lee shore, and the wind was very strong. We
therefore ran down on the east side of the
Island, and at length saw an islet with a
passage between it and Graciosa. This we
determined to try for, in order to keep near


the land, and we fortunately found the water
very smooth. After passing the islet we saw
some people working at a quarry. We asked
them if there was any landing place? And
they pointed to a place a little further on
where there was a village. There we found
a little sandy cove, and ran the boat ashore.
Opposite this cove there was a respectable
looking house of two stories. A young
gentleman came from the house, and we ex-
plained to him that we were shipwrecked
people. He told us that that house was the
residence of Mr. Bethancourt, the “Capitan
Mor ” of the island, and requested us to go
and speak to him. With Toledo Moralez (a
Spanish gentleman who was a passenger from
Lima) and the captain of the ship I thus
entered the house. Mr. Bethancourt, after
hearing our case, gave us refreshment. The
young gentleman who had introduced us was
a native of the island of St. Michael, had
married the eldest daughter of our host, and
was stopping there for some months previous
to his return to his own home. They agreed
amongst themselves that the son-in-law
should entertain the two Spanish gentlemen
and that the Capitan Mor would keep me and
the captain. We were all wet to the skin,


and I had jumped ashore barefooted, having
taken off my stockings in the boat to allow
them to dry. The only thing I saved from
the wreck was my watch, which I still wear.
It had been made for me in London.
They showed me and the captain into a
room, and gave us some old clothes to put on,
until our own were dried at the kitchen fire.
On shifting ourselves the servant saw my
watch. After changing I went to speak to
the Capitan Mor, and he asked to see my
watch, which I showed him. He said
that he would like to buy it. I replied that
it had been made for me in London, and that
I would not like to part with it, as it had been
the only thing I had saved from the ship-
wreck. He said no more.
Next morning the boat which had saved us
was found to have been knocked to pieces by
the waves in the little cove.
There was no British Consul at Graciosa,
and the next day there was a boat provided
to carry the crew to the Isiand of Terceira,
the capital of the islands. While preparing
to embark, Muchado (a Portuguese gentle-
man) came to Toledo, and requested him not
to go with so many people. He said that he
would leave Graciosa in a few davs in a boat


of his own, and would take him and Moralez,
the other Spanish gentleman, and myself; and
that it would be more comfortable for us.
Toledo and Moralez came to me and said that
they would leave it to me to decide what they
should do.
After some consideration, I replied that 1
thought that we should avail ourselves of
Mr. Muchado’s offer, which they were very
glad to do. It would have been very dis-
agreeable again to go to sea in an open boat
with so many people and such a motley crew.
But it appeared afterwards that Muchado
was not prepared to leave the island so soon
as he had led us to expect, for it proved to be
three or nearly four weeks before he was
ready to go. Mr. Bethancourt sometimes
grumbled to me about the delays of Muchado,
but was always kind. Mr. Bethancourt was a
Knight of the Order of St. Jago, and there
were certain religious services belonging to
that Order which he always at the appointed
time performed punctually in our presence,
but he always listened to our conversation
while he was walking about the room saying
his prayers. And he generally made some
remark at the end of every prayer.
It was not the custom of Graciosa for the


ladies to appear to strangers, and I never
once saw Mrs. Bethancourt. I sometimes
saw Miss Bethancourt looking over the
balcony, but she always immediately dis-
appeared. She was a fair, good looking
young lady. Mrs. Bethancourt used to send
me a rose on a silver tray every second or
third day by her servant, with compliments.
We used to make little tours about the
island mounted on jackasses; and upon one
occasion we visited an old crater in the centre
of the island. The lips of the crater were
entire. The bottom was covered with grass
and pools of water, and used by the natives
as a bleaching green. There was a cavern
underneath, with a lagoon of hot water, but
we could not enter it from not being provided
with ropes.
A considerable part of the island was
planted with vines, between old stones of lava,
and the vineyards were always protected with
high walls to shelter the vines from being
injured by the frequent storms.
The Spaniards and the son-in-law of Mr.
Bethancourt, with myself, always spent our
days with that gentleman; but we passed the
evenings at the house of his son-in-law, where
we played a game of cards, and his wife


always appeared at supper and made herself
very pleasant. Her husband said that he
wished to accustom her to appear in company,
as this was now the custom in the island of
St. Michael.
As the family of Mr. Bethancourt went
early to bed, I was furnished with a lantern
and a key to enter my own apartment. I
recollect first passing along the solitary beach
with my lantern, when the winds were
howling and the surf was dashing against the
rocks; it absolutely gave me the horrors when
I reflected on my desolate position. But upon
the whole I passed my time rather pleasantly
than otherwise, and have always gratefully
recalled to my memory the kindness and
hospitality I experienced at Graciosa.
Mr. Bethancourt kept a very fair table, but
he was a rigid Romanist, and on Fridays and
Saturdays had nothing on his table but
fritters and pancakes. This did not please
my friend Toledo, who complained to me of
the meagre diet. I excused our worthy host,
and said that he was only acting up to the
dictates of his religion. “ Nonsense,” Toledo
replied, “ these meagre days have nothing to
do with religion; they are only a canonical
regulation, and even a medico can give a
K


certificate to get rid of it. And it ought to
have been dispensed with in our instance, as
we are shipwrecked people. Besides which,
the Pope has given a bull, in virtue oi which
all the soldiers and sailors of the King of
Spain can eat beef every day of the week.”
I replied, “ Mr. Bethancourt may know
nothing about such a Bull.” “ Well,” re-
joined Toledo, “ if he does not he must be a
very ignorant man.”
Graciosa must have many wrecks near the
coast for an immense number of fine logs of
mahogany had lately been thrown on the
shore; and many of the inhabitants had been
using them to make chairs, tables, and chests
of drawers for their houses.
At length Muchado completed his arange-
ments, and we took our departure from
Graciosa, and arrived with safety at the
harbour of Angra, in Terceira. The English
Consul was a Mr. Dalton, an Irish gentleman,
who received me with great kindness. A few
days after a small vessel arrived from London,
consigned to Mr. Dalton, who loaded her with
oranges, and gave the captain a passage to
London. The captain on his arrival at
Terceira, had made the usual protest con


cerning the loss of the vessel, and took a copy
of it with him.
Mr. Dalton during my stay showed me the
greatest kindness, took me to all the national
fstes, and showed me all the lions of the place,
and offered to supply me with money, but I
only availed myself of his courtesy in this
respect to a very limited extent, and gave him
a bill for the same upon Messrs. Robert White
and Son, of Cadiz, to whom I had written
from Lima, to insure the ship and freight
from Lima to Cadiz—a bill which was, in the
end, duly honoured.
My friends told the people at Terceira that
I was a medico, and as medicos were scarce
at Terceira I immediately had lots of patients,
particularly amongst the ladies, who began to
send me letters containing all manner of
complaints about their state of health, and
asking me to give them advice how it was to
be restored. But none of them would venture
to show their faces, far less allow me to feel
their pulse. I had no medicines to give them,
and therefore contented myself by giving
them general remarks about the best sort of
regimen necessary to be observed for the
restoration of their health. One poor lady
wrote to me that she originally had a charm


ing voice, and could sing beautifully. She
however, had had a bad cold, which had pro-
duced a hoarseness, and the consequence had
been that she had never been able to sing
since. I answered her by saying that I could
only recommend her not to attempt to sing
until the hoarseness naturally disappeared;
and even then, at first, to sing but very little.
But I said that she could not apply to a worse
person than myself to enable her to sing
again, for that I had never sung a song in my
life.
One day a war schooner called the “Thetis”
entered the Bay of Angra, with a message to
the British Consul —going afterwards to St.
Michael’s. Mr. Dalton sent for me, and the
Commandant of the “ Thetis ” agreed to give
me a passage to St. Michael’s, where I could
more readily obtain a passage to Lisbon, or
Cadiz, than from Terceira. I sent for Toledo
and Moralez. But Moralez had some political
dispute with Toledo, and declined to accom-
pany him. Therefore Toledo and myself
went on board the “ Thetis.” On arrival at
St. Michael’s, Mr. Reid, the British Consul,
came on board, and the Commandant of the
“ Thetis ” introduced me to that gentleman,
who invited me ashore to his house. Mr.


Reid had, at that time, only one stranger in
his house —a Mr. Barrett, a London solicitor
—who had come to St. Michael’s on account
of his health, accompanied with his wife.
It must have been only a few days before
the birthday of George 111. (the 4th of June),
for Mr. Reid was very busy making prepara-
tions for the celebration of that day, in the
year 1812. Both Mr. Reid and Mr. Barrett
were able and intelligent men, and I passed
about two or three very agreeable days in
his house. Mr. Reid promised to show me
some of the wonders of the island; when,
suddenly, a transport, bound for Lisbon,
appeared off the island, in which Mr. Reid
gave a passage to Toledo and myself. Mr.
Reid also gave me a passport, and the charge
of his despatches to the Minister at Lisbon—
named, as I think, the Conde de Souza.
I had neither bedding nor baggage, neither
had my friend Toledo. On our arrival we
found the wife of the captain on board. She
received us in a very friendly manner, and
said she was very happy to say that she could
accommodate us very well. And both this
lady and her husband did everything in their
power to make both of us comfortable. We
had a pleasant voyage to Lisbon.


The name of this transport —in which I
went from St. Michael’s in the Azores to
Lisbon—was, I believe, the “ John,” but I
forget, at this distance of time, the name of
the captain. Some years after Mr. Wollstone-
craft and myself had finally settled in Sydney
a certain ship came consigned to our house.
I immediately recognised the captain, and told
him that we were old acquaintances, and that
he had brought me and a Spanish gentleman
from St. Michael’s to Lisbon. He stared at
me and said, “ Now I recollect from this
incident:—On the second day after leaving
St. Michael’s I was on the forecastle taking
the meridianal altitude of the sun. You came
on the forecastle and asked me the altitude.
I told you, and you asked me for my quadrant;
but before looking at the sun you examined
the quadrant to see if it was in adjustment.
You then looked at the sun, returned me the
gradient, and said ‘ you are right.’ ” I need
hardly say that I was most happy to have an
opportunity of repaying this captain for his
kindness.
On arriving at Lisbon my first care was to
deliver Mr. Reid’s dispatches to the Portu-
guese Minister; but on returning to the hotel
where I had slept, I found that the police had


been making some inquiry about my passport.
To my surprise I could not find it. I there-
fore called upon Mr. Jeffreys, the British
Consul, and showed him the protest made at
Terceira, before Mr. Dalton. He received
me roughly, and made certain opprobrious
remarks respecting Dalton, and said that he
could not give credit to any document to
which Dalton had put his name, and pointed
out that two of the sailors’ names attached to
the protest were Portuguese names. These
men, I should here state, were men who had
shipped at Rio Janeiro in place of some
sailors who entered with the Man-of-war.
I took up my protest and left his office. I
only mention this circumstance as it was the
second time I had been treated with rudeness
during my long and disastrous voyage; the
first time, as already mentioned, was by the
notorious “ Bounty ” Bligh.
I found afterwards that this was the usual
way in which Jeffreys was accustomed to
treat strangers.
A friend of mine who had accompanied his
sister to Madeira, on account of her health,
went home by way of Lisbon, but brought
no passport with him from Madeira, and Mr.
Jeffreys, instead of aiding him, gave him so


much annoyance that he was obliged to
apply to the British Ambassador. I suppose
he was a descendent of the notorious Judge of
James the Second. Be this as it may, his
rough and brutal conduct was all for the best
as respects myself.
On leaving Jeffreys’s office I met Toledo,
and gave him an account of the interview
which I had had with Jeffreys. He expressed
his astonishment, but said, “Do not give
yourself the trouble to apply to De Souza
about your passport; I have just seen the
Spanish Ambassador, and he has ordered me
a passage in the Spanish vessel ‘ Confianza'
which sails to-morrow morning for Cadiz. I
shall return to him and request that he will
order you a passage also.” And this he did.
I went on board the “ Confianza ” early in
the morning. She was then at anchor near
the mouth of the Tagus. I was introduced
to two Spanish gentlemen who had come
as passengers in the ship from London. I
entered into conversation with one of them
named Gomez. He was a very social and
intelligent gentleman. I asked him what the
ship was waiting for. He replied that they
were waiting for an English gentleman who
had gone ashore to transact some business.


Soon after, a tall, formal-looking young
man, dressed in black, came on board, and
had some conversation with his friends, and
I saw that ho gave me a look askance, but
did not take any further notice of me. He
took a book out of his pocket, and sat down
on a seat on the deck and began to read it.
I again had a long conversation with
Gomez, who spoke English very well, but our
conversation was carried on in Spanish. At
length he said, “ Why do you show no civility
or kindness ( carino ) to your countryman?”
I replied, “He has shown none to me; he is
at home here, and I am a stranger.” I asked
who he was, and what was his name. Gomez
replied, “ His name is Wollstonecraft; he is
a connection of Mr. De Zastel, a large
Spanish merchant in London, and we have
been in De Zastel’s office together.”
I then went and seated myself beside Woll-
stonecraft, and mentioned what Gomez had
informed me. I asked him if, while in De
Zastel’s office, he had ever heard of a ship
named the “City of Edinburgh”? “Often,”
he said, “ She has been long expected.” I
then gave him a history of the shipwreck, and
told him that I was on my way to Cadiz, for
the purpose of seeing Robert White and


Son, to whom the cargo was consigned, and
to whom I had written to insure the ship and
freight.
I had read some of the works of Mary
Wollstoneeraft, and her life by Godwin. I
asked if he was a relation of hers. He re-
plied, in a slighting manner, “ She was an
aunt of mine.” This is the way our acquain-
tance commenced. Wollstoneeraft afterwards
became my partner and his only sister became
my wife. We always lived :n the same house
and as members of the same family until
death parted us. He died in 1832, and my
wife in 1845. My wife spoke French like a
Parisian, and our tastes as regards literature
were nearly alike.
We had a favourable voyage from Lisbon
to Cadiz which we reached late in the after-
noon, on that very day when Soult, having
repaired his batteries, again recommenced to
bombard the city. His bombs were at once
replied to by the bomb vessels in tlie harbour,
and the fiery missiles were even then crossing
each other. Many of Soult’s missiles fell into
the water amongst the shipping, but did not
hit any of them. The din, however, that all
this firing caused gave me a violent headache.
Next morning Wollstoneeraft and myself


went ashore together, and called on Robert
White and Son. They informed me that the
ship and freight had been insured in London
according to my instructions; partly in the
Royal Exchange, and partly in the London
Insurance Office. The premium was high,
and unfortunately I had not instructed them
to insure the premium. We dined with the
Messrs. White, and in the evening Wollstone-
craft went on board the “ Confianza.” I slept
in the Posada, and was the only one in the
house that slept, all the others keeping on
the watch all night. But I had now become
so reckless that I did not care a button for
Soult and his missiles. When a missile went
over me I always awoke and turned over, but
fell asleep again; and this I did all night.
Soult’s missiles were moonshine to the dangers
I had undergone.
After all, the bombardment was a farce, and
did little or no damage. But it amused the
people by an exhibition of artificial fireworks,
the distance being at least four miles across
the bay. The missiles were not large, and
when filled with powder were so light
as to be affected by the prevailing winds.
They therefore poured into them a quantity
of lead, and filled them up with powder.


But the powder so used was not sufficient
to explode the bomb, so that they only
acted as solid round shot. The roofs of
the houses in Cadiz are all flat, and I used to
amuse myself by watching Soult’s display of
fireworks. First a long column of smoke was
seen to issue from the obus, and some time
after there would be a loud report. Some
time after the fiery missile was seen float-
ing like a meteor through the atmosphere;
when it attained its greatest altitude it began to
descend with so much rapidity that it would
be no longer visible, but when it approached
the earth it caused such a terrible ivhia, that I
always made an involuntary bow to it. I was
much annoyed at being thus compelled to
“ do obeisance ” to Soult’s missiles, and I often
determined not to do so, but never succeeded.
I recollect one day, after Soult had com-
menced his second bombardment, Wollstone-
craft and myself were standing on the ram-
parts near the Water Gate, and all at once*
Soult began his pyrotechnical display. The
first shot fell down into the fish market, a
spot close by and very crowded—we saw that
it had killed some one. Wollstonecraft said:
“We had better get out of this.” I replied,
“ There is very little danger. Only calculate


the size of our heads and the size of the
missiles. It is fifty thousand to one that they
don’t hit us.” He looked at me and smiled.
I asked if he did not agree with my calcula-
tion of chances. He replied, “ I have no
objection to your calculation of chances, but
I like my own better.”
I believe that these two were the only men
whom I saw killed at Cadiz during the siege.
Indeed, I have no reason to quarrel with
Soult’s missiles, for not one fell near me except
once, when I was taking a cup of chocolate
in a coffee-house for breakfast. On that
occasion one of the missiles fell into the
narrow street in front of the door. It merely
broke the arch of a gutter, and stuck in the
hole.
Wollstonecraft and myself took lodgings in
the same house. He first became my agent,
and went to London to manage my affairs,
and afterwards he became my partner.
On the arrival of Wollstonecraft in
London, he ascertained that Mr. Shortt, at the
Cape, had intercepted the bills and documents
which I had addressed to my agent in London
—a Mr. Batley. I suppose that Lord had
sent them to Shortt, instead of sending them
to their address, particularly as the ship


“ Boyd ” intended to call at the Cape for spars.
But I, fortunately, recovered the “ seconds ”
of the bills and documents from the Maoris,
and sent them to London by the ship “ Arch-
duke Charles.” When these reached the
hands of Mr. Batley, he found that the bills
had been presented to the party on whom
they were drawn and had been dishonoured,
but that Shortt had recovered from the
Treasury the two thousand pounds which
had been offered to me by Foveaux.
After the evacuation of Norfolk Island,
Captain Piper went to London and recom-
mended to the Treasury that they should
pay the full freight, which they agreed to do.
Fortunately my documents arrived into the
hands of Mr. Batley before the remainder of
the freight got into the hands of Shortt’s
father, and he prevented him from getting it.
I think it was £1,900, or thereabouts.
Mr. Batley appointed Mr. Edward Smith
Hall and the Rev. Mr. Marsden to recover the
amount due by Mr. Simeon Lord in Sydney.
On the arrival of these documents in Sydney
they found that Shortt had sent a person from
the Cape to recover the amounts due by Lord;
they (Messrs. Hall and Marsden) prevented
him from doing so, and he left Sydney.


Hall and Marsden succeeded in recovering
a considerable sum from Mr. S. Lord and from
John Blaxland—who had entered into a sort
of partnership with Lord.
Captain Piper had been appointed Collector
of Customs in Sydney, and I therefore
appointed him as my agent in Sydney to
supersede Messrs. Hall and Marsden. Mr.
Wollstonecraft also called upon all my
creditors and found them all, to a man, kind
and friendly. They were all, however,
already acquainted with my history up to a
certain time, from Mr. Batley.
The Messrs. White, of Cadiz, sent the pro-
test concerning the loss of the “ City of Edin-
burgh,” to London, and the agents recovered
the amount of the insurance ordered from the
two London offices.
I made out a pro forma account of the
amount expended on account of the average
incurred at Guayaquil. I had no document
to prove items, but I knew to a certainty the
amount which it had cost me.
In the meantime Mr. Toledo had been
appointed to a Spanish ship-of-war bound to
Stockholm, and touched at Portsmouth on
her passage. This came to the knowledge of
Wollstonecraft, and he wrote to Toledo,


requesting that he would make a statement
of the expenses incurred at Guayaquil. This
Toledo readily agreed to do, and his statement
coincided so much with my own that the two
statements were submitted to Mr. Ludlam,
an average-agent. Mr. Ludlam drew out a
formal report which, on being sent to the two
offices that had insured the ship, was con-
sidered so conclusive that they paid their
quota.
Mr. De Zastel, the owner of the cargo, at
first refused to pay his quota; but on the case
being submitted to his own solicitor, and to
his insurance agent, they both of them advised
him to pay his quota, which eventually he
did.
The recovery of the insurance enabled me
to pay Mr. Ferrer for his advances at Lima,
but left only a small edging to me.
I remained long at Cadiz, after Mr. Woll-
stonecraft, in hopes that I might obtain an
account of the cargo of spars, which I had
left unsold in Lima; but I was ultimately
disappointed, and only received, long after, a
trifling sum.
While residing at Cadiz the yellow fever
began to prevail or rage in the city. I. how-
ever, had no fear of what they called the


“ epidemia.” One day after this I went to give
a friendly call on a Peruvian gentleman whom
I had known in Lima. On leaving this house
his servant told me that there was a person
in the house afflicted with the epidemia.
This gave me no fear or apprehension of any
kind. On reaching my own house I walked
to examine some flowers in flower pots.
Whilst so engaged I felt an uneasy sensation,
something like hunger at my stomach. I
went into my apartment and took a crust of
bread, and began to munch it. Suddenly I
felt three slight shocks, proceeding from my
head to my feet downwards, and immediately
afterwards felt myself so weak that I could
hardly stand on my legs. I managed to walk
into my apartment, and threw myself on the
bed, when I was immediately seized with a
violent convulsive shivering. I instantly con-
ceived that I was afflicted with the epidemia,
and I arose and went to my table to write a
prescription. I have no idea what it was I pro-
posed to write, but after several attempts, I
found myself unable to write a single letter.
I became very excited at being thus rendered
perfectly helpless, in a minute or two, by this
complaint, and dashed my inkstand against
the wall. In old picture books, death is
L


always represented as a grisly skeleton, with
a dart in his hand. I was so excited at the
moment, that if I had seen the grisly skeleton
on the wall, I believe I would have dashed the
inkstand at his head. The effect of this
excitement was to stop the convulsive
shivering instantly, and the sensation of
debility also left me. But when I looked at
the looking glass, I saw that my face was like
that of a corpse—and for a whole week I had
no return of the complaint, nor any symptom
of disease, but my face never regained its
natural appearance. I neither consulted a
medico nor any one else, but every night took
a small dose of calomel as an aperient.
During the week, however, the poison must
have been fermenting in the blood. At the
end of the week I arose and took my usual
breakfast. Soon after I felt chilly, and fell
into a short sleep. On awaking I felt
generally indisposed, with a throbbing at my
temples; and I told the servant to bring me
some vinegar and water to foment my
temples. Instead of doing so he went and
informed the ladies of the house that I was
“ ailing.” The fact is, that when the epidemia
prevails, all minor ailments are suspended.
One of the ladies immediately appeared at


the door and asked me what was the matter
with me. I replied, “ Nothing but a cold.”
She replied, “ No, it is not a cold, you have
got the epidemia; I know by your face. Shall
I send for a medico?” I replied, “No; if I
have got the epidemia, I can die as well with-
out a medico as with one.” And here I may
state that the family with whom I was stay-
ing, had suffered from the epidemia some
years ago, and that it rarely attacks people
twice.
She then said, “ What have you sent
for?” I said, “Only a little vinegar to
foment my temples.” The lady replied, “ You
must not do so. It will drive the inflamma-
tion inwards. You must apply sinapisms to
your feet, and that will remove the deter-
mination to the head. You must also apply
an earthen poultice, mixed with Venice turpen-
tine, vinegar, and a sliced onion, to your
stomach.” I said, “ I had no other objection
to the poultice than that earth was so dirty.”
The lady said, “ Not at all; it will be put on
between two cloths. It is a Moorish prescrip-
tion, sent by the Spanish Consul of Tangiers
to Zurilla, some years ago, when the epidemia
was raging in that city, and it was found to be
very beneficial.” I agreed to follow their


advice. While they were preparing the
poultice and sinapisms, the symptoms in-
creased rapidly, and a convulsiye vomiting
commenced. When, however, the sinapisms
were applied to the feet, I was surprised to
find how they relieved the head; and I found
the poultice to my stomach very comfortable,
and had no return of vomiting. One of the
symptoms was as if melted lead were circula-
ting in the temporal arteries, and met at the
top of the head. For many years after I
always suffered from the same whenever I
had a slight cold.
During the first night I felt great pain all
over, and was unable to move myself; but
after that I never had a bad symptom.
At the end of three or four days one of the
ladies called in the morning to ask how I was.
I replied that I was very well, and that I was
thinking of getting up. She said, “If you do
so, you will have a relapse, and these relapses
are generally fatal. You must subject yourself
to a regulation quarantine (of forty days)”;
and they gave me many instances, even of
persons I had known, to prove their
assertions.
I then asked if she could give me any books
to read. She said she would give me all that


they had. The book they first gave me was
“ Don Quixote.” I believe I had read a trans-
lation of it, but it was so much more
humorous in the Spanish dialect that, in the
excitable state in which I then was, it often
occasioned such uncontrollable fits of laughter
as almost choked me; but that, from exciting
the circulation, conduced perhaps to my
recovery.
The next book was written by a Franciscan
monk named Teyos—a book of upwards of
twenty volumes. The author had, it appeared,
published a volume every year for upwards of
twenty years, and the last volume had been
written upwards of sixty years previously.
The name of the book was a “ Refutation of
Vulgar Errors.” I was surprised to find that
the vulgar errors of Spain were nearly the
same as those at home, and I was pleased at
the liberal and enlightened way in which he
dealt with them. I read every word of this
work through, and it afforded me much
amusement. I did not stay in bed many days,
but was unable to leave the house before the
forty days expired, and even then found
myself very weak.
I now found it useless to stop any
longer in Cadiz, and determined to return


to England, but it was difficult to find a
ship. At length a small vessel came to Cadiz
from Exeter, which the Messrs White loaded
with wine and fruit (raisins). I tookmypassage
on board this ship. The first night I slept on
board the ship in the harbour, and the captain
entertained me all the evening with super-
stitious stories. Amongst other things he
told me that a little bird for several nights had
been fluttering about the deck as soon as it
became dark; and that he feared that it
denoted that some misfortune would happen
during the voyage. On the second day his
augury proved correct, for we were captured
by a Yankee privateer near Cape St. Vincent.
I put half a dozen shirts, my shaving appara-
tus, and all the papers I had collected at Cadiz,
into a leather portmanteau, which I kept in
my hand. But the people of the privateer
took my trunk of old Spanish books which I
had collected at Cadiz. The captain took a
boat load of raisins on board and then set fire
to the vessel. I crammed a few dollars into
my pocket, and gave the rest to a young
Scottish sailor to keep for me, which he faith-
fully did. When I arrived alongside of the
privateer with my leather portmanteau in my
hand, I clambered up the sides as best I could.


When near the gangway one of the officers,
apparently to assist me, seized the portman-
teau, and I never saw it again, although I made
many reclamations.
I sat down on the quarter deck near the
captain, who received me as curtly as the Chief
of Opuna. He hardly spoke at all, but
remained on deck all day with his telescope
in his hand, and his eyes were bloodshot.
The crew consisted of a rough and motley lot,
containing English, Irish, and Scotch
renegades.
Sometime after the surgeon of the ship
came to me and said: “You have a fine
Spanish library; I would like to purchase it,
if you will sell it to me.” As I was in the
hands of the people who were hardly better
than pirates, I thought it best to make a
virtue of necessity, and said “ very well
but soon after he returned and said “ I must
have the books for nothing.” I could of
course expect nothing better.
The privateer was now standing away to
the eastward, and by-and-bye the captain saw
a sail a long way ahead and gave chase. As
night came on the chief mate came to me, and
said, “ We are likely to have an engagement,
when we do not wish to have people of your


kind on deck; therefore you must go below.”
Accordingly he conducted me into a rather
large cabin where there were several bed
places.


CHAPTER VIII.
Handed over by the privateer to Swedish friends—
Offer of questionable rank declined —Romance of
the Life of a Swedish captain—Pass Gibraltar—
Arrival at Malaga—Quarantine—Sights at
Malaga—Return to Cadiz—French friend and his
boasting—The Scottishman stands up for Great
Britain—Quizzical Spanish ladies—Story about
the Freemasons —Mr. Berry passes in an English
ship from Cadiz to Bristol—Travels from Bristol
to London in the stage coach —Distinguished
fellow-traveller —Arrival at London—Visit to
Greenwich, where Mr. Wollstonecraft was then
residing—Reflections—All for the best —About
friends and places visited.
They did not starve us on board the
privateer, and I had eaten a handful of raisins
from a box they had brought to the captain
before the dinner was served. At dinner they
gave us some salt pork.
The privateer came up with the ship of which
they were in chase at about eleven or twelve
o’clock at night, and they fired a gun to bring
her to. The captain of the strange vessel was
ordered to come on board with the ship’s
papers. She was a Swedish ship from Goth-
enburg, which had brought a cargo from
thence to Oporto, and she had left that port


two or three days before, and was in ballast
and bound to Malaga in search of a cargo.
The Yankees were at peace with Sweden, and
therefore ordered the captain to return to his
ship; but they also ordered him to take the
English prisoners they had on board along
with him. A call was now made to the
prisoners to come on deck and go over the
side for the purpose of being put on board the
Swedish ship. On my arrival on deck I could
hardly thread my way through the motley
crew. Some of them seized my hand and
spoke to me in Celtic Irish, which I did not
understand. Another fellow seized my hand
and said, “ Don’t go; we will take the ship,
and make you our first lieutenant!” I
succeeded in getting over the side unencum-
bered with baggage. On reaching the deck
of the Swede, the captain braced round his
yards and proceeded on his voyage. Then he
called out, “ Englishmen, come below!”—
when he regaled us with the best he had,
consisting of cold boiled goat’s flesh and
Oporto wine. I felt more happy in escaping
from the Yankees than I did to escape from
the Chief of Opuna.
The Swedish captain had a large private
cabin with two beds—one on each side. He


slept on one of them, and gave me the other.
Next morning at daybreak I was awoke by the
sailors singing their morning hymn, in which
the captain also joined. His name was
almost English; it was Anderssen. He
spoke good English, and had traded much to
the British islands—particularly to the
Orcades. He told me his whole history; how
he was betrothed to an Orcadian lady and
was to have been married on his return from
his voyage, but was captured by the French,
thrown into prison, and reported to be dead.
On his being liberated he went to reclaim his
bride, but found that she had become the wife
of a lieutenant of the British Navy. She
pleaded that it was not her fault, but that she
had been deceived by forged letters, which she
showed him. '‘Well,” he replied, “under
these circumstances I do not blame you, and
wish you every happiness, and hope that your
actual husband will prove a better husband
to you than I would have been.”
On the arrival of the ship at Malaga, she
was put under quarantine, because we (the
prisoners) had come from Cadiz, where the
epidemia had been raging; but we were
released at the end of five days. On the
passage to Malaga I had a good view of
Gibraltar, but of course I never landed there.


At Malaga, I called with Captain Anderssen
on the British Consul, and I asked him to
recommend to me a suitable hotel. He
recommended one kept by a French widow
lady, which I found very comfortable,
and with moderate charges. After having
been there for a few days, the hostess called
upon me and said that a French gentleman
who had just arrived wished me to admit him
as a member of our mess. We, according to
the custom of the house, took our breakfast in
the kitchen—which we found was the custom
with a number of Spanish officers—but we
dined and supped in our own apartments. I
asked the lady if the gentleman was respect-
able, and she replied that he had been properly
recommended. I asked her to bring him that
I might see him, and judge for myself. She
introduced him, and I was rather pleased
with his appearance, and he became my con-
stant companion for some months after.
It was the time of Easter, and I attended a
splendid midnight mass. In the church I
became very tired, and observed a person
seated on a bench apart. I went and seated
myself on the same bench. Soon after a
priest arrived and addressed a few words to
my companion, who then went on his knees


before the priest and began to confess his
sins. I immediately arose and left the place.
There was an immense unfinished custom-
house at Malaga with the names of Philip and
Mary Tudor on it.
There had been a great mortality in Malaga
from the epidemia some years earlier, and I
visited the part where the victims had been
burned. They had dug great pits for the
remains on the tops of the neighbouring
hills, and had first put a layer of corpses,
then a layer of quick lime, and over that
another layer of bodies, and so on until
the pit was full. There was a cross on
the top describing the number of the dead the
pit contained, and the number of days it took
to fill it. This pit, from the decay of the
bodies, had sunk into a hollow and was now
covered with grass. They had not, however,
allowed the Protestants to be buried in these
pits, but had buried them among the shingles
close to the water’s edge.
During my rambles one day I found a
large open cavern full of corpses, which
had been embalmed in their usual clothes, and
were standing on their feet—most ghastly
spectres they were!
On my arrival at Malaga I wrote to the


Messrs. White in Cadiz to give me a credit
on Malaga, and they curiously referred me
to a person of the name of Kirkpatrick—
the person who became the grandfather of the
French Empress Eugenie. I called once on
Kirkpatrick, and only asked him for a very
little money, and gave him an order for the
same on the Messrs. White.
There were several English ships at Malaga,
but none of them were bound either to Cadiz
or England except one, and she had just
brought a cargo of codfish for Malaga. This
vessel, after loading her cargo, went to Cadiz,
and I got a passage to that city on board of
her for myself and my French companion,
Mr. Legal. At Cadiz, Legal and I took
lodgings in the same house where I had
lodged so long. There were many French-
men in Cadiz, but although my friend saluted
many of them in the street he never associa-
ted with any of them. He had been a junior
officer in the French navy, but the vessel had
been captured by the English. He had been
several years a prisoner, and had been libera-
ted after the fall of Napoleon, who was then
at Elba.
He was much given to boast of the military
prowess of the French. It was a common


saying of his that the French were the best
soldiers in the world; that the English beat
everybody at sea, but were good for nothing
on land. This was after the French had been
hunted out of Spain by Wellington. At last,
tired of these vainglorious gasconades, I said,
“ Mr. Legal, on what do you ground your
assertion that the French are the best
soldiers in the world?” He replied that they
had beaten the Prussians at Jena, and the
Austrians at Austerlitz, besides in innumer-
able other battles.
I rejoined that the French were
undoubtedly gallant soldiers, but that gaining
certain battles was no ground for calling them
the best soldiers in the world. Then he said,
“ I have done, and will argue no more, for if
that will not convince you nothing will.” I
said, “If I were to argue in that way the
result would be different. The English have
beaten the French at Busaco, Talavera, Sala-
manca, and last of all at Vittoria, and Welling-
ton has hunted Soult across the Pyrenees, and
so (according to your own system of reason-
ing), the English are better soldiers than the
French. But you hold that the French are
better soldiers than the Prussians and the
Austrians, wherefore the English must be


better soldiers than them all.” He was dumb-
founded, and did not say a word.
We always used to take a light supper and
a glass of wine. Our supper consisted chiefly
of a salad, which Legal was always very
officious in preparing. That evening, how-
ever, he did nothing, and I said, “ Mr. Legal,
do you not mean to take any supper to-night?”
He replied, that I had given him as much at
his dinner that day as would last him for his
supper for the next fortnight.
This little sally produced, however, no
further difference between us. As he had so
many countrymen in Cadiz, and never associa-
ted with any of them, I asked him one day
what was the reason that he preferred the
company of an Englishman to one of his own
countrymen. He replied, that the French
had committed so many atrocities in Spain
that the Spaniards were very vindictive, and
that he was afraid of being assassinated. He
said that this was the reason he wished to be
a member of my mess at Malaga, that he
might pass for an Englishman; and he further
said, that he had read in some book that a
Spaniard would embrace you and call you his
dear friend and yet stab you in the back.
But the Englishman was very different to


that. However savage the Englishman might
be against you, you might safely sleep along-
side of him all night, and he would not even
attack' you in the morning, until you were
provided with the same arms as himself.
My friend Legal got a greater rub from one
of the ladies of the house than I had given
him. One evening, when passing up a
narrow street, we met a long procession of
friars carrying crucifixes and large wax
candles, and we were, of course, obliged to
stand close to the wall and take off our hats
until they passed. It so happened just then
that it came on to rain. Legal was a
Catholic, but a different kind of Catholic to a
Spanish one. “ What fools these Spaniards
are!” he said. As soon as we reached our
lodgings we walked straight into the family
sitting-room, where three of the ladies were
busy working black lace veils. He im-
mediately began with great earnestness in
French—with lots of gesticulation, giving
them an account of his mishap. They did not
understand a word of French, and thought
some terrible misfortune had befallen him.
They all looked at me, and called out in
chorus, “ Que! Que! Que!” I explained to
them in Spanish what he had said—that he
M


had been obliged to stand in the rain, with
his hat in his hand, until the long procession
of friars had passed, and that he was very
much afraid that he had caught a bad cold.
They were all impressed with the idea that
he was ridiculing the observances of the
Catholic religion. One of them, who was
rather of a satirical disposition, requested me
to tell him that they greatly compassionated
him on account of his terrible mishap and
besought him, for God’s sake, to go to bed
immediately, and that they would order the
servant to heat some water, and give him a
lavativa, which would, most likely, avert any
evil consequences. I repeated verbatim what
she said. His countenance fell. Pie said
that surely I must have invented the speech,
for no French woman would have ventured to
make such a speech to any man. The lady
saw the advantage she had attained, and
asked me what he said. I told her. She said,
“ Pray, tell him we are quite in earnest, and
that if he will go to bed we will soon have
the hot water ready.” He declined, however,
to accept of the prescription.
Some time after, a French ship with a cargo
of wine, from Cette, bound to Havre, touched
at Cadiz. Legal was a Freemason, as was


the captain of the ship. In virtue of Free-
masonry they made acquaintance, and as
Havre was the native town of Legal, the
French captain took him as a passenger. But
he declined to take me on the pretence that
he had no accommodation, although I offered
to pay him my passage money immediately.
I would have been glad to have got to Havre,
because if there was no ship to England I
could have passed the Channel in a boat. It
was all for the best; for by the time when we
could have arrived Napoleon must have been
in Paris, after his escape from Elba.
The French captain told me a curious story
about the Freemasons. He said that he had
been captured by the English, and confined in
the Castle of Edinburgh. After some time
with several others, he made his escape. He
did not say how, but I suppose that it was by
the assistance of the Freemasons. He told
me that he got a place on a stage coach foi
London. There was only one passenger on
the coach beside himself. After some time,
the stranger addressed him and asked where
he was going. He replied that he was bound
to London. The stranger replied that he was
attempting to deceive, for he knew he was one
of the French prisoners who had escaped from


the castle, and that he was bound to Deal or
Dover, to endeavour to get a passage to
France. But he added: —“Be not afraid;
for I am especially employed by the Free-
masons to take care of you,”—and he got him
a passage to France in one of the boats of the
Deal smugglers.
The captain of the ship who brought me
from Malaga to Cadiz obtained a freight for
Bristol and Liverpool, and gave me a passage
to Bristol. He used often to vigit me in
Cadiz, and throughout acted towards me as a
brother; but when I had landed at Bristol and
had taken my passage to London I never saw
him afterwards.
The stage coach from Bristol to London
was a cumbrous uncomfortable conveyance,
and consisted of two low confined coaches
joined together by a beam across the inside
of the carriages, against which I more than
once knocked my head. Each carriage was
intended for four. There was only one inside
passenger with me, a tall clergyman, who
took a pamphlet out of his pocket and began
to read it. After a time he held the pamphlet
out to me, and asked if I had read those
sermons. I replied “ No,” and by way of
apology for not having read them, I said that


I had just come from abroad —perhaps I said
from Spain. I certainly should not in those
times have said that I had come from Botany
Bay!
I asked him if the sermons were particularly
good. He hesitated to answer, and at length
said, in an indefinite manner, “ Nothing par-
ticular.” I concluded they were his own
composition, and that his answer arose from
affected modesty. From the tenor of his
conversation I have more than once had the
opinion that he was the person who wrote the
“ History of the Jews,” and who became the
editor of “ Gibbon’s History of Rome.”
On my arrival at London I went straight
to Greenwich, where Mr. Wollstonecraft was
residing. I arrived there more an invalid than
anything else, for I had never entirely recovered
from the effects of the epidemia, although it
had attacked me in a comparatively mild form.
The least cold always brought on a return of
the sensation in the temporal arteries. To
remedy this without consulting any medico I
had my head shaved, and wore a wig. At
first I went to a barber twice a week to shave
my head, but I afterwards contrived to do it
myself, and I certainly found it very beneficial.
And I continued the practice until I went


again to New South Wales in the “ Admiral
Cockburn.” I ceased shaving at Madeira,
and the hair was long enough on my arrival
at Bahia to enable me dispense with a wig
I forgot to mention that, when we aban-
doned the ship near the Azores, the long boat
was so crowded that five of the men betook
themselves to the smaller boat. That boat
we lost sight of soon after dark, and never saw
or heard of it afterwards.
1 may also add that during this long and
disastrous voyage the crew always enjoyed
good health, and that we never had any
sympton of scurvy—then the bane of the
English Navy. None of the crew died at
sea, and when we reached Valparaiso there
was not a sick man on board; and no casualty
of any kind took place until we abandoned the
ship. I afterwards learned that the master of
the “ Fly” (?) in a second voyage to the Cape
of Good Hope was captured by the French,
and remained in prison until the fall of
Napoleon. I also heard with regret that my
early and best friend Mr. Hodge was totally
ruined in his next voyage to India, and never
recovered himself, from the state of the Indian
market. I never saw him afterwards. If I


had made another voyage to India I would
have been equally unfortunate.
There was such a chain of events in my
voyage from the Cape that everything which
happened to me was all for the best, and I
now conclude it was predestined before I was
born.
For the sake of brevity I omitted to give a
correct account of the passengers who accom-
panied me from Lima for the purpose of going
to Cadiz, and therefore shall now add their
names. The first was Don Manuel Moralez,
a native of Lima, who (according to Spanish
regulations) was the nominal supercargo of
the ship; but he neither had responsibility nor
emolument, and paid for his passage like any
other passenger. There was also a Spanish
curate of the name of Bermudez, who had
been elected by the district of Tarma as the
representative, or deputy, in the Cortes at
Cadiz, and also his nephew, and the three
officers of the frigate “ Astrea,” whom I first
met, as already stated, at Valparaiso. Ber-
mudez, although an ordained priest, had never
accepted a cure of souls, but had devoted
himself to mining, and therefore might be
considered as occupying the same position as
a French Abbe. Don Joaquin Toledo was an


old Spaniard, born at Tarifa. Don Eugenio
Cortez was a native of Chili, where his father
was a Haciendero, or landed proprietor; and he
used to boast that he was the sixth grandson
of the Hernando Cortez, who was the con-
queror of Mexico. The second officer, whose
name was Esquivel, was a native of Old
Spain.
On leaving Guayaquil the second time,
Bermudez and his nephew declined again to
trust themselves to the ship, and Don
Esquivel received an order from the Viceroy
to return to Lima. This was done at the
instance of the father of a young lady whom
he had lately married at Lima. So that mv
passengers now consisted of Moralez, Toledo,
and Cortez. Cortez left the ship at Rio
Janeiro, and afterwards became a general of
the insurgents in Chile. He corresponded
with me, at a subsequent period, after I had
finally settled in Sydney. Moralez had some
political dispute with Toledo at the Island of
St. Michael, and refused to go in the same
ship with him to Lisbon.
The recent unfortunate wreck of the
“Maria” on her voyage to New Guinea re-
calls to my recollection the melancholy ship-
wreck of the French ship-of-war, “Medusa,”


on the coast of Africa, in the year 1816; when
one hundred and fifty people were left on a
raft by the inhuman captain—and when a
vessel, about fourteen days after the wreck,
rescued the surviors, there were only fifteen
out of the one hundred and fifty alive, and
five of these fifteen soon afterwards died.
But if this raft had been constructed by the
Indians of Guayaquil, and left under their
management, the whole one hundred and fifty
from the “ Medusa ” would have been safely
landed at Senegal on the coast of Africa.
The city of Guayaquil is situated about
fifty miles from the mouth of the river, and
large ships are loaded at the Island of Puna,
at the entrance. These cargoes consist
chiefly of cacao, which is conveyed from
Guayaquil to ships on rafts, , called Balsa.
These rafts are so constructed that they can
be made to wear and stay, and are steered by
planks called garras, as easily as a boat.
Don Antonio Ulloa, in describing his voyage
to South America in 1735, gives a minute
account of these Balsas, and explains the
principle on which they are managed; and
there is an abstract of this account in the
second volume of Captain Burney’s History of
the Discoveries in the Pacific.


I have gone down to the Island of Puna in
one of these Balsas, and found it more com-
fortable than in a boat, and equally safe; and
I have known them to take down in a trip as
much as thirty tons of cacao in bulk.
The Marine Board of Sydney ought to have
a model of these Balsas, and teach the
captains of colonial craft how to make them.


CHAPTER IX.
Berry and Wollstonecraft determine to settle in Aus-
tralia—Governor Brisbane and Staff passengers—
Land Grant at North Sydney—Building of
“Crow's Nest”—Description of Shoalhaven—Ten
thousand acre grant secured —Disaster to first
Settlement Party—Canal cut between Crook-
haven and Shoalhaven Rivers—Coolangatta
chosen as Headquarters—Adventurous Trip to
Sydney—Treatment of Servants—Land Troubles
—Successful Law Suit—Entertained by Tenantry.
In 1819, Wollstonecraft and I determined to
settle in Australia, and for that purpose
chartered a vessel and took out a cargo to
Sydney. The adventure proved successful,
and we arranged that I should return to
London to enlarge our connection. Whilst
in London I was informed at the Colonial
Office that Sir Thomas Brisbane had been
appointed Governor of New South Wales.
I chartered a new ship, “ The Royal George,’
of five hundred tons burden, and Sir Thomas
with his family and staff went out with me
as passengers. On my arrival in Sydney I
found that my partner had obtained a grant
of five hundred acres on the north shore of
Sydney Harbour, opposite and overlooking


the town, where he had erected a small
cottage called the “ Crow’s Nest,” on account
of its elevated and commanding situation.
Governor Macquarie had given each of us a
grant of two thousand acres, but had
not located them. New South Wales had
begun to attract the notice of the people of
England, and lots of respectable free emigrants
were now flocking here. Sir Thomas
Brisbane had instructions to lessen the
expense of the colony, which was occasioned
entirely from the maintenance of police and
convicts. For this purpose he altered the
terms of granting land, and he gave two
thousand acres of land to every respectable
emigrant who would engage to maintain
twenty convicts free of expense to the Govern-
ment. Everybody was flocking to the Hunter
River, Bathurst, and other places where there
was already a settlement, and all were elbowing
one another. But we neither wished to elbow
any one nor to be elbowed, particularly as the
principal purpose to which land was then
applied was the breeding of sheep, cattle, and
horses.
In the year 1797, Mr. Bass, an enterprising
surgeon of the navy, made a voyage of dis-
covery in a whale boat along the coast to the


southward, and discovered that Van Diemen’s
Land, now called Tasmania, was separated
from New Holland by a strait, now called
Bass’s Strait. In the course of his voyage he
entered into a little harbour north of Jervis
Bay, and a degree of latitude south of Sydney.
He called the harbour Shoalhaven, because it
was full of shoals. He landed at this harbour
and found that there was a large river to the
north of it, which disembogued itself into the
ocean through a sandy beach three miles to the
north of the entrance of Shoalhaven harbour.
This river he named Shoalhaven River. The
river remained neglected until the latter years
of the administration of Governor Macquarie,
when he sent the Surveyor-General to examine
it with a veiw to its colonisation. The report
of the Surveyor-General was unfavourable on
account of the swampy nature of the ground,
which rendered it unfit for sheep. In con-
sequence of this Governor Macquarie made no
attempt to colonise it.
Under these circumstances we made a tender
to the Governor (Sir Thomas Brisbane) to
maintain one hundred convicts free of expense
to the Government, provided he gave us a
grant of ten thousand acres on the banks of
the Shoalhaven River. Our tender was


promptly accepted, subject to the approval
of the Home Government, as the Governor
was not authorised to make such extensive
grants. But we thought he risked very
little as our undertaking was beneficial to
the Government; as at that time every convict
cost the Government £l6 per annum. Earl
Bathurst, the then Secretary of State for the
Colonies, eventually confirmed the grant when
it was brought under his notice. Everybody
laughed at us for such an undertaking. Some
merely ridiculed, others pretended to pity us.
One day a friend of mine said to me he hoped
it was not true that I had taken a grant of
land near Jervis Bay, for the savages would
eat me. I said I had no fear whatever on that
score, as I had learned how to manage savages
in New Zealand. In fact, the only thing I
dreaded was the dangerous entrance of the
river, but I hoped I would be able to over-
come that by care and caution.
After having procured a suitable little
vessel to commence the undertaking—a little
cutter of fifteen tons —I proceeded to Shoal-
haven with the first batch of convicts. This
was in May 3822, and although it was winter
in this part of the hemisphere, the weather
was fine, and the water was smooth. But on


arriving near the mouth of the Shoalhaven
River I observed that, notwithstanding this
smooth water outside, that there was a high
surf and breakers across the entrance of the
river. I had appointed as master of the vessel,
a young man named Davidson, whose life I
had saved at New Zealand, after the massacre,
by natives, of the crew of the ship “ Boyd.”
Poor Davidson was over anxious for my
interest, and insisted that the dangerous
appearance of the mouth of the river was
only caused by the glitter of the sun, and that
there was no danger whatever. After much
discussion, reluctantly I allowed him to take
a boat to examine the entrance, and the boat
was manned by Davidson, his mate, two white
men, and one of the aborigines who was a good
hand at an oar. After the boat set out, I ran
up to the mast-head, whence I saw the
danger more clearly, and immediately waved
my hat for them to return, and called on all
the people on deck to do the same. They saw
us, and heard our shouts, and put the boat
about with her head to the vessel; but instead
of returning, they held a discussion amongst
themselves, and after some time again put
the boat’s head towards the breakers. I
recollect that at this moment my mouth became


dry, and my tongue clave to the roof. They
escaped the first great breaker; but, alas!
after the second, the next sight I got of the
boat it was capsized, and the oars were in the
air, and the men clinging to the bottom.
When I next saw the boat there were only
two men by her. I was told afterwards by
the native black that after it was decided that
they should go on, he stripped himself naked,
and advised all the others to do the same,
and be ready to swim, else they would certainly
be drowned, but they did not take his advice.
When the boat capsized the native black
immediately left it, and swam to the shore,
which he reached safely. Davidson and his
mate immediately swam away from the boat
and were never seen again. The two men
who could not swim stuck to the boat, which
was washed ashore by the surf on the beach
between the entrance to the river and Crook-
haven. I got two long oars and pulled the
vessel into Shoalhaven, and despatched some
cordials to the two men who had been washed
ashore in a state of exhaustion. Next day I
sent some men to launch the boat into the
sea, and by keeping her in shallow water,
contrived to get her into the Shoalhaven River.
I then took my little vessel to a point


COOLANGATTA HOMESTEAD


in Shoalhaven* Harbour—which approached
nearest to the Shoalhaven River —put the
necessary tools into the hands of my men,
and told them to dig a canal of communica-
tion between Crookhaven and Shoalhaven
Rivers. I had, myself, little hopes that they
would accomplish this at the present moment,
but I knew that idleness was the parent of
mischief, and the only safety for my convicts,
after such a disaster, was to have them fully
employed. They worked with a will, and, in
about a month or five weeks, absolutely dug
a canal of communication between the two
waters, and sufficient to allow a loaded boat
to pass. This canal is still open, and noW
much enlarged. When I last sounded the
canal, upwards of a dozen years ago, there
was a depth of three fathoms of water, so
that it is now (although the Shoalhaven River
remains in statu quo ) the real entrance to the
river.
Whilst my men were employed in digging
this canal, I employed myself in surveying
the district, assisted by the natives and a
young friend of mine, a Mr. Hume, a native
of the colony. For my headquarters I fixed
* Now Crookhaven.


on the north side of the river, at the foot of a
hill, called by the natives Coolangatta. This
mount is 930 feet high. I located the ten
thousand acre grant in this locality, and Mac-
quarie’s grant of five hundred acres I located
on the south side of the river, adjoining the
canal.
I then made a wooden store at Coolangatta,
and removed my men and provisions from the
vessel, and was now prepared to return to
Sydney by sea. My crew consisted of one
white man, and the native who accompanied
me to Shoalhaven; also two native gentlemen
—Lager, the chief of Jervis Bay, and Wagin,
the chief of Numba —who were induced to
accompany me by the promise of a suit of
clothes and an engraved brass plate each, as
a badge of their dignity as chiefs or kings!!
After leaving the harbour, we were delayed
for some days by foul winds, and we saw a
large ship from England in the same con-
dition. Those on board of it tried to speak us,
but I evaded them, as I was ashamed to meet
strangers in my dilapidated condition, but at
length they got so near us we could not
escape. The captain of the ship put out his
boat and came alongside. I poked my head
out of the cabin and saw it was a Captain


Reid, a lieutenant of the Navy, whom I had
met in Sydney. He looked at me with
surprise, and asked what I was doing. I told
him I had been forming a new settlement,
and of the disaster I had met with. “ Come
alongside my vessel,” said he “ and I will tow
you up to Sydney ”; and he compelled me to
go on board his vessel at once, that he might
show me, as a spectre, to some lady passengers
whom he had on board. The ladies had come
out with their father to settle in Australia. I
had not seen them before, but had met their
father in London. They flocked round me with
wonderment and assailed me with all manner
of foolish questions respecting the way new
settlements were made, and on hearing there
were no houses, they asked where I slept. I
replied, “ under a tree.” This was true
enough. I put one end of a pole in the fork
of a tree and the other end rested in the fork
of a piece of wood, which was put in the
ground, and then a sail was put over the pole so
as to form a kind of tent. In front a large fire
was kept burning all night, and a number of
natives slept in the open air as my body-
guard. The ladies told me afterwards that
they went into their cabins and cried all night


on account of their melancholy fate of having
come to Australia.
We managed our convicts chiefly by moral
influence as we had no police. Occasionally
we had troubles with incorrigibles, but
these' were the exceptions. There was
a stated Government ration which settlers
were obliged to give to their convicts,
consisting of beef or pork and flour. We
increased these rations, and in addition gave
tea, sugar, and tobacco to all our well behaved
servants, and the overseer had strict injunc-
tions never to call them convicts, but merely
Government servants or Government men.
When they misbehaved or became contu-
macious we put them on Government rations.
Some of these Government men are still in
my service to the present day, and some are
my tenants. A few months ago one of the
heroes of Trafalgar died at Shoalhaven. He
had been transported for striking an officer
when in a state of intoxication, and had been
upwards of forty years in my service.
I have told you the origin of the Shoalhaven
estate. It now consists of eighty square miles
of land; and after the first fourteen thousand
acres it has all been obtained by purchase—
generally from the Government. It now con


tains 368 tenants, but the greater part of the
estate is occupied by myself. The tenantry
have formed themselves into an agricultural
association, called the Shoalhaven Estate Agri-
cultural Society. They admit no outsiders
into their society, but allow them to compete
far their prizes.
Although I have been to a certain extent
successful, you must not think that I have
been sleeping on a bed of roses. On the con-
trary, I have had many severe trials during
the different crises of the colony, and was
nearly ruined about twenty years ago, by the
failure of the Bank of Australia. In this case
I had little personal interest in the bank, but
had allowed myself to become a trustee for two
marriage settlements where the money was
invested in bank shares, and I became liable.
I have often during my long career received
evil for good, but this is what every one must
expect. One of my most bitter .enemies has
been a Presbyterian minister. About nine
years ago he went down to Shoalhaven and
preached a regular crusade against me. His
object was to incite my neighbours to enter
into a conspiracy against me, and grab my
property under a new municipal law passed
by our democratic Government. He readily


got some persons of his own kidney to enter
the conspiracy against me, the chief of whom
was a person who had been convicted of arson
and subornation of perjury.
These conspirators accordingly grabbed a
large portion of my property, which was merely
adapted for grazing purposes, and the Govern-
ment was base enough, strange to say, to pro-
claim their municipality. I refused to pay the
assessments, and they distrained upon me
repeatedly. I brought an action against them
for their illegal distress. The Government
virtually defended the action, but I obtained
a verdict in my favour, and of course the
Government paid the costs and damages.
After many months had elapsed the Govern-
ment applied to the Privy Council in London
to appeal against the verdict. The most
eminent counsel in London were retained on
both sides. My leading counsel was Sir
Roundell Palmer; theirs was Sir Hugh Cairns.
When the case was eventually heard the
verdict of the Supreme Court of Sydney was
confirmed. This affair cost me a thousand
pounds, besides the annoyance it occasioned
me. It must have cost the Government many
thousands.
I may mention that soon after this minister’s


attack upon me, my tenantry seemed to con-
sider it theiir duty to make a demonstration in
my favour, perhaps to show that I was not the
vile tyrant that had been represented. They
invited me to a great public entertainment at
Shoalhaven. Some of my Sydney friends
accompanied me, and we were met at the wharf
by hundreds of people who conducted us to
the large hall where the entertainment was to
be given. One of my friends who accompanied
me, a Mr. Napier, a native of Montrose, said
as we marched along, “ You ought to be
delighted with this, but you look grave.” The
fact is, I am never elated with any popular
demonstration nor gleam of prosperity. I
have never courted popularity, and have
always looked upon it as the vane of a
weathercock.


CHAPTER X.
Retirement from Public Life—Reminiscences oi
Travel—“ Crow’s Nest” Re-built—Growth of
Shoalhavcn—Memories of Schooldays—Early
Governors —Conclusion.
As I am no longer a public man, I have not
mixed in any of the gaieties occasioned by the
arrival of the Duke of Edinburgh in the
colony. Indeed, at no time of life had I any
taste for such things. I am shocked to say
that the Duke narrowly escaped assassination
by a desperate Fenian. The discontent of the
Irish is unaccountable. The late Sir Joseph
York used to say that the only way to pacify
Ireland was to submerge it for twenty-four
hours beneath the waters of the Atlantic.
But I have no more reason to complain of the
Irish than of the English or Scotch, and they
have often boasted that they were more faith-
ful to me than the others were. I believe that
there are at this moment upwards of one
hundred and forty Irish tenants on my estate
at Shoalhaven. My boatman here, originally a
political offender, has been upwards of thirty
years in my service, and one of his daughters,
who was born at my wharf, has been upwards


of a dozen of years in my service, and is now
my housekeeper, but I very seldom change my
servants. My confidential clerk has been with
me upwards of thirty years.
I have met few of my old school or college
fellows during my long earthly pilgrimage. I
recollect after my first voyage to China break-
fasting in London with John Campbell, after-
wards Lord Campbell, and I also met Wilkie
the painter, and a son of Professor Cook.
A younger son of Professor Hunter was a
passenger with me from Calcutta to Madras,
and he told me that his brother George had
charge of a fleet of boats on the River
Nerbudah. I think he must be the person
mentioned by Kaye in his history of the
mutiny in India, as the good General Geordis
Hunter.
I was delighted to see by the last mail that
tardy justice had at last been done to Mr. Bell,
the inventor of the reaping machine; but was
grieved to see that Sir David Brewster was
no more. He was born about a fortnight after
me.
Some years ago I renovated the “ Crow’s
Nest” on acount of auld lang syne; and
upwards of a dozen years ago I erected for
myself a more commodious house in a more


convenient situation. I see the entrance of
Botany across the harbour of Port Jackson
from my parlour window, where I am now
writing. I have made several vistas among
the trees. From one point I have a view of
the lower arms of Port Jackson, which I am
told resembles the Golden Horn at Constan-
tinople. The next point gives me a view of
Sydney and Botany Bay, and further on I
have a vista of the Great Pacific Ocean over
the low land. At the entrance of the harbour
further on I see the light-house on the heads.
Outside of my gate is the church of St.
Thomas’s, the incumbent of which is my old
friend the Rev. Mr. Clarke, a scientific man,
and a celebrated geological savant, hardly
second to Sir Roderick Murchison or Sir
Charles Lyell.
I am only a humble pioneer of civilisation,
and have a new project on the tapis, which is,
to erect two Roman mu-nicipia on my property
at Shoalhaven, which delights the tenantry,
as they will be enabled to construct their own
roads and bridges, &c. One of these muni-
cipia is on the north side of the river, and the
other on the south. The first contains 1,250
souls, and the other onl} r 750, but the popula-
tion is rapidly increasing, and for many years


I have had a surveyor on the place for the
purpose of laying out the farms and mapping
them afterwards.
The Chinese make their sugar from a plant
called sorghum. This plant growns luxuriantly
at Shoalhaven, and David wishes me to convert
part of the estate into a sugar plantation. I
have my misgivings on the subject, and
sometimes think it would be better for me to
rid myself of such a burdensome occupation.
Old Solomon says, “ Court not large posses-
sions; where there are large possessions there
are many to eat thereof,” and I may fairly say
I am only a steward for my dependants, and I
am very sure that each of my tenants eats
more than I do.
When I am alone I always eat porridge
and milk to breakfast. The Queen says in
her book that she tasted porridge and found
it very good; and I eat it only because I like
it, for I am no anchorite, and like to live
generously. There is a great difference
between temperance and abstinence. Adam
Smith has a long dissertation on the temper-
ance of the inhabitants of the wine countries
of the south of France and Spain; but he
mistook the cause. These people largely use
oil in their diet, which supplies hydrogen and


carbon to the system, and renders wine and
spirits unnecessary to keep up the animal
heat. The only cure for confirmed drunkards,
so far as I know, is to give them cod liver oil.
I am just in receipt of the University
Calendars of St. Andrews and Edinburgh. It
gives me great pleasure to see l , how both
Universities have advanced since I first knew
them. I am, however, more delighted with
the resuscitation of St. Andrews. In my school-
boy days there was only one bookseller in
Cupar—a person of the name of Henderson,
who kept hardly anything in his shop except
school books and ballads. There was, how-
ever, a book hawker who used to keep a stall
on market days. On one occasion I s&w a
copy of “ Salmon’s Geographical Grammar ”
and requested my father to buy it for me. I
recollect that after I got that book I used to
try to teach my father’s servants that the sun
was a fixture, and that the earth revolved on
its axis; but I was not able to convince any of
them. And no wonder, the old Popes tethered
up the earth and would not allow it to revolve
on its axis for centuries; but Sir C. Lyell states,
in one of his geological books, that Pope Pius
VII was graciously pleased to cut the tether
and allow it again to revolve.


I recollect that old Salmon endeavours to
prove that the world was round from the fact
of several vessels having sailed round the
world, including Sir Francis Drake and Lord
Anson. What a change a hundred years have
made; a voyage round the world is now an
every-day occurrence. All the ships from
England to this colony complete their voyage
by sailing round the world. With all my
wanderings I have only sailed twice round the
world.
We have lived in eventful times. About
the period of my birth the British American
colonies had obtained their independence,
which eventually occasioned the colonisation
of the Australian colonies. A hundred
years ago N. S. Wales was a terra incognita.
Captain Cook first sighted the coast on
the 18th April, 1770, and landed at Botany
Bay ten days afterwards. Governor Phillip
first landed at Sydney Cove on the 26th
January, 1788, now the anniversary day of the
colony. I first arrived in Port Jackson
harbour on 13th January, 1808, and the
notorious Captain Bligh was put under arrest
on the 26th. At that time the whole popula-
tion of the colony was only about ten thousand,
mostly convicts. Now the population of all


these colonies amounts to nearly two millions,
exclusive of the aborigines. Up to the time
of my first arrival no one had succeeded in
passing the coast chain of mountains called
the Blue Mountains, and they have now
succeeded in constructing a railway across
them.
I have personally known all the governors,
except Phillip, Grose, and King. They
are now all in their graves except the two
last, Denison and Young, and the present
Governor, Earl Belmore, lately arrived.
Governor Hunter I only knew in London; all
the others I knew in the colony, to wit,
Governor Bligh, Colonel Paterson, Colonel
Johnston, Colonel Foveau, General Mac-
quarie, General Sir Thomas Brisbane, Colonel
Stewart, General Sir Ralph Darling, Colonel
Lindsay, General Sir Richard Bourke, Colonel
Snodgrass, Sir George Gipps, Sir Maurice
O’Connell, Sir Charles Fitzroy, Sir William
Denison, and Sir John Young.
This is now our mid-winter, and the
thermometer at my door is at 55 deg., but the
air is cold and clear, and I feel it necessary to
have a fire constantly in my room. I always
prefer to burn wood, though coal abounds.
I have had the pleasure of receiving a


volume on the agriculture and climate of
North America. It is both a practical and
scientific work, and I have perused it
with great pleasure. It has given me
more real information about America than
any book I ever read before. With all its
faults, I prefer Australia to America. In
America, swampy land is fever land. At
Shoalhaven, I have upwards of twenty thousand
acres of alluvial land, much of which was
covered with water at certain seasons, when I
first engaged with it. The place, however, has
always been perfectly healthy. I have never
seen a single case of ague. I have never been
able to account for this anomaly to my
satisfaction, except that it may arise from the
nature of the vegetation. Our forest trees are
evergreens, and the leaves contain essential
oil, which prevents putrefaction.
Australia produces as good oats and barley
as Scotland, but oats are chiefly cultivated for
oaten hay. At one time, I cultivated a kind of
naked oats which produced a finer flour than
the common oats, but now I generally use
Scotch oatmehl. When amongst the Spaniards,
I always breakfasted on chocolate or prepared
cocoa. There it was to be had in purity, but
English made chocolate is nearly always


adulterated. I know nothing more agreeable
or salutary or nutritious, than cocoa. An
Indian will travel a hundred miles without
any other nourishment than a few grains of
cocoa. If I recollect aright, grains of cocoa
served the purpose of small coins in Mexico.
A few days ago, Dr. Smith, Professor of
Chemistry, brought me an analysis of the fruit
of an Australian plant which I had sent to him,
which contains a nutritious fecula, and a
poison. He could easily extract the poison,
but was unable to crystalise it. When the
natives use it as food, they extract the poison
by maceration in running water. The natives
call this plant Burrawang; botanists call it
Macrozamia spiralis. No cereal contains so
many of the elements of nutrition as oatmeal,
though it does not contain so much gluten as
wheaten flour, therefore the best way of using
it is in the shape of porridge.
Originally I had no idea of settling in
New South Wales, and only visited it on
a mercantile adventure. On my return
to England it happened to me repeatedly,
when travelling in a mail coach, some of the
passengers would begin to talk about New
South Wales. On such occasions, if thev
were all strangers to me, I always remained


silent. I was ashamed to say that I had been
there, lest some of them might suppose that I
was a returned convict. But I was compelled
to revisit the colony in order to endeavour to
recover some property, in consequence oi
which it became my domicile.
I recollect that on one of my last
visits to Errol a letter was handed to
me one day when at breakfast. It was
from a man who requested that I would
take a letter to his son, who had been trans-
ported to New South Wales. I handed the
letter to my father, and asked if he knew the
man, upon which he got angry, and said, “ I
will not allow you to take charge of a letter
to a convict; let him send it by post! ” Upon
the whole, I am convinced that unless a penal
colony had been founded in New South Wales,
Australia would not have been settled to the
present day.
The Australian colonies are the cheapest
conquest ever made by England. The
little war in Abyssinia has already cost
England upwards of six millions; and I
believe that during the whole existence of the
convict system the cost of these colonies did
not exceed ten millions, and this was to rid
England of a nuisance and to support and


control her exiled criminal population. Much
of this might have been saved if she had taken
steps to encourage free emigration; but,
unfortunately, for upwards of twenty years
after the settlement of New South Wales,
England was engaged in war, and absolutely
struggling for her existence. In those early
days the criminal laws of England were very
severe, I may say Draconian, and people used
to be transported for offences for which they
would in the present day only be sentenced to
imprisonment for a week. Under sucli
circumstances many convicts were equal to
free emigrants.
W. C. Penfold & Go., Printers, 183 Pitt Street, Sydney.
