

mmm '
»§r®
mtmmi
S
•<*)«
**®
$
)¥(
f
I
REMINISCENCES
Aqpio TP qp n IP TT TP HTP KP
x Jtv, JL X JL U JCa U JIA vj Jtr Jta
THE HON. J. 11. THOMAS, C.E., M.1.C.E., J.P.
(Written solely for private circulation among Relatives and Friends.)
PRINTED AT THE CITY PRESS. BARRACK STREET. PERTH,
1871).
!»*
I
W PRI
&


REMINISCENCES
A TKIP TO EUHQPE,
THE HON. J. 11. THOMAS, C.E., M.1.C.E., J.P.
( Written solely for private circulation among Relatives and Friends.)
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, KING GEORGE'S SOUND, POINT DE GALLE, ADEN,
SUEZ, CAIRO, ALEXANDRIA.
Having made up my miud to proceed to Europe by the overland
route, I was determined not to hurry through as many—l may say
most —do that go this way, but take advantage of the opportunity and
see a little of Cairo, Alexandria, Naples, Rome, Florence, Milan, Paris,
&c., on my way home, I therefore only booked to Suez from whence I
could proceed leisurely, through Egypt, Italy and Floiunue to
England.
Business matters were arranged, farewells spoken, and we (my wife
and I) found ourselves one line morning on hoard the Peninsular and
Oriental Company's Steamer " Bangalore," bound for Point de Galle in
Ceylon, and at 11 a.m. my long dreamed of voyage home commenced.
I used to be a very bad sailor but I now appear to have got over it
to a very great extent, I know however full well what a dreadful thing
it is to suffer from sea-sickness, what a weird sensation it is to feel the
stern of a ship sinking swiftly from under you and slowly rise again,
and I could therefore sympathise with her who demanded my unremit-
ting attention, but I fear that all my efforts to alleviate her sufferings
were in vain, however after a very rough passage of 72 hours (50 being
the average run) we dropped anchor off' Sandridge at 11 a.m., and for
a time at least it was all over.
The whole day being at our disposal to spend ashore we hurried off
to the Sandridge Railway Station to take our tickets for Melbourne,
which is some 4 or 5 miles from the Port, and we were there met by
Mr. and Mrs. Pliipps, who in the kindest possible manner escorted us


over the great Metropolis of Victoria, a city of which the inhabitants
are very justly proud. We " did " all the principal streets and public
buildings, including among the latter the Town Hail, Houses of
Parliament, Railway Stations, Royal Mint, Public Library, Arcade, &c.
In our rounds we got lunch at one of the numerous first-class Cafes
which abound in Melbourne, and then having fairly tired ourselves
out, we once more went on board the " Bangalore."
We certainly, thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Phipps, spent a most delight-
ful day ashore. To me Melbourne was no novelty having been there
five or six times previously, but to C all was new and afforded such
a pleasant relief from being on shipboard.
We did not clear Port Phillip heads until 11. 30 on the following
morning. AVe had.received from Melbourne a large addition to our
numbers, and I found the passengers consisted of a joint contribution
from all the Colonies, a new Zealander or two, an Indian officer and
his lady, an American, an Italian, and a Catholic priest ; on the whole
they were a cheerful and available society. All the officers were first-
rate fellows, the crew consisting of Lascars, Bengalese, Chinamen, &c.
was picturesque, and the living good, so that we were not long in all
settling down into the pleasant stage of nautical intimacy.
Bad as the passage was to Melbourne it bore no comparison to the
terrible weather we experienced between Port Phillip and King George's
Sound. JFor two days we were hove-to during which it blew a perfect
hurricane and I thought the old " Bangalore " would have rolled the
masts out of her, the decks were never dry for an instant, sea after
sea breaking over us in constant succession, onetjjearing a boat clean
out of its Davits, another breaking in the skylights and flooding the
saloon and cabins, and a third completely carrying away the stem
wheel with the four men who were at it, and but for the steering appar-
atus amidships we should have been placed in a most critical position,
as it was, not one on board but thought that we must founder, if the
weather did not moderate.
Thus were passed seven long weary days, a week of suffering on a
tempestuous sea, a week of sea-sickness to many, and to all either con-
finement in close cabins or on the drenched deck, a week of noise and
confusion that made sleep impossible during those long, very long
nights, in fact a week of complete misery, so that glad enough was I
when going on deck just before breakfast, on the eighth day from
Melbourne to hear Mr. Prizell reporting to the Captain that " land was,
on our starboard bow " and I was not long in spreading the welcome
tidings below; later in the day (1.15) we passed Break-Sea Island and
entered King George's Sound, and were soon after ashore again, housed
in the London Hotel, in the little town of Albany, AVestern Australia.
There is nothing particularly worthy of note in the Town of Albany,
nevertheless it was a source of great delight to us to stretch our legs
in wandering about its well kept streets and pleasant outskirts. We
slept ashore that night, and in the morning once more joined the Ban-
galore which at 10 a.m. again got underweigh.
On getting gut to sea we found the ship in much better trim, they
having during the night shifted some of the coal and cargo. AVhen
leaving Melbourne she drew 18 ft. 2 in. forward and 19 ft. 9 in. aft.,
she now draws 16 ft. forward and 17 ft. 10 in. aft., during the night
we rounded Cape Leeuwin and were fairly on our way to Guile.
AVe soon fell into the track of the trade winds, steady gales, and
smooth seas, and thus fared pleasantly on. One afternoon however we
were all alarmed by hearing the fire bell rang, and in a few minutes
every officer and man in the ship was at his appointed station, and
both steam and hand pumps brought into immediate action, but we


found there was 110 fire to put out, this alarm being given occasionally
on all the Company's vessels without the slightest notice, to see that
everything is in jverfect working order, and that every body on hoard
knows what his duty is in the event of actual danger.
On Sundays there is a general muster of all hands on the quarter
deck, the officers being grouped round the after wheel, the " deck
hands " ranged along the starboard, and engine-room men on the port
side. After this inspection, Divine Service is either held in the saloon
or on the quarter-deck, according to the state of the weather, the
Captain on ail such occasions officiating as Chaplain.
Once a week a notice is posted up to the effect that on that date
passengers can, if so disposed, get at their boxes in the hold, this is
called " Baggage day." We however had all our trunks in the cabin,
and I should strongly advise all taking this journey to do as we did,
and not encumber themselves with too much luggage.
As we get further north the weather becomes much warmer, and
passengers found the necessity of discarding the heavy dresses they
had hitherto appeared in, and adopting the gossamer garments of
Ind—double awnings are rigged up over the quarter-deck, and punkahs
set to work in the saloon.
One day I made an inspection of the engines, accompanied by
Mr. Rennie our talented chief engineer, and was very much pleased
with both the excellent work and the general design of the machinery
and boilers, as well as with the splendid manner in which everything
is conducted in this important department of the vessel. The con-
sumption of coal 011 board averages 52 tons daily, with a nominal horse
power of 500 horses.
In the fore-saloon a small theatre was erected, and we were enter-
tained one evening with the performance of " London Assurance " by
a talented company of theatricals who were on their way to India,
assisted by Mr. Frizell, whose acting almost equals his great ability
as an officer which is saying a great deal. At the conclusion of the
comedy ices and other refreshments were served round to the audience,
and then followed a concert at which one of the best lady pianists of
the day, (Miss Schiller) kindly lent her services. The whole affair
was admirably got up, so much, so indeed, that it was difficult to
imagine yourself on board a ship and not in some small but fashionable
theatre in London or Paris. On another evening we had performed
the farce of " a happy pair," and I may safely assert that I never
passed time so delightfully at any such entertainments on shore.
At 8 o'clock on the evening of the 20th day from Sydney, we made
the light of Point de Galle, and hove-to for the night as it is too
dangerous a port to enter in the dark even if the Company's regula-
tions did not positively forbid it. How anxiously we watched that
light as all sat smoking away on deck, speculating on the pleasant run
we should have ashore on the morrow.
When I woke in the morning I found the ship at anchor, and saw
through the open port of our cabin a fleet of strange looking canoes
filled with gaily dressed tawny people. I was soon on dSck to have a
look round this picturesque harbour. The graceful cocoa-palms
fringed the beach, waving their green plumes, as if responsive to the
rhythm of the waves they love so well. Far in the distance rose a
purple-tinted mountain ; fatigued by bright blue waters and a glowing
sky, the eye rested on the gorgeous forest of which the broad rich
glittering foliage, suggested aromatic gardens and spice-laden air.
The hoary ramparts half hidden by profuse vegetation, rose frowning,
011 the soft witchery of the magic scene. All was new, strange,
intoxicating—with the glory and the glamour of a first gaze upon the


burning charms of the East. Scorning the prosaic refreshment of a
ship's breakfast, we committed ourselves to one of the boats and were
soon ashore. On landing we went direct to the Oriental hotel, and
having ordered breakfast strolled foith to look at the town.
It is difficult to suppress expressions of delight as we pass massive
stone buildings of the olden Dutch peiiod, with balconies and court-
yards with noble overshadowing trees. Walls and old trees are always
poetic in combination. Then the little humped bullocks, drawing
Lilliputian wood carts, bazaars crowded with dark-skinned bargainers,
the cool narrow streets, with pillared balconied rows of shops on
either side, the swarming, clean copper-hued gentle Cingalese. All is
of the venerable, barbaric, stored past to me ; but yesterday, as it
seems, from a new planet, I had apparently journeyed into a region
where the value of time had, among other miracles and wonders,
suffered change. I saw a blacksmith with trousers miraculously white,
engaged in shoeing a horse. It was a leisurely performance, which
four friends, apparently of independent means, watched with mild
interest.
A grey-haired tailor, with his subalterns, sat in his verandah, sewing
in comfort and coolness. The entire population had the air of being
contented, happy, and well fed. that condition to which benevolists are
always striving to biing the British poor unsuccessfully.
Galle contains 100,000 inhabitants very few of which are Europeans,
the best portion of the town, although not the largest, is surrounded
by fortifications a mile they say in circumference, here you see the
Cingalese with his comb, flowing hair, and "cornboy" or white
petticoat, the Tamil in turban and breech-cloth, and the Moorman like
Cingalese but clean shaved with conical basket-hat and long pointed
shoes. For the beddahs the real men of the woods a long jungle trip
must be undertaken to see them. We visited the fortifications, the
fish, meat, and fruit markets, bazaars, English and Portuguese
cemetries &c., when the sensation of pleasurable interest was overcome
by that of hunger, whereupon we retraced our steps to the Oriental.
On arriving at the hotel, we found its beautiful broad verandah
besieged by a clamorous crowd of sellers of jewellry and " precious
stones.'' Nowhere is the cheating which allies itself with the manufac-
ture of gold and gems, more developed than at Galle. There are
some really good workers in gold and ivory in the land whence came
to King Solomon " gold, apes, and peacocks," but as finger glasses
were not in general use in his day, we may doubt whether so many
jewelled rings were manufactured there then, as now. This is the
style of bargaining:—
" You buy ring, Massa ? very fine stone dis, old di'mond, get from
native king."
" Hum, ha 1 what do you want for it ?"
Dealer insinuatingly and with keen look at Briton : " Fine time
for bargain, morning time Massa, me let you have dis (another keen
look) for feeft.wguinea, massa. Dis very ole di'mond."
Briton, justly indignant. "Go to blazes 1 you impostor; won't have
it at any price."
" Massa, massa ! you too much angry, you take him, twenty guinea,
dis morning time."
" Go away, you rascal, I don't want it."
" Oh ! massa, (imploringly) you send me away ; you send away riches ;
you give me ten guinea.
" Get out of this ! and leave me alone."
" Massa see hero, me very just man, me give five guinea for dis ole


di'mond. You English lord, you give me five guinea, you no tell
black-fellow."
" Will you clear out of this, before I hammer you."
" Massa, say tree guinea; must buy something for pretty Missie—
Missie very pretty."
" I'll make you pretty directly, if you bother me any more. Do you
see this stick ?"
" Massa no beat poor natif; I make Massa present, say one guinea."
" Not one farthing, walk off; (native running, and with despairing
howl,) Massa, Massa, ten shillin'."
Having amused ourselves for a short time in watching the novel
scene on the verandah we joined the merry party now gathered round
a tempting and appreciated table in the dining room. It was a festive
and enjoyable entertainment of coffee, fish, fruit, ice, cooled wines,
curried prawns, eggs and a host of other things. We were waited
upon by black-fellows in turbans and long flowing robes, and the pun-
kahs overhead were kept going during the meal. I could not help
observing how the cheerful energy and vigorous health of the Austra-
lian party contrasted strongly with the debility and languor of many
of the Indians who were on their way to the mother country like
ourselves.
Feeling very much refreshed we started off for another stroll, post
our letters, and make a few purchases. The great nuisance we found
in walking about was the number of Moormen who pester you to buy
precious stones, ivory and ebony boxes, porcupine's quills &c., and a
lady feels rather shocked at the very simple costume worn by somo of
the natives, the children for the most part being perfectly naked, and
both men and women of the poorer classes having but very scanty
attire. We were of course delighted with the novelty of the scenes
witnessed in the thoroughfares, but what pleased us perhaps most was
the mass of beautiful foliage about the place, which to our eyes, just
off a voyage, had such a refreshing green appearance.
We at last got fairly tired out, and the rain suddenly coming down
in torrents we took a four-wheeled trap and drove down to the wharf
where we found a most exciting scene on the crowded jetty, passengers
bargaining with boatmen to take them off to the ship while hundreds
of natives were pestering everybody to buy something of them before
leaving, so that we had to fairly fight our way into the boat we had
engaged. In Galle harbour there is a constant swell on, which renders
it difficult for a lady or even a gentleman to get in or out of a boat,
C however managed very well jumping as you must do, if you
wish to avoid a ducking, at the precise time you are told to.
We went direct on hoard the P. and O. Company's 8. S. Mirzapore,
which is to convey us to Suez and to which vessel our luggage had
previously been transferred. We soon got comfortably settled down
in our new cabin, and I then found time to inspect and admire this
magnificent piece of naval architecture, to which in comparison the
Bangalore is but a steam collier, the Mirzapore being not only double
its size but infinitely better appointed in all its departments, the
cabins here being good sized rooms with windows, not little round
holes for ports, marble baths surrounded with a flooring of tesselated
pavement, indeed everything that would tend either to the comfort or
even luxury of the passengers appears to have been studied by its
designer. Upon going up on to the magnificent quarter-deck the
large number and variety of cane chairs, private property of the
passengers, at once suggested that she was from Calcutta and that we
should find that our new comrades were principally from India as was
really the case, although they were of mixed callings and nationalities,


Indian officers and Civilians bound for England, mercantile men from
China, from the Islands, from the Dutch Colonies, coffee planters from
Ceylon &c. We had also a considerable addition to our passenger list
in the shape of " Indian" children who by the way are rare little
Turks brought up almost entirely by the native ayahs, over-indulged,
and learning at a very early age to despise their nurses as belonging
to an inferior race, they are most overbearing little despots. They
frightened the Australian children, at the first meals which they
attended in common, by the fierceness of their gestures, and the
recklessness of their manners. These little angularities soon arranged
themselves, however.
As we steamed out of the harbour we saw the masts of the
" Bangoon" just showing above the water, she having struck 011 a
rock when leaving Galle some twelvemonths since, and sank in deep
soundings.
Having talked out the whole series of our Galle experience, we
begin to take stock of our available amusements. We play chess,
quoits, back-gammon, and whist, and the nights being mild, our
obliging Captain has the deck lamps lighted, and we have pleasant
little dances. Many of the purchases made at Galle now came to
light. Tortoishell bracelets and ornaments of a delicate pale yellow —
crepe shawls, rare and costly—rings and brooches, which are keenly
inspected by the experienced Indians, and in some instances denounced
as gross counterfeits. Our society is serene —contented and sesthetie,
a species of seafaring Utopia. Why tempt the land, with all its cares
and dangers?^—" We will go home no more"-—but lingering in these
halcyon seas, float for ever on this charmed main !
The Indian passengers begin to fraternize with those from Australia
finding no doubt that we are not quite barbarians. Everything 011
board is of course Eastern, Indian fruits and dishes being 011 the table
at all meals, with coffee, olives, &c. Passengers, officers, and stewards
all dress in whitq and the crew in Oriental costume. I received one
day at dinner a severe rebuke (in a lookl from one of the stewards for
my asking if they had any colonial wine on board, " No sir, never
heard of it," was the indignant reply, but we have hock, burgundy,
claret and rhenish wines," I tried to look as though I had only been in
fun but the poor fellow felt hurt to think anyone should for a moment
imagine there was such a thing as colonial wine on the Mirzapore.
Prayers are read every morning at 11 o'clock by the Captain, and
the usual morning and evening service on Sundays. A muster of
crew also takes place every Sunday, when the Lascars, dingy enough
on week-days, were truly gorgeous with their gold-embroidered skull-
caps, brilliant sashes and scarfs—white, blue, aud crimson caftans—
they looked like the fellow-voyagers of Siiidbad. They formed two
rows while the captain, attended by the chief officer, passed between
the ranks, with a searching and haughty countenance. They salaamed
with deepest Oriental humility, man by man, as who should say, " I
trust that the lord of the ship and of my life will graciously abstain
from ordering my execution, this time and were piped down.
Still, warm, breezy, smooth, we steamed away, gaily blowing the
black off our fresh coals, until one morning we made Sokotra or
Socrotra, an island on the east coast of Africa, about 70 miles in length
anil 15 in breadth, and which I understand forms part of the most
powerful of the Arab States, Muscat, and has a population of 5000.
"We kept close into the iand, and the coast presented a most beautiful
appearance.
Another day or two's steaming, in all senses, and running into a
pretty bay, we find ourselves surrounded by boats, aud deafened


by the clamour of eastern tongues. We have reached Aden !
It is these frequent stoppages that make this mail route so enjoyable
as compared to passages in sailing vessels, which seldom even sight
land in their voyages to the Australian Colonies, and even steamers
only put in at one place for coal; I however was more fortunate in
my passage out to Sydney in tbe S. S. Sarah Sands, for after leaving
Liverpool we were a day or two at Cork, three days at the Cape de
Verde islands, five at the Cape of Good Hope, and a week in Melbourne,
unheard of detentions in these days.
As we arrived late in the evening at Aden, and did not want to coal,
Captain Parish determined to start at day-break the following morning,
so we did not think it worth while to go ashore, especially as we shall
have a much better opportunity of seeing the place on our return
voyage, contenting ourselves now with an inspection from the quarter-
deck.
The town which hundreds of years ago was one of the most impor-
tant commercial and maritime cities of the East, is now a miserable
enough place. It stands on the peninsular of Aden, and is overhung
by steep and formidable rocks 1800 feet high, evidently the result of
volcanic action, and which no doubt has given to it the name of " the
Cinder Heap." It, is also sometimes called the " Gibraltar of the East,"
from its general appearance somewhat resembling that noted spot at
the southern extremity of Spain, it is also like it in another respect as
its fortifications are capable of being rendered impregnable.
Aden altogether is an abnormal weird-looking place—a huge crater
with splendid peaks and lofty pinnacles of naked rock. If an enchanter
were to fly suddenly out of the topmost cone, he would cause no
surprise—so congenial are all the surroundings. The eye is startled
by dark metallic-looking, rifted rocks, sharply outlined against the
clear blue sky. Calcined, volcanic, utterlv bare of vegetation, its
occupation by us is calculated to excite extreme amazement in the
breast of the non-strategetical beholder. The best description of the
view of Aden from the sea is given by Mr. W. H. Russell in his
narrative of his mission to India during the Sepoy war.
" Early this morning," he says, " we saw in the distance a line of
crags, like sharks' teeth, rising out of the water. These resolved
themselves - into sharp saw-backed ridges of rock, cliffs, and peaked
mountains, of rich rufons and Vandyke brown, streaked with reds and
blacks as we approached. Surely these are Vulcan's workshops ; here
are the dust and ash-heaps of the cyclopean forges. Not one little
tree, not one blade of grass, not one patch of verdure the size of a man's
hand! The eye seeks the summit of those tumuli in expectation of
the smoke of the subterranean fires, in which those rocks were melted,
and cast out in beds of scoriae and ashes. The blue seas seems
actually to fizz at the base of those tremendous hills of slag, and to
boil and splutter as it heaves against them. High in the air, on the
top of the highest peak, a flag is flying from a lofty staff. The old
union jack is flaunting a welcome to us ! A house, which looks like a
childs Noah's ark, can be detected near the staff. Round by the bluff
and sloping sheets of ashes we glide swiftly; here and there white
straight lines run across the ravines, which seem to topple over us.
These resolve themselves into walls of solid masonry; tunnels and
archways are seen high up amid the crags : a round building of stone-
work, with black specks on the flat roof, looks very like a fort; and,
see! as we round the point and run into the shallow bay bofore us,
there is another, from which the dull black eyes of the cannon are
staring right at us. The bay holds some half-dozen merchantmen, a
flotilla of Arab dhows, an odd-looking steam-sloop, and a small armed


schooner. The cinders seem to have been shovelled away to form this
bay. Before us there is a row of a few white houses, one story high,
thatched with reeds, rising out of ashes and hacked by mountains of
cinders. Here and there the cinders rise into cones over the hay, and
on the top of those cones are perched some half-dozen isolated houses ;
one or two huts on the beach complete the public and piivate bnild-
ings of the port, but the military station is perched in an extinct
volcanic crater about three miles away. Travellers have sought iu
vain to convey to their readers an impression of the extreme aridity
and desolation of Aden."
Aden, the first British garrison the traveller reaches on his way to
India, is a peninsula on the south coast of Arabia, and about a
hundred miles from the entrance to the Bed Sea. It is connected to
the mainland by ail isthmus about 1000 yards broad, and by which
supplies of grass, grain, water, &c., are brought to the station. Aden
is very strongly fortified, and has been called the Gibraltar of the
East. There are three sots of barracks for the troops, one at Steamer
Point, another at the isthmus, and a third in the '• crater," where the
native town is. Each of these places has its own lines of fortification,
those of the point and crater being chiefly for the protection of the
place from an attack by sea and those of the isthmus from one by land.
The garrison at present consists of two batteries of Royal Artillery,
the first battalion of the 2nd Queen's Royals and companies of native
sappers, one of native artillery, and the 7th Regiment Bombay Native
Infantry. A troop of irregular cavalry is shortly to be sent to keep
the roads open on the mainland, in the neighbourhood, The native
population, amounting to upwards of 20,000, consists chiefly of Arabs,
Jews, and Somalis, with a few Parsees, Hindoos, and Mussulmans.
The former are employed on the military works still being carried on,
as well as in bringing supplies from the iuterior, and the latter are the
chief shopkeepers. The trade of Aden has largely increased of late
years, both in the way of exports and imports, and there is but little
doubt that it will rise to considerable importance before long. In the
conduct of the Abyssinian expedition it will undoubtedly be the chief
depot whence stores and provisions will be sent. The civil govern-
ment is carried on by a political resident and his assistants, the former
being that highly popular and distinguished Officer Colonel
Merewether. The military command is exercised by the senior officer,
assisted by a regular staff. There is a large station of the Peninsular
and Oriental Company, as well as of the Messageries Imperiales, and
their steamers are constantly arriving from Suez and the East. Some
of her Majesty's ships occasionally visit the place ; and it is generally
considered that, with a few heavily-armed gun boats, Aden would be
almost impregnable. The presence of some ships of war is, however,
quite necessary for its defence.
We were highly amused by watching the Somali boys, who surround-
ed the ships in their little canoes, diving in the shark-haunted waters
of the Bay for small silver coins thrown by the passengers, which they
invariably recovered. These negro-haired Somalis have Arab features
and are a section of an Abyssinian tribe and are powerful well made
men, their profiles are mostly regular and handsome with high fore-
heads, hut all having woolly hair which they dye red occasionally for
full dress.
We left at sunrise the following morning which I got up to see, and
during the day, the passengers were busy with the letters they had
received at Aden, as well as the numbers of Punch, Graphic, Illustrated
News, &c. which were now in abundance about the decks. At Bp. m.
passed the Straits of Babel-Mandeb (gate of tears) and were fairly in


the Red Sea, half an hour later we passed the small Island of Perim
which is a possession of the English. It is 3$ miles in length and
2£ broad, situated at a distance of about a mile from the Arabian and
13 miles from the African coast. The Island is bare and destitute of
fresh water, which with provisions has to be brought from Aden. It
has an excellent harbour on the S. W. side, capable of accommodating
40 men-of-war, there is also a lighthouse and small port, the only
inhabitants being an officer and a detachment of troops which are
relieved every month from the garrison at Aden. It is important as
commanding the entrance of the Red Sea.
The heat is perceptibly greater. Many comparisons are made by
Indians and Australians as to the relative heat of their respective
climates, and their effect upon the average Briton. To settle this
question it was only necessary to look at the men who had passed
long years in the East or in the great South land. The Australians,
though bronzed, were vigorous and thoroughly English in appearance :
while the Indians were sallow, languid, and listless in all their move-
ments.
For my own part I did not find the warm, moist, breezeless
atmosphere so intolerably oppressive as travellers usually describe it,
yet it mat uncomfortable although the thermometer only stood at
98 degrees. There was however shade, there was repose, cheerful
society, books and ever-recurring marvels of sea and land to pass away
the time, hut above all there were no flics, no mosquitos, those
bloodthirsty emissaries "of the fiend iu hot climates.
It was noticeable that the experienced elders, who had been long in
India, fought very shy of the spirit decanters in these latitudes. Were
strict temperance observed I doubt not that few of the midden deaths
which take place in the Red Sea would occur. As it is, the casnalities
are chiefly among the hard livers, invalids, or those whose constitutions
have been sapped by long residence in the East.
The Red Sea is 1400 miles in extreme length and 230 broad in its
widest part being a comparatively long and narrow sea, the origin of
tlie name has given rise to a variety of conjectures and has never yet
I believe been satisfactorily settled. It is supposed to have been so
called from the name Edom (red) as the mountains of that country are
washed by the waters of the gulf of Akahah ; from the red and purjflo
colouring of the rocks which in some parts border it; from the red
colour sometimes given to the waters by animalcules and sea-weed of
which we saw a good deal in our passage down it; or from the reddish
tinge imparted to them in some places by the subjacent red sandstone
and reddish coral reefs.
From the earliest times the Red Sea has been a great highway of
commerce between India and the Mediterranean lands, and traversed
successively by Egyptians, Phoenicians, Hebrews, and Arabs. It is
first mentioned in the hook of Exodus on the occasion of the passage
of the Israelities which is supposed to have taken place a little south
of the present town of Suez.
The navigation of the Red Sea has always been accounted difficult
and dangerous owing to the number of Islands, shoals, and coral reefs
which line the shores. The coral reefs extend generally in parallel
lines along the coast, they abound in all parts but are especially
frequent on the Arabian side, where the navigation is consequently
very intricate. One morning we passed sonic of these shoals, the
Dadalus, a spot which at one time was very much dreaded by travellers
in the Red Sea, it is a small reef just covered with water having deep
soundings up and around it, and hos right in the track of vessels from
Aden to Suez, there is now a lighthouse erected upon it by the


Depth from top of floor to spar deck
32 „
Tonnage builders measurement
3742
Registered measurement
2092-5
Engine room ...
16-19-5
The engines hare inverted cylinders high and low pressure—surface
condensing.
Diameter of high pressure cylinder
...
C8 inches.
Diameter of low Do. Do.
...
... „
' 54 „
Length of stroke
..
No. of Boilers
... 8
No. of Furnaces
16
Total heating surface
12,000 feet.
Fire grate
320 „
Egyptian government, and anybody requiring solitude I would
strongly recommend tlie bertli of lightkeeper to their notice, it is
350 miles from Suez and near the entrance of the gulf of that name.
The same day we passed the two Islands known as " the brothers,"
so named from their great resemblance to each other, and in order to
distinguish them one has a flagstaff placed upon it.
The temperature of the water in the Red Sea is from 90 to 98.
It contains five ounces of salt to the gallon, while that in the Suez
Canal is nearly seven, ordinary sea-water being about four ounces.
At least so says Mr. P. McGregor the chief engineer of the Mirzapore
from whom I not only obtained a great deal of very useful information,
but also spent many pleasant hours in his agreeable society.
The entrance to the gulf of Suez is romantic and suggestive. The
lofty chains of mountains, both on the Arabian and Egyptian side,
with their numberless spire-like peaks—the wide bare desert with
distant strings of camels—the close vicinity of Horeb and Sinai—
called up the past laden with images of awe and grandeur. On the
north-west shore are the jagged irregular peaks of the mountains of
the Holy Land, softened by the delicate azure-tinted haze—or
coloured like the roof of a Moorish hall, in the crimson and gold of
sunset. Beyond them, lies the Land of Promise. Over this narrow-
ing strait of the Red Sea, passed the desert-worn Hebrews, fainting
with toil, frantic with terror, as the spears of the fast-pursuing
Egyptian host flashed through the dust of the desert, and the low
murmurous roll of chariots came over the waste, faintly out-toned by a
far clash of cymbals.
At last we enter the port of Suez just one day under six weeks from
leaving Sydney, and we shall soon have to bid farewell to the thorough-
going commander and jolly officers of the Mirzapore, before doing so
and while I still have my very intelligent friend Mr. McGregor at my
elbow, I would like to give some particulars of the splendid vessel
which has brought us so safely from Ceylon.
Length between perpendiculars ... ... 378 feet.
Beam ... ... ... ... ... 42*4 „
Nominal horse power 000, but the full power indicated is 3,020
horses.
Consumption of fuel, 30 tons per day.
Speed, 10j knots.
Will accommodate 200 first-class, and 50 sccond-class passengers.
Will carry 2,000 tons of cargo and 840 tons of coal.
Although this vessel is nearly double the size of the Bangalore, she
does not burn much more than half the quantity of coal, so that this
system of using steam first at a high pressure and then in another
cylinder at low, or what is known as the compound principle, is a
wonderful advance in marine engineering.


Out of upwards of a hundred passengers 011 board, we are the only
two bound for Cairo, by far the larger portion will be hurried across
the desert by the night train to catch the mail, and the remainder go
with the vessel through the Canal, as she is homeward bound this trip,
and proceeds direct to Southampton.
I would fain linger a little longer on board, but am keeping the small
steam-launch waiting that the proprietor has so kindly placed at my
disposal for a short run up the Suez Canal, and to inspect the harbour
works, docks, &c.; so after a hurried goodbye to all we bad farewell
to the Mirzapore.
No better general idea could be given of the entrance of the Canal,
with the harbour, docks, and town of Suez, than that conveyed by the
large engraving which was published in the Illustrated London News
of April 17th, 1869 ; but as it would not be very interesting to describe
the great works from an engineering point of view, I will simply con-
tent myself by saying that they greatly interested me, and then pass 011.
We were landed from our little steam-launch at the wharf, immediately
in front of the " Suez Hotel," which is in the town some two miles
from the Port, here we found everything very comfortable, the hotel
(which is a large one) forms a quadrangle, with a courtyard in the
centre ornamented with flowers, fountains, &c., presenting quite a
cool appearance. The rooms are large and lofty, with every comfort,
and glad enough we were to again get into a nice bed-room. The
saloons are fitted up with broad ottomans running all round the walls
of the apartment. The verandah (or balcony rather) overlooks the sea,
and is well supplied with easy chairs, stretched upon one of which I
quietly smoked a cigar hi the evening and let my thoughts wander
back to Australia, and then to the journey yet before us ere reaching
the dear old laud of my birth, who can tell if it will ever be reached ?
An ill-fated countryman of mine, a few years before my visit, had his
run home abruptly cut short in Egypt by the plague. When he heard
from the doctor that he must die, his agony was great. Young, strong,
vigorous but the day before —enamoured of the fair present—regarding
the future as a storehouse of pleasures yet untried—how terrible was
the summons, he turned his face to the wall and wept bitterly, " my
God ! that I should die now! I—to die 1 My poor mother !" He
died the next day.
I was up the following morning and dressed by 5 o'clock, and while
dressing I could see from my bed-room window all the boatmen at
their prayers, each kneeling on a small piece of carpet. I then took a
walk round Suez, down the numerous narrow streets or courts, (having
shops aboutjthe size of watch-boxes) which at that early hour were
crowded with men and women, camels and donkeys. The town itself
is a wretched place but not so bad now I am told as it was some short
time since ; English and French houses, offices, and warehouses have
been erected, owing to the works of the Suez Canal and Railway, as
well as the enormously increasing traffic of the P. & 0. Company.
The surrounding.country is a desert, like Aden it was once of great
importance, when all the trade of Arabia and the East flowed through
it to the Levant, but as I have said, the Canal and Railway works have
done something lately to put a little more life into the place, and the
buildings of the French and English form a striking contrast to those
of the Egyptians.
After breakfast we go to the railway station, and are very soon
steaming across the desert, the sole occupants of the only first-class
carriage to the train. The country through which we are borne (the
valley of the Wanderings) is a succession of sandy wastes alternating
with irregular hillocks, with hero and there a cluster of rude village


dwellings, then a square flat-roofed Turkish cavalry barrack, or a few
trees with a girdle of vivid green. Ismalia has a splendid railway
station, and the town is very picturesque, the scene here on the crowded
platform including Turks, Arabs, French, Spaniards, Greeks, &c., in
their national costume would have made a splendid subject for Frith
to paint.
At the junction station of Zagazig we stopped and had lunch, during
which time our train received great additions, our carriage however
was not interfered with. After a detention of some forty minutes we
are again proceeding on our journey. From this town the beautiful sys-
tem of irrigation adopted in Egypt commences to show itself, the
country being completely intersected by a net-work of canals, of which
it boasts of some 113 navigable, and 756 smaller ones, all watered by
the Nile, and consequently everything after passing Zagazig wears a
greener appearance, forming a strong contrast to the previous portion
of the journey. A couple of hours more steaming and lo ! the domes
and minarets of Cairo. We rush through a suburb, with high-walled
courtyards and gardens, bursting with vegetation. Men are working
water-wheels with the aid of buffaloes, for irrigation. Crowds of people,
Turks and others, pursue their way upon ambling donkeys. Long
rows of trees, umbrageous, gloriously green, refresh our desert-wearied
eyes. Fields of cotton, where the labourers open or close the shallow
water-channels with the foot. Lines of Turkish cavalry horses picket-
ed (there was some military movement in progress). All these things
together meet our gaze, and we reach the terminus full of hope and
joy. Omnibuses drawn by mules awaited us; and, after the usual
scramble, we were driven off to Shepherd's hotel.
Pending dinner, we deposited our luggage and got a wash, when I
thought it would be as well to take advantage of the two hours day-
light yet before us to see something of the city, so out we sauntered ;
visited the public gardens and went along some of the principal streets,
and it would have been well if we had kept to them, but I was anxious
to see something of that labyrinth of courts and alleys teeming with
human life I had so often read of, and therefore without thinking- of
the- consequences, turned off into what a Londoner would call the
" back slums " —well we walked and walked until it was very evident
we had lost ourselves ; it got dark and still we wandered in the hope
that by some lucky chance we should come to some of the main streets
again, where as I knew there are shops where French is spoken, and I
could ask my way, or get a carriage and drive back to the hotel. At
last C got completely knocked up and said it was impossible she
could go much further, but fortunately just as she uttered this, a man
came out of ffcsmall shop, and addressing me in French, enquired if we
had lost ourselves, and kindly offered to lead us into a thoroughfare
where we could get a vehicle of some sort, which offer we gratefully
accepted, and were soon driving back to Shepherd's, where upon
arriving we had some tea and went to bed, thoroughly tired, and having
seen rather more of Cairo than we bargained for. It was near 10 o'clock
when we arrived at the Great Cairo —English hostelry and the people
at the hotel were becoming alarmed for our safety, as we had told them
on leaving that we should be back to dinner, and it is not a very nice
place for strangers to be wandering about in at night, especially the
portion where we had been.
A good night's rest had almost made us forget our little adventure,
and at 6 o'clock the following morning we started for the Pyramids,
having engaged for the trip, a carriage and pair, and a " Dragoman,"
on the previous evening. Just outside the city you cross the Nile by
a tine lattice girder bridge on cylinder piers which has recently been


erected, and the scene from the centre of this bridge looking up and
down the noble river with its boats, palaces, steamers, mosques &c., is
very grand, the road with its beautiful avenue of trees extending the
whole way, passes the decayed town of Fostat, the granaries of Joseph,
seven towers supposed to be connected with the patriarch and the years
of famine, near the Rhodal Island on the Nile. On this island is the
Mctyas or Nilometer of Sultan Ommiad Suleyman; it is a stone
(marble I think) column, in a square well, and divided into 24 cubits,
each of which measure 21,386 inches, whose business it is to mark the
rise of the river, and prophecy whether it will reach only about thirty-
two feet and produce a famine, or whether it will properly flood the
land at forty and produce plenty, or whether it will rise to forty-three
and bring death and destruction to flocks and crops, but how all this
is done I cannot say. On the same island is shown the place where
Phavoah's daughter found Moses in the bulrushes ; near this spot also
the holy family dwelt when they sojourned in Egypt till Herod should
complete his slaughter of the innocents; the same tree it was sup-
posed they rested under when they first arrived was there a few years
ago, but the Viceroy of Egypt sent it as a present to the Empress
Eugenie.
As we journey on, the scenery of the Bible is about us—the customs
of the patriarchs are around us —the same people in the same flowing
robes and in sandals cross our path—the same long trains of stately
camels go and come—the same impressive religious solemnity and
silence rest upon the desert and the mountains that were upon them
in the remote ages of antiquity.
A magic charm surrounds the pyramids as you approach them from
Cairo. They do not look like the handiwork of man, but something
greater than a mountain made by hands. As you draw near they look
smaller, which diminution results perhaps from optical effect. Arrived
at their base they once more astound you by their proportions, and you
remain transfixed with admiration at those immense blocks of stone
poised in the air higher than the cross of Strasbourg Cathedral. We
walked round and examined the largest or that known as " Cheops,"
which is especially surprising, and fill us with wonder as we look upon
that monument, which from the days of Herodotus to the present time
has occupied the pens of genius to describe. It is 486 feet 3 inches
in height, with a base 764 feet on each side, or in other words it is
higher than St. Paul's cathedral, and stands on an area the size of
Lincoln's Inn Fields. I paid an Arab a rupee to run to tbe top and
down again as fast as he could, and he performed the feat in eight
minutes.
In a recent work called " Our inheritance in the Great Pyramid,"
Mr. Piazzi Smyth the Astronomer Boyal for Scotland who is the author,
appears to think that the great pyramid is a pre-historic monument of
an eminently grand and pure conception, and which though in Egypt
is not of Egypt. That it is a standard of weights and measures, a
meterological centre, and that all the other pyramids were coined from
it by the Egyptians to be employed as sepulchres. His arguments
and long array of facts and figures in support of the theory are very
wonderful. That its site is exactly at the geographical centre of the
land surface of the whole World. That the length of its sides at the
base is the ten millionth of the earth's diameter. That it shows also
the sun's true distance from this globe. That the sides face astron-
omically due N. S. E. and W. That its position is exactly at the apex
of the angle formed by the delta-land of Egypt. The earth's density,
the squaring of the circle, and numberless other curious facts are all
explained according to Mr. Smyth, by this wonderful edifice. Mr.


Smyth however only endeavours to prove what had long been the theory
of another writer on the subject, Mr. John Taylor, who believed " t-liat
the great pyramid is the one necessarily-material centre from which
those practical things, weights and measures, in a primeval age
somewhere between the time of Noah and Abraham, take whatever
chronology you will, were divinely distributed to certain people and
tongues, and carried with the utmost care from land to land for special
purposes of some grand future manifestation, which is yet to make its
appearance on the stage of human history."
The pyramids are built of large limestone blocks, and two were
originally covered with a casing of smooth, polished dense white lime-
stone, each stone being 5 ft. in height, 8 ft. in breadth, and a length
of 12 ft., having joints no thicker than silver paper filled with intersti-
tial cement. The Oiner pyramid was cased with red granite, of which
also is the king's chamber in the great pyramid lined with.
We then went and had a look at the famous sphinx, and a place
known as the temple of the sphinx. The sphinx itself is, (according
to one authority) 172 feet 6 inches long, 56 high, and 102 feet round
the head, carved out of one solid block of stone harder than any iron.
The block originally must have been nearly as large as our Exhibition
building (Sydney) before they commenced, and it must have been
prodigious labour the carving of it so elegantly, so symmetrically, and
so faultlessly. They say it took one hundred years of patient toil to
perform, which I can readily believe, as the stone is so hard that figures
cut in it, remain sharp and unmarred after exposure to the weather
for two or three thousand years. There is a small palace near the
pyramids, built by the Pacha merely to accommodate the Prince and
Princess of Wales when they were here for a day or two, and it is now
empty, and stands as a monument of wasteful expenditure.
We were the only party at the pyramids that day, very few Europeans
being in Cairo at this season of the year, (August) and were consequent-
ly surrounded by a whole tribe of Arabs begging of us to give them
" backsheesh," and this annoyance took somewhat from the pleasure
of the visit, but after all, as Thackeray says, it is something to have
seen the Nile, and these old majestical, mystical, and familiar looking
edifices the pyramids.
We got back to our hotel by 12 o'clock, and spent the rest of the
day in roaming about the town. Cairo is a most interesting and
beautiful city, situated on a plain at the foot of a mountain, and has a
population of about 400,000, to describe it would, at least to me, be
impossible. The citadel rising above the lofty buildings, appears to
issue forth from a grove of the richest foliage, and presents a most
imposing appearance. A multitude of picturesque structures and
ornaments strike the eye as you pass through the streets, Arabesques
and marble fountains, and elegant tapering minarets shoot up at every
corner into the blue sky. Cairo they say has 300 mosques, 20 at least,
of which, are beautiful as works of art, and competent judges agree
that this city is the most original in character of all the eastern towns,
no place having retained such primitive unaltered manners, none such
an astonishing mixture of African and Asiatic races.
Although by far the larger proportion of the streets are narrow and
unpaved, yet the principal thoroughfares are well laid out, macadamized,
and have trees growing along the edges of the pavement. The public
gardens which are lovely by day, become, when lit up at night, a perfect
fairy scene ; there are also some fine bazaars, squares, and fountains ;
the streets are crowded with camels and donkeys, and you will see as
fine carriages and horses here as in any city of Europe. There are
many excellent hotels, but the Oriental Company's " New Hotel"


which I at first took for a palace, is the finest in Egypt, it faces the
gardens of Ezbekieth, and has only just been opened to the public,
its fine stone fai;ade is 400 feet in length.
Another day we again engaged the carriage and pair, and with our
dragoman on the box, and another fellow to run before us to clear the
way by yelling at everyone, we started off to pay a visit to the
Egyptian, Turkish, and French bazaars, each " bazaar " being a series
of narrow streets scarcely wide enough to allow us to pass along them,
some of these streets are two miles in length and teeming with life.
Having thoroughly " done " these we made for the citadel, our path
being on a gradually rising winding road, far above the level of the
city, until at length we stood at the outer gate of the marble-paved
courtyard of the Mosque. There, an attendant brought us slippers,
which we tied over our unbelieving boots ; so might we not profane
the holy place. Then we strode through the noble courtyard, sur-
rounded by lofty pillars, of the delicate golden-veined marble of which
the whole edifice is built. The Mosque itself is a grand lofty structure,
rich with delicate ornament. You enter a vast hall, in the centre of
which rises a dome of majestic height and proportion. The sides,
as distinct from the centre of the roof, are also domes, but subordinated
to the central one, both in size and ornament. You gaze around, and
find yourself standing in a forest of colonnades—each pillar a wonder
in size, material, and tracery. Magnificent chandeliers, in all forms
of gold and crystal, hung from the roof. A richly ornate curtained
enclosure protects from vulgar gaze the ladies of the seraglio. A
shrine, to use the language of cathedrals, upon which the highest con-
ceptions of Oriental art have been lavished, holds the relics of the
great Caliph.
Hard by, was the citadel, in the courtyard of which the treacherous
slaughter of the Mamelukes —by the old tiger, Mehement Ali —was
effected. Perfectly level, having the Mosque on one side, the Palace
on the other, and the Citadel in the rear, it lies cpen towards the city
and the Pyramids. A low battlement runs round the open portion,
beneath which was a drop of sixty feet.
The view, in the clear cold morning, was wide and varied. Beneath
us lay Cairo, with its flat-roofed houses, into which, Asmodeus like, it
seemed as if you could peep, beholding their inner life. Westward
stood the Pyramids —calm, vast unchanged amid the unchanged desert.
Northward, to the furthest limit of vision, stretched the broad vallev of
the Nile, with the mighty river, the Life of Egypt, winding through
the rice-fields as in the olden Pliaroah days. Eastward and south,
camels are sailing in long streaming, swaying files over the Desert
Ocean. We marked, as the sun lighted up, the brilliant vegetation,
the wondrous power of irrigation—the magical change from the bare
red sands of the Desert to the vivid verdure of the suburbs. Life is
astir with the first dawn in the East. AVater-wheels were revolving.
Asses were drawing water from deep wells, as in the days of Abraham.
Rows of heavy-foliaged trees gladdened the eyes. The murmur of a
great population was faintly audible; the low hum of which was in
harmony with the clear golden eastern morn. All told of the ancient
days—the elder race of Earth. Of the first recorded acts done upon
its surface, this had been the theatre. Among the earliest actors in
the world's grandest tragedies were the people upon whom we now
gazed.
It was difficult to realise that the pavement upon which we strolled,
asking flippant questions, had been slippery with the blood of the
murdered soldiery. Through yonder gateway rode the Mameluke
band, jesting and heedless, with their richest arms, on then- finest


horses. The gates close quietly behind them. The sound is ominous
in the ears of the elder Beys. A time of mirth and laughter, a time of
doubt and undefined dread, as none appears to receive them—and
the roll of musketry—the roar of artillery—the emptied saddles —the
screams of wounded horses, tell the tale of the Pacha's death-feast!
They are trapped and doomed. A momentary survey of the massive
walls —the unyielding gates —the precipice sheer and stark with piled
rocks at its base —brings the stoicism of despair to the boldest, the
most sanguine, the most ruse of the band. Oh ! for one wild charge !
one shout, as each man spurred steed and lifted sword for the last
time, were the armies of the world in front that day I That were to
die as became the wild bright chivalry of Egypt!
It may not be. A verse from the Koran —a prayer to Allah —and
each man yet unwounded, sits calmly on his charger, waiting for that
death-shot which has been recorded in the book where is written the
hour of his birth—the hour and mode of his death. The white-
bearded chief, as " Gaillard " this morning as the youngest soldier of
the troop—as quick with the jereed, still unmatched with the scimeter
—mark how grandly he reins his excited charger, and looks in the face
of Death ! He knows that the pitiless Pacha sits even NOW, watching,
and unmoved! There is no change in the still face and awful eyes
which have so long looked Upop blood and doom. Nothing save a con-
traction of the hand shews that Mehemet Ali is an eye-witness of the
death agonies of his own proud band, whom he has a hundred times
bidden to feast and foray. Has he dreams ? Will he ever see in
them the reproachful gaze of old Achmet BeJ, as for one moment his
eyes turn towards the spot where the Tiger Pacha sits in shielded
safety—as if they could pierce through wall and lattice—and the next,
horse and rider form one crushed, moaning, gore-stained mass.
But Selim Bey, the youngest, the most reckless of that reckless
soldiery —the show-horseman and swordsman of his troop—must ho
die, like a trapped jackal ? His eye blazes'-at every fresh volley, as
he spurs up to the very muzzles of the concealed batteries, and dares
the cowards to come within the sweep of the Mameluke sabre. "No
shot has power to harm HIM," says the grim veterans, as they smile
even now, noting to each other the gallant bearing of the darling of
the band. Less and less grows the haughty group, fuller and deeper
swells the red plashing tide. Selim Bey looks long and fondly on the
mighty river—on the dark and gloomy relics of Eld—at the few palm
trees by the desert border, marking the spot dearest to his heart —and
then, he takes the good horse by the head, gives the well-known shout
and sends him straight at the battlement, not far from the western
angle. Over goes the " White Hawk," spreading out his legs as if
was going to clear Grand Cairo. The White Hawk, pride and tradition
of the Arreyzah—-but he will never snuff the free desert breeze more —
he lies on the rocks beneath the fearful leap, mangled and motionless.
Yet he has fallen fair. He has saved his master, who has yet strength
to crawl to the nearest house, and gain one of the many hiding places
a Cairene suburb affords. Lost for a time to the world —most of all,
to the bloody Pacha.' The day is done. Biver and Pyramid, City
and Desert, lie dim in the darkening eve. The artillery is silent.
Where are the Mamelukes ? A ghastly heap—" rider and steed in one
red burial blent," alone shows where that haughty historic baud, gay
with banners and splendid with arms, rode in with the rising sun.
We came to the end cf our admirations at last and then drove back
to the hotel, having done quite enough sight-seeing for one day.
Another day or two of rambling in this dear delightful old Cairo,
and we one morning at 8 o'clock left by express train for Alexandria,


we crossed the Nile (I think three times) by fine iron bridges, and at
each crossing place there appeared a iarge town, and consequently
were first-class stations. The country nearly the whole way (130
miles) is very fertile and dotted over with Arab villages. The canals
by which this part of Egypt is intersected, vary in width from 10 to
100 feet, and upon the larger, a great number of boats are employed in
carrying passengers and produce. As it rains only once or twice in
the year, what a vast quantity of water must be brought down the Nile
to irrigate the thousands of square miles of country it does by means
of these canals !
Crowds of people were travelling—on foot, or on camels, mules, asses
—along the line of road that runs parallel to the railway. We saw
many a " Holy Family," or their exact models, by the wayside. The
man leading an ass, upon which sat a woman holding a babe, with many
such like groups, all of which however passed away very soon, as we
ran into the station at Alexandria at 12 30, and went direct to the
Hotel Abliat.
After getting a good wash, as we were completely smothered with
dust in the train, we started for a cruise round the town, calling at
the offices of the P. & O. Company, where we learned that there would
not be a steamer for Bi indisi under six days, so that we should have
to make ourselves comfortable for a week, at least, in the city of
Hypatia.
The first thing we did in the way of sight-seeing was the catacombs.
They begin at the extremity of the old city, and extend some distance
along the coast, forming the Necropolis or city of the dead. The
excavation shown is from 30 to 40 feet wide, and 200 feet long,
25 deep, and is terminated by gentle declivities at each end. One
of the openings we entered. Within there are no mummies, but the
places which they occupied and the order in which they were ranged
is still clearly to he seen. Niches 20 inches square, sunk six feet
horizontally narrowed at the bottom, and separated from each other
by partitions in the rock —for the whole affair is cut out of the solid
rock—seven or eight inches thick, divided into checkers the two walls
of this subterranean vault.
Near to this excavation von get a fine view of the harbour and city
of Alexandria, as well as Said Pacha's Palace, and on your way out to
it you pass the racecourse and grand stand, and the beautiful new
Exchange buildings.
Of course we went to look at Pompey's Pillar, which is situated about
a mile from the southern gate. It is built of red granite, the capital
which is corintliian with palm leaves, and not indented is nine feet
high; the shaft and upper member of the base are of one piece,
seventy-three feet long and nine feet six inches diameter. The base
is a square of about 15 feet on each side, and made of marble." It is
beautifully polished but shivered a little on the weather side. The
total height is 98 ft. 9 inches. Nothing can equal the majesty of this
monument ; seen at a distance it overtops the town and serves as a
signal or mark for ships. Pompey's Pillar I am told is an erroneous
appellation as it was erected in honour of Emperor Diocletian, who is
styled in the inscription on it as the " invincible." From the elevated
ground upon which Pompey's Pillar stands you look down over the
great cemetery with its thousands of tombs. It is unfenced and very
badly kept.
One day we took a drive along the banks of the Grand Canal, upon
which we saw an immense number, and of all sizes, of boats for carry-
ing passengers and produce. On either side of the water arc numerous
villas, Palaces, &c., and at a distance of about two miles from town


a-e the public gardens, in which we took a stroll. We returned by a
different route, passing through the fortifications, and calling ou our
way to see Cleopatra's needle, or rather needles, as there are two
obelisks of that name, one of which is lying down and nearly buried in
sand, this was presented by Mehemit Ali to England, but not con-
sidered it would appear worth the expense of removal; the other
stands in a mason's yard, or I should rather say a mason has formed
his yard round the obelisk. It matched the one given to Fiance which
is now in Paris; it i 9 in one piece of Thebac stone and covered with
hieroglyphics, is about sixty feet high by seven square and supposed
to have once decorated the Palace of Ptolemies.
We spent an afternoon in visiting Ramie some five miles from town.
It is considered the Brighton of Egypt, and is reached by a short
railway line running along the coast, which is worked by locomotives
in the day and by horses at night, trains running every hour throughout
the day. All along the line are pretty villa residences facing the sea,
and to these pleasant retreats the business men of the city and others
retire in the evening to enjoy the sea breeze and a bath.
Few cities perhaps present more attractive features to the traveller
than this, whiih was founded by Alexander the Great, little however
of the ancient capital of Lower Egypt now remains, once you may say
that it was at the head of the civilised world for learning, having
formerly possessed a library of some 700,000 vols, which were destroyed
when Ca;sar was besieged in the Greek quarter. There are however
several monuments of its former greatness; the front portico of
Ceesar's palace, a few porphyry pillars, the two obelisks I have already
mentioned, and near the gates of Resella are five columns of marble,
on the place formerly occupied by the porticos of the Gymnasium,
Pompey's Pillar, and the Catacombs.
The present city stands on a peninsular situated between the two
ports, and has all the appearance of a large mercantile town, the popu-
lation being about 120,000. The country about is completely destitute
of water, and Alexandria is supplied by a canal conveying it from the
Nile. Many of the streets are wide, clean, and lined with rows of
handsome houses, there is also a splendid square, but after all, as in
the case of Cairo it is the ever crowded thoroughfares that presents
the greatest novelty to the stranger, the variety of costume and its
picturesque character, the ridiculous sight of thousands of splendid
looking fellows in turbans, long flowing robes and beards, mounted on
diminutive donkeys—veiled women —camels —the curious shops—the
splendid equipages of Pashas, merchants &c., all serve to form a scene
which to me is better worth seeing than all the monuments.
We did not entirely confine our wanderings to daylight, but on one
or two occasions sallied forth in the.cool evenings and visited the
principal cafes of the city, one down by the water's edge at the
extremity of a street leading off the grand square, was a delightful spot,
the large glass pavilion being washed on three sides by the sea upon
which the moon was shining brightly ; there was a splendid band, lady
and gentlemen singers and performers giving us beautiful music as we
sat with hundred of others at small round marble top tables sipping
coffee.
We had during our stay in Alexandria some very agreeable people
with us at the Hotel Abbat. Sir William and Lady Herschel, who
were fellow passengers of ours from Ceylon, and General Reynolds an
American Officer, now in the Egyptian service, who very kindly invited
us out to his quarters at the Palace Gabbara.
I don't think I have much sentiment, poetry and all that sort of
thing in me ; yet at times during our fortnight's stay in Egypt, I must


confess to feeling something akin to it, when I considered that I was
in that wondrous, mysterious land, one of the countries most early
civilised on earth ; certainly no other possesses so long a history, and
its monuments are unique in solemn grandeur and as historic evidences.
Cheops, Sesostris, the Shepherd Kings, Joseph, the Virgin and Saviour,
Cfesar, Alexander, Pompey, the Ptolemies, the early Hermits, the
Mamelukes, pass across our vision like Banquo's shadowy train. I
therefore received a great shock when on the deck of the P. & O.
Company's Steamer Malta, the vessel that was to hear us away from
this ancient land; I heard a young gentleman remark, that by far
the finest thing he had seen in Egypt was— DUST.
lONIAN ISLANDS, BRINDISI, NAPLES, POMPEII, ROME, FLORENCE, MILAN,
TURIN, PARIS, LONDON.
At sea once more, and this time on the bright blue waters of the
Mediterranean. It is beautiful weather as we steam gaily along, pas-
sing close, on the following day, to the island of Candia; mentioned I
think in Faulkner's poem of " The Shipwreck." Candia is 160 miles
long, and its breadth varies from 6to 35 miles. Its history commences
with Greek Mythology, and historians and poets say that it was
governed by its own kings ; among whom were Saturn, Jupiter, and
Minos, 1300 years before Christ; at present I believe it belongs to the
Sultan of Turkey. According to Homer, Candia had once 90 cities,
but now there are hut three towns of any importance, and the popula-
tion of the island is only 200,000. We pass on along the coast of
Greece, cross the Bay of Naverino where the famous naval engagement
was fought, keeping close in to the shores of Zante, an island 24 miles
long by 12 broad, and called in an Italian proverb " the flower of the
Levant." And then comes Cephalonia, the largest of the seven loniau
islands, being 30 miles in length, with a population of 72,000, it was
called, by Homer, Samos. All these islands are very mountainous,
their prevailing tints are grey, and brown approaching to red; little
white villages surrounded by trees nestle in the valleys, or roost upon
the tops of the hills.
At last one line morning I wake up and find we are in sight of Italy,
and immediately off the town of Otranto, which during the latter
period of the Roman Empire, and all through the middle ages was one
of the chief ports of Italy, in the Adriatic, whence passengers took ship
to Greece having in this respect supplanted the famous Brundisiurn of
early times. In 1480 it was taken by the Turks, and at this time it
was a flourishing city of 20,000 inhabitants, but it has long been in
a decaying condition principally on account of Malaria. Otranto
possesses a castle and cathedral, both of which we could plainly see as
we steamed past. Soon after we enter the port of Brindisi, having
performed the passage from Alexandria 825 miles, in little less than
75 hours.
The Malta got alongside the wharf just opposite the great East
India hotel at 12 o'clock, when we immediately went ashore and were
marched over to the custom house with our luggage, which having got
passed we drove to the railway station and deposited our " traps " with
the official there.
Having three hours before us we made the most of our time, there
is now very little to be seen in the ancient Brundisiurn ; two splendid
marble columns mark the terminus of the Appian way, one of these is


nearly perfect and lias a beautifully carved capital, but of the other
very little remains ; there are several curious old Roman works, more
especially the castle, and these together with the modern railway
station are about all worthy of notice. It is a place of great antiquity.
267 B.C. it was taken from the Sallentines by the Romans who some
20 years later established a colony here. The town paitly owing to
fertility of the country, but chiefly on account of its excellent port —■
consisting of an inner and outer harbour, the former perfectly land-
locked and capable of containing a large fleet, and of easy defence on
account of its narrow entrance, and the latter also very well sheltered
• —rapidly increased in wealth and importance. It soon became the
principal naval station of the Romans in the Adriatic. In 230 B.C.
Brindisi was the starting place of the Roman troops that took part in
the first Illyrian war; and from this point the Romans nearly always
directed subsequent wars with Macedonia, Greece, and Asia, and when
the Roman power had been finally established in the Adriatic, Brindisi
became a city second to none of South Italy in commercial importance.
Horace also acccompanied Antony in a hostile movement on Brindisi
in 41 8.C., and has made the journey the subject of one of his satires.
Virgil died here in 1!) B.C. on his return from Greece. The city
retained its importance until the fall of the Empire but it suffered
greatly in the wars that followed. When the Normans became
possessed of it in the lltli century, the crusaders made it their chief
port for embarkation to the Holy Land. Now the glory of it is utterly
gone although it appears to be again waking up since the Mail
Steamers call there, and the harbour of late has been greatly improved.
In the cathedral Emperor Frederick was married to Zolanda in 122b,
and the castle was commenced in Frederick 11, and finished in
Charles the V's time.
We dined in the refreshment room of the railway stations and left
by the 340 p.m. train for Foggia en route for Naples. It is a well
constructed line of railway with all its intermediate stations made to
one size and pattern, the country passed through is very pretty, miles
and miles of olive plantations, vineyards &c., with occasional glimpses
of the Adriatic sea. At 945 p.m. we ran into the station at Foggia
and here found that we should not be able to proceed on our journey
for at least two hours in consequence of a train with a large quantity
of troops being on the road (single line) between this and Naples.
We therefore after inspecting this fine junction station by gas light,
and taking some refreshment in the large magnificently and elaborately
decorated cafe attached, took a look round the town which is
supposed to have been built from the ruins of the ancient Arpi, and was
a favourite residence of the Emperor Frederick 11, and here died
his wife Isabella, daughter of the English King John. It was also for
some time the residence of Ferdinand I and his court, when it ranked
as the second city of the kingdom. It is a well built town with
spacious streets, the cathedral a Gothic building originally, was
partially destroyed by an earthquake in 1731, and afterwards rebuilt in
a different style. The town has a population now of 24,000.
At midnight we were again on the move, and I woke up at daybreak
to find we were at the Benevento Station, the highest point on the
dividing range. I may mention in passing, that this town is the
ancient Beneventum, and the capital of the delegation of the same
name. It is a place of very great antiquity, has a fine old cathedral,
some noteworthy churches, and a magnificent arch, erected in honour
of the Emperor Trajan, which with the exception of that at Ancona, is
they say, the best preserved specimen of Roman architecture in Italy.
Descending on the western side towards Naples, the country passed


through is of a very different character to that of yesterday, mountains
now appear on all sides, dotted over with villages, some of which are
so situated as to puzzle you how it was possible for any human being
to get to them except by the aid of a balloon; vineyards, streams,
torrents and lovely valleys meet you at every turn in the road until
you arrive at " the city of the Sirens," which we did at 8 30 a.m., being
an hour and a half beyond the proper time.
We installed ourselves at the Hotel D'Europe, (by the way not a
very good one) and after a bath and breakfast, at it we went sight
seeing.
The celebrated theatre of San Carlo, which they say, with the excep-
tion of that at Milan, is the largest in Europe ; was just then closed to
the public, but being desirous of seeing the interior we presented our-
selves at the doors, and were politely shown over it by one of the atten-
dants. I was not very much impressed at the time with its enormous
size, and it was not until I had refreshed my memory in London with
the sight of Covent Garden and Drury Lane, that I could see the great
difference between them. These kind of places also look very different
in the day time to what they do lit up at night.
We then visited the church of San Francisco de Paola, a magnificent
place constructed principally of marble. The open space in front of
this church is the Largo del Palazzo, in which are the two fine statues
of Charles the Hf. and Ferdinand the I. The next in order on our
list of visits came the Museum, which is unique, especially in its trea-
sures of ancient art; it possesses besides a picture gallery, frescoes,
mosaics, gold and silver ornaments, etruscan vases, &c., discovered in
the excavations of Pompeii and Herculaneam. Annexed is the Royal
Library, containing 250,000 volumes. The principal pictures are
Titian's portrait of Pope Paul the 111. and Phillip the 11. of Spain,
Domenicheno's Guardian Angel, Raphael's Madonna col' divine amore,
Annibal Carracci's dead Christ, and Hercules, Ribora's St. Jerome,
Claude Lorraine's paysage with the nymph Egeria.
We walked up to an elevated portion of the city, towards the castle
of St. Elmo, (now used as a prison) from which we obtained a glorious
view of Naples, Vesuvius, the Bay, Castel dell' Ovo, and the splendid
neighbourhood of the city.
How dazzlingly bright in the sunshine is that vast multitude of
white houses beneath us, and how pleasingly suggestive of cleanliness
and a cleanly people ; yet the truth is that all this fair beauty is but
the decent outer garment of poverty and corruption. " 'Tis distance "
here that " lends enchantment to the view," for the real nature of the
place is but too apparent on a closer inspection, for it is perhaps the
dirtiest town in Italy.
We wound up the day with a drive in an open carriage, and while
passing through a crowded thoroughfare a man jumped on the step
next to C and snatched her watch and chain from her side before
even I knew of it, and disappeared in the crowd. We immediately
drove to the Prefect of Police, and made a declaration before that
officer, but never expect to see the things again. They informed us,
by way of consolation, at the hotel, that it was the fourth case of the
kind within a week or two. It is a circumstance which will certainly
cause us to remember our first day in Naples.
On another day we paid a visit to the Palazzo Reale, which was
built in 1600, and is a favourite residence of the present king. The
magnificent grand staircase constructed entirely of white marble, the
gorgeously fitted up ball-room, the beautiful pictures of Raphael,
Holbein and Rembrandt, the painted ceilings, the cradle of the young
Princes made with pearl, set with cameos, and supported on an elabr.r-


ately carved stand, —the throne-room —terraces —gardens —the private
theatre, which is as large as the Victoria in Sydney—the grand dining-
room, as well as the hundreds of other beautifully furnished apartments,
the stables and coach house, in which I counted 25 cariiages—all
made this palace a sight well worth seeing.
There are some 300 churches in Naples, and during our stay we
visited many of them besides that of San Francisco de Paola, already
referred to, among the principal was Santa Chiara or the second
cathedral, one of the finest in the city containing the tombs of the
kings; St. Maria del Carmino, San Fileppo Neri, Gesu Nuovo bearing
the same architecture as that of St. Peter's of Rome, and many others,
nearly all of them being adorned with pictures of the first masters,
fine sculpture, or elaborate ornamentation.
We of course spent a day at Pompeii. The railway (Strade Farrate
Napoli e Eboli) skirts the shores of the bay of Naples, and what a
hay it is ! no pen can describe it, there are no great rolling breakers,
but everything is as calm and smooth as a fish-pond. In about an
hour we arrived at the station, and in a few minutes more we were
walking the streets of the once buried city. No—Pompeii is no longer
a buried city; it is a city of hundreds and hundreds of roofless houses,
and a tangled maze of streets where one could easily get lost without
a guide, and have to sleep in some ghostly palace that had known no
living tenant since that awful November night, eighteen centuries ago.
In 63 A.D. it was greatly damaged by an earthquake, and in 79 A.D.
occurred that terrific eruption of Vesuvius, which in one day over-
whelmed it in ruin. In 1755 some excavations were made and these
operations have been continued up to the present time. A visit to this
interesting city certainly gives you a more perfect insight into the
mariners of the ancient civilized world than could otherwise be
obtained. Photographs and hundreds of writers have made everyone
familiar with its present general appearance, and I need therefore only
say that it was a scene I shall never forget. Some of the houses they
do not permit ladies to enter, and these places with their walls covered
with distrusting pictures, do not speak well for the morals of the time
in which they were built.
As it so truly and perfectly describes all we saw and felt on the
occasion of our visit, I will take a quotation from Mark Twain.
" It created a curious feeling, wandering as we did through this old
silent city of the dead—lounging through utterly deserted streets
where thousands and thousands of human beings once bought and
sold, aud walked and rode, and made the place resound with the noise
and confusion of traffic and pleasure."
"We saw the skeleton of a man, who was found in one of the
Pompeiian houses, with ten pieces of gold in one hand, and a large key
in the other. He had seized his money and started towards the door,
but the fiery tempest caught him at the very threshold, and he sank
down and died. One more minute of precious time would have saved
him. We also saw the skeletons of a man, a woman, and two young
girls. The woman had her hands spread wide apart as if in mortal
terror, and I imagined I could trace upon her shapeless face, something
of the expression of wild despair that distorted it when the heavens
rained fire in these streets, so many ages ago. The girls and the man
lay with their faces up on their arm, as if they had tried to shield
them from the enveloping cinders. In one apartment eighteen
skeletons were found, all in sitting postures, and blackened places on
the walls still mark their shapes and show their attitudes, like shadows.
One of them, a woman, still wore upon her skeleton throat a necklace
with the name engraved upon it—Julie de Diomede."


" But perhaps the most poetical thing Pompeii has yielded to modem
research was the grand figure of a Roman soldier, clad in complete
armour ; who true to his duty, true to his proud name of a soldier of
Rome, and full of the stern courage which had given to that name its
glory, stood to his post by the city gate, erect and unflinching, till the hell
that raged around him burned out the dauntless spirit it could not conquer.'
"We never read of Pompeii hut we think of that soldier; we cannot
write of Pompeii without the natural impulse to grant to him the
mention he so well deserves. Let us remember he was a soldier —not
a policeman —and so, praise him. Being a soldier he stayed —because
the warrior instinct forbade him to fly. Had he been a policeman he
would have stayed, also —because he would have been asleep."
Compare the cheerful life and the sunshine of this day, with the
horrors the younger Pliny saw here, the 9th November, A. D. 79.
When he was so bravely striving to remove his mother out of the reach
of harm, while she begged him, with all a mother's unselfishness, to
leave her to perish, and save himself.
" By this time the murky darkness had so increased that one might
have believed himself abroad in a black and moonless night, or in a
chamber where all the lights had been extinguished. On every hand
Was heard the complaints of women, the wailing of children, and the
cries of men. One called his father, another his son, and another his
wife, and only by their voices could they know each other. Many in
their despair begged that death would come and end their distress.
Some implored the gods to succour them, and some believed this night
was the last, the eternal night that would engulf the universe. Even
so it seemed to me—and I consoled myself for the coming death with
the reflection ; Behold the world is passing away."
Pompeii is under the care and management of the government, but
what takes off somewhat from the romance of the visit to it, is your
having to pay at a gate for admission, as though you were going into
the Zoological gardens in London. A guide is also sent with you, hut
his fee is included in the charge for entry. There is an hotel between
the railway station (fancy a railway station at Pompeii 1) and the
entrance gates to the city, and to this, we being very tired, adjourned
to rest with that lovely view of the Bay before us; and notwithstanding
we had been so recently treading such classical ground, gazing on the
tombs of Aricius, Scaurus, Tyche, Quietus, &0., and standing in the
Forum, the Temple of Yenus, the house of the Faun, &c., yet I could
not feel quite right until I had drank a bottle of English beer.
On getting back to Naples we found the whole city illuminated in
honour of the nativity of the Virgin, which is the greatest festival of
the year. So having dined, we took a carriage and drove about the
town for a couple of hours ; the streets were all thronged with people,
and altogether presented a most exciting scene.
On Sunday we took a walk during the morning in the public gardens,
I think called Largo del Castello, and had a look at all the statues and
fountains which adorn it. We then walked on to the grotto of Posilip-
po, a tunnel of half a mile in length, cut through the solid rock in
ancient times; made in order to connect two portions of the city in a
similar manner as the Argyle Cut does in Sydney. In the middle of
this tunnel they call a " grotto," and excavated out of the rock is a
small chapel dedicated to the virgin.
In our wanderings about the city we came across a very beautiful
white marble column, having a bronze figure of Italy at the top, and
four marble lions at the base ; the Rons although all in different atti-
tudes, do not mar in any way the general effect. It is altogether a
splendid work of art.


We went into several churches (luring the celebration of mass, in
one we remained to listen to a sermon by a very eloquent preacher.
Visited the railway station, which although not I think so large as that
at Foggia, has still more superb waiting rooms, decorated with
frescoes, marble columns, gilding, velvet covered ottomans, &c. On
Sunday evening the public gardens were all beautifully lighted up, and
a splendid band was playing to thousands of people, which together
with the crystal palace —soit of cafe on the grounds, fountains, and
statues gave the whole scene quite a fairy-land appearance.
We spent another day or two in a general inspection of the city and
suburbs. Naples is built partly at the base and partly on the slopes of
two crescent-shaped acclivities and has a population of 447,000, so that
it may he considered the largest city in Italy at the present time as
Rome now does not exceed 250,000. The wonderful beauty of the
site and of the surrounding prospect, the delicious softness of the
climate, and the clear atmosphere makes it famed among the cities of
the world. The public buildings of Naples are both numerous and
grand, but are devoid of architectural symmetry in consequence of the
antiquity of their origin and the irregularity of their site. Many of
the old streets are paved with lava and inconveniently narrow, the
houses in these quarters are of great height and appear to overhang
the narrow tortuous causeways beneath. The modern streets, however,
are spacious and splendid.
On leaving Naples the country passed through between that city
and Rome is mountainous, but most charmingly beautiful, dotted over
with towns, villages, villas, castles and monastries. We stop for a
few minutes at Caserta and get a view of the vast palace with its pretty
and well adorned gardens. We also stop a few minutes at Capua and
again three or four miles further on at Santa Maria de Capua, which
is on the site of the ancient city so noted in the history of Hannibal,
and once the rival of Rome. Then at Ceprano once the frontier station
of the Papal States, and so on until we got to Rome where we arrived
at 840 p.m. having been about eleven hours.on tlie journey.
We put up at tlie hotel Anglo-Americafe, No. 128, Via Frattina
situated between the Corso and La place d'Espagne and are announced
in the papers the following day among " fashionable arrivals." I
suppose the first place everybody visits on arriving in Rome, is
St. Peter's, at all events we did. Anything more sublimely grand than
this Basilica of Christendom cannot be conceived, it perfectly
overawes one with its vastness, its elaborate ornamentation and noble
proportions. There are 47 altars and the amount that some of these
cost would be sufficient to build two or three cathedrals, sucli as that
in Sydney. There are 380 statues, besides monuments, mosaics &c.
Porphyry and every kind of marble is used in its construction.
St. Peter's stands on a slight acclivity. It is built in the form of a
Latin cross, the nave being 607 feet in length and the transept 444.
The east front is 396 feet wide and 160 feet high, while the pillars
composing it are each 88 feet high, and diameter. The height of
the dome from the pavement to the top of the cross in 448 feet. The
Baldachino of gilt bronze by Bernini is a wonderful work supported by
four composite columns of upwards of 90 feet in height. In front of
the church there is a large piazza and fountains. The Cathedral
occupies the place of Nero's circus and is erected on the spot where
St. Peter was martyed. It occupied a period of 176 years in building,
and has taken 350 years to perfect. It cost .£10,000,000. It covers
8 English acres ; and is kept in repair at a cost of £6300 per annum.
It was planned by Bramante and carried on by Raphael and Michael
Angeio and in 1626 under Urban VIII. The magnitude of St. Peter's


can never be justly estimated on a first inspection, we therefore went
several times and on one occasion ascended to the roof, dome and
Cupola which certainly gives you a better idea of its vastness, and
fiom the summit there is a splendid view over the Campania, the hills
of Tivoli and Tusculum, Rome and the sea.
Among other curiosities in St. Peter's, we saw the confessional, where
the body of the Apostle Peter and of St. Paul are said to be preserved,
and 142 lamps are always burning there. Among the statues are those
of Pius VI. by Canova, which is very fine. There are many monu-
ments of Popes, and a grand basrelief of Attila on the altar of St. Leo
the Great. In the Clementine Chapel is a tomb of Pius VII.. by
Thorwaldsen ; and in that of the Presentation, is the monument of
James 111. (Stuart) and his sons, by Canova. The chapels of Sebastian
and of the Holy Sacrament contain many tombs of Popes, and in the
transept is a splendid tomb of Clement XIII. by Canova. The
chapel of the Pieta has a fine marble group, by M. Angelo, when 24
•years old. There is the bronze statue of St. Peter, the toe of which
projecting slightly beyond the pedestal, has been partly worn away
with kisses of pilgrims, by those who adored the Pope,
" And kiss'd —whatever he gave them to kiss ;
Toe, relic, embroidery, nought came amiss." '
We also visited the subterranean chapel, (Sagre Grotto) where there
are a lot more tombs of Popes, including the .English one, Nicholas
Breakspeare or Adrian IV. The mosaic paintings in the dome are
very grand ; in fact St. Peter's is as some poet has said, a place
Where majesty,
Power, glory, strength, and beauty, ail are hailed.
Rome is a city that might almost be said to be full of churches, there
being in it a church for every day in the year. We selected, for
visiting, the principal, and took them in order, the first being the
oldest and chief metropolitan church, St. John Lateran, the Pope
himself being its official minister, it was originally founded by
Constantine. The entrance is by five gateways, the interior having
five naves. It contains twelve colossal statues in white marble, and a
painting attributed to Giotte, the roof was planned by Michael Angelo.
There are some beautiful mosaics, and frescoes, polished granitp,
marble, and porphyry columns, and a splendidly carved and gilt
ceiling. It is in this church that the Popes are crowned. It also
contains the famous chapel Corsini reckoned the finest in tire world,
and stated to have cost 11400,000.
Opposite to the Lateran stands the venerable chapel of the Scala
Santa, a shrine of daily pilgrimage to the people, many of whom were
ascending its holy steps on their knees when we went in. The
veneration paid to this particular flight of steps, the centre one of five,
arises from its being said to have once formed portion of the staircase
of the palace, or the judgment ball of Poutius Pilate at Jerusalem,
which were sanctified by the blood of Christ. None can ascend it but
on their knees, and there are two flights of lateral steps on either side
of the Scala Santa provided for all those like ourselves whose piety may
not lead them to genuflexion. It struck me very forcibly that angels
must often laugh as well as weep at the tricks men play. The following
is Mr. C. H. Spurgeon's description of the scene at the Scala Santa.
" Two years ago we stood at the foot of the staircase, and saw persons
of both sexes, and all ages and conditions, climbing up these steps
upon their knees. The marble is protected by planks of wood, which,
it is said, have been three times worn away by the knees of penitents,
and as often renewed. We could quite believe it, for the kneeling
traffic before us was very great. It was a mournful spectacle to look


up and see poor human nature so degraded as to be crawling up a
staircase with the view of reaching heaven, and it was sadder still to
stand at the top and look down upon the faces of the ascending
devotees. Some of them appeared to be going through the perform-
ance with light hearts, but others were quite absorbed in their prayers
and genuflections. In the wood of the bottom, middle, and uppermost
steps there is an opening, through which the marble appears, and
here each climber pauses and kisses the stone, because there our Lord
is reported to have fallen, groaned, or fainted, we forget which. We
were not permitted to walk up this blessed piece of deception, but we
ascended by one of the parallel staircases which flank it on either hand,
down which the penitents descend. At the top is a painting of the
Saviour, in which he is represented at the age of twelve as five feet
eight inches in height; this famous daub is ascribed to St. Luke, and
held in the utmost veneration. "The present Pope has expended large
sums upon the buildings which enclose the Scala Santa, both in repairs
and decorations. Last year, on our second visit, the Scala Santa were
but very scantily furnished with worshippers ; indeed, business seemed
to be at a very low ebb in most of the churches, and we were led to
hope that the trade in " the .Roman row " of Vanity Fair was going to
the dogs as it deserved "
The next church 1 find we visited during our stay in Rome was the
Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, which was founded A.D. 352 ; the
spire is the highest in the city. The interior consists of three naves
and has 44 ancient columns of the lonic order. There is a grand
sepulchral monument, intended I believe for Pius IX, the present Pope.
Also some splendid chapels, especially those of Sixtus and Boighese.
The Gesu, is the next on my list. It is a very rich church built
between the year 1568 and 1575 and has been adorned in all subsequent
times by the splendour of Popes and princes. It contains the tomb of
Cardinal Bellarmin, and the altar of St. Ignatius Lozola, with lapis
lazuli pillars, under the altar there is a gilt bronze coffin containing
bones of St. Ignatius, fqunder of the Jesuit order. We also visited a
number of secondary cliurches-such as San Pieto containing the noted
statue by M. Angela of Moses. The Yriuita del Monti which has a
celebrated decent from the cross by Daniel de Veller. a. Santa Maria
possesses a statue of Christ by M. Angelo and the tomb of Fra
Angelico the " heavenly painter." St. Augustine has a facade, said to
have been built with stones from the Coliseum.
The second, or with many it is the first, great sight in point of in-
terest to he seen in Rome, is the Coliseum ; so soon after our arrival
in the Eternal City, we drove to this grand arena of Christian Martyr-
dom. The building covers nearly six acres, in form it is oval, 620
feet in length by 513 in breadth, and the vertical height is 157 feet,
and was capable of seating upwards of 80,000 people. It is the imper-
sonation of Rome, sublime, majestic, severe, cruel, terrible in its
beauty. It was completed in the year 80 A. D., and its inauguration
was signalized by the slaughter of 10,000 captives and 5,000 animals—
a good day's work I should think even in those times.
Close to the Coliseum is the Forum, the spot where no doubt the
earlier, freer, and stormier assemblies of republican times used to
meet, and where the great events in the history of the 'Gracchi and
other patriots occurred. The present ground they say is 26 feet
higher than the old level. The arch of Septimius Severus is of the
Composite order. The three upright columns of the Corinthian order
are attributed by some to the Temple of Jupiter Tonans, by others
to Ve»pasian Three other handsome columns are thought to he the
remains of the Temple of Jupiter Stator. The other monuments of


the Forum are three gigantic Archways of the Temple of Peace, which
is said to have poured molten gold into the Forum when hurned at the
great fire of Nero. The arch of Titus with bas-reliefs of his triumphs
in Palestine, and the arch of Constantine.
Of course we did not forget to visit the Pantheon, a building that
was built by Agrippa to all the gods,'and is the most perfect work left
of ancient Rome. The portico has sixteen blocks of solid monolith
granite. The capitals are in white marble not perfect in beauty. The
diameter of the interior is 141 feet. It has been converted into a
church, the two belfries have been added by Bernini. It contains the
tombs of Raphael, Annibalir-Carraeei and others.
We did not see the Pope but we made an inspection of what he is
pleased to call his " Prison." The Vatican, a palace that stands prom-
inent among those of the world, as invested with the greatest interest,
whether regarded as identified with all ecclesiastical history, or the
influence its masters exercised over Christendom for 400 years. Its
existence dates from the eighth century, being dilapidated it was
rebuilt by Innocent 111, in the twelfth century. It was the winter, now
the only palace of the Pope, and stands close to St. Peter's. It covers
a large space, and is 1157 feet long and 707 feet broad. It contains
4422 chambers, and has eight grand staircases and 200 smaller ones,
and 20 courts. In it are the Pioclementine and Charamonti museums,
both filled with masterpieces of art, including the transfiguration by
Raphael, the Opollo Belvidere, Lacoon and the Etruscan museum
collected by Popes Gregory XVI and Pius IX. Here is also the
Capilla Sistina or Sistine Chapel, built in 1473, in which we saw the
glorious Fresco by M. Angelo of the last judgment and other pictures
by great masters, the whole, ceiling included, of the interior of this
chapel being decorated in Fresco. The Vatican Library and galleries
contain the richest collection of manuscripts and pictures in the world.
Of Palaces, the next in point of size and interest in Rome, is that of
the Quiriual, or palace of Monte Cavallo, on the Quirinal hill, and is
the residence of the king of Italy and Prince' Umberto, fine as the
Royal Palace is at Naples it is but a mere nothing in comparison
with this one, which has 500 magnificently furnished rooms. It contains
many fine paintings and other works of art.
Of art galleries, beside those of the Vatican we went over the Museo
Gregoriaua attached to the Lateran church, containing all sorts of
curiosities stowed away in twelve rooms, illustrating early Italian art
and Etruscan civilization. The small gallery of the Palazzo
Rospigliosi on the Quirinal, in which is Guido's celebrated Aurora and
other gems of art. The gallery of the Palazzo Doria in the Corso
containing a number of fine pictures.
In driving about we took a look at the palace of Nero on the Palatine,
the baths of Caracella which used to have 1600 marble seats, the site
of the Circus Maximus was also pointed out, and we were struck with
its vast area, and which they say at the time of Constantine could hold
400,000 spectators. The castel Sant Angelo is a grand pile still used
as a citadel close to the Tiber bridge (St. Angelo), and interesting
historically as the place where Pope Clement VII was imprisoned at
the time of the siege of Rome by the troops of the Emperor Charles
V, commanded by the constable de Bourbon. The fine monumehtal
columns of Trajan and of Antonius, the capitals of both being composed
of vast blocks of marble. The Piazza del Populo from which we
ascended Monte Pincio by its zigzag terraces to the public gardens and
lovelv promenade at its summit, and from whence you obtain a birds-
eye view of the whole of Rome, a fine spot for the student, to sit and
contemplate the liistuiy of the eternal city. In the centre of the


Piazza del Populo stands the fine Egyptian obelisk of Rameses I. In
the course of our drive we stopped to look at the fountain in the Piazza
de Trevi, which they say was designed by M. Angelo, and on another
occasion had a look at the Foro Thianno.
I did in Rome what I generally do in all places I visit, viz , to
devote a whole day to just strolling about the town on foot, as it gives
you a good idea of its character. The streets in Rome are seldom to
lie found with any foot pavement, and are in general not wider than
those of the older parts of Loudon, some are wretchedly narrow and
irregular, but the houses are not so high as those in Naples. There
are some streets, however, long and straight, often terminated by an
obelisk, fountain, or church. The great drawback to the beauty of the
city is the singular discrepancy of its buildings, a mansion entitled to
the name of palace, being frequently placed amidst a group of hovels,
and shops of the meanest appearance. The Corso is the great public
walk and is generally crowded ; it is perfectly straight, about a mile in
length, and has a foot pavement on each side, but I was greatly dis-
appointed with it expecting to see a wide street something like Regent
Street lonly much longer), whereas it is a narrow, and anything hut a
beautiful thoroughfare, although I will say all the shops are laid out
with great taste and judgment, one end of the Corso terminates with
two churches in the Piazza del Popnlo, and the other in the Campo
Vaccino Forum. Modern Rome has a population of about 250,000.
It is built of stone and brick, the latter often plastered over, marble
being less common here than in the north of Italy.
As I agree with Mark Twain, let me conclude my remarks on Rome
with a quotation from bis " Innocents abroad."' " I wish to say one
word about Michael Angelo Bnonarotti. I used to worship the mighty
genius of Michael Angelo —that man was great in poetry, painting,
sculpture, architecture —great in everything he undertook. But I do
not want Michael Angelo for breakfast —for luncheon —for dinner—for
tea —for supper—for between meals. I like a change occasionally. In
Genoa be designed everything ; in Milan, he or his pupils designed
everything ; he designed the Lake of Como ; in Pahua, Yerona, Venice,
Bologna, who did we ever hear of, from guiles, but Michael Angelo ?
In Florence, he painted everything, designed everything nearly, and
what he did not design he used to sit on a favourite stone and look at,
and showed us the stone. In Pisa he designed everything hut the old
shot-tower, and they would have attributed that to him if it had not
been so awfully ont of the perpendicular. He designed the Piers of
Leghorn and the custom-house regulations of Civita Vecchia. But,
here—here it is frightful. He designed St. Peter's ; he designed the
Pope ; he designed the Pantheon, the uniform of the Pope's soldiers,
the Tiber, the Vatican, the Coliseum, the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock,
the Barberini Palace, St. John Lateran, the Campagna, the Appian
Way, the Seven Hills, the Baths of Caracalla, the Claudian Aqueduct,
the Cloaca Maxima, —the eternal bore designed the Eternal City, and,
unless all men and hooks do lie, he painted everything in it. Dan said
the other day to the guide, " enough, enough, enough ! say no more !
Lump the whole thing ! say that the Creator made Italy from designs
by Michael Angelo 1"
" I never felt so fervently thankful, so soothed, so tranquil, so filled
with blessed peace, as I did yesterday when I learned that Michael
Angelo was dead."
At 9 a.m. one morning we again found ourselves on the move, and
this time towards Florence, the country passed through is mountainous
but the valleys are very lovely. The first town of importance we
pass is Assini, then Perugia the birthplace of Perugino the master of


Raphael. Soon after leaving Perugia the line shirts the shores of the
beautiful Lake Thrasymene where Hannibal gained his great victory,
B.C. 218. Cortona comes next, situated in a fine Chiana valley made
fertile by the drainage works of Torricelli the inventor of the barometer.
Then Arezzo the birthplace of some more celebrities, Cilnius Maecenas
the friend of Augustus and protector of Horace and Virgil; also of
Petrarch, Vessari, Arelino, Cesalpini the botanist and others—and we
arrive in Florence at 6 47 p.m., and take the omnibus to the Grand
Hotel de New York, formerly the ancient palace of Ricasoli upon the
quay and by the side of the Palace Corsini.
Our sight seeing in Florence commenced with the cathedral of Santa
Maria del Flore. This fine work was commenced in 1298 by Arnolfo
de Lapo whose design may be seen in Muro's Fresco on the east wall
of the Chapter-house of Santa Maria Novella. The walls of the
cathedral are almost entirely cased in marble, (white, black and green).
It is 454 feet long, and 387 feet high, the transept is nearly 334 feet
long, the height of the nave 152 feet, and that of the side aisles 96|
feet. Many architects of great talent were employed in carrying out
this great work. The rebuilding was commenced in 1420. The
Cupola of Brunelleschi's is octagonal in its plan, and is 138'6 feet
in diameter. It served M. Angelo as a model for St. Peter's, who said
"it is difficult to do so well, and impossible to do better." The small
dimensions of the windows and the rich colours of the glass causes the
interior to look sombre and gloomy. The pavement is tesselated with
red, blue, and white marble.
We ascended the Campanile or Bell Tower which is 300 feet high
and has 412 steps, like the cathedral it is covered with coloured marble.
From the top you obtain a fine view of the whole of Florence.
Close to the Cathedral is the noted Baptistery (San Giovanni Battis-
ta) with its exquisite bronze gates, said to deserve the name of " La
Port del Paradiso," the work of Andrea de Pisa and Ghiberti, and are
a perfect study in ancient history. Ghiberti devoted 20 years to com-
plete the north gate. The interior has Frescoes of Fra Jacopo, Gaddi,
Lippi, &c.
The church of San Lorenzo which we visited is another treasury of
art, but its great glory is the chapel of the Medicis with sepultures of
the Medici, and the walls are covered with marble and rare stones.
The new Sacristy is the great attraction, a chapel ordered by Leo X,
forming a sanctuary of Italian art. The great works are M. Angelo's
statues of day and night, dawn and twilight. The dome of San Lor-
enzo is beautifully painted with pictures in the spandrils on gold
ground.
We took in their order the church of St. Marco —The Academy of
Fine Arts —Church of S. S. Annuoziata the altar of which is perfectly
dazzling with silver and precious stones —Church of St. Croce which
has a white marble fagade, and contains among tombs of Italy's great
departed, those of Galilio, M. Angelo, and Dante, of the latter there is
also a fine statue in white marble in the square fronting the church,
and bearing the same name—Palazzo Veccbio the seat of the repub-
lican government from its establishment till 1530, is an inrposing
building surmounted with a tower 200 feet high, in this palace are
Frescoes of Vesari, an unfinished statue of Victory by M. Angelo,
and in front of it the admirable David of the same great sculptor, and
Hercules with Cacus by Bandinclli —To the right of the Loggia de
Lanzi (which is decorated with all kinds of sculpture) is the group of
the Rape of the Sahines, by John of Bologna, Perseus with Medusa's
head in bronze by Benvenuto Cellini, Judith with the head Holopher-
nes, by Donattello &c. Iu the Portico degli Uifizi, the niches inside


and out are filled with marble statues of eminent Tuscans such as
Giotto, L. de Vinci, M. Angelo, Dante, Petrarca, Boccaccio, Vespacie,
Galileo, Benvenuto Cellini, Lorenzo de Medici, &c., &c. The second
storey of this building (Uffizi) contains the picture gallery of world-
wide renown. The collection was begun under the Medicis, and in
1853 has been enriched by the addition of an Etruscan museum, &c.
From this building we crossed the Arno by a covered gallery, 1602 feet
in length to the Pitti Palace, a very large building built by a Florentine
merchant (1440) from a design of Brunelleschi, it has a rather heavy _
looking facade of 661 feet in length, here are to be seen more picture
galleries filled with splendid works of art.
This classical city of art, the capital of the Medici and sun of Italy,
is beautifully situated on the Arno in the midst of a rich vale of olive
groves, gardens and villas, and has a population of 112,236. It con-
tains 87 churches, and has six bridges over the Arno, which divides the
town into two parts. There are 23 public squares in Florence, the
Lung' Arno is the fashionable lounge beside the river, and generally
preferred by foreigners, but the Piazza della Signoria is the focus and
centre of Florence life, and it was here that the celebrated monk
Savonarola was burnt in 1498. In this square is the Palazzo Vecchio,
the Loggia del Lauzi, the Mint Zecca, the Portictf degli Uffizi with the
Galleria de Uffizi, one of the richest art galleries in the world ; in fact
this Piazza is a perfect treasury of high art.
The streets of Florence are well paved, and have g"ood wide foot-
paths, the Via Favour one of the principal streets is far finer than the
boasted Corso of Rome. We had pointed out to us the house in which
M. Angelo was born, in front of which at the time we were passing
was assembled a great crowd of people a man having just been stabbed
in the street, a little playfulness the Italians are rather noted for.
Some of the public places (squares) and gardens are very pretty, the
Parterre near the Porta S. Gallo is a small garden with triumphal
arch opposite the gate, which was constructed by the architect Jadot
in 1745, for the ingress of the Grand Duke Francis 11. The Balroli
gardens belonging to the Pitta Palace are said to be the finest in Italy."
Piazza d'Azaglio has also a beautiful garden and the square is sur-
rounded by sumptuous edifices, among which is the new and elegant
Theatre Principe Unrberto. The Piazza dell' Independenza, the largest
in the city is very beautifully laid out. S. Mar ia Novella has two
pyramids in variegated marble from Scravezza, and resting on bronze
tortoises. We also visited the church of Santa Maria Novella, which
is in the square of the same name ; which edifice was called by M. An-
gelo " his bride," containing some splendid paintings in oil and Fres-
co. The bridges are worth inspecting, that close to our hotel, Ponte
alia Carraia, like the rest, with one exception, has been several times
destroyed by floods, but has stood since 1557, when it was restored by
Ammannate, it was widened to its present state in 1867. The Ponte
S. Prinita is an elegant structure, and has at the four extreme angles,
statues representing the four seasons. Ponte Vecchio was rebuilt in
1345, and is composed of three simple but solid arches, like the Rialto
at Venice it is covered with a street of jewellers and goldsmiths shops,
above which runs the gallery leading from the Pitti Palace to that of
the Vecchio. The Ponte alle Grazie was built in 1237, and from its
solidity has been able to resist all the floods which have destroyed the
others. At the extremities of the city are suspension bridges, these
were constructed some 30 years since.
We left Florence for Milan one fine morning at 7 50 a.m. The
railway station is a very fine one, with a vestibule covered with an
iron and glass roof. The Line is a single one, with a great many


long tunnels, very heavy works and steep gradients. After leaving
Pistoja there are 30 or 40 tunnels one after the other, with but a few
hundred yards between them. I noticed that on all the Italian and
French Lines that there are a great many stopping places of from 10 to
15 minutes and in a long distance (happy regulation) always one of at
least half an hour which gives you time and opportunity for getting
refreshments, stretching your legs and having a smoke, and not five
minutes, as Mark Twain says, " of bolting of flabby rolls, muddy
.coffee, questionable eggs, gutta-percha beef, and pies whose conception
and execution are a dark and hloody mystery to all save the cook who
created them." From Florence to Bologna the countiy is very
mountainous but throughout the remainder of the journey it is a
dead level and like a vast garden fencing being formed by sweet briar
and rose bushes. We stopped half an hour at Bologna, it is a fine
city of 90,000 inhabitants, famous for its University and Art schools,
it has also had the honor of giving six Popes to Rome. We stop a
few minutes at Piacenza a large city with a magnificent cathedral in
the Lombard style and arrive in Milan at 5 12 p.m.
We put uji in Milan at the " Hotel de la Ville," which is by far the
best we have been to in Italy, and is truly as guide books say, " well
situated, has good rooms and excellent cuisine," the dining-room is
large and magnificently decorated, 60 people sat down to the table on
the day of our arrival. The first stroll we took was through the
Arcade and which is by far the largest and best thing of the kind I
have ever seen, it consists of two fine streets, the houses of which are
of one uniform size and style of architecture, intersecting each other
at right angles forming a cross the whole of which is covered in with glass
a la Crystal Palace, and at the intersection a magnificent dome rises
decorated with fresco paintings. Passing through this we came upon
one famous theatre of La Scaia, and it being just opening time we
went in and saw the Opera of Der Freyschutz, it is certainly a noble
bouse having six rows of boxes capable of containing 4000 people, the
Pit with orchestra has 1100 seats and there were 100 musicians on this
occasion. lam sorry to say that it was not until after we left that we
remembered it was Sunday.
The cathedral of Milan, in which Napoleon was crowned king of
Italy, is one of the finest in the world, and after St. Peter's the largest
in Europe. It is built entirely of the finest white marble from the
Simplon. and although they say it is architects ally defective in de-ign,
yet I think it cannot fr.il to strike everyone who sees it with admiration.
It is famous for its magnificent roof (also in white marble) winch for
elaborate detail and richness is not equalled by any other. It has 135
spires or pinnacles. There are some .3900 or 6000 statues in niches
all over the building, and the whole thing looks as though it had been
cut out of ivory " What a wonder it is ! so g and, so solemn, so vast!
and yet so delicate, so airy, so graceful! How sharply its pinnacled
angles and its wilderness of spires were cut against the sky, and how
richly their shadows fell upon its snowy roof ! a vision ! —a mi acle I
an anthem sncg in stone, a poem wn.u ;ht in marble! However you
look at the great catluulr d. it is nnb'e. it is bennt'ful! Whenever you
stand in Milan, or within seven miles of Mi'an, it is visible—and when
itisvisible.no other object can claim your attention." This great
work was commenced in 1386, the mag lificent Virgin's Cliap,l defies
all description, among its relics are—three nails from the crucifixion—
the virgin's shroud—portion of the crown of thorns—a fragment of the
purple robe worn by our Lord, &c. We went into the room of
treasures, filled with large wooden p e ses like wardrobes, which when
opened disclosed literally tons of gold and silver, besides precious


stones in the shape of church ornaments. We ascended to the top
and walked over the beautiful white marble roof which as the sun was
shining made it a perfectly dazzling sight, arid one very trying to the
eyes. On returning from aloft to the floor of the church we were
shown down into the crypt. Service was going on at the time of our
visit, and the effect of the music, and the grandeur of the building
made it deeply impressive, one by one steals quietly in, the wearer of
a heart worn with the world's cares —heavy with sorrow —laden with
guilt. The penitent throws himself upon his knees. At the solemn
chant of the choir, every head droops in self-abasement and humility.
Again the music swells. A deep, measured, half chant, half recitative
comes from the unseen choir. " Rest, troubled heart (it seems to
say) ; faith alone can save ; here only is peace : repent, pour out thy
soul, sin no more." Then streams out the wild, wistful chorus —the
humble, the proud, the penitent, the desperate all mingling in the half
ecstasy, half agony of the wondrous " Miserere."
One is not surprised at the resistless power of the church of Rome.
Tn Catholic countries, you see the tired labourer, the burdened market
woman, steal into the cathedrals—those vast temples never dosed to
the worshipper—out of the busy street and noontide glare. The " dim
religious light," the manifold altars, the unconscious group of fellow
worshippers, all invite to abstraction and devotion. The burden is
for a while laid down, the knee is bent, and, after a short interval of
earnest prayer, the world's wayfarer resumes the dusty march—who
shall say how lightened in spirit, how soothed, how supported.
While in Milan we went to the Exhibition of Fine Arts which was
just then being held in the city, and saw some very fine pictures and
sculpture by artists of the day. We visited the public gardens.
Then the railway station which is the finest in Italy where in its
superb cafe we got some refreshment. How is it, that in this compara-
tively poor country, they can afford to have such vast palaces for
railway stations ? built as they are for the most part of cut stone or
marble, with stately colonnades traversing them from end to end, and
with ample walls and ceilings richly decorated with Frescoes ; the
lofty gateways are graced with statues and the broad floors are all
laid in polished flags of marble ; the first class waiting rooms are car-
peted, and have rich draperies, velvet covered ottomans, couches and
seats.
There is a splendid bronze statue of Cavour on a white pedestal,
the steps at the base of which has a bronze figure of Fame in the act
of inscribing Cavour's name, the whole making a very grand monu-
ment to that noble statesman, one of Italy's greatest politicians. The
Piazza D' Arini is a fine open space for military purposes, the princi-
pal entrance to which is under the Arco della Pace a splendid piece of
art workmanship. I must not forget to mention among the sights
the beautiful monument recently erected to Leonardo de Vinci in
front of the theatre of La Scala.
Modern Milan is one of the most opulent and populous cities of
Italy, having a population equal to that of Rome. Its best streets are
regular, wide, well paved, and kept with scrupulous care, the dwellings
are commodious and tasteful, the roadways are paved with small round
stones, having two lines of cut stone tramways set upon the same level,
and upon these the omnibusses and carnages travel with great ease to
the horses, and comfort to the passengers. Altogether Milan is the
finest city we have seen m Italy.
We then passed on to Turin where we slept a night at the grand
hotel D'Europe hi the Place du Chateau opposite the king's palace,
and the following morning we just drove round this thriving bran-new


city and down the three principal streets, Dora Grossa, Nnova. and
del Po, which are splendid thoroughfares, and it is somewhat refresh-
ing to iind ourselves in a town without much historical or antiquarian
interest.
Left by train at 9 o'clock en route for Paris. Between Turin and
Mount Cenis there are 25 tunnels and about as many viaducts ; the
Great Tunnel is 4,179 feet above the level of the sea at the centre,
and 3,480 below the crest of the mountain (Grand Vallon.) It is
13,393 yards or 74 miles 242 yards long. It is 194 feet high and 33
feet wide, widening a little at the mouths. It is traversed by a
double line of rails. It was begun in 1857 and finished in 1870, and
formally opened 17th September, 1871. It cost about .£300,000. It
was worked from both ends at the rate of 2 to 3 yards in 24 hours.
The two parts at the final joining were only 18 inches out of line.
We traversed it in little over half an hour and did not feel the slight-
est inconvenience from smoke but on the contrary there was a nice
current of fresh air. Immediately after passing through the tunnel
you come to Modane the frontier town where we stopped 40 minutes,
it was from here that Fell's railway over the mountaiu started, I say
" it was " as now the trains have ceased to run, they having com-
menced pulling up the permanent way finding I believe that since the
opening of the tunnel (and even before) it does not pay, I had a good
opportunity however of examining the portion of the line which still
remains, as well as the engines and rolling stock, generally a large
number of which are lying exposed to the weather on the sidings.
As it is at Modane that we enter France passports were demanded
and baggage examined at the custom house attached to the station,
the ceremony over away we go again, pass Macon the birthplace of
Lamartine, and by midnight we found ourselves at Dijon, and got re-
freshment at the excellent Buffet we found at this station. It was a
lovely moonlight night, and while others slept I watched the scenes
which we were so rapidly passing through, until arriving in Paris at
6 55 a.m., having been nearly 22 hours in the train, the time however
had not hung very heavily on our hands, as we had from Turin pleasant
travelling companions in Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Tolme, who were on their
way back from Tunis, where Mr. Tolme (who is an eminent English
engineer) had been to inspect some Railway works.
Having elected to stay at the " Hotel du Louvre," we were presently
unpacked in the lofty roofed courtyard wherein vehicles are depositing
luggage, families, and others, all day and all night—-from north and
south, from tidal trains, from the uttermost parts of the earth—so
unceasing is the stream of travellers, destined to abide for awhile in
that vast gilded palace.
"We were conducted into a city of bedrooms, where after traversing
the Rue Rivoli and the Rue Honore, the name of " our street," and
the number of our habitation were impressed upon us, and we were
left to find our way back out of the labyrinth as we might. As there
are more than five hundred bedrooms, it is a necessity to name the
corridors and passages as well as to number the rooms. As it is un-
protected strangers, unacquainted with the national tongue, were often
met roaming about the lanes and thoroughfares of the City of Sleepers,
muttering their address, in strange accents, and grasping an inef-
fectual key.
After a hot bath and comfortable breakfast we managed to recruit
our wayworn frames and were ready to " see and do" Paris. So hire-
ing a carriage we commenced by paying a visit to our old friend
McS at the Austrian Embassy who—when she had recovered her
Surprise at our unexpected arrival —accompanied us in our drive round


the city. We first visited that noble pile of buildings Notre Dame
erected in the 12th century. It has two majestic towers, and the
principal entrances are finely carved from subjects of the New
Testament. There are some good paintings and fine carving in the
choir which is supported by 120 massive pillars, and the gallery by
297 pillars. The floor is of marble. The altar is most magnificently
carved, and here are placed the statues of Louis XIII and XIV. In a
niche there is a beautiful marble group representing the descent from
the cross. We were admitted to the sacristy and shown the robes
which the Pope wore when he crowned Napoleon I, a wagon load of solid
gold and silver utensils used in the great public processions and
ceremonies of the church ; some nails of the true cross, a fragment of
the cross itself and a part of the crown of thorns, they showed us
likewise the bloody robe that the archbishop of Paris wore when he
exposed his sacred person and braved the wrath of the insurgents of
1848, to mount the barricades and hold aloft the olive branch of
peace in the hope of stopping the slaughter. His noble effort cost him
his life. He was shot dead. There is a cast of his face taken after
death, the bullet that killed him, and two vertebrae in which it lodged.
Is not this relic matter a little overdone ? Mark Twain says in his
" Innocents abroad." "We find a piece of the true cross in every old
church we go into, and some of the nails that held it together. I
would not like to be positive, but I think we have seen as much as a
keg of these nails. Then there is the crown of thorns ; they have
a part of one in Sainte Chapelle, and a part of one also in Notre Dame.
And as for the bones of St, Denis, I feel certain we have seen enough
of them to duplicate him if necessary. "
We then went to La Sainte Chapelle of Gothic building erected by
St. Louis forming portion of the Palais de justice, it is, or rather was,
the private chapel of the kings of France, and is a perfect gem in its
way. From there we proceeded to the church of St. Sulpice in the
place of the same name, this church has a beautiful portico, baptismal
fonts of colossal shells, and a beautiful pulpit. We also in the course
of our rounds paid the Pantheon a visit which is now restored to church
purposes and called St. Genevieve, and may be classed among the
finest buildings in Paris, we descended to the Caveaux and were pre-
sented with the following curious printed document purporting to be an,
EXPLANATION.
I.—Soufflot's tomb the architect of the monument.—The Pantheon
commenced in 1764 during the reign of Louis XV, received his
complete achievement only under the reign of Napoleon I, fourty-two
years after.
'2.—Voltaire's tomb and his statue by Oudon.—Voltaire died in 1778.
His remains wrought from Scellieres were transfered in the vault in
1791.
3—J.-J. Rosseau died in 1778, the same year as Voltaire.—His
limbs were descended in the vault in 1794, sixteen years after his
death, when wrought from Geneva.
4.—Model of the Pantheon by Soufflot, reduced to the twenty-fifth
part; it is four metres high. The Pantheon is a hundred ; there are
four hundred and fifty steps to attain the top.
s.—An echo very remarkable.
6. —Marshal Lannes, duke of Montebello, died gloriously at the battle
of Esling, the 22 of May 1809.
7. —The tombs of the great men who died during the reign of


Napoleon I, Cardinals, Generals, Admirals and Senators, from 1809
to 1815.
We next visited one of, if not tlie largest di aper's establishments in
the eity " Attbon Marche ' in the Rue de Sevres, which gave great
delight to my lady companions, one of whom had never seen so gigantic
a shop before. Then drove through the Champ de Mars, Bois de
Boulogne that limitless park with its lakes, its cascades, and its broad
avenues ; down the Champs Elysees, Place de la Concord, and back to
the hotel in the Rue de Rivoli, having previously left Miss McS at
the Austrian Embassy in the Rue de Grenelle.
We dined at the table d'hote of the hotel with some 300 other
ladies and gentlemen, joyous strangers for the most part representing
I suppose every country in the world. It is a magnificent dining-room,
spacious, lit up with chandeliers having hundreds of jets of gas, gay
with rich decorations, gilding, glittering of mirrors, &c., we fully
realized the charm of the entertainment and felt that we were really
" Doing the grand in a foreign land
Ten thousand miles away."
We devoted a day to Versailles. It would be difficult for anyone to
describe all the beauties of this wonderful palace, that mystic and
charmed realm—haunted by memories of past splendours and shadowy
troops of kings and their favonrities—nobles and courtiers—warriors
and diplomatists—beauties regnant, deposed, or forsaken. With its
pleasure grounds, galleries and noble saloons, containing the historical
museum or collection of paintings representing the wars of France
from the earliest time to the present, no not the present, but to a very
recent period. The park with its statues, fountains, and cascades as
planned by Louis XIV, and glorious vista which discloses a view scarce
equalled in the world. Everything i 3 on a gigantic scale, nothing is
small—nothing is cheap. The statues are all large ; the palace is
grand ; the park covers a fair-sized county, the avenues are intermin-
able.
We of course visited the galleries of the Louvre containing perhaps
the largest collection of pictures in Europe, and looked at the miles of
paintings by the old masters, and among the hundreds of glorious
works of art my eye rested on that of Marillo's " Ascent of the Virgin,"
for which the French government paid the large sum of ±23,000, and
I could not help thinking that if that picture was worth ±23,000, what
would he the value of Raphael's " Transfiguration " in the Vatican or
M. Angelo's Last Judgment, or the walls of the Sistine Chapel which
are infinitely greater works of art.
We dined and spent an evening at the Austrian Embassy, and heard
the two children of the Princess Salmona sing some pretty little
Italian song for our special edification.
We visited the Palais de 1' Industrie, railway stations, the new
Italian opera house, the superb gardens of the Tuileries adorned with
statues, vases, and fountains. The Place de la Bastille with its
beautiful column, and the Place Vendome without its beautiful column ;
but to even enumerate all the places would take up too much space
and they are made familiar to everybody by the Illustrated Papers. I
looked in vain for injuries done to Paris by the recent war except in
the suburbs; hut portions of the Tuileries, Palais Rovalo, and Palais
de justice, the Hotel de Ville and the Place Vendome bear witness to
the terrible work of the Commune of May, 1871, hut these buildings do
not constitute Paris and the statements that went abroad about the
city being " in flames," " in ruins," &c., are utterly without foundation.
How little did I think that some twelve months after my visit to this
still gay, lively, and beautiful city that I should be drinkiug a glass of


wine witli M. Henri Roehefovt, M. Grousset, and three other leading
communists and talking over these events at Floral I-louse Itandwick,
the quiet peaceful home of Mr. J. M. May of Sydney, N. S. W.
But the time has arrived when we must again be on the move and
take the last stage in our long journey. I grew restless as I got nearer
home and was thrown into a perfect fever on the last night of our stay
in Paris, by a telegram from my brother, brought to me when in bed,
to say " that I need not hurry on account of his letter to me at Rome,"
but I had never received any such letter, and I was set wondering what
it could he about, had my mother been taken ill and I after all these
years too late ? These and other such like thoughts kept me awake
the whole night.
At 7 35 the following morning we left Paris, stopped 15 minutes at
Amiens and got a good view of the cathedral and its beautiful spire ;
we pass over the flat sandy tracts between this and the sea and arrive
at Calais by 1 10, and soon are on board the small and crowded steamer
destined to bear me to my native land. I possessed the privileges
conferred by my previous voyaging in the world and look with an air
of superiority upon my less hardened compatriots who are visibly
fluttered as the breeze increased, and soon I am made aware by the
sufferings of my fellow creatures (as Chawles says in the " Tellowplush
Tapers,') and "what basuns was sent for." But I was not very much
inclined for mirth as I stood regardless of rain and hail, or the seas
that were washing over me watching the chalky cliffs of Albion, and a
something unaccustomed stirs my heart and rises in my bosom as lafterI —
after many years —once again behold the dear old land of my birth—
my home.
Landed and speeding away again for London—how one seems to
have journeyed by that narrow strait into another world ! How
different, how diametrically opposite, is everything on the hither side
of the tiny strip of salt water. The men, the houses, the hedges, the
fields, no longer fenceless—the noble unbrageous trees, the broad-
backed sheep and cattle—all these, together with the greyer sky, write
in large characters the legend of Merrie England. Nowhero can you
look without seeing evidences of wealth, of comfort, of neatness, and
that deference to the effect of the landscape in the matter of timber,
which proves how largely profit is sacrificed to taste. It almost
appears as though we had scarcely time for more than these passing
reflections, when —the sky having become more murky, the houses more
dense, the general sense of approaching the heart of a vast city more
fixed and acute —our train, that " modern marvel " of speed, comfort,
strength and punctuality, rolls smoothly into the Metropolitan Station
at Charing Cross, where we are met by my brother and drive to 203
Camden Road Villas.
LONDON MEMORANDA.
Having been born, educated, and studied for my profession, as well
as held an appointment in London, I have no need to write anything
regarding it in order to keep it fresh in my memory, as every street,
square, and building, every nook and corner is indelibly written in my
mind and cannot be blotted out, and often have I during this visit in
walking about the town wondered whether it was not all a dream my
having ever been away from it so long. It is impossible to change the
general appearance of a city like this, compared to which all others,
Paris included, are but villages as regards extent of ground that is
covered, and I found as I fully expected I should do, that what had
often been said by people on their return to the Colonies, about " your


not knowing London now it is so changed " was all " bosh," and about
as near the truth as that Paris was "in ruins." Of course I found
very great improvements, such as for instance, the Thames embank-
ment, underground railways, Holborn viaduct, new bridges over the
river, streets widened, tramways, gigantic Railway stations, additional
public buildings and improvements in private structures generally.
The suburbs largely extended, &c., &c., but these have not materially
changed the general character or topographical features of old London.
We twice visited the interior of the Houses of Parliament or Palace
of Westminster, and were shown over that wonderful pile of buildings,
the general appearance of which is familiar to everybody. I will give
here however a few figures to enable those who have not seen them,
to obtain some idea of their vast dimensions. They occupy an area
of about eight acres and contain no less than 500 rooms of all kinds,
with separate residences for 18 different Officers of the Houses of
Lords and Commons. There is also within the building a suitable
chapel formed in St. Stephen's crypt for the use of residents.
The most important facade is the East front or that towards the
river. It is 910 feet in length, having a paved terrace overlooking the
water 700 feet long and 33 feet wide. The Victoria Tower is the
largest and highest square tower in the world, being 75 feet square
and 330 feet high to the top of the pinnacles, and over 400 to the top
of the flagstaff which carries a Royal Standard 36 ft. by 27 ft. The
Clock Tower is also square and its altitude not far short of the Vic-
toria Tower, being 316 feet from high-water mark to the top of the
sceptre on its roof, the clock has a dial 23 feet 6 inches in diameter,
which is the largest ever made, that is where the clock, as in this case
forms an integral part of the design of the building, the only larger
one being that at Mechlin, but there the dial is formed of open metal
work applied over, but having no connection with, the architecture.
The House of Lords is 90 feet in length, 45 feet in breath and of
the same height. The House of Commons is 75 feet long, 45 wide and
41 high, the size having been made as small as possible consistently with
the requirements for the purpose of speaking and hearing without
effort during the average attendance of members which amounts to
about three hundred.
I observed how the stone of the exterior of this magnificent pile of
buildings which altogether has cost the country over <£3,000,000 is
" fretting" away and regret that all attempts hitherto made with a
view to its remedy, have failed to arrest the progress of decay.
I had not been many days in town when I received a letter from the
secretary of the Whitehall Club, in Parliament Street, to imform me
that I had been elected an Honorary member of the club during my
stay in England. This is a great honor as by the rules of the club
only " distinguished foreign engineers or persons connected with
engineering" are to be paid the compliment. I, of course availed
myself of the privilege, as it is a place of meeting for all the great men
in our profession.
When I left for Australia the Crystal Palace was scarcely finished, I
now saw it in all its beauty and certainly there is nothing to compare
with it that I have seen anywhere ; unlike however the enduring
structures of Rome and Egypt, which appears to have built for all
time, this looks epheimal in its construction, and appears as if, like
those glorious fairy spectacles on the stage, it would pass away with
the next change of scene. On our first visit there was a concert which
opened with the song of " When those we love return once more'/ We
on several subsequent occasions, both by day and night visited this
delightful exhibition.


REMINISCENCES OF
The following paragraph appeared in the Times of the 3rd January,
1878, and a similar notice was also in the Daily JVews of same date.
THE WORKING- MEN'S COLIJEGE. —Last evening the annual Christ-
mas conversazione of the members of the Working Men's College was
held at their house in Great Ormond-street, when, in spite of the
showery weather, the company, numbering about 200, comprising the
members, with their wives and daughters, sat down to tea. The new
rooms, in the rear of the old house, were tastily decorated with speei-'
mensmf art work, executed.by members of the College since the open-
ing of the last twelvemonth, including paintings in oil and water
colours, life studies in pencil and chalk, and some of the productions
of the elementary class. Mr. Septimus Moore at once amused and
instructed the company by exhibiting enlarged microscopic objects
by means of the oxyhydrogen lantern, and a few other microscopes
were exhibited by members. At intervals during the evening the
College choir sang with great effect some madrigals, glees, choruses,
hymns, and part songs, including some of the music of Mendelssohn,
Rossini, Donato, and Gounod ; and the evening was spent alike plea-
santly and profitably. In the absence of the Vice-Eresident (the Rev.
Professor Brewer) through illness, the visitors were received by
Mr. Thomas Hughes, M.P., and among the company present were
Dean Stanley, Mr. Godfrey Lushington, the Rev. Barham Zineke and
Professor Flower. The new session will commence on Monday next,
when the Dean will deliver the inaugural address to the students.
We may add that Mr. J. H. Thomas, C.E., was present, having been
deputed by the New South Wales Academy of Arts to attend for the
purpose of noting the progress of the institution.
We paid a visit to_the_ Polytechnic, and it is an Institution of Lon-
don that I do not think improved, but on the contrary, appears to have
fallen off considerably. We of course, as of old on such occasions,
went down; in the Diving Bell, and in the Lecture Theatre saw exhibit--
ed " Pepper's Ghost," which is a wonderful illusion produced by
reflection ; the " original " of the Ghost is in front, but below the level
of the stage and (screened from the people) highly illuminated by the
Oxy-hydrqgen light. The reflection of this figure is thrown upon the
audience by .a.-, large sheet of plate glass erected in front of the stage
but contrived so that it is invisible in the gloom that always surrounds
the appearance of Ghosts, at least all that I have seen. Of course
the actor who performs with the " Ghost," is behind the glass and
does not see the spectre, but a warning from an accomplice tells him
of the " mysterious appearance." It is on the same principle as the
reflection we often see of a winter's evening-of the fire in the window
before the gas is lit, or the reflection of ourselves in the glass of a
railway carriage when travelling at night.
I went to Christ Church, Marylcbone, to see the altar-piece, " The
diffusion of gifts," painted by W. Cave Thomas, of which I had read
so much about, in the English papers. The following is a description
of this great work in christian art." "The design consists of two paint-
ings, one the figure of Christ crucified, stretched on his cross on the
ground in all the grandeur and gloom of death, and is placed in a
recess below the great Lunette picture, which consists of nine figures
in gorgeous relief on a golden background, representing the Diffusion
or Exodus of God's gifts—the gifts of the Spirit illustrating the words,
" And when He had ascended on high He sent them gifts." The
central figure of the composition is that of the Saviour seated in his
white and Seamless garment, stretching out his arms indicative of
blessing and bounty. On the right hand of Christ are four angelic
and majestic figures representing the gifts of faith, wisdom, justice,


and lionor gliding away oil their divine mission to mankind, each,
endowed with characteristic symbols of its intent and largess. Honour
is dropping crowns on her way, but one is a crown of thorns, indicative
of the first and inevitable fruits of perilous and hard earned honour.
Each of the more intellectual gifts is balanced on the opposite side of
the key of the arch of the composition by the corresponding physical
gifts. The power of faith has for its counterpart the power of might ;
wisdom or the "richness" of knowledge is balanced by golden wealth;
the gifts of judgment by that of beauty ; and the abundance of honour
by that of teeming plenty." This pictures was engraved in the
Illustrated London News of June Ist, 1867, and loßg criticisms have
also appeared in the following papers, Builder, 25/1/67 — livening Star,
12/1/87 — Telegraph, 17/1/07 — Morning Post, 12/1/67 — LB Oourrier Be
L'JSurope 26/1/67 — Art Journal, Nov. 65 — Marylebone Mereury,
12/1/67 — Observer, 4/10/68 — The Reader , which says "in sacred
allegory, indeed, we do not remember anything in the English school
to equal it, and we are glad to see that so high an authority as the
Belgium Art Journal is of a like opinion," — The Athenaeum 9/2/67 —•
Standard—Publio Opinion, 19/1/67, and a host of other papers. The
picture which is in the shape of an arc or long lunette is about 30 feet
long by 12 feet high, the figures being eight feet.
We attended a concert at the most magnificent concert room in
Europe, the Royal Albert Hall at which Madlle Titiens and a number of
other celebrities in musical world, took part. The general appearance
of both the interior and exterior of the Albert Hall has been made
familiar to everyone by the numerous engravings of it which from
time to time have appeared in the Illustrated papers. Its largest
diameter is 219 feet, and the shortest 185 feet, the interior arena is
102 feet by 88 feet; there are 22 distinct staircases and a pat|ent
" lift" for the accomodation of the 8000 persons w T ho can be seated.
It cost J200.000.
At Covent Garden Theatre we saw the Extravaganza <Jf a Babil and
Bijou " which has led such an extraordinary run in London, there is
nothing certainly in the words to account for its very great success, it
must therefore rest with the gorgeous effects of scenery introduced
and which I have never seen equalled.
We paid a visit to Woolwich Arsenal. It is certainly a grand eight,
the Thames, as you go down the river with its unequalled bridges and
the one continuous line of warehouses extending for at least 15 miles
on either side of the water with the perfect forest of masts frobi the
shipping in the river and docks. It tends perhaps to give you the
best idea of the immense wealth and importance of London. We were
just in time to see once more our old familiar friend the " Dreadnought "
hospital ship, as she was removed on the following day. "We dined at'
the Mortar Hotel and then joined a number of foreign officers who had
orders from the war office to see the whole process of forging, boring,
turning, &0., of the 35 ton guns; wc went through all the different
departments, and saw some of those monster pieces of Artillery in
every stage of their construction, which to me—-or I may say to both
of us —was a most interesting sight.
We also took a run down to Brighton to see once more that favourite
•watering place. It turned out however a very unfavourable day for
making such a trip, but we had to make, the, best of it, Brighton
appears to be still increasing in size. It is for the most part extremely
well built, as becomes a favoured retreat of wealth and aristocracy.
It mostly consists of new and elegant streets, squares, and terraces,
and a range of splendid houses fronts the sea for nearly three miles,
along which from one end to the other wc drove. The population


during the fashionable seasons they say amounts to about 90,000.
We visited the old Pavilion, a dull, dismal, fantastic, oriental or
Chinese structure, with domes, minarets, and pinnacles, and Moorish
stables. It is now the property of the Corporation, and with its
pleasure grounds of about seven acres, is devoted to the recreation of
the inhabitants. The old Chain Pier which is 1,136 feet long and 13
wide, (upon which I remember some years ago seeing the Queen and
Prince Albert walking together) is still in existence, although they
have erected a very much finer structure, entirely of iron, some dis-
tance away towards Hove, which I took the opportunity of inspecting.
We of course went to see the new Aquariam, which is by far the largest
they say in Europe, that even at the Crystal Palace being nothing in
comparison to it.
Shoreditch is not a quarter of the town you would expect to find
a fine Art Exhibition in, yet we found a loan collection of paintings,
bronzes, porcelain, &c., at the Bethnal Green Branch of the South
Kensington Museum, that was well worthy of an
whole of this collection, filling a building as large as that of theYEx-
hibition in Sydney, being the property of one man, Sir W. Wallace,
and they say the china alone that he possesses has been valued at
.£70,000 ! They have been lent by Sir William for exhibition during
the enlargement of his London Mansion in Manchester Square.
Some of the pictures by Murillo were fine specimens of that king of
Spanish painters.
From the above Exhibition we went to the Columbia market, the
cost of its erection being one of the many great acts of public gener-
osity of Lady Burdett-Coutts, intended to lighten the mass of human
misery in this vast city, but in this case I regret to say it has proved
a signal failure. It was first intended for general dealers and was
not limited to any particular commodity, and then afterwards tried as
a fish market, but the poor people of this low neighbourhood for whose
special benefit it was erected would not patronize it, preferring pur-
chasing from the retailers in their small shops or migratory stalls.
So there it stands, this costly imposing structure, a splendid, amply
furnished and easily accessible market, with its dreary neatness, its
spick-and-span and florid desolation, contrasting so remarkably with
the busy dirt, meanness and dinginess of Billingsgate, eloquently
admonishing us that bringing a horse to the water and making him
drink are two very different things.
Many times in my boyhood days have I mounted the steps of the
monument in Fish Street Hill, which was designed by Sir C. Wren, to
perpetuate the remembrance of the great fire of London, I could not
leave again without, for old acquaintance sake, paying it another visit.
This noble pillar is 24 feet higher than that of Trajan of Borne, and
its form is that of a fluted column of the Doric order exceeding,
however, the established proportion of that order by one module or
semi-diameter, standing on a palladian pedestal 40 feet in height and
24 feet square, rising out of a plinth 28 feet square. On the abases at
the top is an iron balcony, surrounding a moulding cylinder supporting
a vase of gilded bronze, the extreme height of which makes the
structure altogether 215 feet. There are 345 steps up to the balcony
and on account of the number of suicides the gallery was covered with
iron bars rising from the old railing. The " fluting," of the Column
was done after it was built. The entire cost of the monument was
£13,450.
Far away ! " Where is now the merry party," that was laughing
round that Christmas fire in Camden road in 1872. ' Yes as the song
says they have all dispersed and gone, two have again joined other


members of the familly in a distant land and another—the dearest of
them all—has gone from us for ever and has reached the " fairer
region " —far away.
Although a Londoner and have passed our great cathedral some
hundreds of times in my life, yet I do not think I have been inside it
more than half a dozen times. I was now desirous however of seeing
it again, not only with a view of comparing it with St. Peter's of Rome
that I had so lately seen, but also to show it as one of the " Lions " of
London to my wife. After going round and looking at all the monu-
ments to great Generals, Admirals, Engiueers, Artists and Authors,
we descended to the Crypt and saw the tombs of Wellington and Nel-
son ; we then ascended to the Clock Tower, went into the Library,
Whispering Gallery, and finally up outside the dome. In size we all
know it is much inferior to St. Peter's, but I like the architectural
proportions of the exterior better than the cathedral at Rome, but as
regards the interior the latter is infinitely superior. St. Paul's is cold,
and its monuments not in keeping with their surroundings, whereas
those in Rome appear as though should one be removed you would feel
that there was a something wanting in its place ; the mosaics and the
free use of marble in its decorations makes a vast difference in favour
of the largest church in Christendom.
We went once or twice to Mr. and Mrs. German Reed's Gallery of
Illustration, and they are entertainments well worth going to, as they
hold an intermediate place in evening amusements between a regular
concert and theatrical performances, affording a pleasant means of
spending an hour without restraint or fatigue.
I called on Mr. Trickett (brother to our old friend of Sydney), who is
superintending the erection of the new General Post Office, and he
kindly showed me over the works. I was surprised to find that
although this addition to the Establishment in London is at least three
times as large as the Sydney Building will be when completed through
to Pilfc Street, yet it has only cost about the same amount, the contract
being L 130,000. This new building faces the old Post Office,
communication being formed between the two by means of a Tunnel
under the street. Mr. Trickett informed me that large 'as this
additional accomodation was, it will not be half sufficient now that the
telegraphs have been taken over by the Government and are to be
worked under the same Department. All the interior arrangements
including those for gas and water pipes, telegraph wires, tubes for
blowing letters and messages through (under ground) to different parts
of London, and which are to be worked by four 50 H. P. Engines on
the premises, all appear to me as most complete.
The Collection of Pictures at the National Gallery has greatly
increased since I last was there, and is now one that the nation need
not be ashamed of although it stiil falls short of many Continental
Galleries. The additions to the building are proceeding rapidly at
the rear of the present ugly fapade.
We took our nieces Adela, Florence and Laura to Drury Lane
Theatre to see the Christmas Pantomine of " The Children in the
Wood." Some of the Royal Family were present on the occasion, and
consequently " God Save the Queen " was played on their entering
the house. Such was the anxiety of the young people "tobe in time "
that we arrived at the doors of the Theatre long before they were
opened, and had to sit for some twenty minutes in our carriage. To
me the performance was the same old, old thing, but mindful of days
long gone by I sat most patiently until it was all over.
We attended a conversazione at the opening of the new City Library
at Guildhall, at which there was a good exhibition of engravings, pic-


tures and curiosities. There was a large number of fashionable visitors
on the occasion, and the beautiful new room which has been built to
receive the hooks and manuscripts of the City of London was incon-
veniently crowded. We of course took a look before leaving at our
old friends Gog and Magog in the Hall.
Among the places I delighted to go to in my early days, and which
I now wished to show my wife, was the Tower of London, so after
leaving Guildhall we proceeded to that curious old monument of ancient
times and customs. We went the regular round of the places shown
to visitors, and the splendid armoury—The stores containing 60,000
stand of arms ready for use—The block and the spot where so many
distinguished characters suffered death at the hands of the executioner
—The Tower where the young Princes were smothered —The Traitor's
Q a te —Cells where numbers of celebrated people have been confined
and upon the walls of which are still to be seen affecting memorials
of unfortunate men who suffered for their country's religion —The
Royal jewels including the Crown of England said to he worth a
million—and a host of other interesting things.
Went to Exeter Hall to hear the sublimest musical expression of
Christian Faith and Hope, Handel's Messiah given with all the vast
resources and appliances of the Sacred Hamonic Society of London.
The Band and Chorus consisted of 700 performers aided by the splendid
Organ, the whole being conducted by Sir Michael Costa. The solo
singers on the occasion were all first-class, including Signor Foli, Miss
Enriquez, Madlle Carola and others. Anything more magnificent
cannot well he imagined, I felt that while the memory of it lasted I
should never he able to listen to any other music and that I could
never forget such a glorious composition so gloriously rendered.
I accepted an invitation to attend a meeting of the Graphic Society
at the University College where I and most of us were educated.
It was held in the great Library and the Flaxman Hall. At this con-
versazione I was introduced to Mr. Foley, R. A., the eminent sculptor,
Professor Donaldson the architect, and a host of other Literary and
Artistic celebrities of the day.
I one day found myself standing in front of the house in which I was
born, a place associated with all my earliest recollections, and in a few
moments —minutes at most —the chief events of my life were passed in
review, and " a flood of thoughts came o'er me, that filled my eyes with
tears." I walked down the streets to the old Chapel we used to
frequent in our younger days, and the only change I could see in it
was that the pulpit had been altered from the curious box stuck on the
wall as of old, to one of ordinary construction; there was the lunette
stained glass window at the end of the Chapel which I when a hoy
used to look up at and wonder what it all meant, the clock in the
gallery, the pews, &c., all, all remain just as they were years and
years ago. What " memories of old," both pleasant and unpleasant
the sight of this old place of worship brought to my mind 1
These notes I find, if continued will extend this little work to a
length never contemplated by me I must therefore " Lump " as the
Americans say the few remaining things I had intended to say a word
or two about —The Royal Academy —Highgate Cemetery—The Great
Hotels —Zoological Gardens—Parks —Albert Memorial—South Ken-
sington Museum —International Exhibition—Covent Garden Market—
London University —Royal Exchange —The Holborn Viaduct—Thames
Embankment —Docks —Bridges—Railway Stations everyone of which
I visited —Thorneycroft's Steam Yacht-building yard—Crosby Hall
Dining Rooms —Bazaars —Westminster Abbey—Bank of England—
The new Islington, and the Smitlifield Cattle Markets—The Lord


Mayor's Show—Exhibition of Dore's pictures—Madame Tussaud's—■
Soup Kitchens—Hanipstead Heath—and the death of the Emperor
Napoleon which occurred while we were in London.
TRIP TO BELGIUM AND GERMANY.
After a sojourn of five or six weeks in London I started on a trip
to Belgium and in this journey I was alone. Taking the 2 18 train
(which unfortunately proved a slow one) at the Charing Cross Station,
I proceeded by the South Eastern Railway to Dover, where I arrived
at 5 30, and considering the distance is only 76 miles this may be
looked upon as rather a miserable rate of travelling for England. I
put up for the night at the " Royal Oak," one of the very few hotels
now remaining in the country, of the old type, where the Landlord
comes into the Coffee Room of an evening and smokes his " yard of
clay " with his customers, while he informs them of all the hunting
and farming news of the district. There were also stopping there two
young Americans who were on their way to Paiis, who amused me
very much with their description of London, and the comparisons
they drew between our Capital and New York, which I must say were
always very much in favour of the former.
The following morning it was raining and blowing heavily but the
b -ave little " Maid of Kent" steamed out of Port and faced it, although
it was thought she would take advantage of the proviso " wind and
weather permitting " and soon all on board except myself were suffering
from sea sickness, however it was only for some three hours (days I
expected it appeared to them| and we were safely deposited after a
very bad passage, on the pier at Calais. By the 12 25 train I left for
Brussels. First you traverse a low, alluvial plain, where you notice
how the ancient Estuary (one of the candidates for the title of Partus
Itius, Caesar's point of embarkation) has been converted into dry land
by herring-boning the mud and scoring the morass with frequent
ditches, whose contents, thrown out, solidify the rest. Proceeding
inland you pass luxuriant hop-grounds, lofty elms, and other indications
of a deep, rich soil.
At Blandain the frontier town, there is a visite or Custom-house
examination of your luggage, but the thing is a mere matter of form
a tit-for-tat ceremony, principally kept up as a set-off and a reply to
French protectionist rigours. If France trill examine everything
strictly, Belgium cannot utterly relinquish her right of examination in
return. After playing at being searched on the Belgium side of the
Frontier, you skim over a fertile plain and you see little patches of to
me the not unaccustomed broad-leaved tobacco plants, the ground
then becomes more undulating and picturesque. Habitations are
frequent and have an air of comfort. All the farm-houses look snug
and pretty as you near Tournai and speed on through Lenze and Eng-
hein. Hal the last station we stopped at is quite a picture, and it is
in this little town that you can see the miraculous Virgin who caught
the cannon balls fired at the siege of Hal in the skirts of her petticoat 1
and the balls are there to prove it.
From this into Brussels the scene is like fairy-land if you have ever
seen it. Such trees, such fields, such streamlets, such meadows, such
chateaux and parks ! I arrived in Brussels at 5 30, and took up my
quarter at the Hotel de L'Europe in the Place Royale opposite the
church of St. Jaques, in front of which stands the fine statue of the
Crusader Godfrey de Bouillon, who in 1099 led the storming party
which successfully entered Jerusalem and delivered the Holy place*
from the hands of the Moslems.


The following morning after an early breakfast I started off for a
ramble round the Town and to inspect the two large Railway Stations,
which are situated at opposite ends of the city and connected by along
and wide street dividing the town into two equal portions. It is
surprising how well I remember places, although years have passed
since I visited Brussels, yet I required no guide or did I need once
even to ask my way but went direct to the places I wauted. The first
being the Arcade of St. Hubert, which although fine is nothing to be
compared to that in Milan, I then just took a look in at the fine old
Cathedral of St. Michel-Gudule, and saw the beautifully painted glass
it has in its windows, and the carved pulpit by Verbruggen, representing
the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the garden of Eden, from the
Cathedral I walked on to the Place du Congres in the centre of which
is a fine column something after the style of the one iu, or that was in,
the Place Vendome Paris ; Passed the Botanical Gardens, and then
visited the Grand Place in which is the famous Hotel de Yille with its
exquisite Gothic spire 364 feet high, in this open square are some very
curious old houses, and the monument of Counts Egmont and Hoorue
set up in 1864.
I walked through the Place de la Monnaie in which is the Theatre
Royal. The Place des Martyrs with its pretty gardens in the centre
of which is a statue of Liberty erected over the tombs of the Belgium
Patriots, who fell fighting to regain their independence in 1830, on the
base is inscribed the word " Patria Inspected the Station du Nord,
and then by means of tram and 'bus went to the Station du Midi and
did a little more in the way of inspection, the results of which I as
usual carefully noted. In the course of my wanderings I went through
some of the principal streets, the Boulevards, de Waterloo, du Midi,
du Regent, Observatoire, Jardin Botanique, and D' Anvers, Place des
Palais which has some beautiful buildings, the Park, Rue Royale, &c.,
&e., not forgetting to pay a visit to the very interesting fountain
with its diminutive far famed statue in the Rue de L 'Etiyye behind
the Hotel de Ville, and known as the Mannekin Fountain.
Brussels is certainly a very agreeable City, a miniature Paris. It
would perhaps not be so very interesting to the Antiquarian, the His-
torian, or the lover of Fine Arts, although the latter will find some
splendid paintings in the Museum of Ancient Paintings, the Museum
of Modern Paintings, the Palace of the Duke of Arenberg and the
Wirtz Gallery.
As I was not now on a pleasure trip but one merely to obtain some
professional information, I pushed on for Cologne. Leaving Brussels
by the 9 40 a.m. Express train on a cold morning in November I found
the feet warmers that were placed in the carriages very comforting as
we steamed away past Louvain, Tirelemont, Landen, Ans, Liege the
Birmingham, and Virvier the Leeds of Belgium, Dolhain to Herbesthal.
The country between Louvain and Tirelemont is very uninteresting,
on nearing Landen the Line runs through the plains of Neerwinden
where two great battles were fought, one in 1693 when the third
William was beaten by the French under Marshal Luxemburg, and
the other in 1793 when the Austrians defeated the revolutionary army
and drove them from Belgium. From Ans there is a steep ascent, the
trains being taken up by powerful Tank Engines to the Stationary
Engine House at the summit of the Hill. In descending the incline
plain on the other side you get a fine view of the Meuse Valley, the
whole city of Liege with its numerous manufactories and churches,
extending over the valley at the junction of the Meuse and Ourthe.
This incline plain is 2|- miles in length, and was formerly worked by
rope and two fixed engines of 80 H. P., but now by powerful Tank


Locomotives. As I passed the station I just caught sight of the Hotel
where I stopped wlieu iu Liege some years ago.
On leaving Liege, the Line crosses the Meuse by a fine stone bridge
of seven arches, its total length being 469 feet, and between this and
Virvier the country is most picturesque, woodland and stream, greets
the eye as the train shoots along, which after the flat fertility of Bel-
gium generally, is only the more grateful. On this portion of the
Line which is only 16 miles in length there are nineteen tunnels.
Virvier is the frontier town, but there is no examination of luggage as
the train stops 10 minutes at the next station (in Germany) for this
purpose, carriages however are changed and you have time to get
something to eat at the Buffet one of the best in Belgium. We are
now in Germany and at Herbesthal an official passes down the train
and looks at all the passengers, but I did not see a single carpet bag
opened. A short distance from this station the Railway is carried on
a bridge of 17 arches, 120 feet high in the centre, over the valley of
the Guile, the Line then passes through two tunnels, the second of
which is 2,220 feet long pierced through a sandhill, it then descends an
incline plain, up which carriages are drawn by means of a Stationary
Engine in coming from Cologne. At Aix-la-Chapelle we stopped a
few minutes ; close to the side of the Line is the Castle of Franken-
bnrg, Charlemagne is reported to have built a Castle on this spot, in
which he dwelt, and his Queen Fastrado died there. Some two hours
after we near our destination and as we approached Cologne obtained
a fine view of its numerous towers and steeples. The Line passes
through one of the Forts and enters the central Railway Station, close
to the Cathedral and the magnificent new Iron Bridge over the Rhine.
I was strongly recommended to go to the Hotel du Nord, and did so,
and had not to repent of it as I found it a first-class house and well
situated, being close to the Rhine, Central Station, and Cathedral.
It has 263 bed-rooms and an elegant Dining Saloon decorated in white
and gold, but it is the first I was ever in where smoking was allowed at
all hours in the day. Cologne is not a very large town (122,000) but is
strongly fortified, the streets are narrow, badly laid out, badly paved,
and badly lighted, but there are some splendid shops and good hotels.
I wa'ked over the Rhine by the splendid Iron Bridge 1,500 feet in
length, which serves both for the Railway and Common Road, return-
ing by the Bridge composed of 39 boats the entire length being 1,250 feet.
The great attraction in Cologne is of course the Cathedral which is
within 50 yards of the Railway Station, it is necessary to walk right
round the area in which it stands to get a good idea of this noble piece
of Gothic Architecture. It is 511 feet long by 231 broad, the nave is
160 and the aisles are 80 feet high, and it is nearly 250 feet to the
ridge of the roof. It was commenced in 1248 and is not yet finished.
It is the only Catholic church on the Continent in which I ever saw
regular Pews. The stained glass windows are splendid, the best I
think I have ever seen, and are for the moßt part by modern Artists
of Munich. The two towers of the west front when finished are to be
more than 500 feet above the level of the square from which they rise.
When it is entirely finished they say it will be the most splendid and
perfect specimen of Gothic Architecture in the world, but I have heard
that said of other cathedrals, my opinion however, is, that there is
nothing in that way to beat the one at Milan. There are some twenty
other churches in Cologne but I only went into three, viz. that of St.
Martin which is by all accounts one of the finest specimens of Roman-
esque in Germany ; St. Peter's which has the " Crucifixion of Peter "
by Rubens ; and the church of St. Ursula and the " Eleven thousand
Virgins " their relics being seen on the walls.


There are upwards of sixty manufacturers of Eau-de-Cologne in the
city, I visited the house of the original distiller of the genuine article
Johann Maria Farina, in the Julichs Platz, but did not buy any.
Having seen sufficiently of Cologne I made my way back via Liege
and Malines (which is the great central station of Belgium and to
which the various railway Lines converge), to Antw r erp got domiciled
at the Hotel de la Paix in the Rue des Menuisiers. We left Cologne
at 11 43 a.m., and arrived at the Commercial capital of Belgium at
6 p.m. the distance being 150 miles. The Lines of Belgium belong to
and are worked by the state and there is not even a village of any
importance without railway communication. The fares are lower than
in any other country being per English mile for the three classes
respectively lTd, —0'285d and —o'ssd.—Express fares are however
25 per cent higher than the ordinary fares.
The arrangments and internal comfort of the Railwav Carriages are
different on different lines, varying very considerably. In ceitain first
and second-class carriages you can smoke. On their doors is inscribed
" Fumeurs," or "On Peift Fumer." No one, therefore, who does not
appreciate the aroma of Belgian havannahs or bird's-eye need get in,
or, if he gets in, has a right to make " observations." The inscription
is for male travellers, equivalent to the " Dames Seules " of the
ladies' carriage on French railway-lines. It indicates a refuge for
unprotected gentlemen, travelling as I am, where they will be safe
from the attacks of aggressive females—unless, indeed the latter enter
with the full intention of standing fire.
The following day was employed thus : —I first visited (one always
does in these places) the Cathedral of Notre Dame, a Gothic structure
of exceeding beauty, it is, or rather the spire or tower is, 412 feet high
and runs up tapering with gradual yet correct mathematical precision.
The church contains the famous picture by Rubens of the Decent from
the Cross ; in front of the west door is a remarkable work in iron by
the celebrated blacksmith Quentin Matsys who afterwards became a
great Painter. I then walked to the Quai Van Dyck, where I landed
some years ago when visiting Belgium, round by the docks to inspect
those fine works and the system of tramways about them ; then to the
church of St. Jacques an imposing looking edifice containing the tomb
of Rubens, and several fine pictures ; on to the Place de Meir which
should rather be called Rue de Meir, seeing that it is nothing but a
fine street, —Place Teniers with its fine statue to the artist of that
name, then down the splendid street called the Avenue des Arts, and
on until I found myself at the Railway Station which is anything but
a creditable structure for a town like Antwerp.
After lunch I visited the Place Verte in the centre of which is a very
fine statue to the great Painter Rubens ; then to the Jesuits' Church of
St. Augustine which contains some good pictures and remarkable
statues in wood, indeed the wood-carving in all the churches here is
perhaps unequalled by any in the world, there was a grand service
going on in this church at the time of my visit for something or some-
body, and the jnusic on the occasion was splendid as in addition, to the
fine organ and singers, the choir was supplemented by a lot of
Fidlers; I then went on wandering about the town until 5 o'clock
when I returned to the Hotel and dined at the table d'hote.
The streets of Antwerp, like those of most of the towns in Belgium
are not laid out on any plan but have followed the natural caprices of
a growing population, they wind and turn so that a stranger has no
small difficulty in choosing his way, but the quaint old houses six or
seven stories high, tapering up to a pinnacle, and their fronts all adorn-
ed with the tracery which characterises the buildings erected in Flan-


ders by the Spaniards, present themselves in sueli groups and are so,
picturesque that you forgive the irregular construction of the City.
I spent a most delightful evening at Mr. Cruysman's 18 Longue Rue
de l'Hospital where my brother was so well entertained during the
great Artistic Congress held at Antwerp in the year 1861. Mrs. Cruys-
man is an accomplished English Lady and I shall ever gratefully
remember their kindness to me.
The next morning I crossed the Scheldt (Scant Fleuve) to Tete de
Flandre to inspect the works of a narrow gauge Line worked by a
Company that runs to Ghent, and called " Chemin de Fer du Pays de
Waes," and having made a few notes, returned to Lunch at Mr. Cruys-
man's, after which I drove to the Station of the above named railway,
which is on the Antwerp side of the river, the passengers having taken
their tickets are conveyed across by a steamer kept specially for the
purpose. By the 230 p.m. train I left for Ghent, passing through
St. Nicholas, .Lockeren'and the fine country the most densely populated
in Belgium and known as the Pays de Waes, we arrived in Ghent at
4 o'clock. Having some three hours to spare I took a stroll round the
town and then got some tea at the Buffet of the Railway Station, and
which, without exception both as regards the station itself and the
Refreshment rooms is the best in Belgium. At 7 15 p.m. I left for
Lille in France, arriving there at 9 54 I took the 'bus to the Hotel de
l'Europe, smoked a cigar and went to bed.
Up early in the morning for a stroll. Lille is a town of considerable
commercial importance and has a population of 155,000. The Fortifi-
cations are considered Yaubin's Chef d'Geuvres, they were captured by
Malborough in 1708 and have since been altered ; the streets are wide
and well formed, the houses mostly iB the modern taste and well built,
except in the quarter of the cotton spinners, of whom there are from
7,000 to 8,000 in the town.
I left Lille by the 10 20 train and got to Calais in a couple of hours,
which gave mo time to get a comfortable dinner at the cafe attached
to the Station. Left by the steamer " Wave "at 1 80, had a very bad
passage, the seas washing over the decks of the little craft in constant
succession, and it was quite pitiable to see the state the people were in
for three hours, not one on board besides myself enjoying the trip.
On landing at Dover we were ushered into the Railway Carriages
which lined the Pier, and in an hour and forty minutes after were in
London.
TRIP TO WALES AND IRELAND.
Among the many delightful remembrances of our journeying through
Europe, certainly, not the least will be the trip we made to Ireland to
visit our old Australian friends Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Thomas.
Leaving the Paddington Station by the 1 45 train, we flew along the
Great Western Railway, just getting a glimpse in passing Slough, of
Windsor Castle, and reached Oxford by 2 30; between that city and
Bunbury we found the country completely flooded from the long con-
tinued rains we had had just previously, the ground being covered with
water, no doubt was a source of great amusement to the students,
whatever it may have been to the Farmers, as we observed quite a
fleet of small boats going about among the trees, reminding me of
similar scenes in Australia. Passed Leamington at 330 and reached
Birmingham by 4 30, soon after passing the latter town it got dark,
but the country as far as Wolverhampton we found brilliantly
illuminated by the thousands of furnaces on either side of us. Arrived
at Shrewsbury at 6 10 and we were soon comfortably located at " The


Haven," and enjoying our tea before a roaring fire. We were soon
after joined by my brother who came down by the Loudon and North
Western Train.
After an early breakfast the following morning we took a. walk round
the town. Shrewsbury is irregular in plan and contains many houses
of ati inferior class built partly of timber, hut often of very picturesque
appearance, there are however in. places, bouses of a better description
handsome and regular in their construction. The Town and Country
Halt, the Public Kooms, and the curious old Market House which dates
from the reign of Elizabeth are worth looking at. Shrewsbury is
situated on two eminences rising gently from the river Severn which
by its windings forms a peninsula. The names of the old streets are
quaint Hogpole, Wyle, Cop, Pride Hill and bring us back to the days
of Hotspur or to the time when Shakespere's " Cakes and Ale " were
goodly fare. Shrewsbury is supposed to have been founded by the
Britons in the fifth century as an asylum from their Saxon foes. The
vicinity of the town and the town itself were often' the battle
field between the Normans and the Welsh and subsequently
the English and the Welsh. The most noted military
contest connected with the town is the great battle in July, 1418,
between Henry IV and Henry Percy surnamed Hotspur, in which the
army of the latter was routed and Percy slain, the site of this bloody
contention appears to have been " Battle field," three miles from
Shrewsbury; Shakespere's genins has given to this event an undying
interest, and the bard's story oMJalstaff's fighting with Percy " a full
hour by. Shrewsbury clock," after he had been killed, will ever be con-
sidered as one of the most effective of Shakespere's dramatic pictures.
Battle-field Church was erected by the victor as a thanks-offering.
The population is about 25,000. By the 10. 5 train we were again on
the move, the morning was beau tiful and the scenery we were passing
through lovely. Arrived in Chester we immediately commenced
rambling about that fine old English city; it stands on a rocky sand-
stone height on the banks of th e Dee and is mostly enclosed in an
oblong quadrangle of ancient walls 7 or 8 feet thick, nearly two miles
in circuit and with four gates, and now forming a promenade with
parapets where two persons can walk abreast. The two main streets
cross each other at right angles, and were cut out of the rock by the
Komans four to ten feet below the level of the houses, .The houses in
these streets are curiously arranged, the front part of their second
stories as far back as sixteen feet forms a continuous paved promenade
or covered gallery open in front like 'a verandah, where there are
pillars and steps up from, the street below, with private apartments
above, inferior shops and warehouses below, and the chief shops of the
town within the covered way. This arrangement, called the " rows,"
together with the ancient walls, and the half-timbered construction of
many of the houses with quaintly carved ornamental gables of the
16th century renders Chester perhaps the most picturesque city in
England.
We walked through the Park and saw the fine marble statue of the
Marqnis of Westminster by Thorneycroft, and came upon St. John's
Church which is supposed to hawe been founded by Ethelred in 698
and now partly in ruins ; then on to the Cathedral, an irregular massive
looking structure of crumbling sandstone, which is now and has for
some time past, been undergoing the process of " restoring ;" it was
375 by 200 feet with tower 127 feet high, it was formerly the Church
of the Abbey of St, Werburgh, and for 650 years was one of the richest
in England. Walked on to the Barracks (said to contain 30,000 stand
of arms)., in front of which is a bronze equestian statue of Viscount


Combermere ; just took a look at the Castle and the river Dee, which
is crossed at the spot by a stone arch of 200 feet span the largest stone
arch that has been built. The population of Chester is about 27,000.
The fallowing interesting account of Chester is given in the
Illustrated London Nens
On the border of North Wales, and on the high road from London
to Ireland, this ancient city, with maey features in its aspect highly
characteristic of Old England, has a strong claim to esteem as a
monument of our national history. It ranks, we may consider, next to
York in this respect among the provincial towns which have not been,
like Edinburgh, the capital of a separate kingdom. The earliest
record or token of its dignity is found under the Roman empire, when
the position on the Dee, or Deva, was an important military station.
It is doubtless from the ordinary term Castra, used for a Roman
fortified encampment which the Saxon tongue altered to Ceaster, that
the name of this and many other English towns is derived. But if, as
seems probable, this place was commonly spoken of as the Castra,
with no distinguishing prefix as in other cases, we should conclude
that it was a greater regional centre for the Roman army than such
places Manchester or Lancaster, or Leicester. We know that it was
placed under the command of Agricola, in his able aud successful
labours to complete the conquest of West Britain. After the with-
drawal of the Roman legions Chester was exposed both on the land
side and from the sea to hostile attacks. It was assailed by the
piratical Northmen and pillaging Danes in their naval cruisers. It
was captured, lost, and regained by the Saxon Kings of Northumbria
and of Mercia, till the Heptarchy was merged in the united realm of
the old English nation. The Celtic principalities of North Wales or
Cambria, and of Cumbria, and Strathclyde, were subjected to the
Bretwalda, or emperor of Britain, as the English monarch was now
styled. It is stated that five of their petty Kings, in attendance at his
Court here at Chester, rowed the boat which conveyed Edgar across
the Dee to St. John's. Thereafter came the Norman Conquest;
upon which Cheshire was granted by William, as a county palatine, to
the redoubtable Hugh Lupus, with as much of Wales as he could take
from the Welsh. The Earls Palatine took all they could. They ruled
city and county with a deputed sovereign sway till 1237, when King
Henry 111. united this earldom to the Crown. But since that time the
earldom of Chester has been granted to the Prince of Wales. In the
wars of Edward I. against the Welsh Chester was an essential base of
operations. But it was less exposed than towns in the midland shires,
to share the brunt of hostilities in the Wars of the Roses. Not so,
however, in the civil wars of the seventeenth century, when the attach-
ment of the Cheshire nobility and gentry to Charles I. brought on
severe trials for this ever-faithful city. It received the unfortunate
King, and held out for him, in spite of famine, till the defeat, within
sight of the town walls, of an army that was to raise the siege, in
September, 1645. The ecclesiastical institutions, also, of Chester have
some interest for the student of history. The cathedral is a venerable-
looking pile of red sandstone, chiefly in the Decorated Gothic style,
with Perpendicular additions, but having an Early English eastern
portion. It was the Abbey Church of St. Werburgh, attached to a
community of Benedictine monks till the dissolution of monasteries in
1541. This edifice has lately undergone a complete restoration.
Outside the town walls is what remains of the old Collegiate Church of
St. John, which was of great magnificence.
We then went back to the Station, got lunch in the refreshment
room and left by the 2 48 train, passed through the town of Flint, just


getting a view of its old tower, and was soon after running past Conway
close to its old Castle, one of the noblest castellated structures in
Britain, and by 6 o'clock were comfortably housed in the Royal Hotel
Caernarvon.
The following morning we got a very hurried look round the town,
the principal feature in which is its Castle situated at the west end.
This building was commenced by Edward I. in 1'284, and it is now one
of the noblest ruins of the kind in the kingdom, the walls are still
entire and encloses an oblong area of three acres. There are thirteen
embattled towers with five, six, or eight sides and surmounted by Tur-
rets. The gateway under the great square tower has four portcullises.
The town itself was once surrounded by walls and round towers in con-
nection with the Castle, and a great portion of this still exists. The
streets of the town are narrow and the harbour capable only of accom-
modating vessels up to 400 tons. The population is not more than
9,000.
At 9 45 a.m. we left Caernarvon for Portmadoc, changed trains at
Afonwen station, passed Crieccieth with its Castle (there are no end of
Castles in these parts) perched on the top of the hill, and arrived at
the small seaport town of Portmadoc by 11 80. Leaving my travelling
companions to look about the place, I went and delivered my letter of
introduction from Mr. Fairlie, C. E. to the Engineer and Manager of
the Festiniog Railway which has its terminus in this town, unfortun-
ately it was impossible for Mr. Spooner to accompany us that day
along the Line but he issued instructions to all the officers to show us
whatever we desired to see connected with the works, armed with this
order I rejoined C. and A. who had, as previously arranged, gone to
" The Sportsman " and ordered lunch to be in readiness against my
return. At 15 we left by this truly wonderful little line of Railway
for Festiniog. It is a single Line of 1 foot 111 inches gauge and
winds with a continuous rising gradient averaging 1 in 70 for 17 miles
round the sides of the mountains. The scenery is perfectly charming,
although at times you cannot help feeling a little nervous where the
rail runs so close to the edge of the precipices as it constantly does re-
minding one of Mount Cenis. As you pass along you obtain beautiful
views of the peaceful valley lying beneath, of which it has well been
said " that with the woman one loves, with the friends of one's heart,
a man may pass his life in this vale and think it but a day."
At Tan-y-Bwlch we stopped a few minutes to allow a train of 90
trucks loaded with slate to pass us, we had another stoppage also at
Duffws where we had to change trains and did not get to Festiniog
until 3 o'clock. Festiniog is only a poor mountain village but there is
a great trade carried on in the district in connection with the slate
quarries. We endeavoured to obtain some refreshment at the only
decent looking house in this primitive place the " Abbey Arms," but
owing to the landlord being out, and the fact of his having taken the
keys with him we had to go away as we came. At 330 we left on our
return journey, and in the course of three hours were again in
Caernarvon having spent a very pleasant day the weather being
delightful although rather cold, sharpening our appetites for the good
dinner they had prepared for us at the Royal Hotel, where we are to
pass another night.
It would appear that Australians have a similar mania for writing
their names everywhere, as the English people have, here for instance
in the Royal Hotel Caernarvon we discovered the following written
upon a pane of glass in one of the bedrooms, "J. Struth, Sydney,
N. S. W., 1856." We have seen hundreds of places in the course of
our travels disfigured by this very silly practise. At 9 35 we made a


start for Ireland, a rim of 25 minutes by rail brought us to the Menai
station where we found that we should have to wait upwards of two
hours for the Irish Mail Train, so we took a walk over Tilford's famous
suspension bridge (580 feet span) into Anglesea, then taking a boat
pulled down the Straits to the Britannia Tubular Bridge ; this great
work has four openings of which the two centre spans are 460 feet
each, the two short tubes between the Piers and the shore abutments
were constructed on scaffolding and stages in the places they were
intended to occupy when finished, the long central tubes however
were built at the water's edge from which they were floated off on
pontoons to the base of the Piers or towers which had grooves or
recesses made to receive them and then elevated gradually, the masonry
being filled in under them as they proceeded, by powerful hydraulic
presses. There are a double line of tubes and the total length of the
Bridge is 1841 feet, and of the tubes 1518. The height of the tube in
the centre is 30 feet, diminishing to 22 feet 9 inches at the abutments,
" the difference being made to give a true parabolic curve to the top
while the bottom is straight." The total weight of iron used in its
constructions was 12,000 tons, and it cost"£6o2,ooo. Opened in 1850.
We returned in the boat, after a strong pull against the tide, to where
we started from, and recrossed the straits by Tiford's great engineer-
ing works to the station.
We left Menai at 12 15, passed through the Britania Tubular Bridge,
when we got a fine view of Snowdon, ran across Anglesea (Englishman's
Island) which is flat and uninteresting, there being very little timber
and the soil poor, and arrived at Holyhead by 115. At 2 we proceeded
on board the Royal Mail Steamer " Ulster " and after a very fair pas-
sage (although it did not appear so to my fellow travellers) across the
Irish Channel of 41 hours we arrived in Kingstown Harbour and on
landing drove to the " Royal Marine Hotel," and after getting some
tea started off to the friends who we had come over to visit, with whom
we spent a couple of hours, and on the following day availed ourselves
of their kind invitation to take up our quarters at Windsor Terrace.
We spent five clear days in Dublin and enjoyed ourselves immensely.
The word " Dublin" I believe is Irish for black-pool and the city
certainly does credit to its name so far as regards the dirty state in
which the thoroughfares are kept. The river Liffey divides the town
into two nearly equal portions. There are some fine squares such as
for instance Merrion Square occupying 13 acres, and Stephen's Green
which encloses 20 acres and is nearly a mile in circuit, the park and
squares of Trinity College occupy more than 40 acres. In the new
parts of Dublin the streets run at right angles to one another and are
remarkable for their breadth and uniformity of their architecture with-
out being monotonous, the most imposing one is Sackville Street which
is 120 feet broad and 2,100 feet long, at its north end stands the Ro-
tunda with Rutland square—in its centre the beautiful lonic portico of
the General Post Office and Nelson's Monument (130 feet high)—while
on the south it is terminated by Carlisle Bridge and a wedge-like
block of noble houses formed by the converging sides of Westmore-
land and D'Olier streets.
The public buildings of Dublin are famous for their number and
grandeur, but in this respect I am inclined to think there has always
been a little exaggeration, they perhaps appear more to advantage
being in stone while all the surrounding dwelling-houses are built of
brick, there are however undoubtedly many fine buildings and among
the first class I may mention the Bank of Ireland I formerly the
Houses of Parliament) and where we were shown the identical room in
which the Peers of Ireland assembled, still left with its furniture and


everything just as it was before the union—Trinity College—The
Custom House—and the Four .Courts which from the chasteness of
their design and massiveness of their proportions have a very imposing
effect. The Castle has no pretensions to architectural beauty if you
except the " Chapel Royal." There are monuments in Dublin, to
William 111. in College green, (once a ■ green hut now a fine paved street)
of Nelson in Sackville Street, of the late Duke of Wellington in
Phoenix Park, and of Burke and Goldsmith in front of Trinity College.
The Liffey is crossed by seven stone and two iron bridges, and
throughout the whole extent of the city the banks of the River are
faced with granite walls and parapets. There are some good docks
also, below the Custom House.
The Phoenix Park is a magnificent area of nearly 2,000 acres, in
some parts level, in others with broken ground having a large amount
of timber and brushwood which shelter large herds of deer. Portions
of the ground are set apart for Botanical and Zoological gardens, and
in the latter we met an old friencl in the shape of an Elephant which
belongs to Prince Alfred and used to amuse the children of Sydney
while ashore there during the Duka of Edinburgh's visit to the Colony.
It is the largest Park in the British Dominions.
One of the great sights of Dublin is Messrs. G-uimiess's Brewery,
and I was very glad to have had the opportunity of seeing this splendid
establishment. It is certainly a wonderful place, covering as I under-
stand it does, upwards of 12 acres of ground. The store for casks
contained at the time of our visit some 80,000, and more than a
hundred coopers are constantly employed in making and repairing
casks, on the Canal close to their premises they have ten steamers
running, They keep 110 horses and the stabling for them is a sight
worth seeing. There are four steam engines from 15 to 70 H. P. kept
constantly at work. They have 110 vats many of which hold as much
as 2,(100 barrels of beer. The" cellars occupy an area of three acres, —
at least so said the man who accompanied us over the works and he
may he correct in these details although he did not appear to know
much about the process of brewing, a matter of little importance seeing
that we had with us an " expert" in the science.
We were at the closing ceremony of the Great Exhibition just then
being held in Dublin when we saw the Lord Lieutenant (Earl Spencer)
and some of the aristocracy of Ireland, and so far as the ladies were
concerned I am hound in truth to say that they must have been a long
way off when beauty was being shared out.
We paid a visit to St. Patrick's Cathedral, which though much
smaller than most of the English Cathedrals, is, nevertheless, a noble
church. The architectural details of the interior is of a style usually
denominated early English, the exterior however is far less Anglican
in character. The following are the dimensions of the church, entire
length 800 feet; breadth of nave and aisles 80 feet; length of transept
157 feet; height of tower and spire 223 feet. It is not rich in
monuments, there are some however that merit attention. They are
those of Richard, the first Earl of Cork A.D. 1631, which is interesting
from the fact that it originally occupied the place of the altar, and
was removed from that position by the celebrated Lord Strafford, who
being a Hign Churchman, was scandalised that the Lord's table should
be displaced for the monument of any man. . The Earl of Cork,
however, who, it appears, was slttl alive although his monument teas
erected, showed his revenge by taking a prominent place amongst the
witnesses at Strafford's trial. The monument to Dean Swift is a
simple slab bearing a Latin epitaph. There is a similar memorial to
Mrs. Hester Johnson, the celebrated " Stella," who died in 1728. A.


statue has recently been placed in the church of the brave Captain
Boyd, R. N., who lost his own life in endeavouring to rescue the crew
of a ship that was wrecked off Kingstown, and there is also a tablet to
the memory of Sam Lover, besides all the banners of the Knights- of
St. Patrick. The Cathedral which was restored at the sole expense of
Sir Arthur Guiuness is situated in the lowest and dirtiest portion of
Dublin.
Among the many other sights in Dublin I must not forget to
mention the Barracks which are the largest in the United Kingdom,
and the famous linen draper s shops, Messrs. Todd, Burns and Co.,
and Messrs. Pym's Establishment, but what we did not see was a clean
or decent cab for they are without exception the dirtiest and worst
appointed lot of vehicles that I have ever seen in any city.
The Environs of Dublin are especially beautiful. Rathmine a
southern suburb has became a large township and is the favourite
residence of the wealthier part of the mercantile community. Glasnevin
on the north is also a fine suburb, and in its cemetery lie the remains
of Curran, O'Connell, Tom Steele and Peter Byrne. Dalkey and
Kingstown may also be considered as suburbs, the latter but six miles
from the city is a thriving and important seaport situated on the
shores of Dublin Bay, and previous to the harbour works being
commenced it was merely a fishing village known as Dunleary, the
name being changed to Kingstown when George IV paid it a visit in
1821. The harbour embraces an' area of 250 acres with a depth of
water varying from 13 to 27 feet, the pleasing situation of the town
and the invigorating air, has made Kingstown an important watering
place, and it is by rail only a few minutes ride from Dublin.
As I said before we enjoyed ourselves immensely in what Charles
Lever calls " Dear dirty Dublin " the " most car-drivingest City " of
the world, but cannot enter into any lengthened panegyric as to its
merits, and will like the author of " Charles O'Malley," leave the
following liues to express my feelings for the " loved spot."
" Oh ! Dublin, sure, there is no doubtin',
Beats every city upon the say ;
'Tie there you'll see O'Connell spouting,
And Lady Morgan making " tay."
For 'tis the capital of the greatest nation,
With finest peasantry on a fruitful sod,
Fighting like devils for conciliation,
And hating each other for the love of God.'
While stopping with our kind, jolly friends in Kingstown I paid
several visits to H. M. S. Vanguard* one of the finest armour plated
vessels of war in the Royal Navy and on board which Mr. J. C. Thomas
is a Lieutenant. On one occasion I dined on board with the officers,
a fine set of fellows, some of whom I had previously met in Sydney.
We left Kingstown one evening at 7 15 in the Royal Mail Steamer
Ulster, and after a fine passage of only 3J hours found ourselves once
again at Holyhead and comfortably housed for the night at the Royal
Hotel. In the morning we took a walk round the primitive, irregularly
built town of about 6,000 inhabitants. The harbour which is almost
dry at low water, is formed by a Pier about 1,000 feet in length running
north-east from an islet called Salt Island, which is connected with the
main land by a swivel-bridge. The harbour of refuge now just coin-
*The Vanguard carries 14 guns. Her engines are of 800 horse
power, and the registered tonnage is 3,774.


pletcd encloses a very large area of over 600 acres with a depth of six
fathoms.
At 11 45 a.m. we left Holyhead by the Irish Express train, and by
Stafford and Rugby reached London at 6 30, having run the 264 miles
including stoppages in six hours 45 minutes, and after taking tea in
one of the splendid refreshment rooms of the Euston Square Station
we proceeded to Camden Koad.
VI.
RETURN TO AUSTRALIA.
SOUTHAMPTON, GIBRALTAR, MALTA, ALEXANDRIA, SUEZ, ADEN, POINT
DE GALLE, ALBANY, MELBOURNE, SYDNEY.
The day at last arrived when we had to leave London on our return
journey to Australia. I pass over the never to be forgotten parting
with my dear Mother who I felt at the time I was never to see again,
and hasten on to the Waterloo Station where we were met by my
brother William who accompanied us as far as Farnboro' where he
left us to return to town I watching him as he stood on the platform
until a turn in the road shut him out from my sight. At Bisbopstoke
my brother Alfred joined us and we journeyed on together to
Southampton.
Having got our luggage safely on board the P. & O. Company's
S. S. Ceylon, which was not to sail until the following day, arranged
about our cabin, and made ourselves at home at Radley's Hotel we had
plenty of time to inspect the quaint old town. It occupies a peninsu-
lar at the head of the Southampton Water. The High Street which
is the principal thoroughfare extends from the Bargate on the north,
to the shore on the south border of the town. There are several other
very good streets, but the town considering its importance did not
come up to my expectations. St. Michael's Church the oldest in the
town is a Norman structure and several of the private houses are also
of Norman architecture. The Domus Dei dates from the end of the
12th century, and is one of the earliest hospitals in England. The
docks are large, covering an area of 208 acres. It is the Port of
departure and arrival for ten different steam companies including the
P. and O. The population is 50,000 just one third that of Sydney.
Southampton supplanted the ancient Clausentum which stood about
a mile to the north east, and its foundation is ascribed to the Anglo
Saxons. It is the birthplace of Isaac Watts (to whom a monument
has been erected in west park), and of a bard of quite a different sort—
Thomas Dibden.
When we went on board the Ceylon " for good," we found a bustling
scene on deck such as described by Thackeray when Colonel Newcome
leaves for the east in one of the old P. and O. Company's vessels, and
his words (with a few alterations) will serve to describe perfectly what
we witnessed on this occasion. " There were many a group of friends
closing wistfully together and saying the last words of blessing and
farewell. The bustle of the ship passes dimly round about them.
The hurrying noise of the crew and officers running on their duty, the
tramp and song of the men at the Capstan, the bells ringing as the
hour of departure draws nearer and nearer, all, all are unheaded as
mother and son, father and daughter, husband and wife hold hands yet
a little while."
At last the final bell is rang, and I feel a choking sensation in my
throat as they cry, " Now for the shore," that shore which in all


probability I shall never tread again. One more shake of the hand
and Alfred with the rest of the "strangers'' quit the ship, the gangway
is drawn ashore and the separation made complete. " Then the whole
vessel began to throb, arid its great screw to lash the water. The
chimney flung out its black signals for sailing, and our noble old craft
takes its first stroke to swim towards the ocean." We continue how-
ever to watch Alfred as he stands waving ns adieu (bringing a Bimilar
scene years ago at Liverpool vividly to mind) but soon lose sight of
him as we round the dock heads at 3 p.m. "Oh pangs of hearts torn
asunder—passionate regret —Cruel, cruel partings, shall you not end
one day ere many years, when the tears have been wiped from all eyes
and there shall be neither sorrow or pain."
We steamed down the Southampton waters—Passed the splendid
Military Hospital at Netley—l wrote a note to send off by the Pilot—
Went sadly down to dinner where everybody was trying to look cheer-
ful, and when tired, weary and half heart-broken I retired to my cabin
found a letter there (which the steward had forgotten to inform me of)
from William, containing the following lines entitled
PARTING.
Though we part, we are not severed,
Love will bind us all together;
All who love, by love are tethered
In the old lands and the new.
Bound in less, or wider spaces,
Stars and Planets move in order ;
True men have appointed places
Work together for the good.
Cease repining, nought shall sever,
Heavenly beacons light our home ;
Loving, we shall love for ever,
Grateful say " Thy will be done."
Though we part, we are not severed,
Love will bind us all together ;
All who love, by love are tethered,
In the old lands and the new.
I have crossed the Bay of Biscay three times before—twice in
Schooners of 100 tons (the " Champion " and " Active,") and once in a
large Steamer (the " Sarah Sands,") and although upon each of these
occasions it was at about the same time of year and we were
accompanied by bad weather, yet we did not experience such a hurricane
and terrible sea as this time in the P. and O. Company's Steamer
Ceylon. For the whole of one night and a part of the following day
we were placed in a most dangerous position, in consequence of the
Tiller breaking and the ship having to be kept on her course by means
of sails alone, and this with such a sea on! However the skill and
energy of Captain Methwin overcame every difficulty, and early on the
morning of the eighth day out, we rounded Cape St. Vincent with
splendid weather the sea being as smooth as glass, and keeping the
coast of Portugal and Spain in view nearly the whole day passed
Trafalgar Bay, (that I used to sing about,) at 7 o'clock, and anchored
oft' Gibraltar at 11 p.m.
The whole of the following day we spent ashore. Landing long
before breakfast at the old mole, in company with Mrs. Leech and Dr.


Sullivan, we thoroughly well " did" the town and Fortifications.
What a motley crowd pervades the street! Spanish contrabandistas,
theatrical looking fellows in slashed jackets and silver buttons ; dark
eyed, mattilla-clad Andalusian belies, Morocco Jews in red slippers,
veiled Moorish women, mixed up with all this foreign novelty a most
decided flavour of Ratcliffe Highway, Knight's bridge Barracks, and I
may add Millbank Prison, for British Soldiers, Sailors, and Prisoners
are to be found here. It is a charming place to touch at, you leave
Southampton maybe in a ehill fog, the rollers of the Bay of Biscay
pitch your P. and 0. Steamer about unmercifully and then you land
at Gibraltar to find oranges and figs and glorious sunshine.
We visited the Garrison Library and Reading Rooms where we saw
a beautiful large model of Gibraltar made to a correct scale and in-
cludes the entire " Rock," showing every house, fort, flagstaff, road,
dock, wharf &c., in the place, giving you a better idea at a glance of it,
than you could get by residing there for months without its aid. I
believe there is a similar one at Woolwich.
This " Rock" which forms the southern extremity of Spain (An-
dalusia) is three miles in length with an average of if mile in breadth.
The town is inhabited by a motley population of about '20,000, Span-
iards, Jews, and Moors. It consists of three parallel streets in which
the curious intermingling of English architecture and the Spanish
houses and forts spoils the effect of the whole. The " Rock " at its
highest point, the Sugar-loaf attains an elevation of 1,489 feet. There
are no springs and the inhabitants therefore have to collect the rain
fall in tanks. The Bay of Algesiras or Gibraltar is eight miles long
by five broad, with a depth in the centre of 100 fathoms. The
anchorage is not good and quite exposed.
The history of Gibraltar is remarkable and dates hack many centuries
although no certain information of its natural strength being made
available for defensive or aggressive purposes until the year 711 A. I).
when the Saracens fortified it, and one of the towers of the castle they
built still remains. Gibraltar has stood several protracted sieges, one
of them of nearly four years duration, in 1704 the English and Dutch
Fleet under the command of Sir George Rooke took it, and ever since
it has remained in the hands of the British although several efforts
have been made to retake it.
I must not forget to mention the pretty gardens of the Alameda and
Esplanade in which there is a monument to General Eliott who so
gallantly defended the place on one occasion.
We were well treated at the Glub-House Hotel, where we took our
meals and rested once or twice during the hard day's work of sight
seeing, and I embraced these opportunities of airing my Spanish a
little with the waiters, and as I sat in the porch smoking a manilla
previous to going on hoard again, and listened to the Castiliano
language being spoken around me, my thoughts naturally wandered to
that fine old city, Oviedo, at the extreme north of the Peninsula, where
I spent two or three years of my life. Yes, I could see plainly that
Oicilas Bpiscoporum as it was once called on account of the many
Spanish Prelates, who had been dispossessed in the middle ages,
taking refuge there. I could see its beautiful old cathedral as fine a
specimen of Gothic architecture as I have seen anywhere, the
ornamentation of which being as rich as it is elegant, and where are
laid the remains of many of the early Kings and Princes of the
Asturias of which Oviedo was the capital. There to is the church of
San Miguel containing some curious hut very questionable relics, and
whieh is the second oldest christian building after the Moorish
invasion. The quaint old square in the centre of the city which four


principal streets terminating in Alaraedas or promenades, branch off
towards the north, south, east and west respectively. I also took, in
imagination, walks in the immediate vicinity of the old city where
there are other churches in the early saxon style which are among the
oldest in Spain and surrounded by picturesque scenery, Troubia to,
with its vast iron and cannon works, was also remembered, and by
which runs the clear waters of the Nalon where I have so often bathed
or walked its banks with Josefa Segovia taking lessons in Spanish.
But I could not sit there long dreaming of the past, so laying in a
stock of cigars and enriching my photographic album by a fine large
view of the " Kock " we proceeded on board the Ceylon again, well
tired with our day's work, but greatly pleased at having had so good
an opportunity of seeing a place of such great importance, one that I
have long wished to visit having heard and read so much about it.
We found that Lord Roden, the Honorable Colonel Joslin, and other
of our passengers left us here, and that we had taken a number of
Arabs on board as deck passengers bound for Alexandria.
We left the same evening, passed through the straits which are
about 15 miles wide, and keeping along the Spanish coast got some fine
views of the mountains of Sierra Nevada.
Three or four more days steaming along the Mediterranean Sea,
during which we sighted the northern coast of Africa, brought us to
Malta and as we neared early on a fine bright morning the town of
Valletta, the forts commenced ball practice, sending the shots about
in what I thought an alarming manner but of course falling far short
of our vessel.
The anchor was no sooner down than we made for the shore (our
party being about the same as at the " Gib,") and in a few minutes we
were upon what Mr. Midshipman Easy called historic stairs of " Nix
Mangiarepassing through a regular drawbridge, overlooked by
tremendous fortifications, and guarded by sentries, we found ourselves
in a long narrow street, flanked by very tall houses, with overhanging
balconies and casements, gaily painted, and looking much like the
front of a stage scene, with the curtain up. We felt inclined to shout
aloud at the sudden picturesque look of the whole thing, like children
at a pantomime. The crowd was sufficiently foreign and various of
aspect. Women with the graceful bearing and draped mantilla of old
Spain—sombre-robed, broad-hatted Padres—high-wheeled, long-shafted
carts drawn by mules up the steep clean narrow street; water-
carriers, fruit sellers, all was deliciously novel.
First we went to the Governor's palace, a venerable edifice, built by
one of the Grand Masters. We roamed through the Armoury, and
saw De Beaumanire, L'lsle Adam, and other " past " Grand Masters of
the once mighty order of the Knights of Malta. Grim effigies in full
armour —the blazon of whose shields the Infidel well knew—from
whose corslets had rattled many a flight of arrows. We were shown
curious relics of the old wars with the Turk—the marble tombs of
long dead Knights,
Not to have visited the church of St. John's would have covered us
with merited ignominy, The floor is composed of the marble tombstones
of the Knights of Malta : from simple to the heads of the order. You
stand of necessity upon the slab which covers the bones of De Rohan
or Bois De Guilbert, and mark the lineage and blazonry of the warrior
who lies below, with a date centuries old—
" Their swords are rust,
Their bones are dust,
Their souls are with the saints, we trust."


The grand altar which 'stands at the uppermost part of the nave is
very sumptuous being constructed of various Coloured marble and
other valuable stones. Before it on either side on a raised pavement
stands a chair covered with a rich canopy of crimson velvet, that to
the left is occupied by the Bishop, and the one on the right is intended
for the sovereign of the Island, and over which is placed the escutcheon
of Great Britain. We descended into the crypt and saw the tombs of
Valletta the founder of the town and others. The church is certainly
one of the most curious and beautiful in Europe, the ceiling is richly
painted and the walls are a mass of carving and gilding.
We next visited the new opera house designed by Mr. C. Barry, and
cost .£50,000, a building that would do credit to Paris or London. We
went inside and for half an hour sat with Mrs. Leech and Dr. Sullivan
in one of the boxes listening to the rehearsal of Don Giovani.
Feeling mildly interested about dinner we then adjourned to
Dunsford's in the Strada Beale, and having refreshed the inner man
we took a stroll round the town and made a few purchases for some
deai- to us in Sydney. Valletta, the capital of the Island of Malta, is
adorned with some very fine public buildings, Institutions, and works
quite out of all proportion to its actual intrinsic importance as a town
with only some 83,000 inhabitants. There is an extensive Arsenal, a
very fine Dry Dock, and an important Dockyard, it being the head
quarters of the British Fleet in the Mediterranean. The Island is
17 miles long by 9 broad, having an area of about 90 square miles. It
has a splendid harbour and the fortifications are of enormous strength,
so that Malta taken altogether is a possession, if not quite as strong
as Gibraltar, is far more useful.
The cheerful populous little island is said to contain about one
hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants. The lower classes are a
fine athletic-looking people, more like dark-coloured Britons than any
other human variety. The community of characteristics which marks
a Celtic race, and I suppose Malta to have beeD originally more Iberian
than any other root, is curiously illustrated by the extraordinary Irish
look of the common people. I picked out face after face which any
one would have sworn had come from the south or west of Ireland.
The man who drove us looked as if he couldn't have any other name
than Tim Regan or Pat Murphy. It was strange to hear the Italian-
sounding patois from those very Hibernian looking lips.
As to race, the Carthagenian, the Roman, the Greek, the Goth, the
Moor, the Gaul, the Englishman, have all won and worn the island
keep by turns since the fifth century. If fusion of blood be a good
thing, the Maltese have eminently enjoyed it.
Having taken in as many wonders and memories as we could collect
in one day, we returned brimful of knowledge to the old Ceylon, and
were soon after on our way to Alexandria, with tbe addition to our
passenger list of Lord and Mr. Reed C.8., the late chief con-
structor of the navy.
Three or four more days and we are again in Alexandria. The
scene on landing, and at the Custom House baffles all description, we
were nearly torn to pieces by touters for Hotels &c. We however
fought our way bravely through the crowd to an open carriage after
the few things we had with us had been examined by the officious
officials, and drove off to our old quarters at the Hotel Abbat, and
having deposited our luggage took a quiet stroll round the now
familiar town, returning to dine with a number of our fellow passengers
at 5 80.
At 7 p.m. we drove to the Railway Station. Previous to arriving in
Alexandria it is usual for the passengers on board the P. and O.


Company's boats to make up parties of six for the Railway Carriages
for the train which takes them across the Desert to Suez. The lists
are handed to the Purser who communicates with the railway
authorities, and on reaching the station, the passengers find carriages
with the names of the parties who are to go in them pasted on the
doors of each compartment in accordance with the lists made up on
board the ship.
At 7 30 p.m. we started but had not gone more than 30 miles when
something was found to be wrong with the engine and this caused a
detention of half an hour which we all had to make the best of, most
gentlemen getting out of the carriages and taking a smoke al fresco in
the Desert. We got a cup of. liafr-Zayat and a good supper at
Zagazig, and at 8 o'clock the following morning found ourselves safe
at Suez, the train stopping in front of the Post Office for 15 minutes
to enable passengers to obtain their letters before going down to the
harbour, which is some two miles from the town, and I found a batch of
them from London which had come via Brindisi, awaiting our arrival,
and which served to cheer us on our way.
To our great delight' we found that it was our old friend the
" Mirzapore " laying alongside the wharf, and that she was the vessel
by which we were to take passage on to Point de Galle, so that on
going aboard we at once felt quite at home. I found that we should
have the whole day before us here, so at once commenced to make the
most of my time, by walking back to the town along the railway line,
then taking a boat, got another look at the great canal returning by
water to the ship'in time for tiffin. During the afternoon accompanied
by Mr. McGregor our Chief Engineer I thoroughly inspected the
Harbour Works, Dry Dock, &c., visited the offices of the Suez Canal
Company, had a look at the monument erected by the Company
(French) to the memory of Lieutenant Waghorn the pioneer of the
overland route. Went on board the Peshawur, which is a sister ship
to ours, and got home, (that is to the Mirzapore), in time for dinner
at 6 30.
We got away from Suez at 7 o'clock the following morning, the
Peshawur bound for Bombay, leaving about twenty minutes before us,
and five days later precisely at the same hour we entered the Port of
Aden. The Peshawur which had kept us close company all the way
down the Red Sea coming in half an hour later and was received with
cheers from our crew.
We were soon ashore and taking our breakfast at the Prince of
Wales's Hotel. Aden is at best a miserable place, and life must
indeed be very dull for the officers stationed there ; billiards and
bitter beer may alleviate the lot of the British Subaltern, but on a
sentinel station like this, where there is hardly any walking or riding
practicable, where existence is desperately dull inside the walls and
desperately dangerous outsifle the walls, without society, a decent
climate, occupation or locomotion, it must be miserable in the extreme.
The only place I remember to have seen that would vie with it in its
dull barren aspect is Porto Grantkin the Island of San Viceute, one of
the Cape de Verde group, and where we had to remain three days while
the old " Sarah Sands " was coaling.
We lounged about the shops kept by Jews and Parsees, and bought
some photographs, but the " pleasures and palaces " of Aden were
exhausted at a comparatively early hour, and we found our way on
board before sunset, and soon after the great steamer moved gracefully
from her anchorage and glided under the cloudless star-clustered sky,
into the waters of the Indian Ocean.
Another eight days passed on board the Mirzapore during which w«


had a good deal of card playing, reading, dancing and singing, and we
found ourselves once again standing on the verandah of the Oriental
Hotel at Galle. As on the previous occasion when here we had spent
the whole of our time exploring the town, we determined now to -take
a drive into the country and visit Wackwella (or Wak-AVallali) and the
famous Cinnamon Gardens, so engaging a very nice light vehicle
drawn by two horses, aud accompanied by Mr. Hocking, the Attorney
General" of Western Australia, off we started.
Of the glory of the tropical forest through which the well kept
bright red road led us, how can one hope to convey a dim impression ?
Columnar palms, the jak fruit tree, with fluted leaves of lustrous
green, great topes of lofty feathery bamboos ; flower, climber, shrub,
and forest tree were all mingled in lavish glittering confusion and
heaped up vegetable wealth. The Garden of Eden is henceforth in
our minds a pictnre less far faint, and shadowy. The well kept high-
way was occasionally crossed by neat stone bridges, spanning rivulets
the waters of which were utilized in the bright green rice fields which
broke the uniformity of the scene. In front, beside, behind, were
dusky groups of Cingalese. Some as operatives, carried burdens,
others walk gravely under brightly painted umbrellas. Little children
dashed out of the wayside huts with strange fruits and flowers to sell.
It is a " flower-time " throughout, and reminded me of the ride I had
some years ago from Cape Town to Constantia, when, as now, I was
on my way out to Australia.
Arrived at Wak-wallah we found a grand old bungalow, of which the
pillared verandahs and balconies, the high-walled courtyard with
massive gates, the general plan and architecture imposing and complete,
told a tale of some " hon vieux temps," long passing. It may be that
one of the old Dutch officials, putting a little pressure upon the easy-
going natives, had settled the labour question in simple and practical
fashion. They knew, certainly, how to build permanently and effect-
ively. The lines of the old Dutch forts extend for miles, and their
stores are mediaeval looking castellated edifices. This hotel is most
beautifully situated on the summit of a hill, and from its broad verandah
you obtain a lovely view of the surrounding scenery which is of course
quite Indian in character. The valley is devoted to the cultivation of
Padda, while the hill sides are covered with cinnamon, nutmeg, coffee,
and the Ceylon tree par excellence, the cocoa-nut. We sat here
smoking for some time, in easy chairs with little black hoys to fan us,
as we sipped our cocoa-nut milk and brandy, and then drove on to the
Cinnamon Gardens where having refreshed ourselves in like manner,
we returned to town by a different road to that by which we came.
It is the old rolling " Bangalore " that is to take us on to Sydney,
to which vessel we found on going on board that all our luggage had
been transferred. We got underweigh at 9 p.m., the buoys of the
harbour being lighted up to enable us to steam out, and we took our
way down this wave-lit avenue to the Ocean.
In our run to the " Sound," Mr. Frizell the Chief Officer, who is a
great enthusiast for theatricals, kept me well employed at scene paint-
ing as in the course of every trip he gets up some performance or other
on hoard for the benefit of the Seaman's Orphan Fund; I'will here give
a copy of the Playbill during this voyage.
DRAMATIC PERFORMANCE.
S. S. BANGALORE,
March Ist, 1873.
A REGULAR FIX.
Mr. Hugh de Brass ... ... ... ... Mr. Frizell.


Mr. Surplus ... Mr. Leversage.
Mr. Charles Surplus (Nephew) ... ... Mr. P. Moore.
Mr. Abel Quick (Clerk) Mr. S. Krine.
Mr. Smiler (Sheriffs Officer) Captain Reeves.
Mrs. Surplus Mr. Didds.
Miss Emily ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Irving.
Mrs. Carter (Housekeeper) Mr. Morton.
Matilda Jane ... ... ... ... Honorable C. Littleton.
To be followed by
THE CLASSICAL BURLESQUE
of
ALCESTIS.
Apollo ... Honorable C. Littleton.
Orcus (King of Death) Mr. P. Moore.
Mercules (and his club) ... ... ... Mr. Leversage.
Admetus (very weak) Mr. Frizell.
Polax (of Pelisse and Petticoats) Mr. Todhunter.
Alcestis (the Heroine) . Mr. Morton.
Phaedra (maid of all work) Mr. Irving.
cnid™. tELXdi
The scenery painted by Messrs,
J. H. Thomas, A. Watkins and
J. S. Granger.
We dropped anchor off the town of Albany, King George's Sound at
4 o'clock on the morning of the 15th day from Galle. We have
generally on coming into Port rushed ashore immediately the anchor
was down, but on this occasion we remained on board to breakfast,
when, accompanied by our delightful fellow travellers Mr. and Mrs.
St. John, we landed, and together took a long walk, getting lunch at
the London Tavern (where we slept a night on our way to England),
going on board in the afternoon, and the same evening the Bangalore
steamed out to sea again.
We are now rapidly nearing our destination, five days brought us to
Melbourne where we remained the night, and in three more we entered
Port Jackson, where we were welcomed • back to Sydney by loving
relatives and friends.
The distance ran between each stage of our journey out, has been as
follows :
Southampton to
Gibraltar to
Malta ... to
Alexandria overland ... to
Suez ... to
Aden to
Ceylon to
K. G. Sound to
Melbourne ... ... ... to
Gibraltar ... 1160 miles.
Malta 985 „
Alexandria ... 817 ~
Suez 206 ~
Aden 1309 ~
Ceylon ... 2127 „
K. G. Sound ... 3330 „
Melbourne ... 1340 „
Sydney ... 558 „
With what a number of sights and pictures, novel sensation, and
lasting and delightful remembrances does a man furnish his mind after
such a tour as we have had ! you forget all the annoyance of travel,
but the great pleasure remains with you as long as life endures. The
happiest and best of all the recollections in connectiou with this trip
to Europe will be of those hours passed in company with my dear
mother ; and the bitterest the thought that when we parted it was
for ever.
