



.
V
-


REMINISCENCES
OF AN
OLD ENGINEER
By A.J.G.
Youth lives on hope, old age on remembrance.
BRISBANE, JULY 15, 1926.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by R. Dey, Son & Co.,
275 Clarence Street, Sydney.




A .. J. GOLDSMITH, LL Inst., C.E




REMINISCENCES
OF AN
OLD ENGINEER
By A. J. G.
CHAPTER I.
YOUTH AND SCHOOLING.
I wis born in London in 1848 (on the 19th September, to
be exact), in Bow Lane, right under the sound of Bow Bells;
christened in the old Church of St. Mary Aldermary, at the
other eni of Bow Lane —duly entered in the Church Register
thereof—and so I think I may claim to be a true Londoner,
Altlough only five years of age when I left London for
Australii in 1853, I still have dim recollections of those parts
of the idjacent streets, passing the Old Curiosity Shop of
Charles Dickens and other spots made memorable in his books.
I cane out in the ‘‘ Thorwaldsden, ’ ’ a full-rigged sailing
ship, with my mother, who was going to rejoin her husband in
Victoria, but, being in bad health, she died in mid-ocean, and
my only recollection of her is her burial at sea. Our party
also in ended my brother Edwin, who was two and a half
years oder than myself, and my sister Ellen, two and
a half years old. We arrived in Melbourne in the
goldfield days, to find living very rough—in fact,
Melbourne was then called “Canvas Town”-—most of
the homes bringing big rents were only a few sheets of
galvanised iron, with the upper walls and roof of canvas. It
was not long, however, before we shifted up to Sydney, going
by the od A.S.N. steamer, “Wouga Wonga,” where my father,
who was in the iron trade, soon obtained employment at the
original vorks of P. N. Russell & Co., behind what was then the
principa hotel in Sydney—the Royal Hotel in George Street—
lately used as the Soldiers’ Club. It was between Market and
King Sheets; portion of the land so occupied at that time is
now pait of Farmer & Co.’s extensive premises. A year or
two afte his arrival, my father was appointed works manager
by the Bussells, and continued so until the old works were
closed aid merged into the new works in Barker Street, at the
foot of Bathurst Street, in Sydney.


The family of the Russells originally came from Kirkcaldy,
in Scotland —where the grandfather had a small engineering
works under the name of George Russell & Company. I have
seen some small lathes in the Sydney works manufactured by
them. They went to Tasmania in the early thirties, and the
father established a small business, with the sons assisting, but
it did not prosper, and in the early forties —the father having
died —the sons, with their mother, came on to Sydney; and, it
is said, the old lady, who was a masterful piece of femininity,
insisted on leasing the premises behind the Royal Hotel, the
only approach to which was by a gateway, since taken into the
bookseller’s shop on the George Street frontage, the only reason
being that it had a four-storey brick building—the top storey
of which she thought could be fitted up for living quarters for
herself —whilst the various processes and accompanying noises
of a general engineering works, with iron and brass foundries,
blacksmithing, copper and sheet, and plate ironworking, and
many other noisy processes, could comfortably be accommodated
in the storeys below. As a boy, however, and since, I have often
wondered how the wealthy squatters in those days could tolerate
these disturbing processes being carried on just outside their
bedroom windows, when they came to town for their periodical
visits, with a cupola—melting iron—running at night and
belching showers of sparks over the roof and elsewhere, and
can only account for it by the theory that, after spending
months on their lonely squattages, or perhaps droving cattle
to the Sydney or Melbourne markets through the vast solitudes
of the then undisturbed bush, the change to the busy activities
of manufacturing life at such close quarters as those described
was not at all unpleasant to them.
Mr. James Hipwood, who was Mayor of Brisbane twice
many years ago, and now resides at Manly, served his time
under my father as a coppersmith (since 1 penned these words
Mr. Hipwood has passed away), and I well remember what an
active young fellow he was, just out of his time, when I would
watch him hammering away at the copper, fashioning a large
bend of a steam pipe for one of the naval vessels then visiting
Sydney for repairs to their engines. I well remember when he
and the late Mr. Joseph Sutton —another coppersmith—left
Sydney in partnership to start the well-known works of Hipwood
& Sutton, in Eagle Street. That, I believe, was in 1870.
I attended the old William Street School, behind the
Museum, which, with Fort Street at Miller’s Point, were the
model national schools of the Board of Education, whose chair-
man was the Hon. J. H. Plunkett, of an old Irish family; in
fact, the lessons and general system of instruction were developed
in Ireland, many of the leading teachers being appended from


the Green Isle —and what a courtly gentleman was the late Mr.
Alfred Wilkins, the then only inspector, also specially imported
from Ireland! lie made a great impression on my young mind,
of the example of the correct deportment of a thorough
gentleman.
Our head master was Mr. Sloman (whose son, Mr. John
Sloman, was also a teacher) —a fine specimen of dignified
deportment, especially when giving the daily Scripture lesson
and extracts from the Epistles, which, perhaps, were the only
direct instruction in the Holy Scriptures which many of us
received in early life; his explanatory comments being specially
lucid and always of a very high tone, which could not fail to
be of great value to the assembled pupils of all classes of the
Boys’ School, over which he presided, numbering four to five
hundred. My principal teacher was the late Mr. Fred Bridges,
who subsequently became Director of Technical Education for
New South Wales, and afterwards Under-Secretary of the Edu-
cation Department. He was the father of Mr. N. M. Bridges, at
one time manager of the A.M.P. Society in Brisbane. Under this
noted teacher I rose to be “dux” of the school at twelve and a
half years of age, until I left two and a half years later, to enter
the employ of P. N. Russell & Company as a cadet in the Drafting
and Designing Office, under the late Mr. Norman Selfe, M.1.C.E.,
etc., in September, 1863, my fellow-cadet being the late Mr.
Peter Frank! —for over fifty years the manager of Mort’s Dock
and Engineering Company, of Waterview Bay, Balmain, Sydney
-—who died about two years ago. He was about six months ahead
of me, having joined in the early part of the same year as
myself.


CHAPTER 11.
PROFESSIONAL TRAINING.
Sir Peter Nicol Russell —the founder of the Russell
School of Engineering within the University of Sydney—left
the active management of the works, and went to reside perman-
ently in London in 1864. Mr. James Wilkie Dunlop, M.1.M.8.,
the engineer partner of the firm, was a marine engineer of
considerable experience, from the East Indies, and he retired
about 1866. The managing partners then were Mr. John Russell,
whose trade was originally a blacksmith; Mr. George Russell,
engineer; and Mr. George Alexander Murray, financial manager.
These continued until the old firm closed down in 1876, in
consequence of the workmen, who had won in the great strike
for the Eight-hour Day, but who insisted the eight hours should
be worked in two breaks, viz., commencing at 7 a.m. and knock-
ing off for breakfast at 8 o’clock; dinner 1 p.m. to 2 p.m., and
knocking off at 4.80 p.m. in the afternoon, which was quite
impracticable. The firm then employed about six hundred hands
—many grown old in their service having had constant employ-
ment since the firm started in Sydney, and looked forward to
ending their days with them; but all, from the manager down,
had to seek employment elsewhere, through the unreasonable
action of the men in their exultation at their victory over the
Russells in that strike.
Our regular hours when I commenced work were hours
per day—6 a.m. to 6 p.m.—so that I had to turn out at 5.30
a.m. every morning, to which I did not much object, except in
winter when it was very cold. Old John Russell was always first
on the job at the works, and I would meet him riding down
Bathurst Street from his house at Darlinghurst, on his old grey
horse, when on my way to start. The whistle went sharp at
6 a.m.; five minutes’ grace was allowed to get your ticket from
Captain Sommerville —the timekeeper—then the gates were
closed, and any one late was debarred entry until after break-
fast at 8.30 a.m., and lost a quarter day’s pay; so most hands
were very punctual at starting time—now they are more punctual
at knocking-off time. I remember Sir William Patrick Manning
—a well-known Sydney identity of later years, ex-Lord Mayor,
etc. —was then our assistant timekeeper, at £2/10/- per week;
a very steady worker, nevertheless, on that comparatively small
wage. He subsequently became managing clerk in the old-
established office of Billyard & Curtis, Solicitors, of Sydney, who
represented the Earl of Rosebery, who was interested in a
syndicate of land speculators who were developing a large tract
of vacant land beyond an arm of Middle Harbour, behind North


Shore proper, and who erected the handsome Suspension Bridge,
over which the trams now run. Lord Rosebery was Prime
Minister of Great Britain at the time of the Centenary of the
Sydney Municipal Council, with our old Timekeeper as Lord
Mayor—so he rewarded faithful service by the bestowal of a
knighthood, which of course was just and right. Sir William
Manning was, however, a very able man, and did good service
to the community, besides being a very consistent supporter
of Roman Catholic interests. His memory was greatly and
justly honoured by his co-religionists.
Another well-known identity—although in a different
direction—was the late Mr. Norman Selfe, M.1.C.E., M.lnst.
of Naval Architects, a very fine character, who was my life-long
friend, and who inspired me with his devouring enthusiasm
for the study of all matters of professional interest, in con-
nection with Engineering; he is generally recognised—and the
Government of the day recognised his claim—as the initiator
of the first attempt at providing facilities for young appren-
tices obtaining, after hours, some limited technical education,
by starting and carrying on for a time a class at the Sydney
School of Arts for the teaching of Mechanical Drawing and
the first principles of Applied Mechanics. He, however, gave
up the class after the expiry of twelve months, and the young
fellows applied to me to continue it. We hired a room
higher up Pitt Street, in fact upstairs in the Chapel-keeper’s
house, next to the Pitt Street Congregational Church, and here
I carried on for about three years until I came to Queensland
in 1874. We had several of the young men in that class,
who availing themselves of such assistance as I could give
them, afterwards became well-known Engineers in the pro-
fessional world of Australia. (One of them, Mr. Hector Kidd,
formerly Superintending Engineer of the Colonial Sugar Com-
pany, and a well-known expert in Sugar Milling, has
just passed away.) These young men, who could not
secure drawing office experience in those days, but who
recognised the extreme importance in the training of all young-
aspirants for a complete equipment for experienced managerial
success in after life, were only too glad to accept such assist-
ance as I could render them, inadequate in many respects as
it probably was, and paid me for my services—which was
very acceptable to me, for the remuneration we received as
apprentices at that time was a mere fraction of what is allowed
by the Arbitration Courts for the support of apprentices
nowadays. However, there was not so much time given by
young fellows then, who were determined to get on in life,
to sport, as perhaps there is nowadays; at any rate, the
available time at their disposal was small, so they


preferred to give their minds to study at night—after 10|
hours’ work a day—rather than to sport, which seemed to
offer more physical enjoyment for the time being. Well!
many of them reaped the reward in after life as great captains
of industry, directors of much influence—leaders of men rather
than hewers of wood and drawers of water.
In 1868 an Intercolonial Exhibition to demonstrate the
manufacturing resources of the various Colonies was initiated
by the Sydney Corporation, and tlie building since known as
the Exhibition Building, and now utilised as housing relics of
the Great War, was erected in Prince Alfred Park, opposite the
Railway Station (Central), and the Government of the day
gave the Russells an open order to design and build a
sleeping carriage to show the resources of their tine new and
most complete plant and machinery erected for building all
descriptions of railway carriages, waggons, brake-vans, etc.,
etc., for the Government railways—under which they had
granted the Russells a monopoly of five years’ requirements
for the railways. Although only about twenty, and just out
of my time, the work of designing and general supervision
of the building of this carriage—and, so far as I know, the
first sleeping carriage on the Colonial Railways, there being-
no precedents to guide me, it had to be designed upon original
lines of conception—was entrusted to me. This carriage, about
forty feet long, fitted with Bridge Adams radial boxes, for
travelling round curves was built complete—even to stained
glass, carving, etc.—from the designs which I prepared, and
took a gold medal, at which 1 did not even get a look. The
carriage was then adopted as the Vice-Regal, and, as such,
the Australian coat-of-arms—which had been painted on the
door—was replaced by the Royal coat-of-arms, and it ran suc-
cessfully for many years until it became obsolete (I have still
a photograph of that carriage which I value for old associa-
tions). We do not often meet an apprentice nowadays who
could undertake a work of that description and carry it
through in all its details from start to finish, down to designs
for stained glass and carving, at so early an age. However.
I suppose the general run are better sportsmen now than then,
and so that is some compensation.


CHAPTER 111.
CIVIL SERVICE: N.S. WALES AND QUEENSLAND.
After nine years in the employ of the Russells, I was
offered a position in the Harbours and Rivers Branch of the
Public Works Department of New South Wales as “locum
tenens” for the late Mr. Francis T. Rose, who had been left
a legacy of five hundred pounds and obtained six months’
leave to visit England, after an absence of some years. He
was originally trained at Galloway’s, of Manchester, and was
a very competent Mechanical Engineer, engaged principally in
the design of dredges and dredging plant built in Sydney.
In due time he returned, and I remained as his Assistant, he
holding office as Chief Mechanical Engineer of the Depart-
ment. He was the second President of the Engineering Associa-
tion of New South Wales, the prototype of the numerous en-
gineering societies which have sprung up in the Southern States,
and which coalesced about six years ago to found the Institute
of Engineers of Australia, with its two thousand five hundred
members —the original Association handing over its library
and other assets, valued at £5OOO, to the new Association. It
is with pleasure that I personally refer to the fact that Mr. D.
P. Harricks, Chairman of the Engineering Association of New
South Wales for four years—who did much of the spade work
leading up to that magnificent consummation- —was trained at
the works of Walker’s Limited, Maryborough.
In 1874 the Government of Queensland advertised for
applications for the appointment of Chief Engineer to a new
Harbours and Rivers Department which they proposed to start,
to take over works which were partly completed under the
direction of the late Captain Heath, R.N., Chairman of the
Marine Board, Portmaster, and Head of the Pilot Department.
It also contemplated building a more powerful dredger,
with accompanying plant, tugs, barges, etc., for the improve-
ment of the navigation of the Brisbane River, and also for the
investigation and consideration of many schemes for the
general improvement of the various ports of Queensland, as
far as Cooktown in the North, as Aveli as the navigable rivers
of the Colony.
At that time the only available entrance to the Brisbane
River was by a very winding channel through the sand-
banks of the Bar, known as the Francis Channel, and carrying
only seven feet at low water Spring tide. It was really a
succession of deeper water-holes with intervening shallows
carrying only that limiting depth of water, and the surveys


showed plainly that an additional three feet could be obtained
by cutting- through these intervening bars, but ten feet at
L.AV.S. was the limiting depth of the shallows in the Brisbane
River right up to the town. Contrast this with the present
state of the Brisbane River from Moreton Bay to the Town
Reach, carrying twenty-six feet at L.AV.S. The progress
made in fifty years has been marvellous, considering the com-
paratively small population of Queensland and consequent
limited financial resources of the State. The present profes-
sional Head of the Harbours and Rivers Department (Mr.
E. A. Cullen, M.1.C.E.), who has occupied the position for
twenty-five years, has proved himself a very able Engineer, and
has always been recognised by the Cabinets of all parties as
an exceedingly reliable adviser, in all matters relating to
harbour improvements in the State. His services have been
several times requisitioned by the various New Zealand Har-
bour Boards, as Consulting Engineer, on some of the more
important undertakings in that Dominion.
Reverting back to my appointment in 1874, and transfer
from the Harbours and Rivers Department of New South
AA T ales to that of Queensland, Mr. F. T. Rose —to whom I have
before referred —applied for the new appointment, and was
selected as new Chief Engineer, leaving Sydney in August
of 1874. He offered me the appointment of his Chief Assistant,
which, after due consideration, I agreed to accept, and fol-
lowed him to Queensland, although my old Department offered
to double my salary if I would remain, but I had given my
word to Mr. Rose, so I left on the first of September, and we
started the new Department on that date.
The Hon. AAnlliam Hemmant, M.L.A., of the firm of Stewart
and Hemmant was then Colonial Treasurer, and Minister in
charge of the Department. The coming session of Parliament
being not far distant, he was very anxious to expedite the
preparation of preliminary designs, estimates, etc., with the
recommendations of the new officer, so that the necessary
votes for several projected works could be .passed in the
forthcoming session. He therefore proposed to Mr. Rose that
he should make a preliminary inspection of the principal ports
as far as Cooktown, and he would accompany him. My friend,
who was not in too good a state of health, got as far as
Cardwell, when he contracted a bad attack of malaria. He
managed to get back to his quarters at the Bellevue Hotel,
but despite the assiduous attention of several of the leading
Brisbane doctors, he died, and his body was conveyed to
Sydney. I was thus left, a young man of only twenty-six,
to organise the Department, and to prepare reports and* esti-
mates to be submitted to the Cabinet, and subsequently to


the Housse, who ordered them to be printed and published in
the “Voiles and Proceedings.” These were for several im-
portant projects, such as the Brisbane Graving Dock, Towns-
ville Han-bonr Works, improvements to the Fitzroy and Mary
Rivers, (etc., besides specifications and plans for the new
dredge “‘Groper” which the Government intended ordering
from Glasgow. 1 was then the only officer of the Department,
but had the assistance of Captain William Sunners of the
“Groper.. Shortly afterwards young Joseph Baynes came
to me from the Brisbane Grammar School as a cadet, and he
claims to) this day that I gave him his first lesson in Marine
Surveying, at which he afterwards became an adept. Many
old engineers will remember the late Captain William Sunners.
He was somewhat of a character in his way, and was the
Master o)f the dredge “Groper,” and her attendant fleet of
tugs, barges, etc., in later years. He was brother-in-law to
Mr. Rose, and had considerable experience in Newcastle, New
South Wales, in the Dredge Service, and was a good organiser,
securing crews for his plant, and generally pushing on the
work. He was in many ways a lovable character, although
given to explosions at times if the work did not go straight,
and the members of his crew r were liable to severe personal
comment from the gallant Captain on their individual and
collective “competency.” There is a tradition about the
Captain in the early days which was probably founded on
fact, but which may have been apocryphal. However, I will
give it for what it is worth. My old friend has been dead for
many years. Sunners used always to sport a tall white hat—
a la Governor Normanby—although the said white hats -were
now beginning to go out of fashion. It is said that Sunners,
wdio was going down Queen Street one day, looked in to-
Dickson ’s Auction Mart to see if there were any bargains
about, and espying a crate of the said white hats, lie bade for
them a sporting offer, and they were knocked down to him,
and subsequently shipped down to the dredge. Now, the
supply of hats being so abundant to the end of his life, the
Captain did not require to economise in their use, there-
fore, when one of the explosions of temper before referred
to occurred, it became necessary to impress the members of
his crew with the fact that the Commander was seriously
discomposed at their want of efficiency, he acquired the habit
of casting his tile on the deck, jumping on it, and then
casting it overboard. Of course, the effect was somewhat
electrical and apparently expensive—although, as I have said,
the supply of hats held out until my old friend went the wav
of all flesh.


After the death of Mr. Rose, I was located in a room in
the former officers’ quarters of the old Military Barracks in
Treasury Square, an annexe to the main building then utilized
for the headquarters of the Treasury. I found located in
the next room to me Mr. T. R. Connah, 1.5.0., afterwards
Under-Secretary to the Treasury, and subsequently Auditor-
General, and Mr. Schlencker, senr., two gentlemen who gave
me every assistance and advice in opening up my books and
putting my expenditure through the Auditor-General’s Office,
and keeping myself clear of exceeding appropriations from
loan funds and Parliamentary votes for works in progress.
I also had business dealings with Mr. Edwin Westaway, R.N.,
Chief Clerk in the office of the Marine Board, with whom was
a young lad who afterwards became a very distinguished
Federal Civil Servant. I refer to Sir Samuel Petherbridge,
K.C.M.G., etc., the first Governor of the Mandated Territory
of Rabaul.
All these gentlemen were most kind and considerate to
me, a “stranger in a strange land.” They have all passed
away, but I hold the memory of each very dear. It might
have been otherwise, as the Service is sometimes inclined to
resent the importation from the Civil Service of a neighbouring
State in the case of the local officers —however, I had but little
to complain of in that respect.
Reverting to the history of the old “Groper,” which
worked fairly satisfactorily for forty years on various stations
—from the Gulf of Carpentaria, cutting through the Norman
River bar, to the Brisbane River —plans and specifications
after Mr. Rose’s death were prepared by me and sent to the
Old Country, and tenders were called by the Agent-General in
Glasgow. The contract was let to a firm of Glasgow engineers,
who had considerable reputation as builders of improved dredg-
ing plant in those days, for £32,000, to be delivered in Brisbane
in eighteen months. I may say that after having worked on
the plans of the largest dredger in New South Wales —built
in Sydney in 1872 —and hearing many discussions by various
experts, which were of daily occurrence in the Harbours and
Rivers^ Department in Sydney, before coming to Queensland, I
was fairly well equipped with the full knowledge of the details
of that dredge, designed to meet the special exigencies of
carrying on the work in a new country, where facilities, such
as in Glasgow, for expediting repairs, lifting heavy weights,
etc., did not exist. That dredger is still working away at
Newcastle, but under a new name, having been' re-
christened the “Clarence”; her original name, “Newcastle,”
was appropriated by the Walsh Island authorities for a some-
what more powerful dredge built by them in later years.


Instead of the heavy working parts, such as the tumblers,
buckets filled with dredged material, which, with other parts
are subject to great wear and tear, being designed in heavy
castings of solid metal, chilled to a very limited depth, and
the whole machine being provided with very expensive spares
to admit of the heavy permanent weights being lifted out on
the Quay, as at Glasgow, by powerful cranes, and the spares
lifted in to their places, avoiding detention of the whole
attendant fleet, and a speedy resumption of work-in the
absence of these facilities we designed the details to admit of
“double sheer” steel highly tempered wearing parts, which,
when worn, could be speedily removed and replaced by spares
without interfering with the permanent weights before
referred to.
In due time the dredge “Groper” arrived in Brisbane,
and anchored in the stream off the Harbours and Rivers
Wharf, having come through the Suez Canal and coaled at
Singapore on the way, and Mr. Nisbet, M.1.C.E., the new
Chief, who had lately arrived and taken charge, said, “Come
on, Goldsmith; we will go aboard the new dredge,” and I
found myself ascending the gangway ladder, and stepped
aboard, but it did not take five minutes’ examination to satisfy
me that the designs and specifications prepared and forwarded
by me to the Agent-General had been completely ignored by
the Contractors, who had been allowed to substitute a design
similar to that of the ordinary Glasgow dredges employed in
deepening the Clyde. I pointed out to Mr. Nisbet the serious-
ness of the situation, and also that the value of the work
involved by the substitution of an inferior design was fully
twenty-five per cent less than our own design, which was
the basis of the tender accepted. Mr. Nisbet took the matter
up with the Agent-General’s Department, and it came out
that the eminent Engineer appointed to inspect the work in
Glasgow, on behalf of the Queensland Government, had allowed
himself to be talked into giving permission, without con-
sulting us, to adopt the inferior substituted design, thereby
greatly reducing the cost of production to the Contractors.
Further inquiries and protests from this end disclosed a great
scandal, which obtained world-wide notoriety, involving the
eminent Engineer in serious consequences. The bulk of the
contract money, however, having been authorised for payment
before the vessel left Glasgow, we had to make the best of
it, retaining the very small balance, and, as Wingate’s repre-
sentative had promptly cleared out, I took charge, dismantling
the vessel, removing false bottom, and commissioning the
dredge. In due time she was set to work on the virgin sand
at Pinkenba flats, which speedily showed her defects. A


further £SOOO was spent in effecting improvements, after which,
as I have said, she had a fairly successful career for over forty
years, during which I introduced several valuable improve-
ments, which materially economised expenditure and reduced
the duration of stoppages for repairs; some of these improve-
ments I found, on a subsequent visit to England, had made
their way there and been adopted by firms in Glasgow and
elsewhere. I did not get any special allowance for these ideas;
perhaps I never sought for any, being satisfied with results
of my work and the credit 1 received from those best able to
judge.
One of the first projects which was placed before me
by the Treasury, under my esteemed friend the late Mr. W.
L. G. Drew, Under-Secretary, was the preparation of the pre-
liminary design and estimate of the probable cost of a Graving-
Dock of suitable dimensions to accommodate the dredges and
barges of the Harbours and Rivers Department, for repair,
and the private requirements of the general public. The
absence of such a public utility at that time was making itself
felt. Levels were taken, and trial pits were opened up to
provide other very necessary data for the full consideration
of the whole of the details of the work, and the late Mr.
Austin, a very experienced Engineer, was engaged to prepare
this preliminary information. Under the direction of Captain
Heath, R.N., Chairman of the Marine Board, a previous report
had been presented to the Government, indicating £25,000 as
the probable cost of the dock, but to my mind this amount
was simply absurd, founding my opinion on experience I had
in Sydney through working on the plans of the Biloela Dock,
since built at Cockatoo Island. At the same time, quite
recently before my arrival, a somewhat bitter controversy over
rival interests had raged for the terminus of the Ipswich to
Brisbane railway being located in South Brisbane instead of
North Brisbane, as it was ultimately fixed, and I ascertained
by confidential inquiry that the provision of the dock at South
Brisbane was by some considered a solatium, offered by the
Government to placate the feelings of the electors in that con-
stituency. It appeared to me personally that my estimate
of costs must be framed to assist the Government by every
effort to devise the most economical expenditure of capital
in its construction, otherwise any excessive estimate might
make them hesitate to proceed with the project, and bring a
hornet’s nest about my ears for being the direct cause of
preventing the realisation of the legitimate ambition of the
South Brisbane electors. My careful consideration of the
water we might expect to meet with in connection with the
excavations for the dock, as the result- of sinking various trial


shafts on the site of the proposed work, satisfied me that the
schist strata would be comparatively water-tight, and yield
little water even at the considerable depth of the necessary
excavations, and on that assumption I prepared a design pro-
viding a substantial lining for the proposed dock and the
altars supporting the shores used in staying the vessel when
grounded on the blocks, but 1 would not attempt to exclude
any ground drainage from being freely discharged into the
dock drains, but rather provide extra auxiliary pumping
service to keep the dock dry during the time it was in use.
It really resolved itself into a question of providing additional
capital to be expended in its construction to exclude water
from the surrounding strata with consequent immensely in-
creased quantities of concrete backing, resulting from the
increased necessary thickness of walls to prevent flotation of
the dock from exterior water pressure, as against the provision
of extra auxiliary pumping expenses for keeping the dock dry
during its use in docking vessels. Expecting little inflow of
water, I based my estimate accordingly—to keep it as low
as might be consistent with the stability of the works- —and
my estimate amounted to £50,000. A fresh estimate was made
by the new Chief shortly after his arrival, but his experience
in England and Scotland inclined him to adopt the idea that
the inflow of water might be excessive. His estimate was
based on keeping such drainage out of the dock when being-
used, and that involved much larger initial cost of the work.
His estimate was £BO,OOO, and at that cost the dock was
ultimately built, although developments during the building
of the work demonstrated that my original assumption of
probabilities was quite correct, and my plan for dealing with
them had to be resorted to, notwithstanding the extra ex-
penditure of capital involved in the adoption of what proved
to be a fallacious assumption.
Early in 1876, the Government, under the leadership of
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, initiated a policy of improvement of
the various harbours and rivers of the Colony, for the develop-
ment of trade between the ports, which involved large ad-
ditions to the existing dredging plant under the control of
the Department. Funds were provided to cover the cost of
three steam hopper barges for transporting the silt, as dredged
in the Brisbane River, to suitable depositing grounds in More-
ton Bay, at an average distance of twenty-two miles. Under
my immediate direction plans and specifications were prepared
and tenders called for building three barges as a first instal-
ment of this additional plant. My instructions were that they
were to be built in the Colony. The tender of John Walker and
Co., Maryborough, for £II,OOO each was accepted, and the


vessels were named “Schnapper,” “Dugong,” and
“Nautilus”; the latter is still running regular trips between
Brisbane and Townsville, carrying cargo as a regular trader,
under the auspices of John Burke and Company, of South
Brisbane, having been purchased from the Townsville Harbour
Board after a successful career of service as an adjunct of
the dredging fleet. These barges were single-screw, self-
discharging through doors forming a false bottom, hung by
chains to a longitudinal bow beam spanning the central portion
of the ship, and propelled by compound surface condensing
engines developing about one hundred and sixty indicated
horse-power, at eighty revolutions per minute with eighty
pounds of steam per square inch. Their speed was about
eight knots per hour, and they were of the type used in the
construction of the Suez Canal. This contract was the largest
up to that time which had been taken by the firm named,
who had opened in Maryborough, as a branch of the original
works at Ballarat, established in 1864, but they had confined
their operations, up to that time, to the manufacture prin-
cipally of sugar machinery, for the districts around Mary-
borough, and stampers and other machinery in connection
with the development of the Gympie mines. The extension
of their business, therefore, into the shipbuilding enterprise,
involving the construction of marine engines and boilers, was
received by the public as evidence of an enterprising boldness
on the part of the firm, and as such attracted considerable
attention. The trial trips of each of the three vessels were
duly celebrated by a gathering of the leading Maryborough
townsmen, and much local oratory was expended thereat.
In 1878, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith being still Colonial
Treasurer and Head of the Harbours and Rivers Department,
a sum of £64,000 was voted by the House for the construction
of two powerful dredges to dredge to thirty feet below the
v ater line and lift from that depth and discharge into punts
alongside about 300 tons of sand or silt per hour, and it was
decided that I should proceed to England and advise the
Agent-General’s Department, and supervise the preparation
of plans and specifications in London with a view to obtaining
tenders for their construction. I had made all arrangements
for my departure, and was to have left about a fortnight
iater, when an election for the representation of Fortitude
A alley in the Parliament, at which the Hon. R. Pring was
the Government candidate, and whose return seemed be
jeopardised by a powerful protest made by the mechanics of
Engineering trade, decided the Government to have these two
dredges constructed in Queensland, and I received instructions
to prepare the necessary plans and specifications with that
end in view, and thus was my hope frustrated, and my con-


templated trip did not come off. In due course tenders were
received for the first dredger to be employed in the Brisbane
River, and the contract was secured by my old friend, Mr.
John Sinclair, representing Smellie and Company, who then
had the Engineering works in Alice Street (now the 8.1.
Works under Mr. Burwood), for £32,000. The second dredge,
from the same plans, was let to John Walker and Company, of
Maryborough, six months later, for a similar amount. This
was to be employed in the Fitzroy River, and both dredges
were completed about the same time. Smellie’s dredge Avas
named the “Octopus,” and is still working at Townsville for
the Harbour Board, and Walker’s dredge was named the
“Saurian.” She worked for some years for the Rockhampton
Harbour Board, and Avas sold to the South Australian Govern-
ment about 19 years ago, for Avork at Port Victor Harbour
and other ports, and, for all I knoAV to the contrary, is still
working. Two other dredges were afterAvards built from the
same plans—“ The Maryborough” and “Hydra”—without
alteration, excepting in the latter case an extra ten feet Avere
added to the length of the hull, to provide increased length
of ladder and consequent depth of water for which that dredge
Avas made available —a sufficient testimony to the completeness
and efficiency of the original design.


CHAPTER IV.
BUSINESS EXPERIENCE.
At the end of 1881, I was approached by the late Mr
,W. F. Harrington, on behalf of the firm of John Walker and
Company, of Maryborough, and invited to resign my appoint-
ment as ( hief Assistant Engineer of the Harbours and Rivers
Department, to join that firm as a managing partner on very
advantageous terms —an offer after due consideration which
I accepted, and took charge of the shipyard which was then
engaged on important contracts for the tug-boat “Sea-horse”
and dredge Maryborough/ etc., for the Government, and so
ended my old connection with the Department, which had lasted
for seven years since my appointment from Sydney in 1874.
1 was presented by the staff with a handsomely framed paint-
ing of myself with inscription, on severing my connection with
my brother officers, testifying to the cordial relations which
had existed between us since the commencement of the new
Department of Harbours and Rivers.
During the years I was employed in the Harbours and
Rivers Department, and especially until we became a limited
liability company, the last occasion being the trial trip of
the S.S. “Pacific,” we had many trial trips of the steam baro-es
and dredges down the Mary River, testing the performances
of these crafts. These trips were made the occasion for much
local oratory by eminent townsfolk, with accompanying re-
freshment and prognostications of the future expansion of
the shipbuilding industry in Maryborough, which then reck-
oned itself the second town in Queensland, and several
humorous incidents come to my mind with reference to these
trial trips. On one occasion we were sculling down the river
near feheiidan s Island, when I fancied I heard a curious rattle
m the engines, and I ordered them to be stopped, the kellick
dropped, and the covers taken off the engines, to ascertain
the cause of the mysterious sounds. After careful search this
was disclosed as a cold chisel, which had been hidden by a
worker in the exhaust pipe of the low-pressure cylinder, to
prevent appropriation by a fellow workman, and forgotten • a
little further and probably the chisel ivould have" worked
through into the cylinder, with the result that the cover would
have been burst off, and heavy repairs rendered necessarv.


Suck ar'e the risks of going to sea with a new craft and a
scratch crew.
On {another occasion, at the trial of the new tug-boat “Sea-
horse” —a paddle-boat—on the word being passed for working
the engines from the bridge through a light copper speaking
tube to the engine-driver under the bridge, no sound reached
the engineer, and a boy was ordered to pass the word along.
On taking the pipe down and breaking the brazed joints,
examination showed that a workman, wishing to keep dirt
out of the pipe, preparatory to closing it up, had stuffed a
lump of waste therein, forgotten it, and brazed up the pipe
joints. Results —absolute silence when word of command
passed down for working the engines.
Shortly after joining the firm of John Walker and Com-
pany, we booked an order from the late Mr. Percy Ramsay—
who had some extensive sawmills at that time in Maryborough,
and who was desirous of opening up trade with the Northern
ports, in sawn and dressed hardwood and pine—to specially
design a small steamer to carry one hundred thousand feet —
half pine and half hardwood; or about three hundred tons,
with specially large hatchways—and clear holds, and moderate
speed, ten knots in smooth water —and to work on a low con-
sumption of fuel. I took considerable interest in working out
this problem, but after personally drafting the vessel —the
“Pacific” —Mr. Ramsay got into difficulties, and we finished
the vessel on our own account and chartered her for various
trips; some to the Islands for the transport of Kanakas for
the plantations, and to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and various
other services during a period of years. She was then sold
to a syndicate at a very low figure, and opened up the sanitary
service under the late Mr. Parr Smith for transporting the
pans outside Cape Moreton, and was very profitable for about
eight years to the syndicate. She was then bought by James
Campbell and Company, and, after an extensive overhaul in
Sydney, was chartered to Mr. Raymond, who ran a cargo of
timber up North, but came to grief on the Bunker Reef, out-
side Keppel Bay, where her “bones” now lie. It is a matter of
satisfaction to me to call to mind that the late Captain Collins,
founder of Collins and Sons, shipowners, to the end of his
life used to regret he had not bought that vessel, but that he
never thought that she would be sold so cheap. He considered
her a very successful craft, and, as he expressed it, “a good
poor man’s boat,” and, being no mean authority on those
matters, I was much gratified to receive his approval. The
late Captain Howard Smith, senr., also, after an inspection,
expressed himself in similar terms —in fact, he added, after
inspecting the quality of the work we were putting into her,


They don t build vessels at Home up to that standard now.”
However, when in the Government service, I laid down the
dictum with contractors that “good enough” was not suf-
ficient, as the Government by way of example would alwavs
require and insist on the highest quality of both work and
material in all contracts. “Good enough” was not sufficient
excuse for any laxity of judgment, and 1 suppose the force of
habit under my eleven years of management set the practice
of the firm, which they have maintained ever since.
In 1888 tenders were simultaneously called for the con-
struction of five twin-screw steam hopper barges, each to
carry five hundred tons of silt or sand, for service in the
Brisbane River, and one dredge off same plans as the dredges
before icferred to, which was intended for the improvement
of the Fitzroy River. Sir Samuel Griffiths, K.C.M.G., was
Premier, and Mr. (afterwards Sir) James Dickson, Colonial
Treasurer, was the responsible Minister of the Department of
Harbours and Rivers, and our firm secured the contract for
some £83,000, but although our tender was also the lowest for
the “Hydra” by £5OO, the contract, for some reason or other,
was given to Evans, Anderson, Phelan and Company.
These vessels were named the “Bream,” “Pumba ”
“Stingaree,” “Bonito,” and “Dolphin”; they are still in
active commission, transporting the dredgings from the higher
leaches of the Brisbane River to the discharging grounds in
Moreton Bay.
An incident occurred during the building of these vessels
which might be of interest to the general public. On the
occasion of a visit of Sir Samuel Griffiths, Premier, to Mary-
borough, and at a banquet given by the firm on the
occasion of the launch of the dredge “Maryborough,”
Sir Samuel asked me if I thought we could make'cannon. ’ I
naturally thought he was what the boy calls “pulling my
leg.” I replied, “We will make anything, Sir Samuel, if
you will give us a payable price.” A little later he again
approached me and asked me the same question. I then
began to realise that he was serious and apparently disturbed,
and I found he was seriously alarmed by what was termed
“The Russian War Scare,” a rumour being reported in the
daily papers that certain strange warships had been sighted
off Cape York, which was causing anxiety to the Government
In the suspicion that they were Russian cruisers contem-
plating a raid on the ports of Queensland, and that at the
time, about 1884, the Colony was absolutely defenceless, havino-
plenty of trained men in the Defence Force, but no arms for
them to fight with. The result of the scare was that I received
instructions in haste to fit a barbette on the bow of each of


the five huindred ton barges then building, and mount a five-
inch “Vaivaseur” gun on each, these guns, similar to those
arming tthe gun-boats “Gayundah” and “Paluma,” being
fortunately in the possession of the Government. Certain
other alfterations, which were carried out under Captain
Wright, R.N., Naval Commandant, involving conversion of
two Scotich boilers for steam supply, of suitable diameter, to
four boihers of much reduced diameter, to keep them safer by
lowering height and admit of carrying the bunkers with coal
over the boilers as a protection from stray shots —the idea
being to station these barges at Lytton as improvised gun-
boats, to attack the enemy should they appear, and attempt
to enter the Brisbane River by the Francis Channel. Needless
to say, the alterations largely spoilt the barges for their in-
tended work as silt carriers, but in course of years new boilers
were supplied in accordance with the original design, and
they have been useful units of the dredging equipment since.
Three years after my joining the firm of John Walker &
Company—that was in 1884 —we decided to float the business,
if possible, into a limited liability company, under the name
of John Walker & Company Limited, and a prospectus was
issued offering very attractive conditions to intending share-
holders, including a guarantee of five years’ dividends at the
rate of twelve per cent, per annum, the four partners (Messrs.
Wood, Braddock, Harrington and myself), all of equal
interests, agreeing to remain for a period of five years in the
active management of the business. The flotation of the com-
pany was successfully accomplished, but the name, on recon-
struction some years after, was changed to its present appella-
tion of Walker’s Limited.
On the expiration of the five years’ guarantee business
was falling off and there were indications of the approaching
crisis of 1893, so T therefore decided to take a prolonged
holiday, including a trip to Europe, and on my return to retire
from the active management of the company and enter into
private business on my own account as a consulting engineer,
taking offices in Brisbane. This necessitated to some extent
my retirement from the board of directors. I remained so
until the year 1902, w T hen I again took my place on the board
by election of shareholders, and continued to occupy that
position, so that, with Mr. AVilliams-—the present chairman,
who resides in Maryborough—we are the only representatives
of the first board of directors now living.
After a retirement of ten months, however, several con-
tingencies having delayed the progress of several very
important contracts, more especially one for the manufacture
of one thousand tons of steel bridge-work for the bridges on


the Bundaberg-Gladstone Railway, which we had undertaken
for a well-known firm of contractors to tire Railway Depart-
ment, to whom we were bound under heavy penalties to deliver
the work ready for erection within a period providing ten
months for its manufacture and delivery on the site of the
works, but the great North British railway strike preventing
us from receiving the material from Britain until my firm
could only see two months for its manufacture and delivery,
I was pressed to take up the management again, and by careful
forethought and a hearty co-operation of the staff, the
provision of brilliant electrical lighting of the yards and a
fair expenditure of overtime, I was successful in completing
our contract in three months, or only one month over our
contract time, an achievement which was considered at the
time by my fellow-engineers as notable, notwithstanding pre-
mature prognostications by prophets of failure.
During my term of employment in the Civil Service, and
subsequently in business, I frequently travelled by steamer,
making the trip often to Brisbane over Wide Bay Bar and up
Groat Sandy Island Straits of 60 miles, and 22 miles up the
Mary River to Maryborough, and on more than one occasion
came on some danger of shipwreck, but never realised how near
until one occasion in 1884. On Sunday morning, when the
week-end steamer left regularly for Brisbane, T had taken my
passage on the S.S. “Fitzroy, ” and it was the practice of the
Customs to allow shippers to load cargo until 11 a.m. On this
particular Sunday morning, however, there being a large ac-
cumulation of cargo, the time of departure was extended until
12 a.m. On arrival at Tin Case Bay, behind Juskip Point at
the Pilot Station, we found a half dozen vessels of all kinds
sheltering and awaiting the Bar to improve before venturing
out. We were an hour behind time, and being a full forward
steamer, our Captain thought he could venture out. I had a
deck cabin at the head of the saloon stairs, where I could look
up from my bunk and see along the decks. We had just
arrived at the worst part of the Bar, at the Black Buoy where
we turn south, when a high wave lifted the vessel into the air,
and we came down with a smash into the hard sand and gravel
of the Bar. It was strong ebb tide. The woodwork of the saloon
went oft like a lot of pistols, and I could see the stewards and
firemen rushing up looking very scared. Again we lifted and
came down as before, and this was continued five times. I
thought it was all up with us, as the main steam pipe would
carry away, and then the breakers on each side of us would
soon sweep our decks and make short work of us. Somehow I
felt I could do nothing, although I kept quite cool. However,
although we bumped up so roughly on the bottom, 1 could
see each time we lifted that we crawled ahead very slowly,


and so we limped through. But it was indeed a narrow squeak,
and I never again travelled by the steamer, preferring to take
the coach to Gympie, and come on by train. I did not want
to court such another experience.


CHAPTER V.
RESUME PRACTICE OF MY PROFESSION.
I left on my visit to Europe in 1892, and had a most
enjoyable as well as an instructive time in the Old Country,
being cordially received by many of the eminent English and
Scotch firms, meeting many men who have since become
famous in the professional world in the United Kingdom, and
comparing notes on the essential differences in methods of
carrying on business there, and in these pioneer States of
Australia. It was a considerable eye-opener to me, and I
would earnestly recommend every young aspirant to fame
in the engineering profession to aim at such a tour with a
distinct object in view, as part of his complete equipment
for achieving subsequent success in life. The University of
the World is a great educator and expander of the mind of
man, and parents and guardians of all young men following
the engineering profession should bear this in mind.
On my return from my visit to Europe in 1892, I took up
practice as a consulting engineer, during which I furnished
reports to the Brisbane and Ipswich Municipal Councils and
other local authorities, and also on several occasions acted as
expert witness on various cases for the Commissioner of
Railways and other Government departments. I then under-
took the superintendence of the Lamington Bridge of rein-
forced concrete at Maryborough for the Works Department,
and took much interest in that work, as it was practically the
first example of the then novel system of construction, which
had only very recently been introduced in Australia. This
bridge was completed in 1896. I then undertook the super-
intendence of the new steel traffic bridge at Bundaberg, being
about a quarter of a mile long. It is one of the finest steel
bridges in Australia, but during its erection a somewhat
alarming development took place, in that the preliminary
borings, having indicated that the bridge was' to be founded
on solid rock throughout, and the piers sunk therein to a
depth of ten feet to be firmly held under the flood stresses, it
was found the rock was only four feet thick, and beneath was
a beautiful kaolin (cup-and-saucer clay) going down to sixty
feet and over. The method I adopted to overcome these diffi-
culties I fully explained in a paper and plans I laid before
the Institution of Civil Engineers in London in 1903, and was
awarded the Telford Premium. At that time these awards,
which were provided from funds left by the great engineer,
Telford —founder of the institution—amounted to the value
of twenty guineas each —were by the vote of the Council given


to the writers of about ten chosen papers from an average of
one hundred and thirty papers selected for publication in the
volumes. These were then presented annually to the successful
writers in the form of an inscribed gold stop-watch, surveying
instruments, or fitted case of drawing instruments, to the
above-mentioned value, but no cash paid.
On completion of this bridge I was invited by the Bunda-
berg Harbour Board to act as their chief engineer, and super-
intend the building of training walls in the Burnett River,
deepening of the river channels by dredging, and in 1905 I
was appointed engineer-in-chief of the Rockhampton
Harbour Board, who were then carrying out extensive works
in training walls, extension of wharves, dredging, etc., all on
'‘day work.” After about two years of very strenuous work
I decided to retire; my family interests requiring my presence
at home in Brisbane. Since then, although occasionally acting
as expert witness, etc., in various cases, 1 have practically
retired from active work.
I have been entrusted by the Governments of Queensland
with responsible engagements, including my commission, in
1899, as a member of the Court of Inquiry (constituted under
the 45th Section of “The Railway Act of 1888”) to inquire
into the “Causes which led to two Locomotive Boiler Explo-
sions which had recently occurred in the Roma Street Railway
Yards and into the General System of Inspection of the Loco-
motive Boilers on the several Railways of the Colony.” The
Department had already held two inquiries to ascertain the
cause of these serious explosions, but as they did not seem
to arrive at any sufficient explanation of the causes of these
disastrous explosions, the Commissioner- —Mr. Robert Gray—
recommended the Government to appoint outside experts to
look into the matter, and I was associated with the late Mr.
George Phillips, C.E., and with Mr. W. Stinton, Deputy Chief
Mechanical Engineer, of Victoria, who came from that State
to assist. That board was successful in definitely ascertaining
the cause of weakness in the boilers which failed, and its
report carefully pointed out the inefficiency of the system of
boiler inspection as then organised. The board also made
suggestions which led to the establishing of the excellently
equipped and extensive railway works at Ipswich—probably
unequalled in Australia. Our report was received by the
leading Brisbane newspapers as a very lucid one and a valu-
able exposition of the whole matter, which was, of course,
very gratifying to me as a member of that board.
In 1902 I was appointed a member of an important board
of inquiry to examine witnesses and ascertain the cause of
the failure to secure satisfactory work from the very powerful


hydraulic dredges known from their inventor as the “Lindon-
Bates” dredges; a system of dredging that at the time was
attracting widespread attention from engineers all over the
world by reason of the astounding output of those working-
in the Mississippi River. On the advice of Captain Almond,
supported by London Bates himself, who visited Queensland
to specially report on the physical conditions of the various
Queensland harbours and rivers, and the suitability of special
plant to speedily deal with the opening up of same —he natu-
rally sustained Captain Almond’s recommendation —orders
were placed with Mr. Bates, who was leaving shortly, for two
powerful dredges, two thousand five hundred and five thousand
indicated horsepower, and to cost £70,000 and £120,000 respec-
tively. These were subsequently built by the great firm of
Armstrong, Whitworth & Company at Newcastle-on-Tyne, but
being duly set to work, the performances for a number of
years had been exceedingly disappointing. With myself were
associated Mr. George Higgins, M.1.C.E., an expert of that
system of dredging, from Victoria, and Mr. Abram Portus,
Assoc. M.1.C.E., the Chief Director of Dredging, who was
brought from New South Wales. I was appointed chairman
of that board, and after very complete examination of various
witnesses, we drew up a very comprehensive report which
clearly indicated the cause of failure and the numerous break-
downs of the machinery, which caused continual stoppages of
the work and added greatly to the cost. I may say I had
very serious doubts from the first advocacy of the venture of
the State in the adoption of the new system of dredging, as
the physical nature of the material to be excavated in the
Brisbane River, and the conditions and the immediate objects
of the work were totally different from those attracting public
attention to the American dredgers. On being appealed to
by the late Mr. James Milne, at that time chairman of the
Chamber of Commerce, to make a public announcement of
my opinion as an expert of much experience in such work, a
substantial fee being offered if I would do so, I explained that
I made it a rule not to criticise the recommendations or
opinions of responsible officials in the Public Service, as it
was not fair to indulge in irresponsible criticisms under those
circumstances. Moreover, I considered it inadvisable for
anyone engaged in private business to enter into controversy
with another of the same profession in scientific or any other
matters of mutual interest. T did, however, indicate to Mr.
Milne, with whom I was very intimate at that time, that I
would state my private opinion to him in confidence as to the
expediency of the Government launching out into such extra-
vagant expenditure of the public funds without very careful


forethought and more complete information than they at that
time possessed. In summing up the situation at that stage of
the negotiations I compared the two systems of dredging—
the “bucket” dredger and the “hydraulic” system of dredg-
ing by suction with mechanical mixing of the dredgings with
water under which the resulting solution might range up to
fifty per cent, of solids and fifty per cent, of water, to be
propelled through steel pipes and discharged a thousand to
fifteen hundred feet from the dredges, forming sandbanks or
other material along the line of dredging, which might be
protected from erosion by the deposition of stone facing.
Under the former system of “bucket” dredging, which was
condemned by Captain Almond as obsolete, I considered we
had a “general tool” well adapted to deal with the different
classes of material in the many ports of Queensland, and these
dredges were expected to tackle any class of material —sand,
mud, clay, and even soft rock, and rock shattered by explosives
prior to dredging and lifting. These dredges were expected
to be employed as required in various parts of the State
hundreds of miles apart, sculling up the coast by their own
power or assisted by a tug-boat, and doing efficient work
through a long period of service. On the contrary, the
“hydraulic” system advocated by Captain Almond and Mr.
Lindon Bates, on the lines of the Mississippi dredges, I con-
sidered “special” dredges—that is, suitable for “special” work
only and under “special” conditions, capable of marvellous
output, but not comparable with the other system working
under totally different conditions. The bucket dredger was
essentially a “general tool” fitted to cope with any material
with more or less efficiency, according to the dredgable qualities
of the harbour or river bottom to be deepened. On the other
hand, the hydraulic dredges—or, as they were originally
termed, sand dredgers—were designed to deal with sand or
other material readily water-borne; as the material became
clayey or more tenacious in quality the efficiency declined at
an alarming rate, until it practically disappeared.
Mr. Milne was then contemplating a trip to Europe and
subsequently to New York, and at my request he promised
to procure, if possible, copies of various reports of the Ameri-
can Bureau dealing with the performances of the Mississippi
dredges, and through the intervention of the British Ambassa-
dor, Lord Pauncifote, these came duly to hand about twelve
months later. I had only time to glance through them as they
were very voluminous, but I quickly realised that my forecast
was quite justified, and that before the Government was
encouraged to launch out into an expenditure of public funds
on what might prove a disastrous experience, a certain


responsibility rested on me, as a citizen, to prevent this if
possible. Although, as I have said, I had no desire to interfere
with public servants in the exercise of their official duties, I
took steps to let Sir Robert Philp, who was then head of the
Government, know that I had some late information on the
subject, which might be of interest in considering this most
important matter, and received an invitation to pass on the
documents. The result was that Mr. Lindon Bates, who was
on the eve of his departure with orders for two of these
powerful dredges in his pocket, also prospective orders for an
additional one for the Rockhampton Harbour Board, one for
the South Australian Government, and others not quite
advanced to the actual ordering stage, was requested to defer
ordering the Queensland dredges until one then being built
in Glasgow for work on the Volga River for the Russian
Government had completed satisfactory trials on the River
Scheldt in six months’ time. A Queensland representative
would be present, and if satisfied with the dredge’s efficiency,
the order would be confirmed. This vessel was of sister design
to those to be supplied. The conditions were complied with,
but I am afraid the official appointed to attend the trials had
little experience of dredging, and his report being favourable,
the order was subsequently confirmed. As I have said, the results
of actual performance were very disappointing. The work of the
smaller dredge, the “Hercules,” costing £70,000, has mainly
been discharging sand, etc., from the other dredges, after
deposition alongside that dredge, over the training walls,
especially along the Hamilton Flats. The larger dredger, the
“Samson,” costing £120,000, was laid up for several years, and
ultimately sold to the Walsh Island works of the New South
Wales Government for £16,000.
Some time after the transfer to the Marine Board of the
work of improving the harbour conditions, rumours were
current of marvellous work carried out in the United States
of America by a Bureau of Military Engineers entrusted by
the Government with the maintenance of the river traffic to
the great inland rivers, Mississippi and Missouri, where the
annual inundations wiped out the channels cut by powerful
dredges for the large shallow draught stern-wheel steamers
which maintained the inland traffic of these great communities
on the banks of the rivers. The obliteration of these artificial
channels annually necessitated the provision of some means
by which the channels might be restored and the traffic
resumed with as little delay as possible. These conditions led
a clever lawyer of a mechanical turn of mind to conceive the
idea of powerful suction being applied to the soft river bottom
of flood deposit, disintegrated by powerful mechanical cutters


in the form of revolving steel knives, mixing the soil with a
great stream of river water and propelling the mixture through
delivery pipes for a thousand or fifteen hundred feet from the
line of channel, and there discharging the water-borne burden
of dredge material. This furnished the solution of the problem
of rapidly restoring river communication after the annual
inundations in those great rivers. Mr. Bates—who was a
clever man intellectually—worked out his idea and patented
what was known as “Bates’ Hydraulic Dredges,” and the
immense quantities of silt and other soft material passed from
those great river beds in undreamt of speed of effectual execu-
tion attracted great attention and interest throughout the
engineering world. The papers were full of sensational
accounts of the marvellous performances of the powerful
hydraulic dredges, “Alpha,” “Beta,” “Gamma” and “Delta,”
working in these rivers, and Captain Almond saw visions of
applying the system to Queensland ports and rivers with
similar results. Alas! the physical conditions of our harbour
and river bottoms were very different from those of these great
American rivers, and a comparatively small expenditure
within the limited financial resources of the State did not
warrant the sacrifice of permanency for the American example
of expediency and rapidity in the restoration of interrupted
steamer traffic.


CHAPTER VI.
RETIREMENT AND REFLECTIONS.
My friends, on reading these reminiscences, may think
perhaps that I have made scant reference to my late chief,
Mr. W. D. Nisbet, M.1.C.E., for he was a most genial old
gentleman and very popular with the public, being always
accessible to callers. There was no line of demarcation
observed in connection with my duties, both branches of the
profession—the civil and mechanical—coming my way as chief
assistant in immediate charge of the headquarters staff; but
most of my attention was devoted to the creation, maintenance
and working of the new dredging fleet, and Mr. Nisbet did not
interfere with me in that work. We got on exceedingly well
together, he being content to wait until I laid the draft" plans
and specifications before him for approval and for his signature
thereto. He had great confidence in my judgment and ability,
and I always felt very grateful to him for the consideration he
showed to me throughout his stay in Queensland. Latterly,
the Institution of Civil Engineers of London, the headquarters
of the profession, has fully recognised the principle and made
it compulsory that a certain time given to actual work in the
mechanical engineering shops is essential to the complete
training of a civil engineer, and the Universities have also
generally adopted that requirement, so that the original
distinction has now quite disappeared.
It is astonishing how the young minds of the rising
generation of the Commonwealth are attracted to the engineer-
ing vocation as a future career. Ask any youngster what he
intends to be, and three-fourths of the schoolboys will immedi-
ately answer, “An engineer,” and especially so of late years,
since the development of electrical science and internal
combustion of gases for the production of power. It is some-
what a source of pride to me that during the whole history of
my firm, extending over more than sixty years, we have never
asked for or accepted a premium for apprenticeship in our
works; yet, when acting as special advocate as President of
the Ironmasters' Association of Queensland in the Arbitration
Court, we were accused by the Unions of not giving our
apprentices the advantage of special instruction by experts
during their working hours. I had a return prepared and laid
before His Honour some thirteen years ago, which gave
particulars of the subsequent careers of over fifty
apprentices who had made good and occupied leading positions
in the engineering world in Australia and elsewhere, including
some in the United States of America; and I suppose by this


time the lumber has doubled. From the general manager down
to the raiks of the leading men in our works, nine-tenths have
received their training therein. The fact is that a natural
aptitude and a desire to know impels the young apprentice to
watch wth keen curiosity the various processes going on all
around Hm at his daily work, and if he be of a studious mind
—as he nust be to succeed —the text-books of the profession
are open to him to enlighten his darkness in the same way as
they are to any graduate of the University. He learns more
by obsewation and personal research into the results of
science, and perhaps more perfectly than by daily teaching
and relunce on memory work only for the passing of examina-
tions with a view to graduation. Nevertheless, I am by no means
decrying the value of University training, and the acquisition
of early knowledge by those whose position in life enables them
to avail themselves of those aids to study which are of immense
advantage. The unassisted student often has a hard row to
hoe to accomplish his object, but enthusiasm will enable him
to accomplish it all the same. Fortunately, facilities for
obtaining the desirable assistance have immeasurably improved
since my young days, and the working conditions of the
apprentice also.
This retrospective effort to recall incidents of my long
connection with engineering in Australia has given me con-
siderable interest and some satisfaction, and I trust my notes
and references to perhaps long bygone men and things may
not prove uninteresting to many of the old engineers who
may still survive, both in Queensland and in New South Wales
and other States of the Commonwealth. I may add that some
two years ago the Council of the Institution of Civil Engineers
in London, with which institution I have now been connected
for forty-seven years, did me the honour of electing me an
honorary life member in recognition of my long connection
with the institution and some services I had rendered to that
body during the years 1916-18, when I represented Australasia
on the Council in London, my successors being Mr. Kernot,
Chief Engineer for Railways, Victoria, Professor Warren,
Wh.Sch., M.1.C.E., LL.D., Dean of the Faculty of Engineering
in the University of Sydney, and now General Monash, D. 5.0.,
etc., late Commander-in-Chief of the Anzac Forces in France
at the close of the late war, as the first chairman of the Queens
land Advisory Committee. This committee was instituted about
twenty years ago, and undertakes the responsibility of advising
the London Council confidentially on all applications for
admission to the institution, and of supervising examinations
prior to the Council dealing with such applications. Having
also acted as secretary and served a subsequent term as
chairman, I can testify to the extreme care with which this


burgh and Braddock, is always available to confer with the
management on any urgent matters which may arise. I have
resided in Brisbane for many years, and am available to the
Brisbane shareholders and others who may desire information,
and I am present every month at the board meetings in Mary-
borough. The same conditions apply to Mr. James B. Wood,
who has lately rejoined the board in succession to the late Mr.
Charles J. Booker, a very esteemed member who died last year.
My son, Mr. Herbert S. Goldsmith, A.M.Mech.E. (Bond.),
assumed the position of general manager about five years ago.
I would not close these reminiscences without a tribute of
praise to my wife, a loyal and devoted partner in a long life,
and one to whom I owe so much for her encouragement and
sympathy.
The preparation of these notes has given me a certain
amount of satisfaction, and has resulted for the most part
in pleasant memories.
I can only add that my long experience has taught me the
truth of the poet’s reflection:
“There is a Divinity which shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we may.”
A. J. GOLDSMITH, M.lnst.C.B.
July 15th, 1926.
Hendra, Brisbane.


t


-
.
am
-
v.> • *:
'■«v
-.
/
'
.
.
- " y - , : i ■. ! '
i
. ... "
V V.
■
/ jA
