

Augugtug
BISHOP
NEW ZEALAND.
JAMES BURTT.
Bucfelanb ;
The Brett Printing and Publishing Company. Limited, Shortland & Fort Streets.






y object in penning these Reminiscences is
two-fold. Firstly, as a very humble tribute
to the memory of a great and good man ; and,
secondly, as a small contribution to the Melanesian
Mission, of which he was the Founder. Several of
the items in this paper were contributed by me soon
after the death of the Bishop, and appeared in
“Tucker’s Memoirs of Bishop Selwyn.” A very
old friend having kindly offered to bear the expense
of printing, the whole of the proceeds of sale of
this paper will be given to the Melanesian Mission.
Auckland, N.Z„ James Burtt.
June, 1907.


REMINISCENCES
BISHOP SBLWTN.
On this year’s jubilee of the Church of England
in New Zealand, my memory carries me back to
the thirties, when Bishop George Augustus Selwyn
was one of the Eton masters, and private tutor to
the Marquis of Granby and several other noblemen.
At this time there was no evening service at the
parish church of Windsor, and several of the Eton
clergymen, prominent masters of the College,
undertook to supply the necessary ministration;
gas was laid on, and the church was always
crowded. Foremost among the preachers was
the Rev. G. A. Selwyn, whose fervid eloquence never
failed to command the most rapt attention. Some
years after, he was inducted curate of the parish, and
his advent in that capacity resulted in a most marked
interest in parochial affairs.
At this time many of the shops were opened on
the Sunday till 10 o’clock. Finding that his remon-
strances from the pulpit had no effect, he took more
stringent measures, and one Sunday morning he was
seen taking down the names of the principal offen-


ders; summonses were issued, which resulted in the
discontinuance of the, practice. The Vicar of the
parish, the Rev. Isaac Gossett, once said there never
was such a man, for he never heard of a case of sick-
ness or distress but he found his curate had been there
before him.
There were at this time very few slums in the
Royal Borough, but there was one exception, a place
called Beer Lane, a corruption of Bier Lane; it was
a cul de sac, and led to the gaol, and the occupants
of this lane were the scum of the town.
Our new curate was advised not to visit it, as he
would be anything but welcome, and might probably
meet with rough handling; but this did not deter
him, and it received his first attention.
On proceeding down the lane, he was accosted by
a brawny bully, who asked what he wanted there,
and not being satisfied with the reply, he took off his
coat and assumed a pugilistic attitude, little dreaming
that he had a trained athlete to deal with, and he
suddenly found himself on his back from a well-
directed blow from the parson, a result which received
immense applause from the bystanders. After this
the curate found no further obstacle to his visits.
The curate’s moral courage was on a par with his
physical perfection. Although the Court of William
IV. was not so profligate as that of George IV., there
was a good deal of the free and easy about it, and the
guests of the royal table used to imbibe more wine
than was good for them. This did not escape the
attention of the curate, and on one occasion, during his


sermon he dwelt upon the influence which everyone
had upon his entourage by his own example, and also
of his individual responsibility, and added, that if the
example of those in higher circles could be pleaded as
an excuse for intemperance, the poor man had an
excuse when drunkenness was tolerated even at the
table of royalty itself. On this occasion His Majesty
King William IV. was within a few yards of the
preacher.
During the time of his curacy, a claim for £3,000
was made upon the parish by the executors of a de-
ceased person's estate, for principal and interest loaned
to the parish many years prior. Upon investigation,
it was discovered that a rate had been levied years ago
to pay off this very debt, and counsel advised, that
although the accounts of the parish showed that the
money had been used for other parish purposes, a rate
could not now be levied for the same purpose, and
that the estates of the wardens for the time being were
liable for the debt. A meeting of the parishioners
was convened, and was largely attended. In a forcible
speech, the curate emphasised the great injustice of
enforcing a claim on those who, although legally, were
not morally responsible, and, large as the amount was,
he was quite sure that if the case were properly laid
before the parishioners, the money would be forth-
coming by voluntary subscriptions. After the curate
had left the hall, the Chairman announced that Mr.
Selwyn had put his name down for two years of his
stipend (£l5O per annum). The consequence was,
that in a few days the amount required was over-sub-
scribed, and the difficulty removed.


Years afterwards, in New Zealand, in a conversation
with the Bishop upon a kindred subject, he said that
Windsor was a grand place to collect money, if you
only went the right way about it, and, alluding to the
above incident, he said : “Do you recollect how hand-
somely good old Major Trent Tame down’ on that
occasion ?” I replied that I also remembered how the
curate “came down.” Alluding to the apparent hard-
ship, where, at Windsor, some of the oldest parish-
ioners who, having occupied a pew for forty years,
had, by moving from one street to another, lost their
right to a pew, he told me of an incident where a pew-
holder, who had his seat allotted to another, persisted
in using it, found on the following Sunday that a lock
had been put on the door, but he put his leg over the
door and took his seat as usual. On the next Sunday
he found that the pew had been boarded over; but,
having got a hint of the arrangement, he went pro-
vided with a camp stool, which he placed on the board-
ing, and occupied it during the service. The Bishop
had not heard the sequel.
On his resignation as curate of Windsor, it was
proposed by the parishioners to make him a presenta-
tion, but, on hearing of their intention, he said he
would not accept anything for himself, but whatever
they liked to give him would go towards the purchase
of Communion plate for his first church in New Zea-
land.
Bishop Selwyn was a remarkably handsome man,
and his head a study for the physiognomist and phren-
ologist. His energy was indomitable, supported by a


splendid physique; he had a most winning smile, but
when occasion required it, he was sternness itself. He
was a strict disciplinarian, but he practised what he
preached, and his whole life was one of self-abnega-
tion ; he valued money only for the good he could do
with it.
In the forties, when New Zealand was a Crown
colony, and the Government decided to appoint a
Bishop, the See was offered to the Rev. W. Selwyn,
who declined it. His brother, G.A., was very angry,
and said that he ought to be ashamed of himself. On
tins being reported to a member of the Ministry of the
day, he said: “Did George Selwyn say that? Then he
is the very man we want.”
On the voyage out to New Zealand, the Bishop
studied the Maori language so effectively that he was
enabled, on his arrival, to preach to the natives in their
own tongue, and on landing, it is said that he knelt
down upon the sand at Auckland and thanked the
Almighty for his preservation.
He was not long in the colony before he commenced
his visitations over the enormous area of his diocese.
These journeyings were almost entirely on foot, and
in this way he traversed the whole of the two islands.
It was arduous work, and very few men could have
borne the strain. There were scarcely any bridges, but
this did not deter him; if the stream were fordable, he
forded it; if not, he swam it, unless he could procure
a canoe.
As a preacher and reader he was most effective and
impressive, and he had a peculiarly good voice, which
could he heard all over an ordinary-sized building, and


this without any apparent effort; and he had not that
failing of many speakers, of lowering his voice at the
end of an argument or a sentence, by which the force
of it is lost to the listeners. In his rendering of the
prayers of the Church, it seemed as if every word came
from his very heart, and always led one to see new
beauties in the grand old liturgy of the Church of
England. I may mention here that he had studied
elocution under Kean, the tragedian. A clergyman
once said that to hear Bishop Selwyn read a passage
of Scripture was a sermon in itself.
Nothing annoyed the Bishop more than irreverence
in a place of worship. On one occasion, when he was
conducting the service to the troops in Auckland at
St. Paul’s, I could see he was vexed at the almost
defiant attitude of a young officer, who occupied a
front seat. There were neither pews, reading desk,
nor pulpit, and the minister conducted the whole of the
service from behind the altar rails. In a part of the
service, when the congregation are accustomed to
stand, this young gentleman maintained a lounging
attitude. The Bishop looked at him severely, and the
young fellow looked at the Bishop, who presently
lowered his book, as if to say, “Now, young man, when
you stand up we will proceed with the service.” The
eyes of the congregation were all upon him, and finally
he stood up, looking very small, and his face as red
as his jacket. He got a good wigging from the
Colonel, who was present.
There was a lack of sympathetic accord between the
Bishop and some of the Nonconformists, and some
prominent members treated him with very scant cour-


tesy, and used to speak of him as “Selwyn.” On one
occasion, when one of their ministers was going up
the river Hokianga in a whaleboat to a meeting, he
was continually shouting out, “Pull away, boys, or we
shall be late.'’ At last one of the men said, “Look here,
if the man you call Selwyn were in the boat, he would
pull off his coat and take the stroke oar; but he is a
man!”
A sailor once said that to see the Bishop handle a
boat was almost enough to make a man a Christian.
When St. Paul’s Church was consecrated there was
no organisation of Wardens and Vestry; there was
simply a committee of management, of which the
Bishop was head, and a discussion arose as to priority
of choice of seats. On the committee was a member
who had subscribed somewhat largely to the Building
Fund. This prominent citizen said he thought that those
who had subscribed most should have first choice. The
Bishop said he saw a difficulty in ascertaining who was
the largest contributor. The prominent citizen replied
that there was the subscription list, which could settle
it. The Bishop admitted this, but he still saw a diffi-
culty ; there was a case in point in which we were told
that a certain poor widow cast two mites into the
treasury, and we had it from the highest authority that
she cast in more than all the rest. The prominent
citizen subsided.
In the consecration of churches the Bishop always
stipulated that every third seat should be free, for it
was not right in the House of God that because a man
was poor he should be relegated to an obscure corner
of the church. This rule would appear to have been


abrogated in later years, and I think it is to be
regretted.
When New Zealand was under Provincial Govern-
ment, a number of settlers were brought out, and
certain provision was made for their housing, but the
housing was not ready on their arrival. A good num-
ber of them were sent up to Pukekohe, and the Bishop
went up to visit them. On his arrival he found a build-
ing which was used as a place of worship, full of them.
An elderly man came forward and said, “Eh,
minister, you’ll be quoting Scripture and saying,
‘My house shall be called the house of prayer, but you
have made it a den of thieves.’ ” “No," said the
Bishop, “I think I can give you a better text than that,”
and quoted the third verse of the 84th Psalm, “The
sparrow hath found her a house, and the swallow a
nest where she may lay her young, even Thy altars, O
Lord of Hosts, my King and my God."
The Bishop was very strong in his condemnation of
the war which originated about the Waitara dispute.
He looked upon it as an iniquitous proceeding, and
incurred considerable odium in certain quarters by his
outspoken opinion that Governor Browne was in the
wrong, and that the trouble would have been avoided
if wiser counsels had obtained.
I was one of the first in Auckland to receive the
news of the Rev. Mr. Volkner’s murder by the natives
of Opotiki, and immediately went to Parnell to ask the
Bishop to break the tidings to his wife, and I shall
never forget the expression of pain and surprise which
suffused the Bishop’s face. When he heard of the
Maoris going over to the Hauhaus, he said, “If I am


bereaved of my children, lam bereaved.” He was
very clever at repartee, and had the happy knack of
always saying the right thing at the right time.
During the Waikato war the Bishop was foremost in
attention to the sick and wounded, administering medi-
cine, dressing their wounds, and sitting up with them
at night, and the soldiers would do anything for him.
They used to say, “What a splendid soldier he would
have made!”
The Melanesian Mission.
The islands of Melanesia were in his diocese, and he
took the first opportunity of visiting them; but the
only means of doing so was by the schooner yacht
Undine, 22 tons, kindly placed at his disposal by the
owner, Mr. Blacket. With only a sailing master and
one or two deck hands he undertook the perilous voy-
ages, he himself navigating , with only an old Russian
chart to guide him. It was the Bishop’s custom to take
with him one or two of St. John’s College students,
and on one occasion, soon after leaving Auckland, he
overheard these two young gentlemen protesting
against washing up dishes. “My father didn’t send
me to St. John’s to wash dishes!” Without saying a
word, the Bishop got some hot water, seated himself
on a spare spar, and commenced the wash; but the
youngsters came up saying, “Oh, my Lord, allow me,
allow me.” “Oh, no,” said the Bishop, “I can do it,”
and directed them to some other work. He always
maintained that no honest work was menial, and he
acted up to his convictions. At this time the under-
taking was called the “Northern Mission,” of which I
was Hon. Secretary and Treasurer.


St. Matthew's Parish.
When the incumbent, the Rev. David Jones, left on
a visit to England, the Bishop undertook to see that the
ministration was provided for, and took it in hand
himself. His unremitting attention to all details was
characteristic of him, and his visits to the sick were
greatly appreciated. A lady friend told me on one
occasion she was visiting a lady whose daughter was
far gone in consumption, and while there the Bishop
arrived. It was a most pathetic scene. The Bishop
was on his knees in prayer at the bedside, when a fit of
coughing came on. He rose, put his arm around the
poor girl, and supported her while the paroxysm lasted.
He turned his head aside, and she noticed that the
tears were rolling down his cheeks. It was so like
him; in the sick room he had all the gentle sympathy
and tenderness of a woman.
A rather amusing incident occurred soon after the
Bishop took charge of the parish. A different warden
was on duty, and the offertory was taken into the
vestry. The Bishop was disrobing, when, to his aston-
ishment, the warden commenced shovelling the coins
into his pocket. “Mr. Blank, Mr. Blank!” said the
Bishop, “what are you doing?" “Oh,” said the
warden, “I always count the money at home.” The
Bishop reminded him that th£ rule was that the money
should be counted, entered into the book, and the entry
initialled by the officiating minister. Still the shovel-
ling went on. The Bishop then locked the outer door,
put the key in his pocket, and with his back against the
inner door, said, “Now, Mr. Blank, you don’t leave this
vestry till you have complied with the rule.” Compli-
ance ensued.


As at this time the supply of clergymen was very
limited and many of the country settlers did not see
one in twelve months, the Bishop said the townspeople
should occasionally dispense with their minister for a
Sunday, and thus enable him to visit those who were
less fortunately situated. “But what on earth should
we do?” was the reply. “I judge you out of your own
mouth,” was the rejoinder, and “you should have pity
on your fellow colonists in the country.” The sugges-
tion, however, was never carried out.
In 1849 tl ie Bishop was grieved when a considerable
number of settlers were hurrying away to California on
the gold discovery, and preached very strongly against
the exodus. In one sermon he said they were leaving a
splendid country, where any man who would work could
eat bread to the full, and were going to a land from
whence ere long would emanate a moral pestilence that
would demonise mankind and people hell. His pre-
diction appears to have been fulfilled. He also re-
minded them that although the ships of Tarshish
carried gold, they also carried apes and peacocks, em-
phasising the last three words.
The amount of work which the Bishop got through
was prodigious. For instance, when resident at St.
John’s College, one Sunday, after prayers and break-
fast, he walked in to Auckland (6 miles) ; at 10 o’clock
conducted service for the troops; at 11 o’clock full
service for civilians; at 3 o’clock full service at St.
Barnabas’ (Parnell), and then started to walk to Papa-
kura (16 miles) to conduct a meeting there on Monday
morning.


When the Bishop was consecrated, New Zealand was
a Crown colony, and half of his stipend (£1,200) was
paid by the Government, and the other half by the
C.M.S.; but when a constitution was granted to the
colony the former moiety was discontinued, and of the
£6OO remaining he waived £2OO a year to establish the
Diocese of Waiapu, so that for the last ten years of his
episcopate he had only £4OO a year, for the Church
contributed nothing.
When the See of Lichfield became vacant, he was
offered it, but he declined acceptance. His friends re-
minded him that half of his stipend was gone, and that
in a few years the grant from the C.M.S. would also
cease. His reply was that his heart was in New Zea-
land, and he would return there; if the Church would
give him a stipend he would take it; if not, he would go
back, even if he had to live on pipis (cockles) and
potatoes. An attempt was then made to get Mrs.
Selwyn to use her influence; even this failed. Then
the Queen sent for him, and it is said that when they
met she took both of his hands in hers and said, “Dr.
Selwyn, I want you to take Lichfield.” This, of course,
was tantamount to a command, and he then returned
to New Zealand to make arrangements for his final
departure.
In all his work he had an ardent coadjutor in his
good wife, whose private purse was always open to
assist him in any plan for the welfare of the diocese,
and great regret was expressed on his leaving the
colony ; but the Chief Justice, Sir Geo. Arney, re-
marked “that it was all very well, but during his resi-
dence they had never given him enough money to buy


a pair of shoes.” There is an old proverb that bread
eaten is soon forgotten. The truth of this was recently
verified. When the tidings of Mrs. Selwyn’s death
reached the colony no notice of it appeared in the
Church Gazette, nor was one of the bells which she
had given to the diocese tolled.
It is not generally known that from Mrs. Selwyn’s
fortune, and from money contributed by their friends
in England, the Bishop invested no less than £30,000
in purchasing land for endowments in the diocese.
The Bishop led a strenuous, simple life, and for
some years lived in a mere cottage at Parnell, now
known as the Deanery, in vivid contrast with many of
the parsonages of the present day; and those who had
the privilege of knowing him thoroughly would admit
that he was one of the grandest men that ever walked
the earth. I was one day speaking with a rather
pedantic friend in Queen Street, when the Bishop was
passing on the other side. My friend said, “There
goes a splendid specimen, physically and morally, of
the genus homo;’' and he was right.
It has been often said that the Bishop made a mis-
take in selecting the site for St. John’s College so far
from Auckland; but the facilities of transit in the
present day go to prove his prescience and the sound-
ness of his judgment.
Before finally leaving the colony, the Bishop had
his several horses shot and buried in Remuera, lest his
good servants should fall on evil days when they were
past work.


I must not conclude these “Reminiscences” with-
out a passing allusion to the Bishop’s very dear
friend, the martyred Bishop Patteson. They were
like father and son, and their lives truly apostolic.
Preaching at St. Paul’s (Auckland) on behalf of
the Melanesian Mission, Bishop Patteson said “that
perhaps the best way to interest his friends in the
work would be to give them a sketch of the mode
which they usually adopted in visiting an island for
the first time,” and he then gave a most graphic ac-
count of how they swam ashore with nothing to excite
the cupidity of the natives, and clad only in singlet
and drawers. Then, on landing, they threw up their
arms to show that they carried no weapons, and in
this way they gained the confidence of those whom
they came to serve.
On coming out-of the church, a friend said to me,
“Wasn’t it splendid? Wasn't it like another chapter
to the Acts of the Apostles?”




