

REMINISCENCES OP DAVID REID
As Giron to J.C.H. Ogier (In Nov* 1905)
TOio Has Set Than Dorm In The Third Person
11 tt


Tho narrator Mr* David Reid was the oldest son of Dr* Bold R.N. His
mother, before being married to Dr* Reid, was Miss Agnes Dyco, He
was born in the year 1820, Dr* Reid, with his wife, son and two
daughters, arrived in Sydney to settle there in 1825, One of the
daughters is now Lady Murphy, the widow of the late Speaker of the House
of Assembly, Victoria, and tho other daughter is the widow of tho late
Alexander Beatson Balcombe, whoso father was tho first Colonial Treasurer
of New South Wales, in reference to whom it may be mentioned that he had
been Commissary to tho Government at St, Helena prior to his appointment
to Australia*
It was during his residence there that Napoleon was exiled in 1815 and
became the occupant of Mr. 801000*0' s house, the Briars, until he occupied
Longwood, then being prepared for his reception, and he became intimate
with tho Balcombe family. Miss Balcombe, at that time a girl of about
thirteen and who promised to be a very handsome and intelligent person,
attracted great attention from the Emperor, She was afterwards married
to a Mr, Abell.and wrote a very excellent volume which was published in
London styled "Napoleon's life at St, Helena" and from an Illustration
in which book, giving a picture of Mrs, Abel and her sister presenting
a bouquet of flowers to the Qnperor, now hangs in this room at Eastcourt.
Tho Balcombe family left St. Helena before Napoleon's death. On their
departure Mr, Balcombe was presented by the Emperor with a very elegant
gold snuff box sot with brilliants and which the Enperor mentioned at
tho time, saying - "This is the snuff box I used when I fought the battle
of Marengo", A singular circumstance occurred in relation to this same
snuff box. It seemed that Mr. Balcombe had this snuff box stolen from his
pocket in London and never afterwards heard of it.
There were two squatters who took up a run on tho Hume River of (sic)
Gooramaddai tho firm was known as Clarke and Brown, Mr, Reid happened
to be at tho Station and stopped the Inight, and in the course of
conversation, ho happened to mention tho name of his brother-in-law
Balcombe • Mr, Lindsay Brown immediately said - "Was your brother-in-law
ever in St. Helena?" He said "Yes, he was born there* why, do you ask
mo tho question?" Ho said "I will toll you the reason. One day I was
geing down Regent Street in London and in passing a jeweller's shop and
looking in at the window I saw a very handsome gold snuff box with tho
inscription "To William Balcombe Esquire frcm tho Emperor Napoleon,
St. Helena", and tho date. "Why", said Mr. Reid, "that must have been
the very snuff box that I have heard described as the snuff box which
was stolen out of Mr. Balcombe *s pocket many years before in London,
Eero ends the snuff box. So the history of even a trifling incident,
equally with a matter of moment, is made by the observations of various
persons from different parts of the world and is connected by tho inter-
course of those of different generations, and thus tho incident arising
from this conversation with Mr, Lindsay Brown at Gooramadda Station
caused a strange history to be elicited as to the manner in which the
Emperor Napoleon appeased his nervous excitement during tho battle of


Marengo, This incident being discussed at a station of Port Phillip,
now belonging to the father of Madame Melba, of when it has been
erroneously mentioned that she was born -there - at Gooramadda Station -
but it was at or near Melbourne, hence her appellation of Melba,
During the time Governor Macquarie was in power the mortality amongst the
convicts which were shipped to New South Wales was very considerable, so
Eiuoh so that the Governor drew the attention of the authorities at home to
the circumstances, in consequence of which the Lords of the Admiralty
determined to provide their own Captains and Surgeons on board each
transport ship, And to test this experiment they then requested Sir
William Knighton, the physician to the Fleet, to choose whoever he consid-
ered to be the best medical officer upon the retired half-pay list to test
the effect of the experiments, and Sir William Knighton chose Dr, David
Reid R,N, for the first ship under this new system, and Lieutenant Lamb,
lately of Lamb and Parbury, merchants of Sydney, to command the ship
called "Baring", This was in February, 1815,
The cause of the very great mortality amongst the convicts on board ship
during their passage to Australia was in consequence of the Transport
Board entering into contracts with ship-ownsro to carry a cargo of convicts
to Australia, the owners to find their own captains and surgeons, * Conseq-
uently the ship-owners placed improper persons in authority and the
passengers when ill, were left to die without any systematic method of
treating their complaints, principly scurvy. The mortality often averag-
ing 30 to 40 per cent during the voyage of from six to eight months, a
ship probably about 700 or 800 tons would usually carry about 300 or 400
convicts besides the crew and soldiers or marines.
The Surgeon under this new system had full authority on board and upon his
command the captain was obliged to put into any port for fresh provisions
as the Commissioners conducting His Majesty's Transport Service directed
by their "Commission” and "Instructions",
In consequence of Dr, Reid compelling the ship "Baring" to put into several
ports for fresh food the mortality from scurvy was very inconsiderable,
and the arrival of the ship at Sydney with an average mortality of only
four per cent was considered most extraordinary and Dr. Reid received the
special thanks of Governor Macquarie together with a recommendation that
he should be entrusted with another ship, when he made a second voyage in
the same ship with equally successful results and after that he was
entrusted with a ship called "Providence", with female prisoners to the
number of 350 who were brought out without any unusual mortality.
It was shortly after the completion of the abovementioned voyage that
Dr, Reid married, and after completing his next voyage in the "Baring"
Governor Macquarie advised him, as he was then a married man, to bring
his wife out to Australia and settle there, which after several voyages
he did, and brought his wife and son and two daughters along with him
in a ship with free emigrants called the "Mariner" in 1823,
The Home authorities were so well satisfied with the result of the good
effect of the proper supervision of the transports that Sir William
Knighton caused a letter to be sent under the sign-manual of the King to


Governor Brisbane (the successor of Governor Macquarie) commanding
Dr. Reid R.N, to his special consideration for advancement and promot-
ion in the colony of Now South Wales, which, when it was received hy
Sir Thcauas Brisbane, he remarked that no such document had ever been
received before by a Governor of a Colony as a mark of especial care
and attention for services rendered.
All that Dr, Reid obtained, however, was the appointment of Magistrate
ani 2000 acres of land in the County of Argyle now styled "Inverary
Park", whore Dr, Reid and his family settled.
Mr, David Reid's memory is good from the time he was 8 years old. His
impressions about the working of the convict system in N.S. Wales in
the early times have left an indelible impression on his mind. The
arbitrary powers that both masters and magistrates exercised seemed to
him in those days, young as he was, tyrrany of the worst kind when
exercised to the full, which many did, though there were numbers of
very humane masters who treated their convict servants like human beings,
but there were many who were most severe and cruel to them. And it was,
no doubt, from these facts that, as the Colony grow, the people demanded
the abolition of the whole convict system of transportation.
What actually took place in consequence of the power with which magis-
trates wore invested at that time was that prisoners wore often punished
most severely for very trivial offences, so much so that if a man
approached his master upon any and every occasion, no matter where or
when, and did not take his hat off and hold it in his hand whilst talking
to him, it would be considered insolence, and if the man was brought up
by his master before a severe magistrate it was mere than likely he
would receive the sentence of being flogged with 50 or 75 lashes by a
oat-o'-nino tails while tied up to a gum-tree, if no triangles were at
hand, in the oomer-post of a fence.
For what were considered greater offences a man might be sentenced to
what was called at that time an "ironed gang" j- that is to say to work
in a chained gang. And what is nowadays not understood the man in a
chained gang had two chains apiece, one rivittod upon each ankle with a
chain held up by » string round the waist and so remained night and day
working on the roads of the colony, with stockades where at night they
might be kept tinder surveillance by soldiers at different portions of
the roads, with' an Officer styled "Superintendent" commanding each stock-
ade, And the roads were all made by the Government and tinder military
control and nothing but convict labour employed in their construction.
The prisoners transported to the Australian Colonies were sentenced for
the term of 7 years, 14 years or for life. On landing they wore passed
into barracks whore Hyde Park now stands, and upon application settlers
could obtain any number of convicts and of every description from the
Govonuasnt, no restriction being placed upon the numbers supplied, the
Government being only too glad to got rid of their responsibility• By
application any mechanics applied for could bo readily obtained. By way
of illustration there were at Inverary Park blacksmiths, carpenters,
shoemakers, wheelwrights and even tanners. These men wore employed at
their various trades, which tended very much to the assistance c C the


settlors at their various stations* If these men behaved themselves -well
they received "tickets of 'eave." which meant that they were to a certain
extent free to follow ,*r own labour for their own benefit under certain
conditions, which were, that a ticket of leave was granted to them for a
specific district out of which they were not allowed to go without a pass
from a bench of magistrates and then only for a specified time, not more
than a fortnight at once* They had what was called to muster their
certificates before the magistrates of the district every month to show
that they were not absent from the district. Everyone infringing this
rule and not producing his ticket when called upon to do so incurred
the liability of having his ticket cancelled and he was returned into
Government barracks in Sydney, and, therefore, lost all the advantages
of the ticket of leave system, and had to continue to serve the remainder
of his sentence*
The ticket of leave, it should be explained, was granted under certain
conditions, for instance if a prisoner wore sentenced for 7 years if he
had served 4 years without punishment he then received a ticket of leave*
If sentenced for 14 years if he had served 6 years without punishmbnt
then ho received a ticket of leave* And a prisoner for life if he had
served 8 years without punishment received a ticket of leave.
The assigned servants had to obtain the signature of the master as a
condition precedent to their obtaining a ticket of leave* As an instance
•f how this sytesm was abused by bad masters t-
If a man received punishment, no matter how slight, it debarred him from
receiving a ticket of leave for twelve months, and many of these masters,
not being willing to part with good servants who had served them well,
just before a man was duo for his ticket of leave would, on some pretext
or another, find fault with him and have him before a magistrate, lay a
small complaint against him, however, trivial, for which the lowest
sentence was 25 lashes, by which means the master obtained an extra twelve
months service after the expiration of the four years had elapsed and
some were unscrupulous enough to repeat this diabolical procedure more
than once; therefore, it is no wonder that some of these men, after
serving their proper time and being defrauded of their just rights, became
desperate and took to the unsettled portions of the oolony and became
bushrangers*
The Govermrwnt at one time, in consequence of the difficulties which were
experienced in certain districts from the absence of magistrates, were
induced to appoint travelling magistrates who were selected from Officers
of the Aray.
Lieutenant Cobham was the travelling magistrate appointed for the district
where Inverary Park was situate* These magistrates were always accompan-
ied by three mounted policemen and a soourgar, or man to inflict punish-
ment, His duty was to call at every station whore there were assigned
servants, aai to ask if there were any complaints to bo made* Should there
bo any, the man was called up (who the complaint was against) the case
hoard and dealth with in a very summary manner. The sentence being 25
lashes or more as the case might be, the man being taken out of sight to
the nearest gum-tree and the punishment inflicted*


The men had considerable and frequent difficulties to contend with even
under ordinary circumstances. The rations allowed according to the
Government scale for assigned servants were very meagre. The master was
only compelled to give 7 lbs, of meat, 10 lbs, of'flour or a peck of
wheat which latter they had to grind at a steel mill which was usually
called in those days "banging the mill", together with salt and soap but
not compelled to give either tea, sugar or tobacco. These latter rations
were given entirely at the will of the master, so that if the master so
chose the man must work upon bread, meat and water.
The experience arrived at being, though there were exceptions, that the men
when properly treated were very good servants, for it must be remembered
that in those days, of the men who wore transported many were sent out for
very trivial offences, some for smuggling, some for poaching, some for
breaking the excise laws and some for endeavouring to have laws altered to
the extent to which they have since been constitutionally enacted.
And the toasters themselves had to excuse in treating these men as though
they were the worst of mankind, because they had furnished to them by the
Government with every assigned servant his full description, age, place
of birth, charge of offence, his trial and sentence as well as his trade.
Mr, Reid in his long life has known many of his father's and some of his
own servants become highly respectable members of society and many of
their descendants of the present day occupying high positions throughout
the Commonwealth, Of course, it is not his intention to individualise,
as it is more to their credit that their advancement has arisen. Although
he has known the sons of some of these man who have risen to high posit-
ions and become men of affluence and wealth and who have totally forgotten
their natural obligations to their parents and have allowed them to die in
penury and neglect.
Mr, Reid's recollection was that his father Dr, Reid was considered always
a very good master to his servants and treated them in a proper way.
He sometimes had as many as forty assigned servants at a time, of various
trades and occupations, having very little trouble with regard to the
management of them, many of whom were frequently entrusted with valuable
property in their charge both of sheep, cattle and horses and it was seldom
if ever that any loss was sustained by carelessness or neglect* accidents,
of course, could not be prevented. And it must be mentioned that in this
Instance the mode of conduct pursued was in regard to the men's diet which
was that they not only received what the government regulations certified
as necessary but in addition a half-pound of tea, 3 pounds of sugar and
what was called at that time a "fig" of tobacco a week, 1,e,: a fig of
Barrett's twist.
In the matter of clothing, the Government required in summer one light suit
and in the winter one warm suit and two pairs of boots in the year. The
material of which the clothing was made consisted of what at that time was
styled duck frocks apd duck trousers for summer and Parramatta cloth for
the winter.


This Parramatta cloth was made at the female factory at Parramatta, hence
the term given to women who had been there,as "factory girls".
All female convicts upon their arrival were sent to tho Parramatta factory
whore there was the arrangement of first, second and third class of women,
tho first class being fresh arrivals from shipboard, the second class being
those ready for assignment and tho third class those who wore there for
punishment and consequently had their hair out short. If a selector's
wife required a servant she could go herself to Parramatta and select one
personally or by application.
And to show the advantages in a new country of an establishment like
Parramatta, it may bo observed if a man wanted a wife and ho had good
recommendations from well-known magistrates, ho could go to the female
factory at Parramatta, the girls would bo ranged up in a row and ho could
choose whichever he thought would suit him and if she was willing they
could be married there and then.
Prom Mr, Reid's personal experience it would bo impossible to have batter
servants than could be procured from the female factory as then estab-
lished, the exceptions being very few.
A well-known man, called "Jim the Bear", having some good recommendations,
wont to the factory at Parramatta wiih a damper under his ami and selected
a woman for his wife who was agreeable, and as ho walked out with her to
get married, having his intended wife under one arm and tho damper under
the other to show he was capable of providing for her, was married, and
they lived happily together. To Mr, Reid's personal knowledge he was a
servant of Mr, Barber, Mr, Reid's wife's father.
In the early days of the colony of N.S, Wales many of the settlers had a
habit of placing their servants who had behaved themselves well as over-
seers over their fellow convicts, which often brought to Mr, Reid's mind
afterwards an illustration of the saying that a slave makes tho most tyrann-
ical master, and to curry favour, as it were, with their employers they
were generally very severe with those they had charge of, so much so that
they were very frequently the occasion of these men being punished for very
trivial offences by these overseers, who though they were themselves at
that time only convicts, seomed to have no feeling whatever for those
unfortunates who were placed under their control. They assumed to them-
selves more arbitrary powers and required more deference being paid to them
than to the masters themselves. Consequently it is very easy to conceive
how these unfortunate men kicked, as it were, against these men who we re
little, if at all, better than themselves; which was the cause sometimes
of the men in exasperation turning upon them and using violence towards
these their oppressors.
Mr, Reid can well recollect when a boy, not more than about eight or nine
years old at the time, a circumstance which Illustrates these observations
A neighbour of Dr, Reid had a farm at a distance from his residence, upon
which he ran a flock of sheep in charge of an overseer who was very severe
upon his men, two of whom, who had been driven to desperation, at last
turned round and murdered him.


Those two mon were brought into a Court of Petty Sessions held at
Inverary, at that time the only Court of the Southern District, in the
County of Argyle, They were then committed from there to Sydney to bo
tried, there being at that time no Court outside Sydney for trials.
They were found guilty of the murder, sentenced to bo hanged and gibb-
etted at Goulburn where the town of Goulbum now stands. Two or three
years after their execution their remains were to be soon hanging in
chains and swaying in the winds a pair of skeletons. Same years after-
wards, when Governor Bourke paid a visit to the Southern districts, those
objects came under his inspection, and being a man of a vory humane dis-
position, and horrified at the sight, he ordered them to be removed and
buried. This spot was, however, for many years afterwards known by the
name of "Gallows Hill" for the timber on Tfhioh they had been executed, a
sort of platform with a beam over it, remained there for many years after-
wards, This spot now, however, forms part of the town of Goulbum and ie
all built over and probably very few of the inhabitants at the present
time have any knowledge of the scenes which were enacted there in times
past. This case came within Mr, Reid's personal knowledge and many
similar cases have been spoken of but of this the circumstances are beyond
dis P uto ‘ n . ..
&UU- roTTee. -
The first bench of magistrates in the Inverary District consisted of
Dr. Reid and Robert Pulirer R,N, a nd the Court-house was on the farm of
Invorary Park and held in Dr, Reid's schoolhouse onoe every month,
Mr, Coleman, formerly a purser in the Navy, but -who had been "sent out"
to the Colony, was Clerk of the Court, and also tutor to Dr, Reid’s
children, and it was through the Court being held there that many matters
came under the observation of Mr, Reid in his young days.
A bushranger named Tennant was brought there wounded after conflict with
the police and Dr, Reid and Dr, Gibson, who happened to be on a visit, an
Army surgeon to a Naval surgeon, so they together extracted the bullets
from the bushranger, who with two others had committed some robberies in
the bush and stuck up some settlements, among the rest Mr, Stuckey at
Longreach on Wollondilly River,
After he had recovered from his wounds he was brought before the Court at
Inverary and committed to Sydney for trial where it was proved that when
Stuokoy's place was bailed up Tennant prevented his two mates from insult-
ing the women at the home station. He told them that if either of them put
a hand on any of the women, he would shoot them; which was taken into
consideration end he only got a light sentence, while the two confederates
were executed, Tennant afterwards became a foreman and a reputable
member of society. Another instance may be mentioned at that time j- The
body of a man named "Dick", shot by the police as a bushrarger, was
brought to the Court-house, This man "Dick" was an assigned servant of
Dr. Reid at the time he took to the bush. During the time he was in
Mr, Reid's service he and another servant went to a M r , Styles place, a
neighbouring farm, and stole some turnips out of a field to oat. Styles
caused them to be arrested and tried for stealing the turnips and both of
them were in consequence sentenced to nine months in an "ironed gang".


"Dick" and two others escaped from the ironed gang and took to the bush,
and they had a great encounter with the police at a placed called Jerara,
They took possession of a hut which belonged to a man called "Jimmy the
Weaver" and thero they stood a bombardment by the ‘police. The first of
the attack resulted in the police having two of their horses shot, and
they retired from the attack, .And after a time, after having sent a
trooper to Goulburn, a distance of 20 miles, for reinforcements, while they
were awaiting reinforcements, these bushrangers left the hut and retired
into the bush. The police, who were accompanied by a black boy to track
the bushrangers, followed them up and "Dick" was shot through the heart
and the others surrendered. The body was brought to the Court-house on a
stretcher upon a hand-barrow with a sheet over it.
A printed proclamation was posted on the gaol at Inverary or lock-up offer-
ing a reward of £3OO for the apprehension of John Donohoe, John McNamara
ard William Underwood, three celebrated desperate bushrangers who had been
and were sticking up people in the counties of Camden and Cumberland,
These three men were at the time the most considerable gang of bushrangers
which had appeared in N,S. Wales, They were, so to speak, like the
Gardiner or the Kelly Gang of later days, only that they were always on
foot whilst the latter were mounted.
These men, as long as they remained together, appeared to be able to evade
the utmost vigilance of the police, but according to report afterwards
they had dissention amongst themselves and it was to this extent critical,
that the other two shot Underwood because he was an educated man and was
keeping a diary and they thought that he had an intention of turning infor-
mer and betraying them. So, in consequence of the reward being offered,
they thought they wbuld shoot him. The other two separated afterwards;
Donohoe was shot by a policeman at or near Camden and McNamara was shot
by a constable Horn of Parramatta, Those were some of the very earliest
bushrangers of N,S, Wales, And somewhere about this time Dr, Wardell, a
contemporary of William Charles Wentworth, was shot at Petersham by tho
bushranger Jenkins, because Wardell was persuading him to surrender him-
self and he shot Mr. Wardell dead. This was in the very early days.
Some time afterwards there was a very desperate gang of bushrangers called
"Whitten's mob" who ccramittod depredations all over the Southern country,
sticking up people and men on the road and homesteads, and were not part-
icular as to murder as well as robbery,
Mr, Reid can recollect the time of hearing of Whitten's mob sticking up
Grosvonor'a public house at Gunning, between Goulburn and Yass, Grosvenor
defended his house against them, and they regularly besieged his house one
moonlight night, Mr, John Hume, a brother of Hamilton Hume the explorer,
who lived at his farm at Collingwood, about two miles from Gunning, hear-
ing a number of shots being fired at night and considering it very
unusual, and aware that a mob of bushrangers were out and about the neigh-
bourhood, determined to ascertain the cause, and calling two of his men,
he armed himself and proceeded to the township where he heard the shots,
which place at that time was only recently surveyed (and) was occupied to
the extent of two or three public houses and a blacksmith's shop. Upon
his arrival at the scone of the conflict he was met by Whitton and his
gong who, knowing Mr, Hume and, though being desperate men as they were,
did not wish to do him any harm, Mr, Hume being very well liked, so they


requested him to go away and not tain any part* He tried to reason
with them and told them he was determined to go to the assistance of
Grosvenor, They told him that if he was determined to assist Grosvenor
they would shoot him* Mr* Hume, however, whether, not considering they
wore as desperate as they alleged, was proceeding in the direction of
Grosvenor*s house and as soon as he moved they shot him down dead.
Two men he had with him then returned and informed his family of his
death* The bushrangers then wont off and so Grosvenor*s house was saved
but at the expense of Mr, Hume's life* They were, however, afterwards
apprehended by the police and tried and executed.
As to society in those days, many might think, being as people were, earning
into contact continually with the criminal class and more especially those
of the rising generation they might have become imbued with bad principles
and contaminated, "Now I must say" says Mr, Reid, "from personal knowledge
and experience that although mixing to a great extent with this class I
never found them in any way wishing, as it wore, to make proselytes of
those unimbuod with crime, but in nine cases out of then always giving
good advice to youngsters, and citing as example their own misfortune and
how, through keeping bad company, they had been brought into the predic-
ament in which they now were, and warning their listeners from doing any-
thing which was wrong.
Many of our best men, and men occupying high positions in after life, wore
brought up in continual contact with the "criminal class" as these men
were at that time styled, but men, nevertheless, not to be compared for one
moment with the criminal classes of the present day - they were of a diff-
erent stamp altogether. Of course, there were exceptions as in all cases
but masters in those days very soon ascertained if they had assigned to them
ary very desperate characters, and knowing their own responsibility in
regard to the contamination -these men would cause, perhaps to the injury
of their own families, and also their fellow servants, took precautions
and soon got rid of them by returning them to the Government,
It may be mentioned that in the event of settlers taking up land, the
Governor allowed full rations and clothing to all the men who were assig-
ned to the settlor for the first twelve months; after the first year the
settler had to fini rations ahd clothing which were stipulated for.
On Dr, Reid's station all the clothing was made by persons on the spot,
there being shoemakers, tailors and tanners and weavers, besides carpen-
ters, wheelwrights and blacksmiths.
Mr, Reid can well remember when Captain Sturt the explorer, on his return
from travelling down the river Murrumbidgee and discovering Lake Alexand-
ria, asked to see Dr, Reid, to do something to relieve his eyes which
wore offlictsd with blight; this was about 1828. Mr, Reid remembers as a
boy listening to his conversations with Dr. Reid of his trip down the
Murrumbidgee to its confluence with what he afterwards called the Murray.
And the river called the named so by the discovered Hamilton Hume,
la November 1824. And also his journey to Lake Alexandria and the hard-
ships they went through, having to row upstream from there all the way up
; ack again through the Murray and the Murrumbidgee to the inhabited


portion of the colony. It may bo mentioned that in sifter times being
a visitor at Mr# Hamilton Hume's at Yass (Mr, Hamilton Hume was Mr,
Reid's wife's uncle) and hearing a long talk with him about his explor-
ations in olden times, and especially his journey from Lake George to
Corio Bay in 1824, the question arose through Mr, Reid referring to the
name of the Hume River being altered to the Murray, Mr, Hume said to
Mr, Reid - "I'll show you a letter upon that subject from Captain Sturt
to mo", which he did and which Mr, Reid perused, and in that letter
Captain Sturt acknowledged his mistake in naming it the River Murray, and
conceding the right of Mr, Hume to the name of the river given by him when
he commanded the expedition to which he was appointed in 1824 by Sir
Thomas Brisbane the Governor,
Mr, Hume told Mr, Reid that he named the river after his father from whose
station near Appin the expedition started. Captain Sturt after he had
ascertained that the Darling was the same river which he in company with
Hume had discovered higher up in the north and when satisfied it was the
same river, upon re-entering the main stream running into the lake he
called it the Murray after the -then Secretary of State,
With regard to the question of the proper name of the Hume River, Mr, Reid
wrote a letter to the Editor of the Albury "Banner” of which the following
is an exoert i- (the original letter was published on the 3rd day of
Juno 1901 and subsequently republished afterwards (l) on the 12th of Jan-
uary 1906),
"We in Australia should never forget what we owe to the memory of those men
of old who, by their intrepid conduct, perseverance and courage opened up
to succeeding generations the splendid inheritance they new enjoy. It
seems to mo the present generation does not fully appreciate or call to
mind what they owe to the memory of those gone before, and to whom they are
indebted at present for the prosperity they now enjoy. We, who live on
or near the noblest river in Australia, ought by all means in our power
endeavour to give back to that noble stream given it by its first discov-
ers, the late M r , Hamilton Hume, In olden days most of us called it the
Hume, so-called by Mr, Hume, who discovered it on his memorable’expedition
to Port Phillip in 1824, I may mention Mr, Hume did not name it after
himself, but after his father, Mr, Andrew Hamilton Hume, who was then
alive. No doubt many may object, as they have only known this river as
the Murray, that it would cause confusion and annoyance to change the
name. But as the Victorian people changed Sandhurst to Bendigo, its orig-
inal name with nothing historical about it, how much more has the name
of Hume River in its favour, than the Murray, It was named the Murray by
Captain Sturt during his expedition (by boats) down the Murrumbidgee from
Darbelara to Lake Alexandrine and thence where the Murrumbidgee joined the
Hume, It was called the Murray after Sir George Murray, the then Secret-
ary of State for the Colony",
Speaking of Captain Sturt and Mr, Hamilton Hume reminds Mr, Reid of other
notable men whom h« had met in his younger days, one in particular,
because it unites together the past with the present.


Mr, Reid had the pleasure in his young days of coming into contact with
Captain Cook’s second lieutenant at the time when he discovered Australia
in 1770, in the person of old Admiral Gore, and it seems strange that
Mr, Reid should have conversed with one who was amongst those who first
stepped ashore upon Australian soil in the century before the last.
He had an estate near Lake Bathurst about eleven miles from Dr, Reid’s and
Mr, Reid has often listened to hear the descriptions of old seafaring
times between the Admiral and his father, both being naval men on half pay.
Seme of Admiral Gore's family are now residents of N,S, Wales and Victoria,
one of his daughters being married to Mr, Stewart, one of the first of the
Police Magistrates appointed in Port Phillip,
Besides these Sir Thomas Mitchell in 1836 started upon his expedition to
the Lachlan, the Murrumbidgee and the Hume, Mitchell always called the
river the Hume and always acknowledged the debt which the colony owed to
Hamilton Hume for his discoveries in opening up the whole of the southern
part of New South Wales, from Sydney to Lake George, Yass and Maneroo
for occupation. And that before Hume had discovered the South Coast
callod Illowarra, but better known in those days by the title of "the
five Islands", these islands being situated where the town of Wpollongong
now stands.
People of the present day have very little conception of the hardships and
almost insuperable difficulties in penetrating rough country through
impervious scrub where there were neither roads nor bush tracks to guide
the bushman in his explorations. Mr, Hume in his first expedition to the
south country actually to cut his way through the scrub of what is
now called "Bango B&sh", and the same in his exploration of the five
Islands or Illawarra country for a distance of eight of ton miles at a time, *‘~~
This occurred also in another scrub called Wombat Brush situated about 15
or 16 miles to the south of Moss Vale now on the line of the railway
between Goulbum and Sydney, And strange to tell, from the knowledge of
country which his perception of the locality induced him to fathom his
track was through the very easiest country, and a proof of it is that the
present line of railway, in fact, follows his tracks, being, as it were,
right along on the coast range as far as Marulan, where the railway there
deviates from south to almost due west, coming from Sydney towards
Goulbum,
Mr, Reid well remembers the time when Governor Bourke pAid his visit to
the Southern District, at the same time when he ordered the bodies of the
men who had been gibbstted to be taken down. Why that visit was partic-
ularly impressed upon his memory arose from the circumstance that Governor
Bourke was staying with Lieutenant Fuller at his residence at Lumley
within about two miles of Dr, Reid's, the two properties being adjoining
each other. During his stay there he was out riding, visiting the country
round. He got a severe fall from his horse and Dr, Reid was sent for to
attend to his injuries in his tent frem which after a few days ho recovered.


The system of education in the early days of the colony differed consid-
erably from that at present resorted to. In fact, there was then no system
of education and the education of the young depended upon the efforts of
the parents solely and entirely* there was no State interference whatever.
Everyone had their own teachers on their establishment and these teachers
were, in ninety nine oases out of a hundred, prisoners or those who had
been Prisoners of the Crown, These men, although unfortunato, were very
frequently well educated men. One case has been already referred to, as
the case of the Clerk of the Court, who also acted as a schoolmaster.
When Mr, Paid was ten years old ho went to the Australian College in
Sydney instituted and superintended by Dr, L ang, whose name is so well
associated with the Australian Colonies, therefore, it would be super-
fluous here to enter into any minute description of him beyond observing
that he was a man of very considerable ability and was foremost in prom-
oting emigration towards Australia and developing the progress of the
Colonies, He was the first man who brought out as free emigrants the first
batch of mechanics to Sydney from Scotland somewhere about the year 1830,
"When Mr. Reid went to the Australian College he boarded with Dr, Lang’s
family and although Dr, Lang was celebrated as a speaker, he was nothing
in comparison to his mother Mrs, Lang, who came out from Scotland with
her son and always resided with him. This old lady used to be very fond
of lecturing the boys on many occasions, Mr, Reid at one time having
incurred her displeasure by stopping out late at night having been visit-
ing some friends from the country who had sent for him, on the night of
his returning to school, Upon his entering by the back part of the
promises thinking he was very clever in evading the scrutiny of anyone,
as he was, however, going up a long flight of stairs to his room, who
should be on the top of -the landing but old Mrs, Lang, who immediately
commenced to reprove him for the impropriety, in one so young, of stopping
out late at night, and on the top of those stairs she occupied a full
three quarters of an hour in a lecture to a boy like him. Her volubil-
ity of tongue was something terrible and her vituperation so severe that
compared with it Dr. bang's was calm remonstrance.
After remaining with Dr, Lang about two years, Mr, Reid went to "The
King’s School "at Parramatta which had been instituted under the auspices
of the Church of England by a Bishop Broughton, and the Headmaster of
this school was the Revd, Robert Forrest whose name was universally
esteemed and respected by all those who had the advantage of receiving
their education at his hands and his memory will always remain green
amongst his numerous pupils. He laid the foundation of one of the best
institutions in Australia and which has been ably carried on by his many
successors although it is doubtful if any of them ever had the same
knowledge and aptitude for teaching as the Revd. Robert Forrest, the
first master of the king*s School, From the king's School many of the
best and ablest of Australia’s public men have emanated, holding positions
in the past and present times. Premiers of the Colony, Judges, eminent
barristers, legislators and professional men generally, besides merchants.


lir. Hold con well recollect Mr. Forrest saying i- "Boys, I can lay the
foundation for you, but it is for yourselves to build upon it in after
life", While M r, Reid was at King's School a very clever and eminent
divino, the Rovd, Mr, Kean, who resided at Bathurst, paid a visit to the
school. He was of a very kind and sociable disposition, mixed among the
boys in their playground chatting and having a kind word for everyone,
asking questions here and there as to how the boys liked the school and
their master Mr, Forrest, and also his good lady M rs , Forrest,
Mr, Forrest was a very tall man and Mrs, Forrest was a tall thin woman and
very slender; his Christian name was Robert and hers was Jane, Mr, Kean
asked "Boys, hew/ do you like M r , Forrest"?, The Answer was i- "We like
him very well. Sir, only sometimes he is a little too fond of the cane",
"How do you like Mrs, Forrest"? "We like her very much Sir. she is very
good and very kind only she is too fond of giving us physic". He remarked
"Oh, I see. Long Bob ani Slender Jane, one gives physic and t'other gives
cone". This was impressed upon all the boys then at the school that none
of them ever forgot it, Aid it is now as fresh in memory as it was some
seventy years ago. There is no doubt that whatever survivors there may
be of that time that they all must well remember the occasion, and the
object of these lines.
Very few, I think, are now in the land of the living of the old original
boys of the King's School, Mr, Reid became a pupil at the latter part
of the first year of its establishment, and new/ strarge to say, two of
the first boys to go under Mr, Forrest's tuition at the first opening of
the school are alive still, namely :- The Reverend John Watsford, better
known to thousands as "Father Watsford", and Henry Gordon, lately Police
Magistrate at Gundagai and no// retired from the service on a pension.
The Rovd, John Watsford, of the Wesleyan denomination, is now residing at
Kew;in the neighbourhood of Melbourne and whom Mr, Reid has had the
pleasure of visiting whenever he comes to Melbourne and having long conver-
sations with him respecting old King's School days. Himself, Gordon and
Mr, Reid being about the only original boys of the King's School known to
us to be alive.
Mr, Watsford was for many years after his first introduction into the
ministry a missionary at Fiji, At that time those islands were inhabited
by very savage men and all cannibals, Mr, Watsford was married in the
year 1844 and he and his wife went to Fiji immediately after their marriage
so one can easily conceive the dangers and difficulties which this devoted
couple had to contend with. It would bo superfluous in Mr, Reid to
attempt any kind of description of the several matters which have been
reported by Mr, Watsford to him, because any person wishing to ascertain
the particulars could easily do so by reading Mr, Watsford's history of
hie life, which has been published, and which can confidently be recomm-
ended to be read as a correct analysis of the hardships encountered by
missionaries in an unknown country.
It may hore bo mentioned, as a strange coincidence in regard to the Revd,
Mr. Watsford and M r , Reid, both were born in the same year, both went to
tic King's School the same year, left the same year, were both married the
come month in the same year, and had the same number of ohildron ten.


Both celebrated their diamond weddings, necessarily in the same year and
both Mr, Watsford and Mr, Reid and their wives are, fortunately, all of
them in the enjoyment of excellent health. Therefore their mutual friend-
ship covers throe quarters of a century.
During the time Mr, Roid was at the king’s School, he has often seen a man
who in those days had played a very remarkable career in those colonies,
in the person of the Revd, Samuel Marsden, and who was the second Colonial
Chaplain appointed to New South Wales, a Mr, Johnston having boon the first,
Mr, Johnston came out with the first fleet to New South Wales with the then
Governor, Captain Phillips R.N., who was the first Governor of Now South
Wales,
Mr, Johnston did not long remain and was succeeded by Mr, Marsden,
Mr, Marsden in his day, not only in his ministerial capacity for doing
good, but in various other ways, was a great benefactor to the Colcny, He
was no doubt a far-seeing man and although the credit was being given to
old John Macarthur as being the father of wool-growing in these colonies,
really and truly the credit is due to Mr, Marsden who first brought under
the notice of the Home authorities and the people of Great' Britain the
suitability of the climate of New South Wales for the growth of wool of
fine texture, Mr, Marsden, after being out in Australia a few years paid
a visit to England and took home some of the wool, the produce of his own
sheep, as an example of what the colony could produce. It may'- seem strange
to some how a man like Mr, Marsden could have taken an interest in wool
affairs,- but when it is mentioned that Mr, Marsden was a native of York-
shire and in his young days had been brought up in the very heard of the
woollen industries of Great Britain so When he went to England he took
some of this wool to a manufacturer in Yorkshire, who pronounced it a very
superior article, Mr, Marsden was not, however, satisfied with that
exactly, and wishing to prove the exact value of his import he determined
to have some of it manufactured into a suit of clothes, which was done, and
the result made public in England, and the , George 111, who always
took very great interest in agricultural and farming pursuits end grazing
hearing of Mr, Marsden*s arrival and his wool, sent for him and during
this interview, the King examined the suit which he was wearing made from
Australian wool, and said he would very much like to have a similar suit
himself which Mr, Marsden promised to obtain for him if there was suffic-
ient wool left at the manufacturers, And upon the application being made
it was found there was a sufficient quantity of cloth left, and the King
was fitted. To show -the interest the King took in this matter, he pres-
ented Mr, Marsden with two or three rams out of the King's own flock in
England to take with him back to Australia on the return voyage. These
sheep were of Saxon Merino breed. All these facts relative to Mr, Marsden
and his merino sheep can bo verified by anyone who can obtain a work by
the Revd, James Horsfall, late of Queensland who was a grandson of the
late Mr, Marsden and only died in 1904, in that work will be found copies
of all correspondence relative to the facts above narrated, Mr, Horsfall
having in his possession at the time of writing the book the whole orig-
inal correspondence and which papers are still no doubt in the possession
of his family.


Those events preceded the time -when McArthur commenced to be a wool-grower
therefore there is so much mors credit duo to Mr. Marcden than is generally
accorded to him, Mr. McArthur no doubt carried out,wool-growing to a much
more extended scale and being a very pushing energetic man brought the
matter more prominently before the public eye in hie capacity as a settler
than Mr, Marsdon had the opportunity of doing. These facto in regard to
Mr, Marsden have been mentioned because believing in the motto "Honour to
whom honour is due", Mr, Marsden himself a resident of Parramatta, was a
frequent visitor to the King's School in which he always took a very lively
interest. We, as boys at the King's School, were all delighted to see the
old gentleman come amongst us, the more so that on more occasions than one
a holiday was granted on account of his visit, Mr, Marsden was also in
olden days a missionary to New Zealand and held in the highest estimation
and respect by the New Zealanders. In fact they almost worshipped him as a
god, and no doubt he had more power over them than any white man who ever
stepped on New Zealand, After being some years there he left and returned
to Sydney from whence in his old days he left again to pay them a visit and
they gave him a great ovation.
Mr, Marsden’s grandson, the Revd, Mr, Horsfall, was at the King's School
with Mr, Reid who has in his possession the book published by Mr, Horsfall
above referred to.
Dr, Reid also imported Merino rams and ewes which he brought out with out a
single casualty, Mr. McArthur was present when they were landed, and offered
Dr. Reid £2OO for one of the rams, which he refused, saying if it was worth
£2OO to Mr. McArthur as a stud sheep it was worth that amount to a settler.
But they arranged to exchange rams from time to time so as to improve the
breed and keep the flocks pure. These rams and ewes were also obtained from
the King's own flocks in England, obtained through the good offices of Sir
William Knighton, the Physician to the Fleet and an old personal friend of
Dr, Reid. He was also the Mng's Physician. Dr. Reid also at the same
time imported a Durham bull. The cow was unfortunately injured in a gale
and had to be killed and thrown overboard.
These notes are the recollections of old times and the reader must not be
surprised or disappointed if the narrative does not follow the events quit©
consecutively. Reverting to the old King's School days - on on© occasion
Mr, Forrest was barred out by a number of the boys of whom M r , Reid was one.
This was occasioned by their not receiving a holiday upon St, Patrick's Day,
They had written to Mr, Forrest a day or two before asking him to grant a
holiday - which he refused. Consequently a number of them determined to bar
him out of the School on St, Patrick's Day which was done by locking the
doors of the school room. This happened at the old school in George Street,
Parramatta, He was kept out some hours and Mrs, Forrest who was a great
favourite of the boys came round and, through the windows, expostulated
with the mutineers on the impropriety of their conduct and the folly of their
procedure. Mrs, Forrest, being a special favourite, succeeded with her
persuasions and the siege was raised, consequently Mr, Forrest was admitted
and a remark was made by one of the under-masters, a Mr, Hatch, who said
"Ah, boys, you did not keep him out half long enough. You are only a set
of humbugs", Mr, Hatch being an Irishman, no doubt, wanted to have his
holiday on St. Patrick's Day and thought we gave in too soon.


Nor the truth of the matter, is this, that it was through a history having
been given by Mr, Forrest himself of a barring out at Eton, in conversat-
ion with the boys, which had originated it, And Mr, Forrest afterwards
acknowledged that he himself had, no doubt, been the unconscious instigator
of the whole affair. The boys, many of them, expected to bo either expelled
or severely punished, but Forrest upon laying the matter before Bishop
Broughton who was regarded as the head and front of the establishment, by his
advice he recommended Mr. Forrest to reprimand the boys and pass over the
matter upon the promise of better behaviour for the future, which was done
and so closed the incident of "barring-out”.
After leaving the King’s School Mr, Reid was sent by Dr, Reid, his father,
to tho stations on Manaroo where, while he was under the supervision of
the then superintendent Mr, William Lester, of course as a young boy who
had all his life been brought up amongst farming pursuits, and therefore the
change to him was not strange. He was sent there because Mr. Lostor
intended to leave and was going to a small station of his own, adjoining.
After he left he (Mr, Reid) had full charge. And it may be mentioned that
in those days, and even before that exact time, there were no laws to
regulate squatting in the Colony and might often took the place of right.
For instance a man might have a very fine station occupied with cattle;
another who was looking for a run to pub sheep upon would send his sheep in
to the part of* the cattle run. Consequently, any person who has any know-
ledge of pastoral pursuits knows, as an inevitable consequence the cattle
would bo dispersed to the four winds for as a faot not only do sheep destroy
the grass, eating it so short that the cattle could not get a mouthful, and
whenever sheep depasture they leave sifter thema sort of aroma upon the
ground distasteful to all other kinds of stock. Therefore, in consequence
of the disputes between those who were already in possession and the intruders
strong representations were made to tho authorities detailing the hardships
which many of the first pioneers in a district underwent and suffered at
the hands of the newcomers, many of whom had not the courage or energy to
look for unoccupied country for themselves, of which there was an unlimited
quantity ready to bo occupied by the first discoverer, but rather preferred
to encroach upon and disposses those who had already taken up country, a
good instance of which may be related of the foregoing statement, namely j-
Dr, Reid was the first to occupy country upon the Maneroo plains which was
token up in the year 1828, It may be stated the cause of people being
compelled to take up fresh country in excess of what they held in tho first
instance was simply because they had only granted to them in the old days
a certain amount of land, aikl which at the beginning had been quite ample
for their wants, but as their stock increased they found that the area they
held was too limited and insufficient to support the increment of their stock,
and the country being all open and wide, of course, they took advantage of
such circumstances and occupied fresh country with their stock, hence came
tho name in those days of "stations”.
As before said these stations at Maneroo were taken up in 1828 and tho
reason of going to the Maneroo country was that that part of Australia had
boon strongly recommended to Dr, Reid by Mr, Hamilton Hume who was tho first
explorer of all that south country.


Of course, this country wo occupied with cattle which was held for several
years uninterruptedly and the cattle had increased to about 3000 head.
When all at once a Mr, Dutton swooped down upon the,middle of the run with
about eight or ten thousand aheepj consequently our cattle wore dispersed
in all directions and there being no law to prevent encroachment at that
time, we had to put up wiih the loss and shift our original homestead, which
was near to where the town of Cooma now stands and -then known as Reid f s
Flat, the native name of which was "Beloraa",
We then removed to the "Numeralla River” and afterwards formed another
station on the coast ranges, at the head, nearly, of the Beloraa River,
This was of course done at a very considerable expense -through there being
no law to protect occupation of Crown lands in those days. This has boon
given as one instance, but many of a similar nature very frequently occurred.
And the quarrels ani disputes incident thereto between the parties concerned
and their servants were innumerable. So much so that the Government had to
take action and hence what wore known as the "squatting laws" came into
force, Under these laws every man had to taka oub a licence from the Govern-
ment to occupy Crown lands for which he paid ten pounds a year, no natter
whether he occupied ten thousand acres or a million he paid the same rental.
The Government then appointed Crown Lands Commissioners to the different
districts of the Colony which wore occupied by the squatters, each Commiss-
ioner having his district defined and a certain place in his district as
his headquarters where he resided, and where all communications wore addressed.
And his duty was to make periodical visits to all ports of his district and
settle all the various disputes between the squatters and fix the boundaries
of their runs - and his decisions were final.
The £lO licence was the first tax placed upon the squatting community, but
as the people pushed out into the interior of the Colony and came into cont-
act with the aboriginal inhabitants on the Murrumbidgeo, “uno and Gvons Rivers
they asked the Government for protection in the shape of a Police force.
The Government then instituted a body of men constituting the "Border Police",
This staff of men were all selected from Hyde Park Barracks, which was then
the depot for the convicts. They had been formerly soldiers in the British
Army who had been transported fcr offences which were only known to the
Government, and these men were allotted, so many to the command of Commiss-
ioners of each district, and certain portions again sent by him to any port
of his district and located there as a defence from the aboriginals, under
the immediate command of a corporal.
The Government, finding that the ten pounds a year tax was not sufficient to
defray the increased expenditure incident to the insuguration of these Border
Police, passed a law which was called the Assessment Act, under which the
squatters were compelled to make a return to the Commissioner of the dist-
rict of the number of stock they had on their runs, for which they were
assessed at a small percentage of every thousand of sheep and every hundred
of cattlo and horses. The first person appointed as a Commissioner at
Manoroo was a Mr, Lamb la and his headquarters he made on Cooma Creek hence
the commencement of the town of Cooma, where the Commissioner's camp was
placed in the old days.


The distance between Cooma and the site of the present selected capital of
the Commonwealth at Dalgoty, and -which was formerly known by old Manor oo
people as "Buckley's Crossing", is about thirty miles. If one mip-ht venture
an opinion this choice is without exception about the worst that could have
been chosen in N.S, Wales and it ought to be patent to the minds of the
Federal Parliament that although N.S. Wales is most anxious that the capital
shall as soon as possible be established within their state, still, from the
Premier dawn, they all object to the choice of the Federal Parliament in
the selection of Dalgety as the site of the future capital of Australia,
If a referendum were taken of the people in N,S, Wales ninety nine out of
every one hundred of the population, with the exception, of course, of
those immediately inhabiting that neighbourhood, would vote against Dalgety
as the proper site for a Capital, It has nothing to recommend it in any
manner or shape, either in climate, soil or situation, and there being so
many good eligible sites to select from, the groat body of the people of
lI,S, Wales look upon the choice of the Federal Parliament with great dis-
trust and do not hesitate to say that this selection has been made merely
to satisfy party and political pur poses, irrespective of the merits of the
question. It seems that the object in view in making the choice of Dalgoty
and the 900 square miles of territory, including that part of the country
embracing the seaport of Twofold Bay, was done for the object of having a
port for the Capital City, Why not have the City at Twofold Bay, or near
Twofold Bay, thus securing the advantage of the splendid country all around
Twofold Bay, called the "Bigger Country", which both for cultivation am
dairying purposes cannot be surpassed if equalled in the whole of Australia
and is good for general purposes also.
It is not at all likely that the N,S. Wales Government will ever agree to
the granting of the demands of the Federal Parliament of 900 square miles
of their territory, more especially as the area demanded is a long narrow
strip of territory from Dalgety down to Twofold Bay, and will bo the moans
of dividing, as it were, the Maneroo Country in half which would make its
geographical position anything but advisable to N.S, Wales people. Because
in trading backwards and forwards to their own capital of Sydney, they
would necessarily rapidly invade the cross Federal territory. Whether the
Victorian members who voted to have Dalgoty for the site of the Capital had
in their mind's eye that this portion, isolated as it were from N.S, 7/ales
and adjoining the Victorian border, would ultimately become a part of
Victoria, is hard to say.
In the latter part of the year 1837 Mr, Reid, then being in full charge of
the stations at Maneroo paid a visit to his father at Inverary whore ho mot
a Mr, John Gardiner who was then there in treaty with Dr, Reid for a number
of cattle, Mr, Gardiner had just returned from his first overland trip to
what was dm those days called Port Hiillip or "New Country", It may here
bo mentioned that Mr, Gardiner, Mr, Joseph Hawdon, Mr, Ebden and Captain
Hepburn were the first party that ever brought stool: from New South Wales
to Port Hiillip, Mr, Gardiner, having formed a station on the south bank
of the Yarra, left his portion of the stock there in charge of an overseer
and returned back to New South Wales in order to purchase more, Mr, Ebdon
was tho first who took possession of that part of the Hume River where
Altury now stands.


The. run was known by the native name of Mungabarena which is still the
name of a parish near Albury a>-.d where the pumping works for supplying the
town with water now stand. Closo to this part of the river's bank Mr, Ebden's
people built the hut for the stockmen, Mr, Ebden had both cattle and sheep
and occupied Bungambrewatha Creek with sheep - a creek viiich rises at the
Black Range and flews through Albury Public Gardens and joins the Hume River
whore it was first discovered, and close to where stood the trees which were
marked to commemorate the discovery.
There were two tress, one where the creek joins the river, called Humes's
tree, with Hume River and the date on it. It was burnt down by bullock
drivers camping and leaving their fires alight, so the tree was destroyed.
And after its. destruction, about the year 1860 the Memorial Obelisk in
the Gardens at Albury was erected, being first placed in the exact position
of Hume's tree on the bank of the river and afterwards removed into the
Botanical Gardens where it remains.
Hovell's tree, which is some hundred yards or so higher up the river than
the spot whore Hume’s tree stood is still standing with an iron fenco round
it for protection.
Mr, Ebden finding that cattle and sheep on tho same station did not agree
vhongod his cattlo to the other side of the Hume river to what the natives
called Bongilla, which at that time was a splendid run, being bounded by
throe rivers, the Hume, the Kiowa and the Mltta Mitta, forming almost a
complete natural paddock for his stock and secure from thoir dispersion.
The late M r , William Wise of Howlong had charge of this station. It may be
hero stated that Hr, Ebden had these stations formed prior to the above-
mentioned overland expedition with cattle to Port Phillip by Gardiner and
others. He formed the cattlo station at Mungaborena in 1836, that is twolvo
years after the Hume River had been discovered, Mr, William Wise was tbo
first who ever passed stock across the Hume River, Mr, Ebdon joined theso
overland expeditions of Gardiner and others with sheep and determined to
settlo nearer to the coast; formed a station at Carlarhuo, So littlo wore
the stations thought of, or country, in those days that M r# Ebden gave the
Mungambarena Station to the late Thomas Mitchell of Bringenbrong on the
Hume after he had removed his cattle to the Bongilla station.
Mr. Gardiner came from Tasmania and was amongst the early settlors who
first crossed to Port Phillip, When Mr, Reid met Mr, Gardinor after his
return from his first overland journey in 1837 to purchase stock, ho having
heard that Dr, Reid had a large herd of cattlo at Manoroo, naturally supposed
ho could obtain any he required from that port, Hq was accompanied by his
closo associate Captain Hepburn, who was on his way up to soo on old friend
of his, a. Captain Cogjhill, at Brxalfwood (Mount Coghill is named after
William Coghill his brother) from whom he afterwards bought a flock of ewes
and brought them overland to Port Phillip and settled at Snoaton,
Mr, Gardinor purchased 400 cows and heifers from Dr, Reid and he asked
Hr, ?eid if ho would accept in part payment for the cattlo an allotment of
■which ho had recently become the purchaser at tho first land sale in Melb-
ourne, but to this Dr, Reid would not accede.


lira. Reid, Dr. Hold’s wife, then asked Mr, Gardiner what he wanted for it.
He said he would take sixty heifers for it, which, at the price he was then
paying for the cattlo, four pounds a head, would mean £240 in value,
Mrs, Reid thensaid "Then I will take it on my own account and give you
sixty heifers for it". Hr, David Reid the son was then ordered to deliver
to Mr, Gardiner four hundred and sixty heifers instead of four hundred.
This allotment had been purchased by Mr, Gardiner at the Government land
sale for nineteen or twenty pounds and was situate at the corner of
Elizabeth Street and Little Collins Street opposite McSwan’s and the Colon-
ial Bank, and was presented by Mr, Reid’s mother to his sister upon her
marriage with Mr, Alexander B, Balccmbe and still remains in the possess-
ion of the family, In respect to this allotment no agreement or deed of
transfer had been made out until some two years after or throe, when
in, Hoid, happening to be in Melbourne, determined to see Mr. Gardiner upon
the matter and proceeded to his station "Gardiner's Creek" on the other
side of the Yarra where he found him, mentioned the matter and requested
him to give a conveyance to which he at once acceded and a conveyance was
executed in favour of Mr, David Reid in his name because Dr, Reid being dead
and Mr, Reid reconveyed it to his mother, Messrs, Montgomery and McCrae
being the solicitors in Melbourne,
Dr, Reid’s son was deputed to accompany Mr, Gardiner to Maneroo and deliver
the stock. According to the bargain these stock had to be delivered at
Yass, a distance of 120 miles from the station. During the journey together
from Inverary to Maneroo which occupied about four days, both of course on
horseback, they had long conversations together about Mr, Gardiner's first
trip overland and his description of the Port Phillip country and also the
advantages likely to accrue to the early settlers who night be lucky enough
to obtain good stations in what Sir Thomas Mitchell then denominated, in
1836, "Australia Felix", It was owing to all these glowing accounts which
Mr, Gardiner instilled into Mr, Reid that he naturally felt a strong desiro
to migrate to Port Phillip, So, after having delivered the cattle to
Mr, Gardiner at Yass, which occupied about fourteen days in the month of
■January 1838 this was really Mr, Reid's first journey with any largo number
of stock and he has very good recollections of the privations he suffered
cn the road. Of course being only young and green as it were, and never
lefore being occupied in droving he was not aware of the equipment required
for a journey of that sort. Consequently he started with these cattle from
Maneroo to go to Yass with only one old stockman to assist him, and had it
not been that this man had two good cattle dogs it is most probable that
the cattle would never have arrived at Yass, The reason why there was so
much difficulty in the driving of these cattle were not above quiet as being
bred from a milking strain but in low condition also, owing to the severe
drought there was in Maneroo in 1837 and 1838,
After delivering the cattle and on returning to Dr, Reid's at Inverary, the
latter part of the journey he happened to fall in with a stranger who in the
course of conversation with him related he had just come back from the Hume
River, He turned out to be the late Robert Brown, of Collondina Station
afterwards, but then of what was then called "Hume's Crossing Place", now
Albury, He had been on a visit up there on inspection and had determined to


return and open a public house and blacksmith’s shop, he being a wheel-
wright and his father a blacksmith, which he afterwards did and was really
and truly the first resident of Albury, Mr, Brown when he first went to
Albury, with an axo was about to cut down the tree by Hovell when, after
he had cut a chip out of the tree, he noticed the end of a letter and being
an intelligent man and one who knew about Hamilton Hume's journey in 1824
(this being in 1838) ho cut carefully round the bark that had grown over
the lettering and figures. Consequently Hovell's tree was saved, and so
standing to this day.
Note - Recently when in Albury I was informed that when-the railway was
opened at Albury Mr, Hovell was there, and he then recut the
inscription on the tree, the bark having grown considerably over it on the
east side.
J.C.H, Ogier,
26th March 1907,
To resume s- On the return home from Inverary Mr, Reid at once signified
to Dr, Reid his intention of Migrating to the new country, to which Dr, Reid
replied - "What I Boy, the blacks will eat you", Mr, Reid replied "Let
them eat me, lam determined to go. If you do not give me a start I intend
•to go with the next overland party that are going, if I only go as drover".
Dr# Reid then consented to furnish him with all the means necessary for an
overland trip, which consisted of two bullock drays, eight bullocks for each
dray, six assigned servants, six stock horses, 500 head of cattle and rations
sufficient to be required for two years, and all the necessary equipment for
culinary utensils, axes, arms, spades, shovels and pick-axes and every other
thing for the formation of a new station, with horse-shoes, nails etc.
Starting from the Humeralla Station at Maneroo in the early part of 1838,
just about the time of the murder of Faithfull's men by the blacks at the
Broken River, as it was called in those days, the very place where the ‘town
of Benalla now stands, the news of this mishap to an overland party was any-
thing but comforting to those who were starting on the same lino of travel.
What occurred to M r , Faithfull's party as related by some of the survivers
and from M r , Faithful's own words :-
It appeared there were two separate expeditions, the first consisted of
Mr, Faithful's party in charge of an overseer of the name of Crossley and
fourteen others, fifteen in all. The other party was under the charge of
Mr, George Faithful himself with cattle and sheep. The first party, under
Crossley the overseer, consisted of sheep belonging to Mr, William Faithful
and was one day's journey in advance of the others. They wore camped on
the bank of the river exactly whore Benalla itself now stands, and at that
time many parts of the river banks were covered with high reeds. The blacks
of course, took advantage of this and the following narrative is from the
statements of those who participated in the conflict and were fortunate
enough to have escaped, *t seems that for several days before the actual
attack took place the blacks had been travelling in a lino parallel with the
party and had often during that time visited the camp at night and morning
and seemed very friendly.


This, of course, was done to lull suspicion of any hostile intent and to
disarm preparation or suspicion of any intention on the natives to attack
them. In fact so much so that instead of these men carrying their firearms
as they should have done and being always prepared for any sudden attack that
might be made; but thinking themselves perfectly safe through the friendly
disposition evinced by the conduct of the blacks towards them, put their
firearms on the dray and underneath the tarpaulin.
Early in the morning the shepherds started with their sheep; that is to say
having been camped all together during the night, in the morning after break-
fast the sheep were divided into several flocks, enabling the sheep to graze
the bettor. Two or three men had the driving of each flock. No blacks wore
at this time visible. After the several divisions had started with the.
sheep, after an interval of from half to three quarters of an hour the men
at the camp heard these men with the sheep cooeeing and crying out for
assistance, and upon the impulse of the moment they all rushed away from the
drays with the exception of one man, to see what was the matter. Immediat-
ely these men had left the drays a party of blacks emerged from a bed of
reeds close by and surrounded the drays, cutting off the retreat of those
men who had just gone from the drays to look after what the shepherds had
been calling out about. And as all these men had, as before stated, deposit-
ed their arms on the drays they were entirely defenceless except the one man
who had remained with the dray, and who tried hard to restrain the others
from leaving but who, after the blacks surrounded the dray, had a dozen
spears driven through him instantly.
It seems that the blacks must have had all this planned out for two or throe
days before and only waited place and opportunity to make their attack.
They in the first instance attached the shepherds with the sheep by one party
of blacks, knowing full well that this would attract the attention of the
men with the drays and that they would, on the spur of the moment, rush off
to see what was the matter and that then the oilier party which was lying
in ambush would by surrounding the drays reduce the whole party to their
power - and such was the case.
These men, being without the means of defence, and too soon the men who had
rushed off from the drays found oub what the disturbance was of which the
shepherds had been crying out, for they saw the shepherds being killed by
the blacks, and naturally they rushed back to the drays for their firearms,
but found that another party of blacks surrounded the drays, their only
manner or means then of saving their lives was by speed of foot and some ran
one way and some another. However, the resylt was that nine men out of the
party of fifteen were killed ani six escaped. Of those who saved themselves
four made back to George Faithful’s party who ware then camped at the
Fifteen Mile swamp, now called Greta, Two of the shepherd s party never
ceased running as fast as they could until they reached the Goulburn River
at the old camping place, now called Shopparton, to a Ur, Tom Clark s
place at the Goulburn.,
Mr, Reid has often seen and conversed with four of -these men who escaped,
one in particular, named Jones Brown, and who was an intelligent man, gave
a whole history of the affair.


One story, the circumstances of which, though extraordinary, are true,
is that one of the men those who escaped commonly known by the name of
"Lanky" and who was badly attacked by rheumatism and who on the journey
was frequently known to remark "Well, boys, if the blacks attack us I'm
sure to be killed for I am not able to fight and I am not able to run
away", but strange to say this man out-ran every man of the whole of the
survivors who were .retreating* Mr* Reid has often seen him at Mr* George
Faithful's station afterwards, at Oxley Plains, and he never had an attack
of rheumatism afterwards* This is an authentic fact for M r. Reid knew the
man afterwards for upwards of more than twenty years.
There is no doubt in Mr, Reid's mind that it was through carelessness and
an inattention to discipline and the want of having an efficient men to
control the expedition that occasioned the sad loss of life to Faithful's
party. Evidently the man in change had very little conception of the
cunning and ability of the natives of Australia to make their power felt, or
he would never have allowed what has been related to Mr, Reid to have
occurred some time before the attack, and which was allowing the natives
with their gins to have constant intercourse amongst the men of the party
and, therefore, giving these savages the opportunity of observation of the
weak points of the white man, and his neglect in taking means for his own
defence. These natives of the soil are keen observers, much more so than
the whites give them credit for, and seeing the carelessness of the man in
not arming themselves but placing their muskets on the drays, shoved that
they had completely lulled them into fancied security, hence they took their
time for attack when the opportunity presented itself. To show how utterly
careloss the supervision had been by those in authority, instead of always
being armed they were, from the constant association with these blacks
travelling with thorn and the familiarity engendered, entirely thrown off
their guard aid completely neglected those precautions always adopted by
the first overlanders as against any sudden attacks by aboriginals.
It was always a rule in thoso days that no man went about any occupation
without having his firearms immediately at his disposal, in fact a hut-
keeper never went for a bucket of water to the river or creek without going
armed, not knowing at any moment whether or not he might be intercepted
before he returned to his hut. It is not so long ago that throe of those
very men who escaped and who became settlers on their own account passed
asay to the great majority, their names were Brown, Crossley and Vfalch,
Often and often has Mp, Reid had conversations with these men about this
very affair and it is, as before said, from their narratives that this is
now related here.
Mr, Reid had from ocular demonstration also for some months afterwards, by
the fact that in travelling to Melbourns from the Ovens he went by and
examined the place of attack and well remembers seeing some of the bones of
these men who had been killed by natives exposed to view where they had been
merely covered over with sods of earth where they fell. No doubt their
remains had been rooted up by the native dogs, as we call them "warrigals".
Poor fellows, poor fellows, they had not the benefit of a grave, there was
not time when their corpses were found to bury them.


Thoy were found by George Faithful's party, of course, who, there was no
doubt and under the excitement of the time and the eager wish to recover
the stock that had been taken away by the blacks, they had touso the most
expeditious way to bury these men and cover them with turfs, which, no
doubt, the warrigals afterwards tore away.
This circumstance ought to be also mentioned that the blacks not only pill-
aged the drays but drove off the sheep as well, but becoming, no doubt,
tired and unaccustomed to drive sheep and having satisfied their hunger by
the killing of some, they left the remainder to the mercies of the warrigals
or native dogs. Out of the large number of sheep that M r# William Faithful
had, in this unfortunate expedition not more than some two or three thousand
wore recovered.
This sanguinary engagement which occurred on the banks of the Broken River,
by the natives with Faithful's party, displays not only a thoroughly accur-
ate knowledge of the advantages of locality on the part of the aboriginals,
but exhibits an amount of excessive skill, and the exercise of military
tactics, which is altogether without rivalry in the history of the early
days of adventure in the District of Port Phillip, and will probably compare
in a favourable manner as to the amount of intuitive resource exercised by
the wild tribes of any part of Australia,
After receiving all necessary equipments for his journey Mr, Reid proceeded
to Maneroo to take 500 head of cattle from the herd, making the Nuneralla
Station his starting point. He proceeded from there via Mickalago, Quoan-
boyan to Yass; there they were on the main south road to the "New Country",
Thoy travelled along without any mishap until they reached Gundagai on the
Murrumbidgee River, which was at that time a cattle station belonging to
Mr, william Hutchinson of Sydney, In coming down on to the river flats whore
the main road first enters, ho saw on a gum tree with a fine white bark
some words out. In his curiosity he went up to it to see what it was. He
sow a piece of doggerel rhyme of which the recollection survives :-
"Good people all as you pass by.
Should you see any cattle branded W.H, on the thigh.
Please herd them round for Gundagai",
Ho was afterwards told that this was written by a man named "Port-a-down
Bob" who was a sort of stockman and overseer for Hutchinson and who was then
a notable character in those parts as a worthy competitor in rhyme with our
oldest Australian post Beverly Sutton,
The inhabitants of Gundagai, at the time of his arrival there in 1538, were
but few. The principal among them was Mr, Andrews who kept a small public
house and store on the very bank of the river, better known as "Major
Andrews", he having boon a sergeant in the Army and who in his conversation
asaimed a certain amount of military hauteur although Mr, Andrews was a
most excellent man in his way and most obliging. Both he and his family
wore held in the highest estimation by all who came in contact with them.


He assumed to himself almost the right of the crossing place of the river
from the fact that he had in his possession the only moans of communication
from one side of the river to the other, namely, what used to be called a
log-punt, a dug-out made from a large tree. And a man always in attendance
to carry passengers backwards and forwards across the river which was worked
by means of a rope stretched across the stream, and was generally used by
those travelling in parties to convey their goods and chattels across the
river for which, of course, a charge was made. On his arrival there he
availed himself of this log-punt to put over everything he had on the drays.
Of course the horses and cattle had to swim the river, then he had to
consider how the empty drays were to be put across and at that time being a
vary young man and never had any experience in such matters and having no
one to guide him ho attempted a very rash proceeding in the matter of- cross-
ing the drays. He put four bullocks into each dray of those which wore the
most tractable, the drivers stood on the dray in each case and drove the
team into the river at the usual crossing place. After going some distance
into the river the bullocks, of course, were off their feet and had to swim;
the dray being heavy sunk to the bottom and the bullocks in the act of
swimming had to draw the weight of the dray after them. This, of course, was
had management, but in the case of the first team they succeeded in making
the opposite shore safely, but no so with the second toam. The bullocks not
being under as good command by the driver as the first so soon as they
found they wore off their logs and began to swim allowed themselves to bo
to bo carried down the stream and throe out of the four bullocks wore
drowned. The man, who was a good swimmer, with the help of his mate was able
to release the one bullock and save it. The incident gave him an exper-
ience which was new to him and caused him to think of different ways and
moans of obviating any further loss in crossing rivers. There is an old
adage that experience teaches, and, as it may be of use to those going into
new tracts of country it may be stated that in the case of crossing drays or
any heavy weight over a river, by means of placing an empty hogshead fairly
lashed over the axle of the dray you can float the heaviest of drays. In
crossing, in the first place you require a tolerably sized rope across the
river. Some will say, how is this to be done? Any person in reading over
the pamphlet written by Hamilton Hume after his overland journey to Port
Phillip in 1824 will see how he succeeded in crossing the Hume River, One
of his men, Thomas Boyd, afterwards a settler at Tunut, swam across with a
line in his mouth and with this line a medium sized rope was afterwards
hauled across by this means. Attaching this rope to the centre of the axle-
tree underneath and the dray or waggon to be crossed put into the river
backwards, the men on the opposite bank can pull it over without difficulty.
This he has often done in his journey and without any accident.
6
After leaving the Murrunbidgee where /Pundagai new stands Mr, Reid proceeded
on by Tarcutta and passed the station lately taken up by Mr, Thomas Mato the
founder of the great firm afterwards of T,H. Mato & Company of Albury vrho
had taken up Tarcutta as a squatting run. Further on he came to Kyambra
where a Mr, Smith had formed a station for Mr, Thomas Walker of Sydney, Now
as there is something historical about Kyambra it may be here related. Here
was planted the first vineyard in what was then called the Southern District,
from which emanated the thought that the climate and soil was adapted for the
growth of the vine. It cannot bo known at whose suggestion but nr. Walker
was at all the expense and' Mr, Smith the management.


Mr, Walker was so satisfied in his own mind that a vineyard there would be
a success that he imported four German families, vignerons, under an agree-
ment to remain for five years in his employ as vignerons at Kyambra, Hence
was founded the large Kyambra vineyard and from this vineyard nearly all the
after vineyards in the Albury district were originally supplied with cuttings,
Mr, Walker not only imported these families but also introduced from Germany
the very best kind of vine cutting for vines which were planted in the
Kyambra vineyard. These man after fulfilling their stipulated time with him
came to Albury, settled down there on land which they took up on their
account, and formed vineyards of their own and were the pioneers of the vane
industry at Albury, Three of their names were Shubuck, Ran, PVaunfelder,
and there wore others. They have loft behind them in Albury numerous
descendants who reside there still. There can bo no doubt but from tho
oxortions of these men both in the culture of the grape and the manufacture
of the wine the first stimulus was given to the wine industry of Albury,
and afterwards of Corowa and Rutherglen, Mr, Reid can well recollect the
first time when colonial wine was introduced into Albury and having been at
Shuback's vineyard and tasting some muscatel of very excellent quality. To
show tho difference of the prices then and now, it may be mentioned that the
price of a dozen of muscatel was sixty shillings, Now, the same or a similar
wine would bo ten shillings or five shillings a gallon. Some of the land
that those men had under vines in Albury is now all built over and forms
part of the town.
After leaving the Yarra Yarra on the Billabong country, Mr, Reid camped on
the spot where Germanton now stands, then called the "Ten Mile Creek", which
ha found at that time occupied by a man named John and his brother
and it appeared to M r# Reid to be more a grog shanty than anything else,
He lid not, however, remain there long, and the place was. soon afterwards
taken up by Mr, J,H, Mate as a sheep station, the sheep being placed in
charge of a Mr, Pabtf whose descendants are resident thereabouts at tho
present day. From there he pushed on to Hume’s crossing place on the river
where Albury now stands.
Having left the stock in charge of an overseer at a place called Mullengandra
with orders to proceed slowly until Mr, Reid's return when he reached the
crossing place of the Hume he there found, encamped on the bank of the river
-the Reverend Joseph Docker, who, with his family, was proceeding with stock
in search of a rim in the new country. And, strange to say, • almost the sane
-mishap that happened at the Murrumbidgee occurred to Mr, Docker at the Hume
crossing place, namely, in the attempt at crossing his horse dray it was
upset in the current and two of his horses drowned.
Tho only inhabitants of Albury at that time consisted of Mr, Robert Brown
and a non in his employment who were busy in putting up a slab building
close to Kovell's treeon tho bank of the Hume River, It was just before
Mr, Reid's arrival that Mr, Brown discovered the mark on Hovell's tree as
has already been referred to in this narrative, Mr# Brown was quite alive
to tho interest of the public which he had determined to serve by having a
small dug-out boat made almost in the first instance after his arrival, by
v/hich noons people were enabled to cross and recross tho river. This is the
sarr.o gentleman as above referred to as having been met on the road some
months before when going back to Yass after meeting Mr, Gardiner,


Ho gave him a Tory hearty welcome and was glad to see that ho had carrlod
out hi« determination of coming to tho now country* It may bo ctatod
Mr, Hold had ono stoekman with him and they pushed on after ©rousing tho
river, having swum their horses across and taken the saddles and accoutre-
ments in Mr, Brown's dug-out. It may hero be mentioned that the night
before coming to the crossing place M r , Reid stopped in a small hut at
i'ullongandera which was occupied by a hut-keeper of Mr* Thomas Mitchell,
the station having been recently given to him by Mr* Ebden* Hence the
oommencoment of the Mitchell family in the Albury district, whose descend-
ants are now almost legion*
After leaving tho Hume crossing place he proceeded towards whore Wodonga
now is, which had just been occupied as a station by Mr, Paul and Charles
Huon, Prom thence he proceeded down the south bank of tho Hume to the
Bamawatha station then just occupied by a Hr, Joseph Slack who had been
formerly a settler on Maneroo and to whom ho was known* It xaay bo mentioned
that this was at that time tho furthest out station on the left bank of the
River, Mr* Reid stated his intentions to Mr, Slaok which were that he
was in search of good country to form a large station on. Ho very kindly
said to Mr, Reid "I think there is some good country out south from here,
and tomorrow, if you think proper, I will spend a day or two in having a
look round", Mr* Bold rested there that night and tho next morning Mr, Slack,
Mr* Reid and a stockman started to explore the country south-west of the
Bamawatha station* Strange as it may seem they traversed over the very
country whore the town of Chiltem now stands, as also its goldfield. That
night they returned to Slack's homestead at Bamawatha, Mr, Reid had no
very great opinion of the country he had traversed that day as to its advan-
tages for forming a large station, so he determined to push further on.
Strange as it may bo, that very night a stockman of Mr, William Bowman from
his station on tho Ovens River, now called Taravringee arrived at Slack's
station, Mr, Bowman was the first man to form a station on tho Ovens River,
hence Bowman's Perry, This stockman, hearing that Mr, Reid was in search
of a good run, mentioned to him that ho would be very glad to show him one
on the Ovens River and adjoining Mr, Bowman's run, Mr* Reid wont with him
the next day for tho inspection of this country mentioned by him and which
was on the north bank of the River, from the crossing place of the
Ovens up to about eight or nine miles up the river and about three miles
above where the township of Tarrawingee now stands.
Mr, Raid liked the country very much and immediately determined to form a
station there, turning back and joining his party with the cattle near where
Albury now stands, pushed along and at a place called (in those days) "the
rooky water holes" not very far from where Springhurst Is now on tho line
of the old Sydney Road, where ho overtook tho Revd, Mr, Docker and his party
and they camped within a mile of one another that night, and both came on to
the Ovens the next day, he going down the river from the crossing place to
the Bontherambo plains and we going up the river some five miles from where
the township of Wangaratta now stands, to what is now called Reidadale and
in the possession of Mr, Shaw, I


There hare been various disputes as to the first settlors on the Ovens
River* From Mr* Reid's recollections of old times Dr* Maokay settled
first on the King River some seven or eight miles above what is now
Wangaratta Town, but was hunted off by the blacks and glad to make good
his retreat with the remaining portion of his stock which the blacks left
him to a more settled part of the country. The first person who formed a
station on the Ovens, and held it, was William Bowman who left this very
man in charge, named Benjamin Reid, who showed Mr, Reid the Currargarmungee
Run where Reidsdale now is, and thither Mr* Reid proceeded in order to
establish himself* The next person who established a run after Bowman was
George Faithful who had a cattle run on Oxley Plains situate between the
Ovens and the King, having a frontage to the two rivers* And a magnificent
stretch of country it was, now cultivated by farmers in every direction*
The next were Mr* Raid and Mr* Dooker upon the same day* Mr* Reid considers
this is correct as te the history of the first pioneers of the Ovens district*
Others, of course, came shortly after, namely i- Bowles, Ford, Green, Warby,
Chisholm, and Dr* Maokay having returned took up Worouly station, also
Rowans brothers and others*
In regard to the trouble which Mr* Reid had with the blacks when settled,
most of the settlers at that time would not allow any of the blaoks to oome
on to the stations or have any communication whatever with them, having had
palpable evidence in regard to their cunning and duplicity in the murder of
Faithful * s man, Henoe they were determined not to trust then in any manner
or shape* It was some eighteen months after Mr* Reid had formed his station
before he allowed any blaoks to oome there* One day he was sitting in front
of a hut he hod on the bank of the river, and the dogs began to bark furiously
dogs having a great antipathy to the blaoks and being able to soent them at
a very great distance, and knowing this we were always on the alert when the
dogs either growled or barked* Mr* Reid looked around at onoe and to his
astonishment he saw two blaoks approaching without war instruments and carry-
ing & green bough in e&oh hand, holding it up before them* This he at onoe
comprehended was a sign of peace, when within a distance of about twenty
yards they stood, seeing which he beckoned them to come on* These men had
been deputed by their tribe to make peace with the whites and they having
had intercourse with the whites in some more thickly populated districts
could speak English enough to make themselves understood, and they gave Mr*
Reid to understand that it was the general wish of the blaoks to make peace
and be allowed to coma upon tile station and promising never to molest the
stook if allowed to do so*
The sequel will show how little they were to be depended upon and will also
illustrate their ohar&oter* Mr* Reid thought, at the time, that it would
be advantageous to both whites and blaoks to bury the hatohet, consequently
he signified to them that they might oome and camp upon the station with the
understanding that they would not disturb the stook. Same two or three days
afterwards, however, they began to assemble, not very many at first but
gradually their number increased, but having their women and children with
them no danger was anticipated* It is the custom of the blaoks always, when
upon what is called the "War-path I ', never to have with then either women or
children, henoe the fancied security which was engendered*


Those natl/res made their camps about one quarter of a mile up the -river
from the hut* It may be mentioned that the hut that Hr, Reid lived in was
of a very primitive description, consisting of one large room with bunks
around with a large chimney for cooking purposes -no outhouses* Inside
the slabs of which the building was constructed the fire arms were so
arranged as to be ready for immediate use if required* The building was
loopholed all round in case of attack by having large holes bored through
the slabs sufficient to admit the barrel of a gun* There was one window
which could be opened if necessary, and which could be secured by the
pieces of the two slabs being replaced so as to fill up the window space,
this being hung up by the side of the window with hinges made out of green
hide so it could be closed in a minute* Their reason for being all together
in one hut was, they being united in case of sudden emergency* Had there
been two or three hurts on the place there would have been muoh more diffi-
culty in waving arrangements for defence, and everything in those days had
to be made subsidiary to safety. For seme three or four weeks those natives
appeared to be perfectly content in going and coming and made themselves
useful in many ways about the station, no doubt with the intention of lull-
ing suspicion and to enable them to quietly observe the means of defence
which the station afforded and their best opportunity for attack as will be
shown by the events which followed.
This season the first orop of wheat had been planted and which he believed
to have been the first wheat ever grown on the Ovens River* This paddock
of wheat comprised about nine or ten aores and was situate in the neighbour-
hood of the lagoons under a high bank in an angle of the river, and down the
river from the hurt some five or six hundred yards, so that the hut was about
midway between the camp of the blacks and the cultivation paddock* During
tho time the blacks were there this orop of wheat ripened* Everything at
this time was out by the hand, with a sickle. So when the wheat was ripe,
Ur* Reid end three or four of the men started one morning to reap this wheat,
and had been cutting it until about eleven o’clock in the day, and the
weather being hot Ur* Reid determined to give the men a glass of grog each*
It used then to be the universal custom both in shearing time and in harvest
to allow all hands employed their three glasses of spirits a day* Sometimes
this consisted of rum, purchased in Sydney, or Ifhisky made on the establish-
ment, there being at that time no excise laws and everyone could brew and
distill at his own discretion* Ur* Reid knows that at his father Dr, Reid’s
establishment at Inverary they grew their own barley, made their own malt,
and grow also hops and kiln-dried them and brewed their own beer and distilled
their own whisky and made every year a quantity of poach brandy* /q
Ur* Reid despatched the overseer to bring down a bottle of rum from the hut
paddock to give the men their grog. After waiting for his return for some
tine and thinking he was somewhat long, Ur* Reid said in a Joke to the other
men i- "I think Cosgrove must have broken through his oath" (he being a
tea-totaller) "and I think I will go up and see what he is about", and on .
proceeding from this paddock up tho high bank by the river, to his aston-
ishment, instead of seeing Cosgrove coming baok with a bottle on his hand
he was armed with a double-barrelled gun and appeared to be looking very
intently across the river, on the bank of which they were both standing*


Naturally casting his eye in that direction at once Reid could per-
ceive bobbing up and down amidst the long kangaroo grass on the other side
of the river many black pipe-clayed heads, a sight that was enough to
realise the exact positions of affairs* Consequently Ur* Reid immediately
returned as quickly as possible to the mon who were reaping in the field and
exclaimed "Come on, my ladsj here are the blacks* Keep your reaping-hooks
in your hands and follow me”* Of course that was sufficient for them to
understand the danger and know the exact situation when they arrived at the
spot where Cosgrove was standing, which occupied but a few minutes* The
blacks from the opposite side of the river had advanced as far as the river’s
bank, and to show how well they had chosen their ground immediately opposite
the place where they had oome to the bank a tree had fallen more than two
thirds of the way across the 'river, and which, after they had waded in the
river up to their waists enabled them to utilise as a natural bridge or
causeway* This, of course, was well known to them before as they made
directly for it, and wading up to their waists the first few yards they were
enabled to get on to the trunk of the tree and cross in single file without,
difficulty* So one by one they came across all armed and in their war paint,
some fifteen or twenty fine young men* Immediately upon the first blaok
coming on to the tree Cosgrove said, "Shall 1 shoot him, Ur* Reid?"
Mr* Reid at once answered "No, our only chance of safety and getting back to
the hut, for we are all of us, except you, entirely unarmed and it is only
your gun and the fear of it will prevent any attack, and enable us to return
in safety because it is plain to see that the blacks had been intercepted
in their arrangements for the attack"* As they all, one by one, came across
they formed in a sort of half-circle at a short distance from us, we at the
same time moving towards the hut with Cosgrove protecting us with his double-
barrelled gun* Mr* Reid was near enough to some of them to make them under-
stand that the cause of our leaving the field was that we imagined when we
saw them coming over the river that they were "wild blacks" but we were glad
to find that they were the blacks that were up on the flat* This, of
course, was only policy en his part to ward off hostilities* During the
time we were partially surrounded these blacks kept up an incessant talk,
"yabbering", no doubt discussing amongst themselves whether they should
attack or not* Mr* Reid thinks what decided them in their dilemma was a
man who was left in the hut, sick, had risen up from his bed and having
taken up a firearm came towards us, having seen the position of affairs
from the window of the hut* His appearance, ¥r* Reid thinks, decided thorn
not to attack, seeing that they were between two fires, Cosgrove on one side
and this sick man on the other* We at last reached the hut without any
further attempt at molestation, and of course immediately on reaching the hut
all aimed themselves* It is not for Mr, Reid to describe what followed,
but there was soon a soatterment made of our sable foes*
Mr* Reid remembers well the circumstance of one of -these blacks, in the
molee, who was running for the hisi bank of the river and just as he got to
the brink of it Ur* Reid fired and ran to the edge of the bank and, looking
down, could see no trace of anyone and naturally thought that the firing
had had a fatal effect and that he had sunk under the water* But in this
idea he was mistaken as was proved to him seme two years afterwards When the
blacks became perfectly quiet and were allowed to corns round the station
Ur* Reid had a conversation with this very man whom he thought he hod shot*


It seemed that the moment he fired the black jumped, consequently/ instead
of the charge of shot striking him in the back it struck him in the under
part of the thigh. And where he fell in the water there was a small black
dead tree which had been partially burnt and he gave Mr .Reid to understand
that when he fell he immediately made for this tree and laid underneath it,
under the water, except his mouth. He saw Mr. Reid looking for him on the bank
ar l that he expected every moment he would see him and send a bullet through
hie head. He showed the scar where the bullet struck him and as it was only
a flesh wound he soon recovered from its effects. He then related the full
design of the attack of the natives at the time and also the manner in which
they had intended to carry it out, and as being another instance of the
cunning and the strategy of the Australian natives it is here related as far
as can be recollected in the words of this aboriginal. He said, in the first
instance the blacks had made up their minds to attack the hut, but were
undecided, not knowing exactly the means of the occupants for its defence.
They had therefore determined to send two envoys in the first instance to
pretend that they wanted to make peace with the whites so that they might be
allowed to ccme on the station in a peaceable manner and by degrees ascertain
the preparations and means of defence which no doubt they did during the three
weeks in which they had camped on the river above the station. They ascertained
evidently that it was the intention of the whites to exit this crop of wheat,
and thereby they laid their plans to intercept them during their harvesting,
in their retreat to the hut. The evening before they had despatched their
lubras and all the piccaninnies across the river to an appointed place so as
not to be inconvenienced by them during an attack and no doubt also to prevent
their giving any warning of their intended movements, which black women
frequently do after intercourse with white people. He said that they intended
crossing the river and reorossing between the hut and the paddock so as to out
the whites off from their retreat to the hut. And if such a plan succeeded to
snoak quietly into the wheat crop which was very high and spear all the whites
while they were at work reaping. Having finished with those in the field they
knew that they then only had a sick man and the hut-keeper in the hut to deal
with, which they could easily accomplish with a little stratagem and their
usual cunning. He said when they were coming across the log over the river
they were quite taken aback on observing the whole party of whites opposite to
them retreating from the paddocks and going towards the hut, so much so, that
all their previous plans were frustrated and hardly any of them knew what was
best to be dons under the altered conditions of circumstances, but thought it
bost to oesao across boldly and appear to be friendly to the whites. They had ■
some discussion amongst themselves during the time they were surrounding the
whites as to whether they should attack them or not, but owing to Cosgrove
having the double-barrelled gun in his hand in the first instance, and after
«f • Lz.r -th? sick man coming down from the hut with another gun in his hand,
th»7 v-ought it would be more prudent not to make any further hostile
movements, and to disperse as quickly as possible towards where their camp
had been before its removal in anticipation of this outbreak. We, of course,
after this took the precaution to take our firearms with us and to have a man
on horseback riding up and down and keeping watoh during the time we were
getting in the harvest, which was the first crop and very nearly proved a very
dear crop to all of those connected with it.
The reason for sowing this crop of wheat was the high price of flour ruling
at that time. Sixty pounds a ton was the usual price of flour at the lass Mills


or at Melbourne, and the great difficulty of the carriage besides. People
would naturally ask how this wheat was to be made into flour without any
mill being in the neighbourhood. Part of the appliances of the station was
a steel mill made exactly upon the seme principle as a coffee mill, only
upon a larger scale, together with a large fly wheel to assist the grinding.
This was usually fastened by bolts to a small tree or sapling where a man
could grind about half of a bushel of wheat in an hour. This was called
"banging the mill" and it was the duty of the hut keeper to grind and make
sufficient flour for the use of all in the hut and this was the most
important duty which he had to perform.
The flour before it was used had also to be sifted with a hand sieve which
separated the brqn from the flour. The operation of "banging the mill" was,
after the blacks had become perfectly quiet, generally conceded to them by the
hut keeper, who was but too glad to be relieved of that which was the hardest
part of his work. Ho could always find plenty of the blacks to do the work for
him, because he being both hut keeper and cook they always received plenty of
food from him.
Afterwards, all the wheat required for flour for the station was grown on the
spot, consequently there was no necessity for the purchase of grain in future
and there was no further trouble with the blacks in the station after the first
harrassing encounter except that they might now and then spear a bullock for
their food, which they ware not blamed for in consideration of their land and
hunting grounds being occupied by the whites.
Some few months after this the blacks made an attack upon Dr.Mackey's station
at Warouly, which was situate adjoining the upper end of Mr.Faithful's Oxley
Plains station towards the Buffalo Mountains and immediately opposite the
Tarrawingeo station belonging to William Bowman, There they made an open
attaok, surrounding the establishment and besieging the place. At that time
Dr.Maokay himself was absent on a visit to Yass, and the only inhabitants of
the station were Mr,John Maokay, Dr.Maokay's brother, and one stockman and his
wife, the other stockman being away. The blacks commenced operations by
burning the shed containing some wheat an hay, a stockman's hut and other out-
buildings, Mr,John Mackay, the stockman and his wife barricaded themselves
in the principal hut where they lived, and in which they were kept some two
or three days, the natives surrounding the place and precluding any means of
communication being adopted with the outside stations. At night the blacks had
fires all round the place so as to make the least chance of escape impossible.
It seemed that this very black had afterwards the interview with Mr .Raid
regarding the arrangement for the attack upon him and his party at the wheat
field, and whose name was Iferryman, was the chief leader of the attack upon
Dr.Maokay's station and no doubt had also been the leader upon the former
enterprise against Mr. Reid, This blaokfellow had been several years amongst
the whites on the Hume river and therefore was to some extent a half civilised
black the most dangerous, beoause from being brought up amongst white people
he had the opportunity of judging as to their menas of defence, and their
customs were familiar to him, Henoe he had the knowledge as to what would be
the best means to attaok them with the least danger and the greater certainty •
of success.


This man showed himself conspicuous in the attack upon Dr.Mackey*s place
and was known to the stockman whose name was Ben Reid and who happened to
be the same man who showed Mr,Reid the Currargamunge run as alluded to
herein before, Merryman during the siege came within speaking distance
of the hut wherein the whites wore detained, crying out "Turn out white
gin along with black fellow, blackfellow then all gone cooler, "meaning
by Cooler "all anger gone," They were, it appears, very anxious to
obtain possession of the white woman. Strange to say although there were
many opportunities by those in the hut who were well armed to shoot this
black man "Merryman" and others also Mr. John Mackay would not fire nor allow
any of the others to do so. The second night of the siege this stockman.
Bon Reid, determined to make an attempt to alarm one of the neighbouring
stations. It was a clear moonlight night and he thought he would attempt to
catch one of the stock horses, usually kept in a small paddock adjoining the
hut. So, taking a bridle with him, he stealthily crept out of the hut and
caught one of the stock horses, mounted him and made towards the slip-rails
of the paddock. But quietly as he thought he had proceeded in his movements
the blacks had observed his manoeuvre and immediately tried to out him off from
his exit from the paddock by the slip-rails. He galloped his horse as
quickly as he could to the slip-rails, jumped off to open the slip-panel,
but so close were the blacks upon him he had ho time to do so. He then ran
as quickly as he could to the hut to save his life. The blacks then to
prevent any further attempt of escape by any one from the hut, and
anticipating what their Intentions would be, immediately set to work and
speared and tomahawked every horse in the paddock. The next morning, about
nine or ten o’olock, a stockman from Mr. George Faithful’s who was in search
of some cattle and intending to call at Dr.Mackay*s station, on approaching
in sight ef the station and seeing the camps of the blacks, and also that
all the out-buildings on the establishment had been burnt dorm and only one
hut left with the doors shut, he at once concluded the state of affairs and
turning his horse made off as fast as his horse could carry him back to
his master’s station on Oxley Plains and giving the alarm, as to the position
of affairs at Dr,Mackay*s station. One of Mr. Reid's stockmen happened to be
at Mr.Faithful's station at the time. He at once returned and conveyed the
news to Mr. Reid who immediately ordered a party to be got ready consisting of
three stookmen besides himself, who proceeded at once to join Mr. Faithful * s
party at his station and as quickly as the horses could carry them made
tracks for Warowly Station, Quick, however, as they had been in their
movements and also the man who had seen the blacks in the morning and had
brought them the information the blacks were quicker still. Although
Mr .Faithful’s stockman thought he had come away unperceived by the blacks, it
was not so, and they know well that he would Immediately carry the news to
other stations whence speedily relief would be sent, they therefore at once
s&w that their attack must be futile and they therefore commenced an immediate
retreat. From Oxley Plains it was necessary to travel some thirteen or
fourteen miles to reach Dr,Mackey’s station which was accomplished as speedily
as possible, but on arrival at Warouly station it was discovered that all
the blacks had left the place and the inmates of the hut had seen them depart
about the same hour (ten o’clock in the morning) which was about the time
that Faithful's stockman observed the state of affairs. Ur. John Mackay then
expressed his anxiety about the shepherd and watchman from four miles away
where there was an out-station, with sheep; the custom was to have cattle at


the homestead and keep sheep at an out—station* We determined at once to
advance thither knowing there was no danger to be apprehended for those who
were left in the hut* And we could see by the trail of the blacks that they
were moving off in a body and in the direction of this out-station*
We had gone about two miles towards this sheep station when we perceived a man
running as if he was making for die home station. This man was known to some
of the stockmen* he being an American negro and as being the shepherd. He ran
so fast and in such a manner that he did not seem to see the horsemen
approaching. We shouted to him but the more we shouted the faster he ran.
Two or three of us then galloped alongside of him* and when he sew who we were
and that he was safe he fell as if he was shot upon his face and for some
minutes could not speak. He then told us that while he was driving his sheep
home towards his hut he had seen some blacks on the outside and heard the
cries of his watchman ooming from the inside of the hut and was quite sure the
blacks had killed him* He then determined to run as fast as he could to the
home station and he thought when he heard our shouts that it was the blacks
after him. He then had no idea of the blacks having been at the home station
so we explained the state of affairs and told him to go on and that he was still
safe. Then we proceeded to the sheep station hut and there found our worst
fears realised. There lay the watchman in the middle of the hut, tomahawked,
out open and his kidney fat removed. We then fastened up the door of the hut
and followed on the trail of the blacks until nightfall. When we thought ourselves
close to them we decided to wait and surprise them at night by the light of
their own fires. Now here is another instance of the cunning of the Australian
savage:- a little after dark we saw the light of their fires some distance off*
which we approached very cautiously, intending, of course, to take them by
surprise. When we got near we did not hear the slightest stir or sound, and
which appeared to us somewhat extraordinary. But we soon ascertained that the
birds had flown, and these fires had been made for the express purpose of
deceiving us, or any other whites who might be in pursuit. So, being well aware
it was useless to attempt to follow them any further we returned that night
to Uaokay's home station, getting home the next day*
After his return from Yass Dr.Mackay had warrants taken out against a number
of these aboriginals, some of whom it seems must have been known to Mackay's
stockman Ben Raid. It was a well known fact that the most dangerous amongst
the aboriginals were those who had been brought up amongst the whites and who
always deserted after a certain time and rejoined their tribe. These tribes
vary often fraternised together when there was work to be done against their
oorison enemy the white man* Hence those tribes who had never as yet come in
contact with white men had the assistance and knowledge of these half civilised
blacks who ware generally the most prominent in any action against the whites,
wherefore many of these men became well known*
More attacks and murders were committed after about two years time from the
occupation of the country than there were at the beginning, and which well
establishes the fact that all these plans and schemes for the assaults upon the
whites wore concocted in nine oases out of ten by these half civilised blacks.
Polio* wore sent to execute these warrants which Dr.Mackay had taken out; from
the district of Yaas, but did not suooeed in capturing any natives. During that
time the polio* with the stockman of Currargarmunge Station, named Christopher
Vincent, having heard that one of the blacks for whom they had a warrant was
at Howlong Station on the Hume River (then owned by Matthew Pearce) went there
to apprehend him. This blaokfellow was known on the Hume River and was o&lled


by tho name of "Jammy Charlie." TOien they got near the hut of the Station
at Howlong which was situate on the high bank beside the river this black-
follow saw them approaching and immediately rushed into the hut, Tho stock-
man Jumped off his horse and followed into the hut* The stockman was armed
with a double barrelled pistol; as he entered the hut he saw the black
escaping up tho chimney. Immediately he raised the pistol and fired which
appeared only to hasten tho blacks departure. He got out of the chimney,
jumped on to tho bank of the river and with one bound over tho steep bank fell
partly in tho water. Of course they thought as tho distance was about forty foot
he was killed, and therefore, did not hurry their movements much, as they had
to go about two hundred yards round to get under tho bank where he lay, but to
their astonishment he rolled over and disappeared in tho Hume, They watched
for a considerable time but never got another sight of him and made up their
minds he had been drowned.
Soroe twelve months after this occurrence Mr. Reid happened to be over at
Bamawatha station (at that time in tho possession of Mr,G.H,Barber) on the
river Hume, and there he saw in camp this very "Jemmy Charlie" who at that
time had hardly recovered from his' jump over Howlong bank, having had his
collar-bone broken and one arm in two places and tho skin off a great part of
one side of his body. Had it been a white man, no doubt he would have been
killed, but a black man is like a natiye dog - you worry him with other dogs,
think him dead, leave him, and no sooner are you out of sight than he gets up
and runs away. Both are very tenacious of life. Upon being asked how he got
away he said as soon as he recovered the shook of the fall he rolled himself
into the river and dived down to where he found some reeds growing. These reeds
grew from fifteen to twenty feet high and it is from these reeds the natives
make their spears. He concealed himself amongst the reed beds until all danger
of pursuit was over and then crawled as well as he could to the black's camp.
But was a complete cripple ever after, his hip was broken as well.
Mr. Reid does not remember if any of these blaoks were ever punished for the
murder of the hut-keeper at Dr.Mackey's station. Some were apprehended,
but were not identified. Sending the police to apprehend these men was a
farce and nothing more. Men totally unaccustomed to the country and the
habits and ways of the natives could effect nothing.
About this time Mr,Reid had determined to remove all the stock belonging to
his father before his death, from Maneroo to the Ovens. He accordingly
proceeded to Maneroo and brought from there two large drafts of cattle.
Returning to Maneroo for the balance of the cattle and from eight to ten
thousand sheep, which was in the year 1840, He thought there must be a much
shorter route across the mountains by tho head of the H uae River to the
station on the Ovens, Accordingly he determined to ascertain if it might be
practicable. So, starting with three other men and taking a paokhorse with
them, they proceeded to explore the oountry for this assumed route. After
travelling for some three or four days and passing where Kiandra now stands,
they wore caught by snow storms in the mountains. This was at tho end of May
and at last found themselves unable to proceed any further and finding as they
did that the track would be impraotible at that season of the year determined
to return, which they did, after sustaining very groat hardships both to them-
solves and their horses which had had nothing to eat for days owing to the
oountry being covered with snow.


They were in excellent condition when they started, but very miserable by the
time they got back. During the journey they ware often compelled to sleep
out on the snow at night with their saddles under their heads for pillows and
their great coats around them. One night they were all very cold and chilled
and wanted, if possible, to find some place where to build a fire, and which
at any ordinary time had required a little while to do so, for they had only a
steel and tinder box to depend on, matches at that time such as are now in
everyday use, being then unknown. The mode and maimer in which they procured
a light for a fire was by taking a portion of tinder out of a tinder box,
wrapping it round with a piece of cotton rag, holding it on top of the flint
and Igniting the tinder by sparks struck from the flint and stool. They then
blow that with their breath into a flame and haring prepared beforehand some
dry stringy bark, rubbed fine, which ignites readily, they at last got a fire.
This of course to those accustomed to it was easily done in fine weather, but
not so when the whole country was covered with snow and everything wet or
damp. It may be also stated that in these mountains are thousands of dead
trees, killed by what cause it is difficult to say. This night they looked
about and found a tree that had fallen resting on its branches at a consider-
able distance from the ground, and upon examining the under portion of the
trunk they found some of the bark on it partially dry, and with which they
thought there was every chanoe of making a fire, which they did manage after
more than an hour’s incessant labour, but then at the cost of two or three
shirts out of Mr. Reid’s valise in front of the saddle. If they had not succ-
eeded that night in obtaining a fire, it is probable some would have perished.
However, before the next night they had got back to Beloraa, at a station
belonging to Barrett and Moore and from thence the next day made further back
for a distance of some forty miles to the old station on the Numeralla River,
Mr, Reid had sold this Humoralla Station to a Mr, Clifford who was to take
possession of it after he left. It may be stated that prior to this Journey
into the Snowy Mountains there had been despatched two drays with teams of
bullocks along the ordinary road by "way of Yass, and all the preparations hod
been made for the journey across the mountains by moans of pack bullocks,
thinking they wore better than horses. These were quiet old shaft bullocks,
chosen for the purpose, which had been accustomed to harness. In the meantime
a man had been despatched after the drays to stop them until we arrived, TOxen
we started in the morning these bullocks had on the packs all the cooking
utensils required for the journey until we overtook the drays and the three
pack bullocks were placed in charge of one man to drive. The herd of cattle
hod already started in charge of stockmen while Mr, Reid was back attending to
the sheep. This man with the pack bullocks overtook the oattle with the stock*
man and presumably to save himself trouble allowed the bullocks to wjy with
the oattlo. The moment the bullocks got amongst the cattle the rattling of
tin pots and pans caused the oattlo to scatter in all directions, A simple
matter of this kind delayed our expedition for several days, for the oattlo
wont book to all portions of the run and had to be re-mustered. And as for
the different things that were packed on the bullocks being lost they had to
be all replaced. However, we again started and nothing further occurred.
After fourteen days journey we overtook the drays at Bogalong, twenty miles
from Yass on the main Rort Phillip road.


On the journey, which was the first which Mr. Reid had made with cattle and
sheep together, he found it anything but a pleasant experience, for cattle and
sheep narer agree together, as has been already explained. And as it almost
seemed that they had communicated the dislike of one another to the men the
shepherd and stockmen were incessantly quarrelling with each other, so much
so that many fights were occasioned on the road amongst them and which, of
course, added to the other troubles.
However, we eventually arrived with the stock all correct at the Hume River
crossing place. Here, of course, the only way of crossing the stock was by
swimming them through the river. This was done with the oattle in a short
time, but with the sheep it was different. We had crossed with the drays
about a quarter of a mile above the usual crossing place, about the same
position as where the bridge for the traffic now stands over the river, and
it was determined that there the sheep should be put aoross the current being
less there than at the usual crossing place. Having got the sheep into the
river a large number of them got over very well, but towards the latter and
and from the constant rounding or ringing through the action of the current
they got down the river under a bank and consequently were unable to extric-
ate themselves from the river and wore smothering one another in their
attempts to land, the bank preventing their getting out of the river, Ur,
Reid himself and two men were on the same side of the river as the bank under
which the sheep were struggling in the water. He said "Will either of you
men swim across the river and get a spade from the dray?” They said "How
oan we swim and carry a spade?He said "I never asked a man to do a thing
I was not able to do myself". He then swam across the river, got a spade
from the dray, tied a piece of string to the top port of the handle where
the loop is for the hand, and went into the river with the end of the string
between his teeth, allowing the spade to swing with the stream, and took it
across to where the sheep were under the bank. They then cut the bonk down
with the spade and allowed the sheep to be released from underneath, having
only nine smothered out of about five or six hundred that were swimming
about under the high bank, and no further noteworthy incident occurred on
the journey to the station on the Ovens. Hq occupied at that time with the
sheep all the country now known as Eldorado, Woolshed, Reid’s Creek, and
where the town of Boechworth now stands, then called by us "the Sandy Forest",
a great plaoe fcr the kangaroo, And on the Ovens flats, some two years
before, when he first went there, the kangaroo grass looked more like a
field of barley, or rather oats, than anything else; and in many places as
one rode along one could have pulled up the horse and tied the kangaroo grass
over the horse's withers as it grew on either side. Many people of the
present day might doubt the fact but by old colonists it would not be con-
sidered at all strange. This kangaroo grass was always looked upon as most
valuable but today it is fast disappearing from this end all other districts
which are occupied by stook for the simple reason that both sheep and horses
and in fact all classes of stook are extremely partial to it as is well known
to all those engaged in pastoral pursuits and it is generally considered to
bo incapable of cultivation as it is well known that sheop and horses eat
closer than any othor animals. Hence in a dry season and when grass becomes
scarce they eat into the very roots of this kind of grass and so destroy it.


No other grass is possessed of the some succulent properties in the roots
as the kangaroo grass.
It nay bo stated that the country now known as Woragee was first taken up
as a heifer station by William Bowman, and from ■whom some years after l'r
Reid’s purchase he consolidated with the whole of the runs he held in thn
Ovens district.
Here a warning may be given to those about to occupy new country with sheep
to beware of the deadly effects of grass seed to the sheep and also its *
effect upon the wool. At the time when he first brought his sheep on to
these stations he was young and inexperienced in these matters, for, coming
from Maneroo, a thinly grassed country, the injurious effects of grass seeds
to sheep were never known there and there was more cause to complain of the
WaE * s o^u^ raSfl an else. This is not written in any way to dis-
parage “aneroo as a good grazing country for during sojourn there they had
throe years drought in the years commencing at the end of 1836 and lasting
to the end of 1839, The seeds of this kangaroo grass not only injures the
wool but is of such a penetrating character that by its spiral action it
screws Itself completely through the skin of the sheep and right into the
flesh as well, consequently creating an amount of irritation which often
kills the sheep. He has frequently skinned a sheep and found the skin on
the inside one mass of grass seeds from head to tail and as thickly studded
together as pins in a pincushion* With great regard to the wool and our
first shearing season the fleece when taken off presented on the inside the
appearance more like a mat than a fleece of wool and would take a very strong
man to tear it asunder. Hence it was of very little value to the wool-buyer
and he got but an insignificant price for it that year. This was a warning
to him ever after. Another cause of annoyance to the sheep was this seed
getting into their eyes and causing blindness, from which cause they often
strayed from the flock and wore lost and then afterwards killed by the dingoo
or native dogs which at the time were very numerous. All sheep had to be
shepherded. Usually there were two flocks of shoep at a station. These
were Invariably tended by a shepherd by day and folded by night. There
were two shepherds and also a watchman to look after the sheep at night, and
his duty during the day was to look after the hut and oook fcr the shepherds.
At night the watchman had what was called a watchbox, which was usually
covered with stringy bark or light palings, and wheels at the front so that
it could be easily removed from place to place, and his duty also was to
change the fold after every second day so that the sheep might have a clean
comping ground, consequently he had to move his watchbox also.
At El Dorado, then called the Back Creek, a woolshed was built and although
the blacks wore considered to have became quiet one of the men, a hut-keeper,
during the time of shearing came manning from the hut which was some dist-
ance from the woolshed crying out "Rook out boys, look out, here are the
blacks". This so frightened the men at the shearing shed that the sheep were
left to run, seme one way and seme another, one of the shearers becoming so
terrified as to be inoap&ble of moving or even speaking.


Mr* Reid, -who had a rifle by his side, on perceiving that the hut-keeper
began to laugh, at onoe sew that it was a joke and told the men to proceed
with their work, And upon Mr, Reid remonstrating upon their running away
from the blacks this man who was so terrified exclaimed - "Master, you are
wrong, for I could not mm - I was so frightened I" The hut keeper barely
escaped a sound thraslng from the other men for this practical joke he had
played upon them.
After this Mr, Reid had many journeys with fat stock to Melbourne and was
present on one occasion at the first races ever hold upon the Flemington
racecourse and remembers the race for the Town Plate which was won by
Mr, McCall's horse "Plenipo" after running four heats. In those days the
distances were much greater than at present and weight-for-age was in
practice, and the race being two mile heats this horse actually ran eight
miles to win. The first heat was won by Watson's "Countess", the second
by Hunter's "Young Romeo" and the two succeeding heats by "Plenipo", half
an hour being allowed between each heat.
This circumstance is related to show the stamina of the horses of those days
as compared with that of those racing at present, Mr, Reid particularly
remembers this occurrence as he had a horse of his own "Bay Diamond" runn*>
ing at the same meeting, by which he won the Avene 1 Cup, presented by
Mr, Henry Kent Hughes of Hughes* Creek, called Avenel at his instigation.
This horee was purchased from a celebrated character in Melbourne in those
days called Jack Ewart, ocanmonly called Hopping Jack, who was & great dealer
of horses in those days. The horse was bred in Tasmania, This Jack Ewart
«rid a Jack Hunter (a station owner) and also a racing man took passage in
a sailing ship which after a few days passage was wrecked. While the ship
lay on the rocks, while both were standing on the forecastle. Hunter said
to Ewart "How cold it is, lam very cold", "Hold your tongue" replied
Ewart, "you may be too hot before long I" However, a friendly vessel
rescued both of then on the morning after they struck upon the reef.
The first course for horse races in Melbourne was round Batman's Swamp,
where the docks are now, from whence it was removed to what was called the
Salt-water River, new Flemington,
The first newspaper was the "Port Phillip Patriot", Fawkner's paper, after
that the "Port Phillip Gazette", George Arden's paper, then the" Melbourne
Herald" by George Cavanagh, and the "Argus" by William Kerr, who was after-
wards the first Town Clerk in Melbourne,
In the year 1844 Mr, Reid was married to Miss Mary Romaine Barber and
consequently he dissolved partnership with his mother and brothers and
ccnmenoed upon his own account, taking possession of Woragee and all the
country above the woolshed upon the Back Creek was called Reid's Creek,
"Beochworth" and the "Nine Mile" below the woolshed belonged to Mr, Reid's
brothers, Mr, Reid also purchased the run of Merrimarenhong from
Mr, Aimes Huon also anrfah from Mr, Thomas Mjltchell,


Mr, Reid was residing with his wife at Merrimarenbong for some time, on which
station he kept cattle, and sheep on the Woragee station. In the year 1844
at the time of his marriage he happened to fall in with a man who was a
mill-wright, and who had been repairing a windmill for his mother at Inver-
ary Park, in the course of conversation he asked if there was any good
place for putting up a water mill in the new country as it was then termed,
Mr, Reid replied "I think there are plenty of places,” And the thought then
first struck Mr, Reid of how important it would be if a grist mill could be
erected in our part, so as to do array with the then steel hand mills which
were universally used throughout the district, there being no flour mill
nearer than lass on the one side and Gilmore on the other, Mr, Reid then
thought of the Yackandandah Creek as a most excellent site for the erection
of a water mill. And he finally agreed with this man, George Lyall, to
erect one, on condition that he was to do all the mechanical labour requis-
ite for the mill and Mr, Reid to find all the material and all the other
expenses in connection with its erection, in consideration of which he
bound himself to remain for two years after the starting of the milling and
act as miller, receiving in compensation half the profits derivsd from the
mill.
At the present time this may be considered a light undertaking bub the diff-
iculties which had to be contended with at that time, that is in the years
1845 and 1846 were the obstacles encountered in transit and the difficulty
in obtaining all the requisite material for a good sited water-mill. And
an instance of what had to be contended with will be illustrated by the
following :-
In the first instance Mr, Reid had to obtain a pair of four-feet French
burr stones, which he found were obtainable neither in Sydney nor Melbourne,
And he thought that the only alternative would be to import them direct
from France which would, of course, have delayed the operation for a very
considerable time, in fact it would have taken in those days at least twelve
months. But fortunately he received a notice from his agent in Melbourne,
Mr, Henry Ward Mason, that there was an old windmill near Launceston for
sale in which there was, amongst the other machinery, a pair of four-feet
stones. The owner would not sell the stones separately but demanded that
whoever required the stones should purchase the whole in one lot. Conseq-
uently Mr, Reid had to purchase the whole of this windmill machinery to
obtain the stones he required which h© did and brought these stone* over
from Launceston to Melbourne, The other machinery of the windmill being
useless for a water mill consequently the stones cost about double their
worth.
After their arrival in Melbourne Mr, Reid had to send down all the way from
Yackandandah a bullock team expressly to bring them up, and being very
heavy they were just as much as the dray could carry with safety on a road
such as had to be travelled in those days with creeks and rivers to cross
without any bridges on any part of the journey. And considering that these
stones weighed 18 owt, and 22 cwt, respectively, it is easy to conceive how
difficult it would be to extricate such a weight if the team of eight
bullocks happened to have the dray bogged on the road, and which happened


but once during the whole of the journey at what was then called Templet on* s
creek, near Mr,Templeton’s head station in the vicinity of Euroa, Five
chains were broken by the bullocks and it appeared that no chain was
sufficiently strong to with-hold the strain caused by the pulling of the
bullocks. The bullock driver, finding himself in a difficulty, proceeded
to Mr, Temple ton's overseer, who kindly lent him what was called a drag chain,
which was of double the strength of the ordinary chain used in the bullock
dray in those days, which proved effectual, for the bullocks at the first
attempt pulled the dray clear out of the bog, and it may be here remarked
the settlers of those times were all very kind to one another in lending
assistance in any case of difficulty, not knowing it might not be their own
case tomorrow. After this there was no further delay and the dray arrived
safe at Yackandandah,
Mr,Reid had also to contend with many other difficulties in the construction
of this mill. In the first place having to find two good sawyers. In those
days, saw mills being then unknown, all timber required for building had to
be cut by hand. All logs from which the timber was out had first to be
drown to the saw-pit. This had to be done by the station teams, and then
after being sawn to be conveyed to the building. It was also necessary to
find a good blacksmith and to erect the forge and premises for him to reside
in, a matter of great difficulty in those days at two hundred miles from
Melbourne,
The mill-wright made upon the premises the models requisite for the castings
required for the journals and other castings necessary for the mill. These
had to be sent to Melbourne, to Lang land and Fulton's foundry where all
castings were made and thenoe brought to Yackandandah,
Of course it was necessary to make a dam across the Yackandandah creek and
which, in the simplicity of the time, was thought to be easily accomplished,
but, from sad experience, found out the mistake. In the construction of
this dam which was carried across the flat, some three hundred yards from
the course of the creak towards the high land on the opposite side, over
five hundred piles were used inside of which was erected on another embankment
across the whole flat.
Of course not being engineers they applied the same style of embankment
across the course of the creek to the head of the water-face to convey the
water to the mill-wheel. This acted remarkably well until the floods came,
when to the astonishment of all the whole of the embankment as far as the
width of the creek was bodily carried away. The dam was repaired on three
several occasions, in endeavouring to overcome the pressure of the water in
the creek, but all to no purpose.
It was then resolved to alter the plan, as far as the bed of the creek was
concerned, namely to use nothing but stone, and as there was plenty within
four hundred yards of where the dam was swept away by the current three teams
of bullocks were employed in carting stone for more than three weeks. This
stone was all thrown into the bed of the oreek. It seemed, during the first
week or ten days, as if the stone would not show above the water in the
creek, but after some fortnight's work, it gradually made its appearance
and two stone abutments were made upon either side of the course of the oreek.
Upon these abutments was placed a blue-gum log about thirty five feet in
length completely across the course of the oreek, upon which was built


sliding boards which could bo easily depressed or raised by means of levers
upon either side, so as to maintain a medium height of water in the creek.
When a flood was expected these boards were raised so that the stream of
the creek could flow over the stones and no further trouble was ever
experienced. These details have been mentioned to show the difference
between those times and the present, in any ordinary work to bo performed.
After the creek had been successfully dammed up so as to secure a constant
supply of water being conducted along the mill-race, the mill was worked
successfully from that time until the station was sold in 1853, and worked
for many years afterwards by the purchaser Dr.Mackay and afterwards Mr.Coombos,
and until such time as the dam and race wore filled by the sluicing claims
above sending their debris down the oreek.
In the excavation of this water-race, which was only about one hundred and
fifty yards in length, whilst it was being dug a man named Beaton who was
employed in cutting the race, said to Mr .Reid "Master, this looks like gold",
showing him at the same time a handful of the earth from the bottom of the
race. Mr .Reid replied "There is no gold in the Colony or in this part of the
world. This is only mica, if you want gold you will have to go to the Ural
Mountains in Russia", This was in the year 1845.
At the same time there was a briokmaker named Robinson making bricks on the
opposite side of the oreek to the mill, on the flat. One day he came up
with some brick earth in a handkerchief and said "I think there is gold in
this clay I am making bricks of" and he received a similar answer which had
bean given to Beaton.
It is remarkable that the discovery of gold, afterwards, in California was
made by those employed in the digging a mill-race in the first instance, for
Captain Sutton's mill.
In the year 1905 Mr .Raid paid a visit to his old place in Yaokandandah after
absence of 53 years. The old mill presented a very sad appearance to what
it had been in the old days. The whole of the dam upon which five hundred
piles had been employed and which formerly had the appearance of a lake was
completely hidden by debris from the washings of the gold slaims above it,
and not a vestige of one of those five hundred piles could possibly bo
observed. The only trace that there was of a dam having been erected across
the flat was, here and there, a willow tree. Of these some forty or fifty
had been planted by Ur. and Mrs. Reid when the dam was first completed.
Of all the stonework, which was the result of so much labour, across the bed
of the oreek and from which the mill-race started, not anything whatever
was to be seen. All was now submerged by the refuse from the mines above,
and the mill-race completely filled up and its course could hardly be
recognised.
The mill building still stands erect although surrounded by three or four
feet thick of the new deposit from above. A lot of the old machinery inside
is still in a good state of preservation although in many places covered
with sand.
The water wheol from the outside, by which the whole machinery was driven,
still stands in its original position although covered to half its diameter
by debris. And when taking into consideration the fact that this wheel
is seventeen feet in diameter and four feet six inches across, anyone can
imagine the quantity of mullock whioh has been sent down the oreek from
these sluicing claims and consider that the present opposition on the part
of many landowners to have their fields similarly treated is by no means
unreasonable, and on the other hand highly commendable.


The creek itself, which at one time had only one channel and over which
Mr,Reid had built a bridge to connect the mill with the homestead, is now
diverted into four separate streams, and where it formerly ran through a
fine open flat is now covered with gum trees and willows, thus precluding
the delightful view which formerly existed from the house when looking towards
the mill.
It may be mentioned here that during the time the mill was being built also
a stonemason and a carpenter were engaged in the erection of a residence on
opposite side of the creek to the mill on the high land. That residence is
still there and is in the occupation of Mr,Adams who owns the property and
with whom and his good lady, Mr,Reid spent a very pleasant evening on his
visit to Yackandandah, and who was extremely kind in showing Mr .Reid around
the old premises and the mill and from whom he received the photograph of
the mill in its present condition and as it is herein represented on
opposite page.
In conclusion, regarding this old mill, it may have been considered a very
venturesome undertaking to erect anything of the kind in those days, because
the old custom of the use of the steel-mills, universally used at every
station, Mr,Reid had nothing to depend upon but a grist trade, as the wheat
grown in the district at the time was principally grown for home consumption
and not a pound of flour sold to anyone in the district.
There were no farmers in those days and he had to depend wholly and solely
for the grinding of the wheat received from various stations, for which he
received one shilling a bushel for grinding and dressing. But to show how
well he succeeded he had the whole of the trade as far as Taroutta on the
north and Benalla on the south, until some two or three years after a small
steam mill was erected in Albury by a Mr .Heaver just opposite Mate’s old
store and consequently this took away a very considerable part of the trade
on the northern side of the Hume river.
In the year 1847 was made a magistrate for the Colony of New South Wales
which, at that time, included the district of Port Phillip, which was not
divided into a separate colony until some considerable time afterwards. The
bench of magistrates was formed in Albury about that time, being composed
of three, Mr. James Wilson, Mr. Reid and Mr.Heriot, of which Mr. James Wilson
of Tallangatta station was the chairman. The court was held in Albury every
month. Mr. John Roper was the clerk of Petty Sessions, This Mr,Roper had
been one of Leiohardt’s party, who successfully mads an exploring expedition
to Port Essington and who had been severely wounded by the blacks during
the journey. He had lost the sight of one eye in consequence of a severe wound
on his head, the optio nerve having been destroyed, A strange circumstance
occurred in relation to this. Many years after a swelling took place upon
the side of Mr,Roper’s face and he then consulted Dr. Barrett who was then
practising in Albury, He examined him and pronounced that a foreign substance
presented itself. He operated upon it and drew out the point of a blackfellow's
spear. This must have been in his head some seven or eight years before,
at the time of the expedition. Afterwards his health, with the exception
of the loss of an eye, was perfectly recovered.
John Bourke, otherwise known as "Johnny the Postman" was the first to ride
on horseback with a mail on his saddle from Yass to Melbourne, there being
at that time already a mail between Sydney and Yass, He was until very
recently in the Melbourne Post Office, E,B,Green of Boyalong held the
second contract for the mail, and he was the first to carry passengers as


well as the mall in a vehicle.
At the time we have been referring to there wore very heavy floods in
the winter time and the means of communication across the river to Albury
was by a black-fellow's canoe. Mr.S.B,Green, who had the contract for
carrying the mails between Melbourne and Yass, had a blackfellow always
stationed with a large canoe at Wodonga to convey his mails from the Port
Phillip side to Albury. Often Mr. Reid had made use of this mode of
conveyance in going to Albury both on public and private business, and to
show how high floods then were, he has often landed out of these canoes in
the upper part of what is now called Townsend Street in Albury and all that
portion of the lower part of Albury which is now built over afterwards had
four or five feet of water over it. It may very reasonably be asked, if such
was the case in those days why does it not occur now? The reason is plain
at that time there was no Wodonga Creek; after the breaking out of Wodonga
Crook from the main stream every flood added to its depth and width, thereby
acting as an anabranch to the main river and driving the water which formerly
flooded Albury to the southern side. Many other smaller creeks likewise
have been formed, thus diverting the water still more from the Albury side
of the river Hume, Over all at the present time there are good bridges over
which, as also Wodonga Creek, in old times it was all flat land without
any creeks between Wodonga and the river, in fact as an instance, what is
now styled Wodonga Lake was formerly cultivated as a garden by Charles Huon
for vegetables for the use of the station. And Mr. Reid well recollects when
it was so cultivated and soma of the posts of the garden fence are still
said to be seen when the water is low. This, of course, has become a lake
since Wodonga Crook broke out. In thses days people have very little
conception of the dangers and hardships incident to the settlers in thos
times, and often and often has he run the risk of his life in going from
Wodonga to Albury in those canoes to carry out public and private duties.
Those canoes were always navigated by the natives for no white man could have
safely guided them across such an expanse of water as there was to be crossed
between Wodonga and Albury,
In relation to the canoe that was stationed at Wodonga by Mr .Green the maim
contractor, Mr .Reid once went across with Yarrie, the black, in which canoe
the carrying capacity was such that Mr .Robert Wilson, the Mailman (and all
the mail bags, some four or five) including Mr,Reid were all carried
crossing all the smaller streams as well as the Hume River itself in safety.
This is given as an illustration of the size of some of these blaokfellow's
canoes which were used formerly showing how expert they were on the water.
In 1848 Mr, Reid suffered from a severe attack of neuralgia in the chest
and went to Melbourne for advice, and was recommended by Dr,Campbell to
take a trip by sea. While in Melbourne there came round from Sydney the
old "Juno" steamer, owned by Benjamin Boyd & Co, and commanded by Captain
Kersopp. Kersopp, who had been a lieutenant in the Navy but had turned
squatter on Maneroo and was personally known to Mr. Reid in his old Manoroo
days, consequently he thought it would be an excellent opportunity to take
passage with him on his intended voyage to Adelaide. This "Juno" carried
a number of excursionists who were taking a coasting trip round from
Sydney and calling at all the ports along the coast.
The first port reached after leaving the Heads was Port Fairy. The anchor
was cast some distance out. It was a fine day and Mr .William Rutledge,
commonly known as "Terrible Billy", the then king of Port Fairy, and several


other gentlemen cane out in a whale boat. After leaving Port Fairy we
visited Portland and thence by the Backstairs Passage to the Gulf of
St,Vincent and through the north arm to Port Adelaide, The "Juno" being the
largest steamer that had ever attempted to go up this north arm. Captain
Kersopp asked the pilot what depth of water there was on the bar, who
immediately ask 4 in reply "What water do you draw. Captain?". He saidt-
"Fourteen feet". He said "There is just that much water on the bar now.
Put on all steam and wo will carry enough water along with us to carry her
over in safety", which was done, and wo arrived at Port Adelaide in safety
about seven or eight miles further up, Thenoe the passengers were conveyed
in traps to Adelaide, On the journey from the port to the town of Adelaide
upon inquiring of the driver ''Where is the river Torrens?", he said "WhyJ
we’ve crossed it." Mr,Reid exclaimed - "I expected to see a fine river
but there was nothing to be seen but a sandy bed with a little water trickling
through it". We stayed in Adelaide some nine days, during which time
numerous excursions round were made by the passengers of the "Juno", One
trip was made to a silver mine belonging to a Mr,Gillies, known in Adelaide
as the great "G", who was very kind end after an excellent luncheon he showed
them all over the mine and bestowed as many specimens of lead and silver
ore as they liked to take back with them. At that time South Australia was
the only port, except for coal in Newcastle, where there was any mining
in operation. The Burra Burra mine then in its zenith as a very successful
copper mine, but being somewhat above a hundred miles away the time would
not permit such a journey. But they had the opportunity of making an
examination of the ore from the Burra Burra mine at the wharf belonging
to the company whence the ore was shipped. These premises were of very large
dimensions and contained at that time some 40,000 to 50,000 tons of copper
ore all sorted and packed in different stacks ready to be sorted awd bagged
for shipment. Upon enquiry for some specimens as we were • strangers they
said go round and'help yourselves from any of the heaps that you think
proper. Prom which Mr,Reid availed himself and brought away some twenty
pounds weight of various kinds of copper ore, some of which specimens are
now in the Albury Museum, TUhile there, at the company’s wharf, to show the
extraordinary richness of the mine, there could not have been less than two
hundred teams, of eight bullocks each employed in waiting to have the copper
ore they were carrying weighed at the weigh-bridge, each dray being loaded
with from three to four tons of ore.
It was stated upon good authority that many men made themselves comparatively
independent by carrying ore from the mine to the port.
Adelaide appeared to be a very well laid out town although then only in its
infancy, and the scenery around appeared to be very grand. The only
disappointment was in the river, which has no doubt been since remedied, but
of all places Adelaide must have the palm for mosquitoes. A new experience
was presented in the "Juno" which was of wood. Formerly Mr,Reid had been at
sea in iron vessels, TThen he lay in his bunk at right angles the heavy
weather, which, off Capo Northumberland he encountered, he thought when the
vessel was rolling that from the creaking of the timbers she was going to
.pieces, but was told afterwards that that was common to all timber-built
vessels. Still he fully determined never again to venture in a wooden
vessel if he knew it, for it was anything but an agreeable sensation. However
the old "Juno" and her good Captain Kersopp arrived safely back in Melbourne,
Poor fellow, he was, some time afterwards, in coming round from Sydney to


Melbourne as a passenger in a schooner called "The Favorite" lost with all
hands off the coast of Gippsland,
In the Albury district, formerly, there were what were oalledsquatter's
races, from which the general public were prevented from entering horses,
the privilege of entry being confined to station owners* There were several
meetings of this description which were usually held at Mitchell's at
Thargominda, It occurred to Mr* Held that this exclusion was wrong and he
was one among the first that agitated for public races in which the whole
community could participate. The agitation was successful and a club was
formed in Albury of which he was elected President, from which time the
squatter's racesdlod a natural death and public races superceded them. The
same thing occurred also at Wangaratta, although there had not been any
squatter's races there previously* The people in those times appeared to
fraternise to a greater extent than at present, for Wangaratta helped Albury
and Albury helped Wangaratta in all these amusements for the public* And
it was not until after the separation of Port Hiillip from the rest of New
South Wales that any little local jealousies occurred, Mr* Reid thinks,
and possibly some who remember those times can corroborate him that the
very commencement of these bitter feelings between these two colonies were
engendered in the first instance by the accursed border duties and from that
time has been growing*
All fully expected that when the federation of the States took place it
would cure all the petty local jealousies, but from the turn which events
have lately taken in regard to a Federal Capital, it seems that the ashes
of discord have not been put out but euro only smouldering*
Upon Thursday 6th February 1851, commonly called Black Thursday, the whole
of Victoria to the west and also to the south was on fire* On the Saturday
following the great smoke reached us at Yackandandah about 11 o'clock in
the day. The atmosphere suddenly became almost dark, clouds of smoke kept
rolling along as if the whole country around us was on fire. As the day was
fine before it seemed as if something very extraordinary had happened, for
at that time no tidings of ary bush fires being in Victoria had been recei-
ved - there were no telegraphs or telephones in those times. In appearance
it seemed as if there was going to be a great earthquake, but seeing the
clouds of smoke rolling about us Mr, Reid endeavoured to ascertain as a fact
whether the neighbouring country was on fire or not. So he ordered the
stockmen to take his horse and ride down the creek while he himself pro-
ceeded to whore the township of Yackandandah now stands* After riding some
seven or eight miles without any sight of fire being visible, he returned
to the homestead where the stockman had already arrived, who intimated that
he could not discover any fire in the direction where he had ridden. The
still continued and the country was almost in darkness, the wind
still blowing from the south-west* This continued until about four o'clock
in the afternoon, when it gradually cleared off, and not knowing then of any
fires in Victoria we were perplexed at the occurrence* Of course, it was
seme days before intelligence arrived as to the great fires which had
occurred in Victoria*


The smoke rolled away towards Sydney and from accounts received afterwards
reached as far as Yasa, a distance of between four and five hundred miles
from where the conflagration occurred* How much further it reached is not
known; the darkness was so groat that it was impossible to move about the
house without the assistance of candle-light* In speaking about the light-
ing of candles -no oil or kerosene lamps ware in existence, our candles
were made in moulds from the fat of the animals killed for food at the
station* But even this was in advance of the primitive light, for in the
very early days of the original squatters there was nothing but what was
called a slush-lamp, which consisted of on old pint pot half filled with
earth, the upper part being fat with a piece of soft wood with cotton rag
wrapped round it, this piece of cotton rag being well greased before being
wound round the stick which was inserted into the centre of the pint pot in
the earth. This light would last during the whole night, to be replaced by
a fresh stick and rag on the following night. This light acted well in the
old bush huts; it was not easily extinguished by any puffs of wind of which
there were generally plenty in the old slab huts usually erected in the
bush. Ventilation in the habitations then erected was never deficient at
any tine. No doubt M Black Thursday" was a memorable day in Victoria and
to be remembered particularly by those who were unfortunate enough to
inhabit that portion of the country where their homes, their stock and their
lives were endangered and some of their friends and neighbours perished,
buildings burnt and innumerable stock perished.
The excitement that took place upon the discovery of gold in New South Wales
was incredible and the rush of diggers to "Summer-Hill" and the "Turon"
consisted not of hundreds but of thousands • The amount of inconvenience
that was sustained at the time by all the settlers is not easily to bo con-
ceived except by those engaged in agricultural or pastoral pursuits. For
instance two flocks of sheep had to be merged into one to the detriment of
the stock and also to the expense the ona shepherd received double wages,
and then only as a compliment, that ha remained on with the sheep. Cattle
runs did not staffer so much because one man or the owner himself could
attend to a large number, of beats not requiring the same attention as sheep.
The diggings of New South Wales did not affect the settlors to the same
extent as the discovery afterwards in Victoria did, by reason of the distance.
At the time of discovery of gold in Victoria, at lit, Alexander, after it had
boon discovered at Ballarat, and which appeared to influence the Hum®
district more particularly than oven Ballarat had done, the reason for
which it is difficult to explain except perhaps that the shallow sinking
probabljr influenced more station hands than the deeper mining at Ballarat
had done. The sheep were being shorn at the wool-shed on the same spot tui
was afterwards known as the "Wool—shed Diggings" and from which it was so
oalled. It required all the persuasion possible to keep the men from leav-
ing on masse, and it was only by a promise given "by Mr, Reid to soao of the
leading men who hod great influence with the rest that if they would only
stay and finish the shearing ho himself would piok out a party at his own
expense and proceed with them to Mb, Alexander diggings. Upon those
conditions they agreed to stop and complete the shearing which they did.


During these alterations Mr* Reid happened to say that, which afterwards
turned out to bo prophetic, "You are a parcel of fools to run off to Mfc,
Alexander for you have more gold under your foot than ever was there".
Their answer was "there is too much granite hero for gold". Of course
when the observation was made there was no expectation of gold being found
on the Woolshod or in its vicinity, it was said in joke. Although not
having a desire for a digger’s life himself, it, Reid kept his promise to
these men, proceeding to Melbourne he fitted out a party of some four
or five of the shearers with whom afterwards he proceeded to Mfc, Alexander,
During tho time, previous to going to Mfc, Alexander, the Bendigo diggings
had broken out but were known only to a few persona. But a Mr, Shields
who had formerly bean a superintendent for It, George faithful at Wongar-
atta and who was known to it, Reid, had just come down from Mfc, Alexander
and had been whoro this new discovery had been made at Bendigo, and ho
strongly advised us to go to Bendigo Creek* Had we done so more than
likely wo should have been among the first fortunate diggers there, but we
were so far impressed with tho reports from Mfc, Alexander that we were
determined to proceed there instead of Bendigo where it is said that more
than & pound’s weight of gold had been washed from a tin dish of surface
earth upon Eagle Hawk Gully,
While staying in Ms 1 bourne a singular circumstance occurred to him whilst
riding down Bourke Street upon an old favourite station horse, and heard
someone in the street calling out, and on pulling up to ascertain who it
was, to his astonishment this was an old shepherd who had loft him upon the
first rush to Ballarat soma three months before named MoClinsoy and who
had just come down from Mfc, Alexander, After saluting he said "Mr, Reid,
will you sell the old horse?" "Oh, yes, MoLlnsey, if I get money enough,"
"What do you want for him, bridle and saddle as he now stands?" The thought
passed through M r , Reid’s mind to ask such a price as would preclude any
further bargaining about the horse, being a favourite he did not wish to
part with it, so he said "my price is fifty guineas". His answer was
"jump off. Here you are i Here’s the fifty guineas for you"j put & hand in
his pocket, pulled out a roll of notes and paid the fifty guineas down.
Mr, Reid then asked him if he had done well at tho diggings. He said "Yes,
I make over five hundred pounds in a few weeks at Mfc, Alexander", He than
got on his horse and rode off, When this became known to tho rest of the
party they were all the more eager to get to the gold fields, A horse and
dray hod been brought to Melbourne from the station near Wangaratta
because it was stated that all modes of conveyance had been taken up in
Melbourne and it was impossible to procure any means of transit in conse-
quence, Purchases were made in Melbourne for all the requisites for 4
digger’s equipment and although new it might be considered very simple
was then thought ample for the purpose. It consisted of a oradle, picks,
shovels, tin-dishes, tent and cooking utensils, together with a supply of
flour, tea and sugar, boaf and mutton wore said to be plentiful on tho
diggings and such wo found to bo tho case as there wore butcher's shops and
stores in all directions.
The journey from Melbourne to Mfc, Alexander by the Deop Creek wore an old
acquaintance known as Tulip Wright, tho first Chief Constable in Melbourne
who was then the landlord of tho hotel at tho oroek.


Mr, Reid became acquainted with him from circumstance which occurred when
he was in Melbourne in 1839 with fat stock. One morning while stopping at
the Old Lamb Itui in Collins Street, where Scott's Hotel now stands, the
servant girl told him that someone wanted to see him. He went and found this
man to be Mr .Wright, the Chief Constable of Melbourne, It was then about
eight in the morning. He said:- "are you Mr,Reid?" I said "Yes". He then said
"I have two of your men in the watch-house," "Have you ?" "Yes, they were
in for drunkenness last night. Drunk and kicking up a row, I suppose you
do not want to lose them or have them punished ?", He answered - "Ho,
Mr. Wright, I do not, I gave them their liberty after bringing the cattle
down and I have no wish to see them punished". He said :- "I thought not.
That is the reason I have called upon you before the court opens, which
will not bo before ten o'clock and I thought it would bo better to settle
it before," I said "Oh, certainly i Here's a oouple of pounds to pay
any fine or expenses. Please send them up to me".
The Watch-house was then within a stone • s throw from the Lamb Inn and ten
minutes afterwards the men made their appearance, Mr, Reid warned them
then and told them to go at once to the camp which was then at the Merrie
Creek, At the time it appeared very kind on the part of Mr, Wright as it
would have been a very serious inoonvehlenco to have lost the services of
these men as they were assigned servants and might have been flogged and
detained for a considerable time.
To resume the Journey from the Deep Creek t- Progress was made by easy
stages and through the Blaok Forest, afterwards celebrated as the scene of
stfcking-up and murder and robbing constantly recurring. All along the
route from Melbourne to Mb, Alexander the scene presented a most extraord-
inary appearance; it seemed in the day time like one long continuous street
occupied by conveyances of every description and people travelling in every
manner possible, with their various belongings, bullock-drays, horse-drays
paok-horses, and trucks and wheelbarrows carried along drown by both men and
women. At night time looking from the camp either towards the way back-
wards as well as forwards there was presented the extraordinary appearance
of a long line of fires.
When Kyneton was reached, i,e, where the township of Kyneton now stands,
there was a public house kept by a Mr. T, Tolmie, and who was one who
formerly kept another house up the Goulbum whore Seymour now is. On
calling in he was very communicative as to the diggings and also, ccement-
ing upon many matters, which were afterwards found to be of great use.
Before obtaining an interview with Mr, Tolmie it was necessary in the first
instance to push one's way through a crowd of soma four or five hundred
diggers who were going and coming in front of the house. This endeavour
to pass through the crowd in front of the house appeared impossible, but by
good luok Mr. Tolmie happened to recognise Mr, Reid and made signals to
him to proceed to the b&ok of the house, which he did and there met him and
took him into his own private parlous where, after a long conversation about
old times, he gave some very useful Information about the diggings.


Wo then proceeded thence to Forest Creek where, at that time, the Gold
Commissioner's camp was situate. The first operation necessary was to take
out a "Digger's licence M for the party, which amounted at that time to
thirty shillings per month for each man. Now with regard to the licences
which were heavy in a pecuniary sense but not the least of the many incon-
veniences which diggers had to endure, for the regulations then wore vexy
strict and one hardly knew xvhother ho was breaking through them or not, and
the mode of their enforcement was still more arbitrary and perplexing. For
instance t- you had to carry your license in your pocket, whether you were
working or otherwise, and should it happen that you met any member of the
police force attached to the Gold Commissioner, of which there were a
considerable number, and he demanded to see your licence which might have
been left for safety in your tent, no excuse that you might advance would
prevent him from arresting you, marching you off to the camp where you were
fastened to a long chain which was secured with staples into two gum trees
and of sufficient length to be able to secure some thirty or forty other
prisoners. There you had to abide until it suited the convenience of the
powers controlling the gold field to be brought before the Gold Commissioner
charged with having no licence.
Fortunately Mr .Raid never had this experience himself personally, but such
was the case with many others, some being detained for from ten to twenty
hours handcuffed to this chain. It is easy to conceive the indignation of
men who had not committed any offence against the laws of the land being
placed in such an ignominious position, handcuffed to a chain like an
ordinary felon, exposed to all the inclemency of the weather and the
observation of all passers-by, when at the same time they had actually
conformed to the payment of their thirty shillings a month, although the
evidence was not about their persons.
TOien appearing before the Gold Commissioner they were generally dealt with
in a most summary manner, no excuse being taken as to having their licence
at the camp not forthcoming. They were immediately fined, sometimes to the
extent of five pounds, for being on the gold-fields without a licence.
There can be no doubt that the laws of the gold-fields were exceedingly
arbitrary and the way in which they were administered conduced to make them
still more aggravating. This was only one of the many grievances which the
diggers had to complain of and which afterwards, no doubt, was the cause of
celebrated Ballarat riots.
TOion this party arrived at Forest Creek after looking around they took up a
claim but before starting work they had to arrange as to who should bo tho
tent keeper and cook, and it was allotted to Mr,Reid to occupy that position
as least liable to hard work. But he found that though there was no hard work
attached to the occupation of tent-keeper and cook, it was anything but
an agreeable occupation. The first essay in cooking after buying a log of
mutton from tho butcher who oame round regularly with a tray on his chouldor
on horseback, was anything but a success. He put this Joint into a camp
oven, placed it upon the fire in front of the tent, heaped hot ashes on the
top and thero left it for an hour and a half or two hours. Thinking it must
then be cooked he removed the lid of the comp oven and to his astonishment,
instead of seeing a leg of mutton nioely cooked, he sow something like a
black round ball, resembling a cinder.


There was alongside the tent another party of diggers who also came from
the neighbourhood of Wangoratta, and some of whom were well known to him.
One of the name of Parker had his wife with him and she was their cook
tont-teoper, Just as this mishap with the leg of mutton occurred
Mrs. Farter, who was passing at the time and say; the result of the experi-
ment, had a hearty laugh at the result, but kindly offered, if another log
was brought, to see that it was properly cooked, which was done and she
then superintended its being properly cooked and afterwards gave him great
assistance in his capacity of cook and tent keeper. However, he was so
dissatisfied with the position that he determined, upon the first oppor-
tunity, to resign the office, and, a man whom he had known on the
River happened to come past. He had formerly been a hut-keeper at Robert’s
station on the Mitta-Mitta and seemed to be out of work, although on the
diggings. So Mr. Reid said to him "Mick, do you want a job?” He replied
"What is it Mr, Reid?" He said "To cook and tent-keep"; he said "All
right, what wages will you give me? 11 Knowing him to be a thoroughly
competent man, and anything in the way of wages was very high on the diggilngs
he said "three pounds a week". He said "All right, I will take it". It
may be mentioned here that an account of all expenses was kept so that any
and all payments had to be deducted before any division took place at the
settling up, but Mr. Reid paid this man's wage out of his own pocket, as he
relieved him from the duties to which he was appointed. He then determined
to work and take his shift in turn with the rest of the party at digging.
The party had already some two or three claims bottomed without finding any
gold upon what was then known as Red Hill on Forest Creek, So, hearing
some very good accounts about Fryer’s Creek across the range, we determined
to go there and take up a claim. The camp was not struck but was left
where it was, but it required a walk of about from two to two and a half
miles to reach the claim every morning. It was situate in Spring Gully
where large quantities of gold had been found. The claim was close to the
main road between FVyer’s Creek to Forest Creek over which there was much
traffic, as Spring Creek was destitute of water and all the wash-dirt was
conveyed from thence to Forest Creek to be cradled for the gold. Many a
jeer they received from those passing along, asking if we were going to
mate & paddock, l,e, a place to deposit the wash dirt. The reason for doing
so was that the usual system had not been followed, which was generally a
small round or oblong shaft, but in this instance we had determined to take
down a large square shaft seme twelve feet square. This was an idea of
Mr, Reid's own, and much against the inclination of one of the party of the
name of Kenion, This Kenion had originally been digging in California and
who wont from the Ovrens to the fVisco diggings ontheir first opening, or,
rather, the news of it. Naturally he was looked to for advice which the
rest, as new hands, were unacquainted with. But after Mr, Reid joined the
working party he soon found that this man was of & very restloss dispos-
ition and was not imbued with much perseverance. For instance, after two
or throe shafts had been sunk at Forest Creek and no gold being found at
bottom, ho immediately despaired of finding any gold there, and then changed
to a fresh place to repeat the same thing again. Of course in these shafts
which had been already deserted gold might have been close to the shaft on
either side, but he appeared to have no idea of driving. Therefore, when
wo went over to JVyar’s Creek wo determined to take this large square blook
down, so as to enable then when they bottomed the shaft to drive round in
every direction, hence it was that many persons passing by frequently


observed to us "You chaps will have tho banks down upon you directly and
you will all be smothered," thinking the traffic along the road would so
shake tho earth that the ground would fall in and smother us, When this
claim was twelve feet deep they bottomed on the rock, Kenion then said,
"This is another duffer", and wo had better look out for another claim".
Mr .Reid then said "If we go on in this way sinking holes and because we
cannot find gold on the bottom deserting them, we may go on for ever unless
it is by the merest chance. We have sunk this claim for the express purpose
to enable us to drive all around and see if there is any gold in the
neighbourhood". He replied, "I will not drive." Some high words passed, so
much so that at last Mr,Reid told him "If you do not go out of the claim I
will knock you down with this pick”. He then left and went to his tent -
this happened early in the morning.
Mr .Reid then determined to drive from one comer of the shaft towards tho
road, and on driving about two feet discovered a run of gold in slate rock.
He was working in this drive himself and can hardly describe his excitement
when after a blow with the pick he saw what he conceived to be a large
nugget of gold staring him in the face. But upon closer acquaintance found,
much to his disappointment, it was a long shaped piece of gold weighing
about 2ig ounces. Not long before in this same gully a Chinaman had obtained .
a nugget of 50 pounds weight from a claim which had been deserted. It was
found in a sort of pillar that had been left, and upon the nugget itself
there was the mark of the point of the pick showing how nearly it had been
missed by the original claim-holders. During the next two hours after this
ounce nugget had been unearthed he picked out with a butcher's knife
some 30 ounces of gold, all in small nuggets. Then wash dirt was sent up to
the cart which was alongside the claim and carted to Forest Creek to be washed.
This Mr,Kenion, who had gone over to tho tent in the morning and to whom
Mr,Reid sent word by the man to take the horse and cart over, the result of
the morning's work, requesting him with the aid of the man with the cart to
put through the cradle the cart load of wash dirt so as to ascertain what
fine gold there was in this comer pocket, on returning heme to the tent at
night we found that the result of the washing from the load of dirt was very
satisfactory, some forty ounces of gold having been obtained from it.
Upon continuing to work this claim they eventually obtained some six or seven
hundred pounds worth of gold from it. After having been a month on the
Mr,Reid determined that he would not remain there any longer him-
self as he did not like the manner of a digger's life and, having stations
as well as his family to look after, he was satisfied that any advantage that
he might obtain in searching for gold would be more than a loss to him in
other directions and no compensation for his absence. So ho informed the
rest of the party of his intention to return home. They, however, determined
to remain another three months and in this his brother John Reid also
determined on remaining, Mr .Reid then returned to Melbourne in a butcher's
spring cart which took some three uncomfortable days for the journey, but
for which he paid five pounds. There were no coaches then on the road to
Mb,Alexander,
The rest of the party, together with Mr. Reid's brother did not get much gold but
remained for the remainder of the three months. Most of them afterwards
returned to Wangaratta and some of them did remarkably well when tho diggings
broke out afterwards at the Ovens,


After his return home to Yackandandah, he determined to take Mrs,Reid and the
children down on a visit to her mother Mrs,Barber at Glenrock in Argylo
New South Wales, where they arrived after a pleasant journey of seven or
eight days on the road. While at Mt. Alexander it was plain to see that
before long there would bo a great demand both for horses and working
bullocks for the conveyance of goods and passengers to the gold fields, and
he therefore determined that before long he would enter the speculation of
purchasing both horses and working bullocks in Now South Wales where they could
b© obtained at a moderate cost and then take them across to the Victorian
markets. But before doing so ho had made up his mind to return to the station
and make arrangements accordingly, which he did. On return to the stations '
another circumstance happened which justified the opinion he had formed
already of the groat demand that would immediately occur in the cost of all
animals suitable for the means of transit, namely the breaking out of the
Ovens diggings.
Perhaps it ought to have been mentioned before, or probably some readers may
say it need not to have been mentioned at all, nevertheless, it is here
narrated that in the beginning of the year 1848 Mr. Reid, being in Melbourne •
with some of his fat stock, and was stopping, as was usual with him, at
Mortimer's Crown Hotel, Mr,Reid had known Mr,Mortimer the landlord for some
years, and he being aware of his (Mr. Raid's) being engaged in large pastoral
pursuits on the Ovens, mentioned to him that a young gentloman, who had
recently arrived from Bradford in Yorkshire, who was also staying there,
intended to enter into the wool trade, and had brought out with him some very
high testimonials as to abilities for the assortment and classification of
wool and also his family were personally known to him in the old country
years before. He said his name was a Mr.Goldsborough and he would be very
happy to introduce him at breakfast the next morning, and asked, as a favour,
if he liked him, to give him a turn at the sorting and classification of
the next clip of his wool. Accordingly the next morning Mr.Goldsborough
was introduced by Mr,Mortimer, Afterwards a long conversation occurred and
his capabilities were made manifest, in every respect, consequently Mr .Reid
promised him his next clip of wool. It was then the custom to have your wool
sorted and repacked in Melbourne so as to make it more saleable in the London
market, there being no such thing as a Colonial wool sale in those days, the
credit of which becoming instituted belongs entirely to the enterprise and
execution of Richard Goldsborough and the gigantic proportions which it has
now assumed, enticing as it does purchasers from all parts of the world
began originally by the induction of Mr,Goldsborough, Thus the introduction
commenced Mr .Reid's acquaintance with a man who made himself so universally
known and respected throughout the whole of Australia, Tasmania and New
Zealand besides the whole woollen trade in every part of the world, known
afterwards as the great house of Goldsborough, Mort & Co. of Ifelbourne
and Sydney,
Soma time after the lamented death of Goldsborough, Mr. Reid received through
another old friend of his, Mr.Horsfall, who had been intimately connected
with Mr.Goldsborough in the olden times, a gold medal, the transcript of the
inscription upon which will speak for itself,j-
T°*“ A memento of his having been
David Reid Esq, the first wool constituent of
the late Richard Goldsborough,
1848.


ilany reports have been from time to time reported as to the way in which
these Ovens diggings were in the first instance discovered, but it is
thought that the real facts of the discovery can be here narrated from one
of the actual participators in the finding of the first gold workings in
the Ovens District, It may be premised that all the first gold workings
upon the Ovens were found upon the runs of Mr,Reid in the first instance
and afterwards upon the run of his brother.
He happened to be over at his station at Woragee, when one evening two
men with their swags came up to the station and requested to be allowed
to stop for the night, which was of course acceded, and during the evening,
upon entering into conversation with these men, who appeared to be very
respectable men, they said they had been working with Mr,Smyth the surveyor
in the mountains, and as he had concluded his survey and was coming in to
the settled districts to work up his notes, he had discharged all his men
including themselves and that their intentions were to go to the diggings,
as they had been old Californian diggers, and said that they were satisfied
from the appearance of the country in and around Woragee that the country
was auriferous and that they would like very much to have a few days
prospecting in and around the district, but that they had neither the
necessary rations or tools to do so. Having had a turn at digging himself
Mr. Reid could easily see what it was they required and he therefore told
them he would furnish all the requisites if they liked to prospect for a few
days, and with this an agreement was made to supply to them sufficient rations
and the necessary outfit for mining. An hour or so after his conversation, one
of his shepherds, a man of the name of Howell came to him and asked permission
to accompany these two men to show them the country, they being strangers,
while ho knew the neighbourhood well as he had been shepherding over it, and
stating that his wife would take charge of his flock of sheep during his
absence. To this Mr. Reid agreed.
On the following morning the three men started upon their prospecting tour
and wore away some two or three days. On their return they reported to
Mr. Reid that they had found gold, a good prospect of gold, on what was
afterwards called "Spring Creek" and where the town of Beeohworth now stands,
but which was then known as the Sandy Forest where there was a sheep-station
hut and sheep there not long before. From what they said it appeared that
they had stopped in this sheep-station hut all night and on the following
day they determined to prospect the bed of the creek which was Just opposite
to the hut, which they did, and found in their prospecting dishes that there
was good gold, a sample of which they produced to Mr. Reid upon their return.
They wished, of course, to keep the discovery as quiet as was possible, so
as to enable them to reap the fruit of their find. This party of throe
continued to work together and were afterwards known as Howell's party, but
this discovery of gold in Spring Croek was not alone, for the same party
afterwards discovered gold on Reid's creek, on a subsequent occasion.
Although the discovery of Spring Creek was kept as secret as possible, rumour
end the breath of gold soon spread the news that gold had been discovered
and parties from Wangaratta and from Albury made their appearance upon the
ground. For come considerable time those who were working on Spring Creek
wore, as it seemed, people of the neighbourhood, for it was hard to convince
a number of those who had been accustomed to dig in a slate and quartz
country that there could be any gold in a country which appeared altogether


composed of a granite formation. However it soon became a fact beyond
dispute that those were doing well who were working on Spring Creek, and
hence a rush took place not only from the Victorian side but also from
New South Wales,
Before the great rush to Reid's creek occurred Mr,Reid’s brother John and
himself were riding up the creek from the wool-shed towards the place
where the rush afterwards took place at Reid’s Creek when, in a little gully
near the Junction with the rocky oroek they saw a party of diggers at work,
who, seeing them riding up, one of them was observed to conceal a pint pot
under a bank. To Mr. Reid’s astonishment he found this to be Howell's party.
So ho said "HulloJ You have soon shifted your quarters". They said;- "Yes,
there are too many now on Spring Creek; too much of a rush", Mr .Reid then
said;- "How are you doing here?" They said "Only Just middling" and
produced a prospect of some two or three ounces of gold, Mr. Reid said:-
"is that all you have got here?" They said "Yes", Mr. Reid then said "What
have you got in your pint pot that you have put under the bank?". They
then began to laugh. Mr. Reid said "Let's look at it and see. You have got
more gold than what you have shown to us". They then produced the pint pot
which was about two thirds full of very finely grained gold, and as a pint
pot was known to hold about sixteen pounds weight of gold, there could not
have been less than twelve pounds in weight of gold in this pint pot.
Mr. Reid then said "I think you are doing pretty well". They then begged of
us to keep the discovery quiet at possible, but it was not long before the
great rush took from Spring Creek to Reid’s Creek which wq» proved to be
one cf the richest of the diggings found in the colony.
It has been stated by old experienced .American diggers and vrtio had been
both in California and Mexico and Ballarat, Bendigo and Clunes that they
considered that without exception Reid's Creek was the richest spot of gold
ever discovered in the world. Hardly a claim on Reid’s Creek could be
called, in digger's language, a differ.
It is easy to understand the conclusion these men came to as Mr. Reid was
himself a gold-buyer on Reid's Creek and often bought from various parties
of minors for a week's washing up from £5OO to £lOOO worth of gold, in some
cases much more, and the following is an instances- vis. Brown and party
had a claim Just opposite the old sheep station hut on Reid's Creek and at
that time he had a small store, more for the purchase of gold than anything
else. He had paid Brown's party for their week’s washing up as much as
£9OOO for their gold and when the then price given for gold at that time was
only £2.17, 0 an ounce it is easy to conceive the quantity required to make
up that sum, mr.Reid paid that party, during the time they were working their
four-men's claims, over £40,000 for the gold taken out of that claim by
them. This is only one instance of the extraordinary richness of the ground
on Reid's Creek, but there were many others besides this; it seemed to be
a whole pocket of gold for some two miles in length and about a quarter of
a mile in width, and easily obtainable, the sinking being very shallow and
the gold almost from the surface. Near the bed of the creek the water was
troublesome but oould be kept under by the use of a common pump.
After Reid's Creek broke out the Woolshed diggings became the scene of a
similar rush. Here, however, they had to employ steam driven pumps to keep
the water down and hence it required men with some capital to conduct the
mining operations. Hence the term "Woolshed Bosses",


One of the chief men of these Woolshed Bosses was Jack Johnston, who
was well known to Mr. Reid, having worked as a boy on the old Maneroo
stations and travelled with the sheep to the Ovens in the year 1840, He
was on the Ovens for years and looking after the sheep over this same
ground on the Woolshed Creek where he afterwards amassed a fortune. He
only left Mr,Reid when the diggings first broke out in Victoria but returned
to the Ovens when the diggings broke out there. Although Johnston accumulated
a fortune on the Woolshed diggings, of between £40,000 and £50,000 he lost
it all afterwards in the quartz reefing, and Mr .Reid met him some years
afterwards in Beechworth when he said he was then as poor a man as when
he went to the Woolshed first as a digger, that he had lost most of his
money in quartz speculations.
It is now some two years ago when an account of his death appeared in a
Sydney newspaper.
These Woolshed bosses were men of great influence in their time, and
wealthy besides, so much so that they wore the men who had the horse shod
with gold that carried their member Mr,Cameron from the Woolshed into
Beechworth, the horse belonged to a Circus proprietor named Brown,
As a curious circumstance connected with this woolshed, which was built
by Mr. Reid himself and his brothers in 1844:- The position of its situation
being approximately at the boundary of his own run and the run of his
brothers, and was used by them mutually at shearing time. At about a year
after the woolshed had been erected they sank a well close to the end of the
woolshed for the purpose of obtaining cold water during the shearing. This
well was only nine feet in depth, the water was plentiful and had been
drawn from this well from the year 1845 up to the breaking out of the Ovens
diggings, no one having any idea of the riches which were below. After the
Woolshed diggings broke out a claim was taken out upon this very spot,
including this identical well, and at fifteen feet sinking gold was struck.
It had previously been flunk to a depth of nine feet, so that the additional
fathom found gold, and fifteen pounds weight of gold was taken out of this
claim. This, however, was only considered as a poor claim in comparison
with many others round about, in fact, all over that part, which afterwards
was known as Spring Creek, Reid's Creek, Woolshed, Sebastopal and El Dorado
all upon the run of Mr .Reid and the run of his brothers they had for years
been travelling over gold most prolifically dispersed without the slightest
suspicion of its existence there.
Cne circumstance did occur before the actual discovery was made, and which
after the discovery actually occurred was brought to mind, it was thist-
A man who was employed by Mr,Reid's brothers, and commonly known by the
name of "Paddy the Postman 11 who was accustomed to go to and from the head
station on the Ovens river to the sheep-stations on the Woolshed and
El Dorado (as it was afterwards called) and after the discovery of gold
at Ballarat and Bendigo, he brought in a parcel of black sand (as it was
called at that time) and what he considered to bo gold mixed with it.
At the time we ridiculed the idea, not knowing what this black sand really
was or that which was mixed with it, but pronounced it at onoe only mica.
Consequently no further notice was taken of it, but after-events seemed
to show that this man's idea was correct. This was found on the actual


Woolshed Creek which afterwards proved so very rich in tin and gold,
for this black sand was nothing else but tin ore, stream tin, now worth
20 pence per pound or £l6O per ton, now £2OO per ton.
During the time he was gold buying he had a habit of going round where
the men wore putting their wash-dirt through a cradle and made a large
collection of different stones thrown out from the cradle, some of which
turned out to be of considerable value. Many of these were brought to
Melbourne and out by Spinks the lapidary, then in Collins Street, and which
he pronounced to be topaz, cairngorm, sapphire, some of these latter very
beautiful, cornelians and agates of various colours and some exceedingly
elegant. The quality of the gold was of the very highest standard. At the
present time there are thousands of these stones among the debris at the
Reid’s creek and the Woolshed, and which some day it will be thought worth
while to be looked for and collected.
About this time Mr .Reid had for various reasons made up his mind to sell his
station for he could plainly see from the influx of population in that
particular part that the day of the squatter was over when there was something
like a population of some 30,000 people occupying the centre of the run with
all the necessary traffic required to supply such a population, with some
hundreds of horses and working bullocks turned out constantly upon the run.
It was quite easy to see the chance of keeping stock adjoining or intermixed
would bo an utter impossibility. Besides the quantity of grass that these
animals, belonging to the diggers, consumed, left the country like a desert
and as the principal part of the gold fields was situated on his particular
run he had to bear the full brunt arid inconvenience incident to the diggers
depasturing their cattle in the immediate neighbourhood and more particularly
the carriers and others.
About this time, before he sold out, gold was found in the Yackandandah
creek near where the town of Yackandandah now stands at the bottom of Osborne's
Gap, through which he, Mr,Reid, had made a road many years before going from
his head station at Yackandandah to the sheep-stations at Woragee and Reid's
Creek. The first men who found gold at Yackandandah were a man named Carroll,
with his son working at the bottom of this Osborne's Gap, This fact is
merely related to prove who were the first persons to make the actual discovery
of gold at Yackandandah.
During the time of the great rush to Spring Creek and Reid’s Creek many
cases of sticking-up and murder occurred, one case in particular Mr,Reid
had stopped all night at his station at Woragee, proceeding the next morning
from thence to the homestead at Yackandandah, At the top of Osborne's Gap
ho met a party of .Americans going to Rei's Creek diggings, who stated that
there was a man lying murdered in the bed of the little creek running down
the gap, and they said that the man had his throat out and had been shot in
the head, and was lying on his back, and the water just running over him,
with a saddle placed across his chest, that they had nailed a piece of paper
upon a tree just opposite to where the body lay, which I would see upon the
side on proceeding down the road. Going down the road he found the paper
and also the dead man as they had described. He appeared to have been a young
mem about seventeen or eighteen, who was afterwards identified as George Stone
who with his brother-in-law had. been digging at Reid's Creek.


They had heard of the gold discovery at Yaokandandah and he was proceeding
thither to ascertain the particulars of the alleged find when he must
been mot by the same party of bushrangers who murdered Marcus on the same
day a few hours before. This happened upon a Sunday and Marcus's body was
not discovered until the following Thursday, It seems that Marcus and his
wife camped at the mill'at Yaokandandah. He was what was calle a bum-boat
man and had his cent and an immense puncheon of rum which he was selling
at a good figure and intending to proceed to the diggings. During his stay
at the mill three men rode up, called for something to swig, on the same
Sunday morning, and asked Marcus if he had a horse he would swap, as one of
theirs was very tired. He said:- no, he could not do anything of the kind
as ho had only two horses which drew his trap. They then left and proceeded
along the road to where Yaokandandah is now and which at that time was the
main road to the main Ovens digging.
Soma little time after their departure from the mill Marcus, knowing that
his two horses were feeding on the flat over a small range from the mill
and on the main road these man were travelling and having some suspicions
of them that they were not altogether "right” as it was called in those days,
determined to follow after and see that his horses were safe when he found *
one of the horses gone and a knocked-up horse in its place. So he immediately
took his other horse and followed on after overtaking these three men about
a mile before reaching Osborne's gap. Near where there was a steep wattle
gully was camped a Mr. Davis, a watchmaker in Goulburn in New South Wales,
who was going to Reid's creek, and who was to a certain extent cognizant*
of what took place at the interview that occurred between Marcus and these
three men, which he related at the inquest which was afterwards held on the
body of Marcus,
Ho said he heard an altercation between them, that Marcus demanded the
restoration of his horse, to which these men only laughed, and said :-"You
want payment, do you?" One of them, seizing the reins of his horse urging
the horse forwards at the same time saying:— "We will soon pay you for the
horse, come on," He then heard Marcus praying and beseeching to be released,
but they would not, but one on each side with a pistol to his head compelled
him to go over the hill.
Davis stated also, that it was some ten minutes or so after ho had lost sight
of them over the hill, that ho heard a shot fired, and in a few minutes
afterwards these same three men passed him and went along the road towards
Osborne's Gap, No doubt the same morning they mot young Stone, and thinking,
no doubt, as he was coming away from the diggings and probably had gold in
his possession, stopped him. It was said ho had some gold with him, anyway,
they murdered him and placed his body in the creek, Mr .Reid was himself
present at the inquest held upon Marcus, and ho had seen the body out down
from the tree to which it had been tied. It seems that those men had tied
him with his back to the tree, a horse halter round his neck with a running
noose through the end over a small branch above, thereby strangling the man,
and then shot him through the centre of the forehead with a shot from & *
revolver.
Ode can easily conceive what a state the body must have been in from
remaining there from Sunday to Thursday in a hot summer sun. He was buried
at the foot of the tree where ho had been found, it being impossible to


move the body, the inquisition having viewed the body on the scene of the
raui-der, Mr .Reid being the foreman of the jury at this inquest, and the
coroner was Dr. Green who had come from "May-day Hills", afterwards known
as Beechworth which was the headquarters of all the Government officials,
comprising Gold Commissioners, Officers of Police, the Police force and
many other Government Officials, too numerous to mention - in fact their
name was legion. It was also the starting point for the Gold Escort which
every week escorted thousands of ounces of gold from thence to Melbourne,
During the time that Mr. Reid was gold buying on Reid’s Creek, a scene
occurred which left an indelible impression on his memory, namely:— the
hunting of a Commissioner off the diggings. It occurred in this manner.
A dispute arose between some diggers as to the ownership of a claim. Of
course an appeal was made to the Commissioner at "May-day Hills", who was
a Mr.Smyth, He had been formerly a Crown Lands Commissioner at Benalla,
and been placed in that position by the Government owing to his knowledge
of the country. His appointment as Gold Commissioner was only temporary,
for he was afterwards succeeded by Captain Matthew Price, When this dispute
came before Mr.Smyth, ho ordered the Sub—commissioner named Meyer to proceed
to Reid’s Creek to decide this dispute which ho did, and he was escorted
by two mounted troopers, TThen he arrived at the claim he found two men at
work in it; these were the men who had disputed the right of the others to
the ground. He immediately, in a very peremptory manner ordered these two
men to leave the claim, which they refused, point blank, to do. They said
the claim was theirs and they intended to continue to hold it. He then
ordered the two constables to go down into the claim and arrest these two
men for refusing to obey the order of the Gold Commissioner. This claim
being situated in the thickest part of the diggings and the dispute being
known to many, attracted the notice of hundreds of diggers, who congregated
all round to the number of at least a thousand at the time.
One of these policemen proceeded to execute the orders which had been given
and descended the claim which was only some nine or ten feet deep, with
stops on one side to go down, he having his revolver in his hand in proceeding
down the steps slipped and the revolver going off, shot one of the men in
the claim, dead. At once there was a regular furore created and the
impression which took possession of the diggers was that the Commissioner
had ordered this man to be shot. And as Commissioner Meyer was not a
favourite amongst the diggers, it required very little to stir up anger
against him. The shout went rounds- "Pull him off his horse. Hang him J
Down with the Commissioner", He, seeing how events had turned out, thought
discretion the better part, and turned his horse's head to the crossing place
of the creek (the only crossing place) followed by some four or five hundred
infuriated diggers, some of whom endeavoured to out him off before reaching
the creek, stones and other missiles being thrown after him, one of which
struck hie head and Icaocked off his Commissioner’s gold laced cap. However,
he was successful in reaching the head camp at May-Day-Hills,
After the escape of the Commissioner, the rage of the diggers was transferred
to the mounted trooper who had accidently shot the man in the claim, and he
was so severely handled, kicked, ouffed and knocked about, that he became
insensible. Some wanted to hang him, but there were some of better


principles and feelings who prevented them from doing so, by reasoning
with the others that it was only an accident on the Policeman’s part and
that if any blame was to be attached, it was to the Commissioner for
ordering him down into the claim.
The man was then taken to Dr, Keating’s tent and from thence, afterwards to
headquarters at May Day Hills to be attended by the Government surgeon, but
he never recovered and died shortly after. The man who was shot in the
claim was said to have been a married man with a wife and two children.
He was well known and had a large party of friends, hence the great excite-
ment occasioned by his being shot. On the following day Mr, Smyth the Chief
Commissioner came down from headquarters to Reid’s Creek to hold an inquest
into what had occurred on the previous day. Upon it being known that the
Commissioner was caning an immense concourse of diggers assembled on the
spot where the late calamity had occurred. In a very pompous manner he rode
in amongst this two or three thousand diggers, accompanied by two or three
mounted troopers. Then sitting on his horse he made a sort of speech upon
the improprietry of the conduct of the miners on the day before to the
Commissioner and used the expression "Rebels” and other appellations,
designated to arouse their anger. Shouts went out directly "Pull the
Commissioner off his horse", "Make him apologise". Commissioner, seeing
how things were likely to turn, very wisely retracting his words and spoke
in a more conciliatory manner to the diggers, and although he was accom-
panied by three or four polioemen he could plainly see it was utterly
impossible to overawe these miners with force, because the whole body of
these diggers was well armed. These diggers gave Mr, Smyth to understand
there and then that if ever Commissioner Meyer showed himself again upon
Reid's Creek they would hang him as they considered he was instrumental in
causing this death in the claim, Mr, Commissioner Smyth then returned
quietly to the headquarters camp at May Day Hills, However, there was an
enquiry instituted by the Government into the conduct of Mr, J&yer, which
resulted in his being relieved of his duties as a Commissioner,
Mr, Reid decided upon soiling his station. Before doing so he determined
to take a trip to Goulburn to see his family which he did. While there the
thought occurred to him that it would bo a very opportune time to purchase
horses and bullocks for the Melbourne market. He accordingly did so having
associated with him Mr, Frederick Moore, who afterwards became his brother-
in-law, They then purchased some one hundred and thirty working bullocks
and twenty draught horses. At that time both bullocks and horses were
cheap in Now South Wales, prices of draught horses being from £8 up to £l4
and it had to be a very superior horse indeed to fetch the higher price.
Working bullocks with tackling and all complete were from £5 to £6 the pair.
Having collected all their stock together at Goulburn which was their head-
quarters and having furnished themselves with two horse teams of four
horses to each, and loaded these teams up with goods calculated to be
easily sold at the diggings, they then started with the intention of pro-
ceeding to the Ovens diggings to dispose of these goods and then proceed to
Melbourne to dispose of the stock. Upon arriving at Albury they had an
offer for the stock by Mr, John Hore and Mr, Charles King for the working
bullocks and horses in conjunction for the lot, and which they considered
to bo advantageous as it gave a profit of over two hundred per cent upon
the cost price, and they therefore accepted it.


The goods which were upon tho drays were also sold in Albury at a satis-
factory profit, tha horse teams being of course sold as part of the bargain
to Messrs. Here and King.
This was tho year of the great Gundagai flood, which occurred in June,
1852, And it was sometime about the middle of this month that they disposed
of their stock at Albury, A Mr. James Crichton, who joined their party at
Goulburn with some stock of his own and which was disposed of at tho same
time as theirs at Albury, and Mr, Moore determined at once to return to
Goulburn, Mr, Reid would have accompanied them, but on account of having
some business at the Ovens did not do so. On their journey back to Goulburn
they stopped at Mr, Collins station at Kimo below Gundagai, This was the
night of the great flood there. About three or four o’clock in the morning
all those who were sleeping in the hut at Collins’ station were aroused
from their sleep by an old black man who, with his family which consisted
only of his lubra, resided on the station, crying out to them that they would
all be drowned if they did not get up as n a very big water coming down".
To their astonishment, when they jumped out of their bunks they found that
there was water already in the hut to the extent of several inches. Very
fortunately Mr. Collins had a boat alongside the hut in a lagoon. This the
old black fellow had brought close to the door of the hut, and Mr, Collins,
seeing that this was not an ordinary flood, determined at once to put
supplies of rations and blankets into the boat and cross over to the high
land on the opposite side of the Murrumbidgee River, to a part of tho
Adelong range, which was speedily accomplished. And upon selecting a
suitable camping place upon the high range it was determined that Mr, Collins
and the black fellow should go with the boat to Mr, Henry Stuckey’s station
which was on the river flats some two or three miles higher up the river
and which they concluded from its position must be flooded.
When they arrived at the station they found Mr, Stuckey and his family in
tho branches of a good sized leaning tree. He had in the first instance
placed a dray against this tree and fastened it with a chain, and upon
which the different members of the family placed themselves. But as the
flood continued to riAe higher and began to submerge the dray they were
compelled to ascend the tree and take to the branches for shelter to save
their lives, and so they remained, until Collins rescued them and brought
then to this camp at Adelong range. Had it not been for Mr, Collins fore-
sight in going to their relief in all probability they would have all
perished. As it was, they lost their homestead and all its contents which
wero swept array by the flood, not to mention the stock.
After leaving Moor© and Crichton at Albury, Mr, Reid then proceeded to the
station at Wangoratta to see his mother then living there. After a day or
two ho determined to proceed back again to Goulburn for tho purpose of
purchasing another quantity of horses and bullocks, On. his way through
Albury he heard the account of this disastrous Gundagai flood and at
arriving at Mandarloo which is tha first part of the river Murrumbidgee
struck by tho main road from Albury to Sydney, from thero up to Gundagai,
which is a distance of twenty miles, he had full evidence of the amount of
the damage which had been enacted by this fearful flood.


Here and there the road strikes the bank of the river and one had full
evidence of the devastation that had been caused. Of all the western
rivers in Australia the large swamp oaks grow only on the Murrumbidgee,
Ti/hen he approached the river near Mandarloo, one of the first sights
presented to view was stock of all kinds hanging by their necks or horns
to the branches of these huge swamp-oak trees some twenty or thirty feet
above the river bank and on every little shore of the river were cast goods
of every description, the wreck of houses and furniture of all kinds, in
fact it presented in the appearance the sane as of vessels wrecked upon the
coast. Any amount of spoil lay there at the mercy of wreckers, and sorry
to relate from rumours on the subject, this opportunity was not neglected,
When he arrived at Mr, Stuckey's station at "Willey Plummer" where he passed
the night he had full accounts given him of the whole of the flood, A
Mr. Watt who had been in the flood and was still suffering from its effects
related to him the particulars of hovr he managed to escape. He and his
partner had crossed horses over the river, which they intended to take to
the Melbourne market. On putting them into a paddock on the south side of
the river they had then proceeded back to Spence's Hotel, also on the south
creek of the river, with the intention of remaining there during the night.
It was during this night that the flood came down and so suddenly that they
had no means of escape as they wore immediately surrounded with water
before they could realise their position and so rapidly did the flood rise
that all the inmates of the house were compelled to take refuge upon the
roof, Mr, Watt and his partner being amongst the number. This occurred
early in the morningj as the waters gradually rose the amount of room that
they had on the ridge of the house became smaller and smaller, so much so
that a largo dog of the Newfoundland breed and belonged to the premises, and
which had taken refuge with them upon the roof, was pushed off, Mr, Watt
said that he watched this dog who made for the dry land about a quarter of
a mile away and could see him land in safety, and the thought immediately
him why he could not follow the example which the dog had set, and
immediately addressed his partner as follows "You're a good swimmer and
so am k. Why should wo remain here and he all swallowed up when the house
gives way. The dog has shown us the example; let us take it". His
partner replied "You can do as you like, but I intend to remain here so long
as the house stands", Mr, Watt said "I intend to have a try for my life".
He then divested himself of all but his flannel shirt, handing to his
partner a belt with a pouch attached, saying "Take this, there is some forty
or fifty pounds in bank notes in the pouch; the house may stand, you may bo
saved, I may be drowned". He then struck into the water from off the roof
and swam towards the shore in the same direction as the dog hod shown
previously and after a great struggle and being nearly exhausted reached
the high land in safety. There was there, already on the shore of the high
land, Mr, Stuckey and others ready to receive him, which was only a very
short distance from the residence at Willy Plummer. Ho was, however, so
exhausted that they wrapped him up in blankets and carried him into the
house, whore he had been for some two or three days before Mr, Reid's
arrival.
Jt may be stated as to this Spencer's hotel, upon the roof of which so
manycollected, was, some throe or four hours after Mr, Watt left,
« jpv by the inundation and every soul thereon drowned with the except-
o* «r, Sponoor himself and amongst them Mr, Watt's partner, whose body


was recovered afterwards with the belt which Mr, Watt had handed him, but
the contents of the pouch had disappeared. There were many rumours after-
wards regarding Spencer, for he seemed to have borne a charmed life. Many
said that he had been helped by the Prince of Darkness, for he escaped from
that flood with his cash-box in his hand, and it appeared to many almost
impossible that a man could escape from that flood and carry a heavy cash-
box in his hand without some supernatural aid. He was not by any means
liked and, therefore, many stories were got up against him, Mr, Reid
remained at Mr, Stuckey's for a day or two and being on the high land and
only about a mile from the township he had every opportunity of seeing the
fearful damage that had been caused, Of the whole of the township of
Gundagai proper not one single building remained intact with the exception
of Gass* Hotel on the south bank of the Murrumbidgee and which was situate
on a very high position on the side of a hill beyond the roach of the flood
waters. During his stay at Mr, Stuckey's Mr, Reid went over the whole of
the scene of this disaster. At Gass' Hotel they were holding an inquest
on some nineteen dead bodies recovered from the flood, all laid out in the
stable - a ghastly sight to look upon. The few people met with appeared to
be in a dazed condition, and when spoken to, in reply to any question gave
only incoherent answers, which could not be wondered at after the dreadful
ordeal they had recently gone through.
Knowing Gundagai as he did, and all the different places he could easily
realise the amount of damage which had been sustained. Where not a fort-
night before stores and private dwellings were situated not a vestige
remained.
The only wreck of a building visible was Turnbull 1 s store which had been a
lofty two-storied brick building. The roof was gone and the walls gave
the appearance of having been battered by cannon. Large holes here and
there appeared in the walls which had been caused by having been battered
by logs swept down the stream against the building. This was, as far sis
could be seen, the only evidence that a township had ever existed at
Gundagai, About half a mile above whore the township had been there was a
building psirtly standing which had been a school. There a fearful catas-
trophe had happened during the flood. The school-master, his wife and
fourteen pupils had been drowned. It was stated to Mr, Reid by some of
those who had helped to extricate some of these unfortunates from the wreck
of the schoolhouse that the sight presented was enough to harrow the
feelings of the strongest. The bodies of the schoolmaster and his wife
were found looked in each others' arms and those of the children presented
the appearance loke those of a number of smothered lambs. In the position
whore Lindloy's hotel stood not a vestige remained. He was told that of
the eight and twenty persons who were on the roof of this hotel out of this
number twenty six were drowned, the only two who escaped being Larkins the
mailman and a sailor whose name was not known, Mrs, Lindloy and the whole
of the Lindloy family of some seven or eight children were amongst those lost,
Mr, Lindley himself was away down at Yass for supplies for his hotel and so
he missed the disaster. What the poor man's feelings must have been upon
his return can bo imagined but cannot well be described. His wife and
family lost to him for ever and probably all his worldly possessions gone
at one fell swoop.


One would have thought that tho common feelings of humanity would have
prevented tho desecration of the dead where such a catastrophe as this
happened, Not so, however, for upon the body of Mrs. Lindley being
recovered the jewellry that she wore was gone, even to her wedding ring,
to obtain which the wedding finger had been severed from the hand, proving
tho unsorupulouaness of some persons.
Tho Honble, domes Gormley was at that time only a lad and was of those who
escaped out of the flood, but who, it is believed, lost all those nearest
and dearest to him. He has, at various times, through the press, given
his own experience of this ever-to-be-remembered Gundagai flood, and no
doubt a more correct description has been furnished by him than the narrat-
ion now given, although it sometimes that a person who is not a particip-
ator may give a more exact narrative than one who has really acted on the
scene owing to his excited feelings on the occasion, Mr, Gormley is a very
old friend of Mr, Reid’s and they have often had many conversations together
over the affair of the Gundagai flood, H© is, Mr, Reid is happy to say,
still in the enjoyment of good health respected and esteemed by all classes
of the community both as a public and a private citizen, which has been
shewn by his having been returned as a member for Wagga in the Sydney House
of Representatives for five and twenty years. He has now retired from the
representation of Wagga and is in the Council.
Mr, Reid was not at all sorry when he turned his back upon Gundagai in the
year 1852 after witnessing the desolation and misery which had been caused
by this dreadful disaster. It was a scene ever to be remembered and one
stamped on the memory never to be erased. Many scenes he has witnessed
during his long life, of losses and disasters, but nothing has been so
impressive as this at Gundagai, Somewhere about ninety persons of tho
inhabitants of the town were known to have been drowned, besides strangers
or persons who ware not known. He proceeded on his journey from Gundagai
to Goulburn and then determined to make a second trip to the Melbourne
market with stock as soon as he was able to purchase the same. He had been
in Goulburn some time when he received notice that Messrs, Power find King
had collected a largo number of working bullocks and draught horses with
all the necessary outfit for an expedition to Victoria and that there was
no doubt that they would be very glad to dispose of the whole of their
stock for a handsome increment upon the outlay, Mr, Reid’s brother John
and Mr, Frederick Moore were partners in any expedition projected by
Mr, Reid find they agreed to see Messrs. Power and King and to ascertain
their terms, which they did and an agreement was entered into for tho
purchase of the cattle and outfit to tho mutual satisfaction of all the
parties. In a short time after this Mr, Reid and. his brother and Mr, Moore
proceeded to Buningalore, Mr, Power's residence, and there they took
delivery of the purchased stock. This was a very rainy season and conseq-
uently all the creeks and rivers were flooded in every direction so that
there was a very great difficulty in travelling from place to place. TShen
they arrived at Colao Creek they found the oresk running like a large river
and which to all intents and purposes appeared to block the progress of
the expedition. After waiting some days there, seeing no prospect of any
subsidence and knowing that it was necessary to get to tho Melbourne market


as quickly as possible they were thrown on their own resources to find a
mans of crossing this creek; whereupon Mr, Reid said to his partners -
"I will go and I will build a boat’ 1 , at which they only laughed, asking at
the sane time where the material was to enable a boat to bo constructed,
Mr, Reid replied - "I will find all the material I require in the. bush to
construct the frame of the boat”. He then proceeded, accompanied by one of
the men engaged in the expedition to the bush where he out, in the first
instance, a centre piece, then cross pieces, and knees which had grown in
the shape which ho required, angle-Triss, The centre-piece was then laid down,
the cross pieces fastened to it and then two pieces, one at each end of the
cross beams, fastened to the end of the cross pieces for the full length of
the boat. The angle pieces were then fastened to each end of the oross
pieces, forming the ribs of the boat. There was also an angle piece in
the front fastened to the end of the centre piece, which formed the prow of
the boat and the same on the other end of the centre-piece, another angle-
piece forming the stern. Upon the top of all those was fastened a bent
sapling on each side forming the gunwale of the boat, When this frame was
completed it was that of a flat-bottomed boat, but required covering. The
others said "You have made the frame of a boat, but what are you going to
cover it with?" Mr, Reid replied "I will soon show you what I am going to
cover it with". He then proceeded down-to Handley's public house where a
day or two before he had seen several green hides spread upon the fence.
He asked of Mf, Handley, the owner, if ho would sell some of these green
hides. He said certainly. He then got these hides, out off the ends of
each side, stitched them together with thongs of green-hide. It being very
wot weather these hides ware very pliable from their exposure to the rain
and there was no difficulty, after placing the frame of the boat upon the
hides in strapping them down tight on to the cross pieces of the boat.
When this was dona the boat was complete. The hairy sides of the hides
v/ere turned inwards, leaving the smooth side out-turned. This toolf more than
a day to finish but the boat answered admirably. In two hours after
commencing the work of crossing all the goods and chattels that were on the
drays had boon taken across the oreek. Then came the question asked by his
partners - "how are you going to get over the drays?" He said "Easy
enough". The reason why they asked such a question was that neither of
thorn had had such an experience in the olden days as he had had. So Mr,
P.oid wont again to Mr, Handley and asked him if he could lend him two
small casks or one large cask. He said he had two quarter casks he could
let him have. These were brought dawn and lashed to the axles of the empty
drays and which will keep afloat a vary considerable weight. He then
proceeded with tho boat to place a rope across the stream, one end of
which was tied round the axle and bed of tho dray. The dray was then
pushed into the water and hauled across without any further difficulty.
They then put the stock across by swimming them and in a few hours they ware
all safe and sound on the opposite side of tho oreek to that upon which they
had been delayed for some days and were on the high road to Melbourne, This
boat had been made as small as possible in order that it might be carried
on top of one of tho drays as they were quite aware of tho difficulties
before them in consequence of the flooded state of tho country.
At this time there was a great rush of diggers from Hew South Wales to tho
Ovens and seeing this boat on top of the loading they followed our party


and during the frequent crossings of the various rivers not less than throe
or four hundred were assisted across at different times. It was a novelty
to see a boat constructed of green-hide, and the rumour about this boat had
got abroad and numbers cam© to examine it. The great advantage of having
hide instead of planks was that it might encounter as many as twenty snags
without any damage occurring. With an ordinary boat a single snag would be
quite sufficient to render it quite useless.
After leaving Colac Creek, which was about nine miles from the crossing
place at Gundagai they arrived at that which, some months before, had been
the flourishing township of Gundagai, but now a scone of desolation and
despair. The first oreok which had there to bo encountered was named Morley's
Creek which was an anabranch of the Hurrumbidgea and running round under the
high land on the north side where a public house had been erected by a
Mr, Morloy, The rivers and creeks, though still high were not so much
swelled as they had been. Here the advantage of having a boat to enable us
to cross was made manifest, for had it not been for it they would have been
in a similar predicament to what they had been at Hanley's (or Colao Creak),
Morley had a boat of his own upon the creek but had lent it to a fisherman
who was far from obliging. It would have boon beter to have hired his boat
had he not been so obnoxious in his manner because it would have saved the
trouble of putting a rope across the stream to ply their own boat. After
some altercation with this fisherman he was told that they were quite
independent of his services as they had a boat of their own, which rather
caused him some astonishment, particularly when he observed this green hide
boat taken from the top of the dray. He was then quite willing to render
every assistance, which was then declined, and to show how he was a loser by
his want of civility, scores of diggers availed themselves of the opportun-
ity of crossing in the green-hide boat gratis, whereas they would have had
to pay him whatever ho chose to demand for their passage across. The party
crossed over successfully without accident, os they had done previously, and
camped the same night surrounded by the ruins of Gundagai and where, some
four or five weeks before there had some twenty five feet of water running
but now dry. This boat was carried on the dray on the Journey to Melbourne
as far as the Black Dog Creek, Dillon's public house, still remaining in the
town of Chiltern, and as the weather had became fine and knowing that there
were already all necessary conveniences for crossing the rivers and creeks
between there and Melbourne they determined to lighten the load by leaving
the boat behind, Mr, Lindsay Brown of the Gooramadda Station, an old friend
of Mr, Reid's, having heard that this boat was left at Dillon's sent a horse
and dray and took it home to Gooramadda and kept it there on the Hume River
for several years and found it very useful at the station. This boat put
many hundreds of pounds into their pockets for it enabled the party to get
the first of the Victorian market when the great demand was for draught
horses and working bullocks.
At the time of their arrival at Pretty Sally's hill near Kilmore the price
of carriage to Bendigo, which was then at its zenith, ranged very high, being
from one hundred to one hundred and twenty pounds a ton freight for the
hundred miles, and the demand for working stock was very high, in fact anyone
could got whatever he chose to ask for them. The extent of the demand may
be easily imagined from the fact that during days camping at Pretty


Sally*s hill they disposed of over two hundred working bullocks out of a
nob of two hundred and twenty, prices ranging from fifty to sixty pounds
for a pair of bullocks. And the draught horses were sold at Kirk's Bazaar
in Melbourne and averaged forty eight pounds apiece. The bullocks cost
twelve pounds a pair and horses on ah average of thirteen pounds each. It
may appear strange that carriers could afford to pay such high prices, but
when they themselves wore paid from a hundred to one hundred and twenty pounds
a ton for carriage, and on the average taking some three or four tons of
loading at each trip thereby by one trip alone clearing all that they might
have paid for a team of horses or bullocks, the explanation is very simple.
One trip usually cleared them. As an example, when Mr, Reid had a small
store in Reid’s Creek for gold buying he paid for carriage over six hundred
pounds to a Mr. Bond for one trip of goods from Melbourne to the diggings on
the Ovens,
After the disposal of his stations, Yaokandandah to Dr. Mackay, Woragee and
Coreen to Dr. Cornell, he devoted his whole time to trading in stock from
Not South Wales to Victoria. But although very successful in his various
speculations he had a strong feeling to return again to the Hume district
and resume settlement there, eventually purchasing the Bamawatha Station
from his brother-in-law, Mr. Goorge Barber, After this purchase he deter-
mined to build a good house for his future homo and he chose for the building
a position on what was called the "Hermit Hill", a solitary and very remark-
able eminence (now visible from Albury) near the left hand bank of the Hume
River, hence the name of the homestead being called "The Hermitage", He
expended seme two thousand pounds on the house and grounds. It was there
ho exorcised his right to take up his pre-emptive right, that is to say the
privilege of purchasing 640 acres at one pound per acre from the Government,
in fee simple, and which was conceded to all squatters who held the right to
a run, so as to secure them the re-imbursement for whatever they might have
expended upon improvements. After the completion of the house he removed
his family from Goulburn to the Hermitage thinking that there he had escaped
from every annoyance incident to the neighbourhood of a digging community
and that ho would be allowed there to carry on his pastoral occupations
without let or hindrance. But, as the sequel will show, he was very greatly
miotaken. H e had already suffered severely by the breaking out of the digg-
ings at Reid’s Creek and Yaokandandah, for whenever a diggings breaks up
upon a run that run is, to all intents and purposes, destroyed for squatting
purposes, and no doubt many others who have suffered in a similar manner can
corroborate this statement. In the first instance he had lost severely by
the sale of both Woragee and Yaokandandah stations, as both runs had been
rendered useless for the profitable depasturing of stock, and in the case
of Woragee which would have been valueless to the purchaser for grazing
purposes had it not been that a fine station called Coreen on the other
side of the Hume river near the Billabong creek being attached to it when
Mr, Reid sold it to Dr. Gemmoll. The two stations in conjunction could be
well worked together, the one for fattening the stock, and the other as
depot for their sale at the diggings. In the case of Yaokandandah it was
no doubt the water-mill that enabled it to be sold, as the mill was at that
time in full operation. When he settled down at the Hermitage after some
little time, to his astonishment, diggings broke out on the Black Dog Creek


new called Chiltorn, the first intimation of which he had from the follow-
ing personal observation. One day he was taking a short cut from the
Hermitage towards the woolshed diggings when he came across a party of
diggers while passing by where the town of Chiltem now stands. There ho
found that they had just bottomed their shaft and had obtained good pros-
pects of gold. This was in the exact position almost of what was afterwards
the Star Hotel, the party consisting of Conness and others. Some time
afterwards a rush took place to these Black Dog Creek diggings, and after-
wards the Indigo lead was discovered, which was on the outskirts of the
Barnswatha run which he had just purchased. Gold seemed to haunt him
although he did not derive any benefit from its being developed. After
those diggings had broken out it seemed that there was a groat ory-out for
lend all through the North-Eastern district, consequently the Government
of the day determined to survey and cut up some of the squatting runs
adjacent to the diggings. H is own run of Barnawatha being one there they
decided that the time had arrived to inaugurate an Agricultural and Pastoral
Association, The inhabitants on both sides of the Hum© river wore then in
unison end had no local jealousies or prejudices to interrupt their harmon-
ious intercourse which was so strongly evinced some years afterwards* The
Association was accordingly formed and all the leading people of the town
and district on both banks of the Nume river were enrolled as members. He
had the honour to be elected as its first President and so he continued
until a disruption occurred, a year or two afterwards. The following circum-
stance was the cause It had been mutually agreed that the annual show
should be held alternately at Albury and Wodonga, The Government of New-
South Wales had voted £IOO in aid of the Association, which happened just
before the show was about to be held at Wodonga, The New South Wales
members of the Association took exception to any part of this Government
subsidy being expended at Wodonga, insisting that that sum of money had been
given by the New South Wales Government to be expended at Albury, To this
those residing on the southern side of the Hum© River objected, arguing
that the money had been given to the society generally for all purposes
conducive to the advancement of pastoral and agricultural pursuits, and
therefore, they had a right to expect that money for prizes should bo
expended at Wodonga as well as at Albury. A special general meeting of the
association was there convened and the members from the north bank of the
Hume River predominating carried a resolution that no part of this sum of
£IOO should be expended upon the show at Wodonga, The result of which was
that all the members of the Association who resided on the south bank of
the Hume immediately resigned their membership in the Association and
I'r, Paid also amongst them resigned his position as President. The Assoc-
iation did hold one or two shows at Wodonga, but it soon died and in
consequence of the absence of support, the people on the southern bank of
the Kuna considering that they had been badly troa ted by the Albury
residents in connection with this Government subsidy of £IOO,
A few of the Association who had resigned met together and discussed the
auestion as to where would be the most central situation to form a society
of their own. They decided that if they could obtain sufficient support,
Wengaratta, it was considered, would bo the best locality to establish
the society.


Mr Lindsay Brown and Mr. Reid were appointed to visit Wangaratta and
ascertain what the feeling of the people there was on the subject, with
the result that some of the leading residents of Wangaratta heartily
concurred in the subject in view. A public meeting was convened at which
it was unanimously resolved to establish a Pastoral and Agricultural
Association to b/holden at Wangaratta, to be called the Ovens and Murray
P. and A. Society, this was in the year , which has continued to
successfully advance up to this present time. And here again Mr. Reid had
the honour to be elected its first President, and Mr. Parfitt, who some
years afterwards represented the district in Parliament, Seory,
+ , „„ a century had elapsed after is inauguration, last
October (i a in 1905) Mr. Reid revisited Wangaratta at the time of the
Society’s Shw and was intensely delighted with everything which came
under his observation. A perfect showground, situate in the bank of the
Ovens River soma mile or two down the river from the town, a fine grand
offices and all appurtenances necessary for the success-
very extensive chav end ell in first rete order end
condition. The exhibits which he saw there of both stock and machinery as
well as agricultural produce could not be surpassed outside the metropolitan
shows and possibly could stand a very fair comparison even with them. The
management of the show was excellent, an experienced committee, good Judges
an efficient secretary, *ll Pf iz ® s * which were very liberal, well
competed for. and what was pre-eminent above everything was the general good
feeling and social happiness everywhere exhibited by the spectators.
Although he had been absent for very many years and few of the old identities
of the district of his day remained, yet the old name had not been forgotten,
but seemed as if it had been handed down from one generation to another, and
he received from those present the utmost possible kindness, from the Member
of the District the President of the Society and all others connected with
the show, whether offices, exhibitors or usual spectators.
Mr Reid was sorrv to read in the newspapers the other day a paragraph
respecting the death of Mr. George Mott. He could well remember the first
time he first published in Alburyits first newspaper, the Border Post .
±a Ur, Mott of being the first pioneer of the press in the
Albury district! supplemented some time after by the "Albury Banner« which was
conducted by Messrs. Adams and Cook. It is only a short time back that the
Border Post ceased to exist. The Banner is now the leading newspaper of the
district and has been so for many years.
TOiile residing at the Hermitage, in 1859, somewhat to his astonishment, a
o f «• district in the Percent £ Victoria.
Before this he had never given much consideration to politics, although
he had always taken a very active part in all local matters of public
interest. He acceded to the request, and published his address which
appeared in the Constitution in August 1859, at tiiat time a daily newspaper
published in Beechworth. H« stated that he was prepared to give his assent
to any T.«r»d Bill that he thought would be conductive to the general inter-
ests/ But two things he would insist on t- Free selection all over the
colony and no reduction in the upset price.


Every man should be permitted to settle where he liked, but not till after
survey. The price of lend could not be reduced without damaging the credit
of the Colony in the eyes of the British capitalist, since it was to the
revenue from land that the country looked for the payment of the loans
raised taking railways and other public objects. At the same time, as there
was land that was well worth from £3 to £A per acre, like that on Docker’s
Plains, he would strive to establish a plan of fixing a fair value upon it.
His opponent was Dr, Rowe of Mount Battery Station near Mansfield, who was
one who was well versed in politics and a very able man and a good speaker,
but notwithstanding his having to contend against such a formidable adver-
sary, he was returned by a very large majority. During the time he sat in
Parliament he had at that time associated with him in the House as fellow
members some of the ablest men who have ever sat in the Victorian Parliament,
Sir Francis Murphy was the Speaker,
After being in Parliament some considerable time, and having entered into
some squatting pursuits across the river, and a dissolution of Parliament
having occurred, he determined that he would not again offer himself for re-
election, finding that it was impossible to give necessary attention to his
own affairs while he devoted his time to his parliamentary duties. At the
last moment, just before the day of nomination, he published an address to
the electors of the district intimating that it was not his intention to
again solicit their suffrages, but some of the most influential electors
strongly urged to re-consider his determination to withdraw from again
contesting the seat. Importuned as he tvas, at the eleventh hour he consented
to become again a candidate for the honour of a seat in Parliament, This
time his opponent was a Mr, John Orr of Rutherglen which place was then,
although of recent existence, the centre of a very large mining community,
Mr, Orr was the representative of the diggers who there amounted to more
than ten thousand persons. At that time there was great aversion existing
between diggers and squatters, hence the opposition to Mr, Reid by Mr, Orr,
Individually speaking Mr, Reid thought that the diggers had no reasonable
ground for complaint against him, as he was not awaro of having given any
cause for their prejudice and had always acted liberally towards them when-
ever he had the power, which some of them who had voted for Mr, Orr
acknowledged afterwards. It may be here related as a somewhat extraordinary
occurrence, which took place at an election meeting held at Rutherglen in
an Hotel kept by a Mr, Forty. Here there was a very large hall, a sort of
theatre. The hall was filled with diggers. Dr, H.B, Wilson, formerly the
Mayor of Rutherglen, was in the chair. After Mr, Reid’s address had been
continued for a considerable time, upon his stating - I am a squatter",
instantaneously a head, four feet and the tail of a bullock were visible
and struggling above the heads of the diggers giving the appearance of a
boast stranded and struggling amidst a crowd of diggers, whose vociferous
shouts and yells made it impossible to hear the sound of any other voice
in the theatre, and this lasted for a considerable time, when several of
these feet were sent against the stage without any serious damage occurring,
A show of hands was then called for, and the meeting being composed almost
entirely of diggers the show of hands was consequently in favour of Mr. Orr
in an overwhelming proportion.


At the declaration of the poll Mr, Reid was declared to have been duly
elected, and accordingly took his seat a second time in Parliament, lb*, Orr
and his friends appealed against the result of the election by forwarding a
petition to the House, which was duly laid before the Elections and Qualif-
ications Committee, who decided against the sitting member and decided that
Mr, Orr had been duly elected by six votes. Consequently Mr, Reid ceased
to sit in Parliament any longer. As already referred to, Mr, Reid having
purchased largo stations on the Lachlan river called The Langerin about thirty
miles from Hay, devoted his time to pastoral pursuits, having previously
while in Parliament fitted out an exploring party with a Mr* Conn as leader
to explore all that part of the continent beyond Bourke on the rivers Paroo
and Woragoe with the object there to tako up squatting country.
As far as the taking up of country the expedition was very successful and
after Mr, Conn returned to the Hermitage Mr, Reid gave into his charge seme
SCO head of cattle with horses, drays and a full outfit for the formation
of a new station, which he did on the Woragee River, called Delalah, In
reference to this exploration, a quantity of the country that Cann had
explored was on a subsequent occasion passed over by the Burke and Wills
expedition in reference to which, it may be mentioned, that it was in 1860
that it was inaugurated, whilst Mr, Reid was a member. The following
circumstance occurred i- Mr, Mollison, who was also a member, came to
Mr. Reid one day, knowing that he was acquainted with Burke, and asked him
if he would give his assistance to obtain for Burke the position of leader
for the expedition, Mr, Reid told Mr, Mollison at the time that although
Burke was an old friend of his he thought he was totally unfit to be the
leader of an expedition of that sort, Mr. Mollison explained to M r# Reid
that Mr, Burke was to be associated with a Mr, Wills, who, he said, was a
most competent man, Mr, Reid then said s- "Then, under those conditions,
I shall offer no opposition", Mr, Reid had known Mr, Burke as a police
officer in Boechworth and was well aware he had but little experience of
bush exploration, hence his objection to him as a leader for an expedition
intended to traverse the unknown country lying between the occupied districts
and the Gulf of Carpentaria, He was present when the expedition started
from Melbourne and had some conversation with Burke about his journey.
Mr, Reid enquired if ho thought he could reach the Gulf, He replied in his
usual impulsive manner - "Tea, I’ll do it or leave my bones there", which
appeared to be almost prophetic. Amongst those who contributed to the
origination of this project was a Mr, Ambrose Hyte, who offered to donate
towards the cost of the equipment a thousand pounds, provided that the
Government would supplement that sum by the procurement of camels and all
other necessary requirements, which was ultimately acceded to, Mr, Kyto
was at that time in Parliament where ha had very-great influence, and
thereby received the support of many of the other members in carrying out
.hia projected exploration of the interior of Australia,
After his residence at the Hermitage for a few years, and never having
quite recovered from his Barnawatha run having been taken from hia by the
Government and the land sold by public auction, and becoming in consequence
hemmed in by the settlers who had purchased the land upon the run In all
directions, and having in consequence been compelled to purchase through
a bank other land adjoining to the pre-emptive right of the Hermitage, and


tho bank demanding the repayment, he found it irrespective I that ho should
dispose of, not only the stations which he had on the Lachlan and on the
Woragee, but also the Hermitage estate. At the time of these properties
being sold all real property had decreased very considerably in value, so
much so that land which had cost him from £3 to £5 per acre at the Govern-
ment Auction sale, was now sold by auction at the Hermitage sale for from
6/- to £1 an acre. So it is evident that a very severe loss had been
sustained by Mr. Reid in consequence, and when the whole was wound up and
all claims satisfied he found himself a very poor man. To show how the
value of property is liable to fluctuate, instances can be given
The station which he sold on the Lachlan was re-sold, some twelve to 18
months afterwards, for £40,000 the sum Mr. Reid received for it being only
£13,500 with not more stock upon the run than there had been at the time
of tho former sale. Years afterwards, but with more stock upon it, the
selling price was £85,000, Another instance may be stated, thus, the
particulars of which Mr. Reid ascertained from Mr, John Strickland the
auctioneer of Chiltern who said "I have just sold some of your old land,
Mr. Reid, at the Hermitage for which you only received 6/-. Today it
brought £6,
The Delalah Station on tho Woragee was sold with all stock and plant on it
for £2,000, which included 700 head of cattle. This station was of enormous
extent, quite capable of carrying some 200,000 to 300, Oqo sheep. The
purchasers, Messrs, Russell and Bignell, after some little time resold it to
a Mr, Waller, who afterwards sold it again and who was said to have realised
for station and stock some £150,000, The value of these stations has been
alluded in order to show how, had a little time boon allowed by the bank to
realise upon his various stations and properties instead of losing by the
investments, their value would have been greatly enhanced and instead of his
becoming a poor man, he would have found himself a rich one. The sale of
these properties took place in the latter part of tho year 1864, His brother
Mr, Robert Reid had in the year 1863 taken up land on the Major’s Plain under
tho Robertson Act 1861, of Hew South Wales, upon a part of which he planted
a vineyard of 50 acres, and ha offered the selections amounting to, in all,
about one thousand acres, with all improvements, including the vineyard,
upon advantageous terms to Mr, Reid which ho then accepted and in the month
of February 1865 removed from the Hermitage to Mborwatha on the Major’s
Plains, and there he commenced the world afresh, not as a rich squatter but
as a poor cookie.
In having the land prepared for making a vineyard at Moorowatha, in tho first
instance an agreement was made with Mr, John Graham of Nothorby at Ruther-
glon to trench fifty acres, twenty two inches deep for the sum of £750,
This was accomplished by him with a steam plough, the first ever introduced
into Australia, All but one acre of this land had been successfully ploughed
when by some mishap tho steam plough was broken and the remainder of this
acre had to bo ploughed by an ordinary hand plough with horses, Owing' to
that part of tho stoam plough which had boen broken being incapable of
being repaired in Australia, Mr, Graham in consequence induced a brother of
his to proceed to England, not only for tho purpose of having the requisite
parts of this stoam plough replaced, but also to bring out another steam
plough as well with the necessary appliances for repair if necessary.


Those his brother obtained and having married, and with another brother and
his wife, accompanied by some agricultural hands from Carlisle in Cumberland
intended to proceed to Carlyle in Victoria in which parish Netherby is
situate together with experienced vignerons and all the requisite appliances
for a vineyard. When they took their passage, a las, it was in the "London"
and all were lost. To the ruin alike of his family and the serious injury of
the Rutherglen district and its wine industry. But with a broken heart
Mr, Graham still held on to Netherby, which is still managed by his descend-
ants, and is a very extensive wine making and exporting vineyard.
Never having been accustomed to a vineyard Mr, Reid had everything to loam,
and in the first instance he engaged a Mr, Ludovic Marie as manager, but
soon discovered by experience that the expense of a manager would not pay.
Ho certainly derived considerable and valuable information from him during
his management, which ho afterwards found very profitable. For the first
few years the vineyard was in bearing it was fairly remunerative. He did
not attempt to make wine but pressed the grapes out in a wine shed and then
delivered the must to Mr, J,T« Fallon of Albury who, having a very large vine-
yard of his own there - the Murray Valley Vineyard - and extensive cellars
and all the appliances for the manufacture of wine, purchased must from all
the surrounding growers. His price, at the commencement, was 2/- a gallon
for must. This price only continued for some two or three vintages and it
paid the grower very well. Gradually the price went down until it was only
l/- a gallon. This induced many to try the experiment of making their own
wine, which was not at all times a very marketable production, FVom this
circumstance, in great measure, the public became prejudiced against colonial
wine. The low price which at present rules for the general samples,
combined with the high price of labour tends to make the wine industry unprof-
itable, Many vineyards have thus been given up altogether, the vines rooted
out, and the land used either for cereals or to fatten stock and Mr, Reid's
own vineyard of some fifty acres has now been used during the last three
years to fatten sheep and with the result that it was found to be more profit-
able than was the produce of the vines after paying all the incidental
expenses connected with vine culture and gathering and carting. To illustrate
how unprofitable the working of a vineyard is at the present time, but with-
out reference to the original cost in planting it, of which fencing, trench-
ing, the cost of the cuttings, and the expenses of planting and tending
until the vinos begin to bear, after the first three years, and the sacrifice
of all the necessary material incidental to wine-making being thrown upon
one’s hands as useless after the relinquishment of wine making. One of the
reasons why this amount of plant remains at present useless and unsaleable
is because the process of wine making is continually being changed and the
utensils which were formerly in request afterwards become superceded and
abandoned.
Some few years after removing to Moorewatha there arose an agitation with
reference to tho formation of "Farmer’s Unions", The first of the origin-
ators of then Messrs, Plunkett and Ryan who established one at Yerong Creek,
The second union was formed at Burrumbuttook of which Mr, Raid had tho honour
of being elected the Chairman which ho held for some years. From the
exertions of those two unions, and noro particularly to tho Secretary Mr,
Ryan, all tho other unions in New South VTalos have sprung into existence, now


united in the style of "the Farmers* and Settlers* Association" having
branches over all New South Wales with the paid Secretary at the head-
quarters of the Association in Sydney were annual meetings of delegates
from all the several branches take place. These delegates are chosen at
special meetings convened by each union and Mr, Reid has, on several
occasions, represented different portions of the district of in
various annual meetings, at Wagga, Cootamundra, Junee and Sydney, Formerly
the annual meetings wore itinerant, but now always in Sydney, Some time
after the union was formed at Burrunbottook the question of the construction
of a line of railway between Gregory and Corowa was brought forward for
discussion. There was great diversity of opinion as to the proper route
which the line should follow. Eventually the Government adopted a middle
course for the line of railway, but determined that this line should branch
off from the main line at Culcairn, but it was six years after this agitation
of the subject that this line of rail was actually constructed. During the
interval many meetings were held to impress upon the Government at Sydney
the necessity for the formation of the line, during which Mr, Reid acted as
honorary secretary to the Railway League which was the result of the discuss-
ion in the first instance at the Farmers * Union* These meetings were hold
at various centres of population and at last the Government acceded to the
local requirements for transit. This lino is now proving itself to be a
great boon to all the inhabitants along it. It now only requires a railway
bridge between Corowa and Wahgunyah to make it a loop line between Melbourne
and Sydney,
About the year 1802 a smoke concert and an address was given to Mr. Reid at
Burrimbuttook as an acknowledgment for his services in relation to the
inauguration of the railway and general public exertions during a long life
in the district, which was very gratifying to him, the more so as it was
numerously attended by all classes of the community. In 1903 he was elected
a member of the Rabbit Board at the head of the poll, of which there were
six elected members, the Chairman being nominated by the Governmenti After
some time it was decided by the Government to consolidate the "Diseases of
sheep -f-ct, the Rabbit Act and the Factories Act", Consequently other
elections were necessary under this consolidated Act, when he was again
returned at the head of the poll by a very large majority and of which ho
remains still a member and, up to the end of the year 1905, he never omitted
to attend at every meeting of the Board,
The 'Pastoral Times", published in Deniliquin, contains the announcement
j.-arriage. REID—BARBER, On 29th February, 1844, at Marulan Church by Rovd,
George Napoleon Woods M.A., David, eldest son of the late Dr, Reid, of
Inverary Park, Argyle, to Mary Romaine, third daughter of George Barber Esq.
of Glonrock 2s*orulan, Golden Wedding", And a paragraph in another part
of that issue informs its readers of one of those unusual events, A golden
wedding was celebrated at Howlong between Corowa and Albury last week, the
participants, as will be seen by an advertisement elsewhere, being Mr, and
Mrs, David Reid of the Worrawatha Vineyard near Howlong, Mr, David Reid
is one of the pioneers of the north-eastern district of Victoria and one of
the earliest settlers under the Land Act of 1861 up the river.


And it also, emongst other things, states that Mr, Reid had been a magis-
trate for forty years. "Both he and Mrs, Reid live in the enjoyment of a
green old age", and again, "Mr, and Mrs, Reid had a largo family of sons
and daughters, the former preponderating and some of them occupy responsible
positions either in the public service or in prominent commercial firms.
The original wedding was celebrated on the 29th February 1844 at Marulen
Church",
On 29th February 1904, under the heading "An Australian Pioneer, Mr, David
Reid of Moorawatha, A Diamond Wedding", states "An event of a novel and
pleasing character took place at the Mechanic’s Institute this afternoon,
when a public meeting was held for the purpose of paying a tribute from the
community to Mr, and Mrs, David Reid on the occasion of their Diamond
Wedding, or the completion of the sixtieth year of their married life. When
it became known that this rare enough event was to be celebrated to-day a
public meeting was held and it was decided to give the people of the district
an opportunity of participating in it. The matter was cordially taken up on
account of Mr, Reid’s long and honourable connection with the development of
the community, in some small recognition of his public services and in
felicitation on the occasion of their diamond wedding".
Mr, T,H, Griffith M.L.A, presided, and intimated that the invitation would
be endorsed by the Committee and presented to Mr, and Mrs, Reid, During his
long life their guest had had many ups and downs, and if he had not devoted
himself might have been a wealthy man to-day. But he had what was of greater
value, a long life and he and his wife still in the enjoyment of perfect
health, though ho regretted to say that Mrs, Reid was not wall enough to be
present at that gathering, Mr. Reid stood there to-day without a stain on
his character, a typo of an honest man, the noblest work of God, He con-
cluded by asking the company to give three cheers for Mr, Reid and his wife.
The invitation was most cordially acted upon, and when the cheering sub-
sided Mr, Reid rose amidst a further demonstration, Reid then thanked
them most sincerely on behalf of his wife and himself for the great honour
done them. They were deeply grateful, Mr, Reid went on to give some very
interesting reminiscences from his stirring, adventurous early life. He
mentioned that his wife. Miss Barber, was a native of Australia, and that he
was educated in Sydr-y under that grand man Dr, John Dunmore Long, "Ha was
born in 1820 and came to Australia in 1823, so that he was a colonist for
the long period of 81 years. His father was Dr, David Reid who had been for
about 20 years attached to the Admiralty Office as medical officer. He
retired from the Service and brought his family to settle in Australia in 1823,
When they landed in Sydney Sir Thomas Brisbane was Governor and the whole
while population of Australia totalled only 30,000. Dr, Reid did not remain
in Sydney, but came inland as far as Goulburn, He made his home at Inverary
Fork, about fifteen miles from Goulburn, and died there in 1840, Previous
to that (in 1838) Mr, Reid left home in search of squatting country, and came
across from Manoroo, He crossed here at what was then known as Hume’s
crossing. At that time the only people at Albury were Mr* Aimeo Huon (who
afterwards went to Fiji) and two black boys, but Mr, John Dight (father of
Mr, C.H, Dight) was already settled at Bungowormah, and Mr, Ebdon had a
station at what is now known as Mungabareona, Mr, Robert Brown was also then
at Albury; ho was its first inhabitant as has already been before mentioned.


From this district Mr, Reid went on to the Ovens. In those days land was
plentiful and Mr* Reid took up an urea which extended right away to Yackond-
andah, and embraced the whole of what was afterwards to become the Ovens
and adjacent goldfields. On settling at Tarrawinya Mr. Reid brought his
mother and the other members of his family from Goulburn and they lived at
the new home until 1844. On the 29th February in that year he married a
niece of Hamilton Hume, the explorer, and made a home for himself about seven
miles from Yackandandah,
Mr* Reid was always radical and progressive in his views and ideas and to
him was due the credit of introducing public race meetings in Albury. Up
to that time the only races held in the district were of the picnic variety.
They wore held by squatting families and the outside public were not allowed
to take part in them. As a result of Mr. Reid’s action a Jockey Club was
established, and he was elected its first President,
Of the early pioneers of the district Mr, Reid is the only survivor. He is
83 years of age, and Mrs, Reid was 80 on the 6th of this month (February 1904),
But Mr. Reid is not the oldest member of his family. He has two sisters in
Melbourne over 80 years of age. One is Lady Murphy (relict of the late
Sir Francis Murphy) and the other is Mrs, Balcombe, Lady Murphy is 87 years
of age, and is still capable of transacting thewhole of her business. In
all Mr, and Mrs, David Reid have had ten children. There are eight sons
(all living) and one daughter, the eldest having died of typhoid fever.
In speaking about the first inhabitants of Albury it may be here mentioned
that the first medical man to settle there was Dr, Crichton, who had been a
surgeon in the Royal Navy, After his death he was succeeded by Dr, Keating
and afterwards Dr, Owen, who succeeded him, caused a monument to be erected
in the Albury comet ary to the memory of Dr, Crichton, who had been the first
surgeon in Albury but with whom, otherwise, he was totally unacquainted.
Some years afterwards Dr, Owen died and was buried in the same cemotary. And
Messrs, James and Robert Crichton (brothers of the late Dr, Crichton) who had
been engaged in pastoral pursuits, having sold their runs of Round Hill and
Wallan Wallan, before leaving the district caused a tomb to be erected in the
cemetery to the memory of Dr, Owen, thereby acknowledging the compliment that
Dr, Owen had himself previously paid in the memorial to the late Dr, Crichton,
Mr, Reid, continuing to reside at Moorawatha, is engaged there in both agric-
ultural and pastoral pursuits as far as the limited dimensions of the land
he occupies will admit. Several of his sons have estates adjoining, three
are in the service of the state and he has the happiness to loiow that all
those who are near and dear to him are in a good way of living, which is a
great satisfaction to one in his old days. To show that these appointments
under the Government are appreciated, of two of his sons, one has been in the
Postal Department for 21 years, another in the Police and is a Clerk of
Petty Sessions at Kangaroo Valley, having been in the Police Department for
18 years, another has been employed by Messrs, Pitt, Son and Badgery for 23
years, and to show how anyone can work their way up, he commenced on the
lowest rung of the ladder with that firm and by good conduct and steady


attention to tho business worked his way up and in a few years became
their chief manager of the whole of tho stock department at Flemington,
near Sydney, where he now is.
As it may appear impossible to some to realise the change that has taken
place in Melbourne, and although it may seem impossible to have happened
during one life-time, it is nevertheless a fact that in 1838, when Mr, Reid
first arrived in Melbourne it had then hardly assumed the appearance of a
town. There was a building here and there whore Collins Street is now, and
in Elizabeth Street a blacksmith’s shop, and on tho corner of Little Collins
Street and Elizabeth Street, on the very same allotment which had been sold
by Mr. Gardiner to his (Mr. Reid’s mother before in tho same year, there
were also a faw buildings.
"Where tho Spencer Street Railway Station is occupied by the Goods Sheds was
Batman’s Hill (now removed). Here Mr, John Batman and his sons a
residence. Mr. Fawkner lived near the Yarra about where the Mutual Store
is new. He first started the "Port Phillip Patriot" newspaper, which was
originally issued in m.s.s, until he imported a font from Tasmania and a
printing press (now in the Melbourne Public Museum),
The crossing of Elizabeth Street along Collins Street was in those days a
quagmire, with a creek running through the centre of it, and it presented
at all times a menace of serious dangers to all passengers, and it was even
very threatening to those in vehicles, or even mounted on horseback.
He was not long in Melbourne and consequently he had not much opportunity to
examine the place precisely, but he afterwards remarked the wonderful progress
which in tho following two years was developed in its appearance.
;;; ;;; m
