

Reminiscences
OF
WILLIAM AFFLECK
FROM
INFANCY TO PRESENT DATE.
FOR PRIVATE GRANULATION ONLY.
R.Dar, Son and Co., Sydney
1916.


Reminiscences
OF
WILLIAM AFFLECK
FROM
INFANCY TO PRESENT DATE.




Yours sincerely,
WILLIAM AFFLECK.




Preface.
I TRUST the readers of the following reminis-
cences, of what, in my life of 80 years, I have
seen and undergone, may he appreciated, as
they are just the facts as they came before me.
Their character will, perhaps, be better appreciated
and some criticism of them saved, when I say I
have attempted such with the school education J
received, when it is told the school was left behind
and work substituted at the age of (12) twelve
years, and ever since hard work of very various
kinds has been my lot. I have therefore much to
apologize for, in attempting to please my few
friends, into whose hands the work may come, as
they are only printed for private circulation.
WILLIAM AFFLECK.
Gundaroo Cottage, Strathfield, 1916.




Reminiscences in the Life of
William Affleck.
From Infancy to Present Date.
1916.
J l , WILLIAM AFFLECK, was born in West
Wemyss country of Fife, Scotland, on
the fifth of March, 1836. My father was
a paper maker by trade, and was born in
Peneruick, near Edinburgh, in the year 1803, on
the 25th January, and died on the 22nd October,
1888, and was buried at Gundaroo, New South
Wales. When 1 was born he and my mother had
a large grocery business in the West Wemyss. My
mother was a native of Kingsbarns, a short dis-
tance from St. Andrews, she was born in 1807,
and died and was buried at Gundaroo on the 12th
January, 1878.
There was a large family of us. 13 in all, ten of
whom died in infancy. I being the fourth, my
brother was the sixth, who would listen to no oc-
cupation but being a sailor, and was therefore ap-
prenticed to a ship master in South Shields, Eng-
land, and from the time he left home for England,
I never saw him again; but when he was about
seventeen years of age he was drowned at sea,
through falling from the jibboom in a storm, and
we did not hear of his death until about two years


alter. My sister, Mary Ann was the seventh. She
was born in Edinburgh, and after we came out
here she was married in iB6O to James O’Neill, of
Queanbeyan, who has now been dead a good many
years, but she is still alive, and has seen a good
many ups and downs during her married life.
Now to get back. When I was about four years
of age, my father, although doing a good business
in West W emyss, was induced by what was proved
afterwards to be false representations, to purchase
a grocery business in Elder-street, Edinburgh.
After disposing of his Wemyss business, we all
departed to our new home. However, we were not
long there when he found out he was taken in; and
had to clear out of that. We removed to the back
of the Castle, and he opened a butcher’s shop in
Rose-street, and that was my first experience. I
had to help to try and earn my living. We then
attended the U.P. Church in Rose-street. We
managed, however, to exist in Edinburgh for five
years, when we bade good-bye to it, and returned
to the West Wemyss. That was I think about
the year 1845. However, it was only to find out
that the \V emyss was not to be our resting place,
for 1 think in little more than twelve months,
another move had to be made, this time to Dun-
ferline, but it was also a failure. After we had
been there a very short time, my father was offer-
ed the position of canvasser, or as it is now called
traveller and agent for Blackie & Son, London
publishers, and that caused our removal to Aber-
deen. My father did fairly well at that, but my
troubles began. I was then only about twelve
or thirteen years of age. and of course T must now
go and see and earn something to keep the pot
boiling, so I was asked what trade I would like to
learn. I was glad of that for I did not like going
to school, which I have had much reason to regret
ever since. I decided I would like to learn to be
either a stonemason or a carpenter, I did not care


which. But for whatever reason, it was never
revealed to me. I was sent to Alexander Bothwell
to learn the confectionery and pastrycook business.
I was there for about two and a half years, and was
able to do a journeyman's work. My services were
no longer required, for what reason it never was
made known to me, but my health was nearly
ruined, with long hours and hard work all for two
shillings and sixpence a week. As fate would have
it, I procured work with another confectioner
named Shearer, but bad luck attended me here
also, for Shearer became insolvent in a few months
after. Being Had to get anything to do, my next
attempt was with a baker a few doors from Shea-
rer’s ; this proved worse and worse, for the half-a-
crown a week, for the hours were from about 4 a.m.
till 9 and 10 p.m. and then had to work on the
Sunday afternoons beside. This I could not stand,
but it was necessary for me to earn something, as
there was nothing better to turn to, necessity forc-
ed me to take a job at rope-spinning (Byers & Co.)
at their rope and sail works on the links, but no
higher wages. Here T remained till another change
took place. Until then we had attended the U.P.
Church, St. Paul’s, in a street off the Gallowgate.
Rev. Andrew Dickie was the minister. My father
having done so well for Blackie & Co., he got a
better offer from Tallis & Co., of London at the
same business, but through that we had then to re-
move to Dundee, that being the established head-
quarters. On our removal here I did not try the
getting of a position as confectioner or baker, but
took the first place available. Being now over 16
years of age. I was apprenticed for five years to Gil-
ruth Brothers Fancy Warehousemen, at the same old
half-a-crown a week, with a rise of one shilling a
week every year. However, luck was with me this
time, for after about two years they dissolved part-
nership and that broke mv apprenticeship, and T re-
mained on with Peter Gilruth at four and sixpence


a week. In the meantime my father had been
t 3n Unc l e ’ ? n my mother ’ s side, in New
ales » and they between them arranged
that Wishart (my uncle) should secure a NSW!
passage for us as emigrants, he paying twenty-
pounds to the Government as assisted emigrants
and sending us home twenty-pounds to help' us to
get whatever we might require for the journey
No I gave Peter notice I would leave him as we
were going off to Australia. In due course we
received the necessary papers. So that on Satur-
day, 21st October, 1854, we bade farewell to Dun-
dee and went to an uncle at Dunferline. where we
landed the same night, and remained till the fol-
lowing Monday morning; after bidding farewell to
our friends we proceeded on to Glasgow, on arrival
there and spending the night, next dav we left bv
vbh St !n me , r om nCeSS K"-™ 1 for Bi rkenhead, and we,
with about 200 passengers, all bound for the same
place, landed at the Depot, named by us the Work-
ouse, for it was the roughest quarters ever I had
been in. To make it all the more impressive we
were supplied with half boiled beef and half boiled
potatoes for dinner and bread, butter and tea with-
out sugar, or at least so little that it could not be
detected We were here till the 27th October.
During the time the passengers were examined by
the Doctor and the luggage by the Inspector, and
when found all right the broad arrow was placed
k oxe ,y md , tninks and removed to the ship
Nabob. We. the same night, slept on board-
Next morning we had breakfast on board, a con-
siderabie improvement on the Depot., viz., the
Workhouse. We were then towed down the Mer-
sey and lay at anchor. On the 2nd of November we
were taken in tow by the Tugship Dreadnought
who remained with us till next day when we passed
Hoyhead, but about 4.30 p.m. when in sight of
Tuskar lighthouse the tug rope broke and she
left us, everything passed off well. O n the 21st


November a meeting of the male passengers was
called to see if we could form a Debating Club, it
was decided we should and meet on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and that was continued
throughout the voyage. It was the first I ever had
anything to do with, but benefited much by it,
and look back with pleasure on our many meetings.
On the 30th we crossed the line, it was, and had
been very hot weather, and had the very lightest
clothes we could put on. Some of the most beauti-
ful sun-sets I ever saw were to be seen then —the
passengers used to sit on deck and admire the same.
About the 10th December the Captain determined
to get away south to get the trade winds, and it
was beginning to get cold. Up to the 25th Decem-
ber we had several rather stiff winds and rough
seas, but on this morning we saw a very large ice-
berg estimated at about 50 feet high and 200 feet
long, it was only about a mile from us. The De-
bating Club had been preparing for some enjoy-
ment, and on Boxing Day we had theatricals in the
evening and carried through the 4th Act of the
Merchant of Venice, and a farce named the Rivals,
which gave very great satisfaction, and wound up
by all joining in “God Save the Queen.” It was ar-
ranged that we should have something of the same
kind again on New Year’s Night. Between then
and now we had some rough weather and had a
bad time of it to keep clear of the icebergs, for
we saw very many of them and some too close to
us to be safe. During the week a baby had been
born and died and was buried in the sea. The
New Year’s performance was duly carried out and
also gave satisfaction. All went on well —although
cold—for we had got down to 46 degrees latitude,
till about the 15th of January, when for about two
days and a night of Mountain seas, we were think-
ing it would be our last, for the “Nabob” rolled
about and we thought every minute would be our
last. The water casks got loose, and the sailors


•ODed th fh. n'T *° get th ? m fixed U P again, and
' u £f d th helni m case the chains might break
flatter 8 just went on in their usual way till the 2nd
we e e toTd a 7h J Wh T*r. Were «P about 5 a.m., as we
Zrninl Wh' gt WC WOuld see land in the
™ r ?” ng - > V hen ' ve Sot up—there was a fog—with
mnlrf 3 ram ~ and we began to grumble, seeing we
could see nothing, but by and by the pilot hove in
cofmrv 11 if Th' gr ° Wled i him abo «t thls «ne
country if this was the kind of it. He told us
Z^t not I*7 gr T bled if Wc had bee ” here
lining the week, for it had been so hot that there
had been seven sunstrokes during the week How-
TcrnJv l°i T P ° rt Jackson noon, having
accomplished the journey in three months and two
hours from the time the Tug took us in tow i„ the
Mersey We remained on board till the 15th when
my uncle arrived and we left the “Nabob” and put
up m Sydney till the next afternoon about 4pm
when my mother, sister and I left by the mail
coach for Gundaroo, there being no railways the,
and we arrived m Goulburn on Saturday nil'
about TO pm. On Sunday morning, pm
?it Br r U T y ° a f d f ° r - Us to §° into Gundaroo via
Lake George We arrived at the Old Travellers
dome about J p in,, very tired, and stayed there till
next morning about 10 a.m.. when Old Tuckey
ainyed with a horse and a dray to take us down to
the town. My Uncle and Father stayed in Sydney
for about a week purchasing goods for the Store
The carriers had between four and five tons for
which they were paid £2O/10/- per ton as carriage
that was the price in those days. Wheat was sold
rn!l V ?/fi d ln Goulburn at 22/- per busheT and ii
Oat // P T/ S La ‘° take 11 there from Gundaroo.
Thl. w !, f 2O .P er ton - Potatoes same price
Threshing and cleaning cost 1/- per bushel, plough-
TnZT fK aml P u ng 20A P er acre - gives
an idea of charges in those days. We all lived with
my Uncle for the first 12 months, clearing ground


digging drains, reaping and doing general work
about the place; but had it not been for Uncle T
very likely would never have got to New South
Wales. This now brings me up to February, 1855.
During our stay this year I was sent into Yass with
E- Wilkinson and his bullock team, to see deli-
vered, on my uncle’s behalf, a ton of hay to Mrs.
Moses, of the Yass Hotel. At that time little did
1 think my connection with Yass was to become
so prominent, as will be pointed out further on.
After serving a year with my uncle and aunt —
that is four of us —my father rented the farm
(Colyton) on the Yass River about 10 miles from
Gundaroo township on the Yass or North side.
The four of us; father, mother, sister, and myself,
departed for the farm. In the meantime, father
bought several cattle at the pound sales at a low
price, and we removed them with us. After being
there about 12 months, my uncle decided to re-
move to Victoria, and he offered the stock in the
Store, amounting to from ten to twelve hundred
pounds to my father, payable by promissory notes
at various dates, and to rent the premises. This
was agreed to. so the two left and went up to the
township, leaving my sister and myself to carry
on the farm. About this time, 1857. a total eclipse
of the sun took place early in the afternoon, when
we had to knock off work, the fowls going to roost,
for it was as dark as midnight. After about two
hours, as the sun began to show, the fowls
left the roosts for the yard and we renewed our
work. I at the time was helping the carpenter to
build the original store, now a private residence,
nearly opposite the Presbyterian Church. At the
end of my first twelve months on the farm mv sis-
ter left me. and went up to the store with my father
and mother. However. T remained on Colyton for
2 years, clearing and cultivating the land and using
all the old methods of single furrow plough, thresh-
ing with the swingle, cleaning when the wind blew


and all such processes, then living worse than if
I was in gaol. I would get up in summer about 4
a.m., then get breakfast, consisting of tea with
bread and butter or beef, if I had either; about 9
a.m. start out to work; if it was too hot I would
come in and have bread and water at noon, if not
would stay at work till tea time when it would be
a repetition of the morning meal; then knock about
at work as long as T could see. In the busy time,
when there was moonlight. I would work during
the time till bed-time. So there was plenty of hard
work without any remuneration; for, at the end of
the 4 years T had been in N.S.W. I had a mare and
plough and about £7 in debt. So I gave up the
farm; but my father had rented Jackson’s farm
adjoining the town and he made me the following
offer. He would find the horses and if T liked to
do the work for him he would give me my board
and lodging and four acres that I could cultivate
for my self, but T would have to find myself in
clothes. That I agreed to do. Before proceeding
further it might be as well to go back and say just
before leaving Dundee for 'New South Wales there
was a General Election for Parliament, which
raised my political ideas, as it was a fight between
Lord Aberdeen’s Government and the opposition.
When it was finished the Government was defeat-
ed and Lord Palmerston was sent for and formed
a Ministry. Coming to N.S.W- just as responsible
Government was instituted, and on the back of the
Home election my future career began, and just
before T _left Colyton. an election under the new
constitution took place, and I was now aged 21.
T gave my first vote in Yass. and as it happened for
the successful candidate. Henceforth I began mv
political life. To resume, having removed to the
town, the position of pound-keeper became vacant,
and I made application for the position and was
appointed pound-keeper, and held it for five or six
years, when T resigned. That appointment gave


me a start. Although sometimes there was trouble
with some of the people. My sister got married the
year 1 resigned the pound, and went to Queanbe-
yan to live; her husband being a saddler in that
town. My financial condition up to the time of
about two years after becoming pound-keeper,
was very little altered from leaving Colyton. But
when I began to consider my position, my idea was
to come to New South Wales to better living,
and I was determined not to look back on the
turned furrow, but to look forward to the unturned
land; and that has been my rule through life.
About the year 1860 having been up in the town for
a short period I began my active life, and had in-
stituted an Improvement Society, which was suc-
cessful for many years; also a cricket club —which
became—if not the best was easily the second best
in Qeanbeyan district. A dancing class, an Odd-
fellow’s Society, tvhich has survived all those years,
and I am now the only one of the original members
which joined it at the opening and am still a mem-
ber of it. T also became a member of the Yass
Lodge of Concord of Free and accepted Masons,
and was the third member to join it. The same
year T became a member of the Australian Mutual
Society by insuring my life for £SOO- My policy
with the bonus additions added amounts to ( at the
time of writing) £l3oo—so that during this year
it became a memorable one bv the starting of so
many matters, some of which do not now exist-
Now that I was beginning to feel things progress-
ing with me the idea came into my mind whether
I should not begin to look out for a wife. I then be-
ing 25. One voting woman —T had my mind on —
was the first I became acquainted with in N.S.W..
she being a friend and companion of my aunt. I
have no hesitation in saying at this late date, she
was one of the best and purest-minded young wo-
men that anyone could meet with, and I had no he-
sitation in proposing manage to her. There was


only one obstacle in the way, viz., she was Roman
Catholic, and we met and proposed certain con-
ditions re religion. She could not sec her way to
agree to them, so we both made up our minds that
it was better to give up the proposal at once; we did
so without any ill-feeling with either of us, and we
were perfectly good friends up to the time of her
death. So that ended the notion for the time being.
About this time the country was infested with
gangs of bushrangers- The first to start, if my re-
collection does not deceive me, was Gardiner’s
gang, they did not trouble our side of the country,
but as we had neither telegraphs nor railway, it
encouraged others to come to the front. Ben Hall’s
gang; then Clark’s gang; these two gave trouble
around our parts. There was also Moonlight and
Morgan—who acted singly —but were dangerous
characters, especially the latter. The former did
his depredations in the North country, the latter
in the Riverina part. However, we had reason to
remember both Hall and Clark’s gang for both of
these visited Gundaroo. The former never raided
the town, but they stuck up Fraser’s Store, 4 miles
on the road from the town, and also on one occasion
they waited their prey at the Gap on the Lake
George Road. In those days the country was
swarming with police and volunteers, for there
were large rewards offered for their capture. Wil-
liam Davies, of Gindinderra. was one of the volun-
teers and they had a wish to meet him ; they did
so unexpectedly, on his part. He had occasion to
go to Sydney (as I already said we had neither
telegraphs nor railways then. They found out he
was in Sydney and was coming home by the mail on
a certain date, via Lake George road. At Geary’s
Gap, like many other places, all male passengers
had to walk up the range, and they generally got
out of the coach on the Lake and walked up- While
he was in Sydney he hired two female domestics
to go up with him to his residence, and while he


was in Sydney a sample Tranter rifle arrived and
he bought it, the very thing to help him against the
bushrangers if they came within reach ; this, with
the two women, he left in the coach and he walked
a good distance behind. On the arrival at the top
of the range the gang came from behind some trees
and stuck the mail coach up, they searched for the
mail bags and found them, also the new Tranter
Rifle and of course they captured it. When Mr.
Davis arrived they were very happy to meet him,
and asked what he could do now, and then ordered
him to hand out all his ready cash, which he had
to do. After they had searched the bags and took
all that was worth, and left them to pursue their
journey with the new Tranter. I may add
afterwards, when Gilbert (one of the gang) was
shot, he had the rifle, which was returned to Mr.
Davies. Some time later—the same gang—Hall.
Gilbert and Dunn met at a creek ( I forget the name
at present). The same morning—Fred. Hoare —a
carpenter, left Gundaroo for Goulburn. We were
generally frightened in those days to send money
through the post, so I asked bred, if he would call
at Davies,Alexander & Co., Goulburn, and pay them
a small account I was due. I gave him 3 half-
sovereigns, also a letter with half notes (we used
to cut the notes in halves and send the two lots
by different posts) to post in Goulburn. A short
distance on the Goulburn side of the creek he saw
in the distance ahead of him—but coming his way—
and as they came nearer he noticed them unbutton-
ing their coats, and throwing the tails of them back,
and when near enough he saw a row of revolvers in
each of their belts; it was Hall’s gang. They turned
him back to the creek, where two loaded bullock
drays were camped, and they bailed up every one
who came along the road either way, and they sent
one of the captured ones on to the top of the hills
on either side of the creek —on the road—to watch if
any of the police should come along—and give them


notice. 1 may mention —at Collector—as F*ed- was
passing through he met Nelson (the constable) and
they went into Mrs. Podevins to get some refresh-
ment; while waiting for it the two sang an anthem,
“The Dying Christian,” Vital Spark of Heavenly
Flame,” &c. After the refreshment, Fred, went
on, and a lot was bailed up—he included; there
was a good number; all was well provided for, as
the Bushrangers knocked in the heads of the ale
and porter casks and the lids of the brandy and
whisky, and were told to help themselves so they
could have a good time of it. About 5 p.m- they
released their prisoners and told them they could
go on now. It was now after sundown, and the
bushrangers went on to Kimberley’s Hotel in Col-
lector, and bailed up all and sundry. Nelson (the
constable) went down and stood behind a large tree
to wait his chance, meantime without seeing Dunn.
Dunn saw him, took aim and shot him dead. A mon-
ument, erected by the Government a few' years ago,
marked the spot on the Collector Road. As to the
Clark gang, they were in Gundaroo several times,
but only once in the town, when they stuck up my
father’s store; I was then living in the Royal Hotel.
They burst open the backdoor andwent in and found
all in bed. One of them said: “Now, Governor,
where is the cash box?” He told him. One re-
mained armed at the bedroom door while the other
found the cash box, but he could not find the key,
so he came back and said: “Get up. Governor, and
find the key for I cannot.” So father had to get up
and was escorted both ways in front of a revolver.
After thev got the box open they took all the cash
but left a cheque; they did not care for cheques.
They also took his ring and a lot of goods out of
the Store and went their way. I may add here,
when Connell was shot some time after, the ring
was on his finger and was ultimately returned to
my father. On another occasion the gang heard
the police were going to a certain place, as they had


heard the Bushrangers were going there, the lat-
ter started on ahead and took up their stand behind
trees and other shelter. By and by the police came
along and they shot dead every policeman, 9 al-
together, I believe. During these years, I plodded
on at farming, pound-keeping, and other ways.
Amongst other matters, I was advocating the re-
moval of the Post Office to the tOAvnship. or else
the opening of a post office. Of course, to both
these proposals, Fraser, who kept the' post office
up on the road from Goulburn to Queanbeyan,
near the Traveller’s Inn, objected, and it was a
battle between us for years. With the result, it
was a hot contest; but in 1870 Lake George got
filled up to such an extent that no traffic could
get along by the old Lake George Road, so the
route had to be changed and brought over the road
I had been advocating for years, which would
come right through the town, namely the Marked
Tree Line over the Lake George ranges. So the
victory was gained, it might be said by the inter-
vention of Providence in filling up Lake George
with water. It was then about 22 or 24 miles long
and about 10 miles wide in the widest part. We
then had our wish accomplished by the opening of
a post office in the town, but the old post office was
also retained, and to distinguish the name the
town was called Lower Gundaroo and the old post
office Upper Gundaroo. Before this we thought
we ought to have a Money Order office in connec-
tion with the post office. On one occasion, when
in Sydney I called on Sir Saul Samuel, who was
Postmaster-General, and asked him to have a
Money Order Office established, and he at once
granted the request. Very shortly after the books
and papers necessary were sent up to Fraser with
instructions to open the office. I was the first
applicant for a Monev Order, and Fraser point
blank refused it, and said he would not open a
branch, consequently I reported him. with the re-


suit the whole, Post and Money Order Office, was
taken from him. When that office was abolished
the office on the town got its right name, Gunda-
roo, and has retained it ever since. We were
now thinking of trying to get a Presbyterian
Church built for we had succeeded in getting two
acres of ground, granted on the town by the Gov-
ernment for a Church, Manse and School, and we
took steps to build on the land the Church now
stands on. We had a hard struggle in raising the
funds, and when it was completed we were short
of the required amount by about £2OO, I think; but
my father offered to pay £IOO of the debt if the
people would raise the balance- We set to work
and succeeded in doing so, and it was free of debt.
While it was in process of being built, we had a
bazaar on the ground, and many from different
parts of the district were present. And I was
then thinking of marriage—if I could find one who
I thought would suit me. She attended the bazaar.
I was introduced to her, and from then I set to
work to try and accomplish my end, although she
lived a good distance away, namely, at Gininderra.
However, in a little more than a year, viz., August.
1865, I led to the altar of the Gundaroo Presbyte-
rian Church, Miss Catherine Campbell Cameron,
and we were married. We had a happy life so long
as it lasted, which I considered far too short (but
God knew best) for he called her awav at the end
of four and a half years, she dying on February,
1870, leaving with me two sons, the youngest
(John) not able to walk, he was not 12 months
old but fortunately for me my dear old mother
was still alive, and she took the two boys to her
home for about 6or 7 years. It was a great blow
to me, for the few short years of our married life
were very happy, although she had very indiffer-
ent health during the most of the time. Only for
the short time she lived, we —neither of us —regret-
ted our union. To return where I diverged—we went


on with the building of the Church and it was com-
pleted at the end of May or beginning of June, 1864,
it being the first Presbyterian Church in the Ouean-
beyan Parish. After it was completed, I was in-
duced to build.on an allotment of land I had, the
Royal Hotel, for I had then rented Jackson’s Grant
and had the prospect of a good crop; and on reck-
oning what I thought would be the monetary re-
sult of it. with the few pounds I had saved, it
looked as if I could accomplish it, and I xlid so with
the assistance of my father, but it was not so easy
a matter as it was represented before it was started;
for if it had appeared to me in the same light as
when it was finished, it never would have been
started, for when it was finished I had a mill-stone
of debt about my neck. However, it only re-
mained for me to make the best of it. I therefore,
opened it and then got married, as already stated,
with the understanding before we got married,
that my wife should do the inside, and I the outside
work connected with it till the debt was cleared off,
and then we would get rid of it. But as the old say-
ing has it: “Man proposes, but God disposes,” for
my dear wife left me at the end of A l / years, and
there was one hundred pounds still due. But after
her death it did not suit me to keep it on. Ministers
and others said I was the right sort of a publican,
f for I would not encourage men to drink. T would
on no account stand in the bar talking to customers,
nor drink with them- I only supplied them with
what they wished and retired. However, in a very
short time T leased it for a term and ultimately sold
the premises and got clear of it. My father em-
ployed a mason to build the cottage opposite the
present Caledonian Store, and T did all the carpenter
work at it and raised sufficient by my work to clear
off my debts and become a free man. Previous to
this we had got a public school started in the Church,
but in 1868 the Government had a public school and
residence built. These now compose the residence.


After which the present public school building was
erected. About now I was appointed trustee, with
two others as trustees, for several roads —viz.,
Marked Tree Road; Gundaroo to Gininderra Road;
Gundaroo to Murrumbateman Road and Gundaroo
to Yass via Yass River, and held these appointments
for many years; no pay only the honor of the posi-
tion. After many years I resigned, when the whole
of the roads were handed over to the Road Superin-
tendent of the District, and the Minister for Roads
and Bridges sent me a letter of thanks for my long
and successful services- When the Public School
was built, a Local Board was appointed of which I
was appointed Secretary, and held the position for
many years, after which I resigned because the In-
spectors generally treated the Local Boards with
indifference, if not contempt, and the Government
did not seem to protect us from such. And although
asked to act again I determinedly declined, as we
had a lot of trouble, got nothing for it, and then were
treated with indifference by those who should rather
have supported us. I was mixed up in nearly every
thing established in Gundaroo and had the title of
King Billy daubed on to me. The township was
progressing slowly and we could not expect any-
thing else, seeing the land around it was all locked
up in private estates, held by Massey (now Osborne,
Dyee, Dowling (now Hordern) and others. If the
land could only be broken up into suitable blocks,
there could be a large number of families settled on
and around the township. When I finished the car-
penter work of the stone cottage opposite the pre-
sent Store, which was about the month of Septem-
ber. while I was very low spirited; my uncle in Vic-
toria gave me an invitation to go over for a change;
and while there he might put me in a way to do well
for myself; but my father and mother would not lis-
ten to my going to stay there, as they had taken
charge of my two motherless children, they might be
termed babies as the youngest as T have already


slated was barely a year old. But to induce me to
stay my father proposed I should open the store in
the newly-erected cottage; he to find the goods and
Ito be paid a commission on what I sold. So 1
made my first visit to Victoria and after spending a
month there I returned and father met me in Sydney
when we purchased the stock and I opened the store
there in November, 1870, and kept it there till I
erected the present Caledonia Store, when I re-
moved over to it in December, 1880. But for two or
three years before removal I had been carrying on
the business on my own responsibility and" paying
my father a rent of £25 per annum. In June of the
same year I was married to my late dear wife to
whom I will refer later on. On my visit to Melbourne
to meet my uncle, and as I was walking along Eliza-
beth-street, I noticed a plate on a door of a person I
had longed to meet —viz., Professor Hamilton, phre-
nologist. so I called on him and said T would like
him to tell me my character, for at this time I had
taken an interest in the profession he practised, al-
though T did not know whether it could be depended
on. After I seated myself he had a look at me and
ran his hands over my head, and began to talk to
me. I at once told him I did not wish to speak with
him till he had told me all he could about me, so he
went on telling me all. I remaining quiet, and when
he had completed his task I had to confess I was a
convert, for he gave me what might be considered a
full history of my life from the time I was born, and
we had never previously met: but he told me to my
surprise it was necessary I should go away from
home for a change Just what I was doing- He said
there was something seriously troubling me, he
could not say what it was, but it was something se-
rious, and if I neglected to have a change I would
very likely become a monomaniac for I was dis-
tressed and much downhearted. I may add from
then till now I am a strong believer in the science.
He had nothing to guide him in my outward appear


a nee, for I went to him dressed in a very light new
suit of clothers and wore a white bell topper, so there
was no appearance of mourning about me, but he
certainly gave me a true delineation of my position
and character. For years I have been a great mar-
tyr to indigestion and constipation; and when T got
back to Sydney, after having a good time at Whea-
tlesea, with my uncle and aunt, I called on the An-
drew Ballantine, watchmaker. Princes-street, with
my watch to repair on the recommendation of my
cousin, Arthur Affleck, of Melbourne. Mr. Ballan-
tine. after talking to me for a while, said I looked
as if I was not well. I told him he was right for I
was troubled very much with the complaints noted
above. He took to me at once, and wanted me right
or wrong to stay with him and not go home, and he
would see if he could not cure me. He was a great
believer in the Cold Water Cure. I declined his
very kind offer, and said, “No, I would get home and
should I not get any better or even worse, he would
hear from, and might expect to see me. Being home
only a few weeks and getting worse, I determined to
start for Sydney, and on my arrival went straight
to Princes Street, where I was for about seven weeks
so ill I was kept in a room very quiet and attended
to by Mr. Ballantine, who devoted much time and
attention to me. with the advice of John Bowie
Wilson, who was then Sydney’s cold-water cure
doctor. The kind and Christian attention given
me bv Mr. Ballantine I never forgot, even up to
this day, and I was glad it was in my power to after-
wards reward him for his attention. The treat-
ment was (and I give it for the benefit of anyone
reading this, for T was thoroughly cured of indi-
gestion). 6 a.m. cold water pack, being rolled up in
sheet soaked in cold water, as if I was a mummy,
mv hands down by my sides, rolled round and round
in the cold water sheet, then blankets, rugs, etc.,
rolled round about me. doubled under mv feet and
bandaged round my throat, so that no air could


penetrate with plenty of cold water to drink through
a glass tube, the end of which was in the water and
the other in my mouth, so that I could suck the
water m. this was the rule for one hour, after
v\ Inch 1 was allowed to get out of the pack, when
the perspiration was pouring off me, and in that
state I had to get into a bath of cold water and
wash all over. After drying myself there were two
calico bandages ready, one wet with cold water,
the other dry. about 18 inches wide, which was
hxed round my stomach and bowels, the wet one
next the skin, the dry one over. These bandages
were double, and changed night and morning after
the pack. At noon I had to sit down in cold
water for half an hour; then at 6 p.m. the pack and
bandages, as already described, had to be repeated,
and all that here described had to be continued for
nearly three months, and during the whole time
my food consisted of only light things such as milk,
cocoa, maizena, or arrowroot, and such light food •
hut 1 can add I have never been troubled with in-
digestion since, while writing, about forty-five
years. I have often prescribed the treatment to
persons with indigestion, but sorry to say never
have succeeded in getting any person to carry it
?A l !u-i the r eXCUSe be,n£r kis to ° cold and troublesome
VVhile 1 was undergoing the treatment, at the be-
ginning. I wrote home to father and mother, it
was not likely they would ever see me back in
lundaroo alive, but I did survive, thanks to Mr.
and Mrs. T.allantine for all their kindness and trouble
ovei me. Previous to this, there were only two
cemeteries, Church of England, four miles from the
town, and the Roman Catholic, about one mile dis-
tant, on a grant given by Donald McLeod, on the
•'airnsdale Estate. He had previously offered the
ground to the Church of England, but they would
not accept it, then he offered it to the Roman Ca-
tholics. and they accepted it. The Protestants were
buried m the Church of England ground, no mat-


ter what their denomination, but on the death of
old Davie Thomson, we had him interred in the
latter, when the Rev. P. G. Smith told me for the
future none but members of his Church would be al-
lowed to be buried there. I thereupon set to work
and applied to the Government for a grant of land
for a cemetery near the town, and succeeded, for
shortly a surveyor was sent to mark out a portion
for a cemetery for all denominations, which was
accomplished as follows:—lmmediately at the back
of the town reserve 2 acres 2 roods for a general
cemetery, that is, for any person such as socialists,
Turks, and all who have no religion; 2 acres 2 roods
Church of England; 1 acre 2 roods, Roman Catho-
lic; 2 roods 10 perches, Presbyterian; 1 rood 15
perches, Wesleyan; 10 perches, Congregational;
and 5 perches, for the Jews. It was fortunate I
had taken the step I did, and the Government was
so prompt, for my dear wife was the first to be laid
in the new cemetery —there are a good many now
in the different portions, and I suppose 1 will soon
follow, as I am long over the three score and ten.
Of course, I was appointed one of the three trustees
of the Presbyterian portion, and I laid out the paths
and planted a good supply of different kinds of
pines along the sides of the said paths, all of which
are now of noble proportions. After this, I visited
Sydney, and did not feel very well, but purchased a
Homoeopathic chest of medicines, both containing
inward and outward applications, which I used for
many years to the benefit of very many in and about
Gundaroo, at my own expense, as I did not get paid
for even the medicines I gave away, but had to pay
for. However, after treating those who were ill
it seemed to interfere with the finances of the Quean-
beyan doctors, and they tried to get me into trouble,
so I gave the practice up, to the sorrow of many
who had been successfully treated by me, and at my
own expense.
At this time the Government called for tenders


tor the extension of the railway from Goulburn to
\ ass. With that I started to advocate the opening
of the road from Gundaroo to Gunning, so that it
might be fit for traffic by the time the iron horse
travelled into Gunning, for the road was only a
horse or cattle track at the time. I was well sup-
ported in my endeavors by the member for Yass
Plains (Mr. M- Fitzpatrick) ; we got the road on the
schedule as third-class, which meant £lO per mile,
but year by year we got the class increased and
secured £25 per mile. Mr. Slatterie at this time
kept the public school, and he received notice that
his services were dispensed with. Mr. Massey be-
ing in Sydney at the time, I got him to accompany
me to the Education Department, and we received
an indefinite promise that a teacher would be sent
up, but before I started for home I had another in-
terview with Mr, Wilkins, Under-Secretary, and
succeeded, and Mr. Furaman and family were sent
up to conduct the school. I had given it about
that I felt inclined to do no more, but let someone
else take up the wants of town and district; but
none would, so I had to buckle to again. My next
effort was to get a courthouse, we had a lockup, and
after a lot of trouble I had the promise, the Govern-
ment would grant £350 for the purpose. IT.i
after the work was started, it was found to make
the whole complete, stables, repairs to lockup, and
fencing it cost £I2OO, it was finished in 1874. This
year as the opening of the Gunning road was being
proceeded with it was found it would be necessary
to bridge the Fairfield Creek, so the Government
was got to start a bridge, and it was placed so as
to serve both the Gunning and Yass River roads. I
and two others were appointed trustees for the two
roads, and we set to work- I had different men as
co-trustees on the several roads I was trustee for,
but they were all alike, they all left the work with
me. During the many years I was trustee I had to
write out all the specifications, not one of the others


ever put pen to paper to write out a specification
I his year I was appointed presiding officer for the
Gundaroo polling booth for Oueanbeyan electorate,
and the Yass River (Booth’s farm) polling booth
in the Yass electorate, and retained the position for
many years. The Parliament of New South Wales
this year passed a new Commons Act, which gave
the commoners the right to elect the trustees every
three years. I was elected trustee at the top of the
poll, and remained a trustee for many years. Pre-
vious to this time the Government appointed them,
and I was one for the granting of the common.
We had during this year the heaviest flood since
the great one of 1870. Under arrangement with
my father, as previously noted, we took stock every
year, and T always left my commission in his hands
to accumulate. We found our interest in the stock
was about equal, namely. £4OO. so we both agreed
that from now I was to pay the rent of £25 per
annum, and give him what cash I could spare and
promissory notes for the balance, and T would as-
sume the whole of the responsibility. We had
early in the year a visit from the late Rev. Dr. Lang.
He looked well and in good health at the age of 77;
he died two years after at the age of 79. My father
being in Sydney at the time he attended his funeral.
My son Arthur was in Sydney at school, and on mv
father’s return home I proceeded to Sydney, and
while I was there T found that Professor Hamilton
had removed from Melbourne to Sydney, so I took
Arthur to see what he would say about him- With-
out any hesitation he said to me: “Take him awav
from school or you won’t have him long with you;
he is studying too much : take him up the country.
You can let him read a little, but not studv closely
as he has been doing.” So we brought him home
and sent his brother John down in his place. We
had as our minister this year the Rev. G. L. Nairn.
T erected a kitchen behind the store, for during the
past few years the bovs and I were boarding with


my father and mother, and it was getting too much
for her, so when I had the kitchen completed 1 se-
cured Mrs. F. Forbes as housekeeper, and we all
had our meals where we lived, at the store. In
October of this year 1 was gazetted a magistrate of
the territory of New South Wales. 1 now took in
hand the forming of a branch of the Free Selectors’
Association, and was successful, headquarters at
Queanbeyan. Shortly after they arranged to hold
a conference of delegates, every branch to send a
delegate to the conference in Sydney. I was selected
to go as a representative of Queanbeyan. There
was a very large gathering, and before we had
finished Parliament was dissolved, and an election
was on- It was my intention to offer my services
to the electors of Queanbeyan, but I found on my
return home J. B. Thompson, district surveyor, was
in the field and had addressed several meetings, so
I decided not to oppose, but support him, and he
was returned. This year I started to plant trees
in the main street, and some of them are a great
size, but people allowed their goats and fowls to
destroy a lot of the young trees, and although I kept
on replacing those destroyed, horses were allowed to
prowl about also and destroy them. I got so dis-
gusted I gave it up. My mother had indifferent
health for the past seven or eight months, and seem-
ed as if she was not much longer for this world.
The Rev. G. L. Nairn received a call to Wagga
\\ agga, which he accepted, and left. He was the
most successful minister we ever had. When he
left I kept up one service every Sunday by praise,
prayer and the reading of a sermon until we were
again provided with regular services. The New
Year did not begin very bright, for my mother was
still very ill. On the 11th January I sat with her
till 3 a.m., when I went home to have a sleep. Be-
fore leaving I bade her good-bye, and about 10.30
a-m. I was sent for. When I got down she did
not recognise me, but passed peacefully away about


11.30 a.m. on the 11th January, 1878. She was a
good mother to me and mine, for she attended to
my two little boys as if they had been her own chil-
dren until I had a housekeeper to look after them,
i had much reason to be thankful for having such
a loving and good woman as my mother. Hugh
Vallance died, and Jones, storekeeper of Gunning,
bought an allotment of land corner of Lot and Cork
Streets, and erected a building as a store. When
finished he found the goods and sent over Mr. Mc-
Grath, one of his assistants, as manager. At the
end of 12 months, when taking stock, he found it
was not a paying concern, and he induced another
of his assistants to become partner with the man-
ager, and they took it over under the title of Mc-
Grath and Hart. They were going to make things
hum, and would have Affleck out of the Caledonia
Store in six months, for they got six tons to his one.
That was their prediction, and not satisfied with
that, they started a branch at Bungendore. The
company barely existed for two years when they
had to assign their estate, and 1 bought their Gun-
daroo stock for 11s. in the £. So the Gundaroo
people fell into a stroke of luck, for I sold the goods
at less than they cost in Sydney. The bridge over
the Fairfield or Gundaroo Creek was completed in
March, 1879, giving easy communication with the
Gunning and Yass River roads. It was proposed
to extend the railway to Cooma. I was one who
predicted it would never pay in a lifetime, but they
were determined to construct it, so I set to work to
trv and get the junction with Gunning via Gun-
daroo to Queanbeyan, instead of from Goulburn via
Bungendore. I got the support of the Gunning
and Gininderra people; but the political influence
in Goulburn and Bungendore was too strong, for
although the survey via Gundaroo proved it was
both shorter and easier grades. Goulburn political
influence carried the day. I had taken a contract
to have 140,000 bricks made on one of my allot


merits, tor the purpose of building a new store, the
one I was occupying being too small. I had wor-
ried the Department of Works so for a bridge over
the River on the Gunning to Queanbeyan road in
Gundaroo that they began one in March. The su-
perintendent was on the ground and when 1 saw the
lieight it was to be above the level of the river, 1
told him it would be swept away by the Hoods. He
as much as told me to mind my own business. I
then communicated with the department about the
height a good many of the piles were placed near
the site during the correspondence, but none of them
had been driven, when down came a flood and
swept away several of the piles. That settled the
matter, the superintendent saw 1 was right, and
new piles three feet longer were brought, and the
work proceeded with till completed, and we had
a great time at the opening. We had the Yass
lown Band out, and a great number of visitors
who all formed into procession, headed by the
public school children, when all marched off to
the opening ceremony, which was performed by
Mrs. C. A. Massey breaking a bottle of champagne
and naming it the Gundaroo Bridge. After that
there was a public dinner, to which about 50 sat
down, then it concluded with a ball in the even-
ing. Having assisted in the constitution of a
Masonic Lodge in Queanbeyan, 1 cleared out of
mv mother Lodge, the Yass Lodge of Concord,
and became a member of the Queanbeyan Lodge,
and was pressed to become R.W. Master. I de-
clined for various reasons, but filled the Senior
Warden’s chair, and two years later I accepted
nomination and was installed RW. Master. Some-
time after having concluded my term of office I
called off. as I did not like the way they were pro-
ceeding, and I have never put in my certificate in
any other Lodge since. Next year was a memor-
able year. ft was just ten years since my wife
hied. Early in the year there were rumors about


that Mr. Massey was about to try and secure the
ten acres that now form our beautiful park, and
the constable was also about applying for it as a
section, while the section on which at present the
post-office stands was a reserve. The park sec-
tion was subject to inundation, when the river was
flooded. On learning the intention of Massey and
the constable (Walmsley), I proceeded at once to
Sydney and had an interview with the Hon. W.
Forster, our representative. I laid the whole mat-
ter before him, and gave him the full particulars,
and asked him to go with me to the Minister for
Lands and see if he could have the one section
that was reserved changed for the other, as,
by doing so when the land came to be sold, it
would bring much more money than the one sub-
ject to floods. When we saw the Minister and
he heard what I had to say, he called in the Un-
der-Secretary, and asked him if there would be
any difficulty in having that done, the reply was
“None whatever.” He was ordered to see that
the exchange was made at once. I then requested
that the section subject to floods should be gaz-
etted as a reserve for a park. The Under-Secre-
tarv was instructed to have that attended to also.
I felt proud of my success, and at once returned
home; and I caused a stir when I made public
what I had accomplished. I, with J. T. A. Styles,
and Thomas Booth were gazetted as trustees, and
held the position until Styles and Booth died, and I
resigned, which was not till we had had it all
fenced around and a deep creek running through
the middle of it filled up. and all the ground level-
led. We also had a ring fenced in as a cricket oval,
and laid out in pathways, and I received several
consignments of trees to plant in the ground. I
myself dug the holes and planted the trees with
my own hands, and cared for them. And now
the beautiful little park of 10 acres, the admira-
tion of every visitor to Gundaroo, who declares


there is not a more beautiful park anywhere, stands
as a monument, if there is no other, after I am dead
and gone. I may add we had yearly grants from
the Government, but every sixpence was expended
on the park; all our work was given freely and
gratuitously. T ma) r add the other two trustees
left all in my hands. Whatever I proposed they
both agreed to, and as everything comes to an
end. when I removed from Gundaroo, where I had
spent 44 of the best years of my life, and removed
to Strathfield. T resigned my trust. But every
time T visit the “Centre of the Earth,” as it was
styled through my exertion on its behalf, I go
down to review the work of mv hands, and with
nature’s assistance. On the 15th of February
my father laid the foundation-stone of the present
Caledonia Store. There was a large attendance at
the ceremony from all the places around, and very
many of my best friends from Yass. We had a
very social evening afterwards, and very few of
those friends then present are now alive. Still
greater matters were to happen, for on 17th of
Tune this year I married my second wife, whom
T had much reason to be thankful for. She had
only been out from Scotland about 12 months.
But T never had cause to regret having met her.
T shall have more to say about her further on.
T had a great deal of magisterial duties to attend
to this year, which consumed a lot of mv time.
The new store building was completed to enable
me to get into it just before Christmas, and T had
a lot of work removing the goods. A little before
T tendered for a Government contract and was
successful, viz., the building of the Nelanglo Pub-
lic School, and had the work started earlv in the
New Year. T had a good deal of travelling to
it. for T was a working contractor, doing a good
deal of work, as well as seeing that it was done.
T tendered for another earlv in the year (Elisbeth
Fields Public SchooT. but was unsuccessful this


time, a lower tender being accepted. This year
1 had two brick cottages built in Harp Street, and
one in Cork Street, and sold them with about three
acres of land to Miss M- Jobbins.
1881.—Early in the year a bye-election for Quean-
beyan took place through the resignation of J.
B. Thompson, Thomas Rutledge offered his ser-
vices and was duly elected, the opposition candi-
date losing his £4O deposit. The Rev. Robert
Steel, M.A., received a call and was inducted into
the charge, and remained with ns for about 17
years. He was a faithful servant of Jesus Christ
and a good preacher, and many of us were sorry
when he left us. We also had as a newcomer
amongst us Mr. W. R. Clemenger. who had been
appointed as Post and Telegraph Master, and he is
still with us-
On the Bth of June my dear son Arthur died
on my knees. I had been up with him all night,
and thought the end was approaching, and he
breathed his last and passed away about 6 a.m.,
so Professor Hamilton was not far wrong in his
statement. He was a good boy, beloved by all
who knew him. and his schoolmates loved him as
a brother. Had he lived. I think he would have
made his mark in the world. He often had talks
with his stepmother on religious subjects, and
he said to her about half an hour before he died,
after putting on his boots. “I will go out to the
kitchen with you and lie on the sofa and have a
good talk.” In less than half an hour after he
had gone to be with his Maker, another warning
to me and all to accept the saying. “Be ye also
ready, for in such an hour as ye think not,” etc. T
mourned for my poor boy, for he was a good son.
About Christmas time we had a visit from Mr
and Mrs. Anderson and Mr. Ballantine for the
holidays. It was again another hot January, the
thermometer registering 100 degrees in the shade-
The Government called for tenders for the building
of a public school at Tallegandra, and T tendered


for it, and was successful. In the building of it
I had a lot of worry, as I could not get the work-
men to do honest work; after the foundation had
been put in the inspector condemned it, and it had
to be taken up, and I had to get fresh masons to
do the work. Things went on better until about
the end, when 1 myself condemned some cement-
ing. I picked it down, and made them do it
again. However, I got it finished and passed and
then made up my mind not to tender any more
when I had so much trouble to get the work done
properly.
1 joined the Royal Arch Lodge of Free and Ac-
cepted Masons in Goulburn, and at this time got a
new buggy made to order by Southall, of Goulburn,
who charged me £BO for it, but it was a good one,
and I never regretted it. Used it at several elec-
tions taking me round the electorate, and I had
rough travelling at that; but when I was leaving
Gundaroo it was in splendid condition, and I made
a present of it to my daughter-in-law, that was in
1904. The church had now been up about 20 years
and required some repairs, the plaster ceiling was
beginning to fall, so we had the whole pulled down
and put up a T. and G. pine ceiling, and had it nicely
painted, and it looked very well; there were also
othe repairs done, and altogether it made it look
quite smart again. My mother-in-law (mother
of my first wife), whom I had a very great respect
for, died and a little later also her son, Donald
Cameron.
The months of the next year —January and Feb-
ruary—were very hot, occasionally the thermome-
ter registered in the shade from 102 to 104 degrees.
I had occasion to be often on the Bench during the
year, both at Queanbeyan and Gundaroo- We had
sent to us a new .police magistrate (Mr. Woore).
He tried to ride the high horse, and the first time
he took his seat on the Gundaroo Bench he said


we had no right to do this, and do it here. He would
see that it be altered. They did the same at Casino,
where he came from, and he had it altered. Think-
ing he might report to headquarters and get our
rights taken from us, 1 wrote a true account of
what had transpired, and showed we had authority
to do what we had been doing. It seemed that
he had reported, as I expected he would do. He was
then called on for an explanation as to why his
report was so different to mine, and it seemed he
could not give satisfaction for his report, and he
got well snubbed for his pains. He then became
very unfriendly with me; but I did not care. We
retained our position, and he did not get done what
he succeeded in doing in Casino, and he had to treat
me with respect when I took my seat on the Bench
alongside of him, even in Queanbeyan, as well as at
Gundaroo. I had Smith’s Needles gas machine
installed. It certainly lighted up the premises
well, and I thought I would have great satisfaction,
but that was only for a time. The gas was made
from gasoline and air. After having it for some
years it did not prove satisfactory, for a lot of gas
escaped from the tanks, and 1 could not get it re-
medied ; further, in the winter it was most unsatis-
factory, as the cold affected the gasoline and it
was the opposite in summer, the heat had such a
powerful effect on it. I got frightened for an ex-
plosion when I opened the tin to fill the gasometer-
After some years I installed in its place a carbide
plant, and it has been satisfactory to the present
date. This year was somewhat important. On
New Year’s Day 1 was very unwell, so much so
that the household could not leave home. An elec-
tion for Parliament took place, and we sent in as
our representative George F. de Salis. The one
thing most satisfactory in my life was, I began the
year free of debt. It was a great relief to me to
be able to say, “I owe no man anything,” and any
property I had I could call my own. My future


experience was most beneficial, for on purchasing
goods for the store I could pay cash and received
a good discount, which actually enabled me to land
the goods at the store at less than the quoted Syd-
ney price, when I purchased to the extent of £IOO
or over. My mind was greatly relieved when I
was enabled to do that.
The year began wet for January. We had 7j4
inches of rain in two days.
At Cootamundra there was a sad disaster. The
rain had filled their water supply dam so much that
it burst, rushed down across the railway line and
cleared out a great creek, and when the train ar-
rived in the dark it rushed into the gap and caused
great destruction as well as several deaths. The
f noma railway line was finished as far as Bungen-
dore this year. I find that the election of George
de Sails should have been noticed two years before
this, for this year ended his representation of the
electorate. Another general election was now
held, and five candidates offered their services to
the electors of Queanbeyan, namely E. W. O’Sulli-
van, Hodgkinson, Wright, O’.'Nieill. and myself.
O’Sullivan had the majority, a small one. owing to
the heavy vote, as the Cooma line was being con-
structed. He, therefore, had that vote as well as
the Roman Catholic vote, for he was the only R.C
candidate out of the five. This year I purchased
some land in Strathfield; indeed, the cottage I am
writing this in is on the land I purchased. To
show the prosperity of the place, I bought the land
at 37/- a foot frontage, and to-day its value is £4
per foot, and I have 200 feet frontage by 198 feet
back, on which I have erected three cottages, viz.,
“Wemyss,” called after my birthplace in Scotland;
“Caledonia,” in honor of dear auld Scotland; and
“Gundaroo,” where I am now writing this, as the
place where I made any money T am possessed of.
An old friend whom I assisted both by shelter and
some cash. A. J. Slatterie, died this year. Alto


gether Fortune favored me that year. But my
luck seemed to be against me this year (1886), for
I speculatel in the purchase of some land at Manly,
near Sydney, for which I paid £IO6O. I kept it
for twenty years, and when I sold it, after paying
all rates and taxes during that time, I only received
£looo—one of my bad specs. The following year
Mr. Clemenger and I had a consultation as to form-
ing a P.A- and H. Society for Gundaroo. We de-
cided to call a public meeting and see how the resi-
dents would take it. It was decided to carry out
the project, and as we had no special ground for it.
the first show was held in paddock and the ballroom
adjoining the Royal Hotel. It was a great success,
so much so that we held annual shows for many
years after on the land we had granted by the
Government (already alluded to) for the purpose
and a racecourse combined. I may here add the
night before the first show everything was arranged
for next day, judges, stewards, etc., et. I was ap-
pointed to take charge of the ballroom and its
contents. In the morning I had a dreadful attack
of lumbago, and I sent word I could not attend as
it was impossible to straighten myself up. Word
came back I must come down. I did so, and think
I am safe now in recording that I don’t think I
spent a more painful day in my life, and I have
had some very painful days during my seventy-
eight years of existence.
1888 is rather an important year. I bought two
allotments opposite the store, which I did very well
with: one of them had a cottage on it. and I sold
it to AHck Elliott at a good price. The other, I
erected a weatherboard cottage on. and leased it
to Mrs. Holdsworth, who continued in it till she
died- I then leased it to W. Booth. After he left
it I made a present of it to the public for a Public
Library, and it has continued to be such to the pre-
sent day. There was a great Exhibition held in
Melbourne, and as I did not feel very well I took


a trip over for a change; but I was laid up for a
week after my arrival. Owing to that another week
had to be spent. The Exhibition was worth going
over to see. After my return my son John went
over, for the first trip from home since he had left
Sydney and school. He was away for a fortnight.
This year was disastrous for some of the old resi-
dents. Old Charles Darby died in April, old C.
A. Massey died in July, and in October my revered
and respected father died at the age_ of 85 years,
just ten years and nine months after my mother.
Next year I resigned my trusteeship of the com-
mon. and took steps to form a Free Trade League,
as I had been a freetrader ever since my landing
in New South Wales. Shortly after there was a
conference of deputies from all the Leagues in the
State, and I was appointed to attend as the League
representative. There was a lot of business done
at it. A protectionist agitation had been got up
and the future elections were to be fought out on
these two questions, and there were many on each
side until we got Federation, when Free Trade and
Protection were handed over to the Federal Parlia-
ment. I also resigned my trusteeship on all the
roads, after 20 years’ service, and doing all the hard
work, measuring, writing specifications, and draw-
ing plans, etc., etc. I received a very kind letter
from the Department, regretting my resignation and
valuable services, and thanking me for my past ser-
vices, and as T had resigned the trust would be dis-
solved. and all the roads handed over to the Road
Superintendent for the District. The only position
T now held was trustee for the park, where I had
done so much work, and which now stands as my
monument, and will be so when I am dead and gone.
This year a company was formed to start a roller
flour mill in Oueabeyan. thinking it would be a
good thing for the district I invested £126 in
fully paid-up shares. When the company was
really formed T was elected as one of the directors,


and held the position for about two years; but the
meetings being held in Oueanbeyan, it was too much
for me travelling 25 miles there and 25 miles back.
lost too much time, and my expenses were not
paid tor the, allowance being twenty shillings each
meeting, so I resigned the position. After some
years it was also proved to be a non-paying spec
lor I never received even one dividend'and ulti-
mately lost my £126, for it was put into Hquida-
tion. In April of this year our Free Trade League
adopted the principle of the Single Tax League
and we worked under the banner of the two com-
bined, for really land value taxation means free
trade. T was appointed secretary and treasurer
During the years it fell to my lot to induce the
Banking Company of Sydney to es-
ta lish a branch at Gundaroo. which was very con-
venient. They purchased the old store from mv
sister who was now owner, and spent a good sum
m fitting it up for the purpose. The Minister for
Mines and Agriculture decided to hold a conference
of deputies from all P.A. and H. Societies in the
Mate, I was appointed representative of our so-
ciety. to be held in Sydney. There was a very
large attendance, and a great deal of information
gained from papers read by delegates on various
matters connected with agriculture. I read a paper
at it, which was well received. Afterwards I vis-
ited the Albury Show, and in the evening addressed
a large meeting of farmers on land value taxation,
irrespective of improvement, so it was on the unim-
proved value. Some of the protectionists at the
meeting, and, principally, the chairman, did not like
the principles T was advocating, and wished me to
desist; while a large number called on me to go on.
but I said if the chairman said T was not in order I
would go no further. He said that was not what
the meeting was called for, so T took my seat. But
after the meeting was over very many asked me now
to finish what I wished to sav. T did so. and there


were many very favorable to the taxation of unim-
proved land values, and shortly a league was form-
ed and exists to this day. The Government now,
after considering the result of the conference above
noted, decided to offer a prize of £25 to anyone
producing the largest and best collection of native
grasses, to be exhibited at the Royal Pastoral, Agri-
cultural and Horticultural Society’s Show next year
(1891). I set to work and used to go away out in
the bush with a small three-pronged fork and a
pasteboard box under my arm. Naturally, I had
to keep my eyes on the ground, and in consequence
my head bent. Some of the wise kind fellows used
to say, “Look at Affleck, he is surely getting ready
to be a resident of Tarban Creek (Lunatic Asy-
lum). But I only laughed at them, and when the
show was held my collection of grasses was ex-
hibited with others, but mine carried off the prize
and I secured the £25 and the Minister’s certificate,
so I opened the eyes of the wiseacres. Afterwards
1 secured about £9 more as prizes at Cootamundra,
Queanbeyan, and Gundaroo Shows, after which I
gave them to the Gundaroo Public School, and they
now hang on the walls of that public building for
the benefit of the young idea attending the school.
1 exhibited about 40 kinds on cardboard showing
the roots, stalks, and seeds.
1891.—The public gave the public school child-
ren a picnic at the beginning of the year, at which
I was appointed superintendent. They had a good
day and all were well satisfied. There was a gene-
ral election to Parliament this year on the 30th of
Jnue. As Albury was represented by a protec-
tionist, I determined to offer my services as a free-
trade candidate, and many thought I would put out
the late member. So I advertised an address, but
before I started for Albury another candidate ad-
vertised he would address the electors. He had at
two previous elections offered his services as a free-
trader, Both his friends and mine endeavored to


get him to withdraw, but he would not. He said
for the last three years he had kept in close touch
with the electors, and he was positively certain he
would be returned. When this was shown to me,
without further delay I retired, as I said I would
be no party to splitting the freetrade vote. But
I went on to Sydney, and while there received a
telegraphic message to be at Cootamundra on Mon-
day, as they were to select their candidate, and I
had been nominated as one of them. I wired back
I could not be there on Monday night, but if it
would do I would be present on Tuesday. However,
they did not put it off, but there were three candi-
dates named, and only one turned up, and he was
chosen. I waited several days for a reply, and it
was nearly a week before I learned the decision of
the Cootamundra electors. I then determined to
offer my services to the Yass electors, four were al-
ready in the field. I went out as a freetrader, the
others were all protectionists. When I got to Yass
I was met by several who would have supported
me had I gone at the start. They said, “You are
too late, we are all pledged.” My reply was, “All
right, 1 will go round the electorate and make my-
self and principles known, and will come out early
enough next election, if I live.” I carried out my
plan ,although all the others had been speaking for
a week before. When the poll was declared I was
second, the ex-member being returned, who was a
resident of Yass. The lowest on the poll lost his
£4O deposit. At the declaration of the poll, when
the candidates were thanking their supporters, when
my turn came, I told them all being well they might
expect to see me at the next election, when I hoped
they would vote for me.
Having deposited nearly all my spare cash at in-
terest with several building societies, there were
rumors some of them were shaky. So I started off
to Sydney to see how things were going, and we
put one of them into liquidation, and one after an


other fell in. Things looked very blue. Hudson
Bros, had also formed themselves into a limited
company and guaranteed 6 per cent, interest, which
they duly paid for some time, when it was found
out that they were paying that out of capital. I
had 600 fully paid-up £1 shares. I could write a
lot about this and the building societies, but it is
no use stirring up old sores. But to make a long
story short, by these failures at this time I lost
about £3OOO, and ever since I have shunned build-
ing societies and companies. In Hudson Bros.,
Limited, when the liquidator had wound it all up, I
received £35 for my £6OO worth of share. I have
no hesitation in saying that it was a downright
swindle. The party who bought the property as
a going concern paid into another company, and
they, from all appearances, are doing well. To-
wards the end of the year my dear wife, son, and
self were all laid up with la grippe, my wife and I
being in bed at the same time, but in about a week
I was able to get about, but my wife was very ill,
we were almost despairing of her living. However,
after a long illness, it pleased God to restore her to
health again. This year, as both the Wesleyan Con-
ference and our Church Assembly met about the
same time in the year it was arranged that there
should be a United Conference in the afternoon in
St. Stephen’s Church. On the day appointed a
very large meeting was held. During the time
spent together it was felt to be of a very deep spiri-
tual character, and all seemed to enjoy it. and con-
cluded that much good would come from it. T was
appointed as one of a deputation to wait on the
authorities to see if we could not get the express
train to stop at Gunning, and we succeeded. About
his time, the “Sydney Morning Herald” (I think)
offered a prize of £25 for the best essay “On the
best means of settling people on the land and re-
lieving the congestion of population in the cities,
with the least possible injury to existing rights.’


I had the presumption to be one of the competitors.
But when I found out the names of the judges, I at
once came to the conclusion my chance of winning
would be small, and it afterwards proved that my
conclusion was right. My production was far too
democratic for those appointed as judges. (See
Essay at end.)
The sale of Gundaroo town land had always, pre-
vious to this date, been offered at auction at Quean-
beyan. T urged on the Government to try a sale
on the ground at Gundaroo. The Minister for
Lands agreed to give it a trial, and appointed me
to offer the land for sale by auction. But he killed
my chance of selling by fixing the upset price far
too high, much higher than ever before or since. I
think I only sold two lots, and there was never any
more sold to the present time at the same high
upset price. They had to come back to the old
figure. But Gundaroo never again had the oppor-
tunity of offering any more for sale.
The year 1893 opened with a very severe storm,
which did much damage to Mrs. Parkins’ store, and
considerable damage to my garden. Mrs. P. kept
the other store in the town. She sent for me sud-
denly. and when I arrived she asked me if I would
oblige her by making out her will. When I got
the particulars I saw there would be no difficulty,
for she was to leave the things to two sisters in
England. She had a daughter, who did not live
with her. and nothing was left to the daughter.
Two Gundaroo residents were left executors. Sh
died some time after. And the executors appointed
me to go through the stock and make out stock
sheets. When that was accomplished, the execu-
tors advertised for tenders. Knowing as I did the
worth of the stock, having gone right through it.
amongst others. T put in a tender, and being the
highest, secured it. T then held a cheap sale’",and
soon got rid of it. After the sale, the daughter,
finding there was left to her. entered a plea


of insanity in the Probate Court of Sydney. The
executors, the nurse attending her during her ill-
ness, and I were all summoned. We attended, and
after the executors and nurse were examined, 1 was
called as the party writing out the will, and it was
easily seen which way the case would go. The
result was that the daughter received nothing, and
had to pay costs. The trial lasted three days. 1
attended our Church Assembly again this year,
which was rather exciting. The Moderator-elect
presented himself in the Assembly with frills, knee
breeches, shoes and buckles, which took the As-
sembly by surprise, as it was the first time a de-
parture from the plain robes of previous Modera-
tors. More excitement was in store when he got
up to give his address, when the title of it was given,
namely “The Verbal Inspiration of the Bible.” He
disputed the verbal theory. There has been great
discussion both inside and outside of the Church on
the address as delivered. Personally, I think it might
have passed over as a nine days’ wonder had it
been confined to the Assembly, but as it became
public property through being published in the press
1 fear at the time it did more harm than good, for
it was a grand handle for the scoffers and unbe-
lievers of the Bible. I dare say it is not much
thought about now in the twentieth century. This
year we had another trouble, for the banks stag-
gered, and only before the worst came the Govern-
ment intervened, when they saw the bank doors
closing. It caused a good deal of trouble, and it
was some time before the majority of the banks
got over it. Indeed, to the present, there is one
that has not got over it yet, after ten years. Some
thought it was a righteous judgment on them for
their action when the building societies succumbed
Many thought the banks had a good deal to do with
their downfall, and I was one who thought so. As
a general election came on next year, towards the


end of 1893 I posted about 1800 circulars to the
electors of Yass Plains, reminding them it was my
intention of offering them my services as their re-
presentative in Parliament at the election next year.
The election duly came on in July, 1894, and there
were three candidates, namely, the sitting member
(T. Colls), A. McCallum, and myself; the two for-
mer were protectionists, and I in the freetrade in-
terest. I had travelled round the whole electorate
and addressed the electors. McCallum’s suppor-
ters had formed a Farmers’ and Selectors’ Associa-
tion to swell his numbers, and as the polling day
approached his supporters got a buggy decorated
over with flowers and greenery, with ropes attach-
ed, for they had determined not to use horses, but
drag the buggy through the streets with him in it
in honor of his return. The buggy was in the back
yard of one of the hotels, and all were anxiously
waiting for the state of the poll. When it was
announced the decorated buggy was not brought
out, as I was declared at the head of the poll with
a majority of 76, It proved such a dreadful dis-
appointment to both of the other candidates, so
much so to the ex-member that he took to his bed
and had two doctors attending him. Three days
after a rumor went about that at Grabben Gullen,
where there were 130 voters, of which I only receiv-
ed one, the poll was informal. He was at once out
of bed to see if the election could be upset, and
was thoroughly well, and when the matter was re-
ported to the Government he received a reply that
it was all right, and I was the representative of
Yass from the 14th July, 1894, and I retained the
position till July, 1904; and between the two dates
I had gone through five contested elections, some
of which were very severe, for those opposed to
me left no stone unturned to get me ousted, and,
occasionally made some very unworthy statements
to secure their ends. The election proved so very
disastrous to the protectionist Government that


the Dibbs Administration resigned without meet-
ing Parliament, and George, now Sir George, Reid
was sent for and formed a Freetrade Government.
As the new Ministry had to go to their constitu-
ents, it was the 28th of August before Parliament
met. Parliament then held its sittings right up to
the Christmas holidays, when they adjourned for
a month. There had been many all-day and night
sittings, which wearied us out; but there were many
very important measures passed into law. After
a short rest, and previous to the House again meet-
ing, I paid a visit to Victoria in search of informa-
tion on the burning question of freetrade and pro-
tection. I thought it well to go over and see and
hear for myself what could be used in favor of pro-
tection. 1 remained a few days in Melbourne, after
which I left for Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo. My
letter for Geelong was to the Mayor of the city, who
received me very kindly and spent some time in
driving me to various factories and introducing me
to owners and managers, with whom I had inter-
views and gained much information, and as a free-
trader I was glad to get. As an example, I will
give one case. 1 was introduced to a Mr. Gray,
of my own nationality, who was one of the largest
employers in Geelong. After a long argument on
different trades with which he had factories, I se-
lected the matter of boots. I said: “Mr. Gray, yoi
may induce me to become a protectionist if you can
give me a satisfactory reply to the following:—Be-
fore I left Sydney, passing along George Street, I
noticed in a window a pair of gent.’s boots marked
“made in Geelong, price 17/-,” and as I came along
the street to your office, a pair of the same boots to
all appearance marked 21/-. Now, how is it you
charge 21/- for the same article that I can purchase
in Sydney, also made in Geelong, for 17/-?” “That
is easy,” he says. “When we have over-production
we must sell for whatever we can get for them.”
“Then who has to make up the loss, is it you or


the workman by a reduction in his wages?’* “Oh,
yes, he must put up with a reduced wage.” I re-
plied, \\ ell, Mr. Gray, if that is the case you can-
not make a protectionist of me.” That is a sample
of many replies which I received. If possible, 1
leit V ictoria a stronger freetrader than ever. Among
others I was introduced to, was a Mr. Murray, who
was visiting Geelong for the day, but a resident of
Ballarat; in the way of conversation I said it was
mv intention to be at the latter place on the mor-
row. When I reached there he was at the railway
station to meet me, and took me down to a club
he was a member of, and had my name entered
into the book as an hon. member.' He then took
me to Mr. Nevin’s establishment. I had a letter
of introduction to him. He has the largest print-
ing establishment in Ballarat. After taking Mr.
Murray and me through his large
and after lunch he drove me all round the city, and
was extremely kind to me. I had also a letter from
Mr. (now Sir Wm.) Irvine, Premier of Victoria
to the Hon. J. Wanliss, M.L.C., who also treated
me with great kindness, and had me entered as an
honorary member of his club. I had lunch with
him at his private residence, and he arranged to
drive me all about next day to places of importance.
However, when he called I was very unwell, the
hot weather had prostrated me, and I had deter-
mined to return to Melbourne to be with friends,
rather than strangers, if I was to be laid up, al-
though I was told on all sides I would be well
looked after if I would remain. But I returned to
Melbourne. A full account is given in Appendix
A. On my return to Melbourne a telegram was
waiting for me to say my brother-in-law, who was
staying with us for some years, had died. I did
not start for home, for I was too unwell. At any
rate I could not have got home in time for the
funeral. But after I felt well enough I finished
the trip I had laid out. and returned home in time


for the meeting of Parliament, after the adjourn-
ment. We again had a lot of hard work. Amongst
other bills we put through was an Amending Land
Bill, the Tariff Bill, an Income Tax Bill, a Land and
Income Tax Assessment Bill. There was also a
Local Government Bill introduced. The Legisla-
tive Council threw out the Land and Income Tax
Assessment Bill, which entirely killed the other tax
bills. The Government determined to dissolve
the Parliament and appeal to the country on the
bills, and the reform of the Council (But up to 1913
it has not yet been re-formed.) However, the Go-
vernment was returned with a larger majority than
before, and, of course, when the new Parliament
met. the Council then passed the bills they had
previously rejected. In the new Parliament there
were many new faces, and a number of the old ones.
Amongst the rejected rail-sitters were Sir Henry
Parkes, B. R. Wise, James Martin; and from the
Opposition Sir George Dibbs, Henry Copeland,
John Kidd, and Mr. Wall. In regard to the Yass
election, the protectionists were determined to see
and shunt me, and the question was who Avas the
strongest man of the party that would be likely to
defeat me. and it was decided the ex-member (Mr.
Colls) should run. and they were to leave no stone
unturned to beat me. In going the Electorate
he boasted that he Avould beat me by three to one.
But it was not to be. for I was returned by a ma-
jority of 112: much larger than mv previous vic-
tory. It Avas a sad disappointment to my oppo-
nents. We had a lot of hard work, many all day
and night sittings. Avhich did not finish till two davs
before Christmas. We had the credit of passing
more useful legislation than had been done for
many years. The greatest measure, and one which
makes the session the most important. AA r as the es-
tablishment of direct taxation to take the place of
Customs duties. The year was verv dry. and the
crops were looked on as a failure. So that I might


be nearer to my Parliamentary duties I had built
a very nice cottage, “Wemyss,” at Strathfield, to
live in. But when completed my wife did not
care to leave Gundaroo, so I had to lease it, but
was fortunate to get a good tenant, paying for it
£66 per annum.
1896.—January of this year it was very hot, the
thermometer registering 102 degrees in the shade
at Gundaroo. while at some other places it got up to
120. I had not felt very well, for I cannot stand
the heat. However, I remained about till our
Church General Assembly, and attended it till its
close as Oueanbeyan’s representative elder. After
which I left home on a trip to Adelaide and Bro-
ken Hill on the 3rd April. I left by the railway,
and on reaching Albury I rested at my cousin’s
home till the 6th, when I left for Melbourne. I
immediately secured a sleeping berth to Adelaide,
which left about 5 p.m. on a long but pleasant
journey. I arrived at the South Australian
capital next day, about noon Svdney time. I then
secured a sleeping berth to Broken Hill. Regard-
ing this sleeping carriage, it was one of the old
style, and inconvenient in this respect, a lot of the
travellers were smokers and players, and were very
noisy over the latter, and their smoking all the
time without proper ventilation proved highly dis-
agreeable. However, we reached the end of our
journey next day about noon. It was a most dis-
agreeable day. The wind blew and the dust flew.
And after making inquiries if it was often like this
I received the same answer from a good many,
“Yes.” I determined T would not stay long in
Broken Hill. I went and saw the manager of
the principal mine who received me very kindly. He
was a countryman of my own, but had seen a lot
of the world. He authorised one of the men to
show me all over the place, and gave me a lot of
useful information, which I made good use of in
Parliament. But I bid good-bye to Broken Hill the


same night by the return train, for one day of the
kind was enough for me. For full particulars of
the whole of this trip see Appendix B. I arrived
home in good health after this long journey of
nearly 3000 miles. As Parliament was to open on
the 12th of May I left home on the Thursday pre-
vious for Sydney, as I was anxious to be at the
Annual Meeting of the A.M.P. Society on the Fri-
day. In those days I attended the annual meet-
ings closely, as I took a great interests in our noble
institutions. At this particular meeting I was ap-
pointed one of a special committee to confer with
the directors re the revision of the bylaws and the
extension to London. We revised the bylaws,
but we rejected the London extension proposal, all
of which was afterwards confirmed by special meet-
ing of the members of the Society. I attended
the opening of the second session of the 17th Par-
liament, and closely attended the whole time —only
one week I absented myself, having a bad cold,
which had been hanging on me a long time, and I
could not get rid of it. I took a trip to Melbourne
to see if a change would relieve me of the cold, and
as the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
of Australia was being held I attended and repre-
sented the Goulburn Presbytery. I felt consider-
ably better on my return. On the Friday previous
to my starting for Melbourne, T in company with
the late Mr. Lonsdale, member for Armidale, went
U n to Dalton, where I had the honor of declaring
the new bridge over the creek in the main street
open, by cutting a silk ribbon stretched across it.
During the afternoon we both addressed an open-
air meeting. While I was at Melbourne, Mr. Ewan
Cameron, for whom I had a verv great respect, and
who had been teacher of the public school at Nubba,
died, and I was indeed sorry I could not be at his
funeral to pay my last respects to such a man, who
was decidedly a Christian and a gentleman in all
respects. The session closed after a lot of hard


work on the 13th November, and the last sitting
continued for 72 hours, and we kept the members
of the Council sitting from 4 p.m. on Thursday to
8 a.m. on Friday, so as to finish the business and
close the session. The year ended as it began—
very hot at 102 deg. in the shade. It was very dry,
so much so that the crops were about failing when
we had a fine rainfall, and everything ended well.
The beginning of the next year was extremely
changeable; it would be up to 100 in the shade, and
a day or two following it would be down to 45,
which caused us to have fires lighted, it was so
cold. It was this year I transferred over to the
trustees the half acre of land, with building and
fencing all complete, for a School of Arts. I also
gave them a donation of books as a nucleus of a
library, when further on, I might give them a lot
more if all went well. I have done this as a matter
of gratitude for the benefit I have derived in this
place, and one for which I also have done much.
Amongst the old hands they used to say, if it had
not been for Willie Affleck there would not have
been a township of Gundaroo, unless on paper only.
Anything I possess I have no hesitation in saying
the greater portion was made in Gundaroo. although
it was a good many years before I had a fair start.
In the month of February I made up my mind to
have a trip over to Tasmania. I started for that
journey by going over to Melbourne, so that I
would have a short sea trip, for I am a bad sailor
until I get right over it by a long voyage. After
I had secured my passage and got on board, just
as the steamer was starting, one of my Yass con-
stituents (not a supporter), Mr. Luke Trainer, came
up to me, and we were mates while he was on the
Island, for he left before I did for Melbourne on
return. (The full particulars are given in Appen-
dix C.) About the end of my time in Tasmania
the election of delegates for the Federal Conven-
tion was on, and as electors could only vote in their


own State I had to hurry on and get to Albury to
vote. There were ten to be voted for, and six out
of the ten I voted for were elected. On my return
home I paid a visit to the Narrawa end of my elec-
torate, and during the same month I had an invi-
tation from the Minister for Public Works to go
with him and other members to Narrabri for the
opening of the railway extension to Motee. I em-
braced the opportunity, and we had a great time of
it. There was an aboriginal meeting or corroboree
at night, at which they went through a lot of antics,
but they were very cunning, they would only do a
little, then make a collection before they would do
any further, and that was done several times, but
their antics showed how fierce and savage they
could be. We left Moree on our return to Narra-
bri next morning, and proceeded to Wee Waa to
see the route for the railway extension. We were
well entertained at this place, but we paid a penalty
in the shape of dust. My experience of such at
Broken Hill with dust was nothing compared with
this trip. When we returned in the evening the
baths were put to a great strain to wash us, as well
as the brushes to our clothes. However, we were
somewhat compensated by the splendid banquet
that awaited us after. On my return home, for
the trip was very enjoyable throughout, another
invitation was given me, with others, to visit the
Hawkesbury College, at the distribution of prizes
by the Minister for Agriculture. This was also a
very enjoyable trip, as we were shown all over the
place and had everything explained, and the sump-
tuous luncheon that awaited us was something to
be remembered, everything partaken of being manu-
factured or grown on the establishment. It is an
establishment that cost the State a good deal, but
at which much can be learned. Indeed, many of
the one-time students are now serving as superin-
tendents of such places in several parts of the
world. We now met for our work in Parliament.


and had not been long at it when the Federal dele-
gates were to meet, and our Chamber was given
up for them to meet in. So we had an adjourn-
ment for a month. It being the month of Septem-
ber, I determined to pay a visit to Queensland. I,
therefore, left by the Brisbane mail train about 9
p.m., and arrived at Armidale about 6 a.m., and at
the invitation of Mr. Lonsdale, the member for the
district, I spent a day with him at his home. He
escorted me over the place and took me to all the
public buildings, and introduced me to many of his
friends, etc. I enjoyed myself very well. Next
morning at 6 o’clock I resumed my journey and
during the day passed through some very fine coun-
try. On leaving Toowoomba we had to mount
the ranges, with the train, and it is a very fine
sight, but not so pretty, in my opinion, as getting
down the mountains to the Jenolan Caves, where I
had been, and nothing but the loss of memory will
ever allow me to forget the caves I went through.
They certainly show the works of an Almighty
Hand. But to return: We passed through many
towns before reaching Brisbane, where I landed at
about 8 p.m. I put up for the night at Mr. Mur-
phy’s Hotel. Next morning I left for Bundaberg,
and passing through some of the finest scenery I
ever saw, I reached Bundaberg about 6.30 p.m., had
dinner at the hotel at 7.30 p.m., when the manager
of the sugar mills called on me, to whom I had a
letter of introduction. He drove me out to the
mills, for they work night and day, and he escorted
me through the whole of the works; it was well
lighted up. The mills are connected with the
plantations where the cane is crushed. We started
at the pipe that introduces the liquid from the plan-
tation, it is dreadfully dirty looking, just dirty
water mixed with mud. We went on to the next
one, which showed it a good deal cleaner. We then
came on to what was sugar, but something like
what was served out to workmen when I first went


to Gundaroo in 1855. It was called pampangi su-
gar, and was imported in hundredweight bags. The
best way I have of describing it is: If you put a
spoonful in a cup of clean boiling water it made jt
like strong tea, so dark in colour. Such was the
next grade I saw. On we went till we next came
to a nice clean brown-looking sugar. On and on
we went, and arrived at the next pans, where it is
white as we use it. From there it was hoisted up
to a floor above, where it was bagged into the yolb.
hessian bags as we are so well used to. But my last
surprise was when we came to what I thought was
a muck-heap on the floor. I was told that was yet
to be put through another process, from which the
black treacle was made. So ended my visit to the
sugar mill, and it was really very interesting. My
time was very short in Queensland, for I had made
a promise to be present and declare the Yass P.A.
and H. Show open on a certain day for which I was
sorry, but could not then help it, for I made it a
point in my life never to break an engagement, if
it was in mv power to keep it. Only for that pro-
mise, I had intended to visit one or more of the
cane-fields, but could not. I left next morning for
Brisbane. On the way we passed through Gympie,
a large mining town of about 12,000 inhabitants.
A great quantity of gold has been got there. We
also passed close to Maryborough, on the Mary
River. There is a great business done here; the
resources are so many, and a great quantity of
sugar is sent from here and Bundaberg. In pass-
ing through the country between the last-named
place and Brisbane, one sees huge trees; they are
a great size, and there is a considerable number of
sawmills on the route. But I think I saw
some larger in Tasmania. But the other foliage
was quite equal, if not superior, to that in Tasmania.
Along the road portions of it were lovely—a perfect
Paradise. One of the wonders on the side of the
road which we passed was an immense rock; they


call it Mount Bcerburrum. It stands nearly per-
pendicular, on one side 400 feet high, and not of
any great circumference. From one position pass-
ing on the train it looks like an immense pillar.
On the journey we cross some fine and important
rivers; and there are several sugar, as well as saw,
mills. On arrival at Brisbane I spent three days.
It is a very fine city, but, of course, not to compare
with either Sydney or Melbourne. While there I
was introduced to several members of Parliament,
and visited the Parliament House, which is a very
fine building, and puts our Sydney one in the shade,
as all the others do, at Melbourne and Adelaide.
These are very fine, but all have the same fault—
the accommodation for the public who wish to
go and see, as well as hear, the space is too small
altogether. Of course, the Sydney one looks much
better inside than outside for the outside is a dis-
grace to the oldest city of the Commonwealth. There
are some fine churches and other buildings in Bris-
bane. The Wesleyan Church is the most impos-
ing of them all. In going to Brisbane we have to
change carriages at Jennings, which is the border
station. The reason of this is that they have the
narrow gauge on the Queensland line. The Dar-
ling Downs, which we pass through, is some of the
finest land in Australia. I suppose, and a large lot
of it is cultivated. I may add, after we topped the
mountains past I oowoomba we pass through ten
tunnels in about as many miles. I got back in
time to declare the Yass Show open and also be at
opening of Parliament; and the session closed about
the middle of December. Before the year closed
Mr. Green, member for Grenfell, invited a number
of us to inspect the land between Koorawatha and
Grenfell, as he was urging the construction of the
railway between those places. A number of us
went, and there is no doubt that there is a lot of
fine land, and an enormous quantity of it under
cultivation. We got a lot of particulars also about


the share system of cultivation, which Mr. Green
was amongst the first to establish on his Indra Es-
tate. On the way to Indra and Grenfell we called
on several of the settlers, Mr. Suttor’s being the
first, who received us very loyally and gave us some
information. He told us last harvest he let a 12-
acre paddock on the halves, and when the crop was
taken off the person on the halves received £3OO
as his share. We passed on, and went through
several paddocks of growing crops, all of which
gave promise of great returns. And we saw great
Quantities of just as good land, which was only
waiting to be taken in hand. I enjoyed the trip
greatly, and now they have the railway they wished
for. During the year I have seen much new coun-
try to me. Indeed, I might say, many lands, and
have considerably increased my knowledge, which
I trust T Avill make good use of in the interests of
the country I am a humble representative of. Par-
liament closed about 17th December, when I got
home for a rest.
1898.—We took stock, as usual at the beginning
of the year, and I proceeded to Sydney in the month
of March, while I made up my mind to visit the
Jenolan Caves. In accordance with that determin-
ation. T left Svdnev bv the train and reached Mount
Victoria, where I put up at Cooper’s Hotel about 8
p.m. It is a very fine hotel, and I was comfort-
ably entertained. The coach for the Caves leaves
every morning. An elderly gentleman and a young
woman with a young (man) visitor from New Zea-
land, and myself were the passengers. We passed
through some mountainous country, which was de-
lightful, but beyond my ability to describe. How-
ever. just to illustrate a little of it. In passing
along one part, we were driven quite close along-
side of a precipice, for I can find no other word
for it. Had the horses been unmanageable and
swerved to one side there was nothing to keep us
from tumbling over it. I asked the driver the


depth to the level land below. He replied about 400
feet. The flat below, which was a beautiful piece
of land, was inhabited, and the people and build-
ings appeared about the size of the boxes of toys
sold to children for about one shilling; that is about
the nearest comparison I can make. We proceeded
on when we got to the top of the mountain leading
down to the Caves—l think the grandest sight T
have ever seen before or since. To get down we
get along a series of ridges like the leaves of a
book, all alongside of each other, with a hollow be-
tween, by which the water from each sides goes to
the bottom, and the coach has to descend in zig-zag
form from the top. About two miles along the
road there is a cottage, and going down one side
you would think you could nearly throw a stone to
it; but it took us a long time to get to it. such was
the backward and forward way we had to get to it.
However, we arrived at the Cave House about 2
p.m., and after lunch we, with the guide, made a
start for the caves. We were at it till evening and
all next day. But I cannot give any description of
what was seen. It is beyond my ability to do so.
They must be seen to be properly understood, al-
though there are several books of photos, to be
bought, giving a very good description, but when
once seen, they can never be forgotten. But they
are certainly the mighty works of God. Well may
we exclaim —
“When all Thy mercies, O my God,
My rising soul surveys.
Transported with the view I’m lost,
In wonder, love and praise.”
We left the Caves for Mount Victoria on Saturday
morning and arrived at Cooper’s Hotel at about 2
p.m. As the train did not leave until 5.50 p.m. I
had a stroll about the hills and valleys, visit-
ing Mount Piddington, and descending down to the
Fairy Bower, where I killed a snake on our track.


It was getting time to get to the railway station,
where 1 joined the train and reached Sydney safe
and sound, from one of the most memorable trips
of my life. Parliament was to have met on the
sth of April, but as the Referendum on accepting
or rejecting the Federal Constitution was to take
place in June, the Government thought it better not
to meet until the question was decided by the people,
so a further prorogation took place, and 1 went home
only to start away through my electorate to caution
my constituents against voting for it. My action
alienated a great many of my best supporters, and
nearly cost me my seat at the next election, for
they voted against me, but many lived after to re-
gret they did not take my advice. On the 3rd of
June, wdien the votes were counted, it was found the
Bill was rejected, as the 80,000 votes required to
carry it were not recorded. This year I attended
the meeting of the Federal General Assmbly of the
Church. There was much discussion, as the Vic-
torian Church wanted more than their share of what
they would like to see in the basis of Union. Par-
liament met on the 21st of June and was a very
short session, as it was dissolved early in July. I
again offered my services to the Yass electors, and
w f as again returned, but to show my opposition to
the Federal Constitution affected me, when the poll
was declared I only had a majority of 39 over my
opponent. The new Parliament met on the 16th
of August, and during the session no less than three
votes of censure were moved, but all of them were
defeated. Now', while writing (1914), many who
voted against me for opposing the Federal Bill
would now be glad to vote against Federation if
they had the chance. When it was being advocated
those favoring it said it would save a lot of money,
for there would be no necessity for six States Par-
liaments and six Governors and staffs. These were
the arguments used in favor, but w r e have all of them
yet, some with increased allowances to members,


and the Federal Parliament and Governor-General
besides, and both M.H.R. and Senate members are
paid £6OO per annum, in addition to Ministers and
Governor-General and staff salaries. Cousin John
Gibson and one of his sons paid us a short visit,
which we all enjoyed. In the month of November
George Reid (Premier) accompanied me to Yass,
and declared the new additions to the Yass Hospi-
tal opened. It was a great day in Yass. I ar-
ranged at the beginning of the new year (1899)
that my business at Gundaroo should be taken over
by my son John on his own account. I had built
(in which I am now residing) a cottage in Home-
bush Road, Strathfield, as my future home. Having
nearly completed my forty-four years’ residence in
Gundaroo, I look on it as near about time that I
should retire, after all those years of hard work,
and now, being a member of Parliament, the work
attached to that was quite enough for me to attend
to, as it is not an easy one to occupy, if a man does
his duty to his constituency, as well as legislating
for the good of the country, which I have honestly
endeavored to do, as a few letters at the end of
this will show.
1899.—0 n or amout the 15th day of February it
will be 44 years since I landed in Gundaroo, and
during that time I have seen a good many ups and
and downs, and my heart is in the place. So it can
easily be imagined why, when I recount I was mar-
ried there, two sons were born there, and it is the
last resting-place of my clear wife of my youth, who
was called to her long home in 1870. Also my eldest
son, Arthur, who was beloved by the whole people
of the place, and was called home in 1881 at the
early age of 15 years and 10 months. There also
lie in same enclosure the remains of my dear mother
and father, who died the former in 1878, the latter in
1888; and also my late dear wife, after being to-
gether for 33 years, who was interred in the same
enclosure in 1913. With all such ties to bind me, can


it to be wondered why I love Gundaroo? “Lest we
orget. I have named the cotage lam now writing
this in “Gundaroo,” where we came to reside in the
month of February, 1899, so that all the years I
have lived in !New South Wales I have only had
two homes, and should I live till February. 1915,
T will have been sixty years a colonist, and never
been out of the Commonwealth. Strathfield is a
rising suburb, seven miles from Sydney, with the
best railway service in the State, and I expect Gun-
daroo village is likely to be where I will end my
days. Owing to the defeat of the Federation Re-
ferendum Bill, it was agreed that the Premiers of
the different States should meet in Sydney and en-
deavor to come to some arrangement, to submit a
bill that might be acceptable to the various Parlia-
ments which is to be included in anv Federation
that might be accomplished. Several important
amendments on the original proposal were proposed
and although it did not go as far as I would have
liked it, I went round my constituency and ex-
plained what was now proposed, and my personal
opinion was, with the amendments proposed, we
might risk it. Although I was not hot on Federa-
tion. seeing we would be likelv to sacrifice our free-
trade principles, and T being a freetrader all mv
life, it was risking a lot. even for Federation. When
it was again referred by Referendum to the electors
the majority was in favor of the new proposals. Rut
it was the cause of the downfall of nearly all the
Ministers in the States, and George Reid was the
first to suffer. The other State Ministers fell also
in due course. By the defeat of the Reid Govern-
ment we had a new one led by Mr. W. Lyne. which
New South Wales has very much reason to regret
ever since, for that Government, with several recon-
structions. lasted about five years, and was most
destructive to the best interests of the State. Dur-
ing the year Mrs. Thompson, of Yass River, died
and left me sole executor of her estate, and that


added considerably to my work. I bought a cot-
tage near the railway station, which I rented to a
tenant. I also bought an allotment of land which
intervened between my cottage I reside in, and a
lot on the other side. By this purchase I have now
a solid block of 200 by 198 feet. If that was a
fortunate spec, another was the reverse. T had 600
fully paid up shares in Hudson Bros., at the Clyde
Works. The management was bad, and we put it
into liquidation, and when it was all wound up I
received as my share of £600—£32 10s. But as
if that was not a hard enough hit, it seems I was
a shareholder in another society into which I had
paid £6oo on the promise that at the end of ten
years they were to pay me £lOOO, and there was
only two years to run. when the latter sum was to
be paid to me. they made a demand for me to pay
another £4OO, and I was to get nothing, but I re-
fused to pay any more, and it has never been paid
to this day, so they robbed me of my £6OO. I have
been so busy this year as far as now that I had
no time to take a trip further than Gundaroo. I
had to go there, as the residents wished, after my
long residence, now that T had left, to present me
with an address. I went and at a public meeting
I was presented with a very beautiful illuminated
address, which I brought home with me. and now
have it hanging on the wall in “Gundaroo Cot-
tage.” The address is as follows: —
ADDRESS PRESENTED BY THE GUNDAROO
RESIDENTS.
Gundaroo, 3rd March, 1804.
William Affleck, Esq., J.P., M.L.A.
Dear Sir, —
Having decided not to allow your efforts for
the advancement of Gundaroo and District to
pass unrecognised, we a«?k you to accept this.


address as an evidence of our appreciation of
your many sterling qualities.
In your removal from here after a residence
of over forty four years, we lose one who has
always been regarded as our leading townsman,
and whose place it will indeed be hard to fill.
It is perfectly safe to predict that while we re-
main in the enjoyment of our Park, Roads,
Bridges, and Public Buildings obtained mainly
through your advocacy, your name will not be
forgotten and unhonoured.
May prosperity attend you in your new home,
and may you be long spared to work for the best
interests of the land of your adoption.
Signed on behalf of the residents of the Dis-
trict.
Here follow 18 names of the principal inhabi-
tants :■
Again, I as representative of the Queanbeyan
Church to our General Assembly, there was a long
discussion on the introduction of a new hymn book.
The metrical psalms and paraphrases were excluded
from it. I moved they should be added, and 1
carried the day. Then the adoption of amend-
ments to the basis of Union of the Presbyterian
Churches of the Commonwealth was also discuss-
ed. Altogether while I have some reason to com-
plain for the year, I have also much to be thankful
for. I had a cold and bronchitis for 9 weeks. 1900
I went to Melbourne, and attended the Federal
Church Assembly, and came into conflict with the
clerk, Rev. Dr. Laing. He never was very friendly
in our N.S.W. Assembly with me, and here he ob-
jected to my being a member. I took my own part
and gave him a bit of my mind and discomfited
him as the Assembly ruled I was right. He did
not like it, but I have no doubt it did him good.
There was a long and useful discussion on the basis
of Union. New South Wales delegates did not


get all they wanted, but we hope all will come
right. After the Assembly business was over, be-
fore returning home I determined to visit Gipps-
land, although I had been in Victoria I had not
been to that part of it. I therefore took the train
to Sale, then the steamer through the three lakes,
being about 60 miles. Lake Wellington is larger,
and in some parts very shallow, indeed a portion
of it is staked out so that the steamer might not
get aground. The second Victoria Lake is more
like a river, it is very deep but very narrow, so
much so one could throw a stone from the boat to
the land on either side. The third, King Lake, I
did not see much of as it got very dark, but I was
in good enjoyable company. I remained for the
night at as fine a hotel (Kilinania) as ever it was
mv privilege to stay at anywhere, about a mile from
the entrance of the ocean to the lake. Any one with
plenty of cash and wishing a first class holiday has
only to go there and put up with mine host, they
will have no reason to regret it. Next morning I
was up in good time and had a great look round,
and such a sight, is well worth going to see, it is a
country of lakes, they are so numerous and only
about a mile away is the open sea dashing in at
the entrance. After breakfast the steamer drew up
at the landing, and I got on board, and returned
through portion of the lake. I could not see in the
dark, and instead of going back as we came, we
diverted to the right and entered the Mitchell River
and went on to Bairnsdale. This was a fairly long
trip, and along the river banks we saw some very
fine land and a great number of unused hop fac-
tories. They had been abandoned for many years,
a disease had attacked the vines to such an extent,
hop growing had to be given up. We had a
fine trip up the river to Bairnsdale, and I had two
or three hours to spend before the train started
back to Melbourne. The main street is very wide,
and is divided into two. bv a long wide piece in the


middle, fenced oflf, in which are planted trees, shrubs
and flowers, which no doubt looked well when at-
tended to, but when I was there it was very much
neglected, and did not look very well, all the same
it only required labor to make it a place of beauty.
It is a fairly large town, they have some very fine
buildings and wide streets. After leaving by the
train, we had not got far when the rain cpe down
in torrents. Ido not think I ever saw a greater
fall, in a very short time as we passed along, all
the creeks we crossed and went alongside rushing
along over the banks, and the flats about two feet
deep, it was a sight to sit in the carriage and see
the rain pouring down, and the creeks roaring as
they rushed along. However, we arrived at our
destination about n p.m., after enjoying a splendid
trip, which I will not soon forget. Next day I left
for Colac on a visit to my cousin John Gibson, but
I only spent one day this time, for I was anxious
to get home. After getting back to Melbourne I
left for home by the train, but stopped another day
at Albury with my cousins there, and left for home
next day, to find on my return home, my dear wife
seriously ill, and the doctor attending her, but
with the medical skill and good attendance, and
thanks to a merciful providence, she pulled through.
las usual attended the A.M.P. annual meeting,
and to my astonishment, found the directors de-
termined to issue voting papers, without ever dis-
cussing the matter for trie extension of the busi-
ness to the British dominions. I opposed the ac-
tion of the directors strongly, and told them l
would call a public meeting of members to protest.
I did so, and seeing we had defeated the project
when it was proposed before. The meeting when
held was very unanimous against the proposal, and
decided that we should apply to the Supreme Court
for an injunction to prevent them carrying out
their intention. I was to be the prosecutor. A
secretary was appointed, arrangements were made


as to the employment of solicitors and barristers,
and it was decided to send word to the directors
that unless a ballot was taken in a proper manner
as we proposed, we intended to apply for an injunc-
tion, so they agreed to take a vote in a proper and
open way, and when it was taken we beat the pro-
posal by over 7000 votes, so that smashed their
little game once more. I had another unpleasant
duty to undertake as a member of the Goulburn
Presbytery. One of the ministers of the presby-
tery was charged with a very serious offence, many
meetings were held and the matter was fully gone
into. I was made prosecutor in this case also,
and the enquiries made drove us to the conclusion
that he was guilty, and the offence could only be
condoned by deposing him from the ministry,
which we did, and he is no longer a minister of our
Church. Parliament met on the 10th of June, and did
not close till the sth of December so I had a busy
time of it this year. I was on several occasions
sick, but carried through the duties devolving on
me. It had been decided that the sites of the Fede-
ral City should be visited by the members of par-
liament, and as there were two to be looked at in
Yass I had to escort a large party twice to my
electorate. I had also to attend several of the
Federation Sites Committee meetings, and then to
wind up the year with attending to the landing of
Lord Hopetoun as the first Governor-General of
the Commonwealth. Altogether I have had a busy
year. We have now not only entered another New
Year but a new century (1901). During all the
past years of my life I have seen and helped to pass
through a good many ups and downs. The first
days of the New Year are generally the holiday of
holidays for the reason the streets are generally de-
corated as well as illuminated at night. But this
occasion surpasses the general run in commemo-
rating the inauguration of the Commonwealth and
the swearing in of Lord Hopetoun as Governor-


General. The city is covered with thousands upon
thousands of people and erections have been erec-
ted in all parts for the crowd to see the procession
all along the route to the Centennial Park where the
swearing in of the Governor was to take place. All
was done in a most extravagant style, it being
kept up for about ten days. Many of the functions
to which I was invited to attend I declined as a
simple protest from me re the extravagant expen-
diture that was being indulged in. All the same it
went on. In the same month our Good Old and
Most Gracious Queen Victoria died, and King Ed-
ward the seventh was proclaimed King of Eng-
land and its Dominions at Parliament House
where I was present. During the month of May
the Federal Parliament was opened by Prince
George, Duke of York, assisted by Lord Hopetoun
in Melbourne, to which it and many other func-
tions I received invitations, all of which but the
opening ceremony I declined to attend. All the
same I have many of the elaborate invitation cards
framed and hung on the walls of my residence to
be handed down with other things I leave behind
In the building at the opening it was estimated
there were 8000 people present, the function was
carried out with even more extravagance than the
Sydney functions. I returned from Melbourne to
attend our Church General Assembly, at which the
basis of Union with other Churches was agreed to,
it was really the most important business the As-
sembly transacted, and the other business was
soon got over and finished. On the first of June
the Duke and Duchess of York held a reception
and Garden Party at Government House, Sydney,
to which I was invited and attended, and was in-
troduced by the Colonial Secretary and Premier of
New South Wales, John See, to the Duke and
Duchess and Lord and Lady Hopetoun. when I
shook hands with the future King and Queen of
England George the sth as well as with Lord and


Lady Hopetoun. There was a very large party
present. One thing I liked, there appeared to be
no side put on, for all mixed together from the
Duke down. Parliament was dissolved this month,
and I with other candidates had to tour round our
several electorates addressing our constituents,
B. J. Grogan was my only opponent this time. I
had beaten him in past elections; he was a Roman
Catholic, so he and his supporters agreed to run
this election on the sectarian cry. At previous
elections some of my supporters had tried to get
me to run on such, but I positively refused to do so.
I said T would be no party to mix up religion and
politics. But now as my opponent and his sup-
porters were determined to run on that ticket I had
no other recourse than to oppose him on such
grounds. Of course, he made the most of my sub-
scribing to Conningham’s fund to assist him in fee-
ing Counsel in the case Conningham v. O’Haran,
and carried with him a book entitled; “The secret
history of the Conningham case,” written by a no-
torious character, Dan Green. There were many
Orangemen who had never voted for me in the
electorate on previous elections, but his action in
this election was the worst thing he could have
done for himself. He by his action raised the ire
of the Protestants who had* not previously sup-
ported me, because of my taxation on land unim-
proved value principles. And they voted for me
to a man, so the fight was to be between the Orange
and the Green. I will give one case to prove it.
One large land holder near Yass was dreadfully
opposed to me because I advocated taxation on
unimproved land value, and did all possible to get
me defeated on previous occasions. He happened
to be in Sydney waiting for the sheep sales to be-
gin when the polling day came round, and the
sheep he was after had not been offered for sale, but
he took the train and arrived in Yass on the morn-
ing of polling day, and not only voted, but worked


for me, the sequel was 1 thrashed Grogan by getting
double the majority I had polled at previous elec-
tions. Parliament met on the 23rd July, and as
members are called to the table to be sworn alpha-
betically, I was the first called, when I received a
rousing cheer from the assembled members. T.he
new parliament when at work seemed to be inclin-
ed to be the most extravagant of all I had been a
member of. And on many occasions I opposed
motions brought forward by dividing the House,
but my efforts were like a drop in a bucket, I
generally got defeated. Parliament closed on the
19th December, and I was not sorry, for what with
parliamentary duties, functions and elections, 1 was
pretty tired, and glad to get a rest. At the be-
ginning of the new year I visited myconstituents.
and pointed out the business of last session, and
matters I opposed, and at my meeting was fortun-
ate enough to get votes of confidence in me car-
ried. I went over to our Federal General Church
Assembly as the Goulburn Presbytery Elder. 1
did not stay till the business was finished, but saw
the most important business through, and left for
home as our State Parliament was sitting. On my
way home I broke the journey at Albury as my
cousin Thomas’ wife was very ill, and they did not
expect her to recover. A very old friend, Joseph
Massey, and a strong political supporter of mine
as well as an enthusiastic cricketer went the way
of all flesh this year. While my son John was
down in Sydney I obtained orders to be shown
over the Government Printing Office, Darlinghurst
and Parramatta Gaols. The first is a wonderful
place, and we were kindly shown over every part
of the building, and the work in all its ramifications,
and one thing I noticed in several places, they
were cramped for room with regard to the two
prisons. We were shown round the whole of the
buildings, saw many of the prisoners at various
kinds of work, all earning something towards keep


mg themselves and paying expenses. The whole
of these places are worth seeing. I have occasion-
ally made a joke when speaking on prison labor. I
have in my day been in both Darlinghurst and
Parramatta prisons, but the authorities would not
keep me. While at Parramatta we also visited the
woollen mills, and saw the procedure of making
tweeds, blankets, &c., from the dirty wool from the
sheep to the finished article. This year I contest-
ed the election for a seat at the Board of Directors
at the A.M.P. Society as a protest against the Board
of being unwilling to give us the opportunity of
discussing at the annual meetings the necessity of
an alteration of the by laws. Needless to say I
was not elected. But I was so dissatisfied with
the proceedings at the annual meeting that I deter-
mined to give them a rest by my not attending
them. At the same time I occasionally have a shy
at them through the columns of the daily news-
papers. I took out two endowment policies on
behalf of my grandsons Willie and Reg, the latter
is payable (£100) in August next (1914) so he
will have something to start life with. It will be
two and a half years yet before Willie’s is due.
Parliament opened on the 25th of May, and was in
session till the 19th of December. There were
many long and fruitless discussions. The princi-
pal vote of censure was on what was designated
the Friedman case, which will go down in history
as one of the most disgraceful pieces of work that
any man could be guilty of. However the Gov-
ernment gained the day by the Labor Party as
one man going over to save them, which was a
disgrace. Since I have been in Parliament I have
seen so much unreality and trickery that I am about
tired of it, and my conclusion is, it is no place for
an honest man to be if he wishes to retain his
character. In case this may come under the no-
tice of anyone aspiring to the position, for their
benefit let me say: Don’t go in to think you are


going to do good for the country. Before I got
there I thought were I only there I would do so,
and so, and have a difference made, but that was
the greatest mistake of my life, parliment is ruled
by cliques, caucuses and parties, and no single mem-
ber gets a chance. Another old friend of mine
died this year who borrowed, from me a lot of
money, so friendly a feeling I had for him that I
lent it him without any security. Ha returned it
all but £2OO, and he went into the unseen in my
debt to that extent. However, I have still been
able to get along without it. The only regret I
have is, it was so bad an ending to 30 years’ friend-
ship. I also attended the induction of Rev. J.
Barr into the position of the minister of the Pres-
byterian Church, Yass. I went with the Minister
for Education and other Members of parliament to
Crookwell at the opening of the railway from
Goulburn to there. (1903) Had my father lived
he would have been one hundred years of age in
January. Miss Morrison, a visitor from Aberdeen-
shire, Scotland, was with us for a short time, and
I had to show her about a little. She enjoyed her-
self very much. We have had a trying time of it
this summer with the drought. I have also had
some trouble, acting with the Municipal Council of
Strathfield at the action of the Board of Health in
attempting to house a leper in a cottage in the
vicinity of the Council Chambers. But in the end
we succeeding in preventing this undesirable set-
tlement. When parliament met I introduced and
successfully carried through the Legislative As-
sembly a bill to prevent the Government or Board
of Health allowing lepers to reside in populous
cities or towns to the danger of the residents, but
when it was sent to the Legislative Council they
voted it down. There was more than one of the
Ms.L.C. members of the Board of Health, and they
were up in arms against the/ Bill, so my efforts
were fruitless. I bought a cottage (Lulworth) this


year at a very low price, and leased it, and the
rent returned me 7 per cent, clear all the time, 1
held it for some years, and< when 1 sold it I had
£95 more than I paid for it besides the 7 per cent,
clear all the time. Cousin Tom’s wife died at Al-
bury in March. Sir Joseph Abbott, speaker of the
Legislative Assembly also died. Attended the
Church Assembly, also the function of the Jubilee
of four aged ministers of the Church, viz., Dr, Ca-
meron, Dr. Bruce, and Revs. A, Cameron and Gor-
don. The two former are still carrying on the
duties of the ministry. Indeed, Dr. Bruce is at
present Moderator of the United Church, and is
busy visiting the Churches in the various States of
the Commonwealth. I sold my Waroo property.
I bought it for a brother-in-law on the distinct
understanding that he would not leave me in the
lurch with it, but he did, and I had a good deal of
worry over it, but I am glad I have got rid of it at
last. Parliament was in session till the 26th No-
vember, there was a great deal of useless talking,
but we carried a bill through to reduce the mem-
bers to 90. This cf course necessitated a re-distri-
bution of electorates. In one sitting I took part
on 33 divisions. lam getting awfully tired of Par-
liament, and it is very doubtful if I will offer my
services again to the electors. About Xmas I left
home on a visit to Gundaroo. During the year the
only travelling I did was in my electorate, I don’t
care to travel about much now.
One particular matter I omitted in my statement
for 1900 was, our visit to Orange to view a site for
the Federal Capital. There was a large party of
us. Particulars of this visit will be found in Ap-
pendix D., 1904. This was a year of experience for
me as the result will show. It was very hot in the
beginning of the year. I returned home from Gun-
daroo on the 12th January. A special session of
Parliament was called for the 19th, it was in ses-
sion 3 days, being prorogued about 8 p.m., on the


2ist, with a promise we would be called together
in May, but it was not, and that parliament did
not meet again. Commissioners were appointed
to fix up the new electorates, and my electorate
was so altered, by taking away two of my strong-
holds, and adding Burrowa and part of Macquarie
electorate, that I immediately told the Premier,
Mr. Carruthers that if he wished to retain Yass he
had better see and get someone to contest it as I
had no intention of offering my services! He asked
why? I told him they had done as stated above,
and a constituency that would return Tom Slattery
whenever he offered his services was one that
would have nothing to do with me. He urged me
to go. I told him to do so was only to go to my
political doom, and I was not prepared for that,
however, he bombarded me by urging me to go,
and besides wrote me two letters urging me to go
on. I foolishly consented, but I had not been out
a week when I regretted starting. For I had a
bad time with rain, snow and hail, as well as dread-
fully bad roads, but I decided as I had made a start
I would see it out, although I quite expected to be
beaten, especially when three priests and two nuns
were scouring the Burrowa portion for a fortnight
before polling day. The Climax was reached then
when the returns were all in. I had been travell-
ing off and on from the 25th April till the 6th day
of August. To give an idea of the roads between
Bigga and Reid’s Flat, 10 miles in the new added
portion. It took me four hours with a buggy and
pair of horses. I must say my meetings were well
attended when the weather was considered, and I
was very well received in the new portion, although
I knew the majority were against me. I had
several good and staunch supporters at all the
places I went to. I contracted a desperate cold,
and had as my opponents Neilson, the late member
for Burrowa/and the ever surviving Grogan; the
latter being a R.C.. the former anything. The


Roman Catholics determined as they called it, “to
down Affleck, and combined right throughout to
vote for Neil son. and not split the vote with Grogan.
He then retired. It was reported he was well re-
warded for so doing. I don’t know personally. He
admitted himself, that he was informed the Roman
Catholics held meetings at the most important
places, and decided to throw him over, that was
his reason for retiring, had he gone to the poll mv
return was certain. So when the poll was de-
clared it was as follows:—Nielson 2264. Affleck
2052, majority for the former 208. Outside the
Burrowa portion I had 300 of a majority. But in
16 polling booths in Burrowa portion Neilson had
majorities in 15, in only one small polling place
(Breakfast Creek) I had a majority, the votes be-
ing Affleck 2i Neilson 10. In my old electorate
even after losing two strongholds I had as above
stated 300 of a majority. But Burrowa turned
that majority into a minority of 208 when all the
returns were in. I was very sorry for a great num-
ber of my Yass supporters, for they took my de-
feat more to heart than I did myself. X now have
a free leg, and may be classed! as one of the un-
employed. And if God only grants me health and
strength during the rest of my days, I will be
thankful, and be glad of a rest after my 10 years
of parliamentary representation, and 50 years of
hard work and worry. What came worst to me at
the end of the struggle while waiting for the last
returns to come in. a telegram was handed to me
to come home. My dear sister-in-law Annie An-
derson who had been living with us for some years
had died, and they would not bury her body till
Tuesday. I could not get a train till Monday night,
but I took that, and was able to pav my respects
by attending her funeral, to as good a woman and
Christian as ever breathed. As the poll could
not be declared till Tuesday, I arranged with a
good friend and strong supporter although a R.C.


to return thanks for me when the poll was declared.
That ended my career as a member of parliament.
But I was glad to be able to say I had and have
to this day the respect of the electors of Yass, and
they showed it by handing me a very handsome
illuminated beautifully framed address.
WILLIAM AFFLECK, Esq.
Dear Sir, —
We, the undersigned electors of your constitu-
ency of Yass Plains, desire you to accept this me-
mento as a token of the high esteem in which
we hold you, and also in recognition of your past
services to the people of this district.
Whilst remembering your whole-hearted devo-
tion to the principles of which you held to be the
source of true prosperity to your country, and
whilst admiring your courageous, but unswerv-
ing advocacy of those principles, we also appre-
ciate your efforts in the more practical sphere of
endeavoring to advance every individual interest
in your constituency.
That you have treated those who were politi-
cally opposed to you generally, and worked as-
sidously for them, is not for a moment questioned
by your strongest opponent, and we firmly believe
that for many years before you became Parlia-
mentary representative, any movement having for
its object the advancement and progress of our dis-
trict and its people has had your sincerest sup-
port. .
In retiring into private life we sincerely hope
that the rest and peace that one so richly deserved
by your energetic services to both district and
State will be yours, and that you will keep in
kindly remembrance the many friends and co-
workers who were pleased to support you through
many campaigns and who now in matters politi-
cal wish you farewell.
Signed on behalf of the electors by 12 of the
principal.


service r n • . ted tray and tea and coffee
—“Presented e tn n M nP u°r.i° n the tray is as follows:
sion o? C hu s “nd's ri ' am AffleCk ’ ° n the occa-
sentation nf Vs pi ■ e , tlr<:lnent lro m the repre-
liamem a , ln: j, el ®! orate in the State Par-
address'presen ted* to Wmself at° th^same^iine^
presses in a small degree tile kindly feeling of his
ihelr bS? a "? co : work ors, and carries with it
During the'eariy S part ofthe Pea ° e a ” d ha PP m “ s -”
Afflecf of Melhourne° died, Turi
deed tt S IXr Th ° maS - ° f ala "dkSh
aced, tiie latter was so unwell when his father died
& dl h d a n S ° he d ‘ ed without knowing ll’
Churches v °“
not very well at Assembly time, and consequently
ud to°th a$ v egUl t. r i n my atten dance as usual, 1 wem
up to the \ass P.A. and H. Show in September h
was very good, but my time was limited and 1
wished to see as many of my old fritnds and su,
porters as, possible before the train left for ('mil
Sister ' e for l L W ali S d hed ‘° F° “ d h “ J a -1 Ashtot
address and V ’ 3B > was to B lve a political
ciclress, and I was so disappointed when I heard
iim, as he had turned round on his old principle ’
of perpetual leasehold. It only goes to show ho
mistaken some men are. 1 moved abouT
much since election time, f have hardly averaged
” a week Sydney. 1 had such 'a knockmg
a ’ l Tb S ° tMed after the election and wanted
1 k ? e P P fe “y well at home attending the
J
spend my hohclays, it bei„°g
.wars that I was at home on Christmas Day. The


last dav of the year and first of the New Year were
very hot. On the latter day I examined the Sab-
bath School children and distributed the prizes
gained by them. We had a nice religious concert
after, which was well attended. All present were
well pleased.
1905—The heat was very great at the beginning
of the year, so much so that on the second day of
it I was laid up prostrated by the heat, but I gra-
duallv recovered and got home by the 11th of the
month. There have been fearful bush fires during
January. As I returned home in the train there
were great fires on both sides of the line in the
neighborhood of Bowral. and a great amount of
damage has been done, principally in the southern
district. A relief fund was started, and about
£lO.OOO was raised to assist the deserving and
struggling settlers, who lost much, some all. by the
bush fires.
On the 2nd of February it is the Jubilee (50 years')
of mv arrival in New South Wales, having arrived
in Port Jackson on the 2nd February. 1855. On
the anniversary dav T determined to have sail
on that dav with mv dear wife and mv great friend.
Mrs. Tames Anderson. The three of us went down
to Manlv and enjoyed the whole dav. When we
arrived home about Q p.m .we did so very tired.
Several newspapers took notice of the event; one
short extract is given herewith: —“Mr. Wm. Affleck,
formerly member for Yass in the Legislative As-
sembly celebrated the jubilee of his arrival in Aus-
tralia yesterday. Mr. Affleck landed in Sydney
from the immigrant ship Nabob, the voyage cover-
ing three months, and so far as he knows (the only
one of his shipmates alive to-dav is Mr. James Bar-
rie. of Usmore. New South Wales'). He settled
at Gundaroo, on the Yass River, taking up his re-
sidence five years ago at Strathfield. During 50
years his absence at any time from New South
Wales has not exceeded 10 or 12 days.” I may


add, that report, brought under my notice, by per-
sonal visits or letters received, about half a dozen
others who were still in New South Wales that ar-
rived as fellow-passengers. When I look back
on the past 50 years, I recall many ups and downs,
as these previous pages will show; but I have reason
to thank God for all the good that has fallen to my
lot during my life. And now that I have reached
a good old age, I am in a position to rest the remain-
ing days of my life, without toiling at manual la-
bor. I may also add the notice that appeared in
our Church paper the “Messenger”“One of our
best-known Elders is Mr. William Affleck. He
takes an active part in the Assembly’s work, and is
a diligent performer of his duties in the Committee.
For many years he represented Yass in the State
Parliament .though for a good while he has resided
at Strathfield. He has four times been elected to
Parliament, It appears that February 2nd was
the 50th anniversary of his arrival in New South
Wales. Proceeding to Gundaroo. he lived there
for 44 years. He is still full of vigor, and we hope
he may have many years of life and usefulness yet.”
As noticed. I was elected four times—lB94. 1895.
1898 and 1901. I was defeated, as noticed, last
year, having served 10 years and one month. T
was 69 years of age on the sth of March. When
John and Alice, his wife, arrived down, we had
several outings, in which my dear wife joined,
for she has had very few such during our married
life, she being a great sticker-at-home. As usual. I
represented the Oueanheyan Church in the Assem-
bly. and I think it was the most enlovable I ever
attended. Everything seemed to go so pleasant-
ly- Of course, I indulged in criticising some of the
proceedings, but I was sent for such a purpose.
On the 17th day of June we attained what is
termed our silver wedding, it being 25 years that
day since we were married, and I don’t think either
of us regret our action on that day. Both of us


have much reason to be grateful. In August, on my
way home from Strathfield railway station, I was
seized with a pain in the calf of both my legs, and
could hardly walk home; but by degrees it left my
right leg and settled in my left knee, and gave me
a lot of trouble for a long time.
On the 19th of September I left for Melbourne
as one of the representatives of the New South
Wales Church to the Federal Assembly of the
Church. It opened on the 2oth and closed on the
26th. I left on the 27th, and got home-on the 28th,
my knee having given me great trouble during the
time. So great was the pain that I had to consult
Dr. Officer, who prescribed for me. and told me I
would likely have trouble with it for a long time,
and hot-air baths were the only cure for it, and if
I could see Dr. Jarvie Hood in Svdney he would
put me in the way of getting rid of it. He would
post over his report of examination to Dr. Hood,
and I would find out if they agreed. I saw Dr.
Hood, and he said it was a bad case. I knew
that, for by that time I could hardly walk from
the front to the back door of the house. But he
told me I must undergo a series of hot-air baths,
and told me where to get them. I had to have
them three times a week, some of which registered
260 degrees by the thermometer. I had 40 of these
baths, besides other hot-water treatment between
the baths, and I began to feel it was easing off.
Dr. Hood, when he released me. said I was a wonder
to get right so soon, for his own sister, a young
woman, with the same complaint, had been ailing
for about 12 months, and I had not been near so
many weeks. He had another, an old man like
myself, and it was 18 months before he was well.
However, my knee was very weak, and I have had
to wear elastic kneecaps on both knees ever since.
And while writing, my right knee feels as if it was
bent on giving me further trouble.


Un the Bth October, Dr. Cameron spoken of on
a previous page died in his 80th year. On the 16th
December I started for Gundaroo and remained
there till the beginning of the New Year. I visited
Queanbeyan on the 24th December, and after assist-
ing at the Communion as one of the Elders, re-
turned to Gundaroo very tired.
1906.—Spared to enter on another INtew Year, for
which I thank God for His preserving mercy to-
wards me. T feel, day by day, however, as if my
days on earth were numbered. This feeling has
been coming on me for some time now. and more
especially since my knees keep troubling me. Of
course, they are much better, but far from well
T returned home from Gundaroo on the 4th Tann-
ary. and was glad to get back. I feel every day
as it comes round now, more disinclined than ever
to leave home, even if it is only to Svdney. There
is a great change come over me. and I feel that T
should not have much to trouble me in the wav of
business. My son John is due me a good sum of
money, balance of store purchase money, and I
have handed him over all mortgage deeds, leases,
etc., and have arranged he is to pay me £6 per
month to help to pay my way with a small sum
as interest on money I have lent to him. So that
T have got clear of that, and it will not worry me.
From now forward I intend to get rid of all my
property, excepting the three cottages in Strath-
field and the store at Gundaroo. The latter I leave
by will to my son, and the three cottages to his
wife and two sons, Reginald and William. At
the beginning of the year the directors of the A.M.P.
Society have again taken steps to try and carry
out their proposal to extend the business to Lon-
don and Africa, and from the way they have gone
about it. T fear they will succeed. But I will still
oppose it. However, it seems they will be likely
to carry it, for they refuse to supply us with the
information we require to successfully carry out


our opposition. Mr. Gerald Campbell has made
application to the Court for an Injunction to stop
their action until the Privy Council of England
decides as to their rights in opposition to the
wishes of so many members who oppose extension.
At the end of last year Rev. E. S. Henderson was
inducted as minister of the Queanbeyan charge. 1
intended to have gone up, but the doctor forbade me.
However, when at Gundaroo about Christmas time
1 journeyed to Queanbeyan, and there was a ses-
sion meeting held, and arrangements, made for the
election of additional Elders, as I could not always
go from Strathfield when a session meeting wa-j
required. In March of the following year I went
to Qeanbeyan, and assisted at the ordination of ad-
ditional Elders. I sold my cottage in Morwick
Street, Burwood. And again attended the meet-
ings of the General Assembly, at which I did some
plain speaking in the interest of the poorer-paid
ministers of the Church. I was appointed as one
of the New South Wales Church representatives
to General Assembly of the Church of Australia,
which was to meet in Sydney next September.
The Government of New Soutn Wales determined
to celebrate the Jubilee of the introduction of re-
sponsible government into the State, by inviting
every member, past and present, known to be alive.
1 was one of the privileged lot. The oldest mem-
er known to be alive was present (Morris Asher;.
He was a member of the third Parliament under
responsible government in 1859. The first Parlia-
ment was held in 1856. But there were two of
the officers in the first Parliament present, viz.,
Messrs. Calvert and Clapham. 1 have accepted a
tender for the building of a new cottage between
Gundaroo and Wemyss, to be called “Caledonia,”
at a cost of aobut £llOO, exclusive of the cost of
the land. We had a visit of three of my cousins
from Victoria. My Cousin Annie, of Albury, died,
bhe was a great sufferer from cancer.


1 attended the Federal Church Assembly in Sep-
tember. We had some hot weather towards the
end of the year, 101 degrees in the shade. The
new cottage, although finished, is not yet handed
over to us.
1907. —1 have again entered on another New Year
in fair health and strength, for which I thank the
Giver of every good and perfect gift. I have paid
the last instalment on “Caledonia,” and have taken
possession at a total cost of £l3OO. I did not go
to Gundaroo for the holidays. I seem to care less
every year about going from home, as the years
pass on. I only go when I have business to trans-
act, and that is seldom now. I again attended our
Church Assembly, and was nominated by it as a
representative to the Church of Australia, but I
declined the honor. Afterwards the Presbytery
of Sydney elected me as one of their representatives
to go over to Adelaide, not being a member of the
Presbytery. I could not decline, but when the
time for meeting arrived I did not go. There were
some very hot days during the summer, and I did
not go from home during the holidays. I feel old
age creeping on me now.
1908. As noted previously about twenty years
ago I bought some land at Manly. This year I
sold it for about £75 less than it cost me to date,
not a very good spec. But I added £5OO to the
cash received, and lent £1,500 to the Trustees of
the Burwood Church on the land buildings and
fittings on Mortgage for five years at four per cent,
payable quarterly. The property was vauled at
£6,000. This year the Tramway men went out
on strike and dislocated business very much, but
it did not inconvenience me very much, for I don’t
visit Sydney very often. As the teacher of the
Public School at Gundaroo is intending to estab-
lish a Museum for the benefit of the young idea,
I have given him. to be fixed on the school walls,
the collection of native grasses, by which I won


the £25 prize, for the best collection in New
South Wales. I also gave him a very fine collec-
tion of stamps all pasted singly in a book, and
some other things towards his collection. I also
lent on mortgage for 5 years £4OO at per cent.
In the month of August our help left us and went
home to Scotland after being with us for about 4
years. This year I agreed to give £25 annually
to the Council of the College, to assist a poor stu-
dent who had resolved to study for the ministry
of the Presbyterian Church of New 'South Wales.
I had the finest display of roses in my garden that
ever I had, but the month of October, which was
very hot completely destroyed them. The heat
again reached 100 degrees. The house was un-
comfortable, and the fire for cooking helped to
make it worse, so I determined to introduce a gas
stove which only requires to be lighted when need-
ed, and could be extinguished when not required.
It has been a great comfort ever since. John Bur-
net, husband of my cousin, living at Newtown,
died on the Ist of December; I attended the fune-
ral. Another very old friend Hector Gordon,
teacher of the Gundaroo Public School passed
away in the Queanbeyan Hospital.
1909. The year has not started very well with
me. On the 3rd January the thermometer regis-
tered io&| deg. and next day 109 deg. in the shade,
which fairly prostrated me, I was in bed the two
days, on the third day I was up and went into
Sydney, but was very weak on the following day:
I felt a cold coming on me, and on the Sunday and
Monday following I had again to keep my bed with
a bad attack of influenza, and it was three weeks
before I got over it. During the hot days four of
our fowls died, but grapes and other fruits did
splendid; it was the best season for them we have
had down here. The roses did well, and I had a
beautiful display. My tenant in “Caledonia” left
the premises. About a month after I leased it to a


Mrs. Snudden, she had her furniture brought into
it, but she never stayed in it a night, and, after
about a month I was surprised to see the furniture
van in front removing the furniture. I instructed
my solicitor to inform her she would have to pay
me three months rent before I would release her
of responsibility, but as I found a tenant very soon
after I let her off with the payment of two months’
rent. I presented the Queanbeyan Presbyterian
congregation with a single cup communion ser-
service. lam making an effort to get rid of Mrs.
Thompson’s property, for which I was sole trus-
tee named in her will. I hope to get that all ar-
ranged before the year closes. I have had a great
deal of trouble with it also, and the commission ah
lowed by the judge of the Probate Court is so
small that it is not worth my while wasting my
time over it. I was again the Queanbeyan Church
representative at the General Assemblv. I also
attended the annual meeting of the Society,
and asked several questions re the business trans-
acted in London, but the chairman refused to give
me the information I asked for. All the same
everyone knew it was a losing concern. In the
month of June I leased “Caledonia” to Harry Bad-
gery who I believe will be a good tenant. After
doing all my gardening, I had a very bad cold
which has been off and on me for the past four
weeks. My dear wife has also had a bad cold and
severe attack of lumbago. My son arrived about
the end of June and brought his son Reg down to
live with us, so that he might attend Stott and
Hoare’s College. An old friend and brother Odd-
fellow died at Gundaroo this month (James Hard-
ing). I have at last had all matters in connection
with Mrs. Thompson’s estate arranged, and sold
it for £5,300, and divided the balance after clear-
ing off all expenses amongst the eight beneficiaries,
and am glad I am done with it. And I will not
undertake such another job. My dear wife again


became very unwell, and I had to call in Dr. Mills.
His orders were she must give up all work and
worry, for she had a very weak heart, and if she
would only rest and not worry she might live some
years longer. Miss Mandell gave us notice she
would leave, for the work and attending to Mrs.
Affleck would be too much for her. But we were
fortunate to get Ruth Walmsley, of Gundaroo, to
take Miss Mandell’s place. By care she soon got
over the serious position, and made up her mind
to do no work for the future. We have been get-
ting some dry hot weather; the thermometer re-
gistering up to 105 in the shade. Towards the end
of the year I had the outside portion of the three
cottages painted at a cost of £5O, and they look
well and protected from the weather. Reg has
gone home to Gundaroo for his holidays. Mrs.
Dan. Leahy, of Bungendore, another very old friend
passed away from this world, and although nine
years younger than I, still it is a warning to me to
prepare also. The following is appropriate: —
“There are sorrows and labours for all, old man,
Alas, sorrows and labours for all.
And you peradventure have had your share,
For over seventy long winters have whitened your
hair,
And they’ve whitened your heart as well, old man.”
And thank God your heart is well.
Good bye to 1909.
Thank God I have been privileged to enter on
another year, and although the weather is nearly
more than I can bear, I have reason to be thankful
Reg returned on the Bth of January to resume his
studies at Stott and Hoare’s. I now have to pro-
ceed to Gundaroo to get the beneficiaries of Mrs.
Thompson to sign along with myself the convey-
ance of the property. T remained a Aveek up at


my old home where I had spent forty-four of the
best years of my life, when I returned home and
applied to the Court to pass my accounts and re-
lieve me. In February I completed my 55 years
as a resident of New South Wales, the number as
above at Gundaroo. This is rather a memorable
year. In July I will have been an Oddfellow. In
September a member of the A.M.P Society. In
December a Freemason (54 years while I am
writing). I again represented the Church at our
General Assembly, arm while busy at the business
the report was brought in that King Edward VII.
was dead. Professor Harper at once led the As-
sembly in prayer, and after, we adjourned to meet
again to-morrow morning. I again attended the
A.M.P. Society’s annual meeting, and again ques-
tioned them on the London business with about
the same result as last year. I sold to Alice four
allotments at Gundaroo, and made a present to the
Presbyterian Church of N.S.W. of the deeds duly
conveyed of an allotment at Macquarie Fields and
at Schofields one on the Southern Railway line,
and the other on the West. At the same time I
made an offer to the Gundaroo people as follows:
When at Church on my last visit I noticed some of
the shingles had rotted on the roof of same. As I
did not like to think the building should be allow-
ed to go to ruin, although nearly 50 years of age.
if the people would agree to raise sufficient money
to renovate the inside and get galvanised iron fixed
properly on the roof I would purchase and deliver
free at Gunning Railway Station, sufficient iron to
roof the porch, Church and vestry. That was
ultimately done although it hung fire for some
months. I had t 8 vols. of the Agricultural Gazette
which I had paid Angus and Robertson 4/6 per vol.
for binding alone. And as I wished to get Cham-
bers Encvclopaedia New Edition cloth bound, if
they (Angus and Robertson) would treat with me
for same. They agreed to give me the latter for


the former, and I agreed to that. I also sent them
a number of books I had, which of course were
second hand, but good in every way. I valued the
same as having cost me £l5, and they only paid
me £1 for them, as 8 or 9 had cost me a pound
each, I determined for the future I would not pur-
chase any more books at a cost of over about three
shillings. My son John and grandson Willie paid
us a visit, and all the three of us got an attack of
influenza, and had to take to bed and get a doctor
in, after about week we were able to get about when
down went mv wife, grandson Reg. and Ruth our
housemaid, the two latter soon recovered, but the
former contracted bronchitis in addition and con-
gestion of the lungs, and having a weak heart the
doctor was a bit anxious about her. After about
three months she was able to get on the verandah
where she could get the sun, but she passed through
a very bad time. I attended the General Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church of Australia. There
were about 200 altogether from all the States of
the Commonwealth, and some very important work
was done. During October or thereabouts, Alice
arrived from Gundaroo. As Reg. was complain-
ing she took him down to Dr. Lidwill, who on
examining him found out he was getting curvature
of the spine, with so much sitting at the College,
and he ordered him to be taken away up the coun-
try. and to do plenty of manual labor or rough
riding, or both combined, for were he left at the
desk work he would not live long; and on no ac-
count was he to attempt such work as at a desk
till he was 25 or 26 years of age, should he wish to
follow that profession. He was taken home and
attended to in the direction ordered, and in a couple
of years he was again all right. The doctor said
he was just taken in time to save his life. The
year finished up with plenty of rain and nice sun-
shiny weather. The New Year began with fine
favorable weather, but T did not go from home dur


ing the holidays. My tenant in Weymss Cottage
left, after occupying the place for 12 years, but I
soon got another. T again attended the State
Church Assembly, but did not go to it in the even-
ings. I find as I get old lam better at home in
the evenings. During the past two months I have
had a bad attack of rheumatism in the shoulders,
which has interfered with my work in the garden.
The Coronation of King George and Queen Mary
induced the Sydney people to illuminate and other-
wise decorate the city. I went in to see the sight,
which was grand; but in my opinion, not as good
as his father’s coronation. Our Government has
been attempting to nass legislation to amalgamate
the Barrack Street Savings Bank with the Govern-
ment. I have been taking no active part in op-
position. My dear wife has had another severe
attack of the same complaint as she had about the
same time last year, but T am glad to be able to
say she has again survived, although weak. We
have again had some very hot yeather, up to 105,
averaging about 00. which I felt verv much. Willie
and our maid have gone for a month on their holi-
days. and left mv dear wife and me bv ourselves
for the time. T kept about home all the time, for
mv wife was very weak and required attention.
1012.—T went to the church at Burwood to a ser-
vice on New Year’s Morning, at 7 o’clock, and felt
that it was good to begin the year that way. I
have to be thankful for many mercies during the
past, and reason to be thankful for being spared so
long. We have again had some verv hot days, the
thermometer has again registered 107 in the shade.
I had a splendid show of roses and flowers. I
sold my cottage “Lulworth.” in Vernon Street. It
paid me very well while I held it. I have handed
over to Mr. Wood, general secretary of the church.
Government stock to the value of £2OOO. He is
to pay me the interest at 4 per cent, up to the end
of the year, and from then on. The money is


given to be placed in trust to the Affleck Trust
i/ 1 und for ever, the interest to be applied to the
extent, first of paying the minister preaching in
the Gundaroo Presbyterian Church, not less than
once a fortnight, on the Sabbath, the sum of £SO
per annum, but two pounds are to be deducted on
every occasion he misses doing so, unless his ab-
sence is caused through sickness or some accident
that could not be avoided. Second; Twenty-five
pounds to a poor student who needs help going on
with his studies to become a minister of the Pres-
byterian Church. hull instructions as to dealing-
with the above are lodged in the church offices. 1
again was at the General Assembly as representa-
tive of the Queanbeyan Church, and made some
strong criticisms on part of the business, and caused
some of the ministers to feel rather uncomfortable.
Reg. and Willie, my two grandsons, started the
business of their lives—the former going to the
Glen limes Agricultural Farm to learn properly the
business of the farm, the business he intended to
carry out; and Willie bejng apprenticed to Moody
and Co., to learn the profession of electrical en-
gineering. ihe Burwood Presbyterian Church
paid me off their mortgage of £1350. And I pro-
mised if they would make an effort to clear off the
debt altogether, I would pay them £IOO as my
subscription towards paying the debt. 1 hey went
to work and raised £I6OO, so they paid me and had
a good sum left towards improvements. The church
is free of debt, and has been renovated and looks
well. Our help left us, but we were fortunate in
getting another from Albury, who was really a good
one. But at the end of three months she left us
one Saturday, and we have never seen her since.
She left all her clothes, and in a couple of days
after she sent along a cab, the man telling me he
had come for her belongings. I asked where she
was, and he replied at the station. Asked why
she did not come in the cab for them. He said


he asked the same question and her reply was she
did not wish to go. He received her carryall and
that is the last we know about her, However, wc
soon managed to get another. About the end of
November 1 had an attack of gastro-enteritis and
had to call in the doctor- I have been very weak
since, and with hot weather, it did not improve my
condition. It was now I sold the Queanbeyan
property. I have already noted I did not go away
on holiday, as it was too hot, and I was better at
home.
1913. I have again lived to begin another year,
although it has proved an eventful one in my his-
tory, and is only another example that we should
always be ready, for we do not know what is to
happen. At the same time, we have a merciful
God, and have to be thankful for all His mercies,
of whatever kind, for He knows what is best for
us. It was my intention to go to the Highland
sports on New Year’s Day, but it was too hot, and
I remained at home with Mum. St. James’ congre-
gation paid off its mortgage to me, and I invested
the money in Government stock at 4 per cent, in-
terest, payable half-yearly, and the principal in the
year 1917. We have now completed our fourteen
years’ residence at Strathfield, and my fifty-eighth
year in New South Wales. We have had a lot
of hot weather again at the beginning of the year,
reaching 101 in the shade. On the Bth March I
left for Gundaroo in stormy weather, and when I
reached Gunning there was no conveyance awaiting
me, so I remained with Mr. and Mrs. D. Leahy till
Monday morning. The buggy arriving on Sun-
day evening, we left early in the morning and ar-
rived at our destination about 10 a.m., and spent the
dav looking about to see how things appeared now.
Early next morning my son John and I left to at-
tend the ceremony of laying foundations (three of
them) by Lord Denman, Andrew Fisher, and King
O’Malley at what is to be the Federal City of the


Commonwealth, and the naming of the same by
Lady Denman, viz., Canberra. The name was kept
a great secret till the last minute, so there was great
speculation as to what it was to be named. In
the end it gave great satisfaction. The three
trowels used in laying the stones by those who laid
them, and the card case presented to the Governor’s
wife containing the name she was to declare what
the city was to be called were all of gold. There
was an immense concourse of people on the ground,
besides a grand turn-out of military forces, as well
as naval officers and men with the guns on car-
riages. The procession of these alone, with their
several bands, marching towards the site must have
been over a mile in length four abreast. The play-
ing of the several bands, the booming of the cannon
and the crowd was a sight that will never be for-
gotten by those who saw it. The weather for some
days previous had been cold and stormy, but this
particular day was perfection, could not have been
better if those interested had been the makers of
it. The 12th of March, 1913, will never be for-
gotten by any of those present. There was a great
banquet held in a tent on the ground and many
speeches made. The next day as we returned
home, was also one to be remembered, for cold and
rain were equally as bad and rough as the days pre-
vious to the 12th —Foundation Day. We returned
safely to Gundaroo, through cold, sleet, and
rain.' But it was a sight worth going from
Strathfield to see. Also agreeable, for I met so
many old friends that I had not met for years, and
had a good crack about old times. On the follow-
ing Monday morning I with Alice, my daughter-in-
law, started on a visit to Yass, where I also met
manv old and respected friends and supporters of
my Parliamentary days. All of whom were glad
to see me, and congratulated me on my good looks,
now that I had no political worries to trouble me.
Returned the following day, after a long and in


teresting interview with several of my very sincere
friends and old supporters, some of whom have now
passed to “the land that is fairer than day,” and
are at rest. I left on the following Thursday morn-
ing and arrived home safe and sound after being
nearly a week away, in which I enjoyed myself. I
am again appointed representative of the Ouean-
beyan congregation to the General Assembly, this
being my twenty-fifth year for the one congrega-
tion. I question very much if there is an Elder
who has the same record, to be all the years for
the same congregation. I took rather an active
part in some of the business, especially the appoint-
ment of four commissioners to scour the country
for money, of course, for different objects. I had
a very bad cold during part of the time. We had
a long spell of bad weather, and as I could not get
outside to do my garden work, I employed mv
spare time in writing a History of Gundaroo from
the year 1855 to the present date, for presentation
to the Gundaroo Library, for there are very few of
the old hands now living in the place. I have now
reached the sad portion of my history or life, and
which will have a serious effect on the remaining
portion of my days, and can never be forgotten
while I live. On Monday, the 28th of July, mv
late dear wife was. as usual, about the house doing
her little duties, seemingly perfectly well, and no
complaints, but during the night she was restless
in bed. so much so that when morning arrived I
telephoned to the doctor that T wished to see him.
I had a very bad cold on me at the time. On the
doctor’s arrival he prescribed medicine for her, and
told me to put a plaster on her chest, as I had often
previously done when she had her usual attacks
(almost yearly for some years back) of influenza
and bronchitis. I had to attend to her. as she
always objected to have a nurse in the house,
either for her or mvself, for any time I was ill she
W r as the most kindly and affectionate nurse thqt


could be found. The doctor called on the W ednes-
day and Thursday morning, and led me to believe
it was one of the usual atacks, but never once hint-
ed it might be her last. But he said, “You will
have to get a nurse, or we will have you on our
hands also.” My reply was, “We must get some-
one, for 1 cannot attend her any longer, I am so
ill myself.” He then gave me a prescription for
both of us, and I told him to send a nurse. \\ hen
he went I returned to the bedroom and told her a
nurse was coming, for I was so ill 1 could not at-
tend her another night. She just gave me a look
but said nothing. 1 attended to her, and gave her
the medicine as directed until 2 p.m., when I had
to give in and lie down in another room. About
4 p.m. the housekeeper came in to me and said the
nurse had arrived. I got up and had a talk with
her, and while she was preparing for her duties 1
went in and said to my dear Mum, “The nurse has
arrived.” I was then very ill myself and could
hardly sit up with influenza and bronchitis, that
when the nurse came in she said I should go and
lie down. 1 went out, but shortly returned, and the
nurse was offering her some brandy, and she was
refusing to take it; and I asked her to take it as
she would from me, as her heart was very weak,
and she took it, so I left to have a lie down. About
twenty minutes to twelve o’clock p.m., our maid
came into the bedroom and said the nurse sent her
to tell me she thought Mrs. Affleck was passing
away. I jumped out of bed, also my grandson
Willie, and when I got inside the door I saw it
was too true. I sat down alongside the bed and
asked her several questions, which she answered.
The last words I said to her about two or three
minutes past twelve were “Your’e not going to
leave us, are you, Mum?” Her reply was “I am
dying, but Christ knows best.” In a moment or two
after she breathed her last, quietly and without a
struggle. The death of a Christian, which she was


all the 33 years we were joined together, and I may
add, I believe all her life. She knew her Bible
well and her Saviour also, for if there ever was a man
or woman who lived a Christian life she was one.
“I speak ... of one whose stock
Of virtues bloomed beneath this lowly roof;
She was a woman of steady mind,
Tender and deep in her excess of love;
Not speaking much, pleased rather with joy
Of her own thoughts by some especial care,
Her temper had been framed, as if to make
A Being, who, by adding love to peace.
Might live on earth a life of happiness.”
—Extract from Wordsworth.
I hope I will be as ready to answer the call as she
was when my call comes.
‘‘A few short years of evil past,
We’ll reach the happy shore,
Where death-divided friends at last
Shall meet to part no more.”
1 then returned to bed. The nurse and others told
me to go to bed, for I could do nothing. They
would see to her remains. When I went into
where she was laid out to see her next morning, I
never saw her look so beautiful before, she was
lying so peaceful and beautiful, as if she was cut
out of pure white marble. My dear old Mum,
with whom I had lived so long and happily together,
to think it had come to an end. And the doctor
did not give me the slightest hint, further than
saying she was very ill. lat once telephoned to
Wood, Coffill, and Co, re the coffin, and to my son
at Gundaroo, to have the grave dug, as I intended
her to be buried in our family enclosure at Gun-
daroo. And also asked him to have the hearse
at Gunning on Saturday afternoon to meet the train


and get her out to Gundaroo to be buried on Sun-
day about 2 or 3 o’clock p.m., and the Rev. R. Steel
was to join me at Campbelltown, and go up and
do the last rites for one whom he respected so
much. However, when morning came I was un-
able to even go as far as the Strathfield railway
station, so had to send her off under the care of my
grandson, William, till they reached Campbell-
town, when my good friend and former pastor join-
ed him. They went on to Gunning together. When
they arrived there it was dark 2nd threatening a
heavy storm. They succeeded in getting the body
into the Wesleyan Church for the night, which was a
stormy one, and it was raining. All the same they
left for Gundaroo next morning, and about an hour
before they reached there the rain ceased, and se-
veral from the town met them on the road, and be-
tween 2 and 3 o’clock they proceeded to the ceme-
tery, where my good friend did the last duties for
her whom I loved and now so much miss, by con-
ducting the service. It was fine while it was pro-
ceeding, and shortly after they returned to the town
the rain came down. All the same, Mr. Steel con-
ducted a service in the church in the evening, and
so feelingly referred to the occasion that brought
him there that there was hardly a dry eye in the
church, I was informed. A fitting ending to one
who was loved by me and all who knew the Chris-
tian who had left us, although I hope not for ever,
“But in the sweet by and bye,” where I hope for
a happy reunion. lam writing this eight months
after, and the remembrance is still with me, and
often with much sadness at the loss I have sus-
tained. Yes, I miss her.
Some time after this I sold the Queanbeyan pro-
perty, the land I owned in Goulburn, at Rugby and
at Gundaroo. So that the only property I now
hold is that which I have willed to John, Alice,
Reginald and William. So I have disposed of all
that was likely to worry me, and have the rents


of these properties to k eep me going while I live,
and give me the opportunity for as pleasant a pas-
sage to be “For ever with the Lord,” as the dear
one who has gone before, and who is now with
those that I have previously reverently laid in God’s
Acre at Gundaroo, and where I hope to be laid also
when my race is run. While lam now writing I
have not recovered quite from the last illness I had,
namely, gastritis, for my hand shakes so that I have
a difficulty in writing, as I formerly used to do, and
now makes me less iclined to write than ever I
was before. I see I have neglected to notice the ill-
ness I had when my dear wife died, it remained with
me for about a month after her death, and about
three months after I had the attack of gastritis I
alluded to above. It hung on me for a long time
in the shape of weakness, and even now, although
otherwise fairly well, I have that great shaking in
both of my hands above alluded to.
1914. It has pleased Almighty God to spare me
to enter upon another New Year, and should I live
to see its close, I trust I will have the satisfaction
of knowing I am a better and more faithful server
of Him Who lived and gave Himself for me. We
had some hot days again at the beginning of the
year, the thermometer recording 104 degrees. John
and Reg. spent the holidays with me at the begin-
ning of the year, and while Mr. William Ross, of
Garangula, near Harden, was in Sydney, John and
I arranged to meet him re the purchase of some of
the subdivision of his estate, John went up to
Garangula, and after inspection we agreed to pur-
chase for Reg. two blocks, viz., No. 5, measuring
330 acres, and No. 1 of 328 acres, all at £8 (eight
pounds) per acre. We paid cash for No. 5 and
portion of the money for No. 1, the balance to be
paid by instalments, the balance to bear 5 per cent,
interest till all was paid up. Reg. took possession
about the end of January, and has about 200 acres
under wheat. He would have had much more cul


tivatcd only for the dry weather. He could not
get started for fully a month after he had gone up.
However, I hope he will succeed, for T have done
what I could to help him. having parted with all
the cash I had, and he is welcome to it, for T think
he is worthy of it. And if he does not make a
success of it, I feel sure it will not be his fault. I
again represented the Queanbeyan congregation for
the 26th time in the Church General Assembly, and
was appointed as the Goulburn Presbytery repre-
sentative at the General Assembly -of the Presby-
terian Church of Australia, to be held in Brisbane,
Queensland, in September next. The Queanbeyan
Church gave a call to the Rev. A. G. Mackintosh
Carter. 8.A., and he was inducted about May. I
intended to go up. but could not get away- The
Annual Conference of the Independent Order of
Oddfellows M.U. was held in Sydney, and I paid it
a visit and was introduced to the Grand Master
and officers, who introduced me to the members of
the Conference as one of the oldest members in the
Unity in New South Wales. I was loyally re-
ceived by applause from all present. I was asked
bv the Grand Master to address the Conference
shortlv. I did so. giving them the date of my
initiation as 3rd July. 1860. so that I would soon be
54 years an Oddfellow, and although I had not
visited a Lodge for some years I was still a finan-
cial member, and intended to remain so. After
further remarks. I wished them success in their
meeting, and that prosperity might attend the
Unity while it existed. When I finished, and as
I was retiring. I left them amid loud cheers.
The following is a newspaper account: —
‘'Among the visitors to the Annual Conference
of Oddfellows of the Manchester Unity was Mr.
Affleck, formerly M.L.A. for Yass. He is one
of the oldest Oddfellows in the State, having been
a foundation member of Gundaroo Lodge, which


was established 51 years ago. Mr. Affleck is
79 years old, and has been 60 years in New South
M ales, and only had two homes during that time,
viz.. 44 years at Gundaroo and 16 years at Strath-
field.”
On the sth of June I left home for Gundaroo, where
I arrived on the morning of the 6th to take part in
the celebration of our local Church’s Jubilee. It
was then 50 years since we had it built, and it was
the first Presbyterian Church in the Queanbeyan
Parish, and I had a good deal to do with its erec-
tion, and believed I was the only living member of
it. who had to do with its erection; and, further,
mine was the first marriage celebrated in it. We
had a great number of people at the sports, and
about 200 at the banquet, with some fine speeches,
recitations and songs, and wound up about 10 p.m.
We had two services on the Sabbath, in the morn-
iug by Rev. Mr. Carter, and in the evening by Rev.
Mr. Yeates (Wesleyan), of Gunning, and the choir
gave us some very good singing at both services,
which were well attended.
On the Tuesday morning I left for Harden, and
went on to Mr. Ross’ residence, and next day drove
round the boundaries of the purchase for Reg. He
was hard at work, and I am very well pleased with
his home. Of course, it will take some time before
it is all put to rights, for he has his homestead to
build, which- I hardly think that will be this year.
A temporary erection will have to do under present
circumstances. I left Harden on Thursday morn-
ing, and reached home in the evening, somewhat
tired. On the 4th July I met Mr. Ross in Sydney
and gave him my cheque for £2642 in payment of
Block No. 5 of his subdivision containing 330 acres,
and on the 28th August paid him a further sum of
£2OOO as a deposit on Block 1, containing 328 acres.
The balance (£500) to be arranged for at the be-
ginning of 1915. On the 27th August Alice ar-
rived here, and Reg. and his father arrived on the


29th, as it had been arranged we were to ’nave a
conjoint celebration of Reg. and his mother’s birth-
days, as the former was on the 30th, and the latter
on the 28th, so the two were celebrated on the
29th by a nice little party of friends and relatives.
On that occasion I presented Reg. with a cheque for
£loo, which I had insured his life for, to be paid
when he was 21 years of age. But he did not keep
it long, for he gave it as a portion of the £2OOO
deposit paid to Mr. Ross for the 328 acres of land.
I also presented him with severaj volumes of use-
ful books. At the same time I presented his mo-
ther with the tea and coffee service and tray pre-
sented to my late dear wife, as it was her wish
that Alice should receive it. There was also a
beautiful birthday cake presented by Mrs. D. Leahy,
and some other things by other friends, and all
passed off splendidly. But Alice was very much
run-down in health, and was attended to by Dr.
Lidwill, but got sufficiently well to return home on
the 30th of the month, being here a full month. And
before she left, I had a bad atack of lumbago, which
lasted for about three weeks. At the beginning of
September I lodged with the Registrar-General an
application for a new Certificate of Title in Reg.’s
name for the 330 acres of purchased land, and it
was the end of November before I received the
title deed, which I now have in my safe. I have
arranged for Alice to come and stay with me, and
take full charge of my establishment from the be-
ginning of 1915, and in the meantime John is to
endeavor to get rid of his business at Gundaroo,
: nd come down, so that we may be all together.
1915. By the goodwill of God, I am spared to
enter upon another new year. Which I trust will
be a fruitful one as far as my Christian character
is concerned. I began the year by attending the
usual Annual Service at 7 a.m. on New Year’s
Morning at St. James’ Church, Burwood. On the
occasion there was a large attendanc. I confess it


left a good impression on my mind, and I hope
such will remain on me throughout the year, should
Ibe spared to its end. God has been good to me
in the past, for which I thank Him and trust by
mv serving Him to be worthy, when the end comes,
to be entitled to receive from Him those blessed
words, “Well done, good and faithful servant.” We
have had some very hot and dry days during the
end of last and the beginning of this year. Some-
times I wondered if I would survive, for I cannot
stand the excessive heat. John and a person
named Barlow entered into partnership in the store
at Gundaroo for 12 months from the Ist Januarv,
1915.
For the purpose of the latter seeing what the
business was like, as he wishes to secure such a
business, and the condition is that one of them can
retire at the end of the year, if Mr. Barlow does
not find it convenient to take the business on his
own responsibility. However, Mr. Barlow retired,
as the business did not suit him, and it is still un-
der the name of Affleck.
In connection with all our transactions with Mr.
Ross, I must add he has acted as a gentleman all
through our negotiations, for which I thank him.
On the 2nd of February it was 60 years since I
landed in Port Jackson, having lived at Gundaroo
for 44 years, and 16 years at Strathfield. I never
had it in my power to visit my native land again,
but, Auld Scotland, I love thee still. Alice took
charge of my home on the Ist March, and I have
handed over all responsibility to her. In March
and April I had an attack of lumbago. Toward
the middle of April I learned that my dear and
respected friend Rev. Robert Steel, M.A., was in
Prince Alfred Hospital, and I visited him several
■dines, until he underwent an operation, and after,
till he removed to his home in Campbelltown. and
once or twice since.


At the beginning of May 1 had a severe attack
of influenza and bronchitis, so much so that i was
unable to attend the Church General Assembly till
the end of the first week. On the Saturday a mo-
tion of which I had sent in notice, came on and
although still very unwell I went m and got
through the motion, amending the law to give con-
gregations the same right as ministers, m case ot
dispute, the motion was passed and sent down to
presbyteries for confirmation. I flid not again at-
tend till the following Tuesday, this is the first
time during the 27 years I had not attended the As
sembly for the Queanbeyan congregation as their
representative. Alice had not felt very well for
some time, and John had consented for his son Wil-
liam to enlist without consulting with his mother,
and she took it so much to heart that she has been
very ill ever since, and her nervous system is com-
pletely broken down. William went into camp,
and after being in there for three months, had an
attack of illness which was the cause of his going
into the camp hospital for eleven days, when he
received sick leave for a fortnight, and went up to
the farm with Reg. On his return home and pre-
senting himself at the camp he was examined by
the doctor, and was discharged as physically unfit
for the service, so he returned to the farm. n
November I took a trip up to (‘ Wemyss, ) the
farm, and stayed there two days. Reg drove me
all round the ground, grass paddock and cultivation
paddocks; he had a splendid looking crop of about
"200 acres, standing about five feet high on an
average, and splendid headed, since taking the crop
off which consisted of fifty or sixty tons of hay and
2035 bags of wheat, he has been getting things
ready for the next crop. I left Strathfield on the
Wednesday, and travelled 238 miles, and made the
return trip on Saturday; making a journey of
miles; not so bad for an old man. I have been
greatly troubled with my knees. One morning on


getting out of bed my left leg went from under me,
and I fell down with, all my weight on the floor.
Some days after I went down to the Boulevarde
for seven days, and had a hot air bath each day up
to 280 and 290 degrees. It eased the pain, but I
have to take great care and walk very slow to pre-
vent myself from falling, as my knees are dread-
fully weak. Alice has been having a very bad time
with her nerves, for the past four months her sister
has been nursing her all through.
1916, Spared to enter upon another year, and
went over to St. James’ Church at Burwood to the
service at 7 a.m. New Year’s morning, and feel
benefited thereby, a very large congregation met.
On the seventh of January Alice and her sister left
for 1 uggerah Lakes by order of the doctor as being
the only thing to do her good, but they only remain-
ed there a week as it was too noisy with so many
holiday-makers. A week after their return they
then left for Bronte where they had plenty of sea
air and water and fine accommodation, they re-
mained there for three weeks, and returned home
on 15th February, when we called in Doctor
Dansey to see her I am told to make a thorough
examination of her from head to foot, so that I
could report her state to her husband. He did so,
and said there was not much wrong with her fur-
ther than the nervous breakdown; later on he or
dered her into a private hospital at Burwood where
she would be quiet, and he would be able to visit
her daily, after three weeks there she returned no
better, her nervous state making her continually
worry, while the doctor says unless she gives up
the worry it will be a hard matter to get her right.
During February and March I had two or three
visits from my old friend and ship-mate James
Barry of Lismore. We had several long chats
over our past 61 years in New South Wales. On
the fifth March I reached by eightieth brithday,
and I have much reason to be thankful, although I


have seen many changes and ups-and-downs since
coming to this country. About the middle of
March Alice returned from the Burwood Hospital,
no better, if anything, even worse. I then wrote
to John, saying Dr. Dansey said he should come
down and take her about, and see if he could get
her to forget herself; and think on other matters
by showing her about different places, and if he
would do so, I would go up to Gundaroo and ar-
tend to the business for a He agreed to
that, seeing that he was nearly run down himself,
and wanted a change through the worry about
Alice, the business, and the farm, all of which he
was responsible for. I then left for Gundaroo on
the twenty second of March by the 10 a.m. train,
and landed at my destination about 7 p.m., after
travelling by train and sulky one hundred and
eightv six miles. Two days after, John left for
Strathfield, arriving the next morning, and for
three weeks took his wife about to different places
to try and divert her mind from thinking about her
position. But it was no use, he could not do any
good, so he left and went to the farm for a week,
and then returned to his home on the twenty sixth
day of April. I left for home next morning about
7 a.m., and reached Strathfield about 6 p.m. Next
day I went into the city and withdrew from the
A.M.P. Society, £ioo on an endowment policy in
the name of my grandson, William, which he was
to get as a birthday gift on attaining the age of 2r
years, which would be in June, and was ultimate-
ly paid to him. As the A.M.P. Society’s annual
meeting was held on the same day, I attended it,
and at the conclusion of the business I seconded a
vote-of-thanks to the directors and officers of the
Society, and told them that I would now bid them
good-bye. as I ceased to be a member of the in
stitution. having drawn the amount that I held the
last policy for that day. and therefore had no in-
terest in the Society, although at the same time I


wished them prosperity in the future, having been
a member for 56 years. The chairman in returning
thanks said: “He hoped it would not be the last
time they would see me at the annual meetings, I
would be made very welcome at the meetings as
here-to-fore although I had ceased to be a member.”
I originally insured my own life policy for £SOO.
and when I transferred it, the value of it was £1350
including the bonus additions. In the month of
May my dear and faithful pastor and friend, Rev.
Robert Steel, M.A., passed away at the age of 60
years. I had sat under his ministry for about
seventeen years, although our acquaintance had
lasted for thirty-six years. On my return home I
called to see him, but he was so weak and ill he
could not speak to me, but made certain signs he
thought I understood. He had suffered for nearly
twelve months, and was one of the most respected
members of our Church. I was again appointed
the representative of the Queanbeyan Congregation
at the State General Assembly, and after fighting
for many years for an amendment of our code of
rules to allow the members of the Church the same
privileges as the minister, I succeeded in getting
the Assembly of 1915 to agree to it, and my amen-
ded rules were sent down to Presbyteries under the
Barrier Act, and the return to the remit was 15 to
1 in favor, so I succeeded at last in getting what I
had so many years attempted to get.
During the time that I returned home and the
month of July, Alice was making so little progress
that I thought it wise to again call in Dr. Lidwill
to see her, and see what he thought we should do.
He made an examination of her, and told me there
was something seriously wrong, with her bowels,
and if I would take his advice I would call in a
specialist to consult with him. I consented, and
Dr. Morton of Ashfield and he met, and after con-
sultation, they concluded that it was necessary for
her to undergo an operation. I notified the same


to her husband, and he came down; and it was ar-
ranged she should do so. She was then taken to
the Lewisham Hospital and underwent the opera-
tion on the 15th July, and is now progressing most
favorably; and I trust through the goodness of God
she will soon be able to join her husband at home
before very long.
As I passed my eightieth birthday in March,
1916, in the course of nature I cannot expect to live
much longer, and as I intend to live a quiet and
comfortable life for the time allotted to me, I may
as well bring this to a close for 'I do not expect
anything worth recording to occur in the future.
However, I may note that the Presbytery of Goul-
burn has done me the honour to nominate me as
their representative at the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church of Australia, which is to be
held in Sydney in September next, and in winding
up the following, I thank God that he has spared
me length of days andi sufficient of this world s
goods that I need not fear the future but live quiet
ly and use the remainder of my days in doing what
in me lies for His cause and Kingdom, and making
my peace with Him and carrying out the following
words: —
“I live for those who love me,”
For those who know me true,
For Heaven that smiles above me
And awaits my coming, too.
For the cause that lacks assistance.
For the wrongs that need resistance.
For the future in the distance^
And the good that I can do.”


Extracts from a Few Letters
Sent Me.
From Hon. Sir George Reid.
On my return for Yass in 1895: “A thousand
hearty congratulations.”
From the Hon. J. N. Drunker, Chief Secretary.
On the same occasion: “I am truly gratified at
your great success. Nothing is so much required
in Parliament as men of sterling integrity, and of
high reputation. And it is always a source of com-
f(.t to me. in the country’s interest, when I see
such men as you returned.”
On another occasion: “I note that you are likely
to have an exciting time at next election. Still
I cannot think that the electors of your district will
be so ungrateful as to fail to recognise the time and
strict attention that you have devoted to your Par-
liamentary duties. Just now New South Wales
wants no erratic changes. Its steady progress
can only be ensured by honest and patriotic service,
and you have never hesitated to contribute your
quota in this respect.”


From the Hon, James Ashton, M.L.C*
“Will you allow me to do what I ought and in-
tended to have done long before, viz., to tell you
how profoundly I regretted your defeat at the polls.
You took a giant task, and that you were not suc-
cessful gave me as much regret as anything which
happened during the election. We were ten years
together in Parliament, and during that time, I, m
common with most others, learned to appreciate
your unflagging and self-denying industry and
singleness of purpose in the promotion of the public
good. The country never had a more faithful and
honest servant than yourself, and it is a pity that
your courage is not more widely distributed.
From the late Rev. Robt. Steel, M.A.
You may be, as you are, not slow to call
yourself sometimes ‘Jack Blunt,’ but, on the many
occasions on which I have asked for, or with you
in private on other matters, I have always found
you had a heart, a big heart, and no one, I think,
knows that better than I. Ido not hesitate to
write this of you while you are yet alive, for I think
a man ought sometimes to tell his friend what he
thinks of him.”
From W. Jermyne, Yass Council Clerk.
“I have been instructed by my Council to inform
you that at its last meeting the following resolution
was carried unanimously‘That this Council place
on record its high appreciation of the services ren-
dered to the Council by Mr. William Affleck while
he represented the Electoral District of Yass m the
Parliament of New South Wales, and that the same
be communicated to him.’ And it gives me much
pleasure to now communicate the same to you.


(INDEX A).
Some Remarks on Eight
Days in Victoria.
NOTES BY THE WAY.
By W. Affleck, M.L.A.
Leaving Sydney by the express train after a
good night s rest we reached Albury by 6 a.m.
After having breakfast we had to remove our bag-
J rom Sydney to the Melbourne express.
The first matter that strikes a New South Welsh-
man is the very great difference in the arrangement
of the express train. For instance, on the N.S.W
lines long stretches are rushed over by the express
without stonning-. Not so in Victoria for there
every little station is stopped at until within a few
miles of Melbourne, when it is a continuous run
However, I will give the credit due to them by say-
ing they do the journey in the time. But in these
days of fast travelling would it not be advisable for
the Victorians to adopt our plan with the express
and they would then have it in their power to say
thev are ahead of us in express travelling. This
is a matter worthy c f consideration.
Having arrived in Melbourne a stranger with a
solitary introduction, this was soon personally de-
livered and it is with much pleasure I can record


1 soon had hosts of fnends who were only too glad
to honor me with attention far beyond d e s ert .
On the strength of the friendship acquired Iws
soon armed with introductions by order of the Hon.
N Levi M.L.C., president of the Council of Manu-
factures with introductions to the presidents o
“me at Geelong. Ballarat and Ben ;
digo, as well as with an invitation to attend a soc
which the Honorable the President N. Levi, M.L.C.,
had arranged for to celebrate his two years of
office This was a very large gathering held m
the Vienna Cafe and at which L was honored by
replying to the toast of our visitors.
Of course as my visit to Victoria was more tor
information than pleasure, it was my prrvileg
through the kindness of many fnends I had made
In the course of a couple, of days, to get mtofce
rieht way of making enquiries for myself, and from
the enquiries made I found as with ourselves, busi-
ness o?all kinds was stagnant, and great complaints
of dullness of trade. But the feeling for Federa-
tion is most intense. Nearly every man you speak
to tells you it is likely to be the saviour of the
country if adopted, for with Federation they expect
to secure Intercolonial Freetrade and Protection
against the world, and with that, down w. come
the heavy duties now imposed on the Victoria
m f d vi tii e railway workshops at Newport and
saw much to study. All kinds of work go on
here repairs as well as manufacturing. Old en-
gines are being repaired and new boilers made, as
well as all the necessaries required to complete the
work required. Several new machines for saving
labor have been here introduced so that one man
can now do what it usually took four to do. As to
the wages paid there they have been very much
reduced Fourteen shillings is now paid instead
of twenty for the same work, and the amount paid
to the various trades are from 14s. to 2s. 6d. per


day. That is the general pay all over the work-
shops. There are about 900 men now employed
instead of about 1400 as formerly. After a thorough
inspection we preceeded to the chilling and freez-
ing works adjoining. Here we saw the sheep
brought in, their throats cut, the carcase skinned
and cleaned in a very short time. A large number
of hands are here employed and paid at the rate
of 14s per 100. and I was told each man could put
through about 60 per day. The sheep killed during
the day are removed at midnight to the chilling
room, where they remain 40 hours, after which
they are put into other cooling rooms till the last
stage of freezing is completed, when they are so
stiff anything can be done with them. I was also
shown kidneys as hard as stones, likewise tongues,
tails, &c., &c. Being a very warm day I was ex-
tra warm, but soon got cold enough before I was
many minutes in the place. Here I got the only
cool drink of water I have had in Victoria.
GEELONG.
On Monday morning by the 6.30 train I left
Spencer street station for Geelong, armed with an
introduction to Mr. Conran, President of the
Chamber of Manufactures at that place, from Mr.
B. D. Smith, secretary of the Melbourne Chamber,
by order of the Hon. N. Levy, M.L.C., President.
On my arrival at the Geelong station a few minutes
after 8 a.m. I met Mr. Farnell, M.L.A., chairman
of our fisheries commission, who was on his way
to Ballarat, in connection with the commission en-
quiry, having a conversation with him for a few
minutes previous to the starting of the Ballarat
train. I afterwards proceeded to the town and had
breakfast. After breakfast I met a gentleman, a
Scotchman, of nearly 50 years’ standing in Geelong,
who very kindly took me in hand and led me to


Mr. Conran’s office. Having placed my introduc-
tion in that gentleman’s hands, he expressed the
pleasure it would afford him in showing me round
and securing all the information 1 required m
every shape and form. After first introducing me
to the respective members of his firm, which is the
largest of its kind in Geelong, viz., Pastoral and
Agricultural Agents, for they both sell by auction
and put through for shipment very large quantities
of wool, wheat, and other produce; and also show-
ing me over their very extensive warehouses,
which are very large, he then ' called a cab and
took me to the establishment of Messrs. Donaghy
and Co., rope manufacturers. We had an interview
with Mr. Sergeant, the manager, and he was very
willing to supply me with any information 1
wished Of course as manufacturers they were
strongly in favor of Protection or prohibition
duties, so that they might not have competition.
He stated the duty on reaper and binder twine was
£8 per ton, and but for that their business would
have been materially decreased, as the manufac-
ture of steel rope had very much decreased the
necessity for the ordinary heavy ropes. But, he
added their preat want was Federation, which he
thought would bring about Intercolonial Freetrade
and give them a larger market, when they would
not be afraid to compete with the Sydney manu-
facturers. Mr. Conran next drove me to Messrs.
Harvey, Dann and Co., the large grain merchants
and millers in Geelong. They thought the duties
had certainly very much injured the trade of Gee-
long and they gave it as their opinion that Federa-
tion’was the’only cure for the present depression
and for an increased prosperity to all the colonies.
They were not particularly anxious for protection
against the outside world as they believed the fsr
mers of Victoria were able to hold their own
against the world.


Mr. Conran next drove me to Messrs. Gray and
Dobbie’s Albion Woollen Mills on the Barwon
River, here we were most kindly received by both
gentlemen and taken all over the premises, shown
every process of the cloth making from the wool
as shorn from the sheep, till it was ready for the
tailor. This was most interesting, they made
nothing but the finest quality of tweeds at this
mill, and strongly impressed on us there was no
shoddy here. They were full handed and working
full time, and what enabled them to do so was the
heavy duties imposed, but they were very emphatic
on this, if we had federation with intercolonial free
trade they would not require half the present duties
against the world, and their business would largely
increase. Mr. Gray has also one of the largest
tanneries in the colony, but as it was five miles fur-
ther on and my time was limited we did not go to
the works but were satisfied with a look at a photo-
graph of the large establishment. He said they
did a very large trade here, importing many of the
hides from New South Wales, he was also interest-
ed as a partner in the ropeworks at Melbourne, and
expressed a very decided wish that we might soon
have Federation with Intercolonial Freetrade, when
he was satisfied it would be to the mutual advan-
tage of all concerned, both manufacturer and con-
sumer.
We next proceeded to the Excelsior Woollen
Mills, Messrs. Hurst and Co., and were equally
w T ell received and every information accorded us.
Here they manufacture tweeds, but not of so first
rate a quality as at the Albion Mills, they also
manufacture flannels and blankets here. These we
saw in process of manufacture as well as completed,
and it was the same old cry—Federation with In-
tercolonial Fretrade as the great boom desired, and
the remedy for present distress.
Our next visit was to Messrs. Strong Bros’ large
boot factory, where we saw the whole process of


the manufacture gone through. Their great objec-
tion to the high duties now imposed, is that on
their raw material, they say, of course, the tanners
object to the duty being taken off leather as it is
their manufactured article, and they are also
strongly of opinion, the only cure, and that which
will satisfy all parties, is the Victorian unanimous
cry at present of Federation with intercolonial
freetrade. If they could get that instead of the
present duties of ss. per pair on men’s and 3s. 6d.
on women’s boots they could do with less than
half against the outside world.
In describing the country I passed through, I
will do so as shortly as possible. It is all splendid
level country; the only objection is the immense
quantity of stones on the surface, which have no
doubt been thrown there by volcanic eruption. It
is very questionable which is most trouble to clear
—land with the stones on as we see it, or land as
with us heavily timbered. I notice much of the
cultivated patches between Melbourne and Geelong
have been cleared of the stones, and these utilised
by making dykes of them, which are no doubt
splendid divisions instead of timber or wire fences.
But I have to remark, in proportion to the large
scope of country we can see from the railway,
only a small proportion of it is under cultivation,
and is therefore used for grazing.
BALLARAT.
On Tuesday morning I again resumed my tour
as far as Ballarat armed with an introduction to
Mr. Niven, President of the Chamber of Manufac-
tures, who, reading my introductory letter, said he
would be most happy to show me round. He
then got out his own barouche, and at once as a
tour of pleasure drove me out to and around the
fine artificial lake, which is something over three


miles in circumference, in which there are plenty
of fish, with liberty granted to the inhabitants to
do what they like with the hook, in following the
pleasure of Isaac Walton. There are also plenty
of boats, yachts and steamboats for the amusement
and pleasure of those who wish to indulge in such,
and the lake is all planted round with evergreen
trees, with plenty of seats, so that it is really a
place of pleasure. On the opposite side of the road
are the gardens, which are lovely, and the statuary
here is only to be seen never to be forgotten. I will
not occupy your space with a description, but
would suggest to anyone visiting Victoria they
should not neglect visiting the sights of Ballarat.
Here, as at other places, I was most courteously
entertained, being made an honorary member of
both the Ballarat and Old Colonists’ Clubs. Mr.
Niven, my guide, showed me all over his premises
which are very extensive, and the work turned out
at this establishment is AI. indeed, I have no hesi-
tation in saying that when his work was placed
alongside of some English work of the same class
the local work carried off the palm. Mr. Niven is
a staunch freetrader, and would not care if the
policy of Victoria was Freetrade to-morrow, but,
like all others, he seems to think that Federation
is the only thing that will bring about a proper
state of progress and prosperity for Victoria. Any-
one who has any doubts of these facts has only to
send for a copy of Mr. Niven’s work, published
under the patronage of the Government, entitled
“Victoria and its Resources.’’ I next visited the
Phoenix foundry works, and it is really a pity to
see such fine works practically idle. They have
just got an order for two engines, which will keep
them going for a short time, but the information
supplied is that when in full work they employ 500
hands, but at present about 5o is the number.
The manager also advocated Federation with in-
tercolonial freetrade as the only likely remedy for


the present state of affairs. Very many others
also intimated to me it was the only remedy m
their opinion out of the depression.
The Hon. T. Wanlass, M.L.C., was to have
taken me in hand on the following morning to
show me round to other places, but when he called
I had to ask him to excuse me, as I felt so unwell
that I proposed to return by the mail train to Mel-
bourne, so that were I laid up I would be near re-
lations. I therefore returned to Melbourne by
another route, which is worth recording. In going
to Ballarat I went via Geelong, and the first strik-
ing sight worth looking at was the Moorabi Valley
The sight here was very interesting, as away up
and down this valley are patches of beautifully
cultivated lands, and the undulating sort of country
is charming. After passing that the country be-
came more like N.S. Wales country —undulating
ridges, with timbered portions, and very unlike the
land passed through between Melbourne and Gee-
long. But my return to the city was by the Bac-
chus March route, and here I must be more parti-
cular for the benefit of our farmers. Indeed, if it
were possible for them to have a run between Bal-
larat and Melbourne it would open their eyes. True,
they have splendid land, but they do not stick to
the eternal crop, wheat, as is the custom in New
South Wales. On leaving, one of the most strik-
ing sights is to see a large portion of Mount Bunin-
yong cleared and cultivated, and on as far as Gor-
don on both sides of the line are to be seen very
large paddocks of potatoes. These are grown
very largely and not only on good flats, but up the
sides of what mav be termed mountains. Person-
ally although I have had some experience in farm-
ing, I admit I am at a loss to know how they
managed the horses or bullocks and plough, for as
already stated not only the sides, but the top of
these mountains are cultivated, and splendid crops
of potatoes growing on them. It really delights


the eye and causes one to exclaim, these growers
deserve success. I could hardly have credited the
statement had I been told instead of seeing for my-
self, and would not wonder should some of your
readers say, that must be taken with a grain oi
salt. Now what I have to say to our settlers is,
if they were to do as I have done see for them-
selves, it would be an object lesson, for besides the
large crops of potatoes growing, very large crops
of peas, beans, turnips, and hay as well as wheat
is grown. In some of the paddocks they were
busy threshing the peas, while at other places they
were stacked. In other paddocks I could see
sheaves of other grain, but were our settlers to go
in for dairying and grow the crops mentioned
above and not be so dependent on wheat alone
they would not have such reason to complain that
they not only get a low price for their produce,
but that the return is so small. Rotation of crops
as practised in the part just described would help
the land as well as the owner of the same. As we
proceed between Ballan and Rowley it is in some
places somewhat rough, more like some of the
rough New South Wales country than anywhere
I have yet been, but it is splendid grazing country
and occupied by large landed proprietors. Proceed-
ing onwards we get into open country again and
see beautiful undulating hills with a large settled
plain in the distance. This I found out afterwards
to be Bacchus Marsh; and in the still greater dis-
tance, as far as the eye could reach, are to be seen
the tree-covered ranges with two very large bush-
fires. This with the thermometer recording 98 deg.
in the shade was enough to make one think that it
was warm enough for anything. As we proceed
to Bacchus Marsh the railway line takes a very
great bend in the shape of a horseshoe, and on the
Bacchus Marsh side the place we had c ome round
was about three-quarters of a mile across. After
passing Bacchus Marsh all the way to Melbourne


it is splendid open land. Fine flat country, but un-
fortunately like the Geelong side, the stones are
scattered all over the land, and where we find cul-
tivation paddocks, it is where the people have
cleared it and dykes or walls with the stones as
w r ell as ends and sometimes sides of out-houses
with the same. On much of this land there was
grass from 12 to 18 inches high and any cattle seen
were in splendid condition. Regarding the roads
anv that could be seen from the railway line were
in better repair than most of our roads, and a large
number crossed the line. When we reached Bray-
brook Junction, we might consider we were within
the suburbs of Melbourne. Here and there were
very large agricultural farming implement factories,
as well as engineering establishments. I forgot to
mention before, along the line from Ballarat to
Gordon are several steam chaff cutters so that
much of the hay must be cut up here and sent on
to either Ballarat, or Melbourne.
BENDIGO.
I left b-"- the early morning train for Bendigo
armed with an introduction as before to Mr. Jacob
Cohen, ex-mayor, who received me very cordially,
and at once volunteered to show me over the lions
of Bendigo, as well as to supply me with all the
information in his power, so that the object of my
visit might be attained. He first inroduced me to
Dr. Quick, who is well-known all over the colonies
for his enthusiasm in the cause of Federation. I
found out from him that Protection is on the wane.
No one is so rabid on Protection now as they used
to be, and manv are becoming freetraders, but cei-
tainly all are federationists to the backbone. He
thinks the scheme of the Premiers at Hobart the
one that should be adopted for the election of the
convention, and he trusts that we of N.S.W. will


lose no time in hastening on the matter. Mr.
Cohen then drove me to the Municipal Chambers
where the Mayor and councillors were holding
their usual meeting. He introduced me to the
Mayor, and that gentleman introduced me to each
of the’others separately, all of whom gave me a
cordial welcome to Bendigo. After a long chat on
several political questions they all agreed that
Federation was the question, and they expressed a
hope that our Parliament would lose no time m
taking the matter up and carrying it to a success-
ful issue, when they were satisfied the other co-
lonies would soon follow in our footsteps. After
a prolonged and very satisfactory interview to all
concerned, we left and then visited the picture ga -
lerv, Masonic Hall, Bendigo Club, distillery, an
several other fine public buildings, also the very
fine artificial lake, and the reclaimed gold
diggings, now converted into gardens, which
are in a flourishing condition. Mr. Cohen then
drove me along amongst the mines as far as
Eaglehawk, where we saw the machinery at work.
It is really surprising the enormous quantity of
stuff left after the gold has been extracted, and the
quantity of gold got at Bendigo since the beginn-
ing in 'lB5l valued at £75,000,000. To show
how successful these diggings have been I may
give the returns of a few: —The Garden Gully
United Company: This company has expended
about £22,000 and paid in dividends about £-95°>
000, and has a plant worth £lO,OOO. The Great
Extended Hustler’s Company has also expended
about £46,000 and paid in dividends about £6OO,
000. The United Devonshire Company’s called-up
capital amounts to about £22,000, and they have
paid in dividends about £220,000. These are only a
few to give an idea what has been done there.
Bendigo at oresent depends nearly wholly on its
mining industries, but others are springing up.
They have also very fine public gardens which is


delight, especiall}' in such hot weather as it was
when I was in Bendigo. With regard to the town
itself I am able to repeat as I have done about the
other places visited, viz., the cry is for Federation.
In proceeding to Bendigo, I went up by the Sun-
bury and Kyneton route. Up to the station known
as Diggers’ Rest the land is very much like what I
have described as Victorian country, viz., fine and
flat, or gently undulating with the hard granite or
white stone boulders all over it, and many paddocks
are fenced by the stone dykes. There must be
hundreds of miles of this kind of fence. Just im-
mediately beyond this, we pass the fine residence
and through the estate of Sir William Clarke. From
Macedon to very near Woodend it is grazing tim-
ber land much like our country in N.S. Wales,
with portion of it somewhat rough. From the
latter place to Taradale there is a good lot of cul-
tivation land. Indeed, the sheaves and stocks of
oats were still in the paddocks. At Malmsbury
we get a very good view of the water reservoir
that supplies Bendigo, which is distant by the route
the water is taken about 70 miles. We also pass
through two fairly long tunnels on this line.
There has been some heavy work on this line, and
it cost about £4,000,000, or about £40.000 per
mile. On my return to Melbourne from Bendigo
I went by the Kilmore route, so as to catch the
Sydney express at Wallan. From Bendigo to
Moranding it is all bush country, like what I call
N.S.W. country —very good grazing land—and
from the latter to Kilmore it is more cultivation
land. That was the only place in my travels over
the Victorian lines that I saw bunny, and there
were a good many here. At Kilmore several cases
of them prepared for the Melbourne market were
loaded, to be ultimately exported.
I have only to add that during the time I was
in Victoria I saw much and learned some, which
I trust I will be able to use for the benefit of all


concerned. Believing that people can do much
more in making converts if they use argument de-
cided on from personal experience and observation
I undertook the journey, to see if I might gam
some knowledge that I might use in my position
as one of the legislators when the time conies
that the questions now before the public will be
discussed in our Assembly.
I cannot, however, finish without giving credit
to whom credit is due, viz., to the whole of the
residents of Victoria I came in contact with and
especially to those gentlemen to whom I had letters
of introduction. Although an entire stranger m a
strange land, I was met and treated with the great-
est hospitaiitv. and in the most friendly spirit by
all I shall not soon forget the many friends I
have made in Victoria during my trip, seeking for
information, which I am happy to say has been
afforded me.


(INDEX B).
3,000 Miles in Search
of Information.
Written for the “Border Post” By W. AFFLECK,
M.L.A.
On Good Friday afternoon 1 left Sydney by the
express train and arrived at Albury about 6 a.m.
on Saturday. Here I determined to stay till Mon-
day, when I left by the train for Melbourne at 6.i0
a.m. and arrived there about n. Having spent
about four hours visiting and doing some business,
I again left by the express for Adelaide. I pass on
without comment on my journey to Melbourne, as
I saw nothing new to report since my last account
of a similar journey 15 months ago. The same may
be said of my trip to Ballarat and further on, as it
was dark by the time we reached there. On gett-
ing up in the morning we were there, and had been
for some time passing through the Ninety-mile
Scrub, This portion of country, I was informed,
was about 90 by 20 or 25 miles in extent, and all
covered with mallee scrub about 2ft. high. Here
and there an odd bush would be higher. The
ground around seemed to be nothing but a bed of
gravel, and personally I am at a loss to conceive
what good the country will ever be. It is reported
the scrub growing is of a eucalyptus character, and
very much stronger in that oil than any of the


other timbers of the same class If this be so
may be of some commercial value while it lasts,
“ once made use of. Towards the end of this
desert we passed a bare piece of land with a nice
homestead on it. Here there wereai few shea;p
and other stock, but what they could get to eat i
was puzzled to know, as I did not have a magnify-
ing glass with me, and I could detect not mg m
the shape of herbage with the naked eye. 1 his,
passed through, we came again to a piece of
country producing limestone with pine and si e
oaks y About 8 a.m. the (grand) Murray River
came in view, which we crossed by a very strong
and massive bridge. It is a very great width here,
but it is low, and consequently only navigable m
the very centre, which I am told is very deep, but
when in flood it must be a sight worth looking a .
After getting breakfast at Murray Bridge Station
we proceeded on our way, the first town of any
importance being Callington, but it is a mg
very much owing to mining operations being aban-
doned, but there is a beautiful valley nearly as far
as the eye can reach. Cultivation is carried on here
now, but it seems a pity to look on the large chim-
ney stacks standing smokeless as signs of depart-
ed glory. Leaving here we pass over some rough
country, growing the usual pine and sheoak, with
very deep gullies and large rocks till approaching
the nice little town of Nairn. Here we see what 1
was informed was the first flourmill erected m
South Australia, and built by the once famous
Miller Dunn. It is 35 miles from Adelaide, and
has a splendid lot of agricultural land around it.
It still seems to be a fairly thriving town. Mount
Barker Junction is the next station we arrive at.
Here the junction to the south-east coast takes
place, which is said to be the beauty spot of South
Australia. The land about here is somewhat
thickly timbered. The next station is Balhannah,
surrounded by a very fine agricultural district.


Large orchards are to be seen here also. I may
here state what struck me as peculiar. Nearly the
whole of the buildings, or at least a great propor-
tion of them, right from the Adelaide end of the
Ninety-mile Desert to here are skillion roofed, and
still more strange I do not think I noticed one
wooden building, slab or other kind, all stone and
substantial. Of course this refers to buildings
along the line and not to the towns, for the build-
ings in these are like other towns, but also all of
stone —stone being more plentiful than timber from
appearance. The next station is Aldgate, 22 miles
from Adelaide. I might have mentioned at 25
miles from Adelaide we passed through the first
tunnel, and before we reach that city we pass
through eight tunnels altogether. We get into the
hilly country now, and it is wonderful to see, and
would be an object lesson for many of our New
South Welshmen, the manner in which every ilttle
gully in these hills is cultivated. I saw as fine
vegetables, cabbages, carrots, turnips, pumpkins,
celery and other vegetables growing in these gul-
lies as ever I saw in my life. It is here the land
is utilised and made to yield a living to the work-
ers. The residences also are finer than are to be
seen in some of our towns, while they are anything
but destitute of fruit, for there are many fruit trees
grown here also. I had an object lesson given me
here. Many a time I have heard our Protectionist
advocates sav if you give us Freetrade and do away
with Protection, what shall we do with our boys?
When I tell you I would be inclined to say the next
time I hear this, make stone knappers of them.
We would be lowering our principles no lower than
Protectionist South Australia is doing, for in pass-
ing over those hills I saw on the road alongside
the railway line two boys about 12 or 14 years of
age busy stonebreaking, and they each had a very
large quantity of metal in their heaps. In Free-
trade New South Wales I don’t think we have yet


descended to that, but we can easily see if ever
Freetrade should prevent us from getting useful
trades for our boys, we have a Protectionist lesson
as to what we can revert to without fearing that
we would have flaunted in our face that Freetrade
had compelled us to make our boys stone knappers.
We proceed on, and now begin the ascent of
Mount Lofty, the summit of which is 1613 ft., and
miles from Adelaide. It is a sight almost
worth a journey from Sydney alone to see. All
over the mountain are some of the most palatial
buildings to be found in the colonies. They vie
with the finest buildings in our cities and suburbs,
and here again the hills and gullies are utilised, for
they are cultivated to such an extent that anyone
not struck with admiration at the beauty of the
scenery has certainlv no taste. Besides the cul-
tivation in the gullies the hills have been cleared
of their natural timber, and fruit trees planted in
their places, and all under these are extensive beds
of strawberry plants. On arriving at Mitchell,
where the tickets are collected, we get a fine view
of Gisborne and Adelaide in the distance. From
here to the city we have a fine level run, and get
into the capital of South Australia about noon
Sydney time, or 1 p.m. Adelaide time. Having
arrived at the station a surprise awaited me, as it
was far more barefaced than at Albury by our
Victorian neighbors. Every man’s (and woman’s,
too, for that matter) luggage was seized by the
Customs authorities, and trollied away to the far
end of the station to be examined. However, after
a little time I and some others were allowed to
take our traps, after giving an assurance they con-
tained nothing but clothing, but I may add all were
not treated so. This is only another example of
the barbarous principle of Protection. With Free-
trade nothing of that kind would happen. Having
got my luggage. I secured my berth for Broken
Hill, and spent the few hours I had before starting


at 5 p.m. in visiting some of the “lions” of the City
of Adelaide. The Picture Gallery was closed, as
they were hanging some of the pictures lent by
the other colonies in exchange. The Geological
School was, however, open, as also the Museum,
both of which 1 visited, also the Cyclorama of the
Battle of Waterloo. Then I had a look round the
city till the train started for Broken Hill. It does
the heart good in looking on both sides of the
line to see the large paddocks cultivated, and the
homesteads on them surrounded by immense stacks.
It shows they are farmers in the true sense of the
word. This being the ploughing season, large
numbers of men with three and four furrow ploughs
and four and six horses drawing them were to be
seen at work. This was the general state of mat-
ters till reaching Teroure. It evidently appears
that the farmers here can make a good thing of it,
although their general average is only seven bus-
hels to the acre, if we judge by the great stacks
and absence of slab huts, for they all seem to have
stone residences. When daylight returned we
found we were going over ground as level as the
Ninetv-mile Desert, and although clear of the de-
sert scrub, yet it was as destitute of grass, and
how stock live is more than I can conjecture, for
even the salt bush seems to be a thing of the past,
if it was ever plentiful. We went on, however,
and arrived at Broken Hill about 9 a.m. Sydney
time, an hour late. I had breakfast, then proceed-
ed to the Proprietary. After an interview with the
manager, who I found to be a countryman of my
own, he directed one of the employees to take me
over the mine. This took up my time till noon,
and it is a sight to be remembered. It would take
too long to give details, but some idea of it may be
formed when I say the average monthly expendi-
ture for carting the produce of the mine, and the
coal, &c., required, and paid to the Adelaide Go-
vernment and the Silverton Tramway Company


is £20,2*7. This amount these two parties re-
ceive, while the New South Wales Government has
to pay the expenditure in governing this portion
of New South Wales. Surely this is a good argu-
ment itself for the construction of a light railway
either from Hay or Condobolin. I was very much
interested in all I saw, and anyone whose curiosity
is aroused I would say go, see and learn. During
the afternoon I went round the town to see the
sights of Broken Hill, but it was certainly any-
thing but a pleasure. The dust blowing was some-
thing also to be remembered. T.he shopkeepers
have certainly a rough time of it with the dust, as
their goods are literally covered with it. I remark-
ed to one of them, “Have you many days like this?”
The reply was “We have very few of any other
kind.” I then asked. “What did they do with the
goods,” seeing you could scrape the dust off in
shovelfuls, “did the people buy them?” The reply
was, “Oh, yes, we do not charge for the dust; that
is given in, and they do not complain.” They have
a nice town only for the dust, and a nice moon-
light promenade ground with a good bandstand in
the centre; they have also plots of ground around
it which seem intended for parks, but they are
planting pepper trees galore in them, as they
seem to thrive well, but in such a manner that one
is led to think that they want to have a scrub in
the town. I onlv remained here one day, that be-
incr enough to satisfy me or any reasonable person,
unless they wished to be choked with dust and
poisoned with water, so I bid farewell to Broken
Hill at 7.10 p.m., and resumed my journey to Ade-
laide, where I arrived about 11 a.m. next day. Here
I was the "uest of the Hon. John Darling, M.L.C.,
while in Adelaide, who with his dear wife and
family did all in their power to make my stay a
pleasure, and for which I was extremely thankful.
Mr. Darling escorted me around Adelaide to
places I had not visited, such as the Parliament


Houses. The new Parliament buildings are bare-
ly half finished, but the portion completed is oc-
cupied bv the Legislative Assembly. It is a superb
building, and when completed will be an ornament
to Adelaide. It is built of native white marble,
which looks very imposing and massive. The old
House alongside is built of brick, and is occupied
by the Councillors. The general election being on,
and this being the first time the women were to
exercise the right to vote, meetings were being
held all over Adelaide to educate the women up to
the times. Mr. Darling was to be chairman at one
of them, which he invited me to attend. I did so,
and was struck with the way the women had turn-
ed up and the attention they gave to the addresses
delivered. The present contest in South Australia
is~not as with us—Fretrade or Protection —but may
be summed up as Capital v. Labor, and the Ministry
favors the latter. After a very pleasant couple of
days in Adelaide I left for Melbourne, where we ar-
rived about ii a.m. This being a holiday with the
shops of any importance and the factories I could
do very little but holiday it also. I however made
a few calls after which I enjoyed myself during the
afternoon and Sunday. On Monday I resumed
my inquiries, but the most important item of the
day was the anti-sweating meeting held in the
Town Hall in the evening. The hall was crowded,
as well as the doorways and passages, and an ex-
pectant audience was not disappointed at the re-
velations expected to be made. The Rev. Professor
Gosman occupied the chair, and among the
speakers were Messrs. S. Manger, secretary of the
association; Rev. W. H. Lewis, vice-president of
the Ballarat branch; C .Bishop, president of the
Trades Hall; H. Dalglish, secretary of the united
public service association; Deakin, M.L.A.,; H. H.
Chairq on, and Hancock. M.L.A. Everyone of
these gentlemen made powerful speeches, the two
Ms.L.A. bringing down the house. When we


hear of the blessings Protection, would give us
had we it to perfection as in Victoria, as laid be-
fore our people of New South Wales by our oracles
Messrs. Lyne, O’Sullivan, Copeland and others, it
was only necessary to listen to these champions of
Protection, Messrs. Deakin and Hancock, as the
result of the principle in their own colony, to shun
forever such a policy. So that your readers may
learn a little, I will quote a few statements made
at that meeting by the gentlemen named, and
leave the readers to judge whether we are not far
better off under our Freetrade policy than under
the 20, 40, 50, and 100 per cent, duties as they
have them in the sister colony. At the meeting
we were told the following facts, which were re-
lated to the speakers by the workers doing the
work; —Women had to find their own sewing ma-
chines and thread, and make and finish men's
trousers at from five to seven pence per pair, and
that they were able to make at such rates from
seven shillings and sixpence to 10s per week;
children’s knickerbockers were paid for at the rate
of 2s. gd. per doz. or 2fd. each; and a bootmaker
stated he was offered by a Collingwood boot fac-
tory fourpence (qd.) a pair to finish Blucher boots,
the man refused and was told, “Very well, I can
get plenty of men to do it,” at the prices noted.
It was stated a woman could earn, by doing 100
hours a week, 9 s - 6d., and out of that she had to
pay 2s. for tram fares and 2d. postage. The Rev.
W. H. Lewis said it was a frequent thing to hear of
a woman working from 8 in the morning till 12 at
night, and earning from gd. to is. for that time.
He also said mining was no better. In a claim
yielding £47 17s. 6d. they were paid £l4 17s. 6d.,
and had to pay working expenses, leaving £l2 to
be divided amongst 10 men for a fortnight, at the
same time there were men in the same claim gett-
ing ss. P er day. I might go on, but I think that
is sufficient, and might well call forth, as it did in


Mr. Deakin’s powerful speech, “For whom are you
working?” “What price are you being paid?” This
showed them thousands of helpless, honest, hope-
less, half-starved women compelled to earn their
living upon the very verge of a gulf of famine,
misery and despair. Will our Protectionists con-
tinue prosecuting their dastardly policy in the face
of such revelations in a Protectionist sister colony,
and uttered from the mouths of those who have
preached the same doctrine in the past; but it is
doubtful if such will be preached by them in the
future. The thin end of the wedge was entered
during the last session of Parliament, when they
considerably reduced the duties on many articles;
and the time is not far off when it is expected
they will aim at the tariff of New South Wales, i
was glad I went to the meeting, for the above
statements are not newspaper reports, but as taken
down by me in the body of the hall while uttered.
On Tuesday morning I bid farewell to Melbourne
and proceeded on to Colac, where I remained with
my cousin another two days visiting the district
and making inquiries. This portion of Victoria is
certainly a country of lakes, for there are very
many of these, and the strange fact is that all ex-
cepting Colac lake are salt. The largest, Corringi-
mite, is 90 miles in circumference, with a large
block of land in its centre, and it is so salt that fish
cannot live in it, yet if a well is dug five or six feet
from its edge fresh water is easily got. It seems
strange that such a lot of lakes as there are here
with no outlet should be all salt, but I am informed
such is the case. Strange sights can be seen about
this part. The gentleman driving me asked me to
walk over a paddock about 10 chains from the road.
When I did so it was to behold a large basin of an
extinct volcano, full of water about four or five
chains in diameter, entirely surrounded by high
hills and no outlet. I was told it was very deep,
and, like the lakes, very salt. The land about here


is of superior quality, and still better I am told
(if that is possible) the further one goes west till
Warrnambool is reached, and it was all taken up
in the early days at a pound or perhaps less per
acre. It is now leased to tenants for cultivation at
the rate of from 255, to 355. per acre. Many loads
of potatoes and onions were passed by me on the
road. Thev were taking them to the raihvay
station, and think they get good prices if they se-
cure 40s. or 50s. per ton for them in Melbourne.
Many paddocks were only being cleared of their
produce, and the potatoes and onions looked splen-
did. There were also some good stacks of hay and
wheat, and many were ploughing for the present
season. No doubt this is good agricultural coun-
try, but I know of some estates in my own elector-
ate which if cleared of briars and other noxious
plants have soil quite equal to that of Colac, and
consequently, if put to the best advantage, would
yield a good return, instead of, as at present, being
a breeding ground for hares. After a three days’
sojourn I left Colac and arrived at Castlemaine.
The portion of country I passed over in this trip
new to me was from Ballarat to Bald Hills. There
is some good agricultural land. In times gone by
there seems to have been a good deal of digging
done here. The same may be said of Creswick.
Between Creswick and Clunes there is also a lot of
land cultivated. The latter seems to be an old
gold field, and had been an extensive one in times
gone by, the land about it being only inferior to
Maryborough. It again got dark, and the country
passed over between here and Castlemaine I can
say nothing about. In the morning I had a good
stroll all over Castlemaine, and might say of it. as
I said of one or two other places during my trip,
it is a town of churches, whatever else is represent-
ed. For I think almost every denomination is here
represented, and have really good structures, too.
I visited Messrs. Thompson and Co’s, foundry


works, and was taken all over them by the mana-
ger, and got every information wished for. It cer-
tainly is a great work, and employs 300 hands, and
at present they have plenty of work. When I got
back to the office the principal, Mr. Thompson,
said, “You can go back to New South Wales and
tell them we are prepared to face any competition:
they can introduce Freetrade into Victoria to-mor-
row if they like; we can hold our own, but because
we are not dependent on Victoria. We get very
little work from our own colony, the most being
done for other colonies, and principally Western
Australia. We act on the Freetrade principle, not
only with our works, but with our men. If they
suit us we pay them according to their ability, and
care for no union; and we have no trouble. We get
plenty of work, and can get plenty of men.” I
then visited the woollen mills. It is another Mr.
Thompson who is owner and manager, but has no
connection with the Thompson over the way. He
is a very strong Protectionist, and employs 100
hands all told, but he is a sticker for the duties. He,
however, kindly accompanied me over the works.
The time now arrived for me to leave Castlemaine.
Between the latter place and Harcourt is all a dis-
trict of abandoned diggings, but they are utilising
the land bv turning it into orchards, and around
the latter village I saw some very fine orchards.
Granite seems to be plentiful here also, for there
were some huge blocks squared at the station wait-
ing to be sent away. Right on to Kangaroo Flat,
Bendigo, and on to Bagshot there were a lot of old
abandoned diggings and some inferior land, but at
the latter place there is a lot of good agricultural
land although there is not much under cultivation.
On to Goornong and Elmore there is good land
with a lot under cultivation, especially at the latter
village. Rochester, the next station is a nice little
country town, evidently depending on agriculture
and vineries and orchards. There is some good


land in this neighborhood, and on to Echuca the
land is level and good. The town itself is rather
scattered, and certainly not as large as might be
expected for so old a town, and the buildings do
not come up to some of the towns I have passed
through of far less pretensions. This finished my
railway travelling in Victoria, as we had to change
trains and get on to the Moama and Deniliquin
line. These carriages are small and stuffy, and we
were sadly disturbed with the small dust that got
into the carriages although we put up all the win-
dows to try to keep it out. Before leaving Vic-
toria, however, I cannot help pointing out the bar-
barous practice of the Victorian Railway Depart-
ment in constantly locking in the passengers, as
if they were children, lunatics or prisoners. It
would be well if the authorities would consider the
matter, and make a nearer approach to our 19th
century civilisation. The land from Moama to
Deniliquin is much of the same country right
through, flat and timbered, and is principally pas-
toral, certainly nothing to comment on. We land-
ed in Deniliquin at 5 o’clock p.m., nearly an hour
late. The town no doubt has been worthy of a
name in the days gone by, but it almost leads one to
think “it’s glory had departed.” I left this ancient
town by Cobb and Co’s, coach for Hay, and the
journey of 80 miles during the night was anything
but comfortable, leaving about 6 p.m. and reaching
Hay about 7.30 next morning. Ido not profess to
be a doctor, but anyone with a sluggish liver, if
they want it shaken up, will do well to try this
journey, and I will guarantee they will get all they
require. I remained in Hay two days and had a
good look all round. It seems a nice place, but the
buildings in it, generally speaking, are rather an-
cient. There are one or two exceptions all the
same. The storekeepers keep good stocks. The
Minister for Lands was there a few days before
me, and he has proposed to take over their private


irrigation scheme, which no doubt, if well managed,
would do much good for Hay. After elaving Hay
for Narrandera en route for Jerilderie. ihe land
passed through is all fine, flat, land, but then very
bare of grass. However, the rain had just staitec
to fall, and there was a very good downpour, and
I doubt not but the country now looks much better.
Arriving at Jerilderie, it was raining, and during
the night it rained very hard, which the residents
were delighted with. But, lo! next morning there
was hardly a dry place for the "sole of one’s foot.
To save losing one’s boots the very crown of the
road was the safest place to walk on. Jerilderie is
a very straggling little town, but I think there is a
good deal of business done, owing to the large
back country they have to supply. My next stop-
ping place was Narrandera which is a much larger
place, and seems to be fairly stirring. There are
some very good buildings there. On leaving there
I got into the train for home, from which I had
been absent about a month, and I was glad to get
back. But it really did one’s heart good to look
out of the carriage on both sides to see the large
paddocks turned and being turned over for receiv-
ing the seed. It put me in mind of the 3 and 4
furrowed ploughs I noticed in Victoria, as it was a
second edition, all about the line from Narrandera
to Junee. There we could see the same thing go-
ing on, and not as with us all the good cultivation
land being sheep walks, and the land that should
be devoted to the rearing of stock to cultivation
instead.
I have now returned home to recruit for the
next nine or ten days before resuming my duties
in Parliament, when I shall be ready with the ob-
servations made during my trip. Should any of
our Protectionist friends endeavour to air their
Protection policy, to tell them what I have learned,
what I saw and what I know to be facts. And if
our Protectionist friends outside of Parliament


would only do as I have done, instead of listening
to the melodious voices of Messrs. Lyne, See, Cope-
land and O’Sullivan, before the year 1896 departed
Protection would be as dead in N.S.W. as Julius
Caesar —if it is not so already.


(INDEX C)
A Trip in Search of
Recreation and Information.
By W. AFFLECK, M.L.A.
On leaving home, after getting to Sydney and
spading about ten hours, I left by the express for
Melbourne, where we duly arrived to
portion of my journey having been < d^ cr /
me on two previous occasions, it 13 unnecessa y
that I should repeat the description further than
Jo say that about Albury and on to Melbourne I
never y saw the country looking better— plenty of
srrass and stock in first-class condition. Hav g
secured mv berth on the Pateena for Launceston
there were'only about three hours left me to stay m
Melbourne. I had not been long ,°”
o-nt a nleasing surprise—one of my constituents
doming up to me bound for the same journey. We
naWraflv chummed in with one another, and as
company for each other till the time arrived when
my companion had to leave me, his time i"!nav
little shorter on the island than rrme , . .'
add we had a pleasant time, as I trust the aescnp
tion of our iourneys and visits will show wjju* I
am now about to try and describe. We left the
Yarra punctual to time, 4 pm- and had a pleasant
trip down the river and bay and for some t me
the open sea. But by and by, neither of
very good sailors, along with several others, we


began to feel anything but comfortable. About 10
p.m. I retired to leave my companions still on the
poop determined to see the best or the worst of
it. On seeing him in the morning he did not look
AI, for he told me he had had a jolly emptying out,
and although grievous for the time proved of
benefit to him after. As for myself I determined
to try and not follow his example, and succeeded
to my cost, for he had got over it before we
landed. I had to do my penance on land for a
couple of days, feeling more dead than alive, as
far as beinp- well was concerned. However, it is
over now, and we can look on the past with
pleasure. We entered the Tamar River, which
takes us up to Launceston, Without wasting time
and space in describing all the nooks and turns, I
cannot describe it better than by saying it is much
like our own beautiful Parramatta River, the only
difference was some portions of the Parramatta were
more rugged, as well as more settled, but the beau-
tiful sheets of water at some of the bends were
much alike. There were certainly some antiquat-
ed looking buildings along its banks, and an old
church, the bell nortion of it especially, seemed to
be new, but looked as if it had been carelessly
thumped down on the end without any regard as
to how it would look. There were some large
patches of cultivation also along its banks, and in
several places these banks were too steep to be
ploughed. Getting round the last bend Launces-
ton comes in view, and it is really a pretty sight
from the distance. It is built on the side of a hill,
and the view is all that could be desired. It can
easily be imagined starting building at the water’s
edge; for this is so. as the North Esk begins here,
emntying itself into the Tamar, and the buildings
are built away up the face of the hill. There is no
doubt about the advantage for drainage purposes,
as it should be one of the best and easiest drained
cities of the world. It has regular laid out streets.


all lit with the electric light, which is generally
used, and cost the taxpayers about £70,000 to in-
stal. Having landed shortly after noon we had
lunch at the coffee palace which is a tiptop house
for travellers to stav at. We made inquiries as to
the lions of the place. Of course the first place of
note recommended was the Cataract Gorge. i nis
must be seen to be appreciated. The South Hsk
runs between two high hills whose rugged sides aie
worth seeing, and would almost lead one to believe
it was dangerous to attempt to go between for the
innumerable, high, detached rocks, of hundreds of
tons each, look as if the slightest breeze of wind
would blow them over, indeed some of them look
as if thev would fall without anything, as they seem
to hang'over. The sight is really wild and grand.
The land is leased to a company for 99 years, who
are beautifying it by planting flowers, shrubs, and
runners along the sides of the rugged rocks, and
erecting rustic seats, pavilions, bridges and pat s,
so that the place is becoming a thing of beauty, 1
not a joy for ever. On various rocks, posts of
little houses, seats. &c., are names of people from
everywhere, I might say, who seem to think itt e
right thing to do to record their visit to this sight
worth seeing. At the first basin a refreshment room
is kept where visitors can be supplied with some-
thing to eat and drink under shade m the midst
of a nicely laid out piece of land. One of the con-
ditions of the lease, I am informed, is That no in-
toxicating liquors are to be sold Th . ls , ls , a gr ~*
resort for picnic parties, and well it might be. On
one side of the gorge is a long water race erected
on wooden struts, which must have required some
ingenuity to construct. The water is conveyed
down to a flourmill at the end of the town, which
is driven by a water wheel. It must have cost a
good sum to construct, but it is no doubt effective.
In connection with this cataract gorge there is a
very beautiful tale told of the natives. The tribe


that claimed this as their territory were the Pialu-
mma, and they called the river Weena, now the
South Esk. The tale as told is too long, but I
would strongly advise anyone viewing this beauti-
ful spot should purchase the little book at the re-
freshment room. It is only 6d, and well worth the
money. Next day we spent the forenoon roving
a,bout town, and left by the express at 3 p.m. for
Hobart. It is a sight worth seeing the very sharp
curves and, horeshoe bends that are on this line,
and what surprised us most was the extra speed at
which the train went round these turns. As for
the country passed through, some of it, I may say
two-thirds, is perfectly useless. It may do for
stock running on it, but only to keep life in, if it
would do that. It certainly would not fatten, but
there was also some fine agricultural land, and
what seemed a pity was that so much of it had
been allowed to be overrun with briars and furze.
It seems in old times the settlers had made fences
of briars and furze, and had allowed the seed to
spread, destroying much of the land. What sur-
prised us also was the lateness of the crops. Many
crops were in the fields in stocks, and a good deal
was not ripe enough to cut. This seemed strange
to New South Welshmen. We arrived in Hobart
about 9 p.m., and told cabby to drive us to the
Cofifee Palace, to find to our dismay that we could
not get quarters. We determined, however, to see
if we could get rest for the soles of our feet, and
shortly discovered a most respectable and comfort-
able camp in the Metropolitan Hotel, kept by Mr.
Hope, and any one visiting Hobart will find this a
most comfortable establishment should they de-
cide to stay there. Next day being Saturday we
decided not to go any distance away, so we visited
the Cascade Brewery, established in 1824. We
then strolled along the gully and up the hills which
well repay a visit. After dinner Ave had a look' at
the cricket ground, where a match was being play-


ed and Eady was punishing the ball to the dismay
of Hs opponents. We then visited the gardens,
which are very nice and extensive, but certain y
there is not the same care bestowed as on our
Sydney gardens. They are nicely situated and are
near Government House. On Sunday, after morn-
ing- service, we paid a visit to Brown s River, \Unch
is'a nice sail and a pleasant place of resort, even-
in* service wound up the day. At about 8.30 a.m.
on* Monday morning we got on board stea ei
Nubeena and started for Port Arthur. Ihe sail 1
a very fine one of about 4o miles, the fare (retuin
ticket) being Bs. to Tarrana. We reached Tarrana
about 1 o’clock, and had to coach it to Port Artnur,
a distance of seven miles, the road being ' cry
rough but the scenery very fine, it alone J? ell f
worth the trip. Such trees for size are hardly t
be seen in a life time, and various kinds ofshrubs
bush flowers and ferns made it really a thing ot
beauty and a joy for ever,” in ones recollection
least/ I may mention having met with three men,
Sydney gentlemen, and four ladies from Victoria.
We all became a party, and had a most pleasan
time of it We arrived at Port Arthur about 3
p m and at once began our explorations. Here
there are still two of the old convicts, one of whom
was our guide to the places of interest, the other
criving us a history of how the prisoners were
treated Number one convict then first appeared
with a key in his hand about 10 or 12 inches long,
when we had to follow our leader He fiist took
us to the large building where the first two floors
were cells, certain of which were the dark cexls,
and dark they certainly were, then over these
others much the same, about 6ft. x 4ft., and about
*oor Xof them altogether. The next storey
was the dining-room, which was very large and
in a good state of preservation. The floor above
that was the exercise room, where th e convicts
exercised themselves in wet weather. After this


we were shown the hospital, the workshops, the
exercise yards, the two churches, solitary yards
for convicts, the parsonage, the military tower, and
every place of note. Nearly all of them are in
ruins by fires having destroyed them. One thing
which seems wrong to me is, that the Government
have sold a large number of the places to private-
people. The Carnarvon Hotel is the Commodore’s
old residence; the rooms are fine and large, but the
best use is not made of them. Around here are
some fine old mulberry, plum, pear, and other
trees, and blackberries in galore. We had fine
times amongst these during our stay. We then
got the boat and rowed over to the Isle of the
Dead. It almost seems a pity that this should be
allowed to grow wild, as it is. We were told there
are about 1700 buried there. The oldest tomb-
stone we saw was dated 1831, the newest 1875. I
should say this island is not more than four or five
chains in diameter. We then pulled over to the
Isle of Pour, when we saw some of the dark un-
derground cells. No. 2 convict, produced for our
inspection, handcuffs, legirons, gag, cat’o nine tails,
&c. He also explained about the meals as follows:
It seems, if the meals were not exactly to their
liking they sometimes found fault. When the com-
mandant was informed he went to see what was
wrong. If it was breakfast, and the meat tainted,
he would say, “Yes, it is tainted, but not very bad,
and they had better go on to work, and he would
see they had a good meal for dinner.” If any re-
fused they had 25 or 35 lashes given them and per-
haps seven days in the cells. Those who did not
object had a fine Irish stew served to them when
they came to dinner, it being the same meat they
had refused in the morning, but so well peppered
and salted that it was made palatable. We re-
ceived a lot of very interesting information. Next
morning we left at 7.30 a.m. for Eagle Hawk’s
Neck, where we arrived about 10.45 a.m. after a


pretty rough drive, and by which our breakfast
had been well shaken down. The first item of in-
terest here is the remains of the stage where the
blood hounds were chained to prevent the escape
of any of the prisoners. It seems this stage was
as long as possible, where it did not cover, the
sharks were fed on the offal of the slaughtered
cattle to encourage them to come up, so that any
convicts attempting to escape which the dogs mis-
sed the sharks would get. On one occasion nine
made the attempt and the sharks caught ei ght
them. Having now secured our guide, we started
for Tasman’s Arch, and after a long and tiresome
walk we reached it, and were well repaid the trouble
No visitor should miss this sight; it is a natural
arch very large, and has evidently been done by
the action of the sea. It would be^ useless for me
to attempt to describe it, as I could not do it jus-
tice The next sight only a short distance from
the arch was the Blow Hole. It is also worth see-
ing and two of our party were rather too ventur-
some, as bv their standing too close they had to
accept a little of the spray. After admiring this a
little we proceeded to the front or ocean side of
the Blow Hole and inspected the entrance. Pe
haps the readers of “For the Term of his Natural
I if e ” will remember the statement where one of
the convicts sought shelter here for four or five
days The rugged precipices and grand sceneiy
wed repay the visit to these spots. On our return
to our starting point we visited the tesselated pave-
ment. This is well worth looking at, as the stones,
although natural, are so square and well together,
it looks as if it had been done bv the hands of man.
One or two blocks were examined which had been
washed out looked as if they had been finely
sauared by the square and chisel After . dmne
we had to mount the coach for our return journey
to catch the steamer at Tarrana, which we di ,
and again arrived at Hobart about 8 p.m. It was


arranged by our party to hire a drag next morning
and make a start for Mount Wellington. At the
time appointed nine of us started by the drag for
the Fairy Bower, which is certainly a nice place to
see. Just before we reached the bower we noticed
the mist begin to creep along the brow of the
mountain and gradually increase. However, no-
thing daunted, we began the ascent on foot, and
by the time we reached the springs, three-quarters
of an hour’s walk, the mountain was fairly capped
with mist, and, while getting a cup of tea we dis-
cussed the propriety of attempting to proceed fur-
ther. It was decided we would proceed, which we
did until stopped by mist and rain, so that we fail-
ed to reach the summit, and had to return without
being able to say we were on the top of Mount
Wellington; all the same we were not far from it.
I may here add that it is almost useless for a weak-
ly person to attempt, as it is very hard work. The
writer after the hard work of the day before on the
sandy beach to see Tasman’s Arch, found it almost
more than he could do to trot from stone to stone,
over one lofr and under or round another, which has
to be done, in this ascent his knees nearly failed
him, and when he reached the Fairy Bower Hotel
he was glad to rest and get a dinner. After being
driven into town he took a rest for the remainder
of the evening. The sight from the springs, how-
ever, is a splendid one. Hobart and its surround-
ings can be seen from here to perfection, and I ex-
pect far better than from the top of the mountain,
for at the ton one is so much higher that the view
must be on a smaller scale; indeed, we were told
this was a fact, and the only satisfaction of being
on the summit was that one could say he was on
the top of Mount Wellington, Our party now
broke up, and my companion and self bid good-bye
to them as they were to visit the Huon and we
New Norfolk next day; but in the issue of the
evening paper it was found that some disarrange-


merit of the steamers had taken place, which caus-
ed my companion to have to lose the trip to New
Norfolk, as he had to be in Melbourne on Satur-
day and to accomplish that he had to leave for
Launceston in the morning, leaving me to do the
remainder of the time by myself. Next day being
wet and being very tired after the last two days,
I determined to spend the day in looking around
Hobart, which is a very nice city. Some of the
buildings are somewhat ancient, but very substan-
tial In the evening I went to Lear several candi-
dates for the Federal Convention give their views
in the Town Hall. On the following morning I
started by train for New Norfolk, and it is really a
nice trip up the Derwent and a sight worth seeing.
Arriving there about 9.30 a.m., I had plenty ot
time before leaving by the steamer at 3 P-m- to
return by water to see all the lions of the place.
I noticed two very old churches—Church of Eng-
land and Wesleyan—the latter is dated 1824, and 1
believe the former is quite as old. Ihe Roman
Catholic Church, as usual, commands a hne posi-
tion and is quite new and a substantial stone
building The lunatic asylum, which is here, also
seems to be new, at least a large portion of it, and
commands a healthy spot well adapted for the pur-
pose? I visited the salmon ponds, which at the
present season are very tame; but the sights to be
seen going and coming well repay the journey, as
hop picking is in full swing at present, and gives
employment to a large number of men, women and
children I P’Ot back to Hobart about 545 P m -
After tea went to a meeting at the Temperance
Hall when another four candidates addressed the
electors for the Convention. The hall was crowd-
ed but it was not to hear about the federation
ouestion that attracted the people, as was easily
seen while there. It had been advertised that be-
tween the addresses there would be instrumental
music, also national songs sung and recitations


given. This was the attraction, lor the encores
were verv numerous until the chairman intimated
no more would be allowed, as they had now to hear
of federation with a little music ,and not music
with a little federation. The question itself does
not seem to rouse the people, as the meetings
generally are not large, and the opinions of all the
candidates I have heard are very conservative.
They all go for federation under the Crown, two
Houses, enual representation in the Senate, no fe-
deration of the railways, but federation of the
state debts if the Federal Government are to have
the right to collect the customs. I have less hope
of our succeeding in getting federation for some
time at least, since I came to Tasmania. The de-
legates here are very determined on equal represen-
tation in the Senate, and further, they advocate
equal rights to them with the House of Represen-
tatives, excepting the initiation of money bills,
Next morning I left for Launceston by the express
at 8 a.m. and arrived about 2 p.m. I attended an-
other meeting of delegates, viz., that of Messrs.
Douglas, Woolnough, Henry and Hartnott, who
all gave their opinions similar to the others I have
heard, and were verv firm on the matter of equal
representation and equal power in the Senate. Al-
though there was no music at this last meeting, it
was very fairly attended, and seemed to be an ap-
preciative audience. I met several of the speakers
and discussed points with them, and have come to
the conclusion that if Tasmanian delegates are as
determined at the convention as before, that fede-
ration is not so close to us as I thought previous
to my visit to Tasmania. On Sunday afternoon i
visited Cora Lynn, and was pleased with the sight
of this rugged running stream, as well as the fine
views on the road out and back, having gone one
way and returned by another. On Monday I bid
farewell to Tasmania, and sailed by the Coogee and
arrived in Melbourne by 10 a.m. next day, after a


very pleasant voyage, the sea being like a mill pond
all the way. After a few hours in Melbourne where
I also inauired as to the prospects of Federation
and which lam glad to say they ho 1( i hopeful
views. I left bv the express and arrived at Albur>
where I spent a couple of days and have at last
reached home, a better and wiser man.


(INDEX D .)
A Trip to the Canoblas.
(By W. AFFLECK. M.L.A.)
To the Editor of the Yass Tribune.
Sir, —As you know, the site of the proposed
Federal City of the coming Commonwealth is
causing some stir in various parts of the colony at
the present time. Amongst other places, Orange
is putting forth her claims, which she has a perfect
right to do. For the purpose of making known
the situation, she followed the steps of Yass, and
invited all the members of both Houses of Parlia-
ment to visit the proposed site on the 29th of Oc-
tober. I, with about 40 others (Ms.L.A., Ms.L.C,
and other commercial men of the city), left on
Sunday night last at 11.10 p.m. by special train and
arrived at Orange at 7 a rn. yesterday morning, and
were met at the station by a large crowd of people
and the Town trass Band. After the Mayor had
read and delivered an address of welcome to the
Premier, we took our seats in the carriages await-
ing us and were duly landed at the various hotels
for breakfast, and were informed we were all to
meet at the Royal Hotel at a quarter past 10 a.m ,
to be driven out to the Canoblas. We, on arrival,
were sadly disappointed with the weather, for it
looked as if we were to have a wet day. Several
of us had gone up in light clothes, expecting it to


be warm, and we endured a perishing for neglect-
ing to take our topcoats with us. The town of
Orange is a large country town, well laid out with
wide streets, and has both a good gas and water
supply. . .
About half-an-hour after the time appointed, we
made a start for the Canoblas, and I made no secret
of it that I personally went there as one sent out to
spy out the promised land. I went to spy out the
country proposed as the Federal City, and must
confess was not as fortunate as those mentioned in
the Bible, for while it took two men to carry back
the grapes, I returned without any, even sour
grapes, as I think the chances of my own electorate
are as good as, if not better than, those of Orange.
Well, we made a start for a cold drive of, they
told us, 10 miles, and it may be added not on one
of the first-class roads of the country. Pursuing
our journey, we had to get out and walk short dis-
tances on several occasions, the last being the
longest and steepest. At last we reached the point
where we had to leave the vehicles and take
“shanks’ pony” for the remainder of the road if we
wished to reach Mount Canoblas. This we did,
and when the summit was reached we were told
we were 4,600 feet above sea level and 1600 feet
above the town of Orange, but it must be con-
fessed that the sight was worth the trouble and
perishing we got. No one can deny the fact that
it is a sight never to be forgotten —the beautiful
undulating land encircling the mountain as far as
the eye can reach, with homesteads here and there,
dotting the land, and the town of Orange lying
away in the distance. The panoramic view is
something grand, but we must not forget it re-
quires more than a panoramic scene for a Federal
City. Unfortunately for me, perhaps, I had no one
to take my part, or at least they did not show it,
for I was beset on all sides—what did I think of
that site—Yass could not come near it, and such-


like statements. However, I was congratulated
on my good temper amid such chaff, for they saw
that even with such magnificent scenery as was
before us, I could not be got to go from the state-
ment that it required more than a view from the top
of a mountain to fulfil the requirements of a great,
citv, such as the Federal City must ultimately be.
Arriving at the rendezvous where the carriages
were left, the horses were harnessed and a start
was made for the site of the proposed catchment
area for the Federal City, being about 8 miles from
Orange, and the road to it from the start beggars
description, being only a bush track, and as rough
a one as I have travelled for some time. I was a
bit late in arriving, for one of the drags we had
came in contact with a stump, and the pole bolt was
lost; this caused our drag and other vehicles to de
lay till the cripple was bandaged, so that by the
time we arrived those on ahead had had their lunch
and the Premier was just about finishing his speech.
After it was finished I was called on and had to
speak, which I did without fear or favor by telling
them that no one could deny the beautiful views
they had just seen; all the same, it was not a view
that would make a city, and while I wished them
success —(cheers and laughter) I added they ought
to wait, for I was about to add—after Yass. I
believed we had more to fear from Bombala than
Orange, yet it was my belief that when it was de-
cided Yass would come out on top.
“What about your water supply?” was inter-
jected.
“That was all right, for we had discovered one
of the very best gravitation schemes of cold, clear
water, which I would make known at the proper
time, viz., in the debate on the selection of the
site. But one thing I disapproved of with the
Orange people was that they were continually
praising up their own qualifications, while invent-
ing disparaging comparisons with Yass, one of


which I might state: It was reported that His
Lordship the Bishop of Bathurst had given it out
that Yass was too hot in summer and enveloped
in fogs in winter. There was about as much truth
in that as there would be if I got His Lordship the
Bishop of Goulburn to go to Yass and say
that in summer months the cold so great that
they could not cut butter with a knife, and had to
use a tomahawk; but this was the actual truth at
Orange, as proved that morning—it certainly would
not spread on bread, but had to be eaten in smal
junks. So much for their beautiful climate in the
month of October.” .
A start was now made through the proposed site
to reach the Orange water supply. It was also
really worth seeing. It covers about 45 acres, ana
much of it was about 20 feet high, and on top,
about 4 feet wide. Ihis work was executed ior
Orange at a cost of about £30,000. It is a gravi-
tation scheme, and for house purposes has a pres-
sure of about 160 feet. After our inspection ot
this we returned, reaching Orange at about 5 p.m-
I may add that during the afternoon the clouds
dispersed, and we had fine sunshine although it
blew very cold all the time, and after dark it was
extremely so. Of course Orange being 3000 feet
above sea level, while Yass is about 1900, is na-
tural to suppose the former must be much cooler
than the latter even in summer to say nothing ot
“o p m a banquet took place at which nearly
200 persons sat down. The Mayor occupied the
chair After the good things were disposed of, tae
Mayor, after reading several apologies proposed
the toast of “The Queen,” which was drunk with
musical honors, the brass band being m attendance.
Then “The Governor” was dealt with m a similiar
manner. Next “The Ministry.” Sir W. J. Lyne,
the only minister present, replied in a lengthy
speech, and of course did not forget to praise up


the beautiful sights we had seen. To the credit of
Sir William, he did not forget to say he had also
seen some beautiful sights around Yass, and he
was more careful than some of the following
speakers not to commit himself, but he was pro-
nounced enough on the beauty spots of Yass as
well as of Canoblas. “The Commonwealth” was
proposed by Mr. James Torpy, who like some
others, was careful to try and make some disparag-
ing comparisons about Yass as compared with
Orange as to being the Federal City, and wound up
by expressing the hope that the matter would be
soon enough completed to enable Sir William to
again visit Orange to lay the foundation of the
first federal public building. His Lordship the Bis-
hop of Bathurst replied, and proposed the toast of
“The Parliament,” to which several members were
called on to reply, amongst whom were Mr.
Meagher, who was a little like Sir W. J. Lyne,
careful not to commit himself, if he did do a little
“leg pulling.” But the most surprising reply was
given by Mr. Holman, member for Grenfell, a
southern constituency, unhesitatingly recommend-
ing and speaking strongly in favor of Orange, and
all because of the view from the Canoblas; he not
having seen any of the other proposed sites, it was
certainly with him a case of “love at first sight.”
“The Town and District,” “The Visitors,” and
“The Press,” concluded the toast list. Of course l
was not called on to speak at the banquet, as no
doubt they had heard enough about Yass during
the day, and I was not very particular as of course
I will have an opportunity when the matter comes
before our Assembly to answer such arguments as
used by Mr. Torpy and others, by facts and figures,
and I even hope when I lay our side of the question
before the House, to convince the Member for Gren-
fell that he was rather premature in his decision.
We left Orange at it.io p.m. and arrived home


at 7.30 a.m. this morning, after a pleasant outing
to Orange, which I do not think any the worse of
although competing against my own electorate.
We were treated handsomely by the residents of
Orange, which will, no doubt, induce some to again
visit them all the more readily on some future oc-
casion.
30th October, 1900.




AN ESSAY
BY
WILLIAM AFFLECK
ON THE
The Best Means of Settling People
upon the Land
AND
Relieving the Congestion of Population
in the Cities
WITH THE LEAST POSSIBLE INJURY
TO EXISTING RIGHTS.


An Essay.
In attempting to comply with the conditions laid
down, I do not suppose it will be necessary to
state all that is required to prove the best means
in the exact order in which the terms are laid do\s n,
so long as the conditions are fulfilled. My reason
for stating so, is: it will perhaps be best to inquire
why this congestion of population in cities takes
place, and the cause of the distress when the people
are huddled in the said cities. It will therefore be
well now to attempt to show why the people flock
to the cities.
First Fact. —People do flock to cities; in reality
they constitute cities, and we should have none
were people not to congregate in large numbers.
The only matter to consider is how to have few
difficulties therein, and only to have those residing
in them who can and are able to work. Could we
secure this, then we should have cities in the true
sense of the word, and be a happy people. And this
brings me to the Second Fact, that population does
become congested in cities, and why? because of
the many inducements held out, such as pleasures
that can be obtained at theatres and other places
of amusement, cheaper education, and the better
opportunities of getting into professional life, as
well as being at hand to dog members of parlia-
ment, so that they may secure billets in the civil
service, either for the applicant or his (or her) sons
and daughters.
Many who may have settled in the country, as
mechanics, farmers, or laborers, do well for a time


—while the seasons are good and the money plenti-
ful, and it is only when times of depression set in
the shoe pinches, and they think, well, there is
nothing doing here, or prices are so low that we
will have a better chance if we proceed to the city.
And so far as New South Wales is concerned my
humble opinion is the government labor bureau
lately established in Sydney has much to do with
the large starving population that exists in that city
at the present time. It is population that makes any
country, and without it no country ever became
great, but it is not by that population concentrat-
ing itself in one or two cities in a country that
will cause it to prosper, the people must be scat-
tered throughout the land, forming cities, towns,
villages, as well as country farming populations.
By this means such a country must necessanly
become great: all other things being favorable.
To come back, therefore, to the question chief
among all others, why people flock to the cities?
The three principal reasons as regards Australian
colonies are*. First, Land Monopoly; second, Drink,
third Holiday-making. In New South Wales there
is some of the finest land that can be found in any
country, and which would support a very large
population were it in the hands of those who would
make a proper use of it. It may be said by some,
perhaps by many, is not raising sheep and stock
of all kinds the proper use, or as I have heard it
said by a resident here, and a son of the soil too,
lam sorry to say, “1 his country was never in-
tended for anything but rearing stock. However,
rearing stock absolutely is neither the only or pro-
per use the land should be put to. Some portions,
of course, are fit for no other purpose, but these
are few in number in comparison with the total
acreage in New South Wales. To show there is
good reason for arriving at this conclusion, a por-
tion of the colony in which I have resided for
nearly fort'' 1 ' years can be taken as an example to


prove the truth of my assertion, and no doubt
many of those who may read these remarks will
be able to say of their own knowledge that it is so;
and such another place we are well acquainted
with is exactly in the same position. Over thirty
years ago, when there was no land monopoly, this
portion of the colony was even more prosperous
than it is at present, owing to the monopoly of the
land now existing. For a distance of ten miles—
which I take as my example—on either side of this
village—there is a river running, and on both
banks or sides of this river there is some of the
finest land in New South Wales, fit for agriculture,
and in days gone by as much as forty bushels of
wheat to the acre have been taken from it. This
ten miles of river frontage was divided into six
estates and consisted of about sixteen thousand
acres, with a village consisting of half a section,
or 320 acres in the centre. Over thirty years ago
these six estates were in the hands of different
owners, although only two of these were really re-
sidents, the other four being absentees who leased
their land. Some of the estates had several ten-
ants ; one had as many as six; everyone of whom
cultivated the land, and received good returns from
it. One of the estates was occupied by a tenant
who did not like to see another live; he wished
to monopolise the whole of the estates, and he re-
peatedly stated he should possess all the land al-
luded to before he died. He succeeded in accomp-
lishing his object, except with regard to one small
estate of about six hundred and forty acres, a por-
tion of which is still in the hands of the native
already alluded to, who said the country was never
intended for anything but the rearing of stock. All
the estates in question excepting this one ultimately
fell into the hands of the monopolist, four of them
as freeholds, and one as leasehold —the one which
had the six tenants is still leasehold. How the
monopolist got the other parties ousted previous


to purchasing the estates was by offering a much
higher rent. As soon as the two sides of the river
got into the hands of this man, improvements went
to ruin, people were as ruthlessly evicted as any
Irish tenant in the Old Land, and a sheep-walk was
made of the whole. When the estates were in the
hands of the several tenants, there were about one
hundred hands employed all the year round, and
at harvest time fully five times that number. After
these five estates were secured'by our monopolist,
the hands formerly employed had to go either to
the cities or some where else, as he did not require
their services, and he worked the whole as a sheep-
walk with about six hands besides himself—unless
at shearing time when he gave employment to
about sixteen others while the shearing lasted.
Time rolled on, and about four years ago our
monopolist died, and the land was sold in one
block, another monopolist became the purchaser,
who employs fewer hands throughout the year and
no hands at the time in The present
owner works the five estates with his son as
manager, a boundary rider, a gardener, a rouse-
about. and a female housekeeper—the owner him-
self living’ on another station about thirty miles
distant, and when shearing time comes round in-
stead of employing twelve or fourteen extra hands
as the former proprietor did, he shears five thousand
on the station thirty miles away and sends these
shorn sheep here taking away five thousand to get
shorn, and continues on this way till the shearing
is completed, so that shearing time here is now no
busier than anv other time of the year.
To show the effect of this way of dealing with
our land in regard to our own village between the
taking of the census in tBBi and 1891, or ten years,
our population increased by twenty-eight persons;
can a better explanation be given than this why
population drifts towards ]arg e> centres instead of
forming large centres or cities in the interior. Re-


fore leaving this subject of land monopoly another
example might be given, a road, about twenty miles
distant from where the writer sits, between two
other rather important towns, the one distant
twenty-five miles and the other thirty miles from
here, the direct road from the one to the other is
about forty miles. The land on both sides of this
road, the greater portion of which is first-class cul-
tivation land, is nearly all in the hands of four
owners. There are two small village reserves and
a few small selections, but it would be within the
mark where I to say along the forty miles of road
on both sides not more than two thousand acres
belong to anv one outside the four owners already
referred to; as to how far the land extends back
from both sides of the road belonging to the four
persons, it is not in my power to say, but it goes
back a long wav. Splendid crops have been taken
off portions of these estates in times gone by, but
now they are sheep-walks, and they are well water-
ed all the year round by rivers and creeks. Is it
any wonder the country does not prosper under
such conditions? The two examples given can only
lead to one conclusion, and that is that we need
not be surprised at people rushing to the cities,
causing such distress as now exists in such places
as Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, and Adelaide.
This'brings me to consider in the second place.
What Drink has to do With the Congestion of
Population.
It is a well-known fact that the temptation to
indulge in intoxicating drink is very great, and
while the present licensing law granting _ such
facilities for people procuring intoxicating liquors
exists, we may expect distress to ensue, and with
the increasing appetite for the same and the op-
portunities to indulge, people will lose their charac-
ter as well as their employment and have to re-


move, and when they do so it is to the city they
will flock as the most likely place to obtain em-
ployment, where they are unknown and thus ielp
on the congestion of population. No one can dui)
this fact: drink is the curse of the land: we have
only to look around us every day, whether in
town or country to confirm the proof of this state-
ment. When'we remember that £5,275,170 was
the amount of the drink bill in New South \\ ales
for the year iSqt, being at the rate of £4/12/-
per head of the population, that is for every man,
woman, and child in the colony, can we wonder
at distress existing. It is true we may have rais-
ed as revenue £1,276,000, or say one million and a
quarter from the manufacture and sale of spirituous
liquors,’ but the question is during the same period
have we not spent double that amount (and have
the existing distress to boot, through the drinking
propensities of the people) in police, gaols, lunatic
asylums, benevolent institutions, &c &c besiaes
the amount actually wasted on drink. Will the
majority of the inhabitants believe, or will many
have the hardihood to say, even if the present dis-
tress is not due to it, that we profit by the sale or
manufacture (or both) of intoxicating drink There
is no doubt but it has much to do with the driving
of large numbers to large centres. A case in point;
I personally know a tradesman who has been
earning from £4 to £4/10/- per week for a num-
ber of years, and he has not a large family, nor
does he live in a house of his own. and my hrm
conviction is, were he asked to show a pound note
on any Tuesday morning he would have a difficulty
in doing so. Is it not this reckless spending, this
“sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof,” that
is doing the mischief in many instances. There are
too many licensed houses throughout the land, an
the facility for getting licenses, also are too easy
for the comfort of those living here, and the settle-
ment of the people on the land. Close many o


the houses and place restrictions on the opening
of others, so as to make it difficult to get a license,
then men would have money; that which is now
wasted would be saved, and could be expended in
making homes on the land by those who now are
careless, so long as they can supply their temporary
wants. This would relieve the cities and assist
in peopling the country, which must be done if we
ever expect to make this country what we hope it
will one day be.
To quote a passage which appeared many years
ago, but quite as applicable now, as at the time it
was made use of, will be agreed to by many if not
all. It is a peculiarity of spirit-drinking that the
money spent upon it is at the best, money thrown
away, and in general far worse than thrown away;
it neither supplies the natural wants of man, nor
offers an adequate substitute for them. No way
so rapid to increase the wealth of nations and the
morality of society could be devised as the utter
annihilation of the manufacture of ardent spirits,
constituting as they do an infinite waste, and an
unmixed evil.” Another quotation, which I think
all will agree with, and which statement was made
60 years ago by Joseph Livesey is: “While drink-
ing continues poverty and vice will prevail, and
until this is abandoned, no regulations, no efforts,
no authority under heaven can raise the condition
of the working classes.” Where is the man who
has the hardihood to say this is not a fact; and if it
is, can we doubt for a moment, if we wish to get
rid of the congestion of population in cities; settle
the people, who would rear respectable families, on
the land; and make the wilderness blossom as the
rose.” By abolishing all forms of the drink traf-
fic, even to total prohibition, much money could be
saved by the government as well as by the people
individually. Taking the matter of police alone,
we find where drink is prohibited—sa} l " at Mildura,
where there is a population of 4000, they have only


one policeman. Go to America, and what do we
find? The Hon. J. B. Grinnell, of lowa, stated
that in the town named after himself there are
no saloons, and no one has been sent to gaol, to,
the poor house, or to the penitentiary for 25 years.”
Also in England at a meeting of 27 English and
Welsh mayors, Mr. J. M. Kernick of St. Ives,
Cornwall, said “We made up our mind the drink
traffic should come to an end in that town. I have
been two years chief magistrate, and I had only
one solitary individual brought before me in con-
nection with drunkenness. We have only one
policeman for seven thousand people, and nothing
for him to do.” With such statements as these
laid before us, can we arrive at any other conclusion
than this: to make people happy, and settle them
on the land, close up the public-houses, then we
may expect to get rid of the congestion m cities,
and become a prosperous people. This now brings
me in the
Third Place to Holiday-Making.
which is the next matter to be considered very
briefly. We find in our every-day experience too
much of this, with the half Saturday and the Sun-
dav following, we could do with far fewer holidays
than we have in New South Wales under existing
circumstances. With so many of these, people
are necessarily tempted to the metropolis, where
they have more and better opportunities of spend-
ing their holidays. When we look at the result of
a holiday in Sydney, and we see even the poorest
dress up in the very best style, whether they can
afford it or not, and off pleasure hunting, we know it
cannot be done without incurring expense, and
money is spent that perhaps cannot very well be
spared; or a millstone may be hung around the
family neck by incurring debt, so that they may
look as well as their neighbour, So-and-So, who


may be in a position to afford it. All this tends to
make distress. If we have fewer holidays, we
can depend on it people will have more cash, and
be better able to live on the land in the country
parts, and relieve the cities. Having now dealt
with what I consider the cause of congestion of
population in the cities, I will endeavour to make
some remarks, “On the best means of settling the
people on the land with the least possible injury
to existing rights.”
First by a Loan and its Application.
The government should float a loan of two or
three million pounds sterling, and it should be en-
acted that every shilling of loan should be expend-
ed only for the purpose for which it was raised,
viz., in settling people on the land by creating
settlements as set forth in the following proposals.
The government in the first instance should select
a site in some portion of the colony where the land
is fit for agriculture; say in the dry country, such
as that selected by the present government for ir-
rigation purposes between the Bogan and Mac-
quarie rivers, or say half-way between Hay and
Balranald; indeed there would be nothing to pre-
vent both being carried out at the one time. Let
surveyors be sent out to these places, and first of
all measure off say 100,000 acres—the size is a mat-
ter of detail. In the centre of these blocks, if there
are no existing railway lines running along the
boundaries of the same; measure 640 acres as a
site for a township, and lay it out in half-acre
blocks with wide streets; immediately outside the
township boundaries, let fifty or a hundred acres
be reserved on each side as recreation reserves. All
land between the boundaries of these reserves and
the corners of the 640 acre block, for the same
depth back, except that reserved for roads and
public use, should be laid out in blocks of from 5


to 20 acres as gardens, orchards, and homesteads,
and all lands between these and the outside boun-
daries of the original block, in farms of various
sizes according to the quality of the land, and as
the necessary roads would allow. The land be-
ing now laid out, the government might begin to
use the loan money; first, by erecting buildings
and improvements on the town lots, as the masons,
bricklayers, plasterers, carpenters, painters, fencers,
and others would require residences; they would
in all probability be the first occupiers or tenants;
and were irrigation works going on at the same
time, there would be a great demand by others for
houses to live in; so that here we would be estab-
lishing large towns in the bush, and at once relieve
the congestion of population in the cities, as well
as relieve distress. As to rents to be charged these
should be acording to valuation, and this valuation
should be made at stated periods of say, every five,
seven, or ten years; this is a matter of detail, and
whatever term was fixed on; for the first period a
charge of 4 per cent, on the cost of improvements,
should be the rental; so that the rental charge to
each tenant would not exceed a total of 5 P er cent,
for the first term. While improvements were be-
ing carried on at the town lots, improvements
might also be made on the garden and orchard
blocks, by fencing them and building cottages of
four, five, or six rooms; the charges for rent being
the same as the town lots for the first term. The
farm blocks could be dealt with in a similar manner
in order that there would be a considerable amount
of remunerative as well as reproductive work go-
ing on at the same time. In the case of the farms
where agricultural improvements are required,
there might be some poor but deserving families,
who would like to occupy but unable to do so
without help, a concession might be made to them
Ty supplying them with the necessary implements
for cultivation, these to be paid for at cost price,


with 8 per cent, added, in ten equal yearly instal-
ments until the whole amount was paid, or were
the debtors able to pay in a shorter period they
could do so. For the purpose of making the set-
tlement prosperous and happy a condition should be
laid down and strictly enforced, that no liquor
licenses should be granted, nor any intoxicating
liquors be allowed on the settlement under very
heavy penalties. With these conditions fully en-
forced, we must create bush centres or settlements,
and by and by be able to have many thriving
towns, and even cities, in the interior, and in such
a manner that they could be supplied with the
necessaries of life from the adjoining gardens, or-
chards and farms, where poultry, eggs, bacon,
cheese, beef, mutton, vegetables, fruit; in short,
agricultural produce of all kinds would be raised.
Where it was possible to obtain a suitable lot of
land fronting an existing railway line, the same
conditions would apply, with one alteration thus,
instead of the town being measured in the centre
of the block, it should be in the centre of the
boundary facing the railway line, _ and there would
only be three recreation reserves instead of four as
proposed for the other blocks. By the published
reports of the late trip of His Excellency the Go-
vernor, we are told the people of Balranald are en-
tirely dependent on the river steamers from Vic-
toria and Adelaide for their supplies. Why should
this be? Why should not the merchants and others
of New South Wales, supply the residents of Bal-
ranald. which is a portion of our own territory,
with all they require? It could easily be accomp-
lished. Judging by the report referred to, no set-
tlement could be established at this place unless
water conservation and irrigation were carried
out, consequently here is an opening at once, and-
ultimately a good paying one for the government,
as well as a means of relieving the congestion of
the Sydney population by finding work for a large


number of its unemployed. The township, laying
out and building on, would require to be among
the first matters attended to. Thus we would
absorb a considerable number of hands of ail trades
and occupations; then there would be the laborers
at the waterworks; for a short time they would
have to be satisfied with temporary quarters, such
as tents and the like, even to the annoyance of not
being able to have their wives and families with
them, but that would only be for a short time.
However, during this temporary separation, if the
wives and families had to be left in Sydney or in
other cities, an understanding should be come to
with the contractors and men, that on pay-day the
men should receive one-third of their pay and the
other two-thirds should be remitted by the con-
tractors to the wives, until they joined their hus-
bands on the settlement. Where there was no
family, one third only should be remitted by the
contractor to the wife, and two-thirds paid to the
laborer. By this means no one would suffer, and
it would remove the obligation of the other in-
habitants of the city having to contribute to the
support of those who might otherwise starve. Hav-
ing selected the portions of land, whatever tne
size or extent might be, and laid the same out by
having two or three going on at once, we could
absorb the whole of our unemployed or floating
population within the space of three months; thus
increasing the value of the public lands, settling
the population on the same in various parts, re-
moving the present difficulty of a congested popu-
lation,and asisting to make this country what it
ought to be, and must ultimately become, one of
the most prosperous nations on the face of the
earth. By the proposal above submitted, it is shown
that it would cause the government little or no ex-
pense, as it is proposed to do the work on borrowed
capital, and it is also proposed to pay the interest,
and ultimately the capital, by rent from those set-


tling on the land, by charging them a tax as rental
of so much "er cent, on the value on the improve-
ments they enjoy the use of, and a trifle on the
value of the land irrespective of improvements. A
further advantage, the government would always
have a sure source of income; it will have been
noticed, I have always said “lease the lands. 1
must now explain in connection with these settle
ments, as well as with all other alienated lands,
that no more land from this date should be sold by
the government, but forever remain the property
of the crown. However, in all cases of land at
these settlements, wherever the first tenants
wished to remain, and kept the improvements m
thorough repair, and regularly paid the tax or rent,
under proper conditions to be drawn up in shape
of leases, with conditions, they should not be dis-
turbed. Such a system as is here foreshadowed
would be as good as a freehold to the occupiers,
as no one could disturb them—-not even the govern-
ment if the conditions were faithfully complied with
and it might remain in the hands of a family for
generations, as it could descend from father to son
or mother to daughter as freehold property does
now. ,
My suggestion has made the rental very low for
a start, for we all know that land without either
population or improvements is worthless, and per-
sons in such cases deserve encouragement; nor
would it be well to increase the tax or rent while
enough was raised by a low charge to pay the ex-
penses as already stated in the former part of this
article; but while saying so, as the settlements
would no doubt become very valuable, and ma-
terially increase in value year after year, no tenant
would object to a slight increase at each valuation
period, while their prosperity was equally assured,
as it would be, by increasing population and im-
provements ; however, these are maters of detail.
It should also be arranged, if the progres of the


settlement warranted an increase of the tax, that
a sinking fund should be established,and all monies
received above the first proposed tax, viz., 4 per
cent, on improvements and 1 per cent, on land
value irrespective of improvements, should be ad
ded to this sinking fund, so that either the first loan
might be paid off or appropriated towards the for-
mation of other settlements, and thus save our
going to the loan markets, or even to renew or
materially repair the improvements which would
necessarily decay in process of time; for we could
scarcely expect the tenants to rebuild or do such
like work, as reasonable wear and tear would have
to be allowed, as in all private leases at the pre-
sent day. Of course by the time our scheme was
in full operation, we would likely have as the law
of the land a Local Government Bill, by which
all such settlements, as well as the rest of the couii-
trv would be governed, so that the central govern-
ment would be relieved of the duty of attending
to streets and such like, although they would be
pretty well provided for when the settlement was
formed, and would consequently be a very small
extra charge to keep them in repair. Now to show
the position of our working man under this pro-
posal ; supposing the improvements on his halt-acre
of land cost the country £250, and a good cottage
and fence could be completed for that sum at the
ordinary cost, but as there would be so much work
to do; it would be done at so much less expense
than where only one solitary half-acre was to be
treated in this way. This rent charge our work-
man would be called on to pay for the first term
should be about £lO/5/-, made up as follows: a
tax of 4 per cent, on the cost of all improvements,
and 1 per cent, on the value o? land irrespective o
improvements; it will be seen that in the abo\ e
sum, I have allowed about 4/6 as local government
rates, as these should only be allowed on the land
values, irrespective of improvements, all over the


country. We will now enquire into the condition
of our working man and see how he comes out
At such work as might be going on, he would be
employed at about 8/- per day at the present rate
of wages, and allowing that he works 300 out of
the 365 days of the year he would earn about
£120; he would therefore have about £llO to keep
his establishment, and perhaps lay by a nest egg
for a rainy day. But supposing he had to work for
30/- a week or 5/- a day, he could even then live
comfortably.
It will thus be seen by the proposed plan there
is a remedy provided. Of course, when irrigation
and water conservation, gas, and all such require-
ments are established, the cost to our laborer
would be increased, but he could expect to be paid
the higher scale of wages while so much work was
going .on, gind again the facilities would be in-
creased otherwise for making money; for, as we
saw by the report already referred to, at the irri-
gation town of Mildura, that £4O was made on the
tenth of an acre in the growing of strawberries
alone. I have, in the illustration herein given,
taken the town lands with the working man as my
example, the same will apply to the orchardist; and
as to the former, supposing he had 200 acres, the
cost of his place would be more, owing to so much
fencing; we will, therefore, put his improvements
down at £350, 4 per cent, on that amount would
be £l4, and 1 per cent, on the land, say at £1 per
acre, would be £2; his rent therefore would be
£l6 per annum for the whole. By having a large
population in the vicinity of these holdings, they
would have a good market, and get the regular
market price for their produce, without having to
pay high rates for freight, to take it to distant
markets, for in settlement townships we would
have all kinds of business premises, as in all pro-
bilitv, all kinds of manufactories.
I think in the foregoing remarks I have so dear-


Iv laid down the idea that it will be impossible for
anyone to misunderstand my intentions, and that
it would be useless to prolong the subject under this
head, as I will endeavour, at the close, to show by
the adoption of the policy advocated in the above,
and the suggestions now abont to be committe
to paper, on the land laws, will prove that we can
make this country a perfect paradise for anyone
to live in; it will now be my duty to show how to
Improve our Land Laws and Entirely Stamp Out
Dummyism.
We must at once go for the total repeal of the pre-
sent existing land law, and in the first p ace y
down as a vital principle that no more land be sold.
All lands for the future, whether m town or coun-
try, should be leased for a number of years subject
to re-valuation at the end of certain periods to be
decided upon, with the distinct understanding that
the first holder or tenant should have the pre e
rence, and to hold it as long as he wished, so long
as he complied with the conditions laid down, and
paid the rent imposed. This tenure, it wi be see
is as good as freehold. First, as regards town
lands, fn whatever part of the colony situated, un-
less in settlements already dealt with, they should
be leased, either privately or by public auctiOT, to
those requiring the same, perhaps auction n g
be preferable, as by that means the true value
would be found, and the rent fixed on by such
means, should he the rental 6*ed °n W be paid
tier annum for the first term. The rent always
to be paid to the nearest clerk of petty sessions or
direct to the treasury; but, it should be distinc y
understood in all cases- whether town or country,
ands-that the rents be paid punctually when due.
or it would subject the land to forfeiture ; this con-
dition should be a sine qua non, for it is only by


forming punctual and regular habits in a people
that we can expect matters to go on smoothly.
After the land has been secured by the tenant, he
should be allowed to erect any kind of improve-
ments on it that suited him, subject to the rules
of the local governing body, under the Act sugges-
ted. Of course as to the successor of any tenant,
that is also a matter of detail, and need not be en-
larged on here. With regard to country land,
selection ought to be allowed as under the present
Act, with this difference that the land would only
be a leasehold and not as now freehold, and instead
of paying 20/- per acre by instalments as at present
that he should pay by way of rent a tax on the land
irrespective of improvements. At the present time
the price of land is arbitrarily fixed at 20/- per acre
for country land, no matter what the quality of the
soil may be, whether it is really only worth 2/6 or
£5 per acre. Under the proposed law this would
be altered, and when the land; taken up was sur-
veyed it should also be valued, and if only a forty
acre farm that had land not worth more than 1/-
an acre, as well as land worth £5 or £lO per acre
—if there was such in it—should be valued accord-
ingly, and a rental of say 1 per cent, imposed for
a beginning. But it should be definitely laid down
as law, whatever the percentage might be fixed at
from time to time, it should only be on the value of
the land irrespective of improvements. Of course
it can easilv be seen the value would not remain
the same for all time, as the increase of population,
as it took place, would give the land a greater val-
ue, hence the necessity for periodical re-valuation.
As an example, when Governor Phillip arrived in
Sydney the land on which the Sydney Post Office
now stands could not have been worth 2/6 an acre,
while at the end of his term of office it was per-
haps worth £SO an acre, but now the land imme-
diately opposite to it when offered for sale a few
months ago was withdrawn at over Seventeen Hun


dred Pounds per Foot Frontage, with a nominal
depth back—so with all lands. Plenty of land
which at present is hardly worth having as a gift
will by-and-bye be worth money.
It will now no doubt be understood how selec-
tions should be dealt with in the future. Regarding
improvements, these would have to be erected as
now by the selector. Where the selections were
taken up promiscuously over -the country, the in-
ducements given to settlers on the land around the
settlements are for the nurpose of encouraging con-
centrated population; for the promiscuous selec-
tion, here there and everywhere over the country,
has been the curse of all our land bills. It will also
be necessary to have a limit as to the quantity of
land, any one man and his family could hold; up
to 2000 acres, but not over, should be allowed; this
quantity, properlv dealt with, would enable .the
holder to combine pasture and agriculture. It
should also be distinctly fixed by law, that no
transfer of rights to land and improvements
be allowed by this means dummyism
could not be carried on. If a settler wished
to resign his right, and leave his home-
stead whether town, suburban, or country,
the only party he should be allowed to deal with
would be the government. If he had done any-
thing on the portion of land warranting compen-
sation, and the government were satisfied of its
being worth compensation, it might be allowed,
but no right of one man allowing another to take
possession of the leasehold, he may have been a
tenant of should be allowed. When one man left,
the successor must deal with the government for
the possession of the vacant land: power in the
government to lease to a large adjoining land-
holder, should also be circumscribed to the smal-
lest limit, and the privilege to lease to the large
adjoining land owner only being allowed after


every fair means had failed to secure a bona fide
tenant, such as had left the land. If at the ex-
piration of three months the farm was not leased
as before, the adjoining landholder might then
have the right to lease, subject to the provision,
that had he it under cultivation, before it could be
taken from him he should get twelve months’ no-
tice to quit, and if not under cultivation ,as under
the person who had left it, three months’ notice
should be sufficient. By the terms here offered,
it would pay the selector to make the improve-
ments of the very best description; as he could re-
tain the land all his life, and his family after him,
bv complying with the conditions. It may be said
an arbitrary government might come into power
and make the rentals prohibitive, but that is also a
matter of detail which could be provided for. This
brings me now to
The Squatting Part of the Question.
It 13 well known there are some portions of the
land fit, under present circumstances, for nothing
but grazing purposes, and some so inferior that it
is difficult to lease at all, unless in very large runs
in the hands of one man, or company, which could
be used to far better purpose ,and return to the
country a far larger revenue, and this could, be
done without encountering any very great diffi-
culty. The opinion formed by many when the
present Land Act was passed in respect to its pro-
vision for homestead leases, that it was one of its
ven r best provisions, and there is no doubt but it
is the very best part of the existing Land Act. Witn
regard to the areas, until they are improved by
clearing, irrigation, destruction of rabbits, and
such like; then, where the country is mountainous
and scrubby, or even very dry, it might be left in
good-sized runs, but none should exceed 200,000
acres, and then only to that extent until reclaimed


by artificial means, in order that they might be
made more valuable by having their carrying capa-
bilities incresed, when they should be made smal-
ler. But, under the proposed Act, all runs should
be re-surveyed, taking those in good country,
which have the advantages of rivers or creeks
running through or round them, and a reasonable
rainfall; all should be surveyed into runs not ex-
ceeding 20,000 acres. When surveyed, the boun-
daries should be well by stone pillars, so
that they would not become obliterated in course
of time; by this means a run of 100,000 acres in
extent would be subdivided into five runs. These
ought to be onen to any one to select for the term
of years allowed by the Act, which has already
been referred to, for re-valuation. If we can get
five men to occupy this 100.000 acres it is an ap-
parent fact it must be better for the country than
for one man only to hold them, as the carrying
capabilities will not be reduced by the sub-division,
but the number of hands required all the year
through will be largely increased'. However,
should the five not be found at once to occupy the
five runs, no objections should be raised for one
man to hold the five for a term of years, but he
could understand that as each term came round he
would be liable to lose any one or all the four were
there applicants for them, leaving to himself the
one he was residing on, it being distinct!}' under-
stood that no freehold was to be acquired, after the
passing of the new Act, that was not freehold pre-
vious to it.
There is no doubt some difficulty will appear at
once to arise in the minds of those most interested,
through the systems hitherto carried out. in what
is known as peacocking the run. To overcome
this, provision must be made, making it compul-
sory on any runholder, who has freeholds on say
each of the five blocks. In the first place he should
be allowed to say which of the five he will selec 4 "


as his homestead, then all the other peacocked por-
tions in the other four blocks, should be valued as
well as the one he selected for himself (should it
not be freehold before the valuation), and a fair
exchange made. Thus, we will suppose the one
block of 20,000 acres is not all freehold, the value
of the portions on the other four, after being ascer-
tained, is to be given to the proprietor in land on
the one block if sufficient, if not sufficient let him
either add a commensurate quantity from one of
the other blocks, or else take the equivalent in
cash, it being understood the land given in ex-
change is not to be valued at £i per acre, but at
its real market value, whether it should be 2/- or
40/- per acre. But when the whole was settled
all his freehold should be in one block, and the
value in both land and improvements, on the blocks
parted with, to be included. Of course, as the
country became settled, it might be necessary, to
again subdivide these 20,000 acre blocks into 10,000
acre blocks, provision being made for such a con-
tingency, which is also a matter of detail. As the
runs just dealt with are those nearest settlements
and railway lines or navigable rivers, we will now
take up the runs further back, which should be
dealt with in the same manner as to survey, al-
though perhaps in larger blocks, say forty or fifty
thousand acres, but the same conditions should ap-
ply as to freehold, as it is much the better policy
to deal with all land on this point immediately, for
the longer they are left, with the population in-
creasing, the more vaulable will they become; and
it is the proper policy for the country to secure the
unearned increment rather than to allow it to pass
into the pockets of private individuals or com-
panies. Having- defined how the country should
be divided into blocks, including that in very bad
country, where I have provided that the runs
might extend to 200,000 acres, but all subject to re-
subdivision when improved, and settlement pro


gressed, the nert question to be considered is
The Rent to be Charged.
At the present time this is fixed by the Land
Board or Court in case of appeal. As it is fixed at
so much per section or mile or in case of small
holdings at per acre, it would be the fairest way to
tax the land for rent, as in the cases already dealt
with, say I vtv cent, on the value of the land, ex-
clusive of improvements. At present it is as fol-
lows: —Take a run, the board fixes the rent at so
much per acre, or so much per section of 640 acres;
there may be some of this land worthless, other
portions worth 2/, 10/, or even 20/- per acre, yet
the rental is fixed as if the whole were of equal
value. Such being the case, would it not be the
fairer and more honest way to arrive at the rental
by a tax of sav 1 per cent, on the different values
on the run, irrespective of improvements. An
objection might be raised such as: Look at the ex-
pense incurred above to arrive at a fair estimate! It
might be a little more expense in the first instance,
but it would only be at first, as the valuator would
know exactly the kind of land on a run, and its va-
lue, after he* had inspected it, and would be able to
supply the government with important information,
worth far more than the extra expense caused
through his having to see and know the same.
However, this objection can hardly be raised, as
far as the first valuation is concerned, for no doubt
it would be the surveyors surveying the runs who
would give the value in the first instance, they
having been at work on the land and paid for their
services. When we look at it in that light, the
first valuation would actually cost nothing. Again,
before the board under the present system can as-
sess the rent, they must get the value from some
source, and that must cost money, consequently
there is no likelihood of increased expense on that


score when we consider the matter. By adopting
the system, herein explained, the country would be
a large gainer, and we would have it occupied t>y
a sturdy yeomanry who would soon do away with
the distress that has existed for some time. By
the plan proposed, strikes and unions would not
onlv be unnecessary but would be unknown; as by
having a very large body of men all working for
themselves, and for their own benefit, we would be
more likely to have co-operation, by the one assist-
ing the other, instead of two parties as at present;
neither of whom can do without the other, but the
one being “Monarch of all he can survey,” and the
other fighting against him to prove his statement
to be incorrect; for it is as difficult for capital to do
without labor as it is for labor to do without capi-
tal. While on the land question, and having dealt
with that which still belongs to the Crown, it now
devolves upon me to deal with
Land Which is Alienated.
It is well known that from the first land bill
passed under responsible government, at the in-
stance of Sir John Robertson in 1861, in which
‘Selection before survey” was introduced, that, and
all other land bills since, were passed with the in-
tention of settling people upon the land, and not
for the purpose of forming large estates; but with
regret it has to be declared to be a proved failure,
while some now have comfortable homes who would
not otherwise have had them; still, all our land
bills have conduced to the multiplying of large es-
tates, far more than to settling a yeomanry on the
land, as was intended they should do, and what is
more to the injury of the country,
I think I proved conclusively in my introduction,
by the cases quoted:—although these were old
grants —that the tendency has been towards mono-
poly of the land by the few, instead of placing


homesteads in the hands of the many. These
-ands should also be made profitable to the State
as well as the Crown Lands, and yet at the presciir
time they p3y nothing 1 . It will have been noticed
the rental proposed, all through, on all land, is one
per cent, on the value, irrespective of improve-
ments, this, applied to crown lands only, de-
crease our present revenue very much, and as it is
necessary to provide for the government of the
country, and the government gives protection to
the holders of freehold estates as well as others,
by police courts; and increasing value by roads,
railway, &c., &c., &c., it is only fair that the ow-
ners of these estates should contribute their fair
share also. Provision should therefore be made,
if not in the new land bill, by a separate enact-
ment that all lands alienated should contribute to
the carrying on of the government, by a tax of not
less than one per cent, on the value irrespective <rt
improvements. Were this done the lands already
alluded to, as well as the lands belonging to private
people and companies, such as the Australian Ag-
ricultural and Peel River companies, who draw
such large sums from the land, and take it out of
the countrv to spend, would be compelled to pay a
just proportion of the expenses incurred in govern-
ine New South \Vales, and not, as at piesent, get
the benefit free of the cost.
The imposition of this one per cent, tax all
round on land, from that now held as private pro-
perty, and as rent for that to be leased under the
new proposal would raise sufficient money to pay
expenses, and do away with all other taxes that
have now to be paid on 3.11 the necesssries of life,
as well as some other class taxes which enter so
largely into the comfort of all making a home in
“Sunnv New South Wales.
In conclusion, I will make
A Comparative Statement.
In 1800. the latest date I can lay my hands upon


at present for Mr. Coghlan s estimated value of
the lands of New South Wales irrespective oi im-
provements, was £275,000,000, this at 1 per cent,
would yield £2,750,000, and that is what we might
expect as the result of the proposal herein made,
as revenue. Now, to show how we could ease the
burdens of the people, this I copy from the Gov-
ernment Gazette No. 1, 4th January, 1892, as fol-
lows: —“There was received as revenue for custom
duties as follows; The amount stated is irrespective
of spirits, wines, beer, tobacco, snuff, and opium,
which we propose still to have subject to taxation,
until we get the law of prohibition with regard to
them. Tea, coffee and chicory, sugar and molasses,
rice, dried fruits, specific and ad valorem duties
£852,764. Interest on conditional purchases
£107*142, Runs and leases of all kinds £829,061.
Rabbit assessment £1,240. School fees £,76,916-
Total £1,866,123.” It is intended also to throw off
the sheep assessment, but I could not get the
amount. But as the one per cent, tax would bring
in £2,750,000, it is seen that we should have a good
margin.
Of course I have included rents of runs and leases
of all kinds to be struck out as the proposal is, to
substitute the one per cent, tax, exclusive of _ im-
plements instead. Perhaps it may be said 1
have gone beyond the scope of the conditions, but
if looked closely into, I think it sould not have
been fairly dealt with otherwise; for if there were
no congestion of population in the cities the enquiry
would not have been necessary, and in providing
a remedy it was also necessary to find out the
cause of the congestion. Having done this the
remed ir was more easily found, and when it is
proved, as I think I have done, that we ease the
burdens of the community, and even make it easier
for our present and future land holders, as well as
only charge a small amount for protection to life
and from those now paying nothing,
hence the reason for dealing with the matter at so
great a length.






