

Illllllllllllllllllllllllllillilllllllllllllillllllllllllllllillillllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllilllllilllllllilllllllllilllllllllililillillilllllillllllllllllllllllllllllillllllll
Reminiscences of Mr. A. L. Petrie
For 33 Years a Member of the
Legislative Assembly for Toombul 9
and “Father” of the Assembly
(Reprinted from “The Daily Mail,” Brisbane, February, 1926).
lllllllllllllllllHllllJllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllltiilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll




1 1 AHE following articles are reprinted from “The Daily
Mail,” Brisbane, and contain the reminiscences of
Mr. A. L. Petrie as furnished to that journal. In saying
farewell to the Assembly on Tuesday, October 27, 1925,
on which date the last session of the 23rd Parliament
ended, Mr. Petrie remarked
This is the last time I will take my seat in this Assembly,
as I intend to retire from politics altogether. During my
long term I have seen many changes. I have seen 115
members pass out of the Assembly, and 53 from the Up-
per House. I have seen no fewer than 13 Premiers in
charge of the House, and had Mr. C. Collins, the mem-
ber for Bowen, substantiated himself in the dignity to
which he was raised for 20 minutes, the number would
have been 14. I have served under eight Speakers, 14
Chairmen of Committee, three Clerks of the Legislative
Assembly, and I have seen 14 Ministries on the Treasury
Bench. I think there have been six Governors in office
during my membership of the Assembly.




“FATHER OF THE HOUSE”
Premiers of the ’Nineties
BRISBANE’S FIRST BOWLING CLUB
Reminiscences of Mr. Andrew Petrie
(By A. L. Petrie.)
Mr. Andrew Lang Petrie, the “Father” of the Queensland Par-
liament, begins his reminiscences of 42 years of public life in the fol-
lowing article. He recalls Sir Thomas M ‘ Ilwraith, who was Premier
when Mr. Petrie first entered the House in 1893, and who, he con-
siders, was the greatest Premier Queensland has yet seen. Sir
Thomas founded what was probably the first bowling club in Brisbane.
After him followed Sir Hugh Nelson, rarely separated fron a church-
warden pipe; Mr. T J. Byrnes, and Sir James Dickson, an orator
who provoked the quip of a bishop that he must have swallowed a
dictionary.
My grandfather, Andrew Petrie, been permitted to follow his full pro
served in the old Royal Engineers. He gramme of public works, perhaps,
and his family were among the first Queensland would have reaped manv
batch of skilled mechanics brought to benefits. However, one must not over-
Australia by Dr. Lang. My grand ] oo k the fact that in Sir Thomas’s day
father and his family reached Sydney the population of the colony and its
in 1831, and his first work in the land resources were too limited to enable
of his adoption was the building of works to be undertaken on a grand
Dr. Lang’s famous olci church, on ecale.
Church Hill, Sydney. In 1837. the O ne would not call Sir Thomas
founder of our family came to More MTlwraith an orator, but when be spoke
ton Baj settlement to fix the old he cut the ice. He was a born political
windmill that had been erected to grind leader, and the secret of his influence
meal for the military and the convicts. over men was in the animal magnetism
His duties also included the supervising that radiated from him. This was the
of buildings generally, power by which he held his supporters
The Petrie family travelled to More- together. I have seen him go into the
ton Bay in the small steamer, James Legislative Council when one of his bills
Watt, whose paddle wheels were the happened to be under consideration,
first mechanical agents of steam navi- Then he would lean over the rail and
gation to beat the waters of Moreton survey the members with a keen eye;
Bay. My family thus became asso- and be usually got his way in the end
ciated with the capital of Queensland On my first coming into the House,
before free settlement became an estab MTlwraith was very kind to me. He
lished fact, and the land they first set took me aside on one occasion early in
foot upon was known as Amitv Point. my political career, and gave me this
Thev afterwards appr d-ed the site of sound advice: “Andrew, never listen t.-
Brisbane in a whaleboat. anyone outside. Do not let outside
people pull your lug! If you want any
A GREAT PREMIER. advice, always come to me- There are
. always two sides to every story. If you
At the moment ol writing mv wind ever have a genuine case, I will help
wanders through the past politics vou jf j can; if I cannot, then I will-
world of Queensland, and the leader# ‘ oon te ]] yot , ”
of Governments flit across the screen
of memory. First let me recall Sir MTLWRAITH’S BOWLING CLUB.
Thomas MTlwraith, who was Premier
when I entered the House in 1893. 1 MTlwraith formed what probably was
consider him the greatest Premier we the first team of bowlers in Brisbane,
have vet seen in Queensland. He was I belonged to the team. For a time
not a politician; he was a statesman. I we played on a temporary green in the
do not name him by that title in an Botanic Gardens, near where the bush
extravagant sense, for he had the vision and glass houses are now situated. Sit
splendid, and sought to give expression Thomas later made a green on the site
to several of his great conceptions. To now occupied by the Roma-street rail
some degree he succeeded, but if he had way station. I believe that really wa-
the first bowling green in Brisbane The
club at a later date moved to Boorooda-
hin. Incidentally, 1 may mention 1
was a foundation member of the Clav-
field Bowling Club.
In MTlwraith’s club, as it was col-
loquially called in the ’nineties, there
were some very enthusiastic Scotsmen.
They took the game seriously, and often
in the heat of an exciting finish some
of them would be lavish of advice. To
one bowler, several would cry, “Just
claw the jock, mon.” Then later another
Caledonian would suggest, “Four inches
more this way, Sandy.” But the bowler
would often overdo it, and drive his
sphere right into the dyke.
In October, 1893, MTlwraith resigned,
and Mr., afterwards Sir Hugh. Nelson,
reconstructed the Ministry. which in
eluded the late Premier, as Minister for
Railways Shortly after the reconstruc
tion, however. Sir Thomas went to Eng
land on a health trip, and never re
turned. His successor was a man of fine
physique, and noble presence He pos-
sessed ability as a speaker, and his voice
was pleasant to hear He was always
polite and courteous, but. in my opin
ion, too often he showed an undue ten
dency to compromise-
CHURCHWARDEN PIPES IN
PARLIAMENT
Churchwarden pipes engaged his fancy
frequently in the refreshment or billiard-
room at Parliament House. He thor-
oughly enjoyed drawing the fumes of the
fragrant weed through the queer bowl
and long stem of an old clay dab. When
Nelson had decided to go to England 1
suggested that he should take a consign
rnent of these quaint pipes as a present
for the Prince of Wales, so that they
might smoke a pipe or two together
When he assumed the position of Pre
sident of the Legislative Council for the
first time. Sir Hugh was dressed in re-
splendent uniform; if 1 remember right
ly he wore the Windsor uniform cloyed
with huge masses of gold lace. Dur-
ing the ceremony associated with his in-
stallation, 1 whispered to several of my
friends, “I think we’ll get up a syndi-
cate on Sir Hugh Nelson’s uniform.”
“What do you mean?” queried one of my
companions. ‘‘Well,” I said, “the syndi
1




cate could acquire the old gentleman’s in consequence.
brilliant suit of clothes, boil it down, and Premier for the brief period of five
get a good many ounces of gold to the months.
ton.”
Sir Hugh Nelson himself enjoyed a A MAN OF BIG WORDS.
He held the office of but he was uncertain He was always
suave and polite. His speech was marked
b’ a nasal twang, and he loved big
words. Once when he had the floor of
the House, a distinguished bishop oecu
good yarn, and he could also tell a . „ _ , « sea behind the Speakers chair.
story well. In his serious moments Aft T er the p de^. h of Mr - T ; J - “V" 6 * While he was talking I happened to pass
he did much good work for Queensland. Mr - Ja ™ es H ' ? lcks ° n ' auctioneer, land of the chamber, and in transit the
I think his memory should be hon and estate agent and politician became bishop whinnered to me. “What big
oured for one. alone of his achievements. Vernier. b <’ oa was necessary to elec words he uses. Andrew. I think he must
that that was the practical policy he ad a Speaker< illld Mr Dlc 8011 desired that have swallowed a dictionary.” ““Yes,
that that was the practical policy ne aa Mr A g Cowley should continue to rnv i ord » i said, he does not call a
vocated and applied in regard to boring o<Jcupy thp Speaker chair. But a nun, si ; V ad e a spade, but an oblong instrument
toi water. The enterprise slO i >y ber of tbe p rem i er » s supporters expected 0 f manual industry.’ “Well,” answered
Government in this respect set a splen- position wGuld be given to Mr, tl P bishop< «i neve i heard it put that
did example that others since have fob v We ae< ordingly to thePre W av before. T always heard it called a
lowed, with advantage to Queensland mier what we thought, but, notwith -shovel.’’
and her people. p+anding that. Mr. Cowley was put
The late Mr. T. J. Byrnes succeeded forward. Ultimate!. Mr. Morgen was Dickson dressed in formal style.
Sir Hugh Nelson as Premier. He was selected. Many of us were disappointed He seemed attir°d to be in readi
a very able man, and enjoyed great w ith our choice, because, subsequently. ness to attend a funeral at any moment.
popularity in the House As a result of Mr Morgan negotiated with the Labour Mr. C. A. Bernays. in his delightful
his trip to England his mind was broad and event ally was invited t<> st ry of Queensland politics during 60
ened, and often, after his return, he ] ead a composite party of Labour mem years has observed that Dickson’s “iron
used to tell many bright stories of his bprH and seceder from Philp. He ac- clad white shirt-fron of the old
travels in Ireland. He spoke fluently cepted the invitation, and on an appeal starcl ed type, decorated in the centre
and logically. He was cut off in the t 0 f be country came back with a strong with a larg oval and highly polished
prime of life, and his passing was a majority. The Opposition, which was gold stud, which scintillated like the
great loss to Queensland He never took ] pd bv Philp. numbered but IV. evening star, made him the cynosure of
enough exercise, and his health suffered In a way Dickson was an able man, a good many eves in the ladies’ gallery.”
2




MORGAN TO THEODORE
Political Battles of the Past
A WHIP WHO NURSED THE MEMBERS
Founding of Queensland’s University
(By A L- Petrie )
In the following article Mr. Andrew Petrie tells of his arduous duties
as Government Whip in the days of the Kidston Ministry, when he had
literally to nurse members. His room in the House became a chemist’s
shop. The University of Queensland is a memorial to Kidston’s public
service. Mr. Petrie surveys politics and personalities up to the present
day, and gives interesting character sketches of “ Honest Bob” Philp,
D. F. Denham, T. J. Ryan, and Mr. E. G. Theodore.
When Morgan led the House, after his mark was repeated a second and a
appeal to the electors, he had a very third time Finally the Premier re-
big majority. Two benches had to be torted, “I have a hide so thick that
removed from the Opposition side of a fool's remarks cannot penetrate it-
the chamber to accommodate his new
supporters. Indeed, the Government NURSING THE MEMBERS
men were packed together like sardines . .
Their leader possessed considerable *n. the third session ol the 17 h
ability, and if has been said that in which opened on June 29,
many respects he resembled Sir Hugh 1909, the Coalition had a precarious
Nelson, whom he succeeded in the Presi-
dency of the Legislative Council. He
spoke in a pleasant style, and at all
times maintained modest dignity.
Naturally, he had a tough task in lead-
ing a composite party, and I believe Sir
Arthur, for more reasons than one, ap-
preciated his translation in 1906 to the
serener atmosphere of the Upper House
after about two and a half years as
Premier in a most difficult period of
our political history.
WILLIAM KIDSTON.
William Kidston now comes to notice. mm'
1 think he proved himself the second
greatest Premier of Queensland, J&j.Jwmmm*l
MTlwraith, of course, being the vHSgp? W\
greatest. He was very like the I
MTlwraith type of public man. Some /■ W J
time after his elevation Kidston ar /> I
r nged a coalition with the Philp
section, and retained the leadership. vlbialfc ' w /
He had a strenuous time, but was WMmtm /
more than equal to the demands made ... a /
upon his mental and physical powers.
He had a nice, easy way of speak-
ing, and the Scotch accent was not
altogethei absent from it When .
addressing a gathering he had tlm
ecclesiastical habit of quietly moving
his arms outwards. time in the Assembly. Fate and
He was fairly good at repartee. 1 strategy contributed to reduce Kid-
remember once when he came to ston’s majority to one. About this
speak at a meeting held in the time he came to me, and said he
Albert Hall a man interrupted him wished me to take the office of
with the remark. “You’ve got a ’ide. ’ Whip. He added, “Andrew, you are
Kidston took no notice, and the re- the only man who can handle this
crowd’’ He called on me to take the
post at 48 hours’ notice. I ac-
cepted from a sense of duty. But I
had to work very hard, and for a
tiir.o was ass.sted by the late Mr’W.
Maxwell then member for Burke
The fusion of the Kidstonians and
Philpites had resulted in defections,
and it was necessary that a close tallv
of heads should be kept. The method
ot registering division- then was loose
and with Kidston’s approval, f ini-
tiated a more effective system. Tally
papers were circulated foi divisions,
and also were hung in conspicuous
places in Ministers’ rooms and public
offices.
With such a slender majority I had
an awful time as Whip, and as many of
the Premier’s supporters were old men,
I had to turn my room in the House into
a chemist’s shop to doctor the Queens
land boys. I also stored it with pyjamas
and slippers to meet the convenience of
many a testy'member. When some of the
seniors were out of sorts they came to
me and I prescribed for each o them,
and if they waxed weary I put them to
bed in pyjamas. Having survived this
trying ordeal. Kidston went to the coun
trv and as he was returned with a solid
majority my duties, therefore, became
less strenuous.
A PEOPLE’S UNIVERSITY
The University of Queensland will
ever be a memorial of Kidston’s public
service. The second reading of the Uni
versity of Queensland Bill was moved
in the Assembly on November 9. 1909.
hv Mr. W. H. Barnes, who, at that time,
was Minister for Public Instruction. In
the course of the debate the Premier
snoke upon the project. He said. “Our
iuea in establishing a University in
Queensland is that we should establish
a people’s University, not a place where
men ‘gang in stirks and come oot asses’,
but a practical school —a modern school
like the newer Universities of England
and America. They recognise that intel
ligence is not the peculiar gift of any
one class in the community, and that it
is in the interests of the State, and cer-
tainly that it should be the duty of Par-
liament. to try to utilise and develop in-
telligence in whatever class or person it
3




is found. Ido not think that any amount our association in public life, I have in this capacity he was helped wonder-
of higher education will make a leaden no hesitation in saying, that as one of fully by his amiable wife. Apart from
sword as good as a steel sword, but the founders of the Hamilton local politics, 1 think everyone in Queens
when you have the iron in the man. a authority, in which we were both asso- land lamented the unexpected death of
higher education will sharpen it and ciated, your whole energies were en- this promising young Australian, He
make it available for the work of the gaged in the success of the new coun- was a very active leader of the Oppo
world, and make it available for doing cil, of which fur two years you were sition. and he was fortunate in being
that work better,” chairman. Your public spirit, your we l] and capablv served bv such lieu-
This Premier with a dominating per tact, and your knowledge of men and tenants as Messrs. R G. Theodore and
sonality vacated office in February. 1911, matters, ensured the virile life and W. M'Cormack
anl took a seat on the Land Court growth of the area. Your Parliament
bench. His place was taken by Mr. D- ar y record is one that any man may “HONEST BOB” PHILP.
F- Denham, a gentleman who took a be proud of. No member of the
very serious view of his public duties- House has been more exemplary in Before I close this chapter 1 must
He realised his responsibilities as a his political duties, or more loyal to mention two other Premiers who have
leader, and his sense of caution was de his State and his electors. To myself manifested marked ability. “Honest
veloped to a high degree. As a business as Home Secretary, you were a tower Bob” Philp did a great deal for
man he was sound and thorough. He 0 f strength in all that legislation and Queensland in the hard t’mes. He en-
spoke well inside and outside the House, administration which made for the joyed the respect of his party, and all
and had the gift of handling various care and the amelioration of the con- sections in the community thought well
subjects with striking brevity and tell- dition of the poorer and less fortun him In my opinion the mistake
ing force. However, he could not hold ate members of the community and he made was to give away too much
together the various sections of his party many a time you have helped me to the Labour party, when he gov-
because he lacked personal magnetism. through when the very men who op erned. His legislation, in some In-
Often he failed to sense the possibilities posed the humanitarian policy, after- stances, was too progressive.- He
of a situation, and in the course of his wards were glad to take credit there thought, however, that the Labour
term he introduced legislation that was for.”
distasteful to several sections of the
party would appreciate the conces-
sions, but he lived to be disillusioned.
party behind him - but in pursuing this WA __ DTnn T tritd a t tch/t The late Sir Robert Philp had been
course we usually ascribed his persist- UJ 1 KAL o thoroughly trained in business, and in
ence to his earnestness and his sense of r ihpp .., , virtv itH debacle at hss P ub,i(> and private life was emin-
duty. If he had shown more tact as J hdd in the middle -fly straightforward in all his deal-
Premier, the last decade ot Queensland s „ vear 1915 Mr T J Ryan at ’Off 8 - He possessed manv fine personal
history might have been different. ‘ office ' of Prem i 6r and Leader qualities which I fullly appreciated.
AN ELOQUENT TRIBUTE. -“-J" % £
My old friend, Mr. George Appel, was always able to handle his Ministers to . 03. might have served still
member for Albert, resigned from the and the party as a whole. Whilst he onger had he not resigned, because
Denham Ministry in February, 1915 was in office he did much for the Labour 18 stipporters left him on his Stamp
He was one of the best Home Secre- party in th ewav of passing legislation. °t Amendment Bill with a majority
taries I have known He did much to I admired him and he impressed me as °’ two.
humanise the administration of the Home a man of generous nature He governed E. G. Theodore was a Premier
Secretary’s Department, and foreshad at a time when the community was up with whom I always got on very well,
owed many reforms since established, set by the war, so that feeling, perhaps He gave me the impression that his
and claimed by the present Government. more than reason clouded public issues: heart was not actually in the Labour
And here, 1 would like to quote an but whatever may be said of him, it movement to the extent that some
extract from a letter written by him to will be admitted, I think, that he ad people believed. Of course, this is
me from Southport, under date May 1, hered steadfastly to the policy he enun- only my own impression, and there
1923. when opponents, other than Labour ciated in the famous Barcaldine speech. is no doubt about the good work that
party, sought to displace me from my He could ascend to great altitudes in he did for his party. I regard him as
representation of Toombul- balloons of bluff, and in cases of acci- a very able public man, and T must
“Quite outside our personal triend- dent, could descend gracefully in the say to me he was courteous and kind
ship,” wrote Mr. Appel, “dating from parachute of compromise. As a host at all times, and assisted me. as a pri
our schoolboy days, but dealing witd T. J. Ryan could not be surpassed, and vate member, in every way he conld.
4




FAMOUS GOVERNORS
Vice - Regal Carriage Comedy
“BRUMMAGEM” GIFT PEN RETURNED
Learning and Wit of Other Days
(By A L- Petrie )
Mr. Andrew Petrie calls to the assize of memory some Governors of
the past, and relates a laughable anecdote of what became of a vice-
regal carriage. A “ Brummagem ” gold fountain pen presented to Sir
William MacGregor when Governor was returned and a genuine article
insisted on. Some notable Speakers are also recalled. The wit that
often enlivened Parliamentary debates in Mr. Petrie’s day is exemplified
in the parody of “ Bill Kidston’s oarty.”
JOHJS PETRIE , and his son . A. L. PETRIE.
General Sir Henry Norman held the
office of Governor at the time I first
entered the Assembly. He had a fine
presence, and his eyes formed the
striking feature of his handsome
countenance. He was a gallant
soldier, a statesman, and diplomat. He
enjoyed the respect of all sections of
the community. His experience as a
soldier in various parts of the world
fitted him to take an eminently sane
view of important public questions.
Probably, he was the most popular
Governor we ever have had in Queens-
land. While in office he was ap-
pointed Governor-General of India. He
obeyed the call, but later sought per-
mission, on account of his advancing
years, to resign.
Lord Lamington next was ap-
pointed vice-regal representative in
Queensland. He was a very charming
gentleman, and took a keen interest in
his duties He remained in office for
nearly five years. When he retired
in December, 1901, his Excellency
sold his carriage and pair, which were
bought by .Ir. Henry Morwitch, who
earned on business as a pawnbroker,
on the site now occupied by Ascot
House, Queen-street. The carriage
was an impressive vehicle, and once
when Morwitch was driving down
Queen-street I happened to be talk-
ing to several friends in front of the
office of the Royal Bank One in our
group who came from the south was
attracted by the brilliance of the
equipage, an I remarked, “My word,
that is a fine turnout. Who is in it?”
I replied, “It is the Governor’s.” As
the vehicle came closer I noticed old
Morwitch sitting back in the cushions
with a big cigar between his lips.
Thereupon we all raised our hats, and
Morwitch immediately placed his fin
gers rudely to his nose. My friend
then said disdainfully “He’s a fine
sort of Governor.”
LORD CHELMSFORD’S DISCOVERY
In March, 1902, General Sir Herbert
Chermside assumed office as Governor,
and discharged his obligations in an ex
cellent manner. He took a lively in
terest in the administrative duties ap
5




pertaining to his office. He avoided con-
stitutional conflicts, and always mani-
fested great common sense. Having
served two and a half years, he vacated
office, and was followed by Lord Chelms
ford.
The new representative of the King
was a typical Englishman. Mentally, he
proved himself a big man, and at all
times his manners were charming. Aftei
handling a grave constitutional issue in
Queensland successfully, he left the State
lo become Governor of New South Wales,
Subsequently Lord Chelmsford was selec
ted by the King to act as Governor
General of India at a critical period in
the history of that great possession.
Lord Chelmsford was a good judge of
wine. In that part of my electorate
known as Myrtletown and Pinkenba ex
celleut grapes are grown, and fine wines
are made in those districts. The Raw
lingson family produced splendid types
of wine, and the Governor once chanced
to purchase a case of their product. So
pleased was he with its quality that ho
gave the makers the Vice-regal patron-
age. His Excellency told me the wine
was as good as he had tasted anywhere,
and he was surprised when 1 told him
that the grapes from which it had been
made were grown on ground that once
had been covered by salt water tides.
The wine industry is of immense value
to Australia, and I think it would assist
vignerons if all the Governors in the
Commonwealth stipulated that only Aus-
tralian wines should be served at their
tables on formal occasions. Australian
wines compare favourably with Hie fin
est products of other countries.
A ‘‘BRUMMAGEM” GIFT.
Sir William MacGregor was well
known in Queensland long before he as-
sumed office in December, 1909. I met him
at Mrs. Kidston’s funeral, which took
place in Rockhampton, and at once per
ceived him to be an individual above the
average. I could see he was a man of
the world, a scholar, scientist, and u
genuine friend of humanity. He de
rived great pleasure from the tasks of
laying foundation stones, and insisted
that the titles, M.D.. G.C.M.G., and
C. 8., should be placed after his nanu-
About such details he always was punc-
tilious. A facsimile of a scroll to be
carved, and set up on the portal of the
Queensland University was prepared by
the Department of Public Works. It also
was arranged that Sir William should
sign the scroll with a gold fountain pen
His Excellency duly received a pen and
signed, but discovered later that it was
brummagem. He at once returned it to
the Works Department, and made those
responsible for the gift furnish him with
a “dinkum” gold stylus.
Sir Hamilton Goold-Adams officiated
in the war period, and took a deep in
terest in his work. He liked attending
agricultural shows, and as he always had
a keen eye for first-class poultry, he kep*
his private secretary busy buying good
breeds. He was greatly assisted in his
gubernatorial duties by Lady Goold-
Adams, who engaged enthusiastically in
all social movements having for their
objects the promoting of the welfare of
the people.
SIR MATTHEW NATHAN.
When I was vice-president of the Jus-
tices’ Association, of which organisation
I was one of the founders, Sir Matthew
Nathan was Governor of Queensland.
He attended one of our quarterly meet-
ing at the Brisbane Club, and delivered
an address on Justices’ business. At
that meeting, in the course of conversa-
tion, Sir Matthew asked me were there
any female justices of the peace in
Queensland. I answered there were five.
I also remarked. “It is strange, your
asking me that question, as I noted re
cently that female justices have been
appointed to act in the old country One
of these ladies, Your Excellency, on
taking her seat for the first time in
England, was called upon to deal with a
respectable ‘drunk.’ She looked at the
offender, and then exclaimed, ‘Oh,
Harry, is this what you have been doing
all night?’ He was her husband.
Whether she dismissed him or fined him
I know not; but they lived happy ever
after.” The Governor enjoyed the story
immensely.
Sir Matthew Nathan took great pains
in preparing his speeches, and acquain-
ted himself with the details of every
function to which he was invited. He
was keenly interested in everything that
made for the intellectual and moral ad
vancement of the people. He endeared
himself to all Queenslanders, and I feel
sure that his efforts to encourage art
and literature in this State will prove
fruitful in the near future. He was a
fine soldier, a ripe scholar, and an aide
diplomat. In a few words he was a
model Governor.
IN THE SPEAKER’S CHAIR.
Many' gentlemen have occupied the
Speaker’s chair in my time. The holder
of this dignified office at the period I
first was elected a member of the As-
sembly was Alfred Sandlings Cowley.
In my opinion, he was an excellent
Speaker, and a man who upheld the dig
nity of the chair in a worthy manner.
He was well up in procedure, and was
respected by most members of Parlia
ment during his term of office. He was
strict, and extremely correct in his man-
agement nf the House.
John Leahy donned the Sneaker’s robes
in July, 1907. He acted fairly to both
sides of the House, and showed, perhaps,
a little too much consideration to the
side that was opposed to h.m politically.
But this I regarded as evidence of his
impartiality. This Speaker, in his
younger days, had been a keen student
and he had acquired a sound knowledge
of history. Like his brother, Mr. P. J.
Leahy. John was well versed in good
literature. When Philp held office as
Premier in 1901, John Leahy was his
Minister for Railways, and of his speech
it has been remarked it was a strange
mixture “of fluency and tangled dic-
tion.”
One afternoon in the long ago. this
genial Speaker walked into the cham-
ber to open a sitting. He read the
prayers in his usual solemn way. and
then withdrew to allow the House to sit
in committee. On returning to the
Speaker’s room he glanced through
one of the big windows of
this beautiful apartment, and no-
ticed a lady seated in the
avenue before an easel and canvas. She
anneared busily engaged impressing
glimpses of the avenue and foliage with
brush and oils. Turning to the prin-
cipal messenger. Mr, Charles Heath, who
had attended his chief to his robing room
Speaker Leahy exclaimed, “Who is that.
Charlie?” “I don’t know, sir.’’ was
the reply. “Oh, well, I’ll go down and
see,” said Leahy.' “I’ll go down in
my robes.” So he strolled down the
avenue in his silk gown, and politely
addressed ;he artist- Whe.. he returned
to his quarters he said to the messenger,
“That is Lady Chelmsford.”
A WITTY PARODY.
The next speaker was Mr. J. T. Bell.
His manners were elegant, and his speech
charming. He was a product of the
Brisbane Grammar School, and after
wards went to Oxford. He took the
elixir on June 29, 1909, and died during
recess, in March, 1911. Naturally a
man of his character, temperament, and
education could not but adorn the chair,
and his rulings could not be assailed. Mr.
Bell presided at the time Kidston’s ma-
jority had dwindled to one. The Govern-
ment, in July 1909, was challenged on
the Address-in-Reply. Just before the
vital division, the member for Croydon,
usually known about the House as
‘‘Kuropatkin” Murphy, had a little to
say. Among other things, he said: “The
Premier talked about his present strong
party last session, when he had a ma-
jority of 14. To-day he is anticipating
a majority of one, and he is not certain
that he will get that. In conclusion. 1
will repeat a verse:
Bill Kidston had a barty—
Vere ish dot barty now?
Vere ish de shmile of Villiam proud.
The joy of Cow-ap’s brow?
Vere is their proud dress-circle
shokes,
Their homogeneous glee?
Gone avay mit the lager beei,
Of der last “Lucinda” spree.
Shortly after this effusion was recited
the division took place, and the Govern-
ment escaped by the skin of its teeth,
the voting being 34 to 33.
A moment after the bar was closed by
Mr. Bell’s order, a rumpus occurred about
the entry of Mr. W. Drayton Armstrong,
member for Lockyer, and myself. Mr.
J. H. Coyne told the Speaker that we
had entered after the order to close the
bar had been given. The Speaker there-
upon asked us if we had entered “after
the bar was closed.” Mr. Coyne, ad-
dressing the Speaker, stated, ‘I said
they entered after you ordered the bar
to be closed.” The Speaker decided to
admit our votes, and the incident ended.
6


■ I
1 i ’ . ■ I ■ I . I
'
■
.
■
■
• .
■
■
.
■
■
■ ' •


BAITING A SPEAKER
A Bump That Saved a Vote
CELEBRITIES OF OLD ASSEMBLIES
Pioneers of the Labour Party
(By A.. L. Petrie.)
Mr. Petrie tells the story of how by an opportune bump when Gov-
ernment Whip he ensured the vote of a hesitating member. In the
ensuing general election the incident was much magnified, and it was
asserted that Mr. Petrie carried the member into the House on his
back. The idiosyncrasies of some old colleagues in Parliament are
kindly quizzed, and generous tributes are paid to two pioneers of the
Labour party.
While 1. as Whip, was struggling to a great worker for his constituency,
keep the Government afloat at this per and n keen man on the floor ot the
ilous time. Mr Armstrong, in a fit of House He liked to get on with public
pique, did not want to vote at a crucial business without undue delays. On the
moment. Several members at the bar date mentioned the House was in division
of the House endeavouring to oer- on a proposed amendment to the Agri
suade him to vote. I suddenly came up cultural Bank Act. Addressing the
behind the bunch and bumped them all tellers, Mr. Bouchard said; ‘‘Time, time,”
into the House, and immediately the “1 would suggest.” said the Speaker,
bar was let down, and Mr. Armstrong’s “that the hon. member for South Bris-
vote seized This amusing incident was bane should behave himself.” After a
magnified at the ensu ng general elec- pause, Mr. Bouchard retorted, “That is
tion. when it was asserted by one of insulting. Don’t make any mistake
Mr. Armstrong’s opponents in jockyer, about it.”
that I had carried him into the House The division having been completed,
on my back This, of course, was gross the Speaker asked Mr. Bouchard to
exaggeration, and I wrote Mr. Arm- withdraw the word “insulting.” “Mi
strong a letter stating that I had not Speaker,” answered Mr. Bouchard, ‘‘l
carried him on my back. decline to withdraw,” and this attitude
This Mr. Armstrong became Speaker was hailed with a stentorian, “Hear,
when death removed Mr. Bell from the hear” from the lips of “Kuropatkin”
House As a Speaker, the member for Murphy. The Speaker then named Mr
Lockyer, maintained the dignity of the Bouchard for declining to obey the call
cha r with a nice formality that at 0 f the chair. Mr. D. F. Denham who
times amounted to a mania. He was was Premier, rose. He said: “I very
well up in May’s Parliamentary Prac- much regret the incident, but the au-
tice, but not infrequently some of his thority of the chair should be sustained,
decisions were questioned. He knew the He moved that Mr. Bouchard be sus
Standing Orders well. Ordinarily he pended ‘ from the service of this House
was affable, and his manners were per until fi o’clock this evening.” However,
feet; but as Speaker he was a little when the division was taken the House,
pompous and testy. Mr. Donald Gunn tiy 22 votes to 20, decided that Mr.
and I used often to agitate him by let- Bouchard should not be suspended, and
ting an imitation snake wriggle out of S( , Hie Speaker “missed the ’bus.”
a false camera on to the Treasury Since Labour has been the Govern-
bench We were repeatedly called to (Il ent policy of Queensland we have had
order for our folly. three able Speakers Messrs. W, M‘Cor-
mack, W. Lennon, and W. Bertram, the
A SPEAKER DISCOMFITED. present occupant of the office. They all
appreciated the dignity of the position,
Mr. Arriistrong sometimes used to hut there has been a tendency in the last
waste time over petty details. He got a 10 years to allow machine politics to
Roland for his Oliver when he put ths go to the point of even subverting the
“acid” on Mr. Tom Bouchard on August independence of the Chair. This may be
21, 1913. At this period Mr. Bouchard a sign of progress, or of party discipline,
represented South Brisbane in the As but 1 prefer the old fashioned notions
sembly. He was a delightful companion concerning the Chair.
CLERKS OF THE ASSEMBLY.
The first Clerk of the Legislative As
sembly was Mr. L. A, Bernays, C.M G.
He served Parliament for 49 years, and
passed away in 1908. He was an excel
lent man, and was very particular about
the observance of the rules of the
House. His work on the Standing
Orders will commemorate him for
many ages. To new members, and
to Ministers feeling their way, he was
kindness itself. He wa« skilled in
precedent and a lover of routine. On
his death he was fittingly described
by Mr. J. T. Bell as being of the best
and rarest type of Public servant.
The Hon. C. 6. Holmes • Court be-
came Clerk of the Assembly on No
vember 5, 1908, and retired in Decern
ber, 1919. In the village of Heytes-
bury, adjacent to which many Austra-
lians were encamped when in the
South of England, in the war years,
there is a little church, on the walls
of which the history of Mr. Holmes a
Court’s family is recorded. Public
service is the keynote of the record,
and I am pleased to say that the
scion of the family, who officiated in
the Assembly of Queensland for many
vears, carried on the family tradition.
He understood the true significance of
the old saying, “noblesse oblige.’’ was
extremely courteous to members of
both sides of the House, and ever
tried to make *-htir duties as light as
possible
Of the present Clerk, Mi. C. A. Ber
nays is it not sufficient to say that
he has followed in his honoured
father’s footsteps? Not only has he
carried on the family tradition as
holder of an historic office, but he has
published two books that will form
the basis of the future politic? l litera-
ture of Queensland These publica-
tions are known as “Queensland Poli-
tics During Sixty Years. ’’ and “De-
cisions of the Speakers of the Legis-
lative Assemblv of Queensland, 1860
1923.’’
STALWARTS ON THE OTHER SIDE.
I intend now to look from another
angle through the telescope of memory,
7


‘J O '


and to glance upon some of the friends Another fine Parliamentarian who en- of his campaign speeches that annoyed
who sat with me in the days that are tered the House with me was Senator the German settlers in the electorate,
gone. Perhaps my observations may Matt Reid. He, too, was a good Labour So he got a pretty lively time during the
not be always flattering, but any faint man, and understood the true principles fight. If I remember rightly, he went
wave of criticism that may perchance of democracy, but, like, many other once to address a meeting convened in
disturb the mind of the reader will not great pioneers of the Labour movement. Logan Village. A big German farmer
have been stirred by any breeze of ill- he had the courage to halt when presided, and in announcing the Labour
feeling. I entertain a warm regard theorists, humbugs, and latter-day poli candidate, remarked, “I have to intro
for all those with whom T have been tical saints, who had performed no duce Mr, Reid, but Ido not know him.
associated in Parliament, but my ex penance in the early days, pushed the He ish, I believe, a Labour a'ligalor.”
perience of life has taught me that we great humanitarian movement beyond (agitator!,
all have our little idiosyncrasies. With the bounds of common sense- Evenlu
out them who would be human? So 1 ally he left State politics and now holds Now the lineaments of .Jack Annear
proceed to mention a few of my political a well-deserved position in the Australian flash into my mind. He first entered
companions in this disinterested spirit. Senate Senator Reid is a good speaker, the Assembly in 1883, and later attained
First, let me refer to dear Charles fluent, and convincing. In the early the office of Chairman of Committees.
M‘Uonald. who so recently was sum period of his Parliamentary career he His voice was so loud that the only
moned to join the great majority. He spoke in the Assembly for eight hours chairman who approached him afar off
was a true Labour man, and a stalwart and a half, to help a stonewall stunt, in this respect was Mr. M- .1. Kirwan,
worker for the cause in the Queensland and on the same occasion I battled now Minister for Works. It used to be
and Federal Parliaments. He entered along for four hours. But the Standing said of “Mick’ that, when he was <1
our State Parliament with me for the Orders long since have been altered, and porter on the Central rai’way station he
first time in 1893 and from the outset those tactics are no longer possible. was the breakfast bell for all the board-
took a special interest in Parliamentary
procedure. He slept with the Standing
Orders under his pillow, and dined with
May’s Parliamentary Practice under his
ing housekeepers on Wickham-terrace, for
his voice was that of Stentor when an
nouncing the destinations of early morn-
ing trains. He was not in it with An-
A LABOUR “ALLIGATOR.”
eye His diligence was rewarded when Once Mr. Reid, in an election cam near, whose voice, if uttered in the
he left the State for the Federal arena, tiaign, challenged the late Mr. James House, frightened all the cab horses on
as, in due course, he became Speaker Stodart for the Logan seat the fight the ran ]j near the Treasury building.. He
of the House of Representatives, and, of course being between Labour and the was a good party man. and an excellent
therefore, reached the goal of bis am- Government candidate. Mr. Reid was campaigner,
bition. understood to have said something in one
8




IN LIGHTER VEIN
Some Pranks in Parliament
A REPORT ON A STRETCHER
“The Wild Man of the North”
(By A.. L. Petrie.)
The dignity of Parliament la sometimes disturbed, sometimes by the
levity of the practical joker, sometimes by the heat of party passions
escaping from control. Mr. Petrie relates an amusing prank in which
he participated.. It was barbed with wit to sting the Labour Govern-
ment of the day . Mr. Petrie also describes with generous appreciation
some of the outstanding personalities among the old school of Labour
men, including David Bowman
Mr. Petrie and Mr. Donald Gunn carrying in a pocket edi-
tion of the report of the Rail way Commission.
Dennis T. Keogh, a very dear friend Speakership, and on two occasions
of mine represented Rosewood in the I could have secured the place* but as
Assembly for many years. He dis- I did not aspire to the position I de-
‘harged his duties with great zeal and dined to be a candidate. My refusal
neglected his own material interest in one instance enraged Mr. Keogh,
to serve the people, so that he was al- because it was his ambition to see me
most a poor man when death over installed in the chair,
took him. 1 made many tours through I spent many pleasant evenings at
Rosewood electorate with Mr. Keogh his home in Ipswich, and on one visit
at election and other times. He was he induced me to direct several stories
one of a good many in my party that Into a phonograph, which instrument
wanted to nominate me for the was a novelty in those days. One which
I related was the maiden speech of a
rough and ready gentleman who had
been returned to represent a Downs
constituency. It had been proposed to
give the aborigines a vote, and the
Downs member made his maiden
speech on this question. It was very
brief; this is how I repeated it into
“Danny’s” phonograph: “Mr.
chairman, 1 don’t think a aboriginal
should ’ave a vote, because ’e ’as no
((intelligence. Fancy a blackfellow,
coming from ’is gunyah, in a state of
uugidity to vote! Why, it would be
woi>e than a comic hopera. ”
A BROBDINGNAGIAN REPORT.
Mr. E. H. Macartney, first became
Leader of the Opposition in 1915, and
displayed great ability as a tactician.
As a parliamentarian he had a strong
sense of duty, and took the responsibil-
ity of his position seriously. Ap-
preciating ithe honoulr of being an
elected representative of the people,
he atten ed to his duties, as a Minister
of the Crown, and, as a private mem-
ber, with exemplary diligence. At all
times he was a gentleman, a good
friend, a charming companion. For
health reasons, I believe, he resigned
the leadership. At a later period,
however, Mr. Macartney was re-elected
Leader of the Opposition, and I re-
member an amusing trick Mr. Donald
Gunn, member for Carnarvon, and my-
self played upon members whilst a
committee of supply was cons dering
the “general establishment” in the
estimates for the railways.
On September 26, 1918, Mr. Macart-
ney complained to the committee that
the annual report of the Railway Com-
missioner was not before it, and he
was interrupted by an incident which
is briefly mentionel by “Hansard” in
brackets thus; “(Mr. Petrie and Mr.
Gunn here caused amusement by carry-
ing into the chamber on a small stret-
cher a copy of the report of the Rail-
way Commissioner surmounted by a
small red flag).” The stretcher bore
a notice that it had been made by
“Day Labour” and that the huge
pile of papers resting on it, was “a
pocket edition ’ ’ of the Royal Railway
9


-'I 1
.
•.. .../$■
i ■ . l < , ;/ ' ,
1 .V 1 .... V
• •’ ~ «i . ■ . ~■? ; . I
: • ’ ".. i ■ ■
• ■ . ■ • .«.
. .
• i
«• ■ ■■■ ■■ ■
. ... t.. ■ ' .... ■ V ■ 'i .
• . .
.... . . • . .. .: : ,
.... ■
i : ■•■■■■
■ i.: ’ ‘ • • •
. ' »h:i.


Commission’s report on the administra-
tion of the railways. The members
of the commission were Messrs. E. A.
Cooper, M. J. Kirwan, and A. Dean,
P.M. The report was of enormous
size, and any outsider who desired a
copy had to pay 24s for it-
A RUBBER SNAKE
Speaking on this report in committee
I previously had said that I hardly
thought it worth the paper it was
printed on, but intimated that I did
not desire to cast any reflection on
the members of ,the commission.
That commission, in my opinion, was
very expensive, and very little resulted
from its labours.
My esteemed friend, Mr. Gunn,
served his constituency most con-
scientiously. We enjoyed many happy
days together in Parliament. He al-
ways carried his papers in a “dilly”
bag, which he hung on the back of
the bench whereon he sat. In this
bag he carried the famous “little red
book, ’ ’ from which he frequently quoted
in a manner that delighted the whole
House. Another thing contained in
the bag was a rubber snake, put there
to scare away the inquisitive. When
Mr. Gunn resigned the producers lost
a great advocate and the people a
good friend.
DAVID BOWMAN.
David Bowman was a man I ad-
mired, because he was consistent and
eminently fair in debate. People of
all shades of political opinion loved
him. The workers adored him- He
spent his life in their service. His
intense devotion to social service
stands as an inspiring example to
young men who would champion the
cause of the masses. Because he
overwrought himself in the people’s
interest he went to an early grave, but
not unwept and unsung, for public
sorrow was widespread when his death
was announced. Before his demise he
held the office of Home Secretary, and
sympathetically administered that de-
partment. On August 22, 1916, Mr.
T. J. Ryan, as Premier, moved to
record with regret in the journals of
the House, IPs colleague’s death, and
to express the House’s heartfelt
sympathy with the bereaved family.
Mr. Ryan said of his departed friend,
that “his whole like was one long re-
cord of effort to remove social in-
equalities and injustices. The records
of this House bear eloquent testimony
lo h.s zeal for humanity.”
Mr. John Payne, member for
Mitchell, is a true Labour politician,
and his heart and soul are wrapt up
with the social reform movement. He
understands the land laws well. No
one in the House possesses a wider
Knowledge of the conditions of life on
the land than he, and as a speaker he
never wastes the time of the country.
He has little time for spectacular
Labour politicians who want to pose
as supermen. “If they are Labour
men,” said Mr. Payne once, “that’s
enoughj there’s plenty of work for
them to do without fooling with the
stage stuff. ’ ’
A TELEPHONE HOAX.
Big * ‘ Bill ’ ’ Hamilton belonged to
the old school of Labour men, and
always took a courageous stand, if his
principles were questioned. As a de-
bater he was keen, as a political
lighter he was hard to beat. Both
sides of the House respected him.
Soon after his elevation to the
Presidency of the Legislative Coun-
cil, he showed several times that he
was not in sympathy with some of his
party’s legislation. On the office of
Lieutenant-Governor falling vacant, I
thought the usual custom of appoint-
ing the President of the Legislative
Council would have been followed, but
my old friend did not get the place.
On the score of faithful service he cer-
tainly deserved it.
He was the author of a joke that
caused great amusement amongst mem-
bers. He placed a note in the private
boxes of many of them telling each to
ring a certain telephone number. Each
was requested to ring the same
number, and the ’phone belonged to a
Chinese in the Valley. After he had
been ’phoned up 40 or more times in an
hour the celestial called down the
curses of heathen deities on the
persistent inquirers, with ever in-
creasing emphasis. 1 got the message,
too, but dropped down to it just in the
nick of time.
John Plumper Hoolan came into trie
tenth Parliament to represent Burke
in 1891. He was an amusing card to
listen to. Shortly after I first was
elected member for Toombul, I heard
him criticising the defence estimates.
Touching upon soldiers, he said he de-
sired to present a number with medals,
and thereupon withdrew from under
his coat half a dozen tin plates. These,
he remarked, might be distributed in
recognition of special service. Hoolan
obtained the nickname of “the wild
man of the North.” He owned a
paper in Georgetown, and had some ex-
perience as a pressman. He was a
fair speaker and good at repartee.
A STORMY EPISODE.
Hoolan, and the late Mr. W
Stephens, first Mayor of South Bris-
bane, once “got into holts” when the
latter was acting as a temporary
Chairman of Committees- The sitting
had been late, and lively, and “the
wild man of the North” would not
brook restraint from the Chair. After
a big rumpus he and several other
Labour members were suspended for a
few hours. Horace Tozer happened to
he Home Secretary at this period, and
hearing that “Billy Stephens and
L was going home to spend the re-
mainder of the night at Stephens’s
beautiful home in South Brisbane —in-
tended to cross the bridge, Tozer
thought we might be interfered with,
as a result of the row in the Assembly.
VVe laughed at the idea. I said to
Tozer, “If our mangled remains are
found on Victoria Bridge, and a
memorial is decreed for us, please
place the order with the firm of monu-
mental mason, Knownds, Petrie, and
Son.”
A bill to provide for a parliamentary
standing committee on public works,
involving an expenditure of over
£20,000, was brought forward by the
Ryan Government on November 2,
1915. The late John Adamson, then
Minister for Railways, piloted the
measure through the Assembly, where
it was strenuously fought by the
Opposition, under the leadership of Mr.
James Tolmie. The basis of the pro-
posed committee, Mr. Adamson stated,
“Will be just the idea of proportional
representation, and the numbers on the
committee will be fixed, so far as they
can, on the numbers on each side of
the House. The number of the
committee will be eight.”
The Opposition contended that the
objects of the bill best could be
attained by the appointment of an
engineer, an architect, and a certified
accountant as a works committee.
This was negatived on a division, and
the bill ultimately was passed, and
transmitted to the Legislative Council
by message in the usual form. There
it was amended in vital places, and as
a deadlock arose between the two
Houses on this legislation, it finally
was dropped-
10




AN AMAZING COMMISSION
Rhapsodies on Public Works
PAGES FROM COMIC HISTORY
Burlesque that Convulsed Parliament
(By A. L. Petrie.)
The story of the famous Royal Commission on Public Works ap-
pointed by the Ryan Government is related by Mr. Petrie in the fol-
lowing article. After their peregrinations the commissioners five
Labour members—produced a bundle of reports, which, says Mr. Petrie,
are among the most extraordinary ever tabled in the House. Poetry,
travel talk, and anecdotes were interspersed with discussirm of rail-
way scheme and prickly pear. The Opposition’s burlesque of the
reports, in which Mr. Petrie largely contributed, fill some ol the most
amusing pages in “ Hansard.”
Notwithstanding the fate of the senses of that Royal Commission or.
Public Works bill, Mr. T. J. Ryan de- Public Works. I argued that I always
cided to appoint a Royal Commission had been against the appointing of
on Public Works, and invited the Oppu Royal Commissions where members of
sition to nominate three of its uum Parliament were put on them. Of the
ber' to sit thereon, intimating, at the reports. I remarked that I was not im-
same time, that the Government would pressed by the one relating to the
appoint five members to act on the new Beaudesert-Kyogle line, and did not
body. The matter received careful con approve of the paper dealing with the
sideration at a meeting of my party, Juandah .to Taroom line. Then the
and a motion unanimously was carried farce began, and can be perused in
declining to select any of our side to “Hansard,” vol. CXXV, page 2259-
sit on the proposed commission for the 1916-17
reason that we held that the body “Indeed,” 1 said, “in looking
should be composed of three experts. through them (the reports)), theyap-
But, in spite of our decision, the Ryan peared to be more like works of travel,
Government appointed five members. with a little fi( . tlo „ , nixed up witn
these being, Messrs. W. N. Gillies mu ch poetry. In justice to the chair-
chairman), W. Bertram, J. Payne, J. man of committees (Mr Ber
Larcombe, and J. T Gilday. These tram) —they knew that he was
gentlemen investigated several proposed described in one part of a
railway schemes, and subsequently pre report ag being fleet of foot ami
sented to Parliament a bunch or re- caught like a bird, and that bird was
ports which are among the most extra not a swallow —it should be said they
ordinary ever tabled in the House. Some knew the hon. gentleman was a sport,
of those reports contained numerous j a]so sa jd that I had referred the raat-
poctical quotations and masses of de- ter to the Parliamentary poet, and he
scriptive matter that added unduly to thought the reports should be recom-
their bulk. tnitted. because a lot of things had
been left out that should have been put
FOLLY TURNED TO FARCE. in.” I next made several suggestions
to the committee, a few of which I now
Donald Gunn and 1 decided to bur- recall from the pages of “Hansard.”
lesque the initial labours of the one- Mr. Gillies who lately appointed him
sided works commission, and an oppor- self to a seat on the Board of Trade
tunity to do so came on December 1, and Arbitration, acted as chairman of
1916, when the House in committee eon- this famous commission. I directed the
tiuued consideration of the estimates committee’s attention to the fact that
of the Chief Secretary’s Department. the report referred to his prowess as an
The vote under discussion was, that oarsman. The report, I observed, re-
£107,567 be granted for “miscellaneous cords how he was rowing the commis
services.” I complained that the vote sion up the centre of the stream, and
was too large, but rose chiefly to refer d’sturbed two lovers, who were spending
to the amount of £lOOO for the ex- their honeymoon, in the shape of two
black swans. This sally caused a vast
outburst of laughter, and before it had
died away, I said the report also men-
tioned how a huge pelican was having
his supper by swallowing fish, and
taking them in spoonfuls.
A CONTEST OF BARDS.
The Parliamentary poet suggested a
little alteration in the lines in which the
incident was referred to, as follows:
How sweetly forgetting, while rowing up
stream.
The chairman d'sturbed the black swans'
love dream.
The Commission rowed shorewards, hungry
with Payne.
I incidentally observed that I did not
know whether that was a reference to
the member for Mitchell or not
And soon they boiled the billycan
While near by swam the pelican.
What a wondrous bird Is this pelican!
His beak can hold more than his bellycan.
I informed the committee at this
stage that I would not state on what
side of the chamber the poet sat, but
now 1 suppose I can admit that I my-
self transposed, without particular at-
tention to metre, the pellets of verse
that were scattered through these curi-
ous reports.
One of them, I continued, in another
place had some lines commencing—
“So peacefully their hours were spent,
That life had scarce a sorrow;
1 said I though the lines written
by this poet must have been dug to
a suggestion made by an hon. mem-
ber the other night, and expressed it
thus—
“So peacefully their hours were spent,
That life had scarce a sorrow.’’
They took their fees on every day.
And hoped for more to-morrow.”
Then the report contained these
lines —
“The swallows gay.
In sunshine play
And frolic all the summer day.”
This was rendered by the Parliamen-
tary poet in these word*—
“The commission gay.
After drawing pay,
Gambled all the summer day.”
11




the report stated, “the carnivoracity of
the crow has caused him to become
more daring, and he frequently drives
his strong, conical beak into ihe back
of an innocent, unsuspecting young
AN ANTHOLOGY CALLED FOR.
be devoted to the returned wounded
soldiers’ fund.”
I then remarked that there were
many other suggestions made by the
“VERY PATHETIC.”
.. , . . . 'M Ctll 11111UVC111-. UIIOUOUCHUIg
Parhamentaiy poet, and that did not ... lamb, and picks out a piece of flesh,
desire unnecessarily to take up the Mr. Donald Gunn, continuing the while his viotini drops to the ground
time of the committee Mr. J. C. discussion, said he had been one of paralysed.”
Peterson, member for Normanby, ex- those who consistently had opposed
claimed, “Give us some more.” Mr. the appointment of a Public Works “That,” mused Mr. Gunn, is very
J. A. Fihelly advised m to prepare Commission He stated that he had pathetic. After that no doubt the
an anthology. I replied that two of found the reports of the commission House will have no difficulty in declar-
the reports might be published In book as dry as dust, until he got to where mg the crow a marsupial. Then, again,
form, and that some oi the verses the secretary gave a resume of the I have often wondered where the trades
might be set to well-known tunes. For journeys. A lot o 4 information show- unions got their idea of peaceful picket-
instance. I said, on page 80 of the re- ing how the names of places and ani- ing, and after reading this report, 1 find
port on the Juandah-Taroora railway mals were derived was given, and they there i s ’nothing new under the sun.’
scheme, I found this description of were reminded that the hon. member The different unions copy bird life.”
the prickly pear farmer—
“He took a farm; for 30 years
He laboured like a Turk;
Vntil, alas, quite stony broke
He died from overwork.
for Albert (Mr. J. G. Appel) pro- Finally, Mr. Gunn repeated that a
nounced the word “Beaudesert” in the F ood deal had been reported on concern-
House, omitting the sound of the in £ P ri <*kly pear. He drew attention to
“t.” “Beaudeser,’* as though it were of a description given in one of the ap-
French origin. It was. one of the re pendices, which said that
They laid him gently i„ the earth. norts stated an historical fact that Beau “Mr. Gilday has had a long-but-
With faces sad and grim; desert wa s taken up in 1840 by Edwin , . v , , , . 6 ,
And now he’s no more on the land. Hawkins, who was at that time in the 16 8t flw
Because the land son him. employ of the Suttors, at Bathurst. New Bpin , es . °” the P ear affe f tbe
Perhaps, 1 added, these lines might Wales He brought over a large in tlieir fingers and
adapted from “Poor Old the s taHon afTer in consequence.”
Beaudesert. on the Trent. Staffordshire. vVhen the substance of the reports
“For poor Old .leff has gone to rest, mgland. led us to tripe. I thought it high time
You’ll never see him more. _ ... to leave the matter there tn m
He AU S h d H to 77 H p . rk ; k,y ,F ear coat ’ t . Mr - G “" n ’ P urs ™ n g tbe bal ! ter fur ’ able Mr. Gunn'to round off his speech
All buttoned down before. ther, said from a Royal Commission on neatly j handed him a sli of P
1 concluded by stating, “1 am quite sTo^prSl/pear° * KamedThe beari “« " . Mr ‘ thefe-
sure that, if the reports are dedicated crow as the greatest medium for scat- this 11 coupledexpressi™™ Gildawf
to the Chief Secretary and published tering the pear, and a report described oninion Fn terse— g M Gllday 8
in book form, the Trades Hall will this bird as the crudest member of the P
take thousands of copies, besides other feathered tribe, that had lately de- “Prickly near ripe
people outside,, and the proceeds can veloped a fondness for flesh. “Indeed,” Affects'the tripe”
12




FUTURE OF PARLIAMENT
A Veteran Looks Ahead
ADVICE TO THOSE WHO FOLLOW
Two-Chamber System Must be Restored
(By A. L. Petrie.)
In this, the concluding instalment of his reminiscences, Mr. A. L,
Petrie takes farewell of Parliament, with an eloquent tribute to his
leader, Mr. A. E. Moore, good wishes to his fellow members on both
sides of the House, an acknowledgment of the helpful services of Par-
liamentary officers, and an expression of gratitude to his faithful con-
stituents. Looking into the future, he foresees stormy times ahead for
those who undertake the task of government, and he appeals to mem-
bers of all parties to stand shoulder to shoulder in defence of the insti-
tution of Parliament and its noble traditions. He also predicts a re-
turn to the two-Cham'ber system. The Legislative Assembly to-day, he
pungently remarks, is discharging ineffectually dual duties. It passes
legislation in one session and in the following session it spends its time
revising and amending the botched work of the preceding year.
Thomas Glassey made his first ap- member for Clermont, and it was not
pearance in the Assembly in 1888, and long before we learned that he could
of him it may be said he was the pillar talk incessantly; nor did he make
of cloud by day and of fire by night himself a nuisance by blowing the bel-
that led the Queensland Labour party lows of platitude. His sentences were
into the Promised Land- Having packed with good matter, and he could
served for a period in the State House, gpeak for hours without referring to
he became a Senator in the Federal book or records. The presiding genius
Parliament. He played an important in the Assembly never could catch him
part in shaping the policy of the Aus- on a point of order. Lesina had a
tralian Labour party, although in the tantalising habit of sailing right up to
fullness of time, like many other zeal- the wind, and jibing just in the nick
ous reformers, he refused political of time to avoid a hint from the chair
canonisation at the hands of the ad- as to the right course. He never was
ventists of latter day extremism. He caught on a point of order. Some-
was a man who put his trust in abid- times he used to play with members
ing principles, and my memory of him, of his own side by feeding them with
as a member of the Assembly, is that interjections-
of a fearless advocate and a powerful,
critic. Mr. Glassey ever worked to . „
expose the unjust side of the social ■A MOORE S ABILITY,
system, and at the same time prescribed j now come to the leader of my party
practical remedies for impioving tle —Mr. j] Moore. I have been asso-
lot of the masses. In that sense ic dated with many leaders in the As-
was a true Labour man. tor many gem bly, and I unhesitatingly say of him
years he has been out of Parliament, that he is. of them alb the most con
but he has continued to take an active sidera + e, and equals most of them in
interest in State and Federal affairs. ability and adroitness as a party leader.
I consider "V incent Bernard Joseph Th e f orce 0 f his personality is mar-
Lesina one of tue most brainy men vellous. I have seen men of strong
who ever sat in the Parliament of character give way to his view, because
Queensland. Of an emotional tempera- ultimately they realised that he advised
ment and endowed with a quick, pierc- the true course with gene-ous candour,
ing spirit, he quickly could disturb the Of late years there seems to have grown
poise of any Government. Gifted with up an idea among some politicians in
a lively imagination and a dominion Australia that ruthless methods in poli-
over words, Lesina naturally was tics count with the crowd, but from my
formed to become a force in politics. long experience as a member of Parlia
He entered the Assembly, in 1899, as ment, I honestly can say that never were
public men deluded by a greater fallacy
than that which leads them to bring the
tactics of Bismarck into the field of
’-olitics. Always the first to resent such
methods are the voters, who like demo-
cratic ways and fair play. If the epi-
taph of every Government was truly
written, somewhere in its posthumous
record we would note that ruthless acts
first set up the cause of the demise of
each. It is said we-live and learn, but
many politicians seem to profit little by
experience-
However, to return to my leader, I
think I can say, without flattery, that
he understands public questions
thoroughly. Few can excel him in making
a balanced speech on any subject of
prime importance, prejudice never dis-
turbs his judgment. An extravagant de-
sire to please any party never has in-
fluenced his opinion on any vital legis-
lation before the House. He says what
he thinks, and says it well. Mr. Moore
naturally thinks in close sequence, and
this faculty qualifies him for a pre-
eminent place in Parliament. For years
the Opposition has been split into sec-
tions, and sub sections, but when Mr.
Moore became leader of the fractions,
did he not succet d in consolidating his
forces? Each section entered his fold
of its own free will; no hefty dragons
with glittering blades influenced this
action.
I sincerely trust that when Mr. Moore
goes to the country about the middle of
the current year he will be returned
to power with a working majority, be-
cause I believe it is time we had a change
of Government. There is no doubt that
if he became Premier he would have
much to do in reorganising the adminis-
trative system of Queensland; I feel sure
he is the man that can do it effectively,
not only in the interests of his party,
but also, in the interests of the com-
munity at large.
A STORMY AGE AHEAD.
I must now make tracks from the
field of politics, wherein I have tarried
for more than 30 years. Yet before I
leave, let me mention the names of a
few worthy gentlemen who have
13




worked well for the people in Parlia-
ment. Mr. W. J. Vowles, member for
Dalby, I feel sure, is destined some
time to become a leading member of a
future Government. He has great
natural ability as a politician, and he
is the son of one of the oldest pioneer
families in Australia. While he led
the Opposition he worked with enthusi-
asm, sacrified his personal interests,
and never considered his own comfort
if the welfare of his party was at
stake. He came into the House in the
course of the 18th Parliament, and
among his early associates were my old
friend, “Dick” Trout, and “Tom”
Welsby, a successful business man, and
a true sport. Other genuine workers on
the benches of the Opposition during
the last 10 years have been Godfrey
Morgan, a doughty advocate of the
cause of the men on the land; Mr. B.
H. Corser, who also has striven year
after year to better rural conditions,
and as a Whip has served his party
with unflagging zeal; and Mr. T. R.
Roberts and Mr. J. S. Kerr, who have
attended assiduously to their duties,
the former gentleman over a long
period, always helping to promote in-
dustrial progress and the welfare of
friendly societies.
In saying farewell to Parliament, I
wish all those sitting on both sides a
long life, if not in the House, certainly
in the world. I trust they will prosper
in the future, and whatever their views
may be, that they will stand shoulder
to shoulder to defend the institution of
Parliament and jts noble traditions. The
coming age promises to be sto’niy for
those who undertake the patriotic task
of government, but I honestly believe
that no situation can arise that will re-
fuse to yield to a wise application of
principles already enshrined in the con-
stitutional history of our race. To those
who would preserve the essence of the
old order- I say, do not unduly muzzle
the youthful advocates of a new; for the
clash of new and old ideas eventually
substantiates government, and is the
natural process that washes away the
useless matter, and deposits the gold of
common sense and experience in our
governmental system.
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING.
Of the 72 members who sat in Parlia-
ment with me in 1893, only 18 now
remain. The survivors, besides myself,
are Mr. Justice Powers, Senator M.
Reid, Messrs. G. Agnew, W. D. Arm-
strong, W. H. Corfield, J. M. Cross, H.
Daniels, J. G. Drake- Michael Duffy,
Andrew Fisher. Thomas Glassey, H. F.
Hardacre, G. Jackson, George Kerr, J.
J. Kingsbury, William Thorn, and Henry
Turley. In 1893 there were 37 mem-
bers in the Legislative Council, and
to-day but five of them are alive,
these being my old friend, Mr. James
Covvlishaw. now in his 92nd year- Dr.
C. F. Marks, Dr. W. F. Taylor, Colonel
A. J. Thynne, and Mr. H. C. Wood.
Mr. John L. Woolcock, 8.A., Par-
liamentary draftsman, was associated
with me fo ; a long period I always
found him uniformly polite, and most
helpful in the delicate work of draft-
ing amendments to bills in commit-
tee. He is a man of brilliant attain-
ments, has a marvellous command of
the logical side of language, and his
legal knowledge is extensive. To hear
him speaking in court is an education,
and many newspaper men have told
me it is a pleasure to report him. Of
the various figures of speech he loves
irony, with which he can play in a
most delightful and humorous way
As a story-teller he is inimitable- and
all the yarns 1 have heard him recount
appeal directly to the intellect. Liter-
ature. 1 think, is his hobby.
The late Mr. J. Gilligan had charge
of the “Hansard” staff for many years,
and carried out his duties with courtesy
and ability. The present leader of the
staff, Mr. J. Brennan, is an excellent of-
ficer, and under his capable direction
the proceedings of Parliament have been
reported with an accruacy that to me is,
indeed, astonishing, especiallv as I knew
the great acoustic defects of the cham-
ber. Much trouble also must necessarily
be experienced in consequence of the
peculiarities of speech of different mem-
bers, yet, allowing for all these draw-
backs I honestly can sav few errors oc-
curred in the reports in my time; the
few that did creep in were due to the
speakers rather than to incorrect nota-
tion. I feel grateful to Mr. Brennan
and his efficient staff for the surprisingly
accurate manner in which all my speeches
have been reported in “Hansard.”
PATCHING HASTY LEGISLATION.
Here, perhaps, I should make brief re-
ference to the gallery staffs of the daily
newspapers. I have seen many fine Par-
liamentary reporters come and go in the
course of my long political career, and I
always received fair treatment at their
hands. I think I ought also to remark
that since the abolition of the Legisla-
tive Council the work of reporting Par-
liament for the Press has become more
onerous and taxing. The tendency has
been, in consequence of the removal of
this salutary check on hasty legislation,
to speed up the business and rush bills
pell-mell through the House. This re-
quires reporters to be continuously alert
and unduly versatile. I must add that,
in a sense, the Press, especially the edi-
torial section of it, has been obliged,
very often to do the duty of the Upper
House, by revising and criticising half-
baked enactments. Indeed, the Assembly
to-day is discharging ineffectually dual
duties; it sits one session, passes “legis-
lation,” and spends its time in the fol-
lowing session revising and amending the
blotched work of the preceding year. I
am satisfied that the time will come when
the people of Queensland will see the bi
cameral system again in operation.
I believe the Queensland Parliamen-
tary library is probably the finest of its
kind in Australia. My old friend. Mr.
John Murray, the librarian, is highly
qualified for the position he holds, and
is a man of parts, as they say inf the
literary world. He has a fine memory,
and is ever ready to render speedy as-
sistance in hunting down facts and quo-
tations to assist members. Tempera-
mentally, he is calm, and being a man
of a few words, he really is a wonderful
exception, in a building which has been
flippantly described as “the national
talking shop.” I also desire to record
ray appreciation of the help I have re-
ceived from the young gentlemen who
assist Mr. Murray in the library.
MY FAITHFUL CONSTITUENTS.
The principal Parliamentary messen-
ger. Mr. Charles Heath, served in the
House previous to my becoming a mem-
ber of it. I have found him conscien-
tious, courteous, and a most diplomatic
help when I was Whip. His assistants
have supported him with tact and zeal,
and to me they were respectful and
obliging. The officer who presides at
the main entrance to the House, Mr.
Darcy Brown, is a keen official with a
love for system, and on many occasions
he performed for me services of which
I shall be long mindful. I desire also
to express my appreciation of the work
of Mr. J. Chalk, the House electrician,
of Miss K. Byrnes, who so carefully
supervises the telephone exchange; and
of Miss F. Jefferies, post mistress of the
House.
I cannot conclude ray political re
miniscenc.es without setting forth my
gratitude to the electors of Toombul,
both past and present, for reposing con-
fidence in me through so many years. At
two elections I was returned unopposed,
and in many campaigns they gave me
big majorities. Some years ago the fran-
chise was extended to the women of
Queensland, and this new access of vot-
ing strength helped materially to main-
tain my majorities at the polls. The
Toombul branch of the Queensland
Women’s Electoral League, which com-
prises about 1300 members, solidly sup-
ported me from time to time. I feel
honoured by the confidence they have
in me as member for the district. The
Q.W.E.L. throughout the State has
exerted a good influence in public life,
and has been a tower of strength to my
side in politics. Thirty-three years ago,
my first thoughts were of my constitu-
ents; during the whole of that long
space of time I never have forgotten
them; and my last thoughts will be of
them when I bid adieu to Parliament.
14




MORE PERSONALIA
Ministers and Members
AN OFFER OF PROMOTION
Earnest and Fun* of Politics
(By A. L. Petrie.)
Mr. Petrie reveals his art as a raconteur in the following article.
He touches on the foibles and weaknesses of some well-known poli-
ticians with a wit that will leave no rancour. He also relates an offer
of promotion at the price of transferring his party allegiance.
1 happened to be one of the famous THE LITTLE PROTESTANT
royal commission on public works ol TAILOR.
which Mr. Annear was chairman. It , ... ,
began its labours about the time the Anyhow 1 opened with what the
first outbreak of bubonic plague oc * ald f l°“ a a °
curred in Queensland, and the personnel | nidl ullage. He said- Beloved
included Messrs. James Cowlishaw, T brethren, 1 am going to divide my
Plunkett, T. Bridges, myself, and others. sermon into three parts. First. lam
However, on going North to continue Kpmg to tell ye what 1 know all
our investigations we could not get Mr. about and of which ye know nothing;
Cowlishaw to come with us, because secondly am going to tell ye what
of the recent experience he had gone know about, but about which I
through in quarantine at Rockhamp- know nothing. In the third and last
ton with the late Mr. F. T. Brentnall P lace > m y, dear brethren, I am going
He showed much shrewdness in making Y e something about whicn
this decision, for the other members neither ye nor 1 know. In the fiist
ot the commission who made the trip place, when 1 was mounting my little
were examined no fewer than 17 times brown hack in the stile this morning,)
in the course of the itinerary. Eventu- she suddenly moved off and tore my
ally we wended our way back as far trousers. I know all about that, but
as Maryborough. ye do not. In the second place, it
is ye that will give me a new pair.
There we were well entertained by y e know all about that while I know
Mr. John Norman, then Mayor of Mary- nothing ol it And in the third place
borough. Subsequently he became a what neither ye nor I know, is what
member ol the Legislative Assemblv. the little Protestant tailor across the
He was a Labour man, a good fellow, road j g going to charge for making
and one who could appreciate a joke. the trousers.” Immediately Mr Nor-
At the time 1 have in mind Messrs. nian w ho. besides being Mayor, was,
Annear and J. Bartholomew represented a | go “fb e ” tailor of Maryborough-
Maryborough, and whilst the commis- jumped up and shouted, “I am the
sion stayed in Maryborough Annear and little Protestant tailor” and he called
Bartholomew decided to hold a public himself so afterwards,
meeting. It came off successfully, and ’ -
later at the invitation of Mr. Norman, Allied with Annear comes the
we adjourned to the Queen’s Hotel, kept memory of Isidor Lissner who- in 1883,
in those days by Mrs. Balls. There introduced himself to the Assembly in
the health of the commission was pro- his maiden speech, as a very poor
posed, coupled with my name. After speaker but a very good “list-ner.”
several drinks had been served, I was He was a jovial, humorous little
asked to tell a story. So I narrated fellow, and then represented Kennedy
the tale of “the little priest,” and He always went one better than a
found that its point pricked deeper famous quotation for, not only in the
than 1 had anticipated; but. of course. dining-room did he set the table in
this is a risk storytellers always run a roar- but at formal sittings he often
if they venture to talk in strange set the House in a roar. He had an
environments, eye for big things in politics, and
with me and other members, advo-
cated M'Hwraith’s epic scheme for, the
building of a transcontinental railway
In 1893 he held the portfolio of Min-
ister for Mines in M'llwraith’s Min-
istry. He was the father of Mr. E. H.
(“Tibby”) Lissner, of the Albert Hotel,
Brisbane.
BEHIND THE “SCENES.”
The late Mr. A. H. Barlow joined
the Assembly in June, 1888, and finished
a successful political career as a member
of the Legislative Council, where he was
the representative of the Government at
the time of his death in March, 1915
Mr. Barlow was a member of eight Gov-
ernments, and proved himself an able
Minister. Being formerly a banker, he
had a sound knowledge of finance. He
possessed a shrewd, piercing wit, and was
regarded as a very clever underground
engineer. Once he sent for me, and on
going to his office in the Treasury Build-
ing, he suggested that I should leave
the Philp party and support the Kidston
Government, of which Mr. Barlow then
was a member. “If you come over, And
rew,” said Mr. Barlow, “we will make
it worth while far you. You never got
anything out of Philp.” Of course, he
knew I had a safe seat, and wanted to
rely on it in the future. After a long
argument I replied, “Mr, Barlow, I
have represented the electorate of Toom
bul for 17 years, and up to the present
I have been consistent as far as my
Parliamentary career has been concerned,
and I cannot agree with your proposal.”
“Very well,” said he, “you are a d
fool.”
A MASTER MIND.
He was a good all round man in Par
liament, and could fill any public posi-
tion with ability and credit. Though he
never led in any of the administrations
with which he was associated, he was
the intellectual force behind the scenes,
and directed the plans and policies of
more than one Government. As Minister
for Public Instruction, he attended a
social function at the Enoggera State
15




school. I also had been invited there and try when it took the fatal step of refus-
by request told a yarn that 1 narrated ing the automatic increases to the Public
dresser, and on Mr. Barnes turning up
with the fee, the barber exclaimed, “Oh,
many times since, although the point servants, the aggregate amount of which you are old Barnes himself; but I still
thereof must disturb the self-sufficiency meant but an extra expenditure of about say your Saturday half-holiday ruined
of the modern politician, who made the £lO,OOO a year. Mr. Barnes, in his pub- our business.”
busmess resembie the old game of cards lie and private life, always has been a Mr G . p. Barnes, member for War-
called “Grab.’ man of high ideals, and he has made . brother > Mr w R B arnes.
. many sacrifices in the interests „ • ~, , , „
„ of the State. In his public service he De is upright and sincere, and well re*
MAKING OF A POLITICIAN. has b een g rea t|y assisted by his es- spccted in public life. He usually took
r . , . ■ ar ifl reasonable views of big public ques-
The story I recounted was about an tions, and fairly may be described as
old German and his son. Une day while an open - m i n ded politician of the good
the son chanced to be away from home. MR. BARNES AND THE BARBER. old school,
the old man put three objects on the
lad’s dressing table —a sovereign, a Mr. Barnes also worked disinterestedly
bottle of whisky, and a Bible. The father as a local government man, serving for THE CHIEF JUSTICE,
thought, by these means, that he could many years as a member of the Coot-
ascertain his boy’s bent for a calling in paroo Shire Council. He took his ele The present Chief Justice of Queens-
life. “Now,” murmured the old man, vation to the episcopal dignity in good land manifested great ability in the
“if he takes de money he vill be a part, and his flock is the whole popula- course of his Parliamentary career. I
business man; if he touches de visky tion of Queensland, for in all parts of remember him as a young fellow coming
he vill be a drunkard; and if he takes the State he is hailed as “Bishop” into Parliament for the first time, about
de Bible den he vill be a preacher.” When Barn e s. As a youth the “bishop” was 1902. I soon regarded him as a com-
the boy returned home and went into one the best cricketers in Queens- lug man. In September of the follow-
his room, the old man squinted from be- i and . ing year Mr. James William Blair be-
hind a curtain to watch the result of Treasurer he established the Sat- came Attorney General in the Morgan
the test. Immediately, the lad seized the i , e f’ h established the feat Ministry held that office in Kidston’s
monev drank thp whiakv and took m. urday half-holiday for hairdressers, a w-imairy, neiu mat omce in iviaston s
, an <7»r tfte ” a , .j reform that did not oass without irreat two Governments, and officiated as
the Bible. “Mine gracious,” cried the reform that did not pass without great Min - ster f or Public Xnstruction in Mr
old father astonished, “de bov vill be opposition. Several years afterwards ror ruone instruction, in mr,
he grab l still Mr. Barnes visited Ayr, in North Denham’s administration,
think that the tale is a good definition Queensland, and while there, stepped At one period, when in office as Pro-
of the politicians of to-day. into the local barber’s shop for tonsorial mier, Mr. Denham, contemplated leav-
Mr W H Barnes vet a familiar flir- attention. As he leaned back in the ing politics, and 1 then, as Whip of the
are in the Assembly, held office in the chair he asked the barber, “How is busi- party, looked forward to Mr. Blair’s
second Philp Ministry, was included in uessf and the man replied, “No good assuming the lead, and, in my opinion,
the Kidston Ministry that followed, and a " s 'nce that old fellow Barnes shut it is to be regretted this did not come
acted as Treasurer and Minister for us U P. on Saturday afternoon.” This to pass. I was very pleased to see Mr.
Works in Mr* Denham’s Government. I broadsider silenced the member for Wyn Blair elevated to the high and honour-
say advisedly that Mr, Barnes was one uuni, and in paying the barber he handed able office of Chief Justice, and I am
of the best Treasurers Queensland ever him a pound note, but the man had not sure he will maintain the dignity of the
had. but. I believe, at times, he was a sufficient change. “Oh, you can call position with credit to himself, and
little too cautious. He was in the Mims- back later and pay me,” said the hair- with satisfaction to the country at large.
18


'
-
t
>
