

REMINSCENCES
OF THE
LIFE OF A BUSHMAN;
r,:,:u;;.; u «so V) : it;auii
BY
THOMAS WOOLLEY,
ASDFA
ASDFADF


GLORIOUS NEWS FOR EMIGRANTS TO PORT PHILIP!
J )s; W>'; -J 'lhv f *- '* -1* 'f,■
i i x'V'AjV* fsocwztp fr JJdf W'Ui ;)*J :> *Jm«S *’\v, j s >j j
■ f , r-r-l by ;r v* iV'x
V* t>'sb- „U'* vf IV* I'xijy ',-
i^T f '
r-i'b hly f v *>»' l> a* *vn


REMINISCENCES
OF THE
LIFE OF A BUSHMAN;
OS, HOW TO MAE® .
HAPPINESS, ABUNDANCE, AND PROFIT,
THE HSiSULTS OF
EMIGRATING TO AUSTRALIA.
BY
THOMAS WOOLLEY,
(AS>ST«At.XAK*OfyiCB > 8, CWX.X.’CK-SXKSST, SEKCHCfcCH-STUJs.K'.e),
Who has “trm the gauntlet" through thick anil thin, m& experienced every
state and stags of fortune in several of the Colonic*
of that vast Continent.
“ iide toi, et }.e Cicl fahka."
LONDON;
Wm. s. orb. and co. ? amen corner,
ASM x 0.353 OF
TRELAWNEX SAUNPEEB. f?, CXIMiIHG GROSS
] 85 (A


J.OKDOS? 5
*•»*???£» snt stewasx a»b msm&ie,
OLS BM&ET,


CONTEN TS
Page
Address to the Header ......... 1
My own Adventores - . ....... 3
Australia as it is . . , * . . . . , >5
New South Wales ......... 6
Port Philip or Victoria ......... 7
Emigration to America contrasted with that to Australia , , IS
'Natural products of the properties of the soil 16—1?
The City of Melbourne < •. . . . . . . 18
Bates of Wages—Prices of Provisions . . - . . > 18
life in the Bush . . . < . . . . . 20
The men who should Emigrate . . . . So
How to invest your capital . . . . . . . 2S
Sheep-farming . . - - . - . .60
Cattle-farming S 3
The working-man . 85
The large capitalist . 8G
How to go on board; &e, &e. . . . . . , - 37
What your outfit should l>e - . . . * * 39
The wind-up , . ... . > . . - . 40


REMINISCENCES
OF THE
LIFE OF A BUSHMAN,
&c. &c.
TO MY READERS.
I beg most sincerely and -unaffectedly to assure all who may
take up this little work to peruse, either merely for pastime
or to acquire information (and most particularly the latter),
that I have undertaken the task (a very laborious and onerous
one to me) of compiling and publishing, In a comprehensive
and classified forth, the pith and marrow of the
tioa of facts, statistics, data, and general information, in my
possession, from no other motive whatever than the desire that
those inhabitants of Groat Britain who intend making any
part of the vast continent of Australia their future home, may
not go wandering forth on the other side of the globe, without
carrying -with them that information as to their mode of pro-
ceeding on arrival, which can never bo afforded them, by any
hut those who have gone before them,
I am one of those j and most unfeiguedly can 1 vouch for
the truth of the old couplet-
<4 Experience theoretically 'taught-'
Cringes before experience botigM, tr
I have been told by many to whom 1 have often casually
mentioned some of my adventures in the “-Bush,” on the
mountain, amongst the Aborigines, and as I wended my weary
way over many a “ hill, dale, and rock,"' that there were not
a few men of talent, genius, and character amongst the
literati, who, could they but grasp a fractional part of all I
could communicate on this subject* would, in a very brief
A


space, send it forth in the graceful and fashionable form of a
three"volume Bond-street novel, or on the more popular and
faying plan of a monthly, highly-illustrated serial.
But this is not my object —No--~I seek not the florid or
Bowing eloquence, the gliding sentences and well-rounded
periods, that pass so trippingly from the tongue in this class
of books, to recommend my matter-of-fact narrative'— *if I may
so call it—- to the attention of the Emigrating portion of the
population of these islands* Quite content am Ito say*—*
« I will a round unvarnished tale delivers”
and abide the result.
I can aver, with a fair face, a truth-telling tongue, a clear
conscience, and an honest heart~~~l IvNOAV Australia!
How many engaged in commercial, pursuits in England
similar to uuoe, can say the same ? How many are there
who can exclaim, a Oh, I have lived la Australia many years;
I have experienced all the vicissitudes of fortune in that coun-
try : I have— —* w Bat this is not the way to do it, so here goes
to begin *
In ' order to do this methodically, and in a business-like
mode, so that my readers, as .they go oh, may be able to
understand cfoairly what k to be expected fey an emigrant on
his arrival, not only at the port he has embarked for, hut also
at his destination, I will commence with what I may truly
mid modestly call
MY OWN ADVENTURES.
*s%& Times •newspaper, in, a leading 'article a lew.-days since,
commenced by saying that all good stories, hug ago, always
began with u Once upon a time f* bat as mine is one of
modern date (mine!, 1 assume, of coarse, that mine is a i! - pood
storp ” too), I -will begin m a modern fashion, and
is the time.
I -went oai to Australia a mere lad. I went, in fact, to
* ( Be&k my fortune,” One of tire consequences of that search
was a residence of some years in the district of Fort Philip ;
■and though I can now calmly and smilingly look back upon
the hardships I endured, the, dangers 1 encountered, baffled,
and escaped; ike w hairbreadth "scapes ” I have bad by
« Flood and MdT


gladly,<—ay, right gladly,—•■would I again return to that
most generous sod, and salubrious climate, and there, though a
Britos, once more and for ever « pitch my tent," and I hope to
do so yet,
Austratu.a, maybe said to be divided into two great parts;
namely, the settled and unsettled—over both of these, many
hundred miles have I travelled. Perhaps few have heard of
the chances and changes of fortune to be met with na what is
knows as the overlaud journey from Bytlaey to Melbourne,
though, many may be familiar with a mere geographical de-
scription of that route. Well, that also have I dared and accom-
plished. Is fact, I may go on at onco by stating that 1 was
one of the early settlers at Pori Philip ;* that I had a west-
ward station at the Grampians, 200 miles from Melbourne;
and that there is no conceivable phase of tAg danger, and pri-
vation to be met with in ArsTt-un/A that I have not had a
■very ample share oh
Tire modes of conveyance wn had for the transit of heavy
baggage,- Ac., were called 44 drays/' drawn by bullock* ; and
as night came on, many a time have 1 had the roof of a dray,
as well as that of a rude tent, for my covering (the blue star-
studded vault of heaven oftencr than either), 'while my saddle,
I iken considered, made an excellent pillow!
During those long marches, over a roadless expanse of
wild uncultivated country, unmarked by any other guide
save a cattle track, our node of life was the most rude' and
simple; and not seldom have I experienced all the horrors
of parching thirst, as well as the loss agonising, though not
less gnawing, spasms of extreme hunger. And though we
often encountered, or rather mot with, large bodies of the
Aborigines, I must say I never experienced any anuoyaueo
from them.
Now, I have said that in my practical experience of emi-
grant life in Australia, I have suffered toil, danger, and priva-
tion ;■ I think the above brief narrative a fair illustration of
that ordeal.
Here is » specimen of my -first experience of what would
naturally be expected to follow the acquirement of a largo
stock of all that is said kf fleet on the
tide m the alfrirs of men;
Which, takes at the need, karri o>> to fortune; **
A 2 •


that is to say, peace, ease, and affluence, or
iS Otiam cam digaitateY
.After I. had become what may he called “ a great man”—
that is to say, while I had not. only Emandpees but free emi-
grants in my employ, to whom I paid high wages, in addition
to rations and cottages —many a time have I been reduced, to
the degrading and galling necessity of soliciting my bullock-
driver or my stock-keeper, with a respectful touch of my band
to my hat, to proceed upon their journey, or to look after my
stock I
But being, as I have said, a practical emigrant, I always
reconciled myself to .my lot by exclaiming inwardly that
u Uecessiias son habe-t leges)
though I must confess that upon some of those occasions the
oboler of my wrath was roused to such a pitch, that I was half
inclined to exceed the exploits of “ Our troops in FlandeiY"
who, we are assured by Uncle Toby, -* 4 swore terribly” during
that period.
I shall, as I go along, enter more into the detail of “ my
own. adventures” than I have yet done, as much, for the in-
formation, as exciting the interest or amusement, of my readers ;
but, in accordance with the plan I have laid down for the con-
struction of my book, I will now' proceed to give an outline of
the extent, the estimated area, the natural and artificial, pro-
ducts, the population, and the names and number of seaport
arid inland to wns of
AUSTRALIA.
And when I come to deal with this, what I consider to be
(to the emigrant at least) not only the most interesting hot the
most startling part of the subject I pause in utter wonderment
at the fact that the continent of Australia, though situate ms.
“ t'other side the globe/’ should, in the nineteenth century,
possess a population scarcely equal, to half that of Yorkshire |
The continent of Australia !•—remarkable for its vast forests, its
immeasurable tracts of prairie land, teeming with the richest
verdure, and redolent of nature’s choicest blessings ; its herds ;
of sheep, and cattle, and horses, known only as innumerable d
Its slowly, gently-changing, but never severe climate —as


climate which, ■would astonish a Londoner of twelve months’
experience.
How a spot upon the great globe such as this, teeming with
so many great advantages, should, so long since its discovery,
be so tardily sought after by man, is indeed a matter of sur-
prise—a surprise the greater and more astounding when we
bear in raiad the fact, that while the continent of Europe (not
larger than Australia) contains a population of 227,000,000,
nearly three-fourths of that self-same continent consists of the
empire of Russia, upon the nature of whose climate it is not
necessary to say a word here.
Now, hearing those important tacts in mind, Just lot us
take a glance at the geographical position of Australia, and
of her M settled w and 44 unsettled ” districts, as they are
designated.
It would be an idle and bootless waste, not only of rny
own time but of that of ray readers, to be too minute
upon this point, because they have only to look into any
school geography or gazetteer for such information. Yet
I think I can clothe with interest for the Emigrant a few
simple facts in reference to those places, known to them' only
on paper, as w Port Philip:,” “ Port Adelaide/' “ Sydney,”
&c> Ac.
AUSTRALIA, as I have said, is a vast continent of the earth
upon which nature has bestowed, with a more bounteous and
lavish baud than on any other part of the world, all those of
her choicest blessings available to man’s industry and the ac-
cumulation of wealth. Although Europe must ho admitted to
he the most civilized and prosperous division of the globe,
because the longest known, and most densely populated, yet
take a glance at the map, and observe how very small a portion
of her, after yon deduct the savage wilds and trackless woods
and deserts of Russia, has been, or can. be, rendered profitable
and useful to man, as compared with the hundreds of thou-
sands of miles of the'.Australian continent now lying waste
and idle, though inviting the visits of mankind- of every
description with a Joyous smile of promise and plenty. Illi-
mitable tracts of gorgeous rich verdure, pasture-lauds stretch-
ing away in vast and grand undulations, compared to which
our lands of Europe are as but so many little gardens, over
which now roam, in undisturbed, lonely, lordly possession,


herds of noble cattle and sheep, the property of the present
settlers, of whom they may be purchased most advantageously j
down upon those plains pours a constant, glorious flood of
genial and, I had almost said, ■ unvarying sunshinebut at
fee,si without ever knowing the visitation of such winters as
we here constantly experience in the northern districts of
England, Scotland, and Ireland,
Now, those are the tracts of land known by the designation
of the Bosun 5 '
But then the intending Emigrant very naturally asks this
first and most important question, — u bow are those broad,
lands to be reached ? what are the facilities and modes of
transit to and from them, and the principal towns where the
produce of our toil, time, and expenditure may meet a ready,
profitable market ? ”
.As this really is the very vital, and starting question which,
must be answered to the Emigrant, once he lands at any of the
ports of Australia, I propose to deal with it in liming and to
enter into it, not only with that degree of interest and feeling
which should guide my every act were my own nearest and'
dearest connections here the intending Emigrants, but I will,
furthermore, give the fullest details, and in the plainest, and
most unrnistake&ble language I am master oh
It has been said that not more than about one-fourth of the
whole of the Australian continent, as far as can be ascertained,
is capable of being converted Into agricultural or pasture land;
that is to say, about one million, square miles, English statute
measure ; but even upon, the broad siuih.ee of this immense
area, there is not sow anything like half a million, of inhabi-
tants | and of this infinite item of the whole human family,,
a great proportion is concentrated in the towns ; so that it
will require no very vivid stretch of imagination to calculate:
how few and scattered are those who now roam abroad col-
lecting the wealth everywhere surrounding them.
That colony of Australia whose name has been longest;
known and most familiar to our ears is,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
I propose to dispose of this Colony very briefly, ami for this,
teij plain ami sufficient reason, that it has, I may say, been
already pretty well disposed of. Its two towns of impor~-


tanee are Sydney and Maitland, and they bow possess all the
usaal indications of civilisation, industry, and prosperity; hot
they also possess another, and a negative quality? namely,
the not very desirable vicinity el that locality which has long
been the rxfmtium %mak<rum of Great: Britain,, I allude to
its convicts*
It is tree, that beyond the boundary of Sydney in actual
possession, there is a vast tract of Bush land, a great part of.
which has never been trodden by the foot of man, and suitable
alike for agricultural and pastoral purposes* Those who have
gone out to some parts of it spend the greater part of the
year in collecting the real wealth of the country, i* a, sheep
and cattle, and bringing it into Sydney, where it is readily
bought up, and profitably to all parties,
I eonld say a great deal about the exquisite natural
beauty of the scenery about Sydney, and the splendour
of its harbour, but as that is not the sort of information,
wanted by Emigrants, I will dispose of it with the above note
m pamant*
1 will, therefore, now at once.proceed to lay before the emi-
grating portion of the public (and all the other portions an
well, if they please) the actual present state »t£ the population,
country, laws, civil and municipal' (where such exist), trade,
commerce, agriculture, grazing, facilities for carrying it on, and
every other class of information in my possession (and I can
aver it is far from limited) of the other colonies of Australia*
ib which I have had, for the time being,
f * A local habitation arid a aaase c ”
mid I will begin with the colony of
POET PHILIP OH VICTORIA.
With regard to this most delightful, fertile, and sstonlshw
Ingly prosperous colony, let rose premise' by saying that I
have actually seen statements, of/very recent date, soot;
forth to the public, of a character that have tilled mo with.-
.astonislmmul, inasmuch os the writer, ta a tone the most,
solemn and serious, assure* the British public* m substance,-,
that this hoe coteny is even now “ so'eject to the domineer-.
i»g. sway of Sydney,” which was still, seeking <v to bind the
galling yoke of slavery more firmly <m its victim,*' &c, &c. .
This statement has beam put forward in a pamphlet pub- ;


lisbed. this year, the write?: of •which, bad lie taken the
trouble to ascertain,, would have found that Port Philip
bad, by an act of the Imperial Legislature, been declared &
separate and independent colony I
This 1b bo more idle assertion of mine—-here are the clauses
of the Act of Parliament, 'which speak for themselves,
And whereas it is expedient that the district of Port Philip, now part
of ‘ the Colony of New Sontb. Wales, should he erected into a separate
Colony, ami that farther provision should be made for the Government of
her Majesty’s Australian Colonies : be it enacted, therefore, by the
Queen’s roost Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parlia-
ment assembled and by the authority of the same, that, after such provi-
sions as hereinafter mentioned shall have been made by the Governor and
Council of New South Wales,, and upon the issuing of the writs for the
first election, in pursuance- thereof, as hereinafter mentioned, the territo-
ries now comprised, within the said district of Port 'Philip including the
town of Melbourne, and bounded on the north and north-east by a
straight line drawn from Cape Hoa to the nearest source ■ of the river
Murray, and thence by the course of that river to- the eastern boundary
of the Colony of South Australia, shall be separated from the Colony of.
New' South Wales, and shall cease to return members to the Legislative
Council of such Colony,.and shall be erected into and thenceforth from a
separate Colony, to be known"and designated as the Colony of Victoria.
ll,—And he it enacted, that the number of members of which,.after
such separation as aforesaid, the Legislative Council of the Colony of
New South Wales shall consist, shall, in manner hereinafter mentioned, bo
determined fey the Governor and Connell of New' South Wales; and there
shall be within and for the Colony of Victoria a separate Legislative
Council, to consist of such number of members as shall in like manner be
determined fey the said. Governor and Council; and such, number of the.
members of the Legislative Council of each of the said Colonies respec-
tively, as is equal to one-third part of the whole number of members of
such council, or if such whole number be not exactly divisible by three,-
such number as is next greater than one-third of the whole number shall
be appointed by her-Majesty, and the remaining members of the Council of
each of the said Colonies shall foe elected fey the inhabitants of such Colony.
Perhaps I -may fmd a difficulty with some, and almost-an
impossibility with' others, to free myself from the charge, or
the suspicion that I have a direct interest in extolling the
colonies of Australia, and recommending emigration thereto;
and that my description of Port Philip, in particular, is
exaggerated' and. overdrawn. If the former charge should be
made, I will, lot it pass unnoticed; but against the latter I
defend myself by referring to every authority now in existence
in support of my assertions, and above ail, and before ail, to


the published works of those whose writings are the
result, ■ like aiae, of personal observation and long red~
dense in the colony.- Indeed, I felt so mooli the insuffi-
ciency of my own powers, in endeavouring to do justice
to Port Philip, that 1 had resolved to give extracts from the
books I have mentioned; but were Ito do this, I could swell
out my little work to an nnpardonable and, mayhap, an
unreadable length. I will, therefore, content myself by quoting
one or two passages as I go along, and I will now start with
my own plain homely statement of facts, and pursue the 44 even
tenor of my way.” I merely ask my readers to bear this fact
Jn mind as they get through my pages, that /, too, am writing
from experience, and that every hill and dale, and glen and
valley, forest and mountain pass, prairie and pasture, is as
familiar to me as is the road from my house to my office.;
Now, then, to begin.
Portv Philip, which, by the gracious permission of her Ma-
jesty, since tbs act was passed creating it a separate and inde-
pendent colony, is in future to be known by ike name of
Victoria, stands alone and unparalleled in the world for the
astonishingly rapid strides it has made in the acquirement-of
commercial, wealth, and I may say national importance. When
the greater part of the then civilised world was under the sway
and rule of those benign sovereigns by whose wise and gene-
rous administration, we are told by historians, nations sprang
up almost mushroom-like, and arts, manufactures, and literature
went along with giant strides, we are also assured that the
roost flourishing of those countries bad been a wild but so
short a time before, that it appeared scarcely credible. What,-
then, will be said, when I state, from authentic and incontro-
vertible facts—facts now forming part of our national records,
that thirteen years ago Port Philip—l beg her pardoq, Vn>
tori a —wm one vms wild waste f
Such is the fact—only thirteen years ago a few bold, daring
adventurous fellows, wanderers- in search of a location,.chose
Yicxokia- for 'their resting-place, and there they 44 pitched-
their tents/’ They looked around them in wild and delighted
astonishment, as the industrial resources - of the colony began
to develop themselves beneath their indefatigable operations, :
that so enormous, so beautiful, so rich a- tract of the worlds
surface should have remained so long neglected by man.


The successful results of tfee labours of those adventurers
very soon attracted the attention, the jealousy, and finally, the
competition of others, and the sequel is soon toM. By the last
cdSekl returns, it appears that the export trade of Vioroßia
averaged an annual amount. op sal to~*~wkat, -will it bo be-
lieved ?■—far exceeding
Sevejt Hfxdseu Thousaho Ponuns faarw 1
This fast speaks more for the territorial, wealth of Yi&rom&
than if a score of volumes had beers written on. it by the most
able statktimßj and in. the most laboured style.
Even if it were the result 1 of the expeaditiire of large capital
bringing forth, and rendering into marketable averehaar
diee, the wealth lying bid in, and spread, over, the bosom of a
land already prepared for the operation of man's ingenuity
and industry by an existing government establishment, police
and civil laws, and so .forth, the fact would still be startling ;
but so far from such being the case with Pretoria,, those who
had, with such indomitable energy, persevered in developing
her hidden and loug~ wasting treasures, had, from the very first
moment they set foot on the lend, to encounter, contend
against, and .overcome, every possible and conceivable disadvau~
tags. They found nothing whatever ready to their hands but-
the 'giftsof nature; hut, then, those had beenbestowed with a
baud go profuse, m lavish, and so varied, that man's energies,,
mdnstry, perseverance, patience, and intellect, were not slow
in turning them into the proper channels of nm and benefit,
and we have seen the result.
If this s< Oasis in the desert" bad-been peculiarly marked
out hj Divine Providence for one of especial favour, it could
scarce boast of more advantages and resources for promoting
the happiness, and prosperity of mat*. When beneficent Nature
had ixcimuted , I had almost said, her stores of fruits, flowers,
vegetables, wood, water, meadow laud, hill, dale, and valley,
she crowned all. by bestowing a climate such as could net be
better suited to the rotatory produce of all nature’s treasures,
the feeding of live stock, and the constitution of man, than if
45 Ym bespoke it**
In the woods, too, the wandering settler and hardy squatter
has bis auricular organs awakened by the salutations of the
feathered tribe, as countless in number as they are beautiful in
plumage. And who that has led, and delighted in, pastoral


life, has not felt his heart bound to the thrilling, quiet happi-
ness caused by such sounds m he 'scent forth, as the
li Poificß orb of day
Chased the •warbler froxa the spray ?
and his eyes gladdened and refreshed, as mine have bees, during
mmy a long ride, by the gorgeous end varied landscape
spreading away before him into illimitable space: the green
velvet carpet beneath bis prancing counsels hoofs ; the purling
stream hard by, wending its tortuous, way along, fertilising and
beautifying as it went, and bestowing new life and vigour on
myriads of unseen but unceasingly industrious little house-
wives in the grass, and the flowers forming its margin; the
deep bay of the countless herds of cattle as it came to his oar
softened by distance and wafted by a grateful, cooling, balmy:
breeze; the consciousness that In his journey, turn whither ho
list, the wanderer’s course will not be interrupted by seen or
unseen savage animal or venomous reptile; and,; to crown ell,
the glorious sun shedding down from the cloudless, ethereal
vault above a flood of warmth that X have never 'known
increase to an excessive degree of heat ? Who, I ask, that
has seen and experienced this, as I have, over and over again,
during my wanderings in the bush of YxcxonxA, hut must feel
an involuntary impulse to exclaim, in the beautiful language
of the poet,—
u Ever chamiag, ever new, ,
When will the landscape tire the view s
The fouatai'x's ML the river 4 ? flow,
The wooded valley, warm and low;
The wintry sasuiut, v/i.tl aod high—
BoogMy rushing through the sky—■
The town and village, dome and fans,
Each gives to red- a double charm,’'
I fee! an enthusiastic delight in dwelling upon this part of
my subject, because I am deeply Impressed with the convic-
tion that no language I amid use would deserve the epithet
of exaggeration ox an indulgence of fancy; indeed, for this sort
of thing lam entirely; too much a man of business and every-
day commonplaces. However, in. order to remove all doubt
upon the subject, I now subjoin, one n? two extracts from little
works recently published; and I. will begin with that from
the pen of one who, like myself, was a u Bushman,’’ and who,
in describing what ho had seen, had no motive whatever for


exaggeration or high colouring, I mean li Sidney's Australian
Hand-book.” Indeed, if anything, one 'would be inclined to
think, after reading his book, that he has taken a decided part
In favour of Sydney and New South Wales.
In page 50 of the ( * Hand-book” he says :
“ Port Philip contains some of the finest pastoral land in the world,'
and the climate is very fine.”
This is not much, to be sure, hat it is a good deal from one
■who has made Sydney his favourite.
After hurriedly looking through the book, this was all I
could fmd at a first glance, but in looking over 44 Part lIP roy
eye accidentally lit upon the name of Fort Philip under tbs
heading 44 How to Colonize,” and having read the passages
referring to Victoria, I have made the following extracts.
Mr. Sidney observes.—
61 In Port Philip, which was founded by old colonists from Van
Diemen's Land and New Booth, Wales, no distress was ever experienced,
no expense -was ever incurred,”
Then, again, with regard to the country generally, be
observes, in one of his philippics against the “Wakefield
System,” that
“ Port Philip is, undoubtedly, one of the very finest pastoral and agri-
cultural countries under the ' Sun. It was extensively colonized by
squatters before the Wakefield system was partially introduced.”
In. that part of his book in which he speaks in language
condemnatory of the system of concentration, he gives a quo-
tation from Mr, West-garth on Port Philip, which says
“The services of the labourer were absorbed by the squatters, and thus
Port Philip became prosperous fey squatting, and in spite of the attempts
at concentrating the population. A. proof of the failure of tbe attempt at
coxsceo.tratlon will, be found in the fact, that, out of 2,992,000 sheep,
2,642,000 were grazed under squatting licenses outside the boundaries;
and these sheen, with cattle, afforded exports amounting to 500,000/. in
1846.”
EMIGRATION TO AMERICA.
Just read what Mr. .Sidney says upon this mode of disposing
of yourself and. your fortunes for life.
“ It is the apparent- facility for obtaining tbs possession of land which,
tempts so many to the backwoods and swamps, and unhealthy climate of
the unsettled districts of the United States. ■
“'Of their experience la these inhospitable regions, paupers in York-
shire workhouses can tell many mournful stories.”


Mr, Henry Capper has also published, this year, a little
pamphlet on Emigration to the Colonies, He held a colonial
official appointment at one time, and. though, I believe, he has
never been in Australia, he lias written a good deal of very
useful information upon the subject. Of Victoria this
gentleman speaks in the following language ;~~~
«Victoria,** he says, “is that portion of Australia lying on the
southernmost extremity of the island; the average length of voyage from
this country Is ninety days. This settlement was formerly under the
Government of New South Wales, but is now declared a distinct Colony
by Act of Parliament! ”
Mr. Capper goes oh to say,—
“ The Victoria district comprises upwards of 700 miles of sea coast,
and contains an ares of 98,000 square miles, or 62,720.000 acres}
including within its boundaries the fertile tracts of < Australia Felix’
and ‘ Gipps* Land'; and the harbours of 'Hobson's ..Bay and Geelong,
situate in Fort Philip Bay 5 and Portland Bay and Western Port on the
sea coast.
“ Port Philip Bay is an inlet of the sea in Bass’ Straits, opposite Yah
Diemen’s Land, from which it is distant about twenty-four hours’ sail.
The hay varies from twenty to sixty miles from east to west, dnd from the
entrance about tbndy-rive nides northward. On the western side of the
bay, .is Geelong Harbour; and at the extreme north, Hobson's Bay,
which is tbe principal anchorage for the shipping, opposite a village called.
William’s Town. Portland Bay is situate on the western extremity of the
coast:, near the boundary line of South Australia, and Western .Port Is to
the eastward of the entrance to Port Philip Bay.
“Among the rivers in Victoria are the Murray, which is the largest
river in Australia, and is navigable its whole course through this district .
The Yarra-Yarra, which rises at the foot of the .Australian .Alps, and, flows
into the sea at Hobson’s Bay. There are also the Olenelg, (lonlbnrn,
Wannon, Whnmera, and several minor streams, some Bowing into the
sea or lakes, while others terminate in swamps.
The mountains of this district are the Australian Alps, the Grampians,
and the Pyrecxmes.
“ The climate of Victoria displays the happy medium between. the
extreme heat of the northern districts of New South Wales and the
more humid atmosphere of Van IHemen’e Land . The same peculiar
characteristics of the atmosphere (hot days and cold nights) which are
found in. all parts of Australia ere nevertheless met with here; but from
the drcnmstance of this district lying so much further south than any
other portion of the island, the climate may he said to he more tike that
of this country* Of the agricultural capabilities qf Fort Philip, every-
thing that is favourable may he recorded* Vorn of every description
has heen grown, yielding ms average of forty bushels an, acre, from soil
to which no stimulant has ever been applied . This district contains
numerous extensive valleys, composed of verdant and fertile vegetable
mould, and a boundless extent of fine, open , and undzilafmy ground


Then be quotes another author, who says,™
** The face of this portion of the country lias been described as * a coa«
tihnation of extensive plains, diversified by ranges of hills, and bearing is.
every certain portion, of square miles a grand leading feature, such as that
formed by the Grampians, subdivisions of which are again peculiarly
marked by the existence of numerous lakes, salt and fresh, hy belts of
rna.gnifici wt forest land ; or pasture and. forest, river and vale, alternately ♦
hot in ail parts characterized by a verdant and accessible expanse nowhere
else to he found f
Tins portion of Australia contains the same deseripdonof forest trees,
Indigenous shmbs and bowers, minerals, mnmals,. birds, and fishes, which
are generally found in this island,’ ’
There I—After my own retry imperfect and wholly inade-
quate description of the evidence of my senses, I flunk I might
rest satisfied with the above testimonial, and stop here. But
I shall not do so, for this reason,™my object in publishing
this book is to donyey to intending emigrants to Australia as
mueh of the really practical , us&ftd information, not only that
I possess myself, but -what I can collect from other equally
authentic sources, reduce to a condensed and comprehensive
form, and press Into the limits of a pamphlet; in fact, make
my book, so far as I am, capable, a thorough guide for tire
intending emigrant.
It will be seen by the above, that while Tictobia actually
covers an acreahle area equal in length and breadth to the
whole of England, and is therefore capable of feeding, clothing,
sustaining, and giving abundant employment to many millmm
of human beings, her present actual population does not much
exceed 40,000 !
Dr. CLUTTF.nmTO.K 4 tvhn resided nine years in the oolony,
has also published this year & work in one volume, entitled
“■Port Philip in 1849 T Speaking of the rivers of the
Colony, he says,-™
u They arc most foxiuousiu tbosr corny;?, raid Intersected by lagoons; many
of the hanks are low and alluvial, ami overshadowed by huge umbrageous -
frees,” That “ many of the rivers which rake their rise bn: the base of
mouataias do not ran into the sen, but terminate ia lakes, lagoons, or
swamps. The river Yavra-Tarra varies in depth Irons 2£ to &or 8
fathoms, and ia from 25 to 35 yards. Its sides are lined hy the
tea-tree shrub, which grows in mid Ittsswimce* At present, its naviga-
tion is practicable for vessels not exceeding 200 terns; hut vessels of 500
tens, as they are built for a light draught of water, now come up to the
wharf at MEnnouWß,”


At page 18, the learned Doctor says,, referring to the health
of the colony,—
- Indeed, Xam rm&bk to point to a single work oa Australia Felix- ; —.
(another name for Fort Philip, and which signifies “ AasteaMa. the happy
or blessed”)-— ~ ci which does not paint in the moat vivid colours the
salubrity of its climate, and the comparative imrmrdtg of its
inhabitants from fatal disease ”
and then he quotes a line from a renowned physician oh
Climate, in width he says,-—•
Fevers are inmost unknown, and the same may be said of hooping-
cough, croup, &c/ J
Then, in page 20, Dr- Glutterhnck sap, u Mb cam of Asiatic
cholera has occurred.*
After giving some professional dissertations on the climate
as it is likely to act on health, the Doctor goes on to describe
the seasons- The information ho gives I could have supplied
myself, but I always prefer the language of others where It is
the language of praise*
/“ The spring/* he says, “ commences in September nod terminates in
Kovemher, wheSi golden summer appears, which lasts till March, the
hottest H-orelkheiog February; autumn occupies April, and Map; nod,
SeaSy, winter (not hoary as in England) assrnoes her throne tilt August;
the sky, even timing winter months, is usually elaudlesed’
At page 26,-speaking of the verdure, he says that
5i Patches of land assuming then? grayest mantle the evening previous,
■appear the mM morning with a freshness of verdure truly astmUhmj
when .nourished by a sight’s rain/*
At page 27, speaking of the contrast helweoa the smmty
in England and that of Port Philip, be observes that the
natural and artificial beauties of the former arc superseded in
the latter—
ußy the silvery lakes below and the bright blue sky above, and the
charming vsriety of aspect which the giants of the forest assume—a cour~
Mnatloa of tints which would have “delighted Salvator floss. A ride
sumngst idmse stately forests fordhly reminds one of the pork-ids« scenery
of England/* . ♦ , Ki The pictures '.of Chmde Lorraine iml their proto-
type in the verdant dress which the face of nature presents in the wood~
lands of Fort Fhllip/* .. . Summer may he said to relgu throughout
the- greater portion of the year—-the trees are never denuded of foliage,
end at almost all seasons an abundant supply of vegetables may he
obtained/"
Kow, from the shove extract it 'will, he seen that the writer
is actually poetical iu some of his descriptions, and leaves


bo room for a charge of exaggeration or invention against
ms.
If I were to enter into the same painstaking details that
this gentleman has done on many subjects connected with
Victoria, I could furnish the same information; hut as I
observe that he has fallen into error in some matters, and
has dwelt upon others at a length which, would he unwar-
rantable in me, considering that though “ brevity n may
not be the <e son! of wit” in mj production, it must he a
characteristic.
Under the head, of
NATURAL PRODUCTS OF PORT PHILIP.
I can very easily furnish my readers, from, my notes, with as
much information as I think will be'found to answer all useful
purposes to emigrants. For instance, if the emigrant stands
in need of timber, be can roam abroad, look about him, select
at will what suits his wants, either for the purposes of con-
structing a dray or making a fence, or erecting or roofmg a
house. Timber of a bard, soft, or a medium calibre, be will
find here, and mav have it almost for the trouble of cutting.
Then, again, with regard to the
FARMING PROPERTIES OF THE SOIL.
This is a topic upon which it is scarcely necessary for me to
dwell, so much is known about it already. There is not an
emigrant who has gone To, and written from, Victoria, who
has not given to-the., world the -well-known- fact that he may
take from of? a lot of cleared ground* half a doxen crops ol
wheat, In mamdm (at about 40 bushels the acre), season after
season, and not trouble his head about manures-—ln fact, such
an article is unknown ;there,, and; not dreamt of. Bo say the
great agriculturists who have long been crowding to, and re-
siding in, the colony, and who have given it the very flattering
but truly deserving name of “the Talley of Wine and Corn.”
They have so .christened - it because they have found, the laud
give up those two great staple commodities, by applying
to it the same system of husbandry as that known and prac-
tised in. this country, without- the me of stimulants, Ay*
and not only Helds of nodding, golden, heavy-headed corn,
dot the vast prairie lands, but scattered shout the farm


steads may also bo seen tbe mb deep tinge of the vino
foliage.
In a few pages back I stated, tlml as I rambled over the
bash, my olfactory aad visual organs, vvoro refreshed and
■delighted by tbe sight and perfume of the immensir groves of
kadis and Sowers, as they grew about in wild, scattered, and
most tempting profusion. In fast, with regard to fruit, I
could notice the absence of none I mow zomember, except,
perhaps, lemons and oranges; and as to dowers, they are
abundant and beautiful.
In addition to tbe M feathered deukseus el the grave ” \ have
mentioned, there are also to fee found, in groat bum hors, black
swam, pigeons, and a species of large wild turkey, very-
agreeable to the palate j and those who are loud of bsh will
hnd a great abundance of cod, herring, eel, shrimp, lobster,
bream, blaekfish, and several other kinds.
I think it is high time I should now tarn my attention to,
and give some information respecting, iho capital of this
colony, I menu
THE CITY OF MELBOURNE
The same observations which apply to tbu vskmkf of Victo-
ria's progress in wealth and cnuumsrdal renown, ca«. witk
equal truth and justice l»e applied to the rise aud progress of
title remarkable town, for both were coeval with those of tke
colony itself, Twelve or thirteen years? ago, tbo site now ocou-
pied by the handsome buildinj/s which constitute Melbourne
was’ a barren waste —a- wilderness in tiie truest sense o£ the
word, whoso only denixens wore the aborigines in their most
wild and savage state. This ones inhospitable waste forms
■a series of gentle slopes towards the hay, and on. those
stands the town, the houses thus commanding a very plea*
sank and extensive "view. Of coarse, the drst specimens
of human habitations here exhibited were of the most rude
and simple description, more vfeather~boardod huts or cot-
tages; but those were rapidly swept away to give place to
handsome, commodious odUlees, public and private, of brick,
stone, and saof tan
The traveler who, eight years ago, left Melbourne, would
bow, on Ms return to the same spot, fmd it diiTionlt to credit
the evidence of his senses on beholding rows of substantial, two-
B


storied brick houses, forming wide and regular streets, running
at right angles with each other. He would lift his bawds and
eyes in utter amazement (and well he may) at beholding the
Yarra-Y’arra spanned by a noble, handsome, stone arch, of a
span equal to one of those of London Bridge, and not inferior
in point of architectural beauty-—two very handsome churches,
,n Scotch Church, a Roman Catholic Church, and chapels for
'Wesleyans and Dissenters. It would he to the highest degree
amusing to witness the pleasurable sensations of astonishment
of this returned traveller, as he gazed on those wonderful
changes, and, as he entered the town, to find, in .addition,
reading-rooms, chib-rooms, schools, hotels, boarding-houses,
public-houses, banking-bouses, barracks, a police-office, a
theatre, an . hospital, a mechanics’ : institute, a freemasons
lodge, and— limvspaper s-, an article without which no English-
man can breakfast.
Then, as be wandered down the town, and wondered as he
went, be would find, in addition to all this, several manufac-
tories in course of erection, awd boiling establishments, where
with those in the district, in the course of one year, the enor-
mous number of 120,000 sheep, and over 5,000 head of cattle
had been slaughtered for the tallow, of which they yielded:
more thaw 27,000. hundredweight! But his wonderment
would have gained its climax when he was told that the popu-
lation of the dtp— yes, dip I must call it— amounted, to nearly
15,000 souls!
Carrying out the metaphor, we will suppose this travelled;
stranger to he looking about inquiring for lodgings, what will
bis exclamation be when he is told that out of about 4,500
houses there is not one to let, awd that he had better seek a
hotel or boarding-house ! If he be lucky enough to get ai
house, be will find the rents range at about the London ■
average for the same class of houses; but, oh ! if he he a
Londoner, or a John Bull from, within any .of .the limits of tblsj
land of freedom, with what a,shout of Joy will be wot toss up-
his hat when he is told by his landlord, with a polite conge-—-
u Sir, them are no taxes /”
w What ? no taxes? eh I no poor-rate, window-rate.,-.sewers-i
rate, church-rate, gas-rate, land-rate, income-rate, highway-::
rate, and—and—-all" the rest of it—eb ? Well, I never I Give ;
us vour hand, old fellow G


Howl should like to witness the scene l and then he will
hud that- which is an indispensable ingredient to the comfort of
a John 8011, be his location where it : may, 'namely,, an excel-
lent race-course adjacent to the town ; and for loungers, there
is a- well and tastefully laid out Botanical Garden.
In truth and in feet, John will find himself almost sur-
rounded by those English home comforts which he thought he
.had left . 16,000 miles behind him. When he strolls out, ho
will find that Melbourne is environed hy a ■ Richmond, a
Brighton, St. Kilda, &c„, and he will see scattered about on
little eminences, handsome country houses, snug farms, and the
river Yam- margined by scenery the most exquisite and pic-
turesque, and in the town he will find no difficulty in pro-
curing champagne, brandy, rum, and such like auxiliaries to
the comforts- of an English fireside.
Having thus disposed of Melbourne itself, I will now pro-
ceed to give a detail of figures setting forth the
RATE OF WAGES, PRICES OF PROVISIONS, &c.
Those I give from documents which must be correct and
authentic, as I find them 'published in one of the-Melbourne
newspapers of September 1849, and supplied by the Govern-
ment authorities
The following are the last rate of wages given by the ..squat-
ters, exclusive of rations and hut to live in, which consist of-
10 lbs. of meat, 10 lbs. of dour, \ lb. of tea, 2 lbs.-of-sugar, per
man per week .:
The wages given to married couples (without family), per
annum, 251. , to 25L 10s. j ditto, with family, 22b to 26b j
labourers,. Bs. to 10s. weekly; shepherds, 18b to 20b pb.nL-
beepers, 16/..t0 18b; general servants, 20b to 26b; farm
servants, 20b to- 23b ; bullock-drivers, 25b to SQL ; gar-
deners, 26b to 30b ; cooks, 26b to 80b /.hut carpenters, 24b
to 80b ; .blacksmiths, 30b to' SSL Female servants, 1.2 b .to
16b ; cooks, 16b to 18b ; laun.drymaids, 10b to 20b ; 'nurse-
maids, 6b to 10b
The prices; of provisions, &e„, range as follows :—Wheat,
3s. 6d, per bushel-;, Ibu-r, -l|d. per lb.; meat, '-2d. per. lb. ;
tea, 2s, 2d, per lb.; sugar, B|<b per lb. / coffee, IM. per lb.;
tobacco, 2.?. 6tb per lb.
Live Stock—fat cattle, first quality, B*. 3d, to 10*'. per
b 2


fat wethers,about TS lbs,, 10#. each? store wethers,
td, to €&,. 0& eacli j rMxed cattle, low condition, !o*\ each;
lean steers, 2b& to 25-?, each ; working bullocks, from. 7L to
8/x per pair.
The quantity ol stool m the province was returned
at 16,425 horses, 38§ f 6Si horned cattle, 5 ? t5<9 pigs, and
hfiaoplTT sheep*
With the. foregoing statement of figures and fasts, I think
I hare given, sufficient gmmral information on tire subjects ol
what sort of place V.icix>.u;a is; what feer climate, extent* and
productions ; as. well as. all that la. mqtddlo to be said in refd
mnv o to except to add, that that dtp will, by the
game act which baa declared her a: separate colony, give
hit also a sopamie and ImmPE-auEmr Imsisn.&KTß Absbm&ly
for all local and general ol government, pedice, and
feed alafeSx
There are several, other matters of great importance, with
which I propose to deal in extmso f such as the proper method
of sheep and; cattle'farming; who ought,bind 'ought not, to
■emigrate-j and a- great many others ; but boiue I attack them-
Just let mo give a passage or two lllnsfeatbm of
LIFE W THE BUSH.
Wh m I wander back again in. Imagination to the scenes I
witnessed, and the days—the Joyous, ddigMfnl days—l
Imaro spent in the Bash, I feel reiarning fo my heart ail those;
wild throbbing sensations of unbounded, illimitable emoy.ment
*~~-thut maddening sensatum created by the ccmseionsuess that:
yon arc at free will to scamper and career about as suits yonr
fancy, which such a life can alone inspire the heart of a young
man with ! Oh, yes ! it is a Joyous, jolly, right merry Mfe, Is;
that life in the Bush I Yon feel m free, so nntraimuelled, so
Independent of all the world. Flinging care to the winds, at
sunrise you spring upon, your chargor, who, as ho bounds and;
caracoles bououlb you, and dashes madly forward, appears td
nudorstaud and participate in, to the full, the ’ecstasy of all
j&m mm rapturous feelings. The sub-is up, sc is your blood |
the- sky is cloudless, m are yonr spirits; your horse kopek
timtly paws the soft green sward, smith the oir, tosses Mo
head, evincing, by these and every other gesture be i-; eapabll
of, the IlMirooked restraint put npou him. At length you


am .ready, you give Mm M® hm<% -and t h& wo&i 6< ©it,” as jmt
<tek the rowels into his fiaaks--4m mats, ffeugoa, «&4 w,
aaother instaat he is careosiag with you ovet the ■verdant
undulating expanse before and around you, the 44 rolling .grassy
pkia 5 gpreadiag away m ewrf side, a -grkii, a maguifieent
panorama el prairie, meadow, hill, and wooded autltey, ttafi
their limits miugle with the Imrkom
Talk of your'Turkish and .Arabian horsemen, on their wild
and fiery harbs—of your Southern Africans, hunting the. tiger
ami throwing the lass© l ' —©l your Mexican bub-chasers—of
your steeple-chase riders. Pshaw! for wiki, lead, -reckless,,
yet scientific and dexterous hntsmian&kip, eommend .as to
the stockmen and the squatters of Australia -before all ike
wE There you will see a stripling of tea or twelve years
outrival iu splendid horsemanship anything of the sort to be
met with m any -other part of the world, I care not where.
1 am aow speaking of a period of excitement-, such as the
44 hrandiug season,ihe sensea: at which all the eattle are got
together, aud eenesntrated from, tbs ** run,” for the purpose of
having them branded to prevent confusion, as to their owners*
Here, again, I' will .-quote Mr.- Sidney's book, lest I may he
accused of exaggeration. Speaking of the 14 branding season,”
which is also takes advantage of for a regular feast, and gene-
mi interchange of neighbourly feeling and conviviality, he
aaye,~~~-
Si At -daybreak, about twenty or thirty tiawsm -and a bro-rdred dofs
start for the haste AB the cattle being on the camp, the sag of war eertn-
mences, They resist being driven iuto the yard. Tbc hurseasea. ride .at
them with their formidable stock w'&ips;, the degs.bite isreir heels and hang
m' to their tails, and what- with the bellowing, barking, boEoiag, and
swe&nngy the riot maybe heard wiles oh by any stray traveller ruling over-
tire silent plains and dhroascb the- open forests. The s«ga ride like mad-
men? taking the fsßeo logs and great creeks in the ground ,in .ther? stride*
As soon as the beast is pressed,- Ire doubles sharp Irke a bam, but a good
stock-horse doubles jnss as quick round idee a top. Crack, goes the
horsemarfs whip, as loud as a pocket pistol, drawing blood at every stroke.
’l'he beast doubles and d<, fubl-cs aw.-ria, never turning rorril the borso rs cross
alongside. At last tired our, the Bullock is glad us make the best of Iris
xvav'hack to tbo fold, bis Ixi-J.e ail ■eoverco with iorrur and brood, bis eye®
glaring, and Iris tongue hanging out,”
Back m 44 If© in the bush,' 1 ' and yet, although U is wild and
exulting to the last degree, compared to which your English
fe&Auut Is turn© -and spiritless, yet all the time yon am thus


eajoyiog yourself yon may be~~ln feet, yon must be—minding
your .business, for, la order that you may not be at.the mercy
of your servants, yon should be on horseback from sunrise till
sunset.
On the whole, I can say with great truth that no man,
placed in whatever state of society be may be, leads a happier,
more independent, or more enviable life than the squatter.
Though located on a wild trackless plain, yet be may ex-
claim,
<s I am monarch of all I survey,”
and no wayfaring traveller is ever allowed to pass by bis door—
No, it is ever open, and hospitality tbo' most' unbounded is at
his service, that is if pood plain faro can be appreciated.
The Bush, too, is the place to teach a man the true con-
tempt he ought to entertain for the absurd conventionalities of
our island, forced, bet-bed social system. The man in
England with 20,0001, in the threc-and-a-half per cents., or
an annual income of 1,0001., and a family counting eight or
feu, would be expected to sacrifice considerably for ap-
pearance. Just lot bins go to the Bash for a lesson; there
be will find men under the not very fashionable cogno-
men of vt squatters/’ possessing a tract of land, the value of
whose : fee-simple would in England buy him up ten times
over. And yet many of these squatters are men of. this class
(and many of them, very much, superior too) ; right jovial, open-
hearted,-honest, hospitable follows, under whoso <f mahogany*
yon would feign stretch year legs a second time, once the “ ice
was broken/’
I should observe hers (as I am most desirous of avoiding
the slightest cause for laying myself open to a charge of
misleading) that the districts under the denomination of the
“ Bash” are beyond what are called the boundaries; that is to
say, many miles from Melbourne, and the parcel Hug out of
allotments of land to the squatter in the Bush is in the hands
of the Crown Land Commissioners, whose system of dealing
with parties desirous of becoming squatters is ouc into which,
certainly, some abuses have crept, but which I hope soon to
see remedied.
One of the loudest complaints against the Commissioners is,
that they have not suggested to-the Government the adoption
of prompt measures for irrigating the vast plains of the Bush


in Victoria* It could bo done at a mooli less cost than that
estimated as the expense of cleansing. the Serpentine* The
largest river in the entire of Australia is the . Murray f whack
runs right through the entire district -of ■ Victoria, 'and is
navigable the whole way. At how small a cost aright aot this
tine river be made to yield abundance of water to the vast
plains oa either side of it, by cuts, and hove gladly would the
squatters consent to be taxed to pay. back the expense by
instalments ! This want of a sufficiency' of water.; has often
struck are as a deplorable drawback to the occupation of
these magnificent plains which I have often ridden over on my
journey westward from Port Philip, There are many other
smaller rivers, Sowing about, which, are now allowed to waste
their waters in lagoons, lakes, and swamps, which could be
turned to an equally useful and profitable -account by damming
up, and even at a less cost than the process I at first suggested*
While on the subject of squatters and the busk, perhaps it
may not be uninteresting to the reader if I were to give him
an outline of my own adventures and experience as a squatter,
when, in years gone by, I pushed up into the interior of the
country, a large herd of cattle before mo, with the view of
finding a station.. ■
I started fully equipped, u armed cap~&~ple” from. Mel-
bourne. I bad two drays, laden with provisions and utensils j
two splitters (L e. hush carpenters), a Imtkeeper, a stock -
keeper, and a bey, besides a bullock-driver to each team, and
I took ray departure in. possession of a large mob of cattle* I
mounted my good horse, stockwhip in band, and assisted hi
my own business of driving the cattle before me, and in this
way we managed to cover about two and a* half nril.es in. the
hour, or about fifteen miles a day. As night drew near, wo
halted and allowed the cattle to feed, after which we made a
large fire, forming a circle within which we camped the cattle
for the night, and two men kept watch, relieving each other at
intervals of two or three hoars, while the horses were kept in
readiness hard by, to follow any of the beasts that might take
it:into their heads to bolt. .After a luxurious nap on the
green sward (how a loath embed Cockney would turn up his
eyes and shrug Iris shoulders at this), stretched under the dray,
the saddle my pillow, ,
■‘‘■The heavens my canopy,
The earth my bed,*’


ys® -started again at early dswvp &■ hearty breakfast,
m& off again we weal. This -soft of thing aontiankg regia*
lady for a few days, make the mt fe turn to it, and, thorn-
fore, with a proper degree of eastlon, they seMom evince an
i»ciiwati<'« to *tray or holt, la this way wo proceeded every
day ; too weather v?m bountifully flue ; and though the sort
of life was a rough one, as compared to a lirsfecia-ss railway
carriage from London to Edinburgh, yet it had its plcasums
and attractions. Thorn raws the ever-varying seen©
the healthful, balmy air, the oast expanse of beautiful nerdant
land as far as the eye could reach. tins corwcicusness of u.n-
bounded freedom and liberty to enjoy yourself, to stop when,
and where you pleased, and as long or as short p and the
.natural vivacity of animal spirits which snob a stats of feeling
cannot fail to generate and all —all—euntrlbnted to
atalt the mmd, and create in the heart a stale of feeling the
most pleasurable and ecstatic* Indeed, I cannot conceive any
other position in life in which a man can bo placed, where bn
can secure to biro self Lire same amount uf enjoyment. Snob at
least veere my feelings upon my best excursion of penetrating
tbo Budn in search of a Knm
My journey covered a distance of 2no miles westward of
Melbourne before I reached a station .writable for my cattle, and
as I reached tbo Grampians I could rmt fid! to observe what
a great extent of most lovely loud lay wholly waste and an-
profitable, merely for want of the supply of water which could
so easily and inexpensively he poured in upon, it by the means
1 have suggested. However. 1 have not the least doubt ulum-
my mind, that tho result of hooping ibis slate of things con-
stantly before the public eye, will eventually have-the difeet
of exciting tbo speculative spirit of woo clever engineer,,
who, for such an n chic ms amt as that of causing water to few
to these splendid tree is of land, may have his own price.
It must not be supposed all this sybil© that the whole of
my Journey was a path of roses—oig no; I had my dilSeulties-
and <lLsfsgixy-ald.es, in common with all. others similarly circum-
stanced. For instance, .in, addition to paying drivers- md
others very high, wages, I often received anything bat civil
answers, or §uoh as h sum might outnrsiy expect from a gem
van 1 1 but I was obliged to pocket the affront, for those fellow©
well know the extreme sea roily of labour in the colony j
indeed, the settler, on the whole, found tho credit side of Ida


account, in those days, rather .benefited in the long nm by
occasiosally allowing his men to make a kip to the
finding their pockets ia a state of plethora with, their year's
•wages, whudr the bush afforded them no means of spending,
they hied them to the tows, where they soon relieved them-
solves by washing .down their arisioeratie throttles with. dar©&
and champagne, at l%s, a bo-tke, —-any cheaper lienld would,
he vulgar,—mad thus having spent all ia a very few days,
they went hack and began over agms.
How, while lam upon this part of-jay subject, it occur? to
me that it is about as good a place m. any 1 could select, for
offering the few observations whisk occur to my mind as to
those who I Muuk arc
THE MEN WHO SHOULD EMIGRATE.
a»d- tbs womm ieo j tor m emigrant. in the .bush without, a.
■wife is like b tlfok wl col to u jr.«di coach —of eery little u*c.
Ms can got oi course, without her, bat toe. ihommud times
hotter -with, her.
Often, very eft®, wltei? I lock ground the hmy streets of
luondou, and think iff h* hmumembb shop**, Imnk% vdiekossf
oSkes, ami wwrehmwos-, crowded 'with hustling, active, athletic
jmmg mm, what a ymfebed naif state of existence, nr jratlmr
pining, they bwe doomed them-elves to, from the my cutset;
of life, when 'hope ought io be strong witlda thorn, and m
ambition to 4< gc-abcnd ” ever up|.-wuo*l t» ibetr thoughts
Them they ate, front morning tonight., performing the .same
dull routine of duty, &übvorhcocy and pandering to thee
masters and customers being the uudnsifcbie requisites of
success.
Thousands of young men them au> in this conuky of tbfo
class, who, enjoying health aud strength, and all the vigour
aud ire of youthful manhood, waste away the summer and
sunshine of their dap, earning a sorry pittance from year to
year, yet compelled to keep np a a respectable appnaranca!“
Ob. they go, fagging ami drudging from daylight to dask
behind a counter nr a desk, tiutU, is the course of a few yea«%.
yon see them stooped, soured., and prom&turo old men, 'wlula
their wages (salaries, 1 hog thus pardon) are so hmited that
all hope of domestic happmess is coaspkuely mix t out ; or, il


embarked in, they, in, nine eases out of ten, quadruple the
misery of their position*
Of course there are exceptions to this rule, and many of the
above class are known to have at length, by the time they
had attained old age, and hence, consequently, totally rmsuited.
for the enjoyments a large fortune could bring, accumulated
it j hut, as I have said, those ore the exceptions.
What a mine of wealth and happiness lies beneath the feet
of this class of men in .Australia I If, instead of bowing and
cringing behind a counter, let him take himself to Australia*
where competition Is less keen, and labour scarce, and he
must indeed be a sloven who does not realize a competence in
teu years, to say nothing of leading a free, independent, happy
life, and being his own master*
If in the Bush, he wall require neither dress coats nor gilt
chains, nor sticks, nor casinos; but in lieu he may have his
horse, his house, his liberty, and a whole kingdom to ride over.
Then there is another class of men to whom the very same
observations are equally applicable ; I mean that class of men
who, possessed of a small capital, embark it in trade* They
go on in a steady, plodding course of perseverance ; and, after
many years of great toil and the most rigid economy, succeed
in attaining a respectable commercial position, accumulating a
few.'hundreds, or even thousands, and bring up and edu-
cate a large family* But by the time he finds his sous and
daughters grown young men and women, he finds his busi-
ness, in consequence of the "fluctuation of the times, &c», does
nut yield sufficient to enable him to provide for all as respect™
ahly as he eouM wish*
To such a man I say, 54 Dispose of your business forth with,
pack up your traps, and he off to the land where promises are
not made to the ear and. broken to the hope—where fertile
laud lies waste, where food is abundant and cheap, and where
taxes are unknown* There you will find wherewithal for
yourself aud wife, and family, every member of which, so far
from being: a burthen, will prove a blessing/'''
Then the* re is yet another class. dTonng men who have
come into the possession of a few hundreds or thousands of
pounds, and who know smt how to invest it, or what to do
with it. They are, mayhap, sprigs of aristocracy; and of
course, m business of any sort fa this country would he to


them -a degradation, tbey must needs lounge about the west
end; idle, gamble, and debauch. . To them, I say, 44Emi-
grate—-leave yonr aristocratic , friends : and follies at borne,
become a Bushman, and you uced have no fear.of the result/*
Those young men, those dorks of whom I hay© been speak-
ing, may exclaim, 44 Oh I of what use -would toe be in Aus-
tralia ? we know nothing of agriculture, or of minding sheep,
or herding cattle, or breeding horses, s " —Just so. To you I say,
44 You are the very ■men for that market / I would rather
have you, you clerks, shopmen, warehousemen, scriveners, and
artisans, than the best farmers and shepherds, and cowherd*, in
Lincolnshire, and for tins reason, —yon are educated and have
few or no prejudices, they are exactly the reverse ; you have
your minds prepared to learn something new, they have to
unAe/Mxi all they know, before they can be of any use, and
before that can be achieved the lambs will have become sheep,
and the sheep lard, the cows dry, and the bullocks on
cratches. Therefore 1 say to year, young men clerks, el- hoc
germs omne, you are the men to succeed in Australia, Be of
good heart, make up your mind to 44 turn your hand to any-
thing/’ and always say to yourself, 44 those who are in Rome
must do as Rome does/' But if you arc of the following
germs you won’t do. If you are a 44 diner out/’ stay at homo ;
for there are no Loudon dinner parties in tbo Bush, If you.
are a literary man and nothing else, stay at borne; for there aro
no libraries or literary conversaziones lu the Bush, If yon are
a speech maker, and nothing else, stay at homo; for there are
uo audiences in. the Bnsb. If you are too fond of your bottle
to give it up, stay at home ; for drinking won’t do in the Busin
If yon are a. politician, and nothing else, stay at home; for
squatters don’t care a rush for polities iu the Bush. If yon
expect to make a fortune iu Australia by buying a lot of
sheep and cattle, and leaving the rest to ehauee and servants,
stay at home; for neglect will never do iu the Bush. I f you
are a doctor or surgeon of great experience, going out to
speculate on the 4 British dance of death/ stay at home; for
there is uo disease in the Bush, If you are a lawyer going
out in the hone of snaking a fortune by litigation amongst the
settlers, stay at home; for they can do all that a great deal
shorter aud better without you iu Use Bush. If you are a
ruined 4 fashionable man about town/ going out to retrieve


by the mse mewm» sos these -ate bo klk m
dabs in fee Bush, except tin-se you would not hked ?
And now", taking it, Fo? gnutidl that I bavo gamed you
over to my view of the question, i mean yon ■whom I hav®
described us the class who may sandy go ont, 1 will proceed
to give yon a l«w bints as to the most secure and proiitaM®
way hi which you should
INVIEST YOUR CAPITAL.
i have always entertained too npuiion, and, as it is the
result of long experience, 1 still retain it, that the strong,
active, rigorous mas), going onx to Australia with his mind
BnYth; up to succeed, with odd/, in his pocket, stands iar
and away above, and. superior in position to, the man who
may have five times that sung and resolve to remain m
England. Well, then, supposing; tho rmm with his 20OA m
his AOOh In Ins pocket, landed, wo will say, at
or Adelaide* To hint I say, bo scrupulously careful, patiemfy
vlgilmu, and suspicions, particularly ittqucw'U of those wh%-
almost tho moment you laud, court your acquaintance with a
fesaud and courteous smile, the very honey of politeness oa
their lips, and who in wards tbo moA seductive and plastic,
oiler ymi thok friendship and advice wife a degree of dishm
terostcuness ami self-sacrifice, wldols to jm.i may appear truly
kind and astopifeiag, To me a vulgar but expressive saying,
your Loudon sharpers u ceifeufe boid a candle'"’ to some of
those very disinterested Individuals, If Ton look at all like a
rose vvbo has come out with a. large sum of money to invest
(and they will soon guess}, you are a seated,, and perhaps;
d'-updeed, u f finding a, host of friends spring no around yon,
although a total stranger IfedOO milov from home! friends
whoso object yon will bud, "when too late, if you be not imes*.
in I and Wf.pdc/omg was merely to 44 feefen/fe' yon,— otlmi’s all t
To avoid those ‘ v friends," then, Just follow this very plain
and simple course. When you laud,, say at bluLuauarwc, yon
wih have no uiifiouhy, after the fust day or two, in. imilng- &
boarding-house or cheap lodging, Thao, once located there,
liAou and m-to ail you hear, but avoid 4v Tmpfery e|f{?rr <>f
au/h <ot4 p'svfctalh i/nwimmis” as you would rooks nr shoals
if you Wen; commanding a ship, Iveop your bands in your
pockets if there be mp/dy/ in them, but put yonr money In


the bank till yon want it; there i% will bo safe, s»d you mil
get eight per cent, for it, Tbeu proceed in tike way;
instead of being in a hurry to buy cattle and sheep*, and
set ap at ones,, take ycmr tkm , look about yet? j buy a
horse, yew will got. a good strong healthy one for ton or
fifteen pounds (of coarse, yon have brought out yonr saddle,
fe. with yon),. mount him -ana sot forth in quest of each a
“■Mim” mis likely to suit you, Ynu will be as no expense
for either aas or beast,, for m yon. reach any one of the nume-
rous stations m the Bush, yon have nothing more to do than
dismount aud walk in;, of an hospitable and welcome recep-
tion, you need have no fear - yonr horse will be well led
and foddered, and as for yourself, yon will hud, after your
ride, the abundance of splendid mutton, tea, and u damper'
(cake), spread before you, more appeasing to your Iron-
get than all the delicacies contained in a wesi-end ro~tau~
raid. Indeed, the secluded Bushman wall ho but too glad to
see yon, and hear all the news from dear Old king-land ; and If,
m addition, yon present him wuh a few. newspapers and a
number or two of {i Punch” yonr HU is paid. Make your-
self at home (you are a fool if yon dordt), smoke your pipe,
forget that yon ever beard of such a thing as form or ceremony,
mi yew have secured the esteem of your host.
Having spent three mouths in this way, riding about and
making thqnimos, you will have acquired (or ou*fht to have)
all the experience necessary to begin bush life with ; and
whether you be a man of large capital or small, do not start
before yon have gone through ibis ordeal. You will id ways
End abnndano-3 ox stock, sheep and cattle* ready for sale at
the stations (never buy in the towns),
How, then, supposing you to ho the possessor of from 100 k
to 3C)Ok, If you intend. ■farming you should give yonr sendees
for twelve mouths to a squatter, for which yon will get is
return yonr living and experience, then purchase BO or 100
acres as near a town, as you can got it, and it will cost you 1 L
as aero. If you wish to become a grasier, then purchase tony
on fifty good milch cows, take out a squatting license, which
will cost IDI a year, ami an assessment of Sd, per bead per
annum, and begin. Commence yonr dairy operations, your
twelve months’ experience will tell you how* and there is no
fear of you.


I am decidedly adverse to your embarking in sheep j at all
events, you should not dee so with a less capital than- 600 lg
unless you can meet "with a couple of others ready to make
a joint-stock concern. Then make up your minds to be
your own, shepherds, tend your own? flocks, divide your in
and out-door duties amongst yourselves, in fact, mind your
own business. With 600 L at command, you may buy a flock
of 800 sheep, which, at .1 Or. per head, including right of run,
huts and hurdles, nrnkc -400/.; the remaining 200 k is your
working capital, out of which to defray the expenses of labour,
stores, and casualties for the first year. Then there is your
wool, which will help materially to lessen, your expenses,
whilst your lambs go on increasing at the rate of about eighty
perl cent. As to your domestic expenditure, it should not
exceed'-20/. a year each, for which you are under no rent, and
that well-known and respectable individual, yclept the tax-:
gatherer, has not yet found bis way to Australia, 'at least in;
that capacity.
As I have made so -very long u digression here on the sub-
ject of
SHEEP-FARMING.
■I ■'mil-now continue it to the wind-up. As I have said, If
your capital amount to about 000/., I should certainly ad-
vise you to sheep-farm, for it is enormously profitable, though
it has its drawbacks ia the shape of the scab. But what
commercial speculation Is without its drawback?
If you make use of your eyes, you may avoid scabby
sheep, by not buying them until Just before shearing time,
and then, if they have it, they mmi show it. It is decidedly
more pros table and less expansive, In proportion, to farm
large tier - n ad J?d-, loanee the ?xpen& - of labour, &o.
will m well serve for 8,000 as for 5,000 sheep, I should say
that 6.000 shcop should wean 4,000 iambs, and form four;-
Socks, roqro’ing six nun? to tend them.
I have nut the least hesitation in saying that a man. -invest-
ing 4,000/. in sheep in Victoria, provided he lives at his
station, minds his own affairs, pays as few visits to town as :
possible, and superintends all going on around him, cannot
fail in realizing 25 per cent, tor his money, not including
tlie continual increase of hie 'docks.
if, before you go out to Australia, you make up pour mind ;


to become a sheep-fomer, and take out- & sufficiency of the
sinews of war for that purpose, go not without a good dog or
two I Three or four such as you..see conducting the flocks to
and from Smithfield, you would , find more ; ml viable to you in
the Bush than a carriage and pair in Loudon.
When once yon are fairly afloat; as a .sheep-farmer, let no
mean mincing economy characterise your treatment of your
servants, for you will, find a balance to the credit side of your
account at tbs end of tbe year by an open, liberal hand,
I may here observe, m passant, that by tbe reports of the
great London wool consignees of Loudon, it appears that
tbe clip of last year received from Victoria was such, that
it appeared to be gaining the ascendancy over that imparted
from- JSImo South Wales,
The reason why so many settlors prefer cattle to sheep-
farming is, that it is much loss troublesome, though less pro-
iltable, and a thousand times more amusing and exciting.
Indeed, the labour and anxiety attending sbeep«iarming arc
incessant-, and to enter into a detailed description of them
would swell out a largo book. For instance, I could dwell
at great length upon ail the multitudinous labours which the
shearing operation involves, the wool-washing, packing,
pressing, and sending to market, &c. &c. But by the time
you have been twelve months farming sheep, you will have
acquired all the practical useful information you can possibly
want-.as to the way in which you should dispose of your
sheep. As I have heretofore observed about the advice of
turn a deaf ear to those who would recommend you
to sell, your fine fat ewes for boiling. Listen to that advice,
and you part with your gold for a fourth of its value ia
copper; that is Just about the proportion. Of course the
boiling system is very useful as the only account to which
yon can turn a scabby sbeop, but with no other should you
part for tbe cauldron.
Your sheep station., in order to bo complete and efficient,
will require almost a little tow-'u of offices of all sorts, and the
erection of them will run you up a very 111-looking bill in
a short time, if yon don't contract; yon should, throw in a
helping band yourself with your men, and with the aid of
brush carpenters and ..sawyers who go round to the stations
and do the rough work, you won’t be much out of pocket.


The same abservatioss apply to fencing, railing, &&♦ How-
ever, all this is sometimes avoided, because a purchaser el
sheep often gets ail tile station aconrmuodatiou he at
the time of porcli&se, Speaking of b«aHog *md shearing,
1 may as ■well bore inform the upending emigrant that a
sheep weighing sixty pounds ought to yk-ld about three
pounds of wool, whoa clipped, or about twenty-five pounds of
tallow, if boiled.
Ou looking over the newspapers of last year, which I have
received from Melbourne, I hod that at one of the great
periodical sales of sheep and cattle, which lake place in that
town* the following prices wore obtained from the buyers, the
majority of whom, were, of course, the meat salesmen ami
tallo w-deabrs.
Bullocks?, first oualiiy, from dCm to 65s< per head; steers,
2 or, ; a team of sM working bullocks, with dray and all
requisites, 35L ; a teem of eight, not so good, 4/, 10*. per
pair ; 1,500 sheep, mixed, »tfaa average of about ss, each ;
goad fat wethers, 6s, €d, % one good draught horse, dray, and
harness, Vt\l, ; backs from 9b"o<n to 14/, 1 -Is. ; rough ditto,
about 7 d 7s,
If, iu the course of events. It should so happen that the
cs Order in Council” made in the year 1847, for amending thu
act u regulating the «alo of wa -to hm<l» in the Australian
colonies 5 be carried into direct great changes indeed will ho
made to the advantage of tbo settlor: hulas this is still a
matter in. .abeyance, further allusion to the provirions-of ih®
order would be bet a useless waste of space and time, because
until it become law it is only a 44 Mil/* and cannot he acted
ou.
And ibis facie u Order in Cotmmf'* puls me in mind of the
large space Mr, Sidney occupies of Me hook, iu pointing oat
and suggesting certain alterations and amendments, whieh he,
conceives ought to he made in the laws regulating and direct-
ing emigration to, and settling hn tbo Australian odonies,
No doubt hh suggestions may he very valuable, and if
carried into operation may effect groat changes in tbo present
system.. 'Whether these changes may prove for the better is
not my province to inquire, All I say is, I shall apply my-
self to things as I find them, because, pending these alterations
Mm Sidney recommends (if cm they ho made), emigration


will go on all the while, and therefore emigrants will require
instructions and directions 'under the existing system.
When I started with the topic .of ** Investment of Capital,”
I was led inadvertently into the- subject of -sheep-farming ; but
as I have now disposed of that, I will call iuy reader's atten-
tion to what he should do, and what he should not, if he con-
fine bis operations to
CATTLE-FARMING.
I have already expressed it as toy .decided opinion, In a page
or two back,' that cattle-farming, though not so profitable as
.that of dealing in the woolly quadrupeds, is not so vexations
and harassing. Indeed, I should say that the cattle-farmer
may, by good management, and with a tithe of the care and
attention required by sheep, secure to himself a fair remunera-
tive return for the investment of a comparatively small capital.
Then, again, a man of very small capital may become a cattle-
fanner in Australia, particularly in the colony of Yic.toiua,
■where a good 45 rum” may easily ho had : and, a good ,;t run ”
means a tract of land in '■■which and water abound,
and these sort of runs may be reckoned by the hundred with-
out the limits of what is called the boundayy.
What I should call a good herd of cattle ought to number
about 250 or 300, and that the purchaser ought to got at an
average of about 30*. per bead; and in making this purchase,
let me caution bun to be careful and select the whole number
from one run if at ail practicable, and for this reason ;—Sup-
pose the purchaser buys his cattle from, different runs, that is,
beasts which have been long accustomed to '.different locations,
and. have never experienced the pleasurable limit of a stock”
yard, it is ten chances to one that very soon after he has
brought them to bis station, he will get up some; fine morning,
and find his mob as scattered as a family of grown rats before
bliss Puss, all making their way back as bard m they can,
flying to their former 44 peaceful homes/’
But ■whether he obtain them from one run or a dosen, if he
have only 200, with a mob so small ho must be his. own
stockman ; and if an expert Bushman ibis be can easily do ;
for It is quite a common thing in Tktobta for a good Bush-
man to manage a mob of 1,000 with ono assistant. Of course
those mobs, though composed of much more bulky individuals,
" :. ■ . o


are yet a great 3ea! foots.' manageable than mobs of aoother
sort we sdfootifoes 1 hear of-in more 'civilized regions,
AudtioWj-lvavfog' once embark ediu the occupation of a cattle-
farther, I say the real pleasures of a bosh life begin ; those
pieashtes and rojoyrn'ents to which I ailfol&d In endeawcuTriug
to describe fenbh life In VdcTonm,
The cattle-farmer, in order to mind Ms ownbusiness, and
discharge his duties to himself as ■» stock-man, must mount
his horse as the sun appears ahoye the horkun, and away with
bios, rfehsu about the whole day, and not cea-ds-g ihis agsreeatde
soft of occupation, noth ihc sun dfespporssx, He will be- of no
n«o unices he bo a Srs>t*rato hor» f -*«an; hut then, expert horse-
mausmp, like all «febor nwjfomncnt*, whether physical or
jo< nial, is only attainable by c<«o«tant arydfeafeom Alter
a bufe rsnso, l>e will not only ho bs iapam-s vote Ins new
mode of life, bo:, ho will look hack with a fee Kay of contempt
end -.corn rt theeonr*v of bib led by *om < o'" the to ither-bed
frb safe h- ha- bolt behind loro. The oxlv uai a bn ce he
b liUI yes si to rupTiro fe daring the susudma u<s- on and
time he will have it meet cheerfully and roadsly icon ius kind
oud ho* pi table neighbours.
There is a praeiiee known io IBnshmcn, ufsdo‘ the name of
10 too bog,” which is this ; if you happen to bo • nhbged'to take
Sour snob to a now ruts, they wiU be «n wild sm-'l unaccus--
torued to st } th:sl you stud your assistant mini watch closely,
k-st ibn may yo 'wandering about ; tbs- mate* von sxu-n be ;p
up ohonfe ail day long, driving them Isfeo ihc Unck-yard at
night, and making an utu-patlng use of tbo stock-whip. By a
regular fuvu'rmdfe round of tlm practice, you wib In a short
time mak.< your cattle so aecnsf mnvd to their new homestead,”
that at length thov g<4 weary of wo,awing you, and they
tab* io herding together, form a daily «ocial circle” in the
” -lufev junoness the water; and tbs'm wuh the 5 usual
grave, ruminating air, chow tin- end, By-and-by, Ahen you
have led this life for a year or so, you will find your account
in the profit you derive from the sale t<f yxxr fat stock and
dairy produce ; and by this time yon sfeoubl, by good mon-
eCP n sent, be irs the receipt of a considerable Aeons a < iS dear
■profit,
i cannot ion strongly recommend to adventurous yotrhg
men going out- to Australia, with, perhaps, not more than


lOOL in tbeir pockets on arrival, the system of forming a
joint-stock company for the purchase of a mob of cattle,
Ihe advantages of such a system are manifold. It causes
the formation of a neighbourly circle in a lonely--district, and
creates a mutual interest is promoting the ■'welfare of the com-
mon property.
snob yonug men, -I say, of course, bare nothing to do
with sheep. But suppose each of four subscribes 251,, that
sum will purchase a small mob, sufficient to begin with in
V ictoki a. ; then, with your remaining funds live prudently
on salt beef or - mutton, and damper and tea; you can easily
do this, and bring up a family,, for five or six months, when
your outlay will begin to make a return.
In ibrowmg--out• this- suggestion, I have named the smallest
sum at which such a project could ho carried out. But then,
as I have already observed, bow many hue, strong young fel-
lows are there who, possessing, say l,|Hhjd *adh. if they
clubbed purses and dashed oil" to the Bush in an emigrant
ship, instead of dashing down 11-md~steect ou credit, -would
in a few years readme s, noble fortune I In fact, yotmg men
in this position in life arc as numerous as blackberries in Lon-
don, amt- all over -England ; ami there b no extent to which
they may-not jointly carry out tins suggestion,
1 now-' turn my »y< mion t>> that boomroot el? w of Jm
.eomimmity, without whose existence and services, after all,
emigration anywhere would he of very little use. I mean
THE STRONG WORKING-MAN.
I say boldly,.and without four of contradiction, that too
many of this .elms cannot emigrate to the colonies; and I
have fully ill oatrated the troth of the asserthm by the manner
iu winch I have shown how »a employer Is treated hy las driver
and stockman on a jonrncy, beoanse they know their own
value. Be Ids means ever so scant, so long as bimseif and
his wife and children (if grown) are In the enjoyment of the
first blessings of Divine Providence, health and sight, they
may sing
if A % tor ware. ?>
The vessel scarce reaches the wharf ere they are engaged and
whisked off to the 1 Bush, (Bnt I should caution them against
bringing infant children.) la Australia they need not ceme


provided with those articles which in that country would
be useless luxuries, I mean huce blankets, flannels, coats, &c.,
though in Canada downright necessities, because in the latter
country a biting withering winter for a long period freezes up
all their physical faculties, while in Australia such a season,
is unknown.
But then the mechanical and labouring classes raise two
objections to a voyage to Australia ; the first is the cost of the
passage, and the other, the length of it. How, these two
objections answer themselves in this way. The answer to
the first is, suppose yourself landed at any one of the ports of
the United States, how know' you bow many miles, perhaps
hundreds of miles, you have yet to travel into the' interior
before yon cau reach the'place you intended as your destina-
tion ? How much will this additional transit cost you ? May
it not so happen that, after having arrived at. the port, you
tied the river over which you were to be conveyed into the
interior frozen up and -impassable - for months'? And if not
so, will not the-addition to the exponce equal the-first cost of
the voyage to Melboub.k.e, .where, upon -arrival you may, as
I have said, if you. like, be hired from the, ship's side,
lu hue, you can got to Australia for -15/., to the United.
States fbr Bfi, and then about .seven-dightbs more before you
ecu get engaged, if engaged at all.
Tins, then, is the position of-the man who goes to work for
wages to the United States:.-or■ Cau-ad-a,- -aud the same class
'who go to Australia with the same object.in view. If you
go to Australia to work for wages in the "Bush, I care not
what you -are, you -will find employment, w Never fash your
thumb,”-as the Scotch say, about what you may have been at.
home. You may, for all you -need, care to the contrary, have
been brought up to the goose and■ shop-board, to the loom and
snuttle. to the hammer and anvil, to glass-blowing, paper-
staining, screw-driving, • -wheelwright, shipwright, no matter
what, you-are .all right- so-long as you have health and a dis-
position- to be useful; you will never know an. hour's want,
from the day you set foot on Australian ground.
With, regard to the
LARGE CAPITALIST.
Gentlemen who form this' class are .'men of another stamp


altogether. To those gentlemen I will not presume to offer
any advice; but to those, as well as to ail others whom I
have already taken the liberty to address, I say with equal
boldness —Gentlemen, search where you will, in no known,
country in the world will you hud a colony, in the produce of
which you could make a more safe, certain, and remunera-
tive investment of your capital than in Austkalja.
HOW TO GO ON BOARD, AND WHAT TO DO THERE.
Under this head, my instructions must' necessarily be very
brief. The man with a large sum of money in. his pocket will
of. course take a poop cabin. He being a large capitalist,
expects, and receives the same amount of luxury as that which
he could command in his own drawing-room and salon (the
motions of the ship and the discourteous sea excepted). The
middle man goes in the middle place, the Tween decks, and
there he need envy nobody ; he will find every solid comfort
and convenience he can possibly wish for ; and as he has made
up his mind to 14 rough it ” from the start, he will find this
by no means the roughest part of his adventure. Then, there
is a third department for those who have no means beyond
that which enables them to get o ver the voyage, I mean
THE LABOURING-CLASSES.
'Yet these are the men who, iu a great degree form the blood,
bone, and sinew of Australia, as well as of every other civilised
country. They get into the steerage, and of course have to
put up with u short commons”; but then they mav lay ibis
flattering unction to their souls, that they will be better fed
and cared for on board for 15L for nearly four mouths, than,
they ever experienced at home for twelve, and. they may, in
addition, rest assured of employment almost from the ship's
side when she arrives, so great is the demand hr labour in
Victoria.
WHAT SORT OF SHIP YOU SHOULD SELECT.
Let a man’s fortune be. what-it may iu actual bulk or
intrinsic value, it is to him his fortune, his all; and there-
fore it is to him. a matter of the last importance to guard
against risking it on board any but a sea-worthy vessel.
In order to guard, as far as is practicable, against the chap


ter of accidents to which a voyage involving nearly the
circumnavigation of the globe is liable at all seasons, I
would recommend no emigrant to embark in a ship under
400 tons, in the first: instance, and In the next to ggcer-
tain if she be classed at IdoydA His next step will be
to go on board suck vessel ami Judge for himself as to. her-
ven illation,, her space in the.: 'tween decks, the character her
captain hears for courtesy and thorough seamanship. As for
myself, I will Just say upon-this paint, that I would almost
rather, take, my chance in. a. u tub” with an endurable captain,
than iu an East ludiaman with, one of those pests of society
sometime? ipfiicted on passengers during, a long sea^-voyage.
One more parting word* Bo your rank, and condition in
life, and oa board, what it may, make up your mind to 41 make
the best of it ” with your fellow-.passengers. There you are,
destined, for about a hundred days, to live 'within the same
limits with each other, and therefore, for your own. comfort
sake, you cannot be on too good terms all with each other.
Your passage will not only be short, hut almost as safe and
certain as a ride in ax 'bus; to Paddington. Upon.- this sub-
ject Mr. Henry Capper, in his little book, very truly ob-
serves that
“ la engaging a passage, as in purchasing any given article, it is not
always the cheapest that is the heH : au-i Use competition arising from the
increased emigration has so brought down the rates, of passage, that it
behoves every one to pause before they are induced to pay a deposit for a
passage, simply because they had one vessel advertised at a lower rate
than: another. It should he borne in aamd that the shipowner most be
paid a remunerative price for bis ship. Mis captain, oftieers, and crew
must he paid and.provisioned; and lastly, though not least, hie emigrants
should have a snfliricet space arid proper accommodation, to ensure their
comfort upon- along voyage, and also he provided wills ample food, medi-
cal comforts, and 'medicines, of a good and proper drsoriptiovn
“ The necessity for sins cautxoxs is folly proved by late advices from the
colonies of the treatment of passengers oa hoard certain ships. ' s '
I was about to direct the attention, of my readers to; the
luild of the vessels seat out by us but if they will do me the
favour to come and judge for themselves by aetonl inspection,
I would not only be muck;gratified thereby, but. i would also
have the additional pleasure of hearing them say that the fol-
lowing hues from Mr. Capper applied in the strictest sense to.
our vessels : -
“ The decks of the. veoiffb. g&Uiog for tins A asfoakske colonies


cannot be surpassed for heigM and ventilation; and am uniformly fitted
with cOHixsiodioas and well-ventiiate'd cabins (each married couple having
a separate cabin)-5 and the passengers provkloaed noon a scale of dietary
far superior to that allowed in. emigrant ships : and" as regards the sea-
worthiness of the ships, the. space allowed to., the.passexsgers," and the snin«
deucy of the provisions, are under the inspection and approval of her
Majesty’s Emigration Officer, at the port of London., and experienced
surgeons are carried m each- ship.’--
WHAT AN EMIGRANT’S OUTFIT SHOULD BE.
This is a subject upon which all who have written ou emi-
gration have given, very elaborate details, I think, however,
that such, was a labour of supererogation, because, the larger
the supply of clothes of every description emigrants take out,
the better. Those they purchase here will be cheaper and
better made than any to. he procured in a new eountry'. ami;
therefore I have only to say on- tins-subject that they need, not
provide themselves with any of those heavy, cumbrous
articles indispensable to a rnau selecting any part of America
as bis future home, for- there, he, will have to ©neonate- a
Siberian, temperature, lo.» .a considerable,period; of each. year*
unknown to Yiotobia;
As. to provisions, the articles, most- essential to. the, life and
comfort of an Englishman, beef.-and,mutton* are the, cheapest
in Australia ; for instance, he can, have an 8: lb. leg; of mutton,
of prime quality for a shitting, not Is, a pound, hut ls>fm the
mka'ie. and first rate beef f-or \i>L per lb.
You may bring out with you many things which will; be
welcome luxuries ia the. hush, suds as books, newspapers,
pickles, sauces, and such matters ; hut your outfit iu every
other respect may. he of the. plainest description:;, it is.for seiv
vice, not show, that- yon want those things, aud. therefore: let-
all yonr domestic articles of necessity and use be p| strong
and euduriug materials, and never mind weet-nnd faucice or,
conceits* you. will not find auy of them at your feupb nelgb*-
hours.
TO THE LADIES.
I would say—Have no fear of the. result of yoqr emigrating
to Victokia. This I say to alt classes of females* hut more
particularly to that class who can be mere useful than orna-
mental in the bush. To single ladies on the verge of that
fearful precipice, a “certain age* | would say, Hurry to


Australia, for there husbands await your arriving, and peace
and plenty for ever more, if it be not your <nen fault-.
THE WIND-UP.
I have now, I think, at least m far as it is at all necessary
or useful, touched upon every point connected with emigra-
tion to Australia. As I have already, observed, if I were in
the book-making mood, I could have spun out these pages to
ten, ay, one hundred times their present limits; hut as I
seek not to make a profit or a penny by it, I have oonSned it
to the practical hints ami suggestions which I have often been
worried in giving, rim voco % to applicants, and to avoid the
repetition oI which in future I have compiled in this form,
and so that “those who run may readA
I could say a great deal about
ADELAIDE.
But nothing new. All that I have said of Txotokia will
apply to Adelaide, except that the latter is remarkable more
for mineral than agricultural wealth. There is also this to be
said, in comparing the two, that while Government and other
money has been spent In vast ‘sums in the effort to make
Adelaide, Yiotokia km made kernelf!
In conclusion, : i have only to say that I have not, in the
foregoing pages, dwelt upon what would he likely to be the
happy results of the adoption of a different line- of policy, or a
new course of action, towards our Australian colonies by our
rulers. No; I leave that; to your learned quidnuncs and
would-be legislators, and for this reason, that while ail those
very valuable and sapient alterations and amendments are
being suggested iu our present system of colonial policy, the
world won’t stand still. People: wdll continue to emigrate all
tho while, and therefore I have .shown them how to deal
with things as they had them.
THOMAS WOOLLEY,
Australian Emigration Office, 2 Street;
AAich arch" Strict*
Icafearrtated by Srawiisraad Mbsbax, OM Bailey.


(migrants <m Ship-board*
THE 44 WILLIAM STEVENSON/ 5
EMIGRANT SHIP,
On Monday, the 3rd of June, a meeting was held 5« Sx, Marxists
Hall, London, under the presidency of the Eam. of Habsoyby, for'
the purpose of bringing under public notice the mode of treatment of
EHISE&WS OS SBEP-BOABD.
.At that meeting were also present the Loud . X.xTXSi/roN, the
Bishop op HoawiC'H, and several Clergyman and Member of
Parliament.
I'he .Hoy, Mr. Chills, of Plymouth, proposed the third resolution,
which was to the effect, that each vessel hiking out emigrates should be
supplied with books, maps, working -utensils, ice. S:c. In the course of
bis speech, the re verend gentleman, la .commenting apes the value and
necessity of supplying Emigrants with the means of mental Improve”
meat, said :
K Within the last few days I have had the. pleasure of addressing a
large number of emigrant young women who have gone out to Australia
under the auspices and patronage of that great philanthropist and friend
of mankind, the Hon. Sidney Hskbbux, M.P., and his benevolent and
kind-hearted lady, I went on board the ship on Saturday last, and had


Mmlgrwnts cm SMsf-fearf continued.
the pleasure of meeting several ladies from Plymouth who had gone on
board for the purpose of doing little acts of kindness for those young
women. 1 addressed them at: some length on the nature of the new life
they were about to enter upon, and. they listened with great attention.
On Sunday I went on. board: again and preached. All the emigrants on
hoard, amongst whom were several from my own parish, attended, and
the scene altogether was a most interesting one. After divine service I
walked through the ship, and found everything in the most perfect
order. She is named the William Stevenson, and Is certainly the
largest and finest emigrant ship I ewer -saw; there Is an Immense space
between, the deck on which the emigrants are located and teat over-
head. and a large portion of the stern of the vessel was fitted up and en-
closed exclusively for the use and occupation of the young women, who
enjoy the further advantage of bel»g:..an4er-4he'pt'oteefioa of a matron
specially seat out. with then*.
** .Before taking my final leave they gathered, round me and begged I
would convey to Mrs. Herbert the warmest expression of th«ftr gratitude
and thanks for all. her kindness to thtsm, and to assure her that they
were perfectly happy and comfortable c that their food and sleeping ac-
commodation were excellent and- abundant, and: tho, captain, surgeon,
and officers of the ship, exceedingly k|nd : apd sdtentiye. They found
another source of comfort and happiness in the fact that Immediately on
their arri val at Melbourne they will be taken In charge by a brother
clergymen of mine at that town, with whom I am ie regular com-
munication, and therefore they-need have no fear of being left to wander
about alone and friendless in a far distant la,ed. , ''-«(Applauae.)
xhe po®Ksc«sr,& (smsunr.Axioas Mmmt m
THE SHIP “WX&XIAIi SfEfEIS Of,"
which was seat gatip thespputh of M«ty this year.


IMFOmTikMT TO ItmmMJmTM-.
FREDERIC BARNES,
GU H, RIFLE, AMD PISTOL
MAH I) FACT USER,,
aoiHOssES, & H&RawAm^i,
3j OHIO A ROW, TOWER HILL, LOT DON.
AWB
d®sseral Kmisfusats’ Depot for Rg-ricnlfcayal Implemessts, Ifec.
Continues to solicit the attention of all classes- of Endgnpnts to his
Establishment as above, where they may foe supplied with every smicie in
his liixe of business at very moderate prices for cash, F- B, also desires
to mention that all goods purchased of Mm are packed and sent to the
Docks ios'iii? of Exbbxbe, except the,charge %, whatever package they
may require. He solicits especial attention, to the undermentioned
articles, which he can supply on very advantageous-terms.
Improved Portable Qo'i:n~WS,ill f
Which grinds and dresses the flour, and separates the., hran- from it by
one operation, in a manner superior to any portable mill, before invented.
It may he seen in operation as above. Also bis
BmlgrasaEs Improves! Portable Cooking Stove,
Which, is a most- complete article, and: made to. horn: cither wood: or opals.
R rci grant'o Farm, Carts,
Which take to pieces for saving of freight, the body forming an excellent
packing-case for other goods. •:
Improved Corrugated Iron Hkmsess,
In various sizes,, made to, order, and fitted up with Cooking; Stove, Iron
Bedsteads, &c,, at very reduced prices,
Few pattern Iron, and. Wood Ppoc»KS, Harrows, Imora, Horse
Hoes, Scabivibrs, Portable Forges, l&os Bb»sxba»s, Saddlery, Tin
and Japan Goods. Lamps, Easterns, and Tools-of every description.
The variety and extent of his stock of
SUMS, RIFIF3S, FISTOFE, SWOIBS, fee.
Is acknowledged to be unrivalledi; and from, the facilities be has in
manufacturing, both la Birmingham and London, he is enabled to
supply articles at much lower prices than other houses,
A .Ih ~--Mia Emigrants 5 Complete- Eist of Articles suitable tor their own
ss.se or harder may be bad gratis on application, or seot free of post.
FREDERICK BAEIIES, Gun and Pistol Mamifac-torj,
AM Warehouse for Inovnnoxeoisv, Cbti-bry, Tooxb, dAoneEmv,; &e.
% PRIOR ROW, TOWER HILL, LONDON,
At, .tb.®: bottom, of the and facing iba Tower.-—Also at
ISgj.Eivsry-stiseet,. JBiranngbam, and d;>, Cai-vcrWreot, Sheffield.
Ths 'Depotfar AgriwMm-ai Impfawmt*, Cart*, cjo?,, R m the Mimrim.
vjjmnmg. ikz Mmlwm,


TO EMIGRANTS.
Persona intending to EMIGRATE should furnish themselves with one of
Cteorge nurd, A oh/sx Us&seg’n FmlgAortvoß. Sir owl a.vs.
To be had at the Counting-house of their General Furnishing Iron*;
mongery, Cutlery, Deanean-plate, Lamp, Stove, Fender, Iron and Brass.';
Bedstead, and Turnery Warehouse.
Mo. AM- S SClag “WEliarn-streot, Ibondcm Hrsdge,
where every article required for domestic nse is supplied at the lowest !
wholesale prices, together with Horticultural Implements, Smiths’, ■
Carpenters’, Coopers’, Bricklayers’, and Masons’ Tools ; Pewter, Bri-i.
t&snia Metal, and Tin Goods ; Dairy Utensils, and a large variety of:
everything needful to the well-being of an Emigrant's Family,
The very best and cheapest Saddlery
rosy be procured at G. and J, Deane’s Manufactory, No. 2, Arthur. :
street East, And
Mans, itifies, Fiatela, GnTiaaaeSj
Percussion Caps, and every de.fmpthm of Shooting Tackle at their Gun
Manufactory, No, 30, .King Wilihm-street,
Ucane, Bray, a»d Beale’s one home carts.
Iron Houses, Ploughs, Scarifiers, Horse Hoes, Harrows, Winnowing.
Machines, Indian Cultivators, together with their lately perfected
Emigrant’s Coma Mill,
may be had, along svlib their Illustrated Catalogue, at their Agricultural
Implement Depot,
Swan-ka«j Upper Tbamess-ntreet,
These several Establishments are within a Minute’s Walk of each other, end In-
sure to the emigrant that distinct, end especial attention which ears only be had at
separate -warehoases. But wOlr this is also combined the advantage of having ah
purchases brought to a centre, aod shipped at one time from
George arxd Tolm Beane’s Hnport Warehoims,
Ac. 3, AETIibTt~STBEET WEST. LONDON BRIDGE.
City of London Life Assurance Society,
FOR ACCUMULATIVE AND GENERAL ASSURANCES,
2, Boeal Excn ixwe 11. n,ntNn,- red 5, Watekboo-
Pea ob, Pa.n.t,' Haix. Loeooaa
Actuary.— G. J. FARRANCS, Esq,
This Society einbracoa every convenience offered by any existing Life
OSice, It combines all the benefits of
Tits Mete as System, without its risks or ll&bilities—AN impor-
tant consider at to si to Assn reus.
The PnoEuthTAby Ststem. with the full benefits of its acknow-
ledged Security; and
The AccuMTu.ATtvji, or DiiEosrr System, introduced by this
Society the Premiums at all times available to the Assured,
XEayment of 'Premiums arranged, in any thabn«f to-"suit the con-
venience of parties. u:ud appearance before the Board not required, Al.
further intbraia-vioxt may be obtained of
Edward Frederics, Leees, Seereisry.


LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY.
Incorporated by Act of l^ariia m.ont.
ESTABLISHED 1826.
iksgtSmt,
The Most Hosts THIS MABQUIS OF BAI.HOUBIB.
J3sartf.
Francis Pegler, Esq. ....... .(Messrs, Pegler Brothers.)
Horatio Simon Samuel, Esq,.,(Messes, EC. S. Samuel k Co,)
Augustus Biilem, Esq. ..... .(Messrs. Herman, Slilem, Box!, & Co.
C, F. B. S w f,etl.A.Kd, Esq. ..... (Messrs. Scott, Bell, & Co,)
WittiAM Tottxe, Esq. ...... ..(Messrs. Charles Tottle & Son.)
Consulting Physidan.
Dr. Frrbbrics; Cobb, St. Helen's Place.
Medic a I Off ears .
Chass. Harris, Esq., Surgeon, ?(>, Ouddiord-street & 13, Fenchurch-st.
Dr. Chas. Bkobie Se well, 27, Waihrook & 12, Fexudnuroh-street.
Solicitors. Messrs. G. E. Hi,t.i.bart, 68, I*mchureb~street
Bankers.. —Messrs, Saute, Musbratt, Banbury, & Co.
Pendent Secretary -J. E.,C. Koch, Esq,
OlEee m London- AS, Eornbard-strest,
Examples of the Additions made to Policies at the last Investigation.-
To a Policy of 1,000?. which had, by additions at previous
Investigations, beers increased to . ,£1,221 0 6
There were added Retrospective additions for seven years 170 18 10
Making the amount payable under the Policy ,- £.1,331 19 4
Aed provision was made for payment of a further animal' prospective
addition of "271. 12s, B<E, if the Policy emerge prior to next Investigation,
Slst December 1858.
To a Policy of 1,000/. of seven years’ duration, an addition was made
of 140?., with a further provision for payment of a prospective annual
addition, of 22?. 16s. for each additional year’s existence of the Policy, if
it emerge prior to nest Investigation.
And so to Policies of less duration, additions were made at the rain, of
2 per cont,, or 20?, on a 1,000?, Policy, for each year’s duration of the
Policy, and provision made for payment of a prospective annual addition
of 2 per cent., both, on the original stun .assured, - and the retrospective
additions. These additions become exigible on every Policy emerging
after beltsg in existence five years.
Proposals entertained In every branch of Life Asssxmu.ee Endowments
and Annuities granted-—Educational Annuities to children on death of
parent...
Every information may bs obtained at the Offices, 43, Lombard-street,
or frosn any of the Agencies.


THE
ROYAL BRITISH BANK,
mCOUPOHATBS BY CHARTER,
l?ih SEPTEMBBE, M ,
fOK
BECEITIHG DEPOSITS AT IRTEEEST,
'DISCOUNTING BILLS,
MAKING ADVANCES OM APPROVED SECURITIES,
HEAETITfO CASH CREDITS,
AS! If
TRANSACTING; EVERT OTHB'E BkSCMRTION •OF BANKING BUSINESS
■ O v t.NE
SCOTTISH SYSTEM.
Hi, TOIiBNHOITSE YiUll), LOTHBITET.
The Dikbctoks have .the ratlofaetioa to axmouaoe, tfrat they have opened
Bear chess of the Rot ax Bkxtish Bank, la the
ETM'&WM, Me, Chimer of Bgar Streetj
BAMBKTM, STo. TI, BHdge Monti;
And &pe..ahcnxi:.to open one at
IBrLimGTOm, near the BongeL
WE»SS1»«18, A ftbjuOpm’S fe ww- open at 23, Yens
Stekst j and. arrangements are hx progress he Branches in the Borough
of Southwark,- at Limehoursc, mwl Paddington.
The hoars of.pahhe business «»fe« 0 a,m. till 4 f.m. daily,; at the
'Head Ofßoemd and IVoxix 12 so 8 and. 6 kt 6 o’clock t.nn ai
'the Sab-Office.
Terms of Bnaßxesss.
Deposit AGCoirNTs, Three per cent, will h*' 1 wOii<i dally on ah
deposits for six months. of one pound «nd apv.ardj, and !h-» j.-tonvd pale
• monthly, -or accumulated half-yearly, as she adoption »r the
for every sum not then drawn, and winch in au<-h uUl, fox the neD
period of six *hoxsthg,-fona together ass increased prineipcf »jhh h*ar.n,
■interest at three, per-ceht.—-and if not then drawn, b<- aeam Bceunmixuv
-as-above for-tfee next halt-yearly period, end so on progrosßvoh, cun)-
pounding the interest haif-yiaiiy. Butin any psmleniar ea-e, Die di «•*(,-
tors will, if the circumstances j testify-aa exception from their rales, repai
•any par* or the whole of the deposit.
The Directors’-having by the Charter the peculiar privilege rtf gwlnallj
increasing the capital, will, when new shares are being allotted give *
preference,-after the ••existing shareholders, to depositors mxti -.customer!
who may wish to become proprietors, according to The'priority of theb


fee tteyal Brftlkk Bsmk coatism6d.
applications, allowing, until & dividend be declared, three per cent,
interest on all deposits set apart for ■■ shares. In accordance with the
original purpose of the Institution, and of tbe early promise of Jts pro-
moters, vie,, to endeavour to make tbe proprietary body as numerous as
possible, and. the corporation, as far as the law will permit, a society tor
banking on the principles of a mutual, -benefit association, the share-
holders-and depositors for new shares will have a preference in the enjoy-
ment of such benefits as the Bank can legitimately afford.
Special Deposits for shorter or longer .periods than - ' m *dhs
will be received on snch'terms as may be arranged; in each pa ~i» t < one.
IkaAwTNG ok, Cue-rent Accounts, One per-cent, inn t ? i k-
oned from day to day, will be allowed on ail balances -eo-mio,*' ;or the
half-year, of 100?. and upwards j and two per cent, oh all su< h I<> 1 ;e»
exceeding 300?. : but the permanent maintenance of any halm t 1 d not
be insisted on, when the party has not also a discount accomro.
Cash Cits bit Accounts will be granted to-respectable partly on
.personal sec&rif.yor such guarantees as may be- satisfactory to th*> Hank.
A commission of one per cent, half-yearly, will be charged on the amount
of the credit, but interest (five per cent, pec annum) will be dHni- d <>n the
balance only of actual eu-h born time to tone drawn out by the party
after deduction of fee msm paid in. To shareholders and Depositors
for new Shares the > ononimon on cask credit vUi be but a half per cent,
half-yearly.
Axl Account's 'wilVhe : -baiam»d 'half*ymrly.
Official Receipts will, on (ha one hand, P* giv<n> to Onsdounra
for -all'snips paid'in, and-fheir'Cl&SQt' a*, on tbe ottew, will he p-ovc ;-ii
by the Bank till the succeeding half-yearly hufemee, «b«-u fie 3o , »: l u!'-
will be certified and the vouchees cwbangtd, csc< pt la <*avs via re
parties may specially wish for a different arrangement.
Abvanpes ok 'Loans on 'Promissory Paler wllh marketable -(virri-
ties readily convertible, will be made at rates proportioned to the nature
axel value of tbe security in each case.
Discounts £ ;/ Bills of Exchange will he made at the rates of the
day; but only to parties having drawing aeeoutus, eon herpiue' beb.uces
of not less than one fourth of the amount of their discounts.
Am., Bill® von Discount must fee -lodged dui-j b<-f>ce Id coon,
and not called for till after 2 p. m.
Remittances wßi'be made to, .and'-Six.c*- commemin In anv place
in England, Scotland, or Ireland, or on the Continent of b.arope wnere
there is a Banker: as also in America, the'West India*, India and China.
Dividends, &e., will be received fom Shareholders or Customers
without- obarg-e.
Bo grMnily will fee allowed to he received from a' Customer or
Applicant by any one -in the-Bank’s employment.. .
Forms of Application from Shareholders or Depositors for now shares,
or from parties desirous to open Accounts, will be supplied at the Baen,
or sent by post to any who may require them.
By Order of the Court of THrsctors,
iiUOH IAAES CAMBBOfi.
Cfmeral Manager.
16, T>:>K E:--;--KOi.ra;s; Yard,
19i* April ISSO.


DIORAMA OF AUSTRALIA,
NOW OPEN
la t h& Theatre of the Wssstersx liit&v&rw Institution,
IjEICESTEE square.
la the coas-se of the Exhibliioo, occur the following highly interesting
Scones (Iron), Paintiags made os die Spot, by J. Sk.ikjsse Pkoxjt,
Member- of the New Water Colour Society) :
CITIES OF
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE,
/.AM)
HOBART TOWN,
BUSH SCENES JN THE INTERIOR,
Bivouac of Emigrants, and Emigrant’s Residence,
SHEEP AND CATTLE STATIONS,
T6 f TH ii
PORT PHILIP DISTRICT,
Haunts of ike ■. -JSnemtprfimt of Ah)riginex f
fBE FBICAH fiETfLSISEMfS., fe.
The Diorasa&is aecompaaied by
APPEOFEJATB MUSIC, and by A LECTURE,
Descriptive of the Airsßafem Cbloaies.
©pen Sally at Three and SigliL
A.WMJMMKmW f IME SISII.LIIO*
Reserved Seats, Ss. ChiUrca arid Eehoob, Half-price.


JUST PUBLISHED , PE ICE SIXPENCE,
EMIGRATION COLONIES j
.BBISiO THIS MOST KECSNT
INFORMATION
KISSI»ISCTISr« thh„
POSITION, SOIL, PRODUCTIONS,. LAND IN
CULTIVATION, POPULATION, STOCK,
PRICES OF PROVISION,
&IC3 BATE OF WMES,
IN THE BBVBBAII SKTTLEMISNTg OF
AUSTRALIA,
VAN DIEMEN'S LAND,
SEW IEAtAIS,
A\l)
PORT NATAL,
ALSO THE
COST OF THE SEVERAL CLASSES OF PASSAGE
TO EACH OF THE RF.SBBOTiVIS COT.ONXBB,
COMPILED FROM OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS,
BT
HEMEY CAFFEE,
FOSMEKET BBNZOH CHESK TO SEK MA.,TKST"S' , B BMXO RATION
COMMISSXOWBSS EOF SOUTH AfISTRATA.T,
Author of “ Caper's South Australia,” “Mow to get to Soati* A mtealia/
ami late Proprietor and Editor of the “ Aasiralaslaii EeiX-rd,”
and “ Soatls. Athcm Chronieied''
LOUDON;
CHARLES COX, 12, KINO WILLIAM STREET, STItAXD;
TBRLAWNEY SAUNDERS, COLONIAL LIBRARY,
6, CHARING CROSS;
AND AXC BOOFS,BB?>BI?S<


The ADVANTAGES OF EMIGRATION being materially increased;;
by theeotafaeta of a Bt-tTABLn Ou'rFJ'J'j
B. I. MON NEB Y & GO,, X6T>, FENGMDRCH BTEE.ET, CITY,
baying had nsany years’ experience la that liq« ? feel confidence in
the attettldon o'" all doss-os to their Oat 8 ding Warehouse, where a large
assortment of Shirts, Clothlxssj, Hosiery, &c. &e,, suitable for any of Foe
Coioniea, is. kept ready for Immediate nse, at axmsuaßy low prices. ,* ,
Mattresses, Bedding, Cabin m&- Camp ihjmifere of every description.
Lists, with prices adixed, forwarded by peat,
A CAPITAL OUTFIT POE £& 15s, VERY SUPERIOR £lO 10s.
£ s, ■■■.
Shooting Goat 0 14 0
Pilot Coat 0 14 0
I Cachmeret Waistcoat 0 5 0
1 Doable-breasted ditto 0 S 0
4 pair Back Trousers 4s, fid, 018 0
1 pair good Cloth ditto . . ..., 0 14 0
18 Striped Shifts ~,, fe, Od, 8 5 0
6 Long Cloth ditto, fine linen fronts, &c.,, 4s. Od. 1 4 0
4 Nightcaps. : 0 , fid, 0 2 0
2 Lamb’s-wool under-shirts Os. Od. 0 8 0
$ .-pal?, ditto Drawers. , Bs. fid. 0 7 0
4r pair Cotton ditto 3s, (id. 0 8 0
4 pair Lamb’s-wool, half-hose Is, Od, 0 4 0
13 pair Gotttmditto I-.**,,, .i.fid, 0 6 0
6 Pocket Handkerchiefs 6d. 0 3 0
Black Bilk Handkerchief 0 0 8
2 pair Braces 9d, 0 1 S
2 pair Shoes ♦ « Ss< fid. Oil 0
8 Towels ,A., \ , A (M. 0 4 0
4 lbs. Marine Soap , fid. 080
Che5t................................... 012 0
£ld 10 0
The above articles arc warranted both for qnalhy and workmanship.
Every description of Cabin Fmadture,
IsTSxmxo EHiaaA^ra.—■'Those of oar readers ab»m departing to tfee Canadas*!
Amtmlm, New Kealafcd, &«%. would save «s««b money, time, and trouble, by cords
suiting Messrs, Mo»W33x.y su-5 Co., Ida, Ceuefeareh-sto-ct, whose long eaperb sue as
Oriental Outfitters enable them to tarnish the most statable t-quipraturts tor alt
climates. — The JMiffr&ttfs Nmupaper.
Sec-oner:»k to Emisjusys.—a great roaay of those iron hies mid ini posUio ns to
wbirii intending emigrants are subject may to obv-iited by u judicious selection front;;
whom to cbtsia toe requisite oat jits; and, of an gardes we are acquainted with we;
<3(3 not know any better qualified to give satisfaction: than Messrs, .Mon'S env, of
Feneiittte’n-sfeeet, whose known respeclabillty, and long aspeihence in Colonial o*Jt~
fits, entitle them to every praise, The &mujrmWs trairto,
Knagrsnts who require outfits tor any of the eeiarors, ivrA who Malt to place thonn
selves in the hands of a tcspectoblo house, may save fhemseivo? tnad- moony nub
unnecessary anxiety and trout:a ay applying to Messrs, Mosssax and Oo„ 1(55,
Fmiriinrcfe-street, whose great bfgh character, awl sospmubUity, Is th£
best guarantee that every article widuh they supply »i;‘i give satisfaction.---
Time*, in reply to the inquiries of " An Kang rant/ 5


xsL n» m to
A 11 3 T R A L I A,
r6v.i rm&sr, A3rr> av*»T,v,
j,''* ■»'!;. ; J *.»*• 'Tr>fc* a r ■'!?;;•*,
!,„ *!< , - ; - - , i,”/,»-;i. s f«,- ir ,^ f ,,, f , *,- "j-
V-. »;/.:v;.?/ e , ! , V;-j;.m : ;:",-..'
',f -'(!! It s' , -f' "'I"- ~>* '***'•« «" ;" '"
XKstwy »e*fc*
MH
mmm
Xu
!>»,
■
llliipilß
:
mmmm
'"' "< -" '' - -*> s ' '^"""'" 1 * a ■** ”/ - ; ,«
“* ,V, fc 4"' f '' P '"'' " lf « *A<S**v.R
S* i«,~ '5 'i - -,4 ‘V -MVU- ' ? " * iiiA.U .< -- I'. -* <<,.f» ",
' , i"" t-{ t. ',^, f " A"# v-**
J J f\' ',. '"""K -;3i i- *v*> * * ' '
WkisM&&xmw
%& XvMf
H&
i»n Xu'ttm
MM
* *s S ,i f,f ,
i' a ' <' A*/"'' f *V'
S' -;*»f" *-i *nt*,.y
S' - ' s'-j '„!',■. -,,, s, ,',s
" *' f
<,r «,' ;, f
U'-f,<:>', #,!>-,:
V-, .(}'•“, '"' , f- "
S -»f- A' ; i-'!V S
vV^'"'»' ,<f^
i'f> (vf;vi, ' s <' i,s .i>'
>y , '-j
' ,'' j ',' i' - f
i-, ', -v, .■}
,-"i,',;- ,-{ '-t 't>f '? - ,:
f s f 4 V s V ' ■
'< , 'X\,<


Mw&m
iilii
-, f «-
iftM
s-/ 9 "
rU
* f-
mmgaam
, * %'
', f
%7
mm
, *i
~f /***«*" *'
- ~ %. ft* t ! "& f * f", '’ '" I"■ „ w ~ , ,
j«,j, j tf* - '" i "* "" '' / „ *** »£
;„ fjtv ♦' *,»* *- - f ' f l {
' .jS.f-AK '"K >"-'(**" '
- <""', f tf” ff""***', f ~ , „
„, >, r it, * pf*t* ** * < s ' f ' '* -
T*V* ''- : ''v -*; ;* ™'"«:V; , 'ZZ v:; >
, j* *f ite* *-'* ''•y-'"
' t f *■ > * y < "* * f
fa*',, puffin 's sS s>' *5 **
. *f A «\W' £' ' *8
f' <
£
f' vsr
• '*', .* n*-« '> ■''"' < *** ,V VW -' * *' -* * '** »*' *
at
;'(,' i 1.-). " 51 -' /<*£,'
iiiiii
* ,v£f H. A
