

REMINISCENCES,
By J B. M
Being a reprint from the Camden Times.
1883.
Published by A. J. Doust, “ Times v Office, Camden.




REMINISCENCES,
By J. B. M.
Being a reprint from the Camden Times.
1888.
1884.
Published by A. J. Poust, “Times” Office, Camden.




3 O-U-Tl
REMINISCENCES.
BY J. B M.
The great change that has passed over the Colony, both iitpersonnel and
the habits of its inhabitants, has led me to think that the reminiscences
of one who has witnessed the process during more than fifty years might
not be uninteresting to many. In the mother country much has been
done by local associations in elucidating the history and archceology of
the several counties ; we have none such here, and it is much to be
regretted that Sir William Macarthur, who had such a profound acquaint-
ance with local and general colonial history, and such abundant means
of reference, should have passed away without imparting it to his fellow
colonists. When I observed that his health was failing, I thought of
undertaking a memoir of the district, and applied to him for information,
but found that he had lent his papers to a Presbyterian clergyman who
was then contributing to the “ Sydney Mail.” He promised, however, to
let me have them as soon as they were returned, and enjoined his at-
tendant to remind him of it, but I heard no more of the matter. In the
absence of other attempts of the kind I feel impelled to do the little that
I can to supply the deficiency. I arrived in the colony in January, 1832,
and have had good opportunities for personal observation and experience.
A considerable part of the interval has been passed in this district, but
my sketch will carry me far outside of it, so that it will not be altogether
local, and I regret exceedingly that the want of authentic information on
the subject will prevent me from having much to say as respects the great
Camden estate. I shall not pretend to positive accuracy as to dates, as
I have never kept memoranda, and therefore must ask indulgence on that
score, and as I know there are a few “ old hands ” still surviving here, 1
write subject to their correction. When I became acquainted with the
district (in about 1885) the country was largely occupied by resident
gentry who kept up large establishments and exercised unbounded hospi-
tality ; they were mostly of good social position, with a sprinkling of
army and navy officers among them. Their generally prosperous con-
dition and abundant leisure enabled them to interchange the courtesies of
life very extensively, and their families had a merry time of it. There
then existed that homestead system which Mr. Rankin has so eulogised
in his pamphlets and lectures—tracts of land obtained by grant or pur-
chase, in areas of three or four sections, generally having an outlet upon
Crown lands, affoiding room for a small herd of cattle and a flock or
two of sheep, which with a good deal of cultivation, and the continuous
improvements carried on, afforded occupation for a comparatively large
staff.


The discovery of the “ New Country ” to the South a few years before
had led to the formation of a good many stations, and these gentlemen
had mostly secured an interest there. The stations were managed by
superintendents, sometimes with the help of the ‘ young master ’ sent to
learn station work. The proprietors generally visited their stations at
shearing time. The homestead formed an excellent resting place for stock
brought from the stations for sale, and for the wool teams to refresh after
delivering the wool and bringing the station supplies so far on their return.
At such times opportunity was taken to make such changes as were desir-
able as regarded the station and farm hands. A good deal of latitude
was allowed to the station men during their two or three weeks stay. The
labour, both in and out of doors, was principally done by assigned servants.
So little is known now-a-days about assignment that it is necessary to
explain it here. On the arrival of ships with prisoners of the Crown the
men were drafted off to Hyde Park barracks, and the boys to Carter’s
barracks, where they remained until disposed of. Any person having
employment, whether in trade or on land, and producing satisfactory evi-
dence of fitness, was enabled to obtain men of various occupations ; such
men then served with little or no pay, and with some trifling indulgences,
until they became entitled to a ticket of leave, which enabled them to
engage as free men within certain boundaries. After holding a ticket of
leave for a certain period they became entitled to a certificate of freedom,
unless transported for life, in which case they received a conditional par-
don, which gave them all the privileges of freedom, including a right to
possess land, excepting that they should not leave the colony. As the
ticket depended upon good character it was an inducement to behave well
in service, and where the relation of master and man had been pleasant,
the ticket holder often chose to remain on current wages, to do the same
work that he had previously done for almost nothing, and frequently rose
to situations of trust. It was a kind of adult boarding-out system, by
which the Government were relieved of the charge of maintaining a
number of men herded together in barracks with its vices, and at the same
time enabled the men to adapt themselves to the occupations of the country,
and to redeem their characters. There were but few immigrants, and they
had rather a hard time of it amongst these men, by whom they were
designated “ empty-grants,” and told that they had come into the country
for fear of being “ lagged.” There was a witty saying current that the
colonists consisted of only two classes—those who had been lagged and
those who ought to have been. Looking back at those times, and follow-
ing up the after careers of many men whom I have observed, or had to
deal with, I am persuaded that the assignment system was the most bene-
ficial to the men themselves that could possibly have been devised. It
certainly partook of the character of a lottery, as a well-disposed man
might be assigned to a capricious and evil-minded master, when much had
to be endured, and wretched charges were up to get a
man punished by a longer probation for his ticket, and consequent longer
enforced service, but such cases were rare. Ordinarily the relations of
master and man were satisfactory enough. Bad men, unless especially


skilful or useful, were soon returned to Government (or “ turned in ”
as the phrase was) and were re-assigned. It ought not to be overlooked
that in those days the most venial offences were punished with transpor-
tation, and there was many a poor farm labourer amongst them whose
extreme poverty had driven him to take a few turnips or potatoes from a
field. Some of the best farm servants ever brought here were men whose
ignorance of “ political economy ” made them band together for the des-
truction of threshing machines, which they thought would ruin the
labouring man. I knew many of them, hardworking, trustworthy
simple-minded fellows, who were led Tike children into the commission of
what they considered rather self defence than crime. Such men, und( r
kind masters, were sure to advance themselves, and indeed, excepting to
those who were torn from their families, transportation must have been a
blessing. As the proportion of> free and native born increased, an agita-
tion sprang up for the discontinuance of transportation. Fewer prison
ships arrived, and as the men already assigned obtained their tickets of
leave the system gradually died out; but as there was not a sufficient
supply of immigrants to take their places, operations at homesteads had
to be contracted into the narrowest compass, and many of the land
owners finding the difficulty of maintaining two establishments, removed
to their stations in the interior, and eventually sold their homesteads.
Out of the many such holdings in this district I only know of six remain-
ing in the families of the original grantees. Some of the larger land
owners conceived the happy idea of letting their lands on clearing leases,
under which men of small means were able to obtain the use of farms of
the richest virgin lands on condition of clearing certain portions in five or
seven years. A man of sober and industrious habits could generally
obtain supplies and implements on security of his future crop. So well
did the system succeed that a well-to-do class of farmers was brought into
existence, and at the same time the lands were so raised in value that at
the end of the term the landlord was able to obtain a handsome rental.
Free selection has drawn off the bulk of the pioneer farmers, but the
country has been beautified and improved, and the farms are competed for
as eagerly as ever. Having now traced the change in the land tenure I
will dismiss that part of my subject.
According to Wentworth the Cowpastures were originally reserved for
the wild cattle that were discovered there about 15 years after the settle-
ment of the Colony. They were, chiefly, the progeny of some that had
strayed from the Government herd, and were forbidden to be killed or
captured, but, notwithstanding the taking of them was punishable with
death, the settlers on the Cumberland side of the river would not be
deterred, and some were convicted and executed for the offence. The
Judge Advocate came to doubt the legality of the convictions, because it
was just possible that cattle of private individuals might also have
strayed, and the death penalty was not afterwards enforced. The
criminal laws of that period were hideously barbarous. In the Appendix
to i( Wentworth’s History,” I find that in 1811 a man was executed for
stealing forty shillings in a dwelling house. In 1812 fourteen nien and


women were sentenced for stealing, or receiving cattle, of whom two were
executed, five were reprieved, and the rest were sentenced to from seven
to fourteen years’ transportation to the Coal River (as Newcastle was
then called). In 1813 one man was hanged for stealing £BS in a dwell-
ing house, and two were sentenced to death for sheep stealing, but were
reprieved,’ whilst two men were hanged for cattle stealing, and a woman
was transported for seven years for stealing a cow. Down to 1817 the
death penalty for cattle stealing was generally enforced, but in a few cases
the mitigated (?) sentence of three years’ solitary confinement in Parra-
matta Gaol on bread and water, followed by two years in a chain gang
and transportation for life to Newcastle, was substituted. In all cases of
highway robbery or burglary the death penalty was carried out. In 1816
Mr. Frederick Garling —grandfather of our bank manager—was Acting
Judge. Government was awakened to the necessity of destroying the
wild cattle so as to remove the temptation. I was told by the late Mi.
Wild that a decoy mob of quiet cattle was kept about Cawdor, wheie
yards and guide fences were erected, and that when any wild cattle could
be got to mix with them, the whole were rushed into the enclosure and
the wild ones were shot and burned. He said that he had many times
joined in the chase. About 1812 a government cattle station was formed
at Brownlow Hill in charge of Mr. George Johnson, one of the Annan-
dale family, who was killed by his horse running him against a tree. One
of his brothers succeeded him until the cattle were removed to Bathurst.
Some of the herd strayed towards Goulburn, and led to the discovery of
the ‘New Country.’ Mr. Robert Lowe, of Bringelly, afterwards got per-
mission to occupy Brownlow Hill with his cattle, and the hill upon which
Brownlow Hill post office stands came to be known as Lowe’s Hill.
Owing to the hostility of the blacks no one was allowed to cross to the
Camden side of the river without special permission of the Government.
When I came to know this part of the country the Government had a
cattle station on Theresa Park in charge of Mr. Timothy Cusack, who had
been one of Sir Thomas Mitchell’s exploring party. He succeeded Mr.
McCooey. Only working bullocks were kept there, and they ranged over
Mulgoa Forest. An immense number of working bullocks was required
for the use of the iron gangs and road parties on the Southern and West-
ern roads then under construction by direction of Major Mitchell, and as
they required a rest they were brought to that station and turned out.
As horses were unsuitable for the pioneeer work of farms and the travel-
ling on the heavy unmetalled roads, the use of bullocks was universal, and
the training of them was brought to great perfection. Few persons would
now believe that they were in common use in Sydney in shafts like horses.
When Busby’s water supply was laid on at Hyde Park some were used to
draw the water carts with great tun butts and bell, going from house to
house. They were very commonly used to carry heavy pack loads, some-
times with the driver seated on top. Before pole drays came into exis-
tence the teams consisted of two or three pairs in yokes, and one behind
in shafts, to which the others were attached by a claw-chain, and _ they
drew surprising loads. The intelligence and docility of these animals


under kind treatment were quite equal to that of horses. The drivers
often became so attached to a specially reliable and intelligent leader or
shafter that very serious quarrels arose through fellow servants trying to
get them for their own teams. At the Agricultural Company’s estate at
Port Stephens I believe the rule was for the several drivers to have differ-
ent coloured teams to prevent it. I have seen a pair of bullocks at plough
with reins, and an old man named Joshua Booby travelled these roads for
many years with a team of them in traces. Bullock teams will soon be a
thing of the past. In the early days they were as indispensable as green
hide or stringy bark ; some day they will be as great a curiosity as Lord
Romney’s are in England.
When I arrived in the colony the system of free grants of land had just
been abolished, Governor Bourke having brought out instructions to put
an end to it. Under that system persons who could show a command of
a certain amount of capital and would promise to occupy for seven years,
could obtain up to 1280 acres, and each son on reaching majority, and
each daughter on majority or previous marriage, could claim 640
but all sorts of grants-conditional grants, promises of grants, veteran’s
grants, and grants as rewards for capturing bushrangers and other dis-
tinguished services had been given. They were first given in the county
of Cumberland, but afterwards in the counties of Camden and Argyle.
We have a great many little grants along the river—at Elderslie, Cob-
bitty, Mulgoa, &c. Veteran’s grants, given to old soldiers, still retain
that designation. There were many at Mittagong, Bong Bong, and near
Goulburn j some bear the name of the il soldier s fiats, and with singular
propriety/but quite undesignedly no doubt, many are on “ pipeclay ” soil.
Land was afterwards sold by auction by Mr, Jaques in the Market Place
in Sydney, the upset price being ss. an acre, retired army and navy
officers being allowed a remission of the purchase money, varying with
their rank, but I think limited to £3OO. Sir George Gipps raised_ the
price to 12s. and afterwards to £l, and afterwards stopped remissions.
Special surveys of 10,000 in a block at Jbl per acre weie allowed, but not
many were taken up. I think the noted Port Fairy estate was one, and
Mr. Manton’s “ Cavan ” grant, beyond Yass, was another. Large quan-
tities of grain were grown, but sometimes it stood in stack from year to
year for want of a market, and had to be thrown out to the stock in
sheaf to get rid of it. Threshing with the flail lasted all year round,
A man could do about 8 bushels a day, and when grain was low little care
was taken, so that pigs and fowls came in for a large share. Tlmie as
no market for straw, and as the land was new it was not valued for
manure. Cattle had good times in winter, as they always flocked down to
it at night. It kept them in such condition that the teams were continu-
ously at plough or on the road. Getting wheat ground for home use was
always a trouble, there being few grist mills, and those far off ; Mr.
Blaxland had a water mill at Luddenham, which, according to an adver-
tisement commenced to work as far back as June 4, 1819, grinding at Is.
per bushel; but getting at it was a formidable task. Many preferred to
go to Sydney or Parramatta. Steel mills were always kept on farms for


emergencies, and “ bunging the mill ” was often the lot of a man after
his day’s work before he could get his supper, and men were occasionally
told off to grind for the master’s use.
Imagination carries one back to the delicious damper, Johnny cakes,
and leather jackets. The whole of these various methods of breadmaking
were a marvel to new chums, who were puzzled at seeing dough put into
the ashes and come out as clean as baker’s bread. Hand ground flour
was always coarser than the other, but was considered more wholesome.
Corn meal, “ hominy,” and green corn cobs roasted and buttered, were
much relished. Pumpkins and melons yielded abundantly, but potatoes
were a variable crop, sometimes yielding enormously, and in dry seasons
scarcely returning the seed ; but when Mr. Throsby discovered Win-
gecarribee and Sutton Forest, the climate there was found so suitable
as to ensure abundant root crops of every kind.
Bushranging had always been one of the institutions of the colony, and
the southern road came in for a fair share of it. Many deeds of daring
were attempted or done in the capture of bushrangers ; grants of land to
free men, and freedom or conditional pardon to prisoners, (or Government
men as they were called) were strong inducements to attempt it. It was
the practice of the Governor to issue a kind of proclamation on the capture
of the more desperate criminals, full of fatherly advice and warning to the
evil-disposed, and it was customary to parade the Government men under
military guard to witness executions, as an exrta deterrent. Whilst I
was living in the New Country the notorious “ Scotchy ” gang ravaged
the country. Calling at Cooper’s Inn at Gunning, Mr. John Hume came
out of the house, and they immediately shot him dead. They then went
to Grovenor’s Inn, but he was prepared, and fought them with the great-
est heroism, single handed, till he had to retreat within his house. He
then broke a hole through his ceiling and fought them from the loft, and
finally drove them off. The death of Mr. Hume roused the country, and
they were followed down the Fish River. On the way they wantonly shot
a man of Mr. Oakes’ who was working in a harvest field. Mr. Oliver
Fry, superintendent for Mr. Gibson, of Goulburn, with a party, overtook
and fought them, killing some and capturing the rest. One of them, Rey-
nolds (who had been in my service) afterwards hanged himself by his necktie
in gaol on the hinge of his cell door. Mr. Fry was rewarded by being made
a Commissioner of Crown Lands, Mr. Grovenor afterwards kept an inn
at the “ Gap” nearer to Yass, and was instrumental in taking another
gang. Such was his known bravery, that, although he lived in a lonely
place, he was never molested again. A very gallant act is recorded of the
late Mr. James Crispe, who kept the well known inn at Myrtle Creek. In
1843, Mr. and Mrs. Barber called and reported that half an hour before
they had been stopped by two armed bushrangers about Bargo River.
Two of the Picton foot police happened to be at Mr, Crispe’s, and he told
them to hurry on to the place, and that he would follow on horseback.
Mr. Crispe was a tall, active man ; he mounted a horse and passed the
constables, and about two miles from home the bushrangers came out and
ordered him to get off his horse. One of them laid hold of the bridle.


Mr. Crispe dismounted, and in a moment seized the man round the neck
and threw him down. In the scuffle, Mr. Crispe wrenched the gun from
him. Just then the constables came up and secured the men ; they had
two loaded guns. Their names were Kennedy and Thornton, and the con-
stables were Burgess and Cunningham. Another time when Mr. Barber
was driving in a gig near Marulan, he was shot in the back, but the parties
were soon captured. Mr. Hamilton Hume, the explorer, than living at
Yass Plains, who, like Rixon of Appin, was a most expert tracker, helped
to track them. For a long time the roads between this and Irish Town
were commanded by three men, Donohoe, Walmsly, and Webber, who
long evaded capture. They were harboured, or kept supplied, by prisoners
of the Crown on the farms, either through fear or complicity, and used to
rob on the Dog-trap, Liverpool, and Bringelly Roads, and appear to have
had a thorough cross-country knowledge. Legends respecting Donohoe
attach to some few places in this district. We have Donohoe’s Cave at
Glendaruel, his stock-yards at Mulgoa Forest, and the place of his death
at Hall’s clear ground, near Vermont. Many different accounts have been
given of his death, but the late Mr. Charles Lowe, who then lived at Bir-
ling, Bringelly, informed me that he heard the firing about 7 o’clock in the
morning, and that the body was brought across the range and placed in
their barn on the way to Liverpool for burial, and that the policeman who
shot him was McGregor, a Scotchman ; that they had exchanged several
shots, when Donohoe, looking from behind a tree, received a ball in his
forehead. I used to visit the spot when I went that way. Certain parts
of the roads were particularly dangerous to travellers. The murdering
bridge on the Cowpasture Road long bore a dreadful name, as well as
Liverpool Cross Roads, Razorback, Bargo Brush, Wombat Brush, and
the Hanging Rock. The notorious Lynch and his paramour, Mrs.
Dunkley, lived near Wombat Brush. That villain, besides murdering
Mr. C. Cowper’s black boy at Razorback, and taking his horse and cart,
killed and burned a whole family and took possession of their farm. Mr.
R. M. Campbell, who resides with his son in-law (Mr. J. Antill) at Picton,
has kindly written me a narrative of his brother Mr. Murdoch Campbell’s
death at the hands of a bushranger at Harrington Park, on 16th February,
1833. I have his permission to publish it, and as it describes a remark-
able instance of premonition of death, I prefer to give his own words :
“ I was living with my family at Wingello at the time, and had not seen
my poor brother for many months, but, on the night before I heard of
his death I retired to bed very unwell and restless ; so much so as to
alarm Mrs. Campbell, who asked me what was the matter, and tried to
coax me to go to sleep again, but I told her the cause of my uneasiness,
and that instead of trying to go to sleep, I thought I would get up and
dress myself (it was then between 4 and 5 in the morning), and added
that I had had a most frightful dream in which 1 saw a man shoot my
brother, and felt so sure of this that I thought 1 should soon hear of it
as a fact. I had scarcely dressed myself when a knock came to the out-
side door, and I at once told Mrs. Campbell it was a message for me
telling me of my brother’s death, and so it was. The messenger had


missed his way and gone to Arthursleigh, and the people there had sent
a guide with him to Wingello. Strange to say, my dream was correct in
every point, even to the spot where he fell. lam sorry I cannot tell the
name of the wretch who shot him, or of the man who secured him after-
wards. From Mr. Thomas Barker I learned that my brother was in the
barn overlooking some men cleaning wheat, when a cry was heard that
a mob of people were pursuing a man on the flat. My brother looked
out, and than ran into the hall of the house, and taking down a blunder-
buss which hung there, but which was not loaded, took a short cut and
got between the pursuers and the pursued, calling to the man to stop and
give himself up. The man turned round and said, I don't want to hurt
you , Mr. Campbell, hut if you come a step nearer I will blow your brains
out. It is supposed my poor brother thought the man was only bounc-
ing, and advanced to secure him, when the wretch fired and my poor
brother fell dead on the spot. The other persons would appear to have
been so horror-struck that the murderer got away, and ran off towards
Bringelly, till he came to the entrance gate'-house of Mr. Lowe. The
gatekeeper, it seems, was an old acquaintance, and when the murderer
entered he said I've done it now ; I have just shot Mr. Campbell of
Harrington Park , and want you to give me powder and ball to load my
pistols, as I have only the charge now in the gun. The gatekeeper told
him that he had neither powder nor ball, but advised that the charge in
the gun should be drawn and divided into two so that both pistols could
be charged. The wretch agreed to this and drew the charge. The
moment he did so the gatekeeper seized hold of him, and told him he
was his prisoner. The wretch was tried and hanged, after abusing the
judge, it is said, in most shameful language. I believe the man who took
him was a prisoner of the Crown, and received a full pardon. The
murderer was a young man, almost a mere lad. The gatekeeper was, I
believe, a shoemaker. I was not in time for my brother’s funeral, the
messenger missing the proper road prevented my getting down to
Harrington Park in time, but my brother’s untimely death had raised such
a feeling in everybody that, as I came down, I met at every door a ready
horse and refreshments, and got to Harrington Park, 86 miles, in 10
hours, only in time to meet our friends returning from Liverpool.” On
the day before Mr. Campbell was shot, Mrs. Lowe and some of her
family were travelling in a carriage on the Bringelly road, when the same
man came out from under a bridge and stopped the carriage. He recog-
nised Mrs. Lowe, and reminded her that once when Mr. Lowe had
sentenced him at Biding she had interceded for him and given him a
dinner, and he allowed her to go on. I have since heard that he was
a runaway from Hambridge, of Bringelly. Such was the state of things
in the olden time,” but that kind of crime was then confined to prisoners
of the Crown, whose excuse was “ oppression” or a desire to escape from
the enforced labour and apparently hopeless life in the iron-gang, or from
fear of punishment for some lesser crime already committed. It might
reasonably have been expected that in later and more prosperous days,
when there were no such excuses, that class of crime would be unknown,


but the dislocation of society caused by the discovery of gold, and the
rich prizes to be had “on the road” evoked the spirit of covetousness,
and, lured on by the pernicious example of Gardiner, very many young
men of previous fair promise joined in murderous raids before which the
deeds of the old days paled into insignificance. Many valuable lives
and much treasure were expended before they were extirpated. Through
the energy of the police, and the effective aid of the telegraph, it is hoped
that bushranging gangs have been put down for ever.
Old colonists cannot fail to comparisons between the early
natives and the present generation, in physique, considerably to the
disadvantage of the latter. The Currency lads and lasses, the des-
cendants of the original colonists, were remarkable for their stature.
The men were tall and well proportioned, with broad shoulders, mus-
cular limbs, and general robustness of constitution —the natives of the
Hawkesbury (the cornstalks) and of Bong Bong especially so. They
had, too, a large share of personal courage. I find frequent record in
the Governor’s notices of the captures of gangs of bushrangers in which
they took part, whilst in prize fighting, Ned Chalker, of Mittagong, and
Hough, of Windsor, long carried the belt both of them were of massive
frame and surpassing courage, yet, like all brave me n, were quiet and unob-
trusive in manner ; their portraits by Carmichael, lihodius, and Tom
Balcomb, figured in all the principal hotels in Sydney. Conjectures
have been hazarded as to the cause of the loss of Stamina. My own
opinion is, that the vigour of the early natives was partly due to selec-
tion in the parentage, not the “natural selection ” of our philosophers,
but the peculiar selection caused by the original circumstances of the
colony; and this applies both to the prisoner class and to their rulers
and guards. The criminal career of the majority of the prisoners
generally implied the possession of superior physical qualities, and,
often, superior, though misapplied, intel'igence. Prison life, a voyage
of 6 or 7 months, and much hardship and privation, must have thinned
out the weaklings previous to landing, and the vicissitudes attending
the new mode of life here would sift them still more. By the time a
man had become entitled to the privileges of a free settler he had
proved the excellence of his constitution. Unless the wife was also
transported a husband became practically divorced, so that it was com-
mon for them to form new connections, and they could only take
companions from the prisoner women. The unmarried also had no
other choice. Such women had also passed through the same ordeal.
A powerful race might be expected to result from the union of parents
so strangely selected.
Of the better classes, the military and naval officers, soldiers, sailors,
and those on half-pay, or in Government employ, some brought wives
and others returned to Great Britain to obtain them. These were per-
sons of enterprize, and presumably of good constitution, and their
progeny of the first and second removes would retain the physical
qualities of their parents, or improve upon them. • It must be also
borne in mind that until the times of mixed immigration we had


scarcely any sickness; the profession oi a physician was the least pro-
fitable of any. One great factor was, no doubt, the simplicity in the
food and habits of the people. “ Hominy ’’ of maize meal, coarsely
sifted flour, abundance of milk, moderation in flesh diet —except of
game, which abounded, yet required exercise to procure—were sound
elements to build up a good frame, and the absence of inducement to
spend the night in study or revelry sent people early to bed, and thus
tended to preserve them in health. There was more country than town life,
and people partook of their food without misgiving, and brought good
appetites to the task. Nothing was then heard of bacteria or poison
germs. I used to think I could trace a distinctive cast of features in the
native born which has since been nearly effaced. I could instance a few
not far from here now. The men had well formed heads, with straight
noses, high foreheads, and light colored straight hair. The women were
full-sized, with similar outline of features, but darker hair, of average
good looks, but occasionally very beautiful. „ They were sometimes, how-
ever, much freckled. The teeth in both sexes were well formed and
lasted sound to a good age. A gradual change has been going on that
has been detrimental to the stamina of later generations. The colony
has been inundated with diminutive London cockneys, Yorkshire
weavers, pinched factory girls, and people of all nations and colors. The
follies and vices of the towns, stimulating food, and unwholesome
lodgings, have all contributed to deteriorate the race. Of course there
are abundant exceptions, but the rule is, as I have said. Any old colon-
ist need only take his stand in George-street, Sydney, in the afternoon,
to see what a diminutive race the moderns appear, and what a figure the
tied-up stilted girl of this period would have appeared by the side of the
well-grown currency lass, with her flowing white dress and sky blue sash.
As far as opportunity offered, the native youth shewed great ability. Dr,
Halloran, Dr. Lang, Mr. Cape, and the Parramatta King School, turned
out men capable of anything that the colony demanded, and some emi-
nent in the learned professions. It has often been a matter of surprise
that parents who had none, or almost none, but prisoners as domestic
servants, should have been able to preserve their children from the con-
tamination of evil speech and evil example, but that they were so, generally,
is a fact which speaks well for their times. The young men shewed a
considerable spirit of enterprise, for although squatting pursuits offered
plenty of openings, many were attracted to the army and mercantile
marine, and a good many went whaling, which was a life of great
adventure, not only in the pursuit itself, but from the frequent encounters
with savage cannibals, at whose islands they touched for water and
vegetables, or for sandal-wood and tortoise-shell. They were partakers
of the ship’s fortune, all hands being paid by the “ lay,” or share in the
catch, according to their ranks. Whether it is that the whales have been
driven from these seas, or that the use of kerosene has supplanted that
of whale oil, the pursuit, as a colonial venture, has ceased, except in the
form of bay whaling, and there is but little of that. In former days it
contributed greatly to the business of our chief port; but now a whaler


amongst our shipping would be as great a curiosity as a Chinese junk.
Until transportation ceased, a large military force was kept to guard
the prisoners in the colony and its subordinate penal settlements in Van
Dieman’s Land and Norfolk Island; the latter place and Port Arthur
being the destination of the incorrigible criminals. There was generally
a regiment, or detachments of more than one. Those that I have known,
or heard of, were the 73rd, 39th, 50th, 4th, 17th, and 99th. There had
been many more, no doubt, and there is one mentioned in all the accounts
of the colony as the “ New South Wales Corps," afterwards the 102nd
regiment, to which Capt. John Macarthur belonged, and which became
famous by assisting to depose Governor Bligh, whose previous severities
as captain of the “ Bounty” man of war led to the mutiny of the crew
when on a mission to transport bread fruit trees from the South Sea
Islands to the West Indies. The ordinary regiments of the line came as
guards with the prison ships, and after a certain term of service, passed
on to India, all the better for being acclimatized. Invalids remained
here or were sent home with expired service men, but some elected to
be discharged here. They were useless as colonists, their previous habits
unfitting them for relying upon their own resources. An experiment
was tried at home of commuting the pensions of Chelsea men, and giving
them free passages, but they were a complete failure, and the War Office
had at last, to grant them a charitable allowance. Some of them used
to draw it quarterly at our court-house. It was generally spent in
drink, and the majority were buried as paupers. Sailors, on the contrary,
proved very handy men, and runaways were welcomed everywhere, but
they seldom had a long run, as their old habits betrayed them. The
head quarters of the military were at Sydney, but there were detachments
at Parramatta, Windsor, Newcastle, Port Macquarie, the Derwent, Port
xVrthur, and Norfolk Island. Officers and small bodies of soldiers were
also stationed at the iron-gang depots on the Blue Mountains, and on
the great Northern and Southern roads. The military barracks in Sydney
extended along George-street from Barrack-street to near Jamison-street,
with entrance gates in George-street, and York-street, and near Petty’s
Hotel. The public were allowed free passage from sunrise till “ tattoo.”
The officers’ mess rooms were at the York-street entrance, and the non-
commissioned officers and band quarters at the other end ; a long build-
ing between both accommodated the privates. The married officers
occupied detached buildings along • Barrack-street. The whole area
to Clarence-street was enclosed by a high stone wall. There was a guard
house at the George-street gate. The Treasury was within the enclosure,
near Jamison-street. A sergeant’s guard was stationed at the “ Main
Guard” at the foot of Church Hill, and another at the “ Commissariat.”
There was the tramp of soldiers night and day relieving guard, and the
very frequent spectacle of a parade of all the troops on fine afternoons on
Hyde Park—the band playing through the streets. On fine mornings the
troops went through their evolutions on the barrack parade, which was
neatly gravelled, and this was a constant attraction. The 39th and 99th
were very troublesome regiments, and Colonels Lindesay and Despard


had to give them severe' drill. Even the bandsmen used to draw their
swords and belts upon the townspeople in drunken brawls at night. They
were eventually forbidden to carry side-arms. Sydney presented much
the appearance of a garrison town at home, and all the usual gaieties of
military life prevailed there. The soldiers must have very much felt the
contrast when standing sentry on their lonely posts at the iron-gangs; it
must have been an actual punishment to them. Civilians were somewhat
jealous of the officers who captivated all the fine girls and heiresses;
every departing regiment carrying off some, who must have found cam-
paigning in India an anxious life. I remember that some of them shared
the sufferings of Lady Sale in the disastrous retreat from Afghanistan.
The sons of some of our leading families got smitten with the pomp of
military life. Mr. John McHenry, of Penrith (whose sister, the belle of
the colony, married Ensign, now General Lugard), Blomfield, Riley, and
others not far from here, obtained commissions, and served with great
credit in India. They were worthy representatives of Australian youth.
Good conduct soldiers were allowed to volunteer for the mounted
police, whose duty was wholly distinct from that of the ordinary police.
They were scattered in small parties throughout the country ; a cor-
poral and two men being the smallest number at any station, a sergeant
and four or five privates at the larger stations, and a captain or lieu-
tenant and a larger force at the towns. Major Nunn had the chief com-
mand, and Captain Williams, a very tall man, was a very prominent
member of it. Captain Forbes was stationed at Parramatta. Lieu-
tenant McAlister, of Clifton, near Picton, who was known and feared as
a daring and active officer distinguished himself in an encounter with
bushrangers on the Lachlan.
These police were generally located within the old boundaries of the
colony ; beyond those was a border police, mounted men in dark green
uniform, and under the command of the Crown Land Commissioners.
Mr. Beckham was a commissioner beyond Yass River, and Mr. Bingham
(father of Mrs. Woodhouse, senr.), at Adelong. The force was soon dis-
banded, as being undisciplined, and regarded as mere servants of the
commissioners. The military mounted police were a fine body of picked
men, sober and self-reliant, making frequent rounds, and always travelling
in pairs, the third man by turns, remaining in charge of the quarters,
which were always brilliant with white-wash and with accoutrements in
the nicest order. As the rations of the men and horses accumulated
during their absence, these police were able to return the hospitality they
received on their rounds. Superintendents of stations often pulled up
for the night when travelling by. When on patrol the police were armed
with a carbine and horse pistols. They carried a wallet, hobbles, tether-
rope, head stall and chain, hand-cuffs, spare clothing, and a large water-
proof cloth cloak, and were mounted on horses fully equal to the load.
These men were not tied down to any particular route, but zigzagged
about, turning up most unexpectedly anywhere in search of what they
used to call their “ poly cattle.’’ They got to know the station hands,
overhauled wanderers, picked up information as they could, and followed


up offenders till they caught them. They were always welcomed at head
stations, and both men and horses were well entertained, i'hey generally
preferred to sleep before the fire, with their saddles and arras close at
hand, and helped to make themselves agreeable with anecdotes of fights
and captures, but were discreetly reticent about present business. They
never let their intended route be known, and after starting one way would
be found to have gone in another. When a dangerous gang of bush-
rangers was out, reinforcements were sent from other districts. They
rarely handcuffed a prisoner in the time, but with carbine in hand,
made him walk before them. I once saw a notorious bushranger called
the “ Fiddler” escorted in that way across Cavan station. Service in
this force counted for much longer time than in the line, and the men
became entitled to a pension and passage home at a time of life when it
could be enjoyed. The comparative freedom of the work gave a zest to it.
The force was clothed in light blue, with straw hats and blouses in
weather; the sword was left at home for parade when the inspect-
ing officer called. The depbt was at Carters Barracks, where recruits
were taught riding and stable work ■ but they were drilled just inside
the George-street barrack gate, where I have spent many a pleasant hour
in watching them. On the breaking up of the military establishments
they were disbanded, and their places were taken by a mongrel force of
mounted constables, attached to the various police stations, who had an
allowance of £2O a year to find their own horses and saddlery. This
was again supplanted by a better police, under a system introduced by
the late Sir Charles Cowper, which has been improved upon until it has
reached its present high state of efficiency.
The want of an independent patrol was seriously felt after the dis-
banding of the old mounted police, and only for the invention of tele-
graphy, it would inevitably have been returned to. Indeed, it was at one
time proposed that the duties of the toot police should be confined to
the precincts of the courts and summonsing, and that the patrol work
should be under distinct control. In taking leave of the military, I
must not forget the commissariat branch of it. The offices were at the
stores near the Queen’s wharf. Commissaries Palmer, Laidley, v and
Hazzard were at different times in charge, and kept good state, but the
“ subs,” who were dressed in quasi-military uniform, competed vigor-
ously with the military officers for the smiles of the fair sex. Mr.
Hickey (Count Hickey, as he was nicknamed), and Mr. Jones, a hand-
some fellow (nicknamed Gentleman Jones), Mr. Salway, and Mr. Lid-
dington, now of Bringelly, a great buck in his young days, were amongst
the number. They were much ridiculed for wearing dress swords, which
the wags said were only used for testing the beef casks. ‘‘ Count ’
Hickey afterwards married the “ widow,” of Osterly, Hunter’s River,
and lived in grand style. Jones and Salway often figured at balls at
Mr. Buckland’s and other houses about here, but I believe went away
with the “ army.” Mr. Liddington, the sole remanent, is enjoying the
quiet of a country life, disturbed occasionally, perhaps, by recollections
of the “ lively times ” gone by.


We are told in Collins’ history that a few stock arrived by the first
fleet in 1789. Some cattle and sheep were afterwards brought from the
Cape. The predominating colours of the cattle 40 years ago were var-
ious shades of yellow, and of brown even to blackness. They had de-
veloped into very shapely beasts, the bullocks of great stature, and with
wide but very graceful horns. They were said to have a strain of Buffalo
blood in them, probably owing to their “ Cape” origin. One peculiarity
that I noticed in the bullocks was that they had a well pronounced
shoulder, rising with a gradual swell from the root of the neck to the top,
and thence declining to the middle of the back, forming a curve which
gave them a grand and stately appearance. They were very hardy, and
fattened well, but were disposed to go wild if not frequently visited on
the run. The cows were fair milkers, but of uncertain temper. Mr.
Hamilton Hume had, on Yass Plains, a very uniform herd of the old
brown cattle. He had about the homestead, for pack service, the largest
bullock I ever saw. The men from the out-stations used him to carry
out their weekly rations, and when let go he would return to the head
station, disregarding other cattle on the way.
The first notable change was the importation, by the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, of the Suffolk Polled cattle, the best all round cattle, in my
opinion, that a young country could possess. They were inherently so
quiet, that no neglect could spoil them. The cows had enormous deep
bodies, and capacious udders, and yielded the best of milk and butter in
abundance. The only fault they had was that the teats were sometimes
too large and too long to grasp with the hand, and from the calf finding
them too large for its mouth, the cow, if not carefully tended, was liable
to lose her udder. They had a long bony head, with a cone or top-knot,
and large ears —the muzzle was thick and wide spread. Occasionally
little rudimentary horns appeared, but hung quite loose. There was a
good herd of them at “Ginninderra,” Limestone Plains, but the breed
no longer exists. After them came the Ayrshires. I don’t know who
imported them, but the dairy herds of the Howes at Glenlee, and of Mr.
John Allen, of Liverpool, consisted of them. Theyarenot very numerous
now, and deserve more attention. A cross with the Alderney was tried
at Camden Park, but though they answered well for the dairy, they
were a complete failure for the butcher. They have proved themselves
here, as in England, like fancy poultry, only suited for the rich. The
Durham, the Hereford, the Devon, and even the lop eared Brahmin
have been introduced, much as in the order stated. There was a small
herd of Aberdeens not long since in the Braidwood district. All kinds
are, however, pretty well jumbled up together. Whoever wishes to see
cattle bred on principle must visit the great squattages.
Until of late years cattle rising has been a precarious business. The
pick of a drove of bullocks on the road could sometimes be had for a
pound. A grand herd of milkers, belonging to Mr. Kemp of Cabra-
matta, when he left for Tasmania, was sold at a few shillings a head.
There was terrible monetary depression at the time, owing to the Bank
of Australia’s and Hughes and Hoskin’s failures. For want of popula-


tion there was no steady market for stock. Those persons had the best
chance who happened to be in a favoured locality when drought was
severe elsewhere. As the price of wool fluctuated so did the preference
for sheep or cattle. It was varying problem _ whether a sheep
or a cattle station would be and the incessant fluctua-
tion of the markets prevented a I have often wondered, since
cattle were boiled down for their fat, what put an end to the trade in
salt beef that we once had with the “ Isle of France ” (as the Mauritius
used to be called.) Mr. George Palmer, of Parramatta, and others, used
to salt down all their fat stock for that market, and a great deal was
cured by Jones and Walker, Henry Moore, Captain Towns, and the
Campbells, for their whalers. Yankee ships from New Bedford and
Salem fished largely in these seas, and called here to refit, and tranship
their oil. The men-of-war and merchant service, too, were good cus-
tomers for “salt junk.” Somehow the business fell off long before the
era of tinned meats, and the curing was not so successful, for Sydney
meats got a bad name. Many shipmasters brought from home ports a
supply for the round voyage rather than buy here.
Strangely enough, although dairying was very profitable, it was for a
long time in few hands. It was systematically carried on by Mr. Howe,
McLeay, the Messrs. Macarthur, Mr. Wilford, of Cabramatta, and a
few more. They had acquired such reputations that they commanded
the market, the price being seldom less than half-a-crown. It was a
long time before the average settler paid much attention to it. It may
have been through the difficulty of conveying it. To carry a box or keg
of butter two or three days under a load of produce on the road in hot
weather, and trusting to dry weather to go at all, did not suit so perish-
able an article, and salt butter did not take.
All the larger producers kept a spring cart going with the regularity of
a mail coach, but jealously separate. At last a carrying agency began
at Vermont, and others followed suit. The carrier received the butter
overnight, and with a fast pair horse van started before daylight, taking
every pains to keep his freight cod. He sold and brought back the
proceeds in cash or goods to order, paying himself a fixed charge.
There was liability to trickery, but it was a vast improvement on no
market at all. Still it was a private undertaking only, co-operation
amongst farmers not being dreamt of. There were no refrigerating
contrivances in those days, and the success of the carrier depended on
his own carefulness. It was a difficult matter to keep butter solid
during a hot wind. When Mr. Alexander McLeay was asked by
a friend how he managed to get his butter to Sydney in hot weather, he
replied, “Oh ! quite easily, it runs all the way.” Mr. James Butler,
senr., now of Spotted Gum Range, his trusty carrier, used to take it
down weekly, and he could tell some stirring tales of his adventures with
bushrangers.
In all large dairies the calves were hand reared, and afterwards re-
moved to a station. By this means the grass was saved from unpro-
fitable mouths. Mr. McLeay had a heifer station at .Ulladulla, or


« Holey Dollar,” as the men called it, and Messrs. Macarthur, Mr.
Howe, and Mr. John Allen, on the Murrumbidgee. The heifers had
the fullest chance of development before being brought into use. Whilst
the pastoral lands were only partially occupied, graziers worked their
herds systematically, having breeding, fattening, and heifer stations,
quite distinct. Some even “ tailed ” their herds, i.e., had them tended
by men on foot as sheep were.
Cheese-making was a good deal followed in the interior. It was sent
down in bullock drays, well protected by straw and sheets of bark. I
have seen tons of it carried on these roads. Chisholm s and Cart-
wright’s from the “ Bland,” and Cooper’s from Lake George, were much
liked, and, from the Western countryy Icely’s and Kite’s were most in
favour.
Where cattle stations bordered on broken, or unoccupied country,
cattle escaped, and their increase became absolutely wild. This was the
base with Sam Terry’s cattle at his “Five Islands” station at Illawarra.
They were afterwards removed to Murrumbateman Plains, near Gun-
daroo, but they were the terror of the country, being extremely vicious
when pursued. When he died they were sold to Port Phillip speculators,
but many lives and limbs were sacrificed before they were got rid of.
Wild cattle existed within the last few years in Burragorang. The late
Mr. John Norton, P.M., of Dubbo, who was quite a “Kentuckian ”in
his ways, had a camp on Cox’s River, and followed horse and cattle
shooting as a business. He had two old stockmen named Story and
Pope, and some aboriginals to help him. Many others occasionally
shot a few, but one man made a mistake in shooting a stock horse of
Mr. Moore’s, and was prosecuted for it. The Burragorangers have not
practised with the rifle much since.
The first arrival of horse stock in Australia was with the memorable
“first fleet in 1788, when nine were landed, of which only three were
mares. These were, of course, from England ; but some mares were
afterwards brought from the Cape, and, occasionally, an Arab from India,
and from these few sprang the myriads that cover the continent. My
earliest recollections are that the lighter kinds were numerous and
excellent. Some of the noblest horses in the colony were the progeny
of the Government sire, “ Old Satellite.” The mounted police horses
were of such a stamp as are rarely seen now ; upstanding
great courage and endurance, with plenty of bone, fine foreheads^and
wide loins and hips. There was no difficulty in obtaining good roadsters
and carriage pairs. ,
The finest racehorse ever yet imported was Mr. Henry Bayley s
“ Whisker,” which was, I believe, a gift from Lord Paget, a relative of
his. Mr. Bayley always stabled him during race times at Mr. Charles
Moore’s, the solicitor, who had a large garden and residence in George
and King-streets—his land and Mrs. Reiby’s covered all from King-
street corner to the Post Office, and a long way back towards Pitt-street
—the whole was enclosed by a low stone wall. A descendant cf
Whisker, named “Jorrocks,” was the champion of the turf after him


for a considerable time. The only horse that ever ran Whisker dose
was Emancipation (bred by Mr. Charles Smith), which afterwards came
into the possession of Mrs. Lowe, and finished his days at Billing,
Bringelly. Mr. William Lawson, senior, of Veteran Hall, Prospect, had
two famous sires, “ Emigrant ” and “ Steeltrap.” _ Mr. C. Smith also
had an “ Emigrant,” but as neither would alter his horse’s name, they
had to be distinguished by their owners’ names. The progeny of Steel-
trap were such excellent hackneys and trotters that dealers put on an
extra price when they could claim for their animals a true descent from
him. Captain Daniels brought out'“Gratis” and “Velocipede,” which
were purchased by Mr. Charles Roberts, a sporting cabinet-maker in
Sydney. The blood of Gratis is still in the highest esteem, and the strain
is recognised by horsey men by the grey hairs mixed through the
foundation Mr. William Edward Riley, of Raby, had a noted
white Arab, “ Skelton,” which had won great fame on the Curragh of
Kildare. Mr. H.Ttater imported Tros, Priam, and Cap-a-pie, all very
useful animals.
One of the greatest promoters of horse breeding was Charley Smith,
a sporting butcher, who carried on his trade on a large plot of land
where Kidman’s and Lassetter’s stores are, but taking in the whole square
into York-street. His neighbour in York-street was John Booth Jones,
a fine specimen of an Englishman, sturdy and honest, and who used to
dress in hunting coat and tops. He had livery and sale stables there,
but lived at his country house at Camperdown, whence he rode in every
morning on a superb cob, hunting whip in hand. He was very much
respected, and his name and fame are well upheld by his children.
Charley Smith, I think, ought to rank as the most eminent horse breeder
in the colonies ; he had a marvellous judgment, and was a frequent
winner. At the time of the races near Sydney he had his horses paraded
through the streets in handsome clothing, each winner carrying a blue
cap embroidered with the figures of its winnings worked in yellow braid.
He had a stud farm at Bungarribbee, and an establishment at Camper-
down. He owned more blood stock of the highest type than any other
breeder at the one time.
Mr. Plaistow, a shipmate of mine, made several voyages to India with
horses, and generally brought back high class Arabs on speculation.
One of them, “ Crab,” did good service in Mr. George McLeay’s stud
at Brownlow Hill. Mr. Icely had a very fine stud at Coombing, Car-
coar, and Sir John Jamison, at Regentville. It was a common thing to
see the travelling carriages of Captain Piper, Sir John Jamison, Mr.
Blaxland, Mr. Cox, Mr. Icely, and others, drawn by four magnificent
horses. Mr. George Palmer drove a splendid curricle, and very many
gentlemen drove tandem, the prettiest style of all, but now out of fashion.
I once saw three horses driven tandem fashion in Sydney. The horses
were very highly mettled, and it seemed a perilous feat. Mr. W. E.
Riley used a drag with postilions, English fashion. Great numbers of
ponies—perfect beauties—were imported from Timor and Acheen, and
some pretty Welsh ponies, with silver manes and tails, were bred by the


Agricultural Company at Port Stephens. They made handsome pairs
for small phaetons. Mr. Foss and Mr. Betts drove beautiful pairs of
them in Sydney. No country was better supplied with saddle and
carriage horses; but, as they multiplied faster than the population, they
fell in value, and breeders got careless, until the opening up of Port
Phillip, and, afterwards, of South Australia, created a demand, which
swept off the surplus. We had, at the time, a trade with Valparaiso for
bread-stuffs, and, in an evil hour, some one bethought him of the myriads
of Chilian horses that were slaughtered there for their skins, and brought
a cargo of them over. The speculation succeeded so well that cargo
after cargo followed, and the result was a deterioration of our liglu
stock, which has not been recovered from since. The Chilian stock
were low-shouldered, sometimes without any visible wither, heavy headed,
goose-rumped, and narrow chested, in fact, they had all the bad points
that it was possible to assemble in a horse. Numbers of “ Guachos ”
came over with them as grooms, bringing their lassos with them. They
“ astonished the natives ” with their feats of horsemanship and dexterity
with the lasso, but they confirmed the violent methods of horse-break-
ing, which have been such a reproach to the colony. Until of late years
it was the custom to dock the horses’ tails.
The introduction of the “ Cleveland ” coach horse was due to Mr.
Wilson, of Richmond, father-in-law to Charley Smith. He made several
voyages to England for them, and they soon were established in favour.
The Campbells of the Wharf, and the Johnsons, took to breeding coach-
ing stock. Berry’s Shoalhaven horses were much sought after for
carriage pairs.
Some of our horses were sent to India in 1830, and “ Walers,” as they
were called, were found so suitable, from having been seasoned to a high
temperature, that the Indian Government decided to give them a trial
for military purposes. About 1835, Captain Collins arrived here to pur-
chase for cavalry and artillery purposes, but the expense and risk must
have been found too great, for, after a few attempts, they gave it up, and
have since trusted to private enterprise for their supply. Camden Park
and Brownlow Hill contributed a good quota. Old Boyd, at the former
place, and Miller, at the latter, had busy times when getting up the
annual lot of colts for shipment. Many a time have I seen well-bred
horses at the plough at Brownlow Hill, preparing for artillery work under
Langridge.
The demand for heavy, showy, brewers’ horses, caused the introduc-
tion of the larger kinds of draught stock. When Mr. Cadell, a Windsor
brewer, sent down his waggon drawn by six stout horses, with heavy
brass-mounted harness, and tails tied with coloured ribbons, it created a
great sensation in Sydney. Mr. Blaxland started a brewery at Ludden-
ham, and procured black Lincoln stock. One named “ Crib ” was a
ferocious brute, ready to seize his groom at any moment, but he was a
lamb compared to a chesnut blood horse named “Vagabond ” that Mr.
McLeay got from Major Innes. When I saw him he was tied with two
halters, and had gnawed away a great part of his manger, besides having


kicked to splinters everything within his reach. He was in continual
motion from mere savageness. The Clydesdale found its way into the
colonies, and displaced the Lincolns, whose feet gave way on hot soil,
so different to that of their native “ fens.” The Clydesdale seems to
adapt itself to the country and bids fair to be the draught horse of the
future. There will always be a good market for them, as horse teams
now find their way into the far interior and expedition is the order of the
day. Since the time of “ Steeltrap ” we have had very few trotting
horses. There was a real Norfolk trotter, “ Shields,” at Mr. Terry
Hughes’, Shancamore, about 30 years ago, but no systematic attempt
was made to breed trotters. “ Steeltrap ” was a thoroughbred, and the
trotting qualities of his stock were due to the accident of his paces.
Good trotters have always been hard to obtain, and were never more re-
quired, nor more difficult to find than now when buggies are so much in
use. A good roadster for saddle and harness is the want of the day ;
but so long as the mania for racing stock prevails, the public will be left
to seek them amongst the weedy rubbish that crowd the horse market.
The grand example of America seems wholly thrown away upon the
horse breeders of all the colonies but Victoria. There only does there
seem to be a gleam of hope.
It was a long time before coaching extended beyond Parramatta and
Liverpool, therefore travelling was limited to those whose business com-
pelled it, and it was always at the risk of being stuck up, either by bad
roads or bushrangers. Some travelled on horseback, but spring carts
and gigs were the vehicles mostly used. Families travelled in the square-
bodied—one or two-horse—phaetons of the day. Travelling chariots
and town equipages were imported from London ; but all other vehicles
were colonial built. Many of the latter were made by Urquhart, of
Parramatta, and some typical specimens survive amongst us. One is now
standing in the yard at Wilson’s forge, and there are two at Camden
Park. All these are square. The first attempt at improvement in shape
was when thin cedar was steamed and bent for the bodies of gigs.
Owing to the roads not having been formed, many places, especially
round the hilly parts, were very sideling ; and that was provided against
by “ dishing ” the wheels enormously, so as to resist the thrust, which
made them look very ugly. The wheels were made very low. Bye-
roads were not cleared of the stumps, and in the dark there was a chance
of the axle coming foul of them, as happend with me one night near
Oram Park, when the fore-carriage parted from the vehicle.
Excellent coaches ran on the Parramatta and Liverpool roads. The
former were owned by Watsford ; the latter, I think, by Charley Morris.
Watsford’s coaches started from Dargin’s, opposite George street market,
and the others from Hart’s, in Pitt-street, lately the Labour Bazaar; or
from Titterton’s “ White Horse,” on Brickfield Hill. All of them
pulled up at “Ireland’s,” at the junction of the two roads. Watsford,
who had been coachman to one of the governors when Government
House at Parramatta was kept up, was a fine specimen of the old Eng-
lish Jarvey —steady, careful and obliging; and was a great favourite with


travellers. One of his sons is, I believe, a leading Wesleyan clergyman
in Victoria at the present time; another was a champion pedestrian. A
bitter opposition sprang up on the Parramatta Road, and the opposition
gave the ride to Parramatta, with breakfast at Ireland’s, for a shilling.
In 1828 the mails to Carnpbelltown left Sydney twice a week, which, no
doubt, was thought a great advance, as it was considered worthy of a
special proclamation in the “ Gazette.” Hilt’s coaches ran on the
Western line. Lupton and others extended the service into the Southern
interior, and mails were delivered, weather permitting , once a week at
Yass; the postage to that place was a shilling, I had a journey about
1837 which I shall never forget. It was during a rainy season, and
although I was booked for Yass I was put down at Mat Healy’s, at the
“ old township” at Goulburn, and had to do the rest as I could, and no
money returned. As a local incident I may mention that we break-
fasted at “ Mother Brown’s ” Inn, the house now known as Geary’s,
Narellan. At Sutton Forest we had to cross from the “ old ” to the
“ new ” line, as the road was a mere bog, and “ old cherry-picker,” the
coachman, shewed wonderful skill in threading his way through the dead
timber.
When overlanders had fairly opened a line of stations to Port Phillip
a contract was taken by a Mr. Green, an innkeeper at Bookham, beyond
Yass, to run a horse mail there, and despite the fierce hostility of the
blacks (who had not long before killed Messrs. Gellibrand and Hesse,
and Mr. Faithful’s party of seven at the Ovens), and the risk of swollen
rivers or disabled horses, men were always forthcoming for the lonely and
dangerous task. Green had been a schoolmaster in the 4th Regiment,
at Parramatta, but became wealthy, and finished his days in his own
splendid villa in the suburbs of Melbourne.
Squatters travelled with their families in covered vans, with spare led
horses, and plenty of nails, rope, and tomahawk for accidents. Such
was the ingenuity called forth by the emergencies of bush life that a
damaged vehicle was got along somehow till opportunity offered for its
repair. It was necessary to camp out the greater part of the journey,
as there were few inns or accommodation houses ; but it was an estab-
lished custom to “ make for ” the house of a friend if possible—as, in the
early days, all the old families had lived between Sydney and the
Nepean and every one was known. There was much pleasant inter-
course, and many intermarriages which bound them together. When
squatting separated them the only chance of their meeting again was on
these occasional journeys in the wool season. To pass by one’s house
at such a time would have been considered an affront. Sometimes
quite a crowd of old friends would happen to arrive at the same time,
but it made no difference. Shakedowns were extemporized on the floor
or anywhere, snd what would now-a-days be an embarrassment was
really a cause of increased enjoyment to all. Few houses have had such
a run in that way as Jarvisfield, Picton, the Antills being known far and
wide by all the old families, and the house being situated at a point
which, if passed, would have necessitated camping out.


Before leaving the subject of travelling it may be well to say some-
thing about the Great South Road. Major Mitchell was appointed
Surveyor General on the death of Mr, Oxley in 1828, and Chief Civil
Engineer. He was a wonderfully clever man in both lines, but his
road engineering was based upon a principle which, though suited to
his day, is wholly out of place in ours. He would rather take a road
over the highest hill, or by a side cutting, for the sake of the natural
drainage, than go by a direct and easy line across a flat that might some
day be boggy. With bullock teams time was of little account, so he
sent them by a longer and more laborious route rather than bridge and
metal the roads. There is a striking example at Jarvisfield, where a
quarter of a mile extra has to be travelled round the flanks of the hills,
when a direct line would have gone over a perfect level. Major Druitt,
on the Western Road, was another crotchety engineer. There was a
standing joke that he once gave directions to have all the bridges white-
washed yellow. Old Major General Stewart, of Bathurst, was another
oddity. If he found he was not approached with sufficient reverence he
would say in most pompous tones, “ I am Major General Stewart, sir,
now what do you want?” Major (afterwards Sir) Thos. L. Mitchell,
laid out the Great South Road, but the works were executed by flying
road parties under working overseers. These parties consisted of
prisoners of the Crown, who had not been assigned. In harvest time
they were lent to the settlers, and earned something for themselves and
for the Government too.
At such places as Capstone Hill and Razorback, where there were
engineering difficulties and much excavating, iron gangs, under military
guard, did the work. Stockades were erected —with rough barracks,
officers’ camp, and strong sleeping houses, like elephants’ vans, for the
men. A large open shed with tables was the prisoners’ mess house.
About the last camp of the kind that I knew was that under Captain
Bull, at Blackheath. The remains of the one near the Peach Iree,
and the old stone chimneys formerly on the Picton side of Razorback
were relics cf such establishments. Such places have their legends of
horror. Men have committed murder to get hung, when suicide would
have answered the purpose; others have been shot by the soldier guards
when trying to escape. Hopelessness begat utter recklessness so that no
man was safe alongside his fellow with pick or crowbar always in hand.
The situation of the officer in charge must have been painful indeed ;
his only office to hear complaints, to punish, and to rule with firmness,
yet without hope of reform. The soldiers were forbidden familiarity
with the prisoners, and passed a lonely, monotonous life, enlivened only
by the necessity of constant watchfulness to prevent their arras being
wrested from them by their desperate charge. Mr. J. Antill has given
me the particulars of a tragedy on Razorback, which I will relate in his
own words: —“On the 6th February, 1832, a prisoner named George
Miller, who had charge of the working bullocks attached to the iron gang,
was murdered at night whilst watching his bullocks. The next morn-
ing another prisoner named Smithwick gave information to overseer


Stokes, that three other men, named Moran, Fox and Walsh, had com-
mitted the murder. He said that he and those three men had gone to
Miller in the night; that Walsh struck the first blow with a stick; that
he then handed the stick to Moran, who again struck him and handed
the stick to Fox, who gave him a third blow and handed the stick to him,
but that he did not strike him as the man was dead. When brought
before the court some circumstances came out which seemed to throw
discredit on Smithwick’s statement as regarded the other three men,
and to point to him as the guilty party. Moran almost proved an alibi,
and some men belonging to the gang gave evidence that, a week or two
previous, Smithwick had two or three times asked his mates whether,
if a murder or a robbery was committed and one of the guilty persons,
not the principal one, gave evidence against his accomplices, he would
not receive a pardon and his freedom. Smithwick was not admitted
as king’s evidence as he expected to be, but was committed for trial with
the other three men, and afterwards confessed that he alone had com-
mitted the murder, and had tried to implicate the others, hoping to gain
his freedom. He was executed.”
The road from Camden to Picton was first laid out through Tickner’s
farm, and across the hills by Broadhead’s farm, to where Mr. Antill’s
house now stands. The drains can still be traced part of the way. Jar-
visfield racecourse was then a government cattle station in charge of
John Matthews. Only a bridle track existed across the range to it, until
1823. In that year Major Antill commenced to build the “old
cottage ” into which so many visitors used to be squeezed, but which has
lately been pulled down. Some years after the present road had been
completed, Major Mitchell laid out another line passing along “ Chapel
Hill ” at Campbelltown, via Appin and the Pheasant’s Nest Pass, to
the South Road at Lupton’s in Bargo. Part of his design was to throw
a suspension bridge over the Nepean at the “ Pheasant’s Nest.” That line
would have saved several miles, have avoided Razorback and Picton
hills, and passed over a fairly level country. He had so much faith in it
that he purchased a large estate on the line, and built that fine residence,
Park Hall. Government could never be induced to undertake the
bridge, but Captain Hovell, of Goulburn, got an act passed on the
fifteenth of December, 1851, authorising him to build one within three
years and take the tolls for 30 years. He had to go to Parliament again,
and on 23rd November, 1852, got an extension of time to six years in all,
but failed to get up a company, and the scheme fell through. After
Major Mitchell’s death, Park Hall fell into other hands, and with very
questionable taste, the name was changed to Nepean Towers.
The earliest administration of justice in these districts was by an un-
paid magistracy, the court being held at Bringelly, and presided over by
Mr. Robert Lowe, who was assisted by Mr. Vine, Captain Hovell, Captain
Coghill, Mr. Howe and others. Their jurisdiction covered a large area,
as cases from Penrith, Mulgoa, Campbelltown, Elderslie, &c., came
before them.


Mr Lowe arrived in the colony in 1812, and seems to have come into
possession of Biding soon after. His name appears in a list of magis-
trates of nth June, 1827, but he must have been appointed many years
before. The Court was held on his premises, which must have been an
important centre, as there were gaol, triangles, and stocks there. I can-
not ascertain at whose cost they were erected, but most likely at the
expense of the Crown. A paddock near the house is still known as the
« Q ao i p a ddock.” One of his sons informed me that m his boyhood
he had often enjoyed the fun of seeing both men and women in the
A ©curt of Petty Sessions was established at Cawdor in 1825, which
was attended by Messrs. J. and W. Macarthur and Mr. T. C. Harrington
(afterwards Colonial Secretary.) In a petition to Governor Gipps, in
iB*«for a Court for Camden, it is referred to as the first instance of an
unpaid magistracy, those gentlemen, as it stated, having declined to
accept the customary payment. I cannot, however, discover in the o d
estimates any provision tor such payments, and the Birhng bench was a
PU MajorTnWlZ who arrived in 1809 with his regiment (the 73rd) and
Governor Macquarie, and was aide-de-camp to that Governor till 1818,
and afterwards brigade major, was appointed police magistrate m 18-5,
and presided at Cawdor weekly, besides holding more frequent courts at
Picton. On 2nd October, 1829, he was appointed superintendent of
police for the county of Camden.
Captain Forbes, who became a member of the Camden bench and lived
at Vermont, had been divisional commander of the mounted police at
Parramatta, and police magistrate there. , n , n
Mr William Howe was appointed superintendent of police tor Lampbeli-
townon 12th January, 1828, and Lieutenant Thomas Meynck resident
magistrate of the same place on 20th April, 1881.
The first case tried at Cawdor was against one Cnsford for harbouring
five government men drinking, for which he was fined 100 dollars, and one
Callaghan, who committed perjury in the same case, was committed, and
afterwards got three years hard labour. About that time a good many
clearing parties were at work on the various estates, and the majority of
the cases were for disobedience, absence without leave, absconding, inso-
lence, insubordination, and the like amongst them. There was a flogger
attached to every court, and his services were generally; required in such
cases i .
Clearing gangs were hired out to land owners, who found the food, and
Government found supervision and shelter. The settlers paid for the wor v
in kind. I have before me a Government notice, requiring the wheat and
other produce owing to be sent in to the Government stores at once.
Kirkham and many other old estates about here were cleared in that way,
and so effectively that no second growth followed,, as was too often the
case in contract jobs. ... , i j.
On the 4th January, 1880, the first criminal court, and, on the next
day, the first quarter sessions, was held at Campbelltown. firom 18 Zo


to 1829, under an Imperial act, the juries consisted of eight naval and
military officers, either in active service or on half-pay. They attended
courts at Bathurst, Maitland, Campbelltown, Windsor, &c., but in 1829
our first jury act was passed, and civilians then served. Courts of request
for civil cases were established at various places, and amongst the many
appointments that our old neighbour—the late Dr. Douglass—held at
different times, was that of commissioner of those courts.
On theAOth August, 1841, the court of petty sessions at Cawdor was
abolished, and one was commenced at Camden, first in one of the rooms
of the unfinished Camden Inn. On Mr. Goodluck obtaining a license for
it the court shifted to a little bark hut, afterwards Charker’s butcher’s shop,
near the present tram station. It was next removed to a cottage in John-
street, then to Mr. Bensley’s stable, and at last got a house of its own,
where it is now held.
Of the members of the Camden bench five made the grand tour, three
gained the distinction of knighthood, and several were members of Parlia-
ment. As Saturday was an off day of Parliament it was unfortunately
chosen as the court day, thus depriving the clerk of the half-holiday
enjoyed by every other public servant,
Mr. Pearson, the husband of our late postmistress, was clerk and
postmaster at Cawdor and at Camden, The clerks have been Mr.
Chisholm, Mr. Wood, Dr. Macdonald, Mr, Kingston and Mr. Charles
Thompson. The old Cawdor court-house was brought to Camden and
was till lately our post office. From an incidental remark in a published
letter of Sir William Macarthur it would appear that two constables,
Warby and Jackson, were stationed in 1805 on one of the banks of the
river where the bridge now stands. I cannot discover anything relating
to periods before the days of petty sessions, but as settlers soon fixed
themselves on the Cumberland side of the river, whilst the blacks were
both numerous and aggressive on the Camden side, there must have been
military or other protection within reach. There are some remains of an
old lockup on Mrs. Palmer’s land at Elderslie. In later years constables
were stationed at various places, generally near the residence of a magis-
trate. The late Mr. William Charker was stationed at Birling ; Mr.
Morley at Wivenhoe Lodge ; Davy the Welshman (his wife was known
as the nanny goat) opposite Vermont. Whenever anything occurred, the
constable took orders from the nearest magistrate ; at all times they acted
as messengers and sometimes as fioggers. Lockups were built at con-
venient distances along the main road, and were held by a district constable
and one or two men.
Prisoners en route for gaol, or for trial, were carried on drays, hand-
cuffed to a heavy chain, and were confined in these places at night. The
escort was relieved at each station. The guard was strengthened when
they had extra villainy in charge. The blasphemous and insulting
language of these desperadoes was very trying to the police, who could not
resent it, and sometimes escape or rescue was attempted, the last instance
being when constable Raymond was killed in Bargo.


On returning once from a trip to the “ New Country ” I found that the
village of Camden had, in undertakers’ phrase, been “ laid out.” When
it was understood that the Government intended to bestow some of its
favours upon it a tremendous outcry arose from the Government township
of Narellan, where a lockup, a forge, the “White Horse” and the
“ Queen’s Arras ” had existed from “ time immemorial.” It turned out,
on enquiry, that the township had been bought chiefly by one person, who
had never built upon it, and that the houses were upon private lands, so
that, after all, the rivalry was between two private villages, with the
certainty of the population gravitating to where water was most abundant.
At that time Mr. Thompson’s store was opposite Kirkham private gate,
and the post office between that and the bridge. The postmaster, Pet-
tingall, got into trouble through helping himself to Mr. Cowper’s letters.
Mr. Skinner then kept it till it. was removed to Camden.
The first house that I remember in Camden was the cottage next to the
Wesleyan Chapel, which was built by Mr. Wild, and kept as a store by
old Mr. Nash. There was no place of worship for some afterwards,
and from some prejudice the Wesleyans did not receive as liberal treat-
ment as other denominations. The Rev. Mr, Hassall, of the Church of
England, built the present Cobbitty school house on his own land, calling
it Heber Chapel ; he afterwards sold it to the bishop for £3OO. The
present well placed church was then built, and later on, the parsonage.
The lovely scenery, and the noble park-like trees, the umbrageous grounds,
where the “forefathers of the hamlet sleep,” the river, the forge,
the undulating road, and scattered tenements recall at once the pretty
little secluded villages of the old country Mr. Hassall belonged to a
missionary family, and certainly inherited the spirit of one, for in his eaily
days here, when he had no settled charge, he used to make many preaching
tours along the coast. Before his chapel was built he used to hold divine
service in a loft over Kirkham stables, and in huts or barns, wherever he
could get a congregation together. Mr. Lightbody, who boarded with
Mrs. Howell, at Macquarie Grove, was the Wesleyan minister, and
Father Ruggerio (known as Father Rogers) was the Roman Catholic
priest. They officiated in private houses. Rough as the times were it is
to the credit of the people that there was great respect for religious
ordinances.
Mr. Oxley, the surveyor-general, who owned Kirkham, led several ex-
peditions into the interior and made some important discoveries. He held
office for 16 years, and, on his death, the Kirkham Estate was leased to
Capt. Coghill, and afterwards to Mr. Tooth, during the minority of
Messrs. John and Henry Oxley, who, in the meantime, were taken by
Mrs. Oxley to England and the continent.
Very extensive farming operations were carried on at Kirkham, princi-
pally in growing lucerne, the whole of the paddocks being laid down with
it. I have often wondered how it was all disposed of.
Mr. James Hassall carried on farming on a very large scale at Matavai ;
but for mixed farming and dairying none could beat Mr. McLcay.
Brownlow Hill was also a receiving place for the wool and fat stock from


his large Murrumbidgec stations. Mr. Clark, a Scotch gentleman, was
his manager, and it would be impossible to imagine anything to surpass
the order of his farm arrangements, the discipline of his men, or the suc-
cess of all his undertakings. Mr. Clarke became a partner with Mr.
Win. McLeay and Mr. Petre in some stations, and retired wealthy to
Melbourne, where he was killed from his buggy. He was a high-minded,
reticent, yet very amiable gentleman, with all that keen perception of
business matters that makes Scotchmen pre-eminent as managers.
The first threshing machine that I ever saw here was a clumsy thing,
with some of the cog-wheels of wood, belonging to Mr. Mannix, of
Spring Hill, which was drawn about the country and worked by bullocks.
He had also a primitive flour mill worked in the same way.
Mr. McLeay had a fixed horse-power threshing and flour mill for
farm use.
The first light portable (two-horse) threshing machine, and the first
“ Garrett’s ” reaping machine, were introduced by myself, on seeing the
maker’s catalogue after the first Great Exhibition, I helped others after-
wards to import them, I had no interest in farming, but I was provoked
at the slow labour of the flail. The American peg-drum threshers came
into use in course of time and drove them out of the field, and then rust
cleared them all out.
There were two very fine cricket clubs—one at Matavai, the other at
Kirkham. There were a good many smart young natives in the former
club, and Mr. Hassall, himself a native, did everything possible to promote
its efficiency. Mr. Tooth, who was a Kentish man, prided himself upon
having Kentish men about him. There were some splendid cricketers
among them, and they were ably captained by his superintendent, Mr.
Sergeant, who was of a most genial disposition, and greatly liked by his
men. Mr. Hassall gave a harvest home every year, which brought the
whole neighbourhood together, and the eating and drinking and merry-
making were something to remember. The now Mrs. Tom Richardson
was long the “ Belle of the Ball.” Mr. Hassall afterwards migrated to
Victoria, where he died. Some of his party were drowned on the over-
land trip.
The population was considerably greater than it is now. (Perhaps my
readers will scarcely believe that the census shows a decrease of 1700 in
the last fifteen years.) Sociality was generally observed. The means of
communication with the city being difficult, and but few vitiating entice-
ments existing, home virtues were better cultivated, and the pace was
slower than now. Visiting, riding, and shooting filled up the spare time
of those who were not engaged in the drudgery of the farm. Game was at
hand in abundance. Native dogs sometimes committed great depreda-
tions, but gave plenty of sport in trapping or the chase,
I have been told that Mr. Mowatt kept hounds on Captain Hovell’s
farm at Karelian Grange, but it was before my time, I remember a hunt
club in Sydney, under the mastership of Capt. Hunter. The hounds were
kept at Charley Smith’s slaughter yards at Camperdown, near Sydney,
The military officers chiefly supported it, but there were a few civilians.


Dr. Moncrief, one of the surgeons of Macquarie-street hospital, was con-
sidered tire “ pink ”of tlie club. I often visited the kennels and sometimes
went to see them throw off. After the main body of the military departed
the club languished and the pack got dispersed, but the Fitzroys some-
times got together a scratch pack, and came up here to hunt.
Dr. Wardell, a barrister, who was shot on his estate, had some deer at
Petersham, but the enclosures were wilfully broken into, and the deer got
out to Cook’s River and Port Hacking. Stalking them became a
favourite pastime. I have often seen fine bodies of venison in Sydney
market. Up to a few years ago there were several deer on Razorback,
said to be the increase of some lost from Camden Park. Wild dee rare
said to be numerous at Mulgoa through escapes from Mr. Cox’s preserves.
The desire to pose as the country gentleman did a great deal for the
neighbourhood, although it was .sometimes carried tj an extravagant pitch
as was the case with Mr. W. E. Riley, of Raby. He had a station at
Cavan, beyond Yass, and at Yass races his drag with two posfilions in
full costume, with knotted whips and shield boots, book a party of military
officers about. A cannon was brought on the course and fired before each
race. On the last occasion as the officers were amusing themselves firing
the cannon at Cavan, one of ihem got his arm blown off, and Mr. Riley
the same night was found dead. On another occasion, at the opening o';
the Landsdown bridge by Governor Bourke, he had a procession of choice
stock, carts filled with produce, and one with black boys supporting an
emu and a kangaroo. Mr. John Hawdon, of Elderslie, and his brother
were fine specimens of the English gentleman. They succeeded Dr. Imlay
in the great stock exporting business at Jervis Bay, the elder one has not
long died. Mr. Woore deserves honorable mention for ths excellent rail-
way route that he surveyed at his own cost. He would have brought the
junction beyond Granville, to Kemp’s Creek, and he planned the southern
line to cross a bed of rock in the river at Yermon:, and thence by an easy
gradient by Theresa Park and The Oaks to Picton Lagoons. Notwith-
standing the easy route, and the avoidance of the Mcnangle quicksand
which swallowed up “ a mint of money,” the landed interest from Liver-
pool upwards was too powerful for him. The cost of the line and its fre-
quent liftings to escape the floods of George’s River, proved, when too
late, what the country lost by the choice.
When I commenced these papers I had no thought of relating incidents
of city life, but as my first three or four years were spent in Sydney, and
the contrasts between now and then are even more striking there than in
the country, I ought not to bring my reminiscences to a close without
touching upon that period.
One of the most striking things that occur to me is the fact that, in
proportion to the population, we had more public men, in the real sense of
the word, than we have now. Some, perhaps, had an undesirable pub-
licity, which was a good deal helped forward by the license of the press,
but they stood the attacks with remarkable fortitude, some from a con-
viction that their soiled reputations disabled them from replying, and some
from the strength of conscious rectitude ; but many of them used the


ready power of retort that strength of character and intellect and much
public discussion always produce. To have resorted to the law courts
would have been deemed arrant cowardice ; now and. then a little horse-
whipping was done, and a duel or two was fought, but no lives were lost,
and the public enjoyed the fun. The press was at chronic war with the
Government and with each other, and contributors were the more eagerly
welcomed as their articles excelled in virulence.
The oldest paper was the “ Sydney Gazette,” published semi-officially
by a Mr. Howe, at his office near the foot of Church Hill. It was edited
by a Mr, Watts, a “ Port Macquarie Special.” By direction of the Sec-
retary of State, all literary prisoners were consigned to that settlement,
partly to save them from the full humiliation of their position, and partly
from a fear that they might surreptitiously make dangerous use of their
pens. From some reason, which did not transpire, Mr. Watts was
allowed his liberty and the editorship of that paper. This indulgence was
an exceTent subject for an attack upon the Governor, (the government was
then personal), and the most was made of it. The Emancipist party, feel-
ing its strength, came to the rescue, and party-feeling got very high, when
it was suddenly terminated by the accidental drowning of Watts.
The “Monitor” was published by Edward Smith Hall, down a lane
where Thompson and Giles’ establishment now stands. Monitor Hall, as
he was called, was lifted to high fame by a prosecution for libelling Gov-
ernor Darling, who had too severely punished a couple of soldiers named
Sudds and Thompson. That Governor had long been a thorn in the side
of tiie Patriots, and Mr. W. C. Wentworth had a bullock roasted on the
beach at Yauclusc as the ship bearing him away passed up the harbour.
“ Monitor Hall ” had a farm at Bringclly, still known as “ Hall’s Clear
Ground.”
The “ Sydney Herald ” was published by Stevens and Stokes in King-
street, near the present Arcade entrance. It was a quiet, mercantile paper,
and the original of the “ Sydney Morning Herald,” but it would not have
been so rash as to meddle with judges.
The “ Australian ” was the organ of the native and Patriotic party. It
was edited by Bob Nichols, but was contributed to by the most advanced in
politics, such as W. C. Wentworth, Dr. Bland, Frank and John Stephen,
Dr. Warded, Dr. Lang, and many rising natives. I think Sir James
Martin tried his first flight in it. But when the “ Atlas,” published by
Welsh, and edited by Mr. Robert Lowe {now Lord Sherbroke), and the
“ Colonist,” edited by Dr. Lang, appeared, all political interest centred in
them. Both the latter were conducted with extraordinary talent and vigour,
'i'liey had also the recommendation of being pleasingly got up in form,
paper, and type, and were striking contrasts to the smudgy productions of
the other offices. The morals of the city had sunk to a very low ebb, and
Dr. Lang undertook the task of reprover. The shameless doings of John
Thomas Wilson, of a superintendent of convicts, of Potter McQueen, an
English M.P., and others, drew down his lash, and these outrageous liber-
tines were compelled to hide from the public scorn.


The arbitrary powers necessarily exercised by the Government in the
early days were felt to be galling when the proportion of free and native
born became considerable ; and a very laudable desire for free institutions
arose. Governors were unwilling to relinquish power, and were, therefore,
not disposed to assist such aspirations. They had the ear of the Horae
office, the patriotic party therefore wisely determined to avoid them, and
carry their, appeals direct to Bowning-street, A Patriotic Association
was formed, having Mr. John Stephen as secretary. If wrs known as
“ Rowell’s Club ” from its room in the house of a chemist of that name
in central George-street. The Association was kept in full work by the
active leadership of W. C. Wentworth and Dr. Bland. An immense
amount of correspondence was kept up in the colony, and Mr. Charles
Duller, a member of the English Parliament, gave up all his time to advo-
cating the cause of the colony in the House of Commons and through the
English Press. The labours of the Association laid the foundation for
Mr. Wentworth’s great work, the Constitution which we now enjoy, and
so effectually educated the leading men for Parliamentary life, that,
although sitting in a nominee, or only a partially representative, House,
and under the restraint of the presence of the Governor as President, our
earliest debaters have never since been surpassed, if even approached.
Owing to the freedom of criticism by the Press, and the familiarity with
the persons, and often with the “ doings ” of many of the irore prominent
men in Sydney, they were most frequently spoken of with coarse familiarity
as Billy Wentworth, Bob Nichols, Billy Hutchinson, Bob Campbell, &c.,
(a style which I have been compelled to adopt as flavouring of the period).
Those abbreviations sometimes indicated a kind of regard, but where genuine
respect was felt the prefix of ‘ Mr.’ was willingly accorded. Notwith-
standing the too common and open profligacy of very many of the leading
public men, public sentiment highly honored those who, ly their lives or
by their writings, rebuked the vices of the day. There was a circle into
which it was impossible for a tainted name to enter. The household of
Governor Bourko, a widower, was presided over by his daughter, Mrs. Deas
Thomson, aided occasionally by Mrs Riddell, the wife of the Colonial
Treasurer, a lady possessing singular grace of manner ; and during his
time, and until the time of the Fitzroys the Vice-Regal court was a model
of purity.
The object that most attracted the notice of strangers was the enor-
mous pile of buildings known as the Royal Hotel. It was of great
height, and extended from George-street nearly into Pitt-street. The
front was used as an hotel. There was a theatre in the centre, ap-
proached by a side passage, and a windmill on the top. All the rest of
the building was used as merchants’ stores. The designer of it must
have been a man of vast conceptions, and the carrying out of the work
without the mechanical contrivances of the present day shewed that
there must have been much constructive ability in the colony even then.
The hotel was carried on by Mr. Sippe, formerly a military bandmaster,
who was also the leader of the orchestra of the theatre. The theatre
was under the management of Barnet Levy, and the company vvere Mr.


and Mrs. Knowles, Miss Winstanley, the Buckingham family, and Joe
Simmons as comic man. The Misses Hart, from the great coaching inn
in Pitt street, were the danseuses. Simmons and the Buckingham family
visited Camden a few years ago, the former lectured upon “Old
Sydney,” and the Buckinghams gave a theatrical entertainment. A
Mrs Taylor, the wife of a respectable Custom House officer, took to the
stage. She was a very attractive person, but got to be acquainted with
John Thomas Wilson, who succeeded Macdonald in Burdekin’s iron-
mongery business, and also became a popular auctioneer, Wilson
entered into wild speculations, and after Dr. Lang attacked the pair in
the “ Colonist,” he went to the dogs, and was last heard of as a steward
in a ship on the coast of South America. Mrs, Taylor came to a miser-
able end. The following account of this scoundrel was published in the
“ Sydney Gazette ” at the time: —“ On Saturday the good town of
Sydney was thrown into a regular ferment. Mr. John Thomas Wilson
made a moonlight flitting. His real name was James Abbot, of Bir-
mingham. His first essay in England was the inducing a young lady to
elope with him and then deserting her. He then robbed an old lady
of a large sum of money and escaped to the United States of America.
He started as an auctioneer at Boston under the name of John Thomas
Soanes. He fleeced the Yankees, and then fled to the Cape, but find-
ing the Dutchmen too slow, came to Hobart Town as a merchant, with
an assortment of cases packed with stores, but not succeeding he took to
keeping a grog shanty. In a few months he came to Sydney under the
name ot John Thomas Wilson, and entered the employ of Lancelot
Iredale, was dismissed for immoral conduct, and was next clerk to Caleb
and Felix Wilson. Whilst there he, in conjunction with Mr. Uther,
entered into an arrangement with Burdekin and McDonald and
obtained possession of their extensive ironmongery business at the
corner of George and Market Streets.” So far the “ Sydney Gazette.”
But the sequel was that this man entered into auctioneering, and being
a man of fine presence, plausible manners, and great fluency of talk, he
led the merchants by the nose. It is supposed that his antecedents were
near exposure, for of a sudden he made a grand “ coup” by filling the
ship “ Nevrus ” with cargo and joining her at the heads. The Gov-
ernment was appealed to, and Capt. Biddulph was commissioned with
an armed crew to pursue the ship, but it was found that the ship and
cargo were regularly cleared at the customs, and nothing could be done.
Mr. Abraham Polack, a leading auctioneer, declared himself to be the
chief victim, but there were many doubters, as Abraham had been
mixed up in some other equivocal transactions. Barnet Levy was a
great humourist, and is credited with saying that he could make nothing
of his son who was such a fool that he had not sense enough to drop a
hot poker. The working of the windmill was stopped because one of
the sweeps was whirled off in a gale of wind, and fell into George-street.
The building was destroyed by fire, causing the death of a gentleman in
one of the upper rooms, I think it was the property of Mr. John Terry
Hughes, The present hotel is much inferior in size. There was no


club house then in Sydney, and the steady going squatters and families
had to encounter the fast men who resorted to the Royal. A great
deal of gambling at billiards went on there, and the great stock specu-
lators and overlanders used it as their exchange. Ben Boyd, Dalrnahoy
and Charles Campbell, the Mantons, Duttons, Potter McQueen,
Sempill, Ephraim Howe, and others, drank, played, and speculated
there —and there, too, was formed the “ Pastoral Association,” which
gave Sir George Gipps so much trouble. Mr. Charles Cowper, who
afterwards took the opposite side and swamped the Upper House to
carry his point, was a very active momber of it, and turned it to much
political account. Ben Boyd went on a wild cruise in his yacht, the
Wanderer, and was killed on a cannibal island, Guadalcanar, I think.
Mr. Manning, then Curator of Intestate Estates, built an hotel in
Bent-street, which was leased to Mr. Levien as the Pulteney Hotel;
Petty’s Hotel was also started ; as both were kept free from gambling
they became the resort of the steady going visitors. Mr. Manning had
used the trust funds speculatively, and a financial crisis occurring, the
fact was revealed, and his property was sequestrated. His hotel was
purchased for club purposes, and is now the most exclusive one in
Sydney, though irreverently dubbed the “ old women’s club.” Perrier
Brothers, gentlemen by birth, and squatters at Bathurst, started Perrier’s
cafe in Lower Pitt-street. It was much patronised, but a good deal of
high play was carried on. The death of one of them broke up the
business.
One of my amusements was visiting the Supreme Court, then pre-
sided over by Chief Justice Forbes. The bench had a very high repu-
tation for learning and dignity. Besides the Chief Justice I remember
Judges Stephen (father of Sir Alfred), Burton, and Dickenson. Later
on judge Willis had a seat, but his behaviour was so singular that there
were doubts of his sanity, and as he refused to be lectured by the Gov-
ernor he was removed. I believe the Home Government, though ap-
proving of his removal, did not approve of the method of it, and
procured him compensation. There was plenty of talent at the bar, but
the larger share of briefs fell to Foster, Windeyer, Wentworth, War-
dall, Lowe, Broadhurst and Darvall on the civil side, and Rowe on the
criminal side. All of them had powerful voices, and used them to the
utmost. Foster and Windeyer were distinguished for their cutting
sarcasm, Wentworth for his red face and irritable lifting up the collar of
his gown in his most impassioned addresses. In private conversation,
when in anger, he would swear like a trooper. He was a great patriot
here, but a great monopolist elsewhere, and nearly succeeded in grasp-
ing a large part of New Zealand. Governor Gipps, Capt. Fitzroy, R.N.,
and Mr. James Busby, the British resident at the Bay of Islands, had a
difficult task to dispossess him. Rowe, the leader in the criminal prac-
tice, was a great burly man, of coarse manners, and noted for terrifying
adverse witnesses. He and Dr. Warded temporarily exchanged wives.
Young as I was I could not help wondering that the judges permitted
him to go to such lengths, but as they were men of high principle, I


concluded that they were indisposed to check him lest they should
appear to prejudice the cases of criminals standing between life and
death. Little George Rowe, of racing fame, and owner of the cele-
brated Veno, was a son of his. Mrs. Rowe (as had Lady Wilde) fell
into the hands of Dr. Wm, Sherwin, a man of great professional talent,
a native of the colony, who had been assistant to Dr. Bland, and after-
wards took his degree in England. He was a very handsome man, of
fascinating manner, but utterly unprincipled in such matters.
With the exception of Ryan Brenan, John Dillon, Sydney Stephen,
Myles Sheehy, Gurner, Tompson, Norton, and perhaps one or two
more, the attorneys were a disreputable lot. Sydney Stephen became
a judge in New Zealand, John Dillon was long Secretary to the Court
of Claims. He was of fine person and manners, genial and witty, the
very beau ideal of an Irish gentleman, and his home was of the
brightest. Myles Sheehy and his beautiful wife were an enviable pair.
These and George Louis Poignand were a credit to any community, but
the most of the others were the vultures of the profession, and, in
private life, shameless to the last degree.
About the smallest man in Sydney was an attorney named Williams,
who married a sister of Dalmahoy Campbell, a giantess, and'they were
rendered ridiculous by her taking his hand, as she could not take his
arm. George Robert Nichols and Gurner had such enormous temples
that their hats hung back like modern ladies’ bonnets.
Sandwell’s “ Rose and Crown,” next to St. James’School House, was
a favourite resort for lawyers, and clients more frequently found them
there than at their chambers. It was a ramshackle weather-board
building, in the old colonial cottage style, with a large expanse of roof,
numberless little rooms with low ceilings, wide chimney places, and
sanded floors. Every available corner had a glass cupboard displaying
the wealth of the buffet and the excellence of the larder. Many of the
citizens used to drop in of an evening for a game of chess or back-
gammon, and a chat over the news of the day. There was a great deal
of comfort in such houses, as the owners took personal interest in their
guests. Many of my readers may remember Mrs. Walker’s “ Red Cow
Inn,” at Parramatta, as just such another.
The hearing of criminal trials, I suppose, must have given me a desire
to see the law carried out, for I once had the curiosity to atend an
execution. The gaol was then in lower George-street, running back to
the “ Rocks,” which overlooked it, and where the spectators stood. As
the day was cold there was great anxiety amongst the crowd to have it
over. Three men, dressed in white, were executed together. There
were always as many debtors as criminals in gaol, and the more humane
of them must have suffered much mental distress as executions were
very frequent. I should not like to be compelled to witness another.
Mr. Keck, the gaoler, had a fine son articled to Mr. Dillon, but he
wished to become a squatter, and went on to Ben Boyd’s station at the
Woolshed (now Deniliquin), and got killed leaping his horse over a
fallen tree. The police business was controlled by Captain Rossi and


Mr. C. Windeyer, Captain Innes (a wooden-legged man who saved him-
self in a Hyde Park riot by leaping his horse over the railings), and
afterwards by a Colonel Wilson, a London Police Commissioner, who
was brought out here for the purpose. Chief constable Jilks was a very
clever thief-catcher, but the most renowned was a runner (as the detec-
tives were called) named Izzy Chapman. This man seemed to have a
clue to everything. There was a Jewish element all through the under-
ground operations. Old Joe Raphael attending auctions, Aby Davis, a
noted prize-fighter’s trainer, and Isaac Nichols, a low gambler and dog
fancier, were “ intelligencers.” I kfiew Parry Long, manager in Sydney
Stephen’s office, and, through him, came to know a good deal of the
inner legal life, and one day, as a “great treat,” was given a private
view of Barrington, the “ eminent ” London pickpocket, who was then
being employed by the office to make private enquiry in some suit.
The duties of a Governor being less exacting than they are now, Gov-
ernor Bourke found time to ride about the town of an afternoon. He
was generally attended by Major Mitchell, and Colonel Lindesay, some-
times by his aide de camp, Cap. Westmacott. There was an American
black named Billy Blue, living on the North Shore, who brought a bag
of oysters daily for sale. He was a very old colonist, and well ac-
quainted with everyone's private affairs, and was much liked. He be-
came quite privileged, and when he met the Governor in the streets
used to play the part of court jester, and give him hard hits, much to his
amusement. He left a fine property on the North Shore, called Blue’s
Point, and one of his sons became a Presbyterian minister.- Billy was
very hard on new chums.
Government House was a very ordinary house just within the domain
precincts, approached by a prolongation of Bridge-street. There was
very little appearance of state. The old Government house at Parra-
matta was always kept in readiness, and occasionally visited. The
Governor’s son, Richard, was his private secretary. Another son was
blind, and was under the care of a Mr. Marsh, who to judge from some
doggrel rhymes published at the time of a great drought, was sometimes
consulted by His Excellency on State affairs.
At the time of a revolution in Poland a good many expatriated Poles
made their way to Sydney, Dr. Lhotsky, a geologist, was one. He had
a cabinet in Castlereagh-street, which was much admired for its scientific
arrangement. By the assistance of a few friends he made a little ex-
ploration of the Australian Alps, and brought home some auriferous
sand. I had made his acquaintance, and was one of the few who at-
tended at Dick’s, the silver-smith, to witness its reduction, and saw the
first button of Australian gold turned out of the crucible. The doctor
published a small pamphlet of his travels, of which I long preserved a
copy. His name and work are mentioned in Professor Liversidge’s
catalogue; but he is otherwise unknown to fame. Another Pole was
Count Gordonovitch, the noblest looking man I ever saw. He opened
a cigar divan in King-street, but returned to London and shot himself
on the pavement in Regent-street.


Sandalwood and whaling ships used to bring home large quantities of
South Sea Island curiosities, which were always on sale at the marine
stores, in lower George-street. One very marketable commodity was
smoked New Zealanders’ heads, which were so cured as to preserve the
features and tattooing distinctly. The eyes were represented by pieces
of mother-of-pearl held in by gum. On the 16th April, 1831, a pro-
clamation was issued against the traffic, and calling upon those who had
any of them to deliver them up, especially such as had been brought up
in the “ Prince of Denmark,” so that they might be restored to the re-
latives; but as the possession of them was not they passed
as before from hand to hand. I saw many of them in private houses,
and several shelves of them in Dr. Bland’s coach-house.
The Rev, Mr. Marsden was then carrying on his great mission in
New Zealand, and many of the natives came up with him, and among
whaling crews. (A christianised New Zealander, named Ekoe, one of
Mr. Marsden’s converts, was long a faithful servant as coachman to the
Rev, Thomas Hassall, and lies buried by the chancel of Cobbitty
church.) They were a very muscular lot, and were taken on at Mr.
Barker’s and the Albion Mills, to shift grain, &c. Mr. Kendal, manager
at Barker’s mill, was a son of the Rev. Mr. Kendal, missionary to New
Zealand, and spoke the language. He used to teach them the Maori
testament in their spare time, and occasionally got them to give a war
dance. There were about a score of them, and the precision of their
movements and singing was astonishing. Ranged in double file with
one leg advanced, the body bent forward, the tongue protruding, the
eyes rolling in unison, they would clap their thighs and point their hands
forward quivering them rapidly, all the while singing with a voice that
seemed to come from the depths, when, suddenly with a loud groan all
would leap into the air and change front. They wore at such times
their country mat, with sharks’ teeth neck-laces and ear-drops. Their
demoniacal aspect, their tremendous voices and apparent savageness,
made me sheer off to a safe distance for fear the old Adam in them
might make them “run a muck,” but they were really laughing, tiact-
able fellows, and hard workers. Their usual amusement was snaring
rats with a noose. Occasionally a large body of them performed their
war dance in the streets at night, carrying torches. Mr. lowns’ frizzly
headed Tanna men were a much more dangerous lot.
All the leading merchants, the officers’ mess, and many private
families kept Indian servants, who dressed magnificently in flowing
robes, sashes, various coloured turbans, and valuable jewellery. They
had fine figures and were exceedingly polite and given to “ Salaam.
Representatives of many races might be seen any day about the Old
Queen’s Wharf, which, by the way, could only accommodate one vessel.
A ship that was burnt there obstructed all business for months. The
Government dockyard was a high-sounding name for a place at which
nothing bigger than a boat was ever built. Dan Egan, M.P., served an
apprenticeship there, and Captain Nicholson, the harbour master, had


an office and boat’s crew. There was only one establishment, Dawson’s,
where forging and foundry work for shipping was done.
The lumber yard took up all one side of Bridge-street, from George-
street to the Tank stream. The surplus convict stores were kept there,
and various trades were carried on. It was enclosed by a high wall,
with large double gates of the corner. Peter Plomer, a tall, purple-laced
man had charge. He was a usurer, and laid the military and civil
officers under contribution. To one dilatory ensign he remarked that
he had not principle to pay the interest, nor interest to pay the principal.
A great deal of fraud was done through the yard. Furniture and ma-
terials were made up and passed out to persons high in the civil service.
When an exposure resulted the yard was broken up. I have never seen
the place mentioned in any accounts df"sydney.
The market place was wholly of wood, and was embellished with a
pillory where I have seen a culprit fast by the neck and wrists, and
pelted with rotten eggs and vegetables. There were stocks there also,
and in Druitt-street, Captain Rossi, P.M., would say, “ Ah . you bin
here vun, two, tree time. I vill give you vat you call vun gally-bus-
ter.’ I make you go in de stocks.”
Joining Druitt-street and extending to Bathurst-street was a large space
of ground, about two-thirds of which was the “ancient” burial ground
and the rest a cathedral site. The burial ground was surrounded by a
low dilapidated brick wall. The ground had apparently been dug over
till it would hold no more, and was tumbled out of all shape. M an Y
very grotesque inscriptions could be found. I noticed the records, of
numerous deaths by drowning in the harbor. After the Strawberry
Hills Cemetery was opened this place fell into disuse, and so far had ail
the reverence for it been lost, that it became a resort for the vilest
characters, and it was at last decided to remove the remains and resume
the land for Municipal uses. The Town Hall and Deanery are built on
it. The soil must be largely composed of human dust. There is some-
thing revolting in the idea of dinners being cooked in
kitchen of these mansions, “down among the dead men. ihe whole
space ought to have been planted as a sacred reserve. In the cathedral
portion was the original foundation for a cathedral laid by an cady
governor, but which was not used. The design of the present building
not corresponding with it it was taken up. t .
Right opposite the burial ground was Bob Cooper s inn. Cooper
was a distiller of gin and had immense works in Parramatta-street. His
liquor was used all over the colony. Cooper was a bloated lump of flesh
and was very vulgar. During a fiscal debate in the Legislative Council
his evidence was called for at the bar. His familiar way of appealing
to Sir John (Jamieson), the captain, the doctor, Sir George (Governor
Gipps), and so on, became so unendurable (for he was insensible to re-
buke) that he had to be dismissed. The beer in use was known as
“ sugar beer; ” it was brewed by Bones, of Pitt-street, Grose, of Parra-
matta/zand Terry Hughes. The brewery reservoir of the latter was
withmoirainage area of Strawberry Hills Cemetery, which, no doubt


gave a special flavour to the beer. This beer resembled porter, and was
made of the lowest treacly sugar. It came out on enquiry that the
‘ head ’ was given to it by calcined alum and copperas.
Cooper and Levy’s, afterwards Cooper and Holt’s, Waterloo Ware-
house, still looking as fresh as it did fifty years ago, did a large country
business, which was supplemented by some banking and money lend-
ing, The firm issued “ Waterloo notes,” which always circulated at
their inscribed value. They were very useful, as the currency was very
fluctuating, and of so many denominations of coin. The Cooper of
this firm is Sir Daniel Cooper, now in England, not our friend Bob, the
distiller. The Bank of New South Wales, opposite Barrack-gate, was
managed by Mr. John Black and Old Potts. It was a very modest
affair. Wentworth, Allen, Walker were always directors.
The bank of Australia was in lower George-street, and was once robbed,
by means of a tunnel under the street. It was unluckily tempted into
helping Hughes and Hosking in their gigantic land speculations, and
when they failed the numbers of landed securities were so great that
purchasers could not be found, and a “Bank of Australia Lottery Act ”
was passed which set the whole colony gambling in tickets. Mr. W. H.
Mackenzie was the last manager, and Mr. Stirling, a director, was made
sole trustee in winding up. Hundreds of families were ruined by the
calls made upon them as shareholders.
After that one of Rothschild’s agents, a German, whose name I forget,
and Mr. Elwin, who had been one of the commissioners to dispose of
the 20 millions West India indemnity for the abolition of slavery, had
financing bureaux on Church Hill. Mr. Elwin became a distinguished
member of the Legislative Council.
It is difficult, now that Sydney has extended its suburbs almost to
Parramatta, to realize the limited area that was included by it at the
time I write of. Where Lyons’ Terrace now stands was the Sheriff’s
Gardens, belonging to Sheriff M. n (r
who shot himself. What is known as Woolloomooloo was grazing land,
the Riley upon it a large cottage at the head of Woolloo-
mooloo Bay, occupied by Dr. James Bowman, and afterwards by
Archbishop Folding. At Darlinghurst and Darling Point were the re-
sidences of Major Mitchell, Mr. Busby, Judge Stephen, and Bishop
Broughton ; there were also some windmills. Beyond that to South
Head and round to Botany, all was barren sand, scrub, and swamp.
Upon two or three of the streams were paper mills and the Waterloo
mill. This was a sportsman’s paradise, as quail, snipe, and duck
abounded Many a day did I trudge over those dreary wastes with a
rare old shot, Mr. Wood, of Hunter-street, for the purpose of seeing
the clever working of his pointers, and his wonderful expertness in
bringing down his birds. Southward, the town ended at the Hay-
market, where there were some bails, or crushes for shoeing working
bullocks. Harris’ Ultimo Estate commenced from there, the lodge
gate being about where the Dog and Duck public house stands.
Within the Park was Ultimo House, then tenanted by John Edye


Manning, senior. The house had a lonely look, in the midst of a large
dreary looking waste, extending down to the head of Ccckle Bay (now
called Darling Harbour).
A little way out of Sydney, on the Parramatta Road, was the old
Round House, used as a police station, and the toll bar. The Uni-
versity grounds were at that time a Government farm, called Grose Farm.
A large portion of Sussex-street, fronting on Cockle Bay, belonged
to Mr. Hyndes, and was covered with slaughter yards, which, being on
flat land and undrained, were always in a fearful plight. Cattle were
then extremely wild, and some lively scenes occurred when yarding was
going on. From there to Miller’s Point there were only the Albion
flour mills, the Market wharf, and one or two shipwrights’ establish-
ments, and until Mr. Morris built the terrace in Fort-street, Moore’s and
Jones’ and Walker’s whaling depots occupied all the space from Miller’s
Point to Dawes’ Battery. The Tank stream, except where it passed
under the streets, was a foul open ditch, extending from about Market-
street and by the back of Macquarie Place to the head of Sydney Cove.
There was a well by the side of the stream, near Hunter-street, winch
was drawn from by a lofty wooden pump worked from a stage, under
which the town carts stood for their supply. At the corner of Hunter
and Pitt streets were the mansion and lawn, and the large stores of Mr.
Richard Jones, a China merchant, and, with that exception, all of
Hunter-street between George and Pitt streets on both sides was open
ground. The south side was a favourite place for equestrian and
theatrical troupes to pitch their tents in. Behind that common Mr.
Prospre De Mestre, an American, father of the great racing celebrity,
had oil stores. Mr. James King afterwrds bought the north side of the
street and built the row of small shops still existing, Mr. King was a
Scotch merchant, who lived in lonely bachelorhood, in a room in his
store in King-street. He was an enthusiastic amateur chemist, and
went to Germany to make the acquaintance of Baron Liebig, and on his
return went to the Hunter and established the Trrawang Vineyard.
Mr. James Busby, who was afterwards British resident at New Zea-
land, then under native rule, had been commissioned to make a tour
through the vine-growing districts on the continent, and brought back
an extensive collection of vines, which were propagated at the Botanic
Gardens tor distribution. Mr. King, Mr. Alexander McLeay, my father,
and many others formed fine vineyards from this collection. Mr.
McLean the director of the gardens was very zealous in aiding the ap-
plicants with directions for the culture. So complete was the collection
that but very few useful sorts have since been imported.
One of the chief “ men of the time ” was Sam Terry, who was the
richest man of his day. He had a dwelling and store in Pitt-street,
and by usurious lending and foreclosing upon landed estate, acquired
a vast amount of freehold. His wealth was variously estimated at from
half-a-million to a million, yet his wife would be seen polishing the
knobs of the doors, and sweeping the pavement. His house was op-
posite the present Vickery’s Chambers, and abutted on the Bank of


New South Wales and Chisholm paddocks, which extended to George-
street.
The south ends of Elizabeth and Castlereagh-streets still have many
little houses such as formed the average of Sydney architecture, but
then many of them had spacious gardens with fruits of all sorts. There
was an air of comfort about them that the survivors have lost.
There was a pervading Dutch kind of contentment amongst all
classes, and such a total freedom from hurry and anxiety, that people
were content to do their business leisurely on foot, cabs and omni-
buses being unknown. Shopkeepers and retired citizens sat at their
shop doors or porches of an afternoon, placidly smoking the pipe of
peace. One old couple at the corner of Castlereagh and King streets
always drew my attention. They had a nice garden in King-street, and
a bower covered with a fine grape vine, where they sat on summer after-
noons, dressed in snowy white, the very picture of happiness.
The clergy, with the exception of restless Dr. Lang, were of the same
placid cast. The Rev. Richard Hill, of St. James’, and the Rev. Dr.
McGarvie were greatly venerated for their charitable dispositions and
earnest attention to their duties, and Archdeacon Cowper was a study.
He was to be seen at all hours passing along, saluting no one by the
way, as if his whole thoughts were set upon some lofty purpose. He
was of most unselfish mould, and of such strictness that governors
feared his rebukes. He was of such stern stuff as to be able to preach
the funeral sermons of his wives, yet succeeded in marrying four times.
The venerable gentleman took a trip to England in his very old age,
to be operated upon for cataract. He recovered his sight, and at once
resumed his duties and worked on till the last. The archdeaconry was
in Spring street, and he ministered in the old castellated church of St.
Phillips’. The Independents had a little brick church in Pitt-street,
about where the School of Arts now stands, and the Rev. Mr. Jarrett
was their minister. The Rev. Dr. McGarvie officiated in the Scots
church behind the cathedral. The Wesleyans had a chapel in Prince-
street, and the Quakers a meeting house in Macquarie-street. Tawell,
the chemist, was a leader among them. He had the shop in Pitt-street,
afterwards kept by Mr. Ambrose Foss. I think a son of Tawell’s had
it after Foss. Tawell created a great stir by knocking in the heads of
several casks of rum, in the interests of temperance, but returning to
England had a sad fall, which he thought to hide by destroying his par-
amour, for which he was executed. His case will be always remark-
able as the first in which the telegraph was successfully used for police
purposes, he having been captured by means of it.
The amusements of the Sydneyites were confined to small family
parties ; and a few fiddlers found steady employment by hiring out for
the evening. Pianos were rarely heard, and Ellard’s was the only
music shop; but the daily playing of the military bands compensated
for the deficiency. Ladies obtained their best music through the
officers, and bandsmen earned a good deal by copying it.


Mr. Thomas Stubbs, the great auctioneer, Signor Chiodetti, and Mr.
Stanley taught among the best families, and for the encouragement of
pupils musical parties were held occasionally, at which the brothers
Spyer, the merchants, Germans, who were charming amateur violinists,
used to assist
The lower tastes were provided for at Morris cockpit, just where
Moffit’s shop is, and by sparring, dog-fights, and free and easy clubs.
The fine arts were represented by Clint, the talented seal engraver,
Carmichael, the engraver and sketcher, and Rhodius, a successful crayon
portraitist. Mr. Read, a general artist in water-colours, had a room in
Pitt-street glazed almost down to fhe pavement, in which his works were
always on view. _ .
The streets were kept lively at night by the police running in assigned
servants out on the spree, or without leave, and the P.M. was kept busy
of a morning squaring the last night’s accounts. The women dreaded
being sent to the Parramatta Factory for punishment, as their hair was
always cut off. Fortunately for them at that time all adult females wore
caps, and the women being subjected to much chaff on return to service,
used all kind of devices to conceal their “ misfortune.” Little did they
think then that that badge of disgrace would be elevated to a “ fashion, *
as in these days.
At Parramatta Factory a coarse tweed was manufactured by the
women, having a singular “ herring bone ” texture. It was very soft
and comfortable, and was worn by all classes. The great tailor artist,
Hayes, used to boast that he served the swell and the bullock driver
from the same roll of “ Parramatta,” but that the refinements of his
art preserved their identities.
I must now bring my long chatter to a close, regretting that want of
leisure has prevented my making it more readable. To me, weary of
pen and ink by day, writing at night has been no relaxation; but I have
discharged my promise to the editor of our little paper. It is a very
fit cause for exultation, that so many small towns in the colony possess
a local print, whilst many important places in Europe are without any.
No place is without items of interest, and a local paper affords oppor-
tunities for the interchange of ideas, and for essays and articles which
one might hesitate to offer to the larger periodicals. I trust that others
may be stimulated to do as I have done. As one of the weakly tribe of
provincial scribblers I have committed my reminiscences to print, and
now leave them with a lingering affection for the “ days of old, and
with the conviction that, notwithstanding our great material progress,
we have not the domestic comfort and general contentment that pre-
vailed in the time that I have faintly attempted to describe. If my
readers have found a tithe of the gratification that Mr. Obed West s
“ Old Sydney ” papers in the “ Herald ” have given me, I shall be amply
rewarded.
THE END.


THE COMMERCIAL UNION
ASSURANCE CO.,
ESTABLISHED 1861
Incorporated by Act of Parliament, 7 and 8 Vic., Cap. 10.
Offices, Corner of Pitt & Hunter Sts,, Sydney,
CAPITAL: Subscribed, £2,500,000; Paid-up, £250,000.
Accumulated Funds, £2,191,424. Annual Revenue, £1,114,336.
NEW SOUTH WALES BOARD:
Chairman, EDWARD CHISHOLM, Esq. (Messrs. Brown and Co.)
Vice-Chairman, RICHARD GRANT READING, Esq.
DIEECTOES ;
Hon. JOHN FRAZER, Esq.
CHARLES T. GIDYE. Esq. (Messrs. Dangar, Gedye and Co.)
JOHN HINCHCLIFF, Esq. (Messrs. A. Hinchcliff, Son and Co.)
JOHN NEWTON, Esq. (Messrs. C. Newton, Bro. and Co.)
FIRE INSURANCE
On All Descriptions of Property at Lowest Rates.
WOOL INTSTJE-BD
AT GREATLY REDUCED RATES,
PEOM SHEEP’S BACIC TO LONDON.
Against ALL RISES, including Loss by FIRE and FLOOD.
The Immense Resources of this Company enable it to offer unrivalled
Security to Squatters and others,
BANKS AND MONETARY AND AGENCY INSTITUTIONS
Who insure with this Company will secure the advantage of
lower rates for their constituents.
PROPOSALS for FIRE or MARINE INSURANCES received either at the
Sydney Office, or through the Company’s Agents in every town in the colonies.
J. ST. VINCENT WELCH,
Resident Secretary and Underwriter.


ORAN PARK STUD FARM.
For Sale at ORAN PARK, Narellan, N.S.W., several pure
pvpgspilpl BUMsg PSD PBIFEDP,
Of various ages, also,
mmm ismii siaKSSias Bias,
Bred directly from IMPORTED Stock.
BROWN LEGHORN FOWLS (Imported).
BLACK HAMBURGH „
BLACK RED GAME „
SILVER-GREY DORKING FOWLS (Imported).
All the above Birds are SPECIAL PRIZE Winners,
FOX TERRIERS,
Bred from IMPORTED CHAMPION Dogs.
PURE SCOTCH COLLIES,
Bred from Imported Dogs on both sides.
■Catalogues, prices and full pedigrees from
TONI CADELL,
Oran Park, Narellan, N.S.W.
The NURSERIES,
CAMDEN, AND DOUBLE BAY, SYDNEY.
3P3R.03P3R.1ET03R.S-
F. FERGUSON & SONS,
Have for Sale all kinds of Fruit trees, Forest trees,
Ornamental trees of every description, Evergreen and
deciduous Shrubs, together with every description of
Nursery Stock
Illustrated and descriptive Catalogues on Application.


g^uo
ZZ dayid hott.
AND
SYYAYT MILLS,
Is prepared to enter into contracts for three, six or
twelve months, to supply best Chaff or Wood for fuel,
cut to any length, of best quality, at reasonable rates,
having steam power for cutting at the above station.
Dr. STANICH,
H A ll RlsT l
To His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus, Governor of
New South Wales,
CAN BE CONSULTED AT ROOMS,
50 WYNYARD SQUARE,
•f the Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat.
GENERAL STORES
NARELLAN TRAM STATION,




AEGYLE STORES,
CAMDEN.
OUST SALE.
General Drapery. Men’s and Boys’ Clothing. Boots
and Shoes Crockery and Glassware. Ironmongery
and Holloware. Paperhangings, Paints, &c. Italian
and General Grocery, Machinery and Farm Requisites.
Furniture and Bedding. Taylor and Farley’s Organs.
Sewing Machines.
N B.—Goods delivered free of charge.
DAVID DOUST,
3P3RO3P3RIETO3R..
E. GRIFFITHS,
Family and Carcase Butcher.
Meat delivered any reasonable distance.
Hides, Bark, Wool and Tallow bought in any quantity.
“ CAMDEN TIMES,”
PUBLISHED EVERY THURSDAY MORNING,
Has a large circulation, and is a splendid medium for
advertising.
Subscription — ios. per annum in advance;
or 14s. if booked.
