

610 "
sroi
o~i •
REMINISCENCES OF FRANK V7ALKER
Past President & Fellow - Royal Australian Historical Sociieti
At the request of several friends I have been asked to write some of
my recollections of Sydney in the Eighties, with special reference to the
founding of the Royal Australian Historical Society in 1901, then known as
the Australian Historical Society,
I came to Sydney from Melbourne in 1885, in the interests of the
Printing and Stationery trade, which lam still following, Sydney, in
that year, was a very different city to what it is at the present day,
Thera were very few Trams, most of the services being performed by three
and four-horse Omnibuses, No direct communication from the city to the
Redfem Railway Station (as it was then known) existed, other than by tram-
way, which passed through Belmore Park, along Elizabeth Street, and Phillip
Street to Bridge Street, which was the terminus. Extension to the waters
of the Harbour came at a much later date.
Practically, between the year of my arrival and the present day,
the city has been rebuilt. Many of the old buildings, dating, in some
cases, a century back, have disappeared, and either "sky-scrapers", or a
more modern style of building have superseded them. The shops displayed
their wares in a more modest way, and large plate-glass windows were rare.
Business was conducted in a leisurely manner, and nobody seemed in a hurry.
There were no glaring electric lights in the streets, or the latest invention,
"Neon Lighting System", and after business hours a sort of "holy calm"
reigned around. Perhaps the liveliest time in the city would be towards
the hour of 1 o'clock, when the "Lunch Buses", as they were known, paraded
George Street, at a slow pace, an ear-piercing whistle giving notice of
their approach.


These were the days when Circular Quay was lined with large ocean-going
sailing vessels* such as the "Cutty Sark", "Parramatta", "Neotsfield",
"Port Jackson", "John Duthie", and many more. The wool bales were unloaded
from the lorries, which brought them from the railway, and were rolled up the
sloping gangway "by hand", to the vessel's deck. These beautiful vessels were
the subject of universal admiration, but, alas - that picture will probably
never be repeated.
There were many beauty spots along the shores of the Harbour in the 80's
still untouched by the hand of man, Mosman Bay, in particular, was a quiet
and secluded retreat, where the singing of birds intermingled with the sound of
falling water nearby, came pleasantly to the ear. The wooded heights were
innocent of buildings and most of this delightful area was in a state of Nature,
Alas - "0 tempora, 0 mores" may be written concerning this, and many another
sylvan retreat of former days.
The "Rocks Area", now improved out of knowledge, v/as a prolific field
for Antiquarian research, and in this locality, and for many years afterwards,
old buildings and queer alleys, presented a picturesque appearance, and spoke
eloquently of the early days. Miller's Point, with its old-time hostelries,
most of them favouring searfaring activities, were to be met with here and
there, the very names of which have now passed from the recollection.
Of the very early buildings which the city boasted, the old Commissariat
building at Circular Quay reminded us of a day that has fled, but to-day its
site is bare. In the various streets one could easily pick eut buildings
v/hich certainly owed their existence to that energetic and able administrator,
Governor Macquarie, We are still reminded of this remarkable man when we look
at St, James' Church, the Supreme Court, and the old Hyde Park Barracks, which
fortunately have been preserved to us. Part of the General Hospital and the
Legislative Assembly building awaken in our minds the story connected with their
erection, and one of the great man's mistakes. Should further reminders be
required, a visit to Macquarie Place will reveal the old Obelisk, marking the


distances along various roads, and not the least attention may be given to the
excellent character of the lettering, and its wonderful state of preservation
after 124 years.
One other interesting Memorial in the city is that commemorating the
site of the First Church in Australia, at the corner of Hunter and Bligh Streets,
and which now stands on the actual site of the Church, The writer was a member
of the Committee formed to raise subscriptions for the erection of the Memorial,
As far as I know I am the only one left of those who composed the Committee,
The late Captain Watson was Honorary Secretary of the movement, who devoted
much time and energy to the securing for the city of this important and his-
toric Memorial,
The Australian (now) The Royal Australian Historical Societ
As the only living Founder of our Society, I may be pardoned if I add a
few thoughts concerning the genesis of this Association, which at the present
day is launched on a career that will continue to increase as the years go cn.
It was in the year 1900 that, in company with one or two like-minded men to my-
self, we conceived the idea of forming a Society for the cultivation of our
country's History, The idea was greatly strengthened by the sympathy and sup-
port that was given to us by the "Sydney Morning Herald", This arose from a
letter in the paper, pointing out the lack of knowledge existent concerning
certain facts in the history of Sydney, A leading article followed - (which
will be found in the first pages of Volume 111 of the Journal) - advocating
the formation of a Society for the study and conssrvation of Australian History,
and the collection of interesting objects of historical value, A letter con-
cerning the proper date of the laying of the foundation of old St, Philip's
Church, upon which there was some difference of opinion, next appeared, and
this, combined with the advocacy and support of our leading daily paper, brought
matters to a head, A Provisional Committee was formed, with the late Mr, Edward
Stack as Hon, Secretary, and myself as Hon, Treasurer, which met in a room in
the Town Hall on October 30th, 1900, and resolutions embodying the proposed


formation of a Society were carried. From this time onward until the inaugural
meeting in March 1901? officers were appointed? and the Society may be said to
have started on its career. The late David Scott Mitchell consented to act as
Patron? and the executive officers and council were elected for the first year.
Of the fifteen responsible officers of Council? and who rendered yeoman
service and contributed valuable articles to the Journal? the writer is the
only one living.
The well-known badge of the Society was designed by me, and its appro-
priate motto, "Veteris non inscieus aevi" (Not forgetful of the times that are
old), was supplied by the late Rev, ¥,H,H,Yarrington,
The first paper read before the Provisional Committee was by the late
Mr, Alfred Lee? entitled "The Landing of Governor Phillip", on November 13,1900,
Other papers followed on the 29th of the above month? and in February and March
1901, The first inaugural meeting was held on March 15th, 1901? v/hen the intro-
ductory address was delivered by the late Dr, Andrew Houison? and from this date
the Society commenced its career. The first paper was read by the late Mr,Edward
Dowling, at the second general meeting on April Ist, 1901, The only lady founda-
tion member now living is Mrs, A,G, Foster, the late Mrs. Alfred Lee being the
first lady member to be placed on the roll.
Nothing further may be added, save that the Society is now lodged in
magnificent premises in Young Street, Sydney, and rapidly acquiring a collection
of books, MSS and articles of historical interest in Australia, which will add
greatly to the knowledge of Australian History in the years to come.
The year 1913 coincided with the First Crossing of the Mountains in 1813
by Blaxland, Lawson & Wentworth, and I had the honour of being elected President
of the Committee formed to carry out the which passed off most
successfully. Nearly 10,000 people visited Mount Victoria on the day of the
celebrations, May 28th, and with money collected my Committee were enabled to
erect the handsome Memorial at Mount York, commemorating the work of the Ex-
plorers,


In the early Eighties Motor cars wars not often seen, and those that
ventured on the roads were subject to some minor, or major, defects, which time
alone remedied. In the Nineties a Cycling ,: craz*” burst upon the people, old
and young, and Cycling Clubs sprang up every suburb. The writer
followed the general trend, and for some years was an active member of one of
the most popular Clubs,’’The Waratah Rovers Bicycle Club”, with headquarters at
Petersham, From 1896 to 1908, a period of twelve years, I covered nearly 30,000
miles in country touring on the wheel, through the length and breadth of Now S,
Wales, parts of Victoria, and Tasmania, sometimes with a congenial companion,but
more often alone, I visited every town in this State and Tasmania which had
any pretensions to Australian History, for I had become an ardent seeker after
knowledge connected with that subject. On these tours I always carried a camera,
resulting in a collection of hundreds of negatives, many of these being the sole
record of vanished buildings, and historic places.
In Tasmania I visited many old homesteads, some being well over a century
in ago, and obtained photos and particulars of their history. These form an
unique record, and will prove a valuable addition to the large quantity of
historical matter already acquired by the Society,
In 1917 I visited Norfolk Island in company with my wife, and spent some
considerable time in this delightful spot. Bearing letters of introduction from
the then Premier of the State, the late Mr, W,A, Holman, I was enabled to collect
much information relating to the history of this romantic and historical island,
bringing back with me a large collection of photos, which provided lantern slides
for lecturing purposes.
*• « *
This brings me to the end of my Reminiscences, and if my readers have
found some information and interest in what I have written, I am amply repaid
for the effort made.
26 Albert Avenue, Chatswood,
August, 1943,
Frank Walker,
