

With my Compliments^
P FROM EARLY LIFE
AND INCLUDING
Cycling & Touring Experiences
By» J. ‘REARSON
THE ORIGINAL COMPILER OF ROAD MAPS
FOR TOURISTS, Etc.
V fc. rl s.
**
\ v-;
i
t.V . s
- : V J
Revised Edition


"The friends thou hail and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel.”
— Hamlet.


Dedicated by Permission
His Excellency
SIR PHILLIP GAME
Governor of
New South Wales
”qA loyal,
JuSl and upright gentleman.”
—Richard 11.


Yours sincerely,
J. PEARSON.
1933.


ERRATA.
Page 26—Word “ Dates ” should read “ Data."
Page 65—Should read, “ and let my liver rather
heat with wine, than ”
PREFACE.
IN THE year 1925, 1 presented to a large number
of my friends a copy of a book containing a short
history* of my life from early boyhood, and also
including many experiences during my career as a
cycling tourist.
I certainly never anticipated that it would have
given such pleasure to my readers. The numerous
letters that I received were indeed flattering, and
expressions of regret were made that it was not a
more lengthy volume.
I therefore decided to revise the work and to in-
clude many other events that would be of interest.
This, therefore, is the outcome.
May I ask that you will accept my compliments,
and I trust that my humble efforts will give pleasure
to those who peruse these pages.
It will be noticed that in parts, some repetition will
be observed.
To make the history more complete, I found it
necessary. However, I present it to you and ask your
forgiveness for any blemishes that may occur;
J. PEARSON.


Bungwahl.


lAVAS ushered into this world within 100 yards of
where the present Town Hall now stands, on
July 15th, 1849. lam thus 83 years of age.
My parents then lived in Clarence Street, which
was at that time a residential part of the City. There
were many vacant allotments of land.
Looking back to that time, and having a retentive
memory, very many past events appear before me.
I went to school when five years of age, within a
few doors of our residence. The school was part of
a private house. My teacher was an elderly lady
named Miss O’Connor.
Every Monday morning, the landlord, by the name
of Lee, would call for his rent and it was always the
custom that immediately he entered the door we were
all compelled to rise, bow, and say in unison:
morning, Mr. Lee, ’ ’ and on his exit: ‘ ‘ Good-bye, Mr.
Lee. ’ ’ I did not think asa “ kiddie ’ ’ for what reason,
but now, after my experience in the world, I conclude
that it may have been to keep in the good graces of
the landlord in case of arrears of rent. However, it
taught us to respect our elders.
Near to where my parents dwelt in Clarence
Street, there was a dairy, kept by a man named
McCrory. He owned about six cows that he used to
drive from Clarence Street into Druitt Street, thence
across George Street, through Park Street, to the
Racecourse, which is now Hyde Park, and go back
and drive them by the same route at about 5 o’clock
in the afternoon. Needless to remark, the traffic was
not like what it is to-day.
We afterwards moved into Pitt Street, where my
father established a furniture business, I would then
be about eight years of age. The shop previously
had consisted of two houses with a small garden in
front of each. The gardens were abolished and the


land used for the shop frontage. My father, in con-
nection with this business, purchased dressed timber
or obtained it in logs and had it sawn up in a saw
pit, constructed on land at the back of the shop.
Still in my memory 1 see the one-horse carts, laden
with fire-wood for sale. The driver of the vehicle
calling out in a loud voice: “Fire-wood, fire-wood!”
There were other drivers of coal carts, calling out:
“Good coal, Newcastle coal, one shilling a bag!”
I remember quite well, bullock teams being driven
through the streets to the Slaughter Yards at the foot
of Druitt Street, and noticing the offal, etc., conveyed
by open drain into Darling Harbour.
When driving the cattle to the slaughter yards,
one would occasionally break away from the mob and
cause a stampede of pedestrians. Eventually, the
beast would be shot and afterwards carted away.
There was what was called a patent slip for re-
pairing vessels; also a floating dock in Darling
Harbour, near Miller’s Point.
I also recollect that where the Sydney Town Hall
is now, was a burying ground, which seemed to me,
even when a small boy, to be very old, as on a number
of the tombstones the lettering was obliterated by
age. The cemetery was enclosed by a brick wall, and
we kiddies used to amuse ourselves walking on top
of it.
I remember when Moore Park Avas all scrub land.
We used to go out from the city to gather “gee-
bungs” and “five-corners,” as they were called.
There Avere two swamps near where the Cricket
Ground is situated. They ahA r ays contained water.
One was called “Billygoat” and a smaller one
“Nannygoat” swamp. The former is in existence
to-day in the form of a small lake. It is used by
owners of model yachts, and racing is indulged in.
In the year 1865 I Avent to employment in Bathurst.
At that time, the gaol was in the middle of the toAvn;


Machattie Park now occupies the site. 1 have never
forgotten the trip from Sydney. The railway only
-extended to Penrith, and the journey was then a big
undertaking. There was no bridge across the Nepean,
the old one had been swept away by a flood, and a
punt was constructed, which carried the coach and
passengers over. There being a full coach, some of
us would be compelled to walk up the steepest and
roughest places. I almost forget how long the trip
took, but 1 thought it took an almost endless time to
reach our destination.
I recollect where Hoffnung’s Warehouse is now.
Several one-storey shops and dwellings then existed,
.and on the pathway a peach tree was growing.
There was at that time, also, a big willow tree
growing on the pathway where Howes & Howes
Tailoring shop is in Pitt Street, near Market Street.
The tree was blown down one day during a southerly
* 1 buster. ’ ’
When I was a small boy, it was almost a daily
■occurrence to see a bullock team arriving in Sydney
from the country parts, laden with produce, hay,
etc., and seeing the waggons depart carrying back
to their various little country towns, merchandise
of all kinds. Tn a lot of cases, these teams would take
weeks on their journey.
Probably, very few persons are aware that many
of our city streets are called after some of our fore-
runners or notables. George Street, our main
thoroughfare, was called after George III; Elizabeth
Street after Queen Elizabeth; Castlereagh Street
after Lord Castlereagh; Pitt Street after William
Pitt, the great English statesman; York Street after
the Duke of York; Clarence Street after the Duke
of Clarence; Kent Street after the Duke of Kent;
Sussex Street after the %ike of Sussex; Phillip,
Macquarie, Hunter, King and Bligh Streets after our
first governors.
Next to the Hotel at the corner of King and Pitt
Streets, which was then, as now’*, called the Liverpool


Arms, a Mr. Moffitt kept a stationer’s shop next door
in Pitt Street. Penfold’s had it for many years
afterwards. This Mr. Moffitt was a very stout and
elderly gentleman. Regularly every day, when the
shop was closed at six o’clock, he would get his
assistant to take his easy chair into the middle of
the footpath and spend an hour or two reading and
smoking his pipe. Such a thing, of course, would
not be allowed now.
At the corner of Pitt and Market Streets, which
Farmer & Co. now occupy, there was a small “pub”
called the “Bull and Mouth.” Next to that in Pitt
Street was a little shop, then came Farmer & Co., a
portion of which was a private house; a Mr. Francis
lived in it. It had a verandah in front, but the
lower portion formed part of Farmer’s Emporium.
I was employed by the firm at that time. The old
style of wooden shutters were then used. Afterwards
a colonnade front was put in. No doubt, some of my
readers will recollect it. Afterwards the colonnade
was demolished and show windows substituted as
appear to-day.
When a small boy, I remember numerous bands of
aboriginals, with their lubras and piccaninnies, were
camped in the Domain, not far from where the Art
Gallery now stands. I never went round there alone,
as I was too frightened; yet they were all harmless.
They were all great smokers and fond of the pipe,
including the lubras.
Lake Albina, near summit of Mt. Kosciusko.


THE SAILING SHIPS OF THE EARLY
DAYS.
MANY an hour as a youngster I spent at
Circular Quay watching the loading of the ships
with wool, etc. At that time, the vessels were unable
to get alongside the shore on account of the shallow
water. Big stages had to be run out and the bales
of wool rolled hand over hand from the shore to the
vessel, not by slings or machinery as at present.
What splendid vessels most of them were. The
following names will bring back to the memory of
old residents now living: The “Windsor Castle,”
“Maid of Judah,” ‘•‘Ann Duthie,” “John Duthie,”
“Alexander Duthie,” “The Centurion,” “The
Cimba,” “The La Hogue,” “Strathnaver,” “Strath-
den,” and later the “Sobraon,” “The Thermopylae,”
“The Patriarch,” “The Cutty Sark,” and many
others.
It was from about 1856 to 1880 that many of these
tine vessels traded between England and Australia.
The most favoured for passengers was the “Sobraon,”
now the derelict “Tingara.” Other ships have done
faster times, such as the “Lightning”; she did the
trip from Melbourne to Liverpool in 63 days. Some
would return to England via China in the tea season.
“The Thermopylae” and “Cutty Sark” were great
rivals. Making mention of these vessels reminds me
that in the ’sixties and ’seventies the agents of a
certain vessel would advertise as follows; —“The
splendid ship (by name) would leave Sydney for
London in ‘all March,’ with passengers and cargo.”
The particular day would not be specified as they
may be delayed waiting for loading of cargo, etc.
“The La Hogue,” and vessels of that stamp, would,
as an inducement, mention that a cow would be
carried, thus giving their patrons fresh milk. As
regards the starting time for the voyage, what a
difference to-day, with these 20,000 tons steamers
advertised to leave a certain day at twelve o’clock,
and in about an hour or so they are away from the


wharf, through the Heads, and steaming south on
their journey.
When my parents came out in 1848 in the ship
“Royal Saxon” of about 400 tons, they were over
four months on the trip.
I well remember the wreck of the “Dunbar,” which
occurred on that terrible night and early morning
of August 20th and 21st in the year 1857. Hundreds
of people went out to se£ the wreckage. There were
no trams in those days, and the majority of the
people walked to the Gap. There has been much
controversy about the exact location where the vessel
struck the rocks. There was only one person saved.
He was thrown up by the sea on to a ledge of rock
and was rescued near Jacob’s Ladder, which is a
little south of the Gap. Now for a strange coincidence.
Some years after that, the steamer “Cawarra” was
wrecked off the Oyster Bank, Newcastle, and in this
case, also, there was only one man saved, and he was
rescued by the individual Johnson, the only survivor
of the “Dunbar” wreck.
Only a few days after the “Dunbar” loss, another
vessel went ashore, the “Catherine Adamson,” and
was wrecked near the Quarantine Ground. I went
down to Manly with my parents the next day and
recollect seeing the beach, on the Sydney side, strewn
with all kinds of merchandise.
The Creel, Thredbo.
10


Hawkesbury Bridge.
THE FIRST TRAMWAY IN SYDNEY.
THE FIRST tramway constructed was drawn by
horses. It went along Pitt Street to the Railway
Station. It was completed in the year 1861. It was
a failure and soon discarded. The construction was
faulty, many accidents took place as the tramlines
projected several inches above the level of the road.
This was the cause of many capsizes of vehicles. If
they were driven across the lines at an angle,
especially at high speed, a capsize was almost certain.
After the horse-driven cars were abandoned, new
lines were laid even with the surface of the road and
steam trams introduced. There was considerable
agitation against them as it was considered that the
narrowness of onr thoroughfares did not lend them-
selves to their use. Most of the steam trams when
first introduced were double-deckers. Previously,
’buses had been the means of transport, and many of
them were very fine vehicles, although a person had
to be an athlete to avail oneself of a seat on top.
But we youngsters always disregarded inside accom-
modation.


THE OLD PYRMONT BRIDGE.
WHEN I was a youngster of about eight years
of age, I went to our Sunday School Picnic.
The location of the picnic ground was Pyrmont,
where there was much vacant land in those days.
Our picnic ground was at a place called Brodziaek’s
paddock. There was no bridge across Darling Harbour
to connect Sydney with Pyrmont, we were trans-
ported across in rowing boats. I can picture the
scene, although 75 years ago. The old wooden bridge
that was built was completed in 1859. This remained
in use for about 26 years. Foot passengers were
charged Id. each way, horses with rider 3d., and
vehicles 4d. to 6d. according to the size. Many a
penny it cost me some years after, as my intended
was a resident of Pj-rmont and, of course, I
frequently crossed the bridge in my courtship days.
The present structure was completed in the year
1885.
BUSHRANGING DAYS.
IN MY memory I call to mind during my youth of
the depredations of the days of bushranging.
One of the worst cases was when Ben Hall and his
gang stuck up the gold escort between Forbes and
Orange, at a place named Eugowra. The gang was
aware that the escort was on its way and a short
distance from Eugowra bushrangers had hidden
behind a rock till it came along, when they seized
about £14,000 worth of gold. I have passed the rock,
known as Escort Rock, many times on my tours.
The Kelly Gang’s operations were in Victoria,,
near Glenrowan. The hotel where they were burnt
out is a short distance off the main road. I have
passed the place when on my way to Melbourne, and
have been entertained by some of the old residents
with the exploits of the dreaded Kelly Gang.


SIR HENRY PARKES.
IN THE year 1860, I was a pupil at the old Port
Street School. I was then eleven years of age.
As we lived in Pitt Street, I walked down to Hunter
Street, across George Street, thence up Margaret
Street and Church Hill to the school. 1 recollect as
well as if it were yesterday, proceeding up Hunter
Street, and each morning, looking through a
shop window, a gentleman working at his lathe.
One morning I lingered longer than usual, when he
beckoned me in. As-1 had my school-bag, he guessed
I was on my way.to school. I have never forgotten
his kindly manner and the good advice that he gave
me. I never passed by each day afterwards without
mutual recognition. As you will notice by the head-
ing it was Mr. Parkes, afterwards Sir Henry Parkes,
one of our greatest Statesmen in the history of New
South Wales.


THE SHOOTING OF THE DUKE
OF EDINBURGH.
THIS occurred in the year 1868, at Clontarf,
Middle Harbour. The Duke was shot by an
Irishman named O’Farrell. A picnic was arranged
in honour of the Duke and attended by many
prominent citizens. The shooting had no particular
significance; the dastardly act was a mad freak by
this fanatic. He did not seem to have any associates.
I have occasionally read reports in the Press referring
to this occurrence and in no instance has a positively
correct account of the tragedy been given. I was at
the time 19 years of age and a visitor to Clontarf.
Myself, with two other youths, rowed down from
Sydney in a skiff and had landed shortly before it
occurred. Tt was reported that if it had not been for
the intervention of the Police, assisted by some of
the visitors attacking the culprit, further danger to
the Duke would have been more serious. What I,
and including my mates, saw was that one of the
visitors, a Mr. Vial, a coach-builder of Castlereagh
Street, immediately grappled with the would-be mur-
derer. He pinioned his arms and saved the Duke
from further molestation. It was frequently men-
tioned that the courageous act of Mr. Vial would be
recognised by the Home Authorities, but he did not
receive the recognition that he deserved.


A PUGILISTIC ENCOLJNTER.
I WRITE this not in vanity to boast of my prowess
as a pugilist, for although I did not follow the
precept that I have often heard that “he who tights
and runs away, lives to fight another day,” I pre-
ferred to apply to myself the advice that old
Polonius gave to his son Laertes when he was leaving
home: “Beware of entrance into a quarrel, but being
in, bear it, that the opposed may beware of thee.”
As I was not the aggressor, I prepared myself for
the encounter.
In the year 1862 I was employed in a clothiers
and mercers’ business with a firm called George
Chisholm & Co., in George Street, next door to J.
Sands & Co., where they are still to-day. Harry
Leston was employed there as a lad before he took
to the stage. Chisholm’s building was demolished
for the land on which it stood. A part of the Post
Office now occupies the site.
We had amongst the boys of the establishment one
who was a most aggressive and bullying individual;
in fact, he was detested by us all. I came to cross
purposes with him and he threatened me with a
hiding after the shop was closed. What was Itodo ?
I thought the matter over, and although he was bigger
than myself, I decided to do as Polonius advised.
I therefore accepted the challenge. Now I wish to
explain to the reader my reason for writing this
article. I have done so to show again the difference
in the traffic at that time and what it is to-day. The
arena of the encounter was at the intersection of
George Street and King Street, exactly where the
policeman stands to direct the traffic, and the “fight
started at about a quarter past six, just after the
shop had been closed. The “fight” did not last long,
for shortly after it started he made a terrific lunge
at me, when I side-stepped, and I being the smaller,
he overbalanced and went sprawling in the middle
of the road, which at that time consisted not of wood


blocks, but of clay and metal, and when he was helped
np his face was a picture, and he had no wish to
continue the contest. I therefore won the fight with-
out a blow being struck, and after that I was the
hero of the establishment.
CRICKET AND BUCKJUMPING IN
PITT STREET.
MANY a game of cricket we youngsters had in
Pitt Street. 1 mention this to show again the
absence of much traffic in the city thoroughfare in
those days. On a Saturday afternoon it was even
more scarce. Our wicket would be pitched in the
middle of the road. In those days, wood-blocks or
macadamised roads were non-existent. The roads
were dusty if dry, or muddy or clayey if wet, and
at the doorway of each dwelling a foot scraper was
placed, and often I would get chastised for not
making use of it before entering the house.
With regard to buckjlimping, probably my readers
would be hardly prepared to believe that buckjump-
ing was often indulged in in the city. In Pitt Street
where 1 lived, there were no less than three Horse
Bazaars or Livery Stables between Market and Park
Streets. There were Driscoll’s, Birt’s, and Woollers.
Young, unbroken horses or colts were sent down from
the country for sale. Some were very vicious, but
one of the Woollers (Tom it was) was a wonderful
rider. I have seen him in Pitt Street on one of his
buckjumpers and I never saw him displaced. This
would take place, as remarked, in Pitt Street, between
Market and Park Streets. I do not suppose Mr.
Childs, our Police Superintendent, would countenance
such proceedings to-day.


THREE WARS.
The Crimean War.
AT THAT period, 1856, I was only seven years
of age, yet I clearly recollect the anxiety of the
people of Sydney during that time. Of course, I
did not quite understand what it was all about, but
I do know that there was great talk about the
Russians and that they were likely to fight our
soldiers, and I was told that the Russians would per-
haps kill or turn us out of Sydney, and if they did
we would have no homes to go to. However, this
did not occur, but there was an episode in my
memory that I wish to mention. The Imperial
Soldiers that were here were needed, and to take
their place volunteer regiments were formed. Their
duty was to guard various buildings, such as
Victoria Barracks, and other properties.
My father joined the volunteers and he shared in
this work, I remember one wet and cold July night
when my mother sent my eldest brother and myself
with a parcel to father. He was on duty at the
Commissariat Stores at the Circular Quay. (The
building is still a prominent structure.) The parcel
was wrapped up in flannel and felt very warm.
When we went to the iron gates and handed the
parcel to father, he seemed greatly pleased, and no
wonder, for in the parcel was a bottle of liquid and
I knew that it would not be tea, but something else
spelt with three letters and the first letter was R. I
have no doubt that father found the contents very
acceptable.
At the conclusion of the War when peace was
signed, as can be imagined, there were great jubila-
tions. At night time the city was illuminated and
there was great rejoicing. I might state that at that
time lighting by gas or kerosene was in the early
stages and a great number of tallow candles were
freely used.


At our business place in Pitt Street my father
had a long frame made and covered with calico and
lettered with “God save the Queen,” and candles
inside supplied the lighting. One of our citizens, a
wicker worker in Park Street, who was very
optimistic about the result of the war, had an adver-
tisement over his shop, “The Russians are coming,
oh dear, oh dear, we will send them back with a flea
in their ear. Hurrah for the shop in Park Street,
Riley and Sons.”
It will not be known to many that the island called
Pinch-gut, which is known as Fort Denison, was called
after the Governor, Sir William Denison, who had it
erected at that time as a defence against the
Russians.
The Soudan War.
In February 1885, our Government received news
of the assassination of General Gordon at Khartoum,
which caused great consternation, and under the
Generalship of Sir Edward Strickland, a regiment
was formed and despatched to help the mother
country. It was a great patriotic movement and we
sent guns, infantry and artillery to assist. They
sailed and landed at Suakim. However, I need not
go into further details, but we did our share.
One of the principal objectors to the movement
was then Henry Parkes (afterwards Sir Henry),
not on account of his disloyalty, but he thought it
presumptuous on our part.
The Boer War
This was in 1899. There was much controversy
as regards the wisdom of entering into the war, but
on such I refrain from commenting. However,
Australia thought it its duty to support England,
and nobly she did so, and with our help it reached
a satisfactory conclusion. Sir William Lyne was
Premier of New South Wales at the time.


BOYS TOGETHER.
Three Pedestrians.
Charlie Fischer, Frank Wilkinson and the Author-
Joe Pearson.
When this photo, was taken we three were 80
years of age. In the late ’sixties or early ’seventies
many contests took place on the old Albert Ground,
which is referred to in another part of the book.
Frank Wilkinson’s favourite distances were from
220 yards up to half a mile, and always made a
good showing. The author’s distances were: 100,
150 and 220 yards, and although only 15 years of
age would frequently break 11 seconds, this on a grass
track. Charlie Fischer was a walker in handicap
races. lie was generally on scratch.
About this period three pedestrians arrived from
England. Frank HeAvitt, one of the runners, was a
fine athlete and a picture of a pedestrian. He was
the quickest off the mark of any that I have ever
seen. His best distances were 100 yards to a quarter
of a mile. He broke all records. Topley, the walker
of the trio, was a sturdily built fellow, always in the


best of condition, and was a great success, but
Charlie Fischer eventually beat him in the mile con-
test.
At that time we Australians had some wonderful
runners —Braithwaite, Samuels, Watson from Scone,
and several others.
We had a visit from the Englishman Shrubb since
then. He was wonderful in action, and motion just
like clockwork.
I should have mentioned the names of several
prominent walkers and runners. There was Cum-
mings, Alex. Pike, Baker, Hineks, Matt Cleary, and
a brother of mine, Fred. Pearson.
THE GARDEN PALACE FIRE.
Burnt on September 22nd, 1882.
Probably the most spectacular conflagration that
ever occurred in Sydney. It took place in daylight
and the cause has never been thoroughly accounted
for. It was a .magnificent building and the day it
was opened was a true bright Australian day, al-
though rain for a few days marred the preparatory
proceedings.
The ceremony was most impressive. The Musical
Societies produced all of the Oratorios, assisted by
good artists.
THE HAWKESBURY, OR WINDSOR
FLOOD.
This occurred in the year 1867. It was the great-
est flood in the history of that district and even of
New South Wales, not forgetting the Maitland flood.
The whole of Windsor for many miles was com-
pletely covered with water, stretching out as far as
Penrith to the foot of the Blue Mountains, and also,
beyond Pitt Town and its surroundings.


A large number of boats were sent from Sydney
to rescue farmers and others who were marooned
on the tops of dwellings and farm houses. This
flood, as may be imagined, was not only most de-
structive, but dangerous.
THE ZIG-ZAG RAILWAY.
This was started in 1862. The train only went a»
far as Penrith. It was a wonderful feat of engineer-
ing. There were two zig-zags; the first went to
Mount Victoria and the second for the descent. It
would have been less*expensive to construct tunnels,
such as the Mt. Cenis and St. Gothard through the
Alps. I have been through the former, which is
nearly 8 miles long, and the latter over 9 miles long.
They are perfectly ventilated.
THE INTRODUCTION OF RABBITS.
Mr. Thomas Holt, who had a property on Cook's
River, which he called the “Warren," was the means
of introducing “Bunny” into Australia. This was
in the year 1860. He thought his action would prove
of benefit to the country, but he could not have had
any idea that it would be such a menace as now.
Smith’s Lake, near Bungwahl.


STRANGE CHARACTERS.
THERE were several interesting characters parad-
ing our city streets about this time. One in
particular called “Garden Honey”—“a fellow of
infinite mirth.” He hawked around garden
honey, boot laces, matches, studs, etc. His remarks
were very amusing. He would start and give an
entertaining talk on political subjects and at the end
would couple it with matches or any other article he
had to dispose of.
There was another whom the youngsters called
“Old Dad.” The kiddies teased the life out of him.
It was only necessary to call out “Old Dad” when
language, such as is not allowed at church parties,
would explode loudly from him, and woe betide the
culprit if he were ever caught (but he never caught
one).
We also had “Mad Mary.” who would march up
and down the streets in a discarded soldier’s coat,
or some other eccentric dress.
Then there was the “Russian Duke,” as he was
named. He was a vendor of matches, studs, etc.,
which he carried on a tray. This tray was suspended
by straps over his shoulders. He died in a house in
Surry Hills and it was given out that when renewing
the paper on the walls afterwards a large number of
pound notes were discovered hidden behind some of
the wall-paper.
Another celebrity was the “Flying Pieman.” G e
was a wonderful walker. He raced against the
steamer from Parramatta. He travelled by road and
lost by about ten minutes. Another time he walked
from Sydney to Parramatta in fast time carrying a
sheep on his back.
Before I proceed to recount my cycling and tour-
ing experiences I will just briefly mention some
notable events that have remained in my memory.


FISHING AND PRAWNING IN SYDNEY
HARBOUR.
OYER fifty years ago I had built property at
North Sydney, called then North Shore. At
that time Careening Cove extended a long distance,
even to the end of my property. The Cove has since
been reclaimed, and a beautiful park been substituted
for a long flat at low tide. At the foot of High Street,
where the Neutral Bay Ferry calls, I could, in half
an hour, catch a dozen red bream for breakfast.
Alongside the wharf, at Kirribilli, where the club
rooms of the R.S.Y.S. are situated, I have caught a
dozen black bream at night within 30 minutes, on a
shelf of rock covered only by a few feet of water.
Off Bradley’s Head, where we took our bearings
from Bradley’s Head Pillar, St. James’ Steeple and
Sharp Point, near Vaucluse, I have often gone there
with a couple of mates shortly after breakfast and
returned at dinner time with fifteen to twenty dozen
of good sized bream, and often a few John Dory. We
would have a line with three hooks, and they
frequently would all be occupied, and it was a very
common occurrence to have two on the line at once.
At Lady Macquarie’s Chair we could get mussels
galore; and as for prawns, lower down the bay, with
a small net made from a hoop and mosquito net, we
would get more than we could carry home. On one
occasion, when we had finished fishing on the
Bradley’s Head ground, we started throwing over
scraps of bait, etc. I went forward to draw up the
kellick. When I looked over, I saw an enormous
shark, with his jaws wide open, receiving the scraps,
and when we got the kellick up and started to row
away, he followed the boat as far as Garden Island.
However, at last, he left, much to our delight.


CRICKET MANY YEARS AGO.
BEFORE going into any details in connection with
Cricket, I would like to mention that the first
inter-Colonial match was played in Melbourne in
1856. I was then only seven years of age and just
faintly recollect it. We won by three wickets.
What I more distinctly recollect was seeing cricket
played on the race course, which is now Hyde Park.
This and the Domain were the venues for contests.
On one occasion, which I remember, was an important
match played in the Domain. The cricket pitch and
surroundings being boarded in and the public charged
for admission; but we youngsters found plenty of
•openings in the boards to allow us a view.
In the year 1862, just 71 years ago, the first
English team arrived here, captained by 11. 11.
Stephenson and included in the players were: Caffyn,
Lawrence, Sewell, Mortlock, Griffiths, and several
■others. During their stay in Sydney, they were
located at O’Brien’s Hotel, just opposite to our home
in Pitt Street. Before coming to Sydney, they played
against eighteen Victorians in Melbourne and won by
an innings and 97 runs. They came on to Sydney
and played twenty-two of New South Wales and
beat us by 48 runs. Then, competing against twenty-
two of New South Wales and Victoria combined, they
lost by twelve wickets. In 1864, Parr’s team, which
included E. M. Grace, arrived. They did not lose
a single match. In 1873, W. G. Grace arrived with
a team of mostly amateurs and played against fifteen
or twenty-two players. In 1873, Lilywhite’s team
reached here and in the most important contest we
won by 45 runs. This was the match when Charlie
Bannerman topped the century and Kendall, the
bowler, had a remarkable average. At that time, a
century score was very rare. In the year 1878, the
first Australian team to visit England was that cap-
tained by Dave Gregory, who was then 32 years of age.
Accompanying him were the following: J. Blackham,


23; H. Boyle, 28; T. Horan, 23; Frank Allen, 28.
These four Avere Victorians. There was one Tas-
manian, G. Bailey, 24. A. Bannerman, 21; C. Ban-
nerman, 25; T. W. Garret, 20; W. Murdoch, 23; F.
Spofforth, 22; from New South Wales. The most
important match AA'as against what was considered
the best players in England, Marylebone C.C., Aus-
tralia winning by nine wickets. In the first innings
of the Marylebone C.C., they totalled 33, and in the
second 19, W. G. Grace getting four in the first and
none in the second.
In the County matclies, in several instances playing
against teams of 18 to 22, they won nearly every
match. On one occasion they played an eighteen of
Elland and won by eighty runs. In this contest, the
Australians made 90 in the first and 85 in the second
innings.
In those days, the scoring A\ r as much smaller than
at present. I do not think that in the whole of this
tour was a century made by any player. The
Elland’s only made 29 in the first and 66 in the
second innings. In the first innings, Boyle had the
remarkable record of eleven wickets for 12 runs and
Spofforth about 10 \A r ickets for twenty runs.
Another match against 22 of Crewe, we got a
hundred and thirty, and one hundred and two;
Crewe 54 and 79. Boyle got nine wickets for twenty-
five in the first and ten for forty-three in the
second innings, and Spofforth ten for thirty-three.
Before concluding on the subject of cricket, I will
refer to one match in which I was a participant.
Some years ago the members of the Cricket Ground
usually arranged once a month a match amongst
themselves. It used to be taken very seriously. Two
members were selected as Captains and sides were
arranged. Tom Watson, A\ r hom we know so well as
an equestrian, was one of the Captains. I happened
to be on the opposing side, and during the game I


was bowling against Tom. Well, Tom was a vigorous
hitter, and one of my deliveries he appreciated so
much that he lifted me right over the scoring board
into the Agricultural Ground. 1 can even picture
that occasion when I saw sailing over that board the
piece of leather that had been ejected from my hand,
seeming to endeavour to reach the clouds. I was at
once taken off.
CYCLING, MOTORING AND TOURING
GENERALLY.
BEING well known for many years as a prominent
Cycling Tourist and the Compiler of Pearson’s
Road Maps, I desire before proceeding to express
my thanks to my old club-mate and tourist com-
panion J. Blumer, and also to my dear friend George
Corkhill, each of whom has occasionally travelled
many thousands of miles with me on some of my
long tours, for the valuable assistance rendered me
in getting dates for the compilation of Pearson’s
Road Maps.
Before these Road Maps and Guides were issued
the tourist or traveller was in total ignorance of
how to reach any destination. My ambition was to
make the way for the tourist easy. lam now satis-
fied that my object has been achieved, and now that
we have such an efficient body as the N.R.M.A. to
look after the interests of the tourist by the pub-
lication of excellent road maps, etc., I am therefore
content in knowing that the tourist will be well
catered for.
I have decided to retire with the pleasurable satis-
faction that my efforts have been appreciated by the
tourists generally.
I might mention, in conclusion, that during my
travelling by “push” bike I have covered no less
than 162,000 miles, 100,000 of which have been
covered over Australian roads.


OPERATIC COMPOSERS AND SINGERS.
“The man that hath no music in himself nor is
not moved by the concord of sweet sounds is
fit for treason, stratagem and spoils. The
motions of his spirit are as dull as night and his
affections dark as Erebus. Let no such man be
trusted.” — Shakespeare.
I AM in hopes that this subject will interest my
readers. I am prompted to refer to it, as even
in my youthful days *1 was a constant attendant at
the theatre, when we were visited by the exponents
of the Italian, German or English Operas. I may
truthfully mention that 1 have heard probably every
company that has performed here for over sixty
years. In the early days, many Operas were produced
that the present generation never hear, such as the
“Huguenots,” “L’Africaine,” “Sicilian Vespers,”
“William Tell,” “Don Giovanni,” “Magic Flute,”
“Semiramide, ” “Dinorah,” and many others.
I heard Adelina Patti sing the last named in the
year 1882 in London at Covent Garden.
There are very few alive to-day who had the
pleasure of hearing a Company that performed in the
old Prince of Wales in King Street: Rosnati, Tenor;
Dondi, Basso; Coliva, Baritone. To hear them in
the Opera of Lombardi was indeed a great treat.
Many a delightful evening have I spent listening to
some of Verdi’s compositions: II Trovatore, La
Traviata, Rigoletto, Ernani; but what 1 consider his
masterpiece, “Un Ballo in Maschera.” I have heard
each of these a dozen times.
I hope that you will forgive me if in my vanity
I write the following;—


THE AUTHOR AS AN OPERATIC ARTIST.
IN THE year 1882 1 took a trip to England in the
Steamer “Sorata,” one of the old Orient line.
When we reached Naples, a number of passengers
decided to dis-embark and go through Italy and
France. 1 decided to join the party and was very
pleased that I did so, for it turned out to be a most
educational and pleasurable experience. Whilst at
Naples we spent a day visiting Pompeii. As most
people are aware, this city and Herculaneum were
destroyed by an eruption of Vesuvious in the year
79 A.D. It well repaid us the visit. Before we
reached London, we visited various cities, namely:
Rome, Florence, Venice, Milan, Lake Como, Turin,
Geneva, Dijon. Milan, as all Opera patrons know,
boasts of its wonderful Opera House, “La Scala.”
It is in this wonderful theatre where most of the
world’s greatest artists have appeared, Melba, Galli
Curci, Caruso, Gigli, Battistini, Journet, and others.
Our guide (we engaged a guide when we arrived
at the various cities) was a most intelligent in-
dividual. He had heard most of the prominent,
singers of the day. Well, to the story. We were all
impressed with the wonderful auditorium —there
were six circles. One of our party remarked that a
small voice would not be effective; but he explained
the acoustic properties were so perfect it was not so,
and to prove it he asked had we any vocalists in our
party. Well, we had had several concerts on board
our steamer, and as I had given several operatic
excerpts during the voyage, I was selected as the
“victim.” However, I did my best in endeavouring
to emulate some great singer, by singing “Ah, che
la morte,” and as I got a most enthusiastic reception
from the audience with a request for an encore, I
may boastfully announce that I have sung on the
stage of “La Scala.”


THE ORIGIN OF PEARSON’S ROAD MAPS.
WHEN T toured England on the bicycle in the
year 1893, 1 purchased for guidance a road
map of that country. At that time it was not a
very pretentious production, but it was most useful
and answered my purpose admirably, for it enabled
me by its assistance to reach many places that would
otherwise have not been known to me. I learnt
more of the geography of England and Scotland
than thousands who had lived there all their lives.
This applied also whfn I obtained maps on the
Continent. It was a great delight to me to travel
over the splendid roads and visit many places of
historical interest with old traditions with which
these countries abound.
In England particularly it is almost impossible to
get astray, as direction boards are everywhere. I
made up my mind that when 1 returned to New
South Wales I would interest myself by taking
action to have them introduced here; therefore,
shortly after I returned, I got in touch with several
Members of Parliament with that object, and one
in particular (Mr. Wilks, then Member for Bal-
main), who agitated strongly for the erection of
these useful and necessary guides, and the motorist
of to-day is experiencing the benefit therefrom. As
an old cyclist, who was well known even in those
times, and as an ardent tourist, long before the
innovation of the motor car, it was my ambition
to endeavour to persuade my fellow cyclists to take
an occasional tour in the country, to visit parts that
would not be otherwise known to them, to get away
from the City and all the conventional trammels of
society, to get into our wide spaces and to view
scenes that in many cases are not only equal but
superior to any other places in the world.
1 therefore decided to publish a Road Guide and
to supply such information that would enable them
to reach these parts, and as I had always during


my tours taken particulars of all distances and the
class of country that I had travelled over, it was
an easy matter for me to give a full description of
a large number of favourite routes. Thus, having
all the data needed, I then arranged to compile a
“Road Guide to New South Wales.” This, the first
publication, was in the year 1896, and I am pleased
to state that it was an immediate success. I had
two thousand printed, and they were all disposed
of in two months, and as is well known, “Pearson’s
Road Guides” have been in constant use ever since.
I have hundreds of letters congratulating me, and
each and all of the writers express thanks for the
work that 1 have done for the benefit of the tourist
and traveller.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BICYCLE.
The old bone-s baker as ridden by the Author on the old
Albert Ground in 1865.
This was originally called a velocipede. Most of them had
iron tyres which gave considerable vibration. Prominent
riders were Curtis, Gouldthorpe, Parfitt, Selfe, and a few
others. Much interest was taken in the contests. One of
my companions boasted that he would ride his bone-shaker
from Sydney to Windsor and back in the By the time
he had reached that town, 35 miles, he cried “enough” and
was compelled to return by train.


The Author in the year 1882.
This type, as here shown, was specially built for me. It had
solid rubber tyres, and one had to be an expert to mount it.
It will be observed that it was nearly my own height. On
the backbone it had a step just above the little wheel. The
left foot was placed on the step, then run along a few
yards and spring into the saddle. A learner would have
many a fall over the handles, but when you had become
proficient it was easy to mount from the pedal or even
vault into the seat.


The Author in the year 1887.
I rode this particular bike from Sydney to Melbourne in
1887. 1 was accompanied by a mate Alick Chapman.
He rode a tall machine, as shown on previous page. It
was very amusing to hear the comments made in country
towns and at our stopping places. Sympathy and pity
would be given to “the bloke” who propelled the little one
and how could it keep up with the big one, but they did
not know that the big one had the worst of it, especially
over rough country


The Author in 1893
It was on this bike that ! toured some thousands of miles
in England and the Continent in 1893. It was shod with
Dunlop tyres and I did not have much trouble with punc-
tures as the roads on the other side were so good. The
most hilly part in England I found in the Lake district.
What a delight it was touring there! 1 had viewed many
fine scenes on the Continent, particularly in Italy, but give
me England for charm. To ride over the roads around her
lakes, with their associations of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and
many others, is unforgettable.


On the road to Mt. Kosciusko.
The Author in the year 1900.
It was on this bicycle that 1 rode 7,200 miles in one year,
and a total distance of I 7,236 miles. This is the one
referred to elsewhere which 1 have at home.


THE EARLY DAYS OF CYCLING.
From the Bone-Shaker Period to the
Introduction of the Wonderful
Dunlop Tyre.
THE writer’s first experience was in the year
1867, on one of the “old bone-shaker” type of
bicycle, in contests on .the old Albert Ground, which
was situated on the outskirts of Redfern. At that
time it was nearly all open country. It would be
difficult to-day to locate the position where these
races were held, as shops, stores, etc., occupy the site.
After these, the tall “bike” called the “ordinary”
was introduced. This had a large wheel in front
and a small one behind. These were used largely
in the late ’seventies or ’eighties. It was at this
period that I started to gain information about the
roads of N.S.W. and to measure the distances from
town to town.
To measure the distances, an excellent contrivance
was arranged on the hub of the front wheel. It was
so worked that every revolution of the wheel started
the mechanism, and at the conclusion of each mile
a bell would ring and the dial would record the dis-
tance covered. One of the first trips taken was to
Melbourne, via Goulburn, Yass, Gundagai, Albury,
Wangaratta, etc., a distance of 576 miles, and the
speedometer gave the accurate measurement; but
1 will acknowledge that many a time in hilly or
rough country I listened anxiously for the tinkle
of that bell denoting that another mile had been
covered.
After this came what was then called the “safety
bicycle.” This was shod with solid rubber tyres,
which were attached to the rim with shellac, but in


long distance tonring they gave much trouble, as
the rubber coming into contact with the hot ground,
caused the shellac to melt, thus making the rubber
detach itself from the rim, and I frequently had
to bind the tyre to the rim with copper wire, which
also gave trouble, as it had to be frequently re-
newed, causing much delay. The speedometer on
these and other safety bicycles was attached to the
front fork; the mechanism was more simple and
quite as perfect in accuracy.
The next innovation was called the “cushion
tyre.” This was of a more resilient nature, it being
hollow —much like a garden hose, and it was a great
improvement on the solid tyre, having less vibration.
My first trip on one of these was from Sydney to
Eden (Twofold Bay), a distance of 316 miles, which
I covered under five days, resting, of course, at
night, which was considered then a great perform-
ance. The roads in those days were not as good as
they are now, not much attention being given to
grading, and instead of circling the hills, as we do
now, they simply took a straight line over the tops.
In many places on the South Coast parts of the old
roads are not quite obliterated, and still may be
seen.
It was quite a novelty at that time to see a bicycle
in the country, and during my progress it received
great attention. On this trip I stayed a night at a
little wayside place just south of Termed, and rode
next morning from there to Bateman’s Bay for
breakfast, a distance of 23 miles, and my arrival
caused much excitement, as this was the first “bike”
that had ever been seen down that way. It was with
difficulty that I was allowed to take my departure,
and the “postmaster” of that village communicated
by telegraph (there was no telephone in those days)
to a little place called Mogo, about 8 miles away,
that a cyclist would soon pass through, and when
I arrived there the schoolmaster had postponed the
36


time of school opening so as to allow the pupils
(numbering about ten) to see the first “bike” that
had ever been in those parts. I, of course, got a
great cheer as I rode past.
Another time I was riding from Tamworth to
Sydney, when I had a similar experience at Goonoo
Goonoo sheep station. One of my most enjoyable
trips was from Grafton to Sydney in the year 1889,
with two club mates. We had taken steamer to
Grafton, and after spending a few days riding about
the district, we started one morning, and although
we got away early a large crowd of the residents
had assembled to see us depart. We got a great
send-off, and our progress was reported at each
telegraph office as we passed. A pleasing reception
we received at every town. I well recollect crossing
by punt over the Nambucca Kiver, where we got
Into conversation with a man on horseback. He
inquired of us where we intended reaching that
night, and when we informed him, he promised to
favour us by letting the landlord of the “hotel”
know at what time we would arrive, as he stated
that he would reach there long before us. Ours were
the first “bikes” he had seen. Well, to his astonish-
ment, we had not proceeded two miles from the punt
when we left him out of sight, and we arrived at our
•destination two hours before he did. We stayed
there that night and we were royally entertained by
a number of settlers from the surrounding farms,
many of whom had never seen a bicycle, and we
were enticed to ride up and down the main street
to please them. One thought he would have a try
at riding and bet drinks all round that he could ride
it 100 yards, but after a number of falls gave it
up, remarking “that he would rather trust his buck-
jumper,” and he did not hesitate to keep his word,
but it left him a few shillings poorer. The landlord
did a roaring trade, and he, of course, regretted our
departure next morning, hut to please us he got his
•daughter to play the piano whilst we were having


breakfast; yet we were glad to get away, as the
hospitality extended to us was getting too lavish.
I have met with many strange characters on some
of my long trips, and the reader would hardly think
that what I here relate could be believed. I stayed
at a certain wayside “hotel”; it was a good distance
from a fair-sized town, and although the proprietor
had been in the hotel business nearly all his life, he
declared that he had never tasted intoxicants. There
was another, who died a few years ago, who kept
an hotel not many miles from Maitland, where he
had been in business and lived for 30 years, and
although he was only a few miles from a railway
station, he had never been to Sydney, and at that
time he was over 65 years of age.
INTRODUCTION OF THE PNEUMATIC
TYRE.
THE introduction of the Dunlop tyre completely
revolutionised cycling. This was a wonderful
improvement, both for comfort and speed. I rode
one of the first of these to Newcastle. It attracted
great attention on my journey, especially at Mait-
land and Newcastle, as it was the first that had been
seen in either of those places. The riders of these
to-day are well aware of the present construction of
the pneumatic tyre, but they do not understand the
trouble that we had in repairing a puncture in those
days. The outer cover at that time had not the
wired edge; (this was suggested by a Mr. Welch,
and it was afterwards called the Welch Dunlop
Tyre). The cover, previous to that was laced on,
and the inner tube had a tape attached at each end
to allow it to be withdrawn for repair; but before
doing so the outer cover had to be unlaced, and
after repairing the tube it had to be re-laced, which


would take well over an hour to complete the opera-
tion. What do you motorists of to-day think of
that ? Not only that, we were warned that if the
bike was ridden on a very hot day, especially for
any considerable distance, the heated air in the tyre
would cause the inner tube to burst and cause what
we motorists call to-day a “blow-out.” Therefore,
on my ride to Newcastle, I was very cautious, and
when I came to a stream of running water I would
dismount and place the tyres therein to cool them
down. However, as we know to-day, such was not
necessary, but doing so delayed me on my trip; yet
I left my residence at Woollahra, where I resided
then, at 5 o’clock one morning and arrived at New-
castle by 2 o’clock the next day, a distance of 161
miles from Sydney, staying one night at Dean’s
Farm, at the foot of Mt. Manning,
The trip was not at all strenuous, which I attri-
buted to the Dunlop tyres. Torday that route is
not taken, thus avoiding the rough road from Wise-
man’s Ferry and over Mt, Manning.
The new route is, as is well known, via Hornsby,
Kangaroo Point and Gosford.
The agents for the Dunlop tyres asked me if I
would hand them over to them as they would like
them for exhibition, to which I consented. They
were sent over to England and shown as having been
ridden 7,200 miles over Australia roads. The bicycle
to which they were attached, when I gave up active
cjuding in 1922, I had ridden 17,236 miles. It was
used afterwards by my son-in-law out West, about
Nyngan, Bourke, etc, —another 2,000 miles. This is
the bicycle that 1 rode when I reached the top of
Mt. Kosciusko, the highest point of Australia. I
«till have it at home and frequently look at it and
think of the tours I had, which brings back to me
many happy recollections.


Miles per year.
Miles.
1882
to
1888— 6
years
2,000 . .
12,000
1888
to
1898—10
years
. .. . 3,000 . .
30,000
1898
to
1922—24
years
.... 5,000 . .
120,000
Total
162,000
DISTANCE RIDDEN WHILST GETTING
INFORMATION FOR "PEARSON’S
ROAD MAPS.”
I HAVE often been asked “did I know the number
of miles that I have cycled?” Well, it would be
difficult for me to give the exact total, but I can
approximate it as near as possible. In the six years,
from 1882 to 1888, when I discarded the tall bicycle,
I covered 2,000 miles a year. Aften then came the
safety “bike.” In the next ten years, that is to
1898, the average was 3,000 miles a year; this in-
cluded about 3,500 miles touring England and part
of the Continent in the year 1893. Then in the next
24 years till 1922, I averaged 5,000, the advent of
the Dunlop pneumatic tyre assisting me greatly.
Tims from —
The longest distance in one year was 7,200 miles;
(Ins included a trip to Melbourne, through Gipps-
land, and returning by the Albury-Wagga route.
As the distance from here to England is approxi-
mately 13,000 miles, and as I have ridden 162,000
miles, it means that the whole distance covered is
the same as riding from Australia to England and
back again six times, with an extra 4,000 miles tO'
spare.
VARIOUS BICYCLE CLUBS.
IN the early ’eighties there was a great boom in
cycling and a large number of clubs were then
formed. There were the Sydney, Suburban, Wan-


derers, Balmain, Redfern, etc. There was great
rivalry between the members of each club as to the
numbers attending each run, uniformity in riding,
and general appearance. Each club had a distinctive
uniform, with special club colours, and a neat badge
of very nice design. The first club that I attached
myself to was called “The Wanderers.” After this
club disbanded I joined the Sydney’s, and rode with
them for several years, when I was persuaded to
throw in my lot with the Suburban’s. I did tbis
because a couple of the members were fond of tour-
ing; they were, as referred to elsewhere, J. Blumer
and “Tibby” Coulson. We had amongst our mem-
bers many well-known, influential persons—one in
particular, who was our president, the Honourable
Joseph Carruthers, lately deceased, who happened
to be- a school-mate of the writer’s. We had a
membership of 130.
During the season race meetings would be held,
and there was always included on the programme
a grand parade of the cyclists, which was a most
attractive sight. These were held on what was then
called the Association Ground, and known now as
the Sydney Cricket Ground. On a fine Saturday
afternoon there would be an attendance of spectators
of ten to twelve thousand, and the interest that was
taken was equal to the race for the Derby or Cup
at Randwick. Ladies predominated, and, of course,
as the meetings were held in the spring and early
summer, all the newest fashions in dresses, hats, etc.,
were displayed. All of our best riders would com-
pete, and also many from the various Colonies (now
States), and also a few from England. Some of my
readers will remember such men who came from
Victoria, particularly Shackelford, Con Dwyer, Tom
Busst, Jim Busst, Howard Lewis, Charlie Kellow
(now the well-known racehorse owner), and amongst
our own men Charlie Bennett, Charlie Wood, Cut-
bush, Alf Lee, George Whatmore, Jim Copland (who
rode from Sydney to Melbourne on a heavy Coventry


tricycle), and later, Walter Kerr, Simpson (of Parra-
matta) and Goodson, but the former rider was nearly
always the best of that trio.
From England we had Fred Wood, of Leicester,
a very fine rider; Ernie Mayes, and several others,
including Herbert Cortis, afterwards Dr. Cortis, the
first rider to cover 20 miles in the hour on the tall
ordinary machine. In the year 1882, I think it was,
the two champion cyclists of the world were Jack
Kean, the professional, and Herbert Cortis, amateur,
above mentioned. These two were great rivals, but
Cortis beat Kean for the Championship of England.
INTER-STATE TOURS.
ON March 4th, 1899, twelve members of the Sub-
urban Club started from Sydney for Melbourne.
At that time it required special organising to
arrange for accommodation on the trip and also for
food supplies, and, as can be imagined, in some of
the country towns we had to be content with the best
we could get; yet we fared very well, as we arranged
beforehand with the proprietor of each hotel. Not-
withstanding that we had such a large party, there
was little to complain of. The greatest trouble was
sleeping accommodation. However, after a hard
day’s ride (we averaged nearly 80 miles a day),
some of the riders were not too particular, and were
glad to get a shakedown anywhere, and in one case
a bed that could barely accommodate two persons
had to be pressed into service for three; but it Avas
all in the game. The eaptain of the club on that
occasion Avas A. G. Chapman, who did most of the
prganising and filled the position admirably. We
all arrived safely with the exception of one member
who had to take train a part of the journey on
account of a slight sunstroke, but who afterwards
recovered. We got a great reception on our arriA r al,


reaching Melbourne on Saturday afternoon. Hun-
dreds of cyclists had ridden to Campbellfield, ten
miles out, to escort us to the city. We caused a
cessation of traffic in Bourke Street, where we
alighted at the Coffee Palace. We were all made
members of the M.8.C., and Mr. George Burston,
a friend of mine, did all he could to make our visit
pleasant.
In 1900 I was appointed captain. This position
I held for four years, and during that period I
arranged four interstate tours. It was in that year
I took with me ten members of the club to Brisbane,
via Singleton, Tamworth, Armidale, Tenterfield, etc.,
a distance of 694 miles. We left Sydney on a Satur-
day afternoon and arrived on the following Wednes-
day week at ten minutes past five o’clock, exactly
ten minutes behind the time I had arranged for.
We averaged over 60 miles a day, which was con-
sidered good, as we had several mountain ranges to
cross, some being between 3000 and 4000 feet alti-
tude ; one range in particular (Waldron Range),
which is crossed before reaching Murrurundi, being
the steepest, although not the highest, between Syd-
ney and Brisbane. Since then it has been re-graded.
I should have mentioned that prior to starting on
such a long journey, I had arranged to divide the
party into sections of about three riders, so that in
case of a puncture it wmuld not be advisable to hold
all the party back till it was repaired, as it would
cause much delay; therefore, if one of the three got
a puncture, his partners would remain with him to
repair same. This saved time, for on some occasions
we would go for several miles and perhaps one of
the three companions ahead would meet with the
same trouble, and so on, but it was arranged that
the fortunate members who had not met with mis-
hap would wait for all the rest before entering the
next town where we dined and slept.


The next year Tasmania was our objective. I had
ten members with me on that trip, and all good,
strong riders. We visited all the attractive places
around Hobart —Brown’s River, Russell Falls, New
Norfolk, Salmon Ponds, etc. We rode then from
Hobart to Launceston and returned via the East
Coast. It was a most enjoyable tour, and we re-
ceived a great welcome from the cyclists in all places
that we visited.
The following year we had the same number of
members. On this occasion we took steamer to
Brisbane, and rode to Sydney through all the coast
towns. All of the riders were much impressed with
the glorious river scenery, for what beautiful rivers
they all are! —the Tweed, the Richmond, the Clar-
ence, the Macleay, the Hastings, etc., etc. What a
wonderful asset these are to N.S.W. The last tour
under my captaincy was to Melbourne, over the
Gippsland Ranges. I recognised that this would be
a severe undertaking; I therefore decided that only
strong riders should take part, as it would likely be
a trial of endurance, and before the trip was com-
pleted I was pleased that I had so decided; yet it
was a most enjoyable journey. I endeavoured to
get some information about the roads on the Vic-
torian side (I knew all those to the border), but
even the Government officials could not enlighten
me. However, after studying the maps, etc., I made
up my mind that the trip was possible. I then
mapped it out, and from my experience of touring
I had an idea of the class of country we would pass
through. We were in the habit of covering 70 to 80
miles in the day, but when I arranged to do only
34 miles on one occasion I was held up to ridicule.
This w’as in the Lake Tyers district, and I guessed
that we would meet with a lot of sandy country,
which proved to be so, and this 34 miles was more
severe than on one of our days when we covered
85 miles. On our arrival in Melbourne we received
quite an ovation. There is a little matter here worth


recording. One of our members, in fact, the “boy”
of the party, but a good rider, had an accident with
his bike, and had to take train from Michelago to
Cooma; and as he could not replace the part in
Cooma it was decided that he would have to aban-
don the trip and return to Sydney. We said “good-
bye” to him after we had breakfast next morning,
much to our regret. However, without our know-
ledge, he had wired to Sydney for the part, which
reached there next day, and then started after us.
We had a good day’s lead, but in three days he had
overhauled us at a place called Goongerah, he having
been caught in the snow the night before and walked
a lot of the distance; and what a reception we gave
him! At each place he passed through, the people
encouraged him, telling him in one place that w r e
were four hours ahead only, then at the next place
we were less than three, and so on, and, as I have
stated, he caught us up. He really had wonderful
pluck.
Hawkesbury River.


THE EARLY DAYS OF MOTORING AND
THE INAUGURATION OF THE
N.S.W. TOURIST BUREAU.
VERY many years before the Government Tourist
Bureau was formed, or even suggested, I had an
idea of arranging trips to various places not con-
nected by railways, as in those days there was no
means of reaching many interesting localities as we
have to-day. This was long before the advent of
motor cars. 1
It, I know, would have been a big undertaking, but
I had thought it all out, and had partly arranged for
the conveyances and also for the needed accommoda-
tion in the various towns. Of course I would have
conducted the tours. My main object was to let our
people know that we had such glorious surroundings,
for as I have already mentioned that I consider we
have scenery equal to any in the world. However,
just as my plans were maturing, our Government in-
augurated their Tourist Bureau, and I decided then
not to proceed further. They forwarded a letter
thanking me for the help given them. Since that
time the Bureau has made wonderful strides, and
is now splendidly conducted by capable and obliging
officials, but the individual who deserves great credit
for putting it on a sure foundation and making it
popular was Mr. C. D. Paterson, who was taken from
the Railway Dept, to organise it, and he made it a
success from the start. When he left the position it
had been brought by his efforts into a high state of
efficiency.
I am pleased to state that Mr. Paterson frequently
consulted me on certain touring matters, and what
information I could supply was given willingly, for
it has been my aim and ambition to make the way of
the tourist easy. At that time not one in a hundred


motorists knew much of the interior of N.S.W. or of
the very many tourist resorts till they got a copy of
“Pearson’s” Reliable Road Maps.
Many great changes have been made at the Tourist
Bureau. Every attention is given to the visitors by
a number of obliging officials, who supply informa-
tion to the visitors who are anxious to see the glories
of New South Wales, under the very capable direc-
tion of Mr. Lamble.
EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.
MANY letters of congratulation have been re-
ceived, including a few of the names here
given, in recognition of the benefits derived from
the publication of Pearson’s Road Maps and Guides.
The following are some extracts of letters received-
April, 1896: —
Lord Brassey begs to thank you for the Cylists’ Touring
Guide, which is a splendid production, and it will be most
useful.
January 28th, 1896, from the then well-known
Melbourne cyclist, who had cycled in many coun-
tries, George Burston :
The work is most creditable. In fact, during all my
touring, I have never seen anything better in Great Britain
or on the Continent.
October Ist, 1902, from the Hon. E. W. O’Sullivan,
who was Minister for Works, and was responsible
for the erection of the present Sydney Central Rail-
way Station. He was a man with progressive ideas,
and, had he lived a few years longer, the building
of the North Shore Bridge would have been an
accomplished fact nearly 20 years ago:—
It contains a lot of information which should be in-
valuable to cyclists and others travelling; it will be of
great use to me.


October 17th, 1902, from Vice-Admiral Sir Harry
Rawson: —
It is a most excellent Map, and I am pleased to have one
for reference. Its production does you much credit.
May 19th, 1906, from Lord Jersey, Middleton
Park, Bicester, England:—
Dear Mr. Pearson, —
Your Map and Guide Book are quite excellent and will
no doubt be appreciated by all travellers, for it will prove
of great assistance to all tourists. I hope your Sports
Club is in a flourishing state, and please convey my best
wishes to your members.
1 also received another on August 12th, 1912, con-
veying congratulations on the production of a later
issue.
On April 3rd, 1906, from Mr. J. H. Carruthers,
then Premier of N.S.W. (lately deceased), stating:—
That it would be the means of inducing tourists to visit
many country resorts, on account of its accuracy in detail
as regards distances and description of various localities.
June sth, 1909, from Lord Chelmsford, acknow-
ledging the receipt of Map, and stating that he had
obtained a copy shortly after his arrival, which he
had found most useful and accurate, and offering
congratulations on its excellent production.
May 29th, 1912, from Lord Denman, Governor-
General, and stating as he and Lady Denman did a
good deal of motoring the Map would be of great
help, and offering congratulations on the issue of
such a useful work.
August 15th, 1912, from the officers of Duntroon
College, considering that the information contained
in the book would prove invaluable and exactly what
was really needed, as all other maps in their posses-
sion were lacking in the detail that this showed.


May 29th, 1912, from H. W. Dnmaresq, Esq.,
Private Secretary to the Governor: —
A most perfect and creditable work, which will be of
great help in our journeyings in the wonderful State of
N.S.W.
April 6th, 1909, from Walter Callan, Esq., Private
Secretary to the Governor-General, expressing
thanks for the copy forwarded, and also stating that
it would be of great value to his Excellency.
July 9th, 1912, from P. A. Vaile, Esq., author of
“Wake Up, England!” which was read with much
interest:—
He stated that the Map and Guide were splendid, and
bore most favourable comparison with any English pro-
duction—“in fact, it was more perfect in detail.”
October 23rd, 1912, from the Hon. George H. Reid
(later Sir George) :
Commonwealth Offices,
Victoria Street, Westminster,
London.
My dear Mr. Pearson, —
I have received the copy of the new edition of your Road
Map of N.S.W., which you kindly forwarded me. It is
without doubt an excellent compilation and does you much
■credit.
The publication of your Road Maps has done a great
amount of good, as it has enabled many people to Team
much of New South Wales and how to reach various parts.
I am, yours sincerely,
G. H. REID.
Very many more—in fact, scores of letters written
in a similar strain, and also mentioning the benefit of
being in possession of one of Pearson’s Road Maps.
Extract from letter from His Excellency Sir
Dudley de Chair: —


Government House,
Sydney.
Nov., 1925.
It will afford His Excellency much gratification to have
your book of reminiscences and experiences dedicated to
him and will look forward to receiving a copy.
Government House,
Sydney.
February, 1933.
Dear Mr. Pearson, —
Thank you very much for your letter of yesterday and
for so kindly offering to present me with a copy of your
book. I shall be very glad indeed to have it and am most
grateful to you for your kindness.
Yours faithfully,
PHILIP GAME.
Gold Bearing Country, near Bathurst.


OPEN AIR EXERCISE.
THERE can be no question about open air exer-
cise being conducive to longevity. For such I
have always been a strong advocate. Rowing, Run-
ning, Swimming, Cricket, Football, Tennis, Walking
(this, in my opinion, the best of all), in fact all
exercises, particularly if taken in the open air, are
most beneficial. When I was quite a boy I started
even at that age to go down to what was then called
the Fig Tree, in the Domain, every morning, winter
and summer, to have my swim and back home to
breakfast. At that time there was no enclosure to
protect the bathers from sharks. It was no uncom-
mon thing to see some of the best swimmers,
especially on a Sunday morning, go across to Potts
Point and back again, but one morning one of them,
when about half way across, had a leg taken off by
a shark, and after that there was an agitation to
have the place enclosed as a protection from the
sharks. But to again refer to the benefit of open
air exercises. Scores who have lived to beyond the
allotted span attribute their good health and
longevity to it. Take some of our rowers. Where
would you find a better stamp of man than Bill
Beach, now 83 years of age, Judge Backhouse, and
later Peter Kemp, George Towns, Harry Pearce, Jim
Stansbury, Chris Neillson, Elias Laycock, whom I
saw row on the Thames in 1882. These men are as
vigorous to-day as many who are 20 years younger.
And now, amongst cyclists. Take the case of Ted
Pearson, who has established the cycling record
several times from Sydney to Melbourne and also
the reverse way. His last ride for record was done
in 49 hours, a distance of 576 miles. Several others
have attempted it and only one—Hubert Opperman
—reduced it slightly, but it is not officially recog-
nised, as he did not start from the Sydney Post
Office, but from eight miles out near Enfield.


As another example, probably the reader will for-
give me if I refer to myself. I have already men-
tioned the distance I have covered in a certain num-
ber of years, and would like to state that when I was
63 years of age (that is 20 years ago), “Ted” and
I rode to Melbourne and on the way called at Burren
Juck, and we covered in one day 120 miles, part of
it through the “Glue Pot,” near Winton, just after
wet weather. After we arrived at Melbourne we
crossed to Tasmania and did some extensive touring
there. We rode down from Launceston through the
centre of the island to Hobart. Our next objective
was to the top of Mount Wellington, which was then
shrouded in snow. We both mounted our “bikes”
in Liverpool Street, Hobart, and rode without a dis-
mount to Fern Tree. After spending about half an
hour here, we remounted and did not get out of the
saddle till we reached the springs, and at this place
we were told that no other cyclist had accomplished
that feat. We left our machines here and travelled
by foot to the top, and then descended to the springs
and rode back to Hobart. Perhaps to-day it would
not be a difficult accomplishment, as since then the
grade is not so severe and the surface of the road
better. I only mention this to prove what can be
done when an athlete gets himself by judicious exer-
cise into condition. Of course we are not all con-
stitutionally strong, yet it is wonderful what the
average individual can do in improving his physical
powers if he indulges in outdoor exercise, but need-
less to say that it must not be overdone, yet the
person himself will soon find out his powers of
endurance.


TRIPS TO MOUNT KOSCIUSKO.
I HAVE made several trips to Mt. Kosciusko, the
highest land in Australia, and reckoned by
geologists the oldest land in the world. The altitude
is 7,328 ft. My first trip was over 30 years ago. I
had cycled from Sydney through Goulburn, Quean-
beyan and Cooma to Jindabyne. The rest of the
journey was by horseback, or, 1 should say, by
mountain pony provided by Spencer, the guide,
whose company 1 needed, for in those days there-
was no road from Waste Point, a few miles from
Jindabyne. It was merely a track then, and it was
on that occasion I had a most weird experience. We
reached the top after a lot of trouble, yet it was.
worth it all, for we saw the mountain under wonder-
ful conditions. We had fog, sleet, snow and sun-
shine during the journey.
I should have stated that we could only reach that
day old Betts’ camp, where we spent the night. At
that time the only shelter was a one-roomed hut with
no bedding, and we had to lie down on bushes and
grass that we gathered. That night was the coldest
I have ever experienced. I was glad when daylight
came, so that we could get away and on the move to
the highest eminence in Australia.
My next trip was a few years afterwards which I
essayed by the “bike.” I was accompanied by my
friend and valued companion, Mr. George CorkhilL
This was the first time that a bicycle had been ridden
to the top. There had been one before, but the
tourist, a Mr. Gainford, did not ride all the way, but
strapped his machine on to one of the ponies and
walked the rest of the distance. On this trip we
started from Sydney, on to Goulburn, Yass, Gunda-
gai, Tumut, Talbingo Mountain, Yarrangobilly
Caves, Kiandra, Adaminaby, Jindabyne, top of
Kosciusko, then back to the Creel, and instead of
going into Jindabyne we did not cross the bridge


but continued to Mowenbah, Boloko, Dalgety, and
on to Cooma, then down the Brown Mountain to
Bega, and home via the Coast road; but at Bega we
took a road to Bermagui that is even now very little
known to tourists. It goes over the Doctor George
Mountain to Tanja, Wapengo and Murrah. The
whole distance covered on this journey was the
longest we had taken, 980 miles.
A long tour which 1 took in the early days was
on one of the cushion-tyre machines; the distance
covered was 966 miles. It was a most interesting
and instructive trip, as I passed through all kinds
-of country—some devoted to cattle raising, sheep
farming, wheat growing, and mining.
Leaving Sydney, my route lay through Wiseman’s
Ferry, via Wilberforce and Sackville, which was not
then knowui by tourists; thence to Wollombi, Broke,
Singleton, Muswellbrook, Denman, Merriwm, Cassilis,
Mudgee, Wellington, Dubbo, Narromine, Parkes,
Forbes,
“stuck up” the gold escort), Orange, Bathurst,
'O’Connell, Oberon, Jenolan Caves, Mt. Victoria,
Sydney. I did not have rain any part of the journey,
.although, excepting about Narromine and Dubbo, a
lot of it is basalt country, wdiich does not seriously
affect the roads.
CYCLING CONSUL FOR GREAT BRITAIN.
In the year 1905 I had the honour conferred on me
of being appointed Cyclists’ Consul for Great
Britain. It w r as a most pleasant duty for me to
welcome cyclists from overseas and to make their
visits enjoyable. Many of them remained here and
lifelong friendships have been formed by that means
and in all cases this country of ours has been en-
riched by their citizenship.


A WONDERFUL PIANIST.
AS previously stated that during my captaincy of
the Suburban Bicycle Club I organised four
interstate tours, and one of them through Tasmania.
It is an incident during this trip that I wish to refer
to. There were eight of us on this tour, and we put
up at a small accommodation place at a little village
on the South Coast called Bicbeno. I had written
and arranged for our reception, but it being only a


small dwelling, the landlady was sorely taxed to
find room. However, we were made comfortable.
She informed us that she had never provided for
such a large party. Well, during the evening we
had some music, as we had a good pianist in our
party and a couple of vocalists, and I endeavoured
to “favour” them with a nigger song and dance,
but it was a shaky floor, and after I had broken a
couple of ornaments off the piano through the
vibration I was compelled to desist. Now for the
incident. There happened to be the usual rouse-
about here, and he asked permission to join us. We,
of course, consented, expecting that we would have
a bit of fun with him. After a while we asked him
to sing. He declined at first, but stated that he
would play the piano. Several of the party smiled.
However, no sooner had he started, than we were
astounded at his proficiency. It was a revelation.
What he played were all classical pieces. I asked
him did he know any operas, and without any ex-
planation he commenced and finished what I recog-
nised as the overture to Verdi’s “Aida.” This w T as
followed by the overture to “Tannhauser.” Those
who are acquainted with this gem of Wagner’s will
recollect where the stringed instruments are intro-
duced. I closed my eyes and could fancy that I
was listening to an orchestra. I was amazed.
We had “Traviata,” “Lohengrin,” “Faust,”
“Lucia,” “Favorita,” and a number of others.
He sang “On With the Motley,” from “Pag-
liacci,” beautifully, and I joined him in the duet
“The Moon hath raised her lamp,” from “The Lily
of Killarney.” I then tried “Let Me Like a Soldier
Fall!” from the opera “Maritana,” but the audience
was not appreciative. I learnt that our entertainer
belonged to a good family in England, but—well,
it was the usual story. Yet 1 can never forget the
pleasant time we spent that night at the little place
-called Bicheno, on the east coast of Tasmania.


THE VERSATILITY OF THE MEMBERS OF
THE POPULAR SUBURBAN
BICYCLE CLUB.
IN this club of ours, “Suburban,” we had some
very accomplished, versatile artists. There were
vocalists, elocutionists, pianists, and even pugilists.
We arrived one afternoon at Dungog, a place in the
Maitland district, A travelling company had been
advertised to appear the night of the afternoon we
arrived. This company had met with failure on
account of the treasurer absconding with the funds,
and they had not the wherewithal to pay for the rent
of the hall. We came to the rescue, paid the rent,
and our members filled the programme almost to the
letter. We gave the boxing contest, two of our
members, Ted Pearson and George Madden, filled
that part of the programme entirely to the satisfac-
tion of the audience. Our vocalists, tenor, baritone
and basso, gave excerpts from opera, but as we
found the audience wanted something more lively,
we gave them then “Tommy, Make Room for Your
Uncle!” and others of the same calibre, which were
more appreciated. I tried “Henry V” and
“Othello,” and was counted out, and substituted a
nigger breakdown for Shakespeare. On another
occasion a large number of our members had a run
to Windsor one Saturday afternoon, where we de-
cided to spend the night. It happened that a church
bazaar was to take place that afternoon and evening,
and as several of us were well acquainted with some
of the lady promoters they, knowing of our ver-
satility, accepted our offer to assist. We organised
“lucky bags,” auction sales, etc., etc., and all kinds
of things were put up for auction. A badge belong-
ing to one of the members realised 35/-, but the first
offer was 1/-, and was then knocked down. It
would then be put up again, and so on, till at last
it reached the sum stated. Our efforts accounted


for the amount of £ls/16/- to the funds. They at
last put me up, but I did not receive a single bid,
and therefore did not augment the funds for the
church.
On several occasions we arranged with the J. C.
Williamson Co. for our club to purchase the seating
accommodation in the upper circle, when we would
dispose of our tickets to friends, and a most com-
fortable evening was spent. At that time George
Lauri was the comedian, and during the perform-
ance he, knowing a number of the members, would
“gag” local hits, which caused a great amount of
amusement. Such as if you had lost your location,
he would recommend them to purchase a “Pearson’s
Road Guide.” This, of course, caused roars of
laughter. These little hits would refer to some of
the prominent members.
Manning River.


A REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE.
AS I have before mentioned, in my touring I met
man} r strange people, and in many cases in con-
versation I have been highly amused and very
frequently enlightened on a number of subjects.
Tramps on the road, referred to elsewhere, rouse-
abouts, etc., at hotels. But there was an individual
whom I met twice in different places wide apart. It
is a story of romance, and deserves a chapter to
itself.
I was on my way out west, when I arrived at
Narromine early one afternoon. I intended going
to Nyngan and Bourke, but it looked like rain
coming on, and I decided that if rain did occur
the black and red soil through Trangie, Nevertire,
etc., would give me a lot of trouble. I decided,,
then, to alter my course, and take the Peak Hill,
Parkes and Forbes road, yet I knew that this would
not be too good, but I considered it would be better
than the other, and I was lucky, for that night it
rained all along the Bourke road, but with the ex-
ception of a few miles the road I took had escaped
the downpour. Well, to my story. At the hotel
where I stayed that afternoon I saw a man, the
rouseabout, who attracted my attention. He seemed
to me to be out of place, and although in working
clothes I recognised him to be above the ordinary
knockabout.
I got into conversation, and my surmise was
correct. That evening I learnt a lot of his history,
and what he told me was positively correct, as I
found out a few years afterwards, which is
referred to later. His name was Pentland, his par-
ents were very well off, and he had had a Cambridge
education. But he had left home on account of an
overbearing, cruel father, and rather than submit
to his tyranny he left England for Australia, and
here he was in a position that was degrading to his


station. But I could not understand why he did not
do better, yet he was quite content, as all ambition
had been knocked out of him. We enjoyed each
other’s company for a couple of hours that night
without adjourning to the bar (he was a strict
abstainer, as I afterwards found out). He could
quote Shakespeare, Longfellow, Milton, Byron,
Homer, etc., etc., much to my delight. Now comes
the most interesting part of my story. I took a
trip to England afterwards, and I called a Lon-
don firm that I did business with, where I was
introduced to an individual, and I did not quite
catch his name, but somehow I took a dislike to him
immediately on account of his gruffness and arro-
gant manner. After he had gone, as I did not, as
above stated, catch his name, I enquired and learnt
that his name was Pentland, that he had a son out
in Australia whom they had not heard of since his
departure. About a week afterwards I learnt of
his death through a stroke occurring during one of
his tantrums. A couple of years after I had re-
turned to Australia I was again on one of my tours
where I put up for the night. This was at Bombala.
Shortly after I arrived, who should 1 meet acting
in the same position as formerly but my Cambridge
University acquaintance who, I concluded from the
conversation I had in the London office, must be the
son of the Pentland that I was introduced to, the
son not ever having written home since he left.
They turned out to be father and son, and when I
told him of his parent’s death he seemed more than
pleased, and thereon decided to go back to England
immediately. He, being a steady young man, had
saved a good sum of money, and was therefore able
to provide plenty of funds for his passage. I saw
him in Sydney on the day of his departure, and a
few months afterwards I got a letter from him tell-
ing me how all the family, and more particularly
his mother, were overjoyed to give him welcome.
I have not heard from him since.


ACCOMMODATION ON THE ROAD.
I AM referring now to my experiences on the
road, when we would call for meals or sleeping
accommodation. This was before the motor car
was in evidence, over 80 years ago. My two mates,
J. Blumer and “Tibby” Coulson, and myself, have
during our trips travelled for a couple of weeks at
.a considerably less cost than living in the city, and
fared sumptuously during our many journeys. We
would arrive at a small country place where there
was one “hotel” only,-say about six o’clock. We
would arrange with the proprietor to stay the night,
and after a wash, etc., the tea meal would be in-
dulged in. This would consist of ham, eggs, potatoes,
etc., with usually a custard, also bread and cheese
and tea. In many cases the beds would be clean
and all that could be desired. Breakfast in the
morning would consist of porridge, bacon and eggs,
or chops, steak, potatoes, etc., and the cost of all
would be 1/- each for tea, 1/6 for bed, and 1/- for
breakfast, and on many occasions the landlord
would insist on us having a parting glass before we
departed. We would then ride perhaps 30 miles
or so to the next “hotel” for dinner, and especially,
if it be a Sunday, the dinner would be sometimes
soup, then there would be roast beef, turkey or fowl,
including three or four kinds of vegetables, rice
pudding or custard, bread and cheese and tea, and
two servings if you wished. This repast would cost
the sum of 1/- each. At these places we found that
in Rome you must do as Rome does, that is, to dis-
card your coat and tuck up your sleeves, the same
as all the rest of the diners. There would be one
long table; we sat on a form with the rest, there
being no chairs, the knives and forks of bone
handles, and spoons, etc., to suit the occasion. Yet
those meals were more appreciated than if we were
dining at the Australia. That is what the open air
exercise does for the individual. It was most amus-
ing when dinner was ready to be served, to hear,
* ‘ Now, all yous blokes, dinner’s ready! ’ ’


The Tramp.
This individual is typical of hundreds that I have met on my
travels. He observes me riding towards him and wonders,
what luck is in store for him.


TRAMPS I HAVE MET.
"All the world*s a stage.**
I have met and conversed with many of them.
Whilst touring I was practically a non-smoker,
but I always carried some tobacco and also tea,
purposely to distribute among these “knights of
the road,” so that I might glean some information
of their history, and how interesting some of it was!
There was one I met just near Wombat. He was
a man who told me hfc was 80 years of age—and
probably he was, for he described to me events of
his early life that I knew must have been true. He
was as straight as a rush, and had muscles like
iron. Whilst we were talking I tried to lift his
swag. It was as much as I could do to raise it off
the ground, and at parting he picked it up and
slung it over his back just as easy as 1 would a
feather bolster. He had not been in a city for over
20 years, nor had he slept under any roof but the
canopy of heaven during that time. Even if he
stayed to do a day or two’s work in any place he
would always sleep in the open. After doing a
couple of days’ work the wanderlust would again
seize him, and off he would go on the road once
more. I never met him again, and as that is now
over 30 years ago, he has probably “passed out.”
I could fill many pages describing the experiences
of scores of these nomads whom I have met. Many
of them had been well educated and had come from
good families, yet most of them had led wasted
lives. But it was ever thus. I met one who inter-
ested me very much. He was a good conversation-
ist and exceedingly intelligent, and, like most of
them, he loved the life he was leading. It was on
the road between Gundagai and Tumut, near a place
called Minjery. I spent a couple of hours talking
with him, and it was wonderful the memory he had.
He knew every station within hundreds of miles’
radius of where we were. He could name all the


towns in all that part of the country, with all the
distances between each place, and when I produced
a “Pearson” Road Map, in only a few instances
they did not exactly correspond, but in the majo-
rity of cases there was hardly a mile difference in our
distances. He asked me how I got the information
for the map, and when I showed him the speedo-
meter and how it worked he was astonished.
Another tramp that I met near Tarcutta was a
very intelligent individual, as I found out during our
conversation. This man also had not been in a big
city for years, nor had he any desire to go. He
thoroughly enjoyed the life he was leading, and
stated that he would not change his mode of life for
that of any millionaire. He was, he said, a bit of a
meteorologist, and could predict the change of the
weather for days ahead. Of course I had to believe
him, but it was very remarkable what he told me.
I mentioned that I expected to reach Albury that
night via Kyamba, and the Billabong, and although
the sky was then without a cloud, he mentioned that
I would get heavy rain before I reached there; and,
sure enough, I did, for when T reached Bowna the
rain started, and when I reached Albury I was
drenched. As a general rule I found that these
nomads were always friendly and glad to have a
yarn, but in most cases they cared not what class of
Government was in power. They were not in any
way interested in such topics.
I only once met one who was not only unfriendly
but inclined to be aggressive, and who had a most
threatening manner. Although I was always pre-
pared in case of molestation, as I had frequently to
travel in many lonely places, just as he was lighting
his pipe I hopped on my bike and was soon out of
sight. I came across another one day. He was a
man, I suppose about 70 years of age, lying down
alongside the road, and when I stopped he seemed
to me to be in a very bad way and in a state of
exhaustion. He could hardly articulate. I gave him


a drink out of my water bag and hurried to the next
town and reported the case. I learnt afterwards that
he died before assistance arrived.
I met another on top of Talbingo Mountain.
"A merrier man within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour’s talk withal.”
— Shakespeare.
He was making for Kiandra; he stated that he was
69 years of age. I learned that in his younger days
he was a Shakespearian student and a constant
attendant at the theatre. Many names of old actors
came back to our memories, notably G. V. Brooke,
Creswick, Fairclough, J. B. Howe, Walter Mont-
gomery, Barry Sullivan and others, all of whom I
had heard in my youth.
We both agreed that one of the later school—
George Rignold—was superior to any, particularly
in “Henry V.” I asked him about many of Shakes-
peare’s plays, and he proved himself a wonderful
exponent. He delivered to me Polonious’ advice to
his son Laertes, from “Hamlet”; Shyloek to Antonio
from “The Merchant of Venice”; and when I re-
plied to him with Gratiano’s reply to the sad
Antonio—“ Let me play the fool, with mirth and
laughter let old wrinkles come, and let my liver
heat with wine, then my heart cool with mortifying
groans”—we were Thespians together.
I spent a most pleasant hour with this individual;
we mutually felt regret at parting, and, on leaving,
the money from my pocket was partly depleted, as
also my stock of tea and tobacco, all of which was
willingly bestowed; but it was well worth it.
On another occasion I was touring through the
Burragorang Valley which led me from Wentworth
Falls past the Sanitorium at King’s Tableland,
thence down the mountain, across Cox’s River, which
is crossed several times before arriving ad 'Burra-
gorang.


Between here and Yerranderie I met a tramp who
seemed about my own age. (At that time I was
about 58.) I stopped, as usual, and entered into
conversation with him; his voice and manner seemed
familiar. I questioned him of his early life, and at
last 1 located him. He told me he was educated at
Fort Street School. Then I asked him did he recol-
lect the name of the headmaster; and he mentioned
Mr. Allpass. I knew then that he was right. I fur-
ther questioned him: did he recollect a scholar named
Joe Pearson? and when I announced that I was that
person he was very pleased, yet humiliated for me to
find him in such a position. I felt very sorry for
him, and when we parted he watched me until we
were out of sight of each other. When at school we
were great mates; he was an excellent scholar and
had a cheerful disposition. Many a time he helped
me in my lessons; this was in the year 1861. He told
me his parents had gone on the land after he had
left school; but he did not like the country, came
down to Sydney, got associated with bad companions,
which caused his downfall. However, he was like the
majority of tramps, he seemed quite content.
Bulli Pass.


FREEDOM FROM SERIOUS ACCIDENTS.
IN all my long experience in tonring:, notwith-
standing: that 1 have travelled in much mountain-
ous and rough country, I never met with a serious
accident ; although I have had exciting times, no
serious fall has prevented me from completing a
journey. On one occasion, going down Aaron’s Pass,


which is between Lithgow and Mudgee, both my
brakes failed just as I had increased my speed in
the descent. I found I was losing control; it is
marvellous how I did it, but I sprang out of the
saddle and, gripping both handles of the bike, I ran
alongside the machine and managed to pull up in
about 50 yards. It was a close shave, and had I not
“kept my head” 1 would not now be writing my
experiences, as there were precipitous cliffs on one
side and a chasm over 1,000 feet deep on the other.
I had the same experience on the Talbingo Mountain,
between Tumut and Kiandra, being compelled to do
five miles with the use of only one brake.
Back Row from Left J. Pearson (Captain), V. Riva,
C. Price, J. McCarthy, F. Corti, F. Wilkinson, A. Holmes,
G. Lodge. Front Row from Left A. Campbell, A. Chapman,
T. E. Tillock, S. Lough.
Second Interstate Tour arranged by myself.
This trip created a great sensation. Doubt was raised as
to whether it was possible considering we had to go over
the Gippsland Ranges, but as mentioned elsewhere we
succeeded. One particular part, called the Haunted Hills,,
we got through “without seeing one ghost.”


SEVERAL LONG TOURS.
I TRUST that my readers will forgive my egotism
if I state that very few individuals have viewed
more of the charming scenery of N.S.W. than I have.
Whenever the opportunity offered, I would fre-
quently get off the beaten track, and get well
rewarded for so doing. On numbers of my journeys
I would cover from 500 to nearly a thousand miles,
visiting many places* that were not well known to
tourists in those days. Very few knew of the route
from Wentworth Falls through King’s Tableland,
thence down the mountain to Picton or The Oaks,
via the Burragorang Valley, crossing the Cox, War-
ragamba and Wollondilly Rivers. The scenery along
this route is truly magnificent. I know of no views
in New South Wales superior. The Burragorang
Valley and the Capertee Valley are two of nature’s
masterpieces, and I wish to mention that no tourist’s
itinerary is complete without a visit to these beauti-
ful places. I have cycled up or down all the moun-
tain ranges leading to our coast-line from Eden, right
away to the Queensland Border. In many parts
great care had to be exercised on account of very
rough roads and exceedingly steep grades; but one
is well repaid by the majestic and entrancing scenery.
To mention any particular part for preference it
would be very difficult, as they are all indescribably
beautiful.
No. I—From1 —From Cooma to Eden down Big Jack Mountain,
Bombala, Rocky Hall, Burragate, and Towamba.
No. 2—From Cooma to Bega and Tathra, down the
Tantoanglo Mountain, via Holtz Flat, Wyndham
and Candelo.
No. 3—From Cooma to Bega down the Brown Mountain,
Bemboka and Nembugga.
No. 4 —From Braidwood down the Araluen Valley,
through Araluen over Larry’s Mountain to
Moruya.


No. s—From Braidwood down the Clyde Mountain and
Nelligen to Bateman’s Bay.
No. 6 —From Braidwood through Nerriga, Sassafras,
Beula Mountain, and Nowra to Jervis Bay.
No. 7 —From Moss Vale, Robertson, down Jamberoo
Mountain through Jamberoo to Kiama.
No. B—From8 —From Moss Vale, Robertson, down Macquarie
Pass, through Albion Park to Shellharbour.
No, 9 —From Picton through Maldon, Milton, down Mt.
Keira to Wollongong.
No. 10—From Picton, via Appin, Cataract Dam, Bulli
Pass to Bulli.
No. 11 —From Maitland, through Wollombi and Mount
Manning to Wiseman’s Ferry.
No. 12 —From Muswellbrook, Singleton, etc., to Newcastle.
No. 13 —From Gloucester, over Brushy Mountain to Taree.
No. 14—From Armidale to Kempsey, via Wollomomby.
No. 15—From Armidale to Grafton, via the Dorrigo over
the mountain ranges, over 4,000 feet.
No. 16 —From Glen Innes to Grafton, via Newton, Boyd,
Buccurumbi.
No. 17 —From Tenterfield to Ballina, via Drake, Tabulam,
Casino and Lismore.
No. 18 —From Tenterfield to Byron Bay, via Tabulam,
Bexhill and Bangalow.
No. 19—From Murwillumbah to Southport, in Queensland,
via Tweed Heads.


AN INVOLUNTARY BATH,
I WAS riding on one occasion with my two mates,
J. Bhimer and “Tibby” Coulson, from Wom-
beyan Caves to Mittagong. We were returning to


Sydney from a long tour of 650 miles. On reaching
the Wollondilly River we found that the waters
were running fast and fairly deep, and those who
crossed there a few years ago know that there was no
concrete crossing, as at present. The bottom was all
cobble-stones, and I, having rather tender feet, found
myself in trouble, and I fell, bike and all, in mid-
stream; but my mate, “Jacky,” came to my assis-
tance, and we eventually reached the opposite bank.
It meant a ride from there to Mittagong (40 miles)
in wet garments. I never went away on any trip
afterwards when I knew we had any level crossings
over any river, wuthout carrying a pair of sand-shoes.
I found them most useful on many occasions after-
wards, and on one trip particularly, that through the
Burragorang Valley, where the rivers are crossed in
several places. On the road from the river to Mitta-
gong we passed Bullio Sheep Station, and as we
were passing we were hailed by an individual at the
homestead, and when we approached we were asked
if we were shearers, and, to their great disappoint-
ment, we replied in the negative. It appears that
they had trouble with some of their men and were
anxious to ‘ ‘ cut out, ’ ’ as the season was getting late;
but not understanding shearing, we had to decline.
I have passed since in a motor car, and they hardly
recognised me, till I explained the occurrence, to
their amusement.


THE HANLAN-BEACH BOAT RACE.
IT was in the year 1884 that this contest took place
on the Parramatta River. Prior to this, Hanlan
had been invincible, but we had here an athlete who
lowered his prestige convincingly. This race created
world-wide interest. The name of Bill Beach was on
every person ? s tongue at the time, and he commanded
the admiration of all athletes, and particularly the
rowing fraternity, fgr he rowed as much for the
honour of winning as for personal gain. My club,
“The AVanderers,” arranged for their Saturday
afternoon to Gladesville to view the race. AVe went
via the bridges—Pyrmont, Glebe Island, Iron Cove,
and Gladesville —to see the contest. I alone remained
on the Drummoyne side for a certain reason, which
is here explained. I made up my mind that I would
be the first to give the result in Sydney. There was
no telephone in those days, but use was made of the
carrier pigeon. However, I had a good view of the
finish, and immediately on its conclusion I mounted
my bike and rode to town with all speed, and was
the first to report the result in the city.


TRIP ACROSS MOUNT TOMAH.
I UNDERTOOK this tour nearly 30 years ago,
with my touring mate, J. Blumer. At that time
Mount Tomah was not so much known as it is now,
and very little information could be obtained of the
condition of the “road.” However, I got in touch
with one of the oldest residents of that part, Mr.
Graham, who is still at Bilpin (which was then
known as Norwood), and from his information we
decided on the journey. It was a trying experience.
There had been a terrific hailstorm a week previous,
and we were blocked frequently on account of the
road being covered with a great number of trees that
had been blown down during the storm. We had
taken the precaution to carry a tomahawk, which we
found useful in cutting the branches to clear our
way. One part of the trip it took us five hours to do
three miles. At another place we lost the track and
we had to retrace to our original position, and then
discovered it. We reached Mt. Victoria late that
afternoon, and in the yard of the Roj r al Hotel there
was evidence of the storm, for a large heap of hail
was still in existence, and we learnt afterwards that
it remained there for days before finally melting. I
should have stated that we left Sydney on Saturday
and arrived at Graham’s, where we spent the night,
and reached Mt. Victoria on Sunday afternoon.
This article was written for my previous book of
reminiscences; but since that time the road has been
reconstructed and is now in a condition for motor
traffic, and it may well be undertaken. In fact, I
can now recommend it to be included in the itinerary..


I I


TOURING RESORTS.
MANY of the popular tourist resorts of to-day
were very little known 30 years ago. Narooma
was then known only to a few people. I discovered
this on my second trip from Sydney to Eden. On
the first occasion when I rode to Eden I did not
touch Narooma, but after leaving Bodalla I continued
straight on at Borang Junction through Punkalla,
which is on the Wagonga River, and thence to Tilba.
But a couple of years afterwards I deviated at the
Junction and went to Tilba via Narooma and Cor-
unna. This was a pleasant discovery, and after that
Narooma came to be better known, and very many
of the tourists of to-day are now well acquainted
with this lovely spot through the publication of
“Pearson’s Road Maps.” Bulli Pass was well on
many maps; Sublime Point was a later discovery;
but what I consider even a superior view to that is
from the top of Mt. Keira, which is reached via
Picton, Maldon and Wilton. Only a few people even
A group of several of the members of my Club, "The
Wanderers,” in the year 1883.
The photograph was taken on the Military Road,
North Sydney.


a short while ago were acquainted with the look-out
on top of Cambewarra Mountain, which continues on
the road to Berry, avoiding Nowra; but scores of
places could be mentioned that would fascinate the
appreciative tourist in this glorious N.S.W.
Our club run on that Saturday afternoon was to-
the fortifications at Middle Head. At that period
there were only about three residences between the
brickworks and Spit Junction, a little over a mile.
We frequently had our one-mile road contest over
this course. Sitting: J. Pearson (centre), Mr. C. W.
Bennett on my left, and Mr. Prank Bladen (de-
ceased) on my right. At that time Mr. Prank Bladen
was Principal Librarian of N.S.W. The third from
the left standing is Mr. Atlee Arthur Hunt, C.M.G.,
late Secretary Department of External Affairs for
the Commonwealth of Australia. The others are r
Mr. A. Lee (deceased), Mr. Smith, late of Goodlet
and Smith (deceased), Mr. Arthur Norton (de-
ceased), Mr. 0. B. Rawson, Mr. H. Gerard, Mr. A. J.
Lewington, and the two brothers Gill.
NEW SOUTH WALES FOR SCENIC
BEAUTY.
IT has often been to me a cause for wonderment
why so many of our residents leave this State and
go to Tasmania, New Zealand and other places in
search of scenery and change of climate, as probably
there is no country in the world, not even Great Bri-
tain, France, Italy, nor any place on the Continent,
which offers such inducements for touring as New
South Wales.
Possessing, as it does, scenery that is unrivalled
and which is so easy of access, it is no wonder that
tourists from various countries speak so highly of
our State as an ideal touring resort.
Even within a few miles of Sydney what could be
more beautiful than the country near to Parramatta,


Dural, Hornsby, Castle Hill, Baulkham Hills, Kurra-
jong, etc., with their orange groves. Such surround-
ings could not be eclipsed in Spain, Portugal or
Italy. Where could more charming scenery be found
than that so convenient to the visitor on North Syd-
ney heights? The view from the Spit Road is en-
chantingly lovely. It would be impossible to imagine
anything more picturesque than the sight that awaits
one at that portion of the Military Road overlooking
Clontarf, Watson’s Bay and Manly Beach, with the
majestic headlands, lovely bays and white sandy
beaches so conspicuously visible in the distance.
Then National Park, with its luxuriant foliage,
deep gullies and beautiful river. Take also our
rugged mountain scenery. Could anything be more
delightful to the appreciative tourist than a visit to
the numerous waterfalls which are so easily ap-
proached about Katoomba, Blackheath, Leura and
Moss Vale; or the glorious valleys nestling under
Barrengarry, Cambewarra and the Jamberoo Moun-
tains ; or a day or two spent in exploring the various
caves at Jenolan, Yarrangobilly, Wombeyan and
Abercrombie, some of which are judged as being
amongst the most magnificent curiosities, not only of
the State, but of the world ?
The coast-line of New South Wales, both north
and south of Sydney, abounds in unrivalled variety.
There is no lack of majestic forests, rich meadow
land, tropical vegetation and splendid rivers, all of
which lend to the scene such charming aspects. Round
about Bulli, with its famous pass, Wollongong,
Kiama, Clifton, Shellharbour and Gerringong, with
their beautiful headlands jutting out into the sea,
the views are equal, if not superior, to anything in
Italy or the South of France. For fascinating scenes
and prodigality of loveliness it would be impossible
to even imagine anything more beautiful.
If the tourist desires a thorough change of scene,
and also a variation in climatic conditions, these are
available at Kiandra, which much resembles an alpine


village, with its cool and invigorating atmosphere;
and Kosciusko, with its perpetual snow and the
glorious sight of the Big Bogong and Ram’s Head
Ranges with their wonderfully majestic and fascinat-
ing appearance, which rival those of Switzerland,
delight the visitor.
From this eminence of 8,000 feet the views on
every side are magnificent. Here all the possible
variety of alpine scenery is exhibited, whilst all the
beauties of precipice, broken crag or pyramid hills,
contrasted with other's less majestic, at once please
and surprise the eye.
In all my publications (as many motorists and
others are aware) I always with much enthusiasm
referred to the glorious scenery in New South Wales,
and I still maintain and must emphasise that there is
no occasion to leave this State in search of magnifi-
cent views.
“And seek from home the charms that lie
Around unhidden from our eye;
We miss the beauty at our side,
In seeking far, in seeking wide.”
I recollect some years ago meeting a friend who
was departing one day to Tasmania. I stated that
he should have an enjoyable trip, as that island is
renowned for beautiful scenery. He replied that he
was well aware of that, for he spent every annual
holiday there. I then asked for what reason. His
reply was that we had no scenery in N.S.W. that
could compare with it. It then came to my turn. I
questioned him as follows: “Have you ever been to
the Bulli Pass?” “No.” “Have you ever seen our
Northern Rivers —the Tweed, the Richmond, the
Clarence, the Macleay, the Manning, the Hastings?”
to all of which I got a negative reply. I went still
further. “Have you ever seen the Fitzroy Falls, the
Belmore Falls, the Araluen Valley, the Burragorang
Valley, the Kangaroo Valley, the Myall Lakes, or
have you ever been to Kosciusko? Have you ever


been down from Tenterfield to Casino, from Armi-
dale to Kempsey, from Glen Innes to Grafton, or
down the Brown Mountain from Nimmitabel to
Bega?” Still the same reply. “Yon acknowledge to
me that yon have never seen any of these places, and
you dare tell me that we have no scenery in N.S.W.
compared with that you see on your annual holiday! ’ r
As all know who have read the introduction and pre-
face to my “Guides,” this is a pet theme of mine.
And now, my readers, I will conclude this perhaps
little disjointed piece of history. I trust that it all
has been interesting to you, and if you have experi-
enced pleasure in reading this little book I will be
well rewarded for having written it.
J. PEARSON.
1933.
FINALLY.
As an afterthought I hope that my readers will forgive
me for being prompted to include the following.
This picture, as most of you know, represents my wife and
myself. It was taken on the anniversary of our Diamond
Wedding two years ago. We have thus gone through life
together for 62 years. It has been a mutual combination
of earnestness to earn the respect of our dear friends, and
1 am sure that you will forgive me when I say 1 think we
have succeeded.
80


"To thine own self be true, and it mutt follow as
the night the day, thou cans y t not then be
false to any man.”
— Hamlet. Act I. Scene 111.


