

WSTI7
; v
/r/^-
0r ifKj? 'j f




Reminiscences of a Surveying Trip from Boulia to
the South Australian Border.
Q S ? 9 MAR 18b'j
By C. Twisden Bedford, Esq., Staff Surveyor.
On the 30th of April, 1885, I had the honour of receiving in-
structions from Mr. W. Alcock Tully, 8.A., Surveyor-General of
Queensland, to proceed to Boulia, a small township in the far
west of Queensland, in the North Gregory district, situated
(approximately) in longitude 140° E., and latitude 22° 54' 20
in order to carefully measure the distance between the telegraph
station at Boulia and any point on the western boundary of
Queensland lately defined by the South Australian Government,
with a view of eventually determining the differences of local
time between Brisbane and Boulia by an exchange of electric
signals, and thereby longitude of Boulia, and by this means,
taken in conjunction wdth the measurements from Boulia to the
South Australian border line, ascertaining to what degree of
accuracy the survey by the South Australian Government, pre-
sumably along the 138th meridian line, had been carried out.
Before commencing my duties I had to travel from where I
was at that time located, at Cardwell, on the eastern coast of
Queensland, across the whole breadth of the colony in a westerly
direction, vhi Hughenden and Cloncurry, to Boulia, and from
thence, by the route most suitable for accurate measurements, to
the South Australian border, and I have been asked to place on
record incidents happening and observations of the country, soil,
timber, &c., taken en route , that may be of any interest to the
Geographical Society of Australasia.
I may premise my record by the statement that I saw the
whole of the country passed over at its very worst, owing to the
severe drought experienced by the colonies during 1885 and part
of 1886.
NSTITUTION of surveyors, m
(Ineorpo F***


2
After leaving Cardwell on the 15th of May, 1885, and passing
through the mountainous country lying between the coast and
Bett’s Creek —which latter place was at that time the terminus
of the Northern Railway from Townsville—we passed through a
strip of heavy sandy country, between Bett’s Creek and Hughen-
den, on the Blinders River. While travelling through this strip
of country I had to be exceedingly careful of my horses, as the
poison pea plant grew in great profusion, and the grass being so
scarce and dry, and the poison plant so green and tempting in
appearance to equine eyes, it was no wonder that horses would
try and sample it. We managed, however, to get through with-
out any casualties on this score, and arrived on the Blinders
country —rolling black soil plains. After a few days’ delay in the
vicinity of Hughenden, owing to a heavy thunderstorm rendering
the roads too heavy for traffic, we resumed our journey down the
Blinders River towards Richmond, but, alas! we found that the
rain had been only local, and twenty miles from Hughenden the
country was very dry and burnt up; no grass and but little water
along the road. I may here state that the shower we had at
Hughenden in June was the last rain we experienced until the
end of the year.
On passing Richmond one of my horses succumbed to the
effects of no feed and water, but at about fifty miles from
Richmond we found the best grass and water we had seen since
leaving the coast, and gave our tired horses a spell thereat for
two days. On resuming our journey we found that the good
feed did not extend for more than about twenty miles, and from
this point to the town of Cloncurry we found little or no grass,
and water proportionately scarce and long stages apart.
I had to remain for three weeks near Cloncurry to execute
some Grovernment survey work, and resumed my journey to
Boulia on August 6th, following the general course of the Clon-
curry River upwards for fifty or sixty miles, and thence crossing
the watershed on to the Burke River, upon which river Boulia is
situated, about 150 miles farther down its course. One peculi-
arity of this watershed between the Cloncurry and Burke rivers


INSTITUTION OF SURVEYORS, N.S.W.
(Incorporated.) f 7
is noticeable. Where the main Cloncurry to Boulia road crosses
it, it is almost impossible to say at what point it does cross. The
surrounding country is slightly undulating, but nothing to denote
a watershed between two large rivers. From this point to Boulia
the main road follows the general course of the Burke Fiver,
and the country consists mostly of open downs, stony back from
the river, with thick fringes of coolibah timber on flooded country
along the numerous channels and billabongs that comprise the
Burke Fiver.
We reached Boulia on August 21st, and found it also suffering
from the effects of the prolonged drought. The township is
situated on the western side of the southern end of a waterhole
in the river, about three miles in length when it is full, hut
which dwindles down to insignificance during a drought. The
town is comprised of a courthouse, telegraph and post office,
three stores, four public-houses, a blacksmith and wheelwright’s
shop, chemist, and a saddler, with the ever-present Chinese
gardener; and has a resident police magistrate, clerk of petty
sessions, with the attendant sergeant of police, constables, and
lockup. It consists of one street, and Ido not think would
require the use of three figures to enumerate its adult population;
but if children be included, perchance the enumeration would
amount to over the century.
I have thus far given a mere outline of my journey to Boulia
from the coast, for far more graphic pens than mine have ofttimes
pourtrayed in glowing colours the rich rolling pastures on the
Blinders, Cloncurry, and Burke rivers, and their several re-
spective watercourses; hut how truly does the old saying of
“ circumstances altering cases ” apply to the descriptions 1 w r ould
feel inclined to give of the same country, owing to the effects of
the severe drought so prevalent during and prior to my transit,
and the hardships both men and horses underwent through
scarcity of grass and water on the main roads.
After the preliminary stellar observations necessary before
commencing my work, we started running “ Westward Ho” in
September, 1885, the course I had taken —a few degrees to the
institution OF SURVEYORS, N.S.W.
( Incorporated.) F/6 1^


south of west —being a nearly parallel one to the course of the
Burke Elver downwards from Boulia, and intended to strike in
the immediate vicinity of a large waterhole, fifteen miles in
length, distant about thirty miles from Boulia, in the main
channel of the Herbert or Gfeorgina Eiver, about four or five
miles above the junction of the Burke and G-eorgina rivers. My
first fixed camp from Boulia was at a small mudhole (but styled
a waterhole in that part of the country) in the Bendyacker
Creek, a tributary of the Burke Eiver, about five miles from
Boulia. This was the last water I saw on the line of country
I crossed with my survey for another forty-five miles. The
country from Boulia to the Bendyacker Creek, and for fifteen
miles from Boulia, can be fitly described as open gravelly downs,
interspersed with a few scattered clumps of giddea, with a few
clumps of a kind of timber called, locally, Minnie-ritchie, which
grows tall and straight, seldom more than about six inches in
diameter, not unlike the giddea wood in grain, very hard, and
splits easily, and is greatly prized for fencing purposes, as it
lasts well in the ground. I found it exceedingly suitable for
making my posts and pegs out of, and whenever procurable used
it in preference to any other kind of wood. After progressing
about ten miles with my work, the Bendyacker Creek mud
became undrinkable, and I had to remove my main camp to
another misnomer known as the Corriggia waterhole, situated in
the main channel of the Burke Eiver, about fifteen miles below
Boulia. Here we obtained a fair supply of good drinking water
by sinking a cask in the sandy bed of the river, and making a
trough out of a hollow log for our horses to drink out of; but
our troubles from this time commenced. Our Corriggia camp
was too far to return to every night from work, as the surveyed
line at its most accessible point was seven or eight miles distant,
so that from this time to the end of our work we used to start
out every Monday morning—five, and subsequently seven thirsty
souls in party —with a 36-gallon cask of water on our American
waggon, which quantity had to suffice us for both drinking and
washing purposes until the Saturday night following. One pint


per man each morning and evening was the allowance for wash-
ing, and whenever it became exceptionally hot weather, and
thereby more than the usual quantity being nsed for drinking, I
am afraid we often sacrificed cleanliness to thirstiness, and
satisfied the needs of the inner rather than the outer man. The
horses used for each day’s work had to be brought every morn-
ing from and return each evening to the main camp at C orriggia
for water, and for our food sent out to us daily by our camp-
keeper.
At about twenty-five miles from Boulia the nature of the
country entirely changed from open downs to thick giddea forest,
yclept scrub in the Aorth Gregory district. But to anyone
accustomed to the dense tropical scrubs of our eastern coast line
the farce of terming any thick giddea forest a scrub is obvious.
This thick belt of giddea continued for seven or eight miles before
we entered on the low flooded devil-devil cooliba flats of the
Georgina Biver. And the change in one sense was a relief to
members of my party, for their hands were one mass of festering
sores, caused by abrasions of the skin by the giddea which is
poisonous to a certain extent —and aggravated by the fly pest,
added to the want of vegetable diet so unobtainable and yet so
necessary in the far west.
At twenty-four miles on my road westward I again found it
necessary to shift my main camp onwards to the Parai ltuary
waterhole, hut here we missed the good water we had at the
Corriggia, for the Paravituary unfortunately was very brackish.
This otherwise magnificent waterhole, fifteen or sixteen miles in
length, is quite salt at its upper or northern end, and therefore
undrinkable, whereas at its lower or southern end it is fresh.
We were encamped about the centre, and whenever the wind
blew from the northwards the water became so salt as to be
almost unfit for use, but if calm or blowing from the southwards
it was only slightly brackish; but the effects on all of us both
men and horses —during the few weeks we were obliged to use
this water were plainly perceptible. It made us thin and
emaciated, and on one of our party —our camp-keeper—the after


INSTITUTION OF SURVEYORS, N.S.W
(liiQprpo rated.)
effects lasted for months, nearly causing his death from chronic
dysentery, caused, he firmly believes, from the constant use of
this saline water. Fish —principally bream —are plentiful in the
Paravituary; one party of men camped close to us caught from
thirty to forty pounds weight of fish within an hour. A member
of my party was also fairly fortunate, but I never was lucky at
fishing, probably through not using the proper bait, combined
with the absence of that sine qua non virtue in all piscatorial
pursuits —namely, patience. I ascertained from the aboriginals
subsequently that Paravituary means in their language “ big
fellow saltwater.” Another pest from which the Aorth Gregory
district was suffering at this time was a plague of rats. They
were everywhere in thousands. Nothing came amiss to their
insatiable appetites —rations, saddlery, boots, water bags —all
were sampled by these voracious rodents. A boy we had in
camp used to amuse himself after supper by propping up a box
with a stick attached to a piece of string within the light of the
camp fire, and dragging the stick suddenly away whenever rats
ventured underneath the box, tempted by the bait placed for
them; by this means he often caught dozens of an evening.
These rats move in battalions all over the country. Water
seems to be no object to them, for I have found them just as
numerous fifteen or twenty miles away from any water as they
were on the banks of the Paravituary. From about thirty miles
from Boulia we entered on the low-lying, flooded, loose, black
soil flats of the Georgina. Here during the hot weather the soil
cracks and fissures occur in the surface, some of considerable
depth, aud dangerous for horse or vehicle traffic, while the devil-
devil, or lumpy nature of the ground —destitute of vegetation at
the time of my passing, with the exception of blue bush and
nardoo—rendered progress slow and tedious, and glad were we
to enter once more the giddea forest country at thirty-six miles
from our start.
The nardoo seed is extensively used by the aboriginals as an
article of food. They grind it up between two stones, sifting the
husks from the grain with great dexterity by a peculiar trembling
.
.


w
* £
NEW SOUTH WALE
INCORPORATED.
INSTITUTION OF SURVEVOfS.
motion of their coolimans or wooden vessels containing it, which
method I have seen several white men try and imitate without
success. The flour or meal they thus obtain is then baked into
a kind of bread, which is not at all unpalatable. After two or
three miles of open giddea forest, we traversed open, level,
gravelly downs, crossing the main Georgina road at about forty-
two miles, and continuing to crossing of Ootton-bush Creek at
forty-five miles. Up to this point we had crossed no defined
water channel worth calling a creek since leaving Bendyacker.
The cotton-bush plant, I am informed, is greedily eaten by
stock, and is famed for its fattening properties, but the specimen
I saw of it looked like dead wiry sticks, and my horses certainly
would not look at it as an article of food, probably from vitiated
tastes or through ignorance.
While in the vicinity of Cotton-bush Creek I had the greatest
difficulty in obtaining feed of any kind for my horses, all the
frontage on both sides of the Georgina being as bare and destitute
of grass as a billiard table, and I had in consequence to send my
horses four or five miles back from the river to obtain for them
the least semblance of feed; and yet, if only good seasons were
the rule, this Georgina country must be a grand pastoral district,
for even with the great disadvantages under which the country
laboured during my trip, Dr. Mein’s herd of cattle on Herbert
Downs station looked remarkably well, wherever they obtained
their feed, which must have been long distances back from the
river frontage, judging from the numerous well-beaten cattle
paths leading from every direction to the few permanent water-
holes in the Georgina Kiver. My horses would readily eat of
the giant salt bush on the flooded river flats; this indeed was
the only edible plant the poor brutes could get near the river,
but I do not think that this kind of salt bush has the same fatten-
ing properties as its namesake on the Warrego Eiver and on the
back tracks of Hew South Wales.
From Cotton-bush Creek my course took me across numerous
dry billabongs and anabranches of the river—all flooded country
in wet weather —and by the time we reached the 48-mile post


there was every sign of the drought breaking up, and the long-
wished-for rain coming at last. During this part of my survey,
up to the 52-mile, we worked under great dread of the floods
coming on and catching us on the flooded country between
billabongs, for there was every sign of heavy rain falling np the
river, and the Georgina has been known to come down a banker
very suddenly, and within twenty-four hours be four or five miles
in width, where previously not a vestige of water was to be seen ;
for the part of the river on which we were working is one mass
of anabranches and billabongs, extending over an area of four or
five miles in width, and it is a most difficult matter in many
places to decide which is the main branch where all are equally
large. However, we pushed on as rapidly as we could, crossed
a waterhole at fifty miles in what we considered to be the main
branch of the river (being the first water on our line since leaving
Beudyacker); thence crossed another large anabranch at fifty-
one and a-half miles, previously shifting our main camp from off
the flooded country to safe and high ground at Herbert Downs
station, on the west bank of an outside billabong of the Georgina
Biver. The very day we crossed the last anabranch, at fifty-one
and a-half miles, down came the river, and within twenty-four
hours every anabranch and billabong were bankers; but every-
thing was safe, and although completely isolated from communi-
cation with the outside world in accepting the station hospitality,
life once more appeared worth living, as we had vegetable diet
and fresh meat in lieu of the previous salt junk, and I have spent
less merry Christmases and happy New Tears than that spent
under the hospitable roof of the genial manager of Herbert
Downs station, Mr. Jerome Wafford.
On the cessation of the rain in the first week of January, 1886,
we resumed work and produced the surveyed line across the
outside western billabong of the river on to some open, stony,
hilly country, up to a point fifty-five miles in one straight line
from Boulia, where 1 changed the direction in which we had
been hitherto running to a bearing nearly north-west, with the
object of striking Pituri Creek, a western tributary of the


Gleorgina, and running a parallel line to its general course
upwards to the border.
Pituri Creek runs in a south-easterly direction from the South
Australian territory, junctioning with the Gfeorgina Liver about
twenty miles above Herbert Downs station. But before pro-
ceeding far with this new line, at six and a-half miles I ran into
a deep-flooded channel of the Gleorgina, not shown on the feature
chart of the country from which I worked. This unforeseen
obstacle prevented my further progress, as it would probably
take several weeks for the anabranch, swelled by the late heavy
rains, to be crossable; and, as it was my intention to have run up
Pituri Creek to the South Australian border, I was now informed
on the best authority that unless I at once took advantage of
the present supply of water I would in a few weeks’ time have
great difficulty in obtaining water, except at long distances apart
in Pituri Creek, so I decided to take my party up to the border
line where it crossed this creek, and from thence make a traverse
down Pituri Creek, finishing where I had been obliged to cease
operations pro tern.
In travelling towards the border we passed Idainea, or as it is
now known, Gllenormiston station, owned by Mr. James Tyson.
Gllenormiston is prettily situated at a point of a stony ridge over-
looking the Idamea Lake, a fine sheet of water, swelled by the
late heavy rains to its fullest size, about two miles in length and
about 400 yards in width at its broadest part, opposite the station.
Pituri Creek enters this lake at its north-western and emerges
therefrom at its south-eastern end, from thence finding its way
into the Gleorgina by a very tortuous channel at a point about
five or six miles, as the crow flies, from the lake. The lake’s
waters also, during heavy floods, overflow at its south-eastern
end across low-lying blue bush flats, and find a nearer access to
the Gleorgina than by the circuitous channel of the creek, render-
ing traffic along the Boulia road, which crosses these low-lying
flats, impracticable during very heavy floods. It was in Idamea
Lake, almost dry at the time of the occurrence, that the South
Australian survey party, employed at the border survey under


the command of Mr. Surveyor Peebles, lost some fine camels and
a portion of their equipment. They were encamped on the dry
bed of the lake. Sudden and heavy rains came on, and before
they had time to remove the whole of their effects to high and
dry ground Pituri Creek came down a banker and caught them,
and what had been an hour previously a perfectly dry flat
became, by the enormous rush of water, a swimmable lake.
Some of the camels, with their proverbial stupidity in water,
refused to move, the men diving to unloose their hobbles, and
even when free the camels preferred to stand and drown rather
than make any efforts to reach the high ground within a few
yards of them.
Pituri Creek has a well-defined channel for about twenty-five
miles upwards from Lake Idamea. At twenty miles from G-len-
ormiston is Lake Wanditta, through which Pituri Creek also
runs. Lake Wanditta is considered a permanent supply of
water; it is not so large as Lake Idamea, but apparently it is
deeper. There are no permanent waterholes between Idamea
and Wanditta. Por the first few miles the stony ridges or
gibbers, as they are termed, come very close into the creek —
these gibbers being richly timbered with giddea and a kind of
dense low hush, called turpentine. Glum and bloodwood gullies
run hack in places from the creek among the gibbers. At about
four or five miles from Gllenormiston the creek flats, devil-devil,
and blue bush country widen out from half to a mile and a-half
in width, the gibbers here and there closely proximating to the
vicinity of the creek channels. Thick belts of giddea forest
extend back on both sides of the creek for from one to three
miles, beyond which is open, well-grassed downs country. At
Wanditta are erected a stockman’s hut and fine large newly -
erected stockyards, with all appliances for working a large herd
of cattle. A few miles above Wanditta the southern branch of
Pituri, called Toko, or Linda Creek, joins the main branch, and
this creek also heads from the South Australian territory, and is
the route for travelling stock into South Australia, leading to the
Toko waterhole in Queensland, and also to a newly-formed


station in South Australia, within thirty miles of the Queensland
border, called Allanageer, formed and managed by Mr. L. O’B.
Pfrench.
After passing Toko Creek, a traveller would find great difficulty
in following Pituri Creek, especially if he had any expectations
of being able to follow a well-defined channel, for it breaks off
into blue bush flats without the sign of a channel of any kind for
miles, then re-forms into a well-defined creek, and again within a
short distance loses itself in blue hush flats. The next well-
defined tributary of Pituri Creek is the Teta Creek on the north-
east side, joining with Pituri at the Teta waterhole—a fine deep
permanent waterhole, about a mile long and about thirty yards
wide. Passing onward, in about another ten miles Wallayah
waterhole is reached, where Mr. Predk. Donner, has pitched his
camp, built a stockyard, and manages a small herd of cattle
running on a few blocks of country owned by himself and his
brother, the well-known manager of Carandotta station on the
Georgina River. Wallayah waterhole is about twenty miles
from the border, and as we press onwards, now travelling through
thick giddea, and again ploughing our way across heavy blue
bush, flooded devil-devil flats, though such a short time has
elapsed since the rains, we find difficulty in getting a drink of
water. The creek becomes more difficult to follow, open patches
of blue bush run up into the hilly country on each side, and we
often stop and have a consultation as to which open glade it will
be advisable to follow. Sundown is drawing nigh, and we are
regularly nonplussed as to which direction to steer to get water
to camp at for the night. Standing in the middle of a large open
devil-devil flat, our horses tired with the constant dragging of a
heavy load through the loose black soil since sunrise, the welcome
sight of a flock of galahs about a mile or so away decides our
movements, announcing the probability of the existence of water,
and the screaming and screeching which greeted us on drawing
closer, combined with the sight of flocks of ibis and ducks and
waterfowl of various descriptions which rose from the water and
circled round our heads at our approach, was music to our ears


and a pleasant sight to our eyes, as all fears of having to camp
without water ceased. I found subsequently that the waterhole
we approached was known by the native name of Corriggerree
or Ellahno. This was on a Saturday night, and on the following
day of rest we feasted on roast duck ad libitum , for the ducks
were very tame and easily shot, seldom being disturbed by the
white man.
The creek channel is well defined for the remaining ten miles
between Corriggerree and the border, and we had no difficulty in
reaching the Elladdah waterhole on the following Monday.
Elladdah waterhole, in Pituri Creek, is just inside the present
surveyed eastern boundary of South Australia, on the South
Australian side of the border line, which crosses the eastern end
of the waterhole, and is a permanent one.
While working in the neighbourhood of the border, and indeed
from the time we left Wanditta until we returned to Wanditta,
all members of my party carried firearms, as we were informed
the aboriginals were not to he trusted ; hut during the whole
course of our work we were not molested in any way by them,
and the few natives we did see were camped near the stations
passed, and were semi-civilised. Of weapons they seem to have
a very poor supply, consisting principally of the usual spear,
boomerang, and waddy (or nullah-nullah). I obtained a few
stone spear heads, knives, and tomahawks, hut as a rule they
seem less well supplied than most of the far western tribes I
have seen in the course of my wanderings. They are great con-
sumers of the pituri, a narcotic herb they obtain on some of the
neighbouring rivers to the southward, and as a description of the
method in which the aboriginals prepare it for consumption may
he of interest, I here append a portion of a letter of mine which
appeared in the Queenslander last July, descriptive of the pro-
cess
“ They (the aboriginals) first place a portion of the pituri in
their mouths and chew it into a pulp. This is spit out on to a
piece of hark, and some of the whitewood leaves are burnt and
added thereto, then the whole worked up with the fingers to the


Immrm cr Stftlfftll
NEW SOUTH WAtdtfk
wcoyfQRATH,
consistency of putty. It now undergoes a second process of
chewing and spitting out, and more ashes are added to it. After
this has been done repeatedly it is ready for use, and it is a
comical sight to see half a dozen nude niggers, squatted on their
hams, gravely passing this, no doubt, to them, delicious morsel
from one to another, each chewing it in turn until the effects
begin to appear in their staring eyes and a stupid look. I can
only compare it to the appearance of an habitual opium consumer
after indulging in his favourite drug. The effect on some is
stupefaction, others again begin their corroboree, and the dif-
ferent effects on different aboriginals are just as apparent as the
very different effects alcoholic liquors have on others of the genus
homo. On the completion of the chewing and passing round
business, it generally finds its way back to the original preparer,
who disposes of it by sticking it behind his ear for future con-
sumption. The pituri is an extensive article of trade among the
blacks, the happy possessors being able to obtain in exchange for
it any article dear to the aboriginal heart from their less for-
tunate black brethren, and I am informed on good authority that
it finds its way to the tribes on the Diamantina on the one side
and to the Gregory Biver natives on the other side of the circum-
scribed area wherein it is obtained. The sample 1 send you v\ as
obtained from the south of the Mulligan Biver, from about
twelve or fifteen miles westward of the Sandringham station.
On Pituri Creek none whatever grows, being only another
instance of a misnomer so noticeable in the names of Queensland
creeks.”
A note by the editor at the end of my letter says: “The pituri
of the Australian aboriginal is the leaf of the Duboisia hojpwocdii.
Dr. Bancroft, of Brisbane, investigated its peculiar properties,
and his papers about the subject are recorded in the transactions
of the Philosophical Society of Queensland. The active principle
is nearly, if not quite, identical with nicotine.”
On the Mulligan Biver, which lies to the southward of Pituri
Creek, are extensive saltpans, from which many stations on the
Gleorgina, Burke, and Pituri watercourses obtain their supplies


of salt, stacking it during the dry seasons, and sending their
drays for it as required.
There are also soda springs on the Mulligan. One gentleman
who has lived many years in the neighbourhood related to me an
amusing incident in reference to these springs. They bubble up
so strongly that if a man were to jump into one of them bolt
upright, the force of the spring would raise him waist high out
of the water. On one occasion my informant was trying to
elicit from some aboriginals their opinion as to when the ensuing
rainy season would commence. The aboriginals decided to
consult their oracle, who, they said, lived at the bottom of one
of these soda springs. An adjournment was made to the place,
and one aboriginal taking a big stone in each hand, dived head
first into the bubbling water. A second aboriginal jumped in
immediately afterwards, and catching hold of his predecessor’s
legs, which just appeared above the surface of the water, forced
him further down. A third aboriginal then jumped in and
forced the second down, all remaining under the water for as
long a time as they could hold their breathing in abeyance.
They then all came to the surface, when the leading native
gravely announced that he had interviewed the big fellow masser,
and that big fellow flood come up along a one-fellow moon.
And what is more, the flood did come in another month as
predicted.
The aboriginals as a rule are incomparable mimics and copiers
of the ways of white men. I was very much amused at one who,
for the first time, saw my surveyed line from a slight eminence,
clear as a telegraph line for miles on both sides of him. He
turned to his master in his astonishment at the novel sight, and
said, “My word Marmey all the same adjective crow.” No
doubt he had at some time or other heard the expression of
“ straight as a crow flies,” and applied it in his untutored way to
the novel sight of a straight line cut through the timber.
I have little more to add: suffice to say that I was accurately
informed as to the scarcity of water in Pituri Creek. A few
weeks after the cessation of the periodical rains, and during my


return trip surveying the traverse line, as I proceeded I had
long distances to cart water for the use of my party, for, with
the exception of the waterholes I have mentioned, there existed
little or none in the creek on our downward course.
Here on the Pituri Creek, as on the Georgina River, stock
looked remarkably well, but to get any grass for my horses I
had to send them back three or four miles from the creek,
although the country when travelling up the creek looked like
the proverbial wheatfield, with grasses and herbs of various
descriptions.
I cannot conclude my reminiscences without special allusion
to the kind and generous treatment I personally experienced
from Messrs. Alexander Lamond, manager of Glenormiston
station, and Mr. Frederick Donner, of Pituri Creek. The
difficulties we had to contend with in procuring the barest
necessaries of life would have been intensified fourfold had it
not been for the kind aid I received in every possible way from
these two gentlemen.
My work being completed the first week in July of the
present year (1886), I was recalled to Brisbane, where I arrived
during August, heartily glad once more to be within the confines
of civilisation, and shall always look back on my surveying trip
from Boulia to the South Australian border as one of the
roughest ten months of bush life I have experienced during a
sojourn of nearly twenty years in these colonies, the greater
part of which time has been spent in the back tracks of Queens-
land.
A joint conversation took place between the Chairman, Hon.
Secretary, Messrs. E. Gailey, and E. McDonnell, who spoke in
complimentary terms of the paper read, and after a few respon-
sive remarks by Mr. Bedford, the proceedings terminated.
WATSON, FERGUSON AND CO., PRINTERS, BRISBANE.


INSTITUTION OF SURVEYORS,-N.S.W.
(Incorporated. )Ffcn+.


V VN


INSTITUTION OF SypEyQRS. N.S.W.
(Incorporated.)
'O'
c
