

f-'iycriJth
4* 4* ♦ ♦ 4>
prom papery Establishment
To Temperance platform
P*
by the;
Australian Silverpen.
■f
y ' ~y
-%S»
iXWMW
~~\TZr~\'
Matthew Burnett,
THE AUSTRALIAN “ FATHER MATTHEW
Yorkshire Evangelist Social Reformer
W \V vt/ Vt/ VI/ Vt/ Vt/ Vt/ Vt/




From Drapery Establishment
To Temperance Platform and Pulpit.
REMINISCENCES
The Life and Labors
Matthew Burnett
Yorkshire Evangelist and Social
Reformer.
By THE “ AUSTRALIAN SILVERPEN.”
Dedicated to William Rowntree, Esq., J Pt,
“ Westwood Scarboroug h, Engla7id.
WITH PORTRAITS# OTHER VIEWS.
HsUlboanu:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 305 ’and 307 COLLINS STREET.






-11
< /7/r. *77/. Z/Surneii, /S63'.
z4~
♦
~*T


Downshire Villa,
Ballarat East.
Dedication.
I have taken the liberty of dedicating this Volume
to a gentleman I have never seen, hut one who
was never forgotten by the subject of these memoirs —
Mr. Matthew Burnett.
Many a time, both in England and Australia,
has Mr. Burnett talked to me of God's good
providence in placing him, in his boyhood days , in
the establishment of Wm. Rowntree, Esq., f.P., of
Scarborough, England.
H. GLENNY, J.P., F.G.S.
(The “Australian Silverpeo,”)


Ppefatopy Hot®
By the Rev. William Burridge, Wesleyan
Minister, of Ballarat.
Wesleyan Parsonage,
July 6th, 1898.
I have had the pleasure of an early perusal of the
M.S. of “ The Reminiscences of the late Matthew
Burnett’s life and labors.”
“ Silverpen” not only has the gift of a ready writer,
but had close personal and valued intercourse with the
Yorkshire Evangelist.
There will be few indeed, if any, who will quarrel
with the writer of this interesting brochure because of his
high estimate of the worth of Matthew Burnett’s
character and work. Th roughout the colonies of Victoria,
South Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania there are
to be found ministers, office-bearers, and members of the
Methodist and other branches of the Church of Christ,
who were, and are, the trophies of the burning zeal and
untiring labors of the subject of these pages.
Such a life as that lived by Matthew Burnett, and
such blessed and far-reaching work as that rendered by
him to the Church life throughout Australia, deserved
an enduring record, which has been furnished by the
facile and sympathetic “ Australian Silverpen.” I trust
the publication of these very readable and instructive
“Reminiscences” will do much good.
WM. BURRIDGE.


PREFACE.
tfuW CAN assure my readers it was not without
many misgivings that ] consented to write the
I “ Life and Labours of my dear friend Matthew
Burnett.”
G !
I believe I am correct in saying that I knew more
about Mr. Burnett’s colonial life than any other person in
these colonies ; but to choose and place the various
striking incidents of his career before the public in a
readable form was my chief difficulty.
These pages were written in my leisure hours. If
some of my readers here and there find aught to complain
of, all I can say is, “ I have done my best.”
Mv literary effort, if so it can be called, was written
with the hope that Mr. Matthew Burnett’s widow and
family, now in England, would reap some benefit from
the publication. For myself, I have written and compiled
the narrative without fee or reward —out of pure, dis-
interested love for a dear friend, who during his life
rendered good service to the Religious and 1 emperance
Communities of these Southern Climes, and left behind
him thousands of converts in all the churches, a character
and reputation void of offence, and lived such an unselfish,
pure life that we all might follow with advantage.
Mr. Matthew Burnett was a Christian Evangelist of
whom any country might be proud. His beautiful life
shone out as a ‘‘ beacon light ” to guide and help the
sinful, to lift up the degraded and vicious, and to lead all
to that “ Home beyond the blue,” where there is no need
of the sun to give light, where he now rests from his
labours,
Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternally shut in.
Australian Silverpen.
Ballarat East,
December 1898.




REMINISCENCES OF THE LIFE AND LABOURS
OQatthem Bupfiett,
YORKSHIRE EVANGELIST and SOCIAL REFORMER
N the good ship Norfolk, from England to
Australia, some 35 years ago, a smart, intelligent,
good-looking gentleman, with his young wife,
were in the list of first-class passengers.
From their first day on board, the Christian
character of the young man and his estimable
wife shone out.
The sailors jeered, at the (to them) religious fanatics,
and in the forecastle among their messmates prognosti-
cated a bad voyage and a long and tedious one, on account
of the presence on board of a “ sky-pilot ” and his better
half in the fore saloon. However, there was no shirking
of Christian duty with the young Evangelist referred to.
He did not mind what the sailors called him or said
about him ; he had always a kind word for every one, and
thus gradually wormed himself into the hearts of both
captain, officers, crew and passengers, and before the
voyage was half over, Mr. Matthew Burnett (for he it is
of whom I write) was the most loved and popular man on
board the good ship Norfolk. One of the passengers,
Mr. Lee Brown, now the well-known squatter and
grazier of Cope Cope, Victoria, from the first day at sea,
took a friendly interest in the services of the Yorkshire
Evangelist.


Every day when the weather was favorable, a service
was held in some part of the ship—Mr. Brown acting as
precentor, thus showing his leaning to one, who was
attempting Christian work under not altogether favorable
circumstances, very greatly aiding the evangelist passenger
and his friends in their efforts to do good, to both officers,
passengers, and crew.
When things had pretty well righted themselves on
board, and the voyagers began to understand each other,
and commenced to be communicative and friendly, Mr.
Burnett missed no opportunity of talking to all hands of
matters pertaining to their “ peace
By his consistent tearing and demeanour under all
circumstances, the former hatred and sneering of the crew
was turned into kindness and good wishes; ultimately
there was not a man on board, who would not have laid
down his life for the “ sky-pilot ” Evangelist.
The now sainted Mrs. Burnett was almost worshipped
by everyone she came in contact with. Those who
remember her angelic face will not be surprised to hear
that she exerted a wonderful influence for good, on both
the male and female voyagers to our Southern land.
Mr. and Mrs. Burnett arrived in Melbourne in the most
unostentatious manner, no trumpet soundings or press
notices went before them, heralding their praises. How-
ever, before Mr. Burnett had been many weeks in our
colony (Victoria), the Christian public awoke to the fact—
that a man of God and a religious revivalist of no mean
order, had come to our shores, and it was noticed at the
time, from the first meeting Mr, Burnett conducted,
members were added to all the churches, and in every
place he preached or lectured, it was said —He or she had
been “ born ” there.
I will not attempt to take incidents of note regarding
Mr. Burnett’s work in the order they occurred. If I did
so, I would extend these Reminiscences to a greater length
than arranged for, and have to hunt up press notices of
the last 35 years. But my intention is, in these pages, to
write in most part from memory, and if the jottings I give
are not exactly in their proper order, well, then the
peculiarities of a “Silverpen ” must be the excuse.


mattheuu Barnett’s Birth
and Boyhood.
r <L!y' •
subject of these somewhat straggling and
sketchy memoirs, Matthew Burnett, was born
on the 10th January, 1839, at Cloughton, near
Scarborough, in Yorkshire. When quite a
, J * little fellow he entered the shop of William
mj I®) Rowntree & Co., drapers and silk mercers ;
191 and it was frequently noticed by his Australian
<s> friends that the Rowntree family stood ever
first with him as the friends of his youth and riper age.
This is not always so, but in Mr. Burnett’s case, either
as a “ wee boy ” behind the counter, or the local preacher, or
the village Evangelist, or the Father Matthew of Australia,
the Rowntrees looked upon their protegee as one of their
special favourites, and the kind feeling was fully and
heartily reciprocated by Matthew Burnett.
In the homes of the diggers and business people of
Victoria, Mr. Burnett was always welcomed. In every
family where he located for short or long periods, the name
of Rowntree was sure to be introduced. Many a touching
incident he would relate of his boyhood and youthful days
in Scarborough, England, when under the roof of the
good quaker family of Rowntrees, »
When a mere lad, he would say —“I was induced by
evil companions to take intoxicants, and for several years
was a victim to strong drink. My conversion was brought
about principally by the young lady who afterwards
became my wife, and this was the turning point of my life.”


There is no doubt this change led up in time to Matthew
Burnett’s unique position as an Australian Evangelist,
unrivalled for earnestness, zeal, and all the other special
qualifications needed by a whole-hearted religious revivalist,
temperance advocate, social reformer and rescuer of the
perishing ; and in these capacities no man living, could
compete with Matthew Burnett. He was the good-better-
best of the many who have visited these Australian colonies,
and did work in saving men and women that cannot be
computed by any arithmetical table.
Matthew Burnett’s greatest joy was to see men and
women leaving sin and clinging to Christ for salvation.
He was an enthusiast, whose every-day life spoke out, and
told to those with whom he associated, that the main
motive and aim of his herculean and wonderfully success-
ful efforts was, to lead men and women from the error of
their ways, and with clean hands, sober lives, and pure
hearts present them at last blameless before God.
The number of those who in his comparatively short
life he led to the Saviour might be counted by tens of
thousands. Scores now in the Christian ministry in these
colonies and in other lands testify to the benefits received
at Mr. Burnett’s revival meetings.
Mr. Burnett was a man, every inch of him, and at the
same time a brother beloved. Once he made a friend he
never forgot him, and strange as it may seem, he never
forgot a face. If he had met you twenty years before,
but speak to him, and he had you right before his minds
eye in a second, and his hearty greeting, and his, / am so
glad to see you ) was unforgetable.
Never lived a kinder friend or a more trusty one ; who-
ever turned his back upon you in trouble or distress, you
could always reckon on Matthew Burnett.
Good and loyal to the core, he always had a kind word
to say of every one. His memory will never die either in
Old England or in these Southern climes. Among the
Maories in New Zealand he did a splendid work.
Thousands of them with their Chiefs took the “ little bit of
blue,” and to-day these trophies of New Zealand are to be
met with all over Maori-land.


Mr. Burnett as a Visitor.
Matthew Burnett always took great delight
wherever he was temporarily located in
visiting from house to house, distributing
family pledge cards and temperance literature.
h ' It was seldom indeed he met with anything
but kindness and courtesy. Naturally the
“Social Reformer ” was specially endowed for the vocation
of an Evangelist, going everywhere, seeking the degraded,
and lost, and cheering on those who were trying their
best to help themselves.
Mr Burnett would quietly knock at the door, and with
a cheery, “ Good morning, Mam ; fine day is it not,”
gradually disabuse the minds of the inmates of his intention
to incommode or annoy them by putting awkward questions.
Then he would ask them to accept one of his short,
printed leaflets, say who he was, and invite them heartily
to come to his meetings and hear what he had to say,
assuring them, that his stories of Little Jimmy, Dr. Mitchell,
Big Ben the wrestler, Yankee Bill, and many others would
be sure to amuse, if not instruct, them; and he would say
to the good dame, “Now be sure and tell your husband that
I will be delighted to see him, and he and all your friends
who come, may depend on getting good seats, where they
can comfortably hear all the friends and myself have to say.”
Then if he thought the course was clear and he could
venture so far, like an earnest Christian, he would say,
“Would you object to my praying with you before I go,
and telling our great Father in heaven of our wants?” if
leave was granted, down he would drop on his knees and


with a few simple words of pleading, thanksgiving, and
entreaty, talk with God, and after he had pronounced the
amen, he would shake hands with all present and say, “ Now
don’t forget the meeting to night. I will be looking out
for you. Good-bye, dear friend, God bless you and yours.”
Then away he would go to the next likely habitation, and
so on all the forenoon.
By the dinner hour he perhaps had visited twenty or
thirty houses, and prayed in most of them. As a conse-
quence the evening meetings were generally crowded.
Many went out of curiosity to hear what the strange,
nervous, wiry looking man had to say. Once there, they
would go again and again, until Burnett’s meetings were
so pleasant and profitable, that the folk would say, “It would
be a terrible pity to have to miss one of them.”
So the good work went on, and the glad tidings spread,
the most unlikely cases were rescued ; drunkards gave up
liquor, took the pledge, and in the majority of cases
decided for Christ; and God had the glory.
The appearance of Mr. Burnett on the platform or in
the pulpit was that of a man thoroughly in earnest, full
of nerve action. To the very tips of his fingers he seemed
charged with magnetic power, and when he stretched out
his arms and extended his long thin hands, it would seem
as if he could draw people to the “ penitent form ” by some
occult irresistless force.
Those who have heard Mr. Burnett preach his favourite
sermon on “ The pale horse and his paler rider,” will, lam
sure, never forget the occassion.
There was seemingly passing before the eyes of his
auditory a series of scenic views of the supernatural.
Death with all its solemn surroundings paraded itself
on the pale horse in such a,realistic way, as to, at intervals,
make the flesh creep on the bones and the eye to glare
with all its intensity, as if, wishful to know, what next.
Mr. Burnett exercised a strangely powerful influence, he
spoke with wonderful pathos in his utterances, and great
earnestness; he had a marvellous knack of portraying and
picturing before an audience, the thoughts passing through


his mind. All his discourses, whether on temperance or
gospel subjects, wound up with the invitation, Come to
fesus , He alone can do helpless sinners good.
Mr. Burnett’s organizing power was one of his greatest
gifts. Before he would be a week in a city, town, or
hamlet, he would have singing bands, praying bands,
stewards to look after and seat visitors, penitent form
helpers, male and female pledge takers, and a dozen other
auxiliaries at work; and they, taking their cue from their
leader’s enthusiasm, would be like fire among the stubble.
Wherever the folk went curing the intervals between
services, whether in the workshop, at the bench, in the
market, the kitchen, or at the mine, soul-saving was
talked about to the exclusion of every other subject.
Matthew Burnett’s work was of God. If he wanted
aids, God raised them up. If he wanted mcney it was
given freely and spontaneously. If he wanted power, he
knew the source from where to get it, and it often came
like a mighty sweeping wind in his meetings.
The devil and his myrmidons often kicked and tried
to stop the good work, but nothing in earth or heaven could
stay the fervour and zeal of the evangelist. He felt that
God was at his right hand, and he could not be moved.
When in Melbourne, at Wesley Church, his singing
and praying bands were the talk of the city. An hour
before the evening service Mr. Burnett was in the front of
the outside gathering who paraded the back slums.
Turning his face to his followers and walking back-
ward, one evening, in Little Lonsdale street, he gave out,
as he only could, “See the mighty host advancing, Satati
leading on.” The immense crovd, always looking out for
something comical, soon saw the funny interpretation of
the words, and roared with laughter, and for a long time
the fun was kept up. Here comes the acknowledged
Satan, leading on his diabolical forces.
Notwithstanding somewhat amusing episodes like that
just related, there were always men and women who came
to scoff and remained to pray. The greatest scoffers became
the most active workers in the cause of Temperance and
Christianity.


In every city and town of the Australian colonies
Matthew Burnett either lectured, preached, or spoke on
temperance and religion, and when his health gave way,
and his wasted body seemed as if his work on earth was
over (Mrs. Burnett’s death greatly affecting him), he poor,
dear fellow, felt downcast and sad indeed.
After great persuasion by friends and well wishers he
consented to take a trip to England (1872), so that he
could have a year at least of complete rest, and the benefit
of a sea voyage in order to, if possible, restore and recu-
perate his physical powers
This becoming known, all classes all over the colony
vied with each other as to farewell greetings. Ballaarat
took the lead, Geelong and Sandhurst next, then Clunes
and other places, winding up with Melbourner
Few persons in Australia ever had such good-bye
meetings as those given to Mr. Matthew Burnett. Testi-
monials were presented by the score, purses of mone} 7 and
other valuables were given at every meeting, eulogistic
speeches made by the highest church dignatories of the
land of all denominations. In fact, there was a general
mourning period ; most persons believing that the good
Matthew Burnett would never live to return to these
colonies, poetic effusions appeared in scores of papers.
Editors and contributors alike; spoke kindly and well of
the much loved Evangelist, and amid all the excitement,
bustle and worry of farewelling, Matthew Burnett was
just the same, kind, good, unassuming, devoted follower of
the meek and lowly Jesus.
Mr. Burnett’s “ God bless you my brother, and my sister,”
went right home to the heart, and the loving shake of the
hand, and to many close loving embrace, brought tears to
the eyes and a strange feeling in the throat, as one and
another said good-bye to their dear friend.
Few but those who witnessed these farewells could
possibly understand the depth of feeling, the intense heart
throbbings, felt by one and all during the few weeks before
Mr. Burnett’s departure for England.
Mr. Burnett stood the excitement of farewelling fairly
well, but through it all he never forgot his life work—the


salvation of the “masses” from the curse of drink. He
would, while saying good bye, urge and entreat all to lay
hold on Christ, and never let their faith waver, for. he
would say, “He will keep you under the shadow of His
pavilion, and there you can safely rest.”
The people of Ballarat, Sandhurst, Clunes, Melbourne,
and other places loved Matthew Burnett with a great love.
No Evangelist or Temperance Reformer heretofore had
taken so well with all classes of colonists. The Cornish folk
loved him for his fiery earnestness ; the Methodists for his
untiring efforts on behalf of the unsaved j the Presbyterians
for his honest enthusiasm and his love of the “kirk the
Church of England folk for his agreeable conformity to
to the customs and usages of their ritual ; and the
Roman Catholics for his never interfering between the
priest and his flock.
The drinking community although differing with Mr.
Burnett, gave him credit for hones* y of purpose and stick-
ability to his convictions. The poor blessed him for his
thoughtfulness and liberality, and the rish for his utter-
abnegation ot self, in his efforts to rescue the miserable,
drunken, and sinful.
The more active of his numerous array of followers
prepared little mementos of their love for his voyage.
Everything that a traveller on a long sea voyage could
desire he had given to him.
The following account of his farewell on board the
Hampshire jotted down by the writer, and published in
the Temperance News at the time, will but in part
convey the intensity of love entertained by all, for the
Yorkshire Evangelist, Social Reformer, and Australian
Father Matthew.


fDatthem Burnett’s Mdieus
to Vietoma, 1872.
N Friday, the 12th of April, 1872, the receipt of
a telegram from my good friend Matthew
Burnett, the Yorkshire Evangelist, decided me
in my resolve to be one of the many who
would see him off from the Sandridge pier in
the good ship Hampshire, advertised to sail for
London (direct), punctually at 12 o’clock. Acting upon
this resolve, the first train on Saturday morning found
“ Silverpen,” in company with Mr. D. Ham, comfortably
ensconsced in a first-class carriage en route.
We arrived in Melbourne in due course, and hastily
made our way to the warehouse of Henry Cooke, Esq., and
there, up to the eyes in business, and amidst a large pile
of parcels, we found Matthew Burnett, surrounded by a
number of friends.
We received a hearty welcome, and after a little delay
a cab was called, and off we started amid pelting rain, for
the Sandridge pier.
Arrived safely there, we were soon alongside the good
ship Hampshire, and with some degree of curiosity,
followed our leader over the gangway, on to the saloon
deck, and there halted for a while to breathe freely the sea
breeze, while looking around at the stir and bustle every-
where apparent with the ship’s company, all busy at their
multifarious duties, making ready for the start upon their
long voyage.
Amid the crowd of passengers and friends who thronged
the decks we managed at last to crush through, and steer


for Mr. Burnett’s cabin. On entering, we found ladies and
gentlemen from almost every part of the colony, among
whom we noticed Mr. and Mrs. and Master Balding, of
Geelong; Mr. and Mrs. Webb, of Brighton ; Mr. and Miss
Jefferson, Mr. and Mrs. Matthews. Mrs. Marriott, of
Portland ; Mr and Mrs. Smythe, Mr. David Ham, Mr, H.
Glenny, of Ballarat ; Mr. Thos. Dow, and Mr. Henry
Cooke, of Melbourne ; and a large number of young
ladies, with busy hands and nimble fingers, tidying up and
arranging innumerable articles likely to be wanted on the
voyage, from a pincushion to a good supply of old brown
Windsor, all the gifts of friends.
“Every comfort these good souls have made for me,’’
said Mr. Burnett. One lady sent six warm flannel shirts
to keep out the cold when rounding Cape Horn ; another
thoughtful woman a good supply of warm socks, others
three or four pairs of beautiful slippers, (a pretty good
supply we thought for a poor invalid); felt hats, mufflers,
swing glasses, smoking caps, plum cake (warranted to keep),
swing lamps, and a variety of other useful and ornamental
articles —all sent as tokens of good will, at the last moment,
by friends in Victoria. Books in quantities, with
inscriptions breathing love and hopes of a pleasant voyage,
cartes-de-visite , a supply sufficent to pack a dozen or two of
family albums, with the counterfeit representations of
young and old, from the baby in arms to the patriarchal
grandfather and grandmother, who after much persuasion
got their “pictures” taken, just to please their good friend,
who was leaving them, perhaps, never to return.
No less than 40 letters were received by Mr, Burnett
from all parts of Victoria on the day of sailing. The
reading of these, will, we opine, give Mr. Burnett ample
employment for many an hour after the mal-de-mer has
left him and he feels fully able to keep his equilibrium,
with, as the sailors put it, his sea legs under him. “It
was kind of you,” said he, to the gentlemen from Ballarat,
“to come down to see me off. Tell the Editors of the
local papers on your return, that I deeply feel my gratitude
to them for their kindness shown to me at all times in
connection with my work, from my first appearance to my


last on the goldfields ; their fair and impartial criticisms
I will never forget. Tell the friends of Ballarat, dear old
Ballarat, that I will ever remember their love to me, and
their always disinterested acts of friendship will remain in
my memory as long as I live. Give the W.M. and
and brethren of St. John’s Lodge my fraternal greetings,”
and so he went on, until the clang of the ship’s bell rang
out the warning sound, for all persons who were not
passengers to leave the ship.
My friend and self had previously arranged with the
chief officer to stay, and return by the pilot boat, so we
looked on in amazement while many scores had by
this time surrounded Mr. Burnetu.
Handkerchiefs were freely used, streaming eyes, and
“ Good-bye ; God be with you ” were the the only audible
words heard amid the sighs and tears of departing friends.
It was a very affecting sight. Many were there who
before Mr. Burnett’s arrival in Victoria were victims of
intemperance, but who were now wholly reclaimed. One
gentleman (formerly an “ infidel ”) was pointed out and
introduced before sailing time He, with tearful eyes,
told his own tale, and his first impression of the man—
Matthew Burnett, who by God’s blessing had been the
means of directing his mind aright and turning his feet
into the right path. An aged man and his wife, who had
travelled many long miles to take their farewells of their
spiritual father, left Mr. Burnett weeping bitterly, and
amidst the cheers from the shore, mingled with cries of
good-bye, pleasant voyage, God be with you, &c., &c., the
paddles of the steam tug revolved, and away slowly
went the Hampshire with her pi ecious freight.
Mr. Burnett stood the trying ordeal well and bore up
bravely, but as revolution after revolution of the engines
of the tug steamer took the ship farther, and yet farther,
out to sea, his pent-up feelings gave way, the floodgates of
his heart wereopened, and he wept like a child. Poor dear
fellow, when still waving a long farewell to the many
friends who stood on and around the pier he would point
out one and another, and say how deeply he was touched
by their kindness and great love.


“ There,” said he, pointing to a lady and gentleman
(Mr. and Mrs. Jefferson of Brighton), “are the first friends
I met in Victoria, and my oldest friends in Yorkshire.”
“That dear man,” said he, “was in the chapel in
Scarborough when I became a changed character. God
bless Brother Jefferson. There are my dear friends, Mr. and
Mrs. Balding, of Geelong; I cannot tell you a tithe of
their acts of kindness to me, their house was my home
at all times. God bless them.” And thus he went on
until he had enumerated most of the loving faces ranged
all along the pier, and when scarcely recognisable he still
answered their signals of farewell, pointing upwards with
face uplifted to the sky. His signs were understood and
responded to by those to whom he had been in reality a
guiding star to the better land.
Giving a last look at the fast disappearing groups he
turned sharply round, and in his impulsive way, said to
his friends by his side, “ Do you think It will be thus on
the other side of the river, as the soul of the redeemed
sails gently into harbour. Will it not, think you, be the
reverse of this ? We now part in sorrow with weeping eyes;
but then groups of happy glorified spirits will be on the
eternal shore awaiting our landing, and with shouts of
glory escort us to the mansions of eternal rest.
When no longer able to see even the waving of hand-
kerchiefs, he returned to his cabin and wept afresh.
The Hampshire anchored for the night about four miles
out, and we left in the pilot boat, very sad and sorrowful
indeed, saying our good-byes, as our departing friend
looked from the bulwarks of the ship and wept.


A Farewell Address to Mr. Burnett
ON LEAVING AUSTRALIA FOR ENGLAND.
A, ND art thou leaving us ? Who bade thee go ?
Does thy trail mechanism need repose ?
J Have labors, toils and watching brought thee low—
Weeping in secret for the people’s woes.
This land has need of thee ; canst thou not stay,
And rest awhile in some sequestered vale ?
Cease from thy labors, halt upon the way ;
Recruit thy strength, and then the foe assail.
Exhausted nature droops, and seeks for change ;
And thou shalt have it, worker for thy God !
Go, valiant one, o’er seas and mountains range,
And meekly bow beneath His chastening rod.
The mazy road of life before thee lies ;
A thousand sirens beckon thee away;
Fight, noble warrior, for the Master’s prize ;
Follow thy Leader to the realms of day.
Thou leavest us; but we shall bear in mind
Thy self-renouncing deeds, thy prayer, thy zeal,
To poor degraded drunkards thou wert kind 1
They sat and heard and wept at thy appeal.
Thou, “ Father Matthew” of this land of gold,
The working men with pleasure speak thy name ;
Thy praise shall be rehearsed by young and old,
And future generations hear thy fame.
And worthy thou ; for oft the saddened face
Hath smiled at thy approach ; yea, smilad with joy,
For thy kind hand hath rescued from disgrace,
The wife, the husband, and the darling boy.
Meetings of worthy men shall cheer thee yet,
And rally round thee in tbe trying day ;
Thy notes of warning they will not forget,
Nor heed what drunken foes may of thee say.


Wives, daughters, mothers, in their homes of love ;
Homes darkened once by crimes, by drink depraved,
Now offer praises to our God above,
Whose mercy reached them, and whose hand hath saved.
Zealous for God, Burnett, “fight the good fight; ’
Point trembling slaves to Zion’s holy hill;
Follow thy Master—soon will come the night,
When holy followers will be holy still.
Praise is ephemeral; worth shall never die ;
Praise undeserved will bring no halcyon days ;
Evangelist, thy treasure is on high,
Thou needest not the poet’s tuneful lays.
Be still, my muse, let flowing numbers cease.
The hero goes —for northern climes departs;
But on his head shall rest the wreath of peace,
And memory treasure him within the heart.
Victoria’s Farewell to Matthew
Burnett.
WHO here for long, long years has tolled,
By all beloved, an upright soul,
J Who sought to lead his brother man
To Him who bids the planets roll;
And He, the Master whom He served,
Will be his father and his friend,
And send His angels evermore
His wandering footsteps to attend.
The time draws nigh when we from thee
With tearful eyes will have to part,
And bid to thee a fond farewell,
Dear brother of our soul and heart.
And thou wilt ever serve the Lord,
And for poor sinners watch and pray,
And seek for them a happier lot—
The dawning of a brighter day.


When all mankind shall fear their God,
And murderous wars for ever cease;
And o’er a ransomed world shall shine
The glories of the Prince of Peace ;
And in the armies of the Lord
A standard-bearer thou shalt be,
To gather in the precious souls,
And set sin-ridden captives free.
Ah, may our Father thee protect,
Where’er thy wandering footsteps stray ;
And as the apple of an eye,
Shall keep thee in the narrow way.
And we unto the Lord will pray,
Here humbly kneeling on the sod,
That we may meet in realms sublime,
Before the glorious throne of God.
Oh, fare thee well, beloved, revered,
Who now departest from our shore
To give thy wearied spirit rest;
May angels guard thee evermore,
And on their balmy pinions bring
Returning health and peace of mind,
And length of days to serve the Lord,
Thou sterling friend of human kind.
Farewell, O man of upright soul,
Of kindly heart and open hand,
Who now departest from our shore,
To view once more thy native land ;
Farewell I may prosperous gales attend
Thy progress o’er the azure main ;
And may thy friends in Britain’s isle,
Behold thy well-known form again.
And tell the men of that dear land,
That here is room and bread for all
Who will in paths of duty go,
And shun the cup’s seductive thrall.
Tell those, our loved ones o’er the sea,
We here await them on the strand,
To aid us build, firm and secure,
The empire of the Austral land.
Farewell, farewell, O man revered,
Who leaveth now our golden shore !
May all good angels still attend
And guide thy footsteps evermore —


Of this, thy loved Victorian land.
Nor powers of evil e’er annoy
Thy labours ended, thy reward
Is in the realm of endless joy,
Geelong, March, 1872.
Around thy childhood’s happy haunts,
And once again upon the sea,
When here returning to the land
Where loving hearts will welcome thee.
For thou, dear friend, will come again,
And fill thine own accustomed place ;
And we will hear thy pleasant voice,
And gaze once more upon thy face.
And he who writes this humble rhyme
Once more will take thee by the hand,
And bid thee welcome to the shore
For, oh, that land can hardly spare
So truthful, brave, and sterling man,
Who still with heart and hand was found
F.ngaged in every righteous plan
Whereby was served the cause of God,
And of His people, high or low;
And all will pray Almighty Power
To guard him wheresoe’er he go.
In after years, when I am gone,
And wintry honours crown thy brow,
God grant thee friends to love thee then
As those who love thee fondly now.
And may the blessing of the Lord
With thee remain for evermore,
And gently guide thee o'er the stream
That laves the heavenly Canaan’s shore.
And may the loved ones gone before
Receive thee on the radiant strand,
And lead thee to thy blissful home
In mansions of the happy land,
Where care and sorrow ne’er can come,
W. Stitt Jenkins


Mr. Burnett in the scars=
dale District.
BIRD, ex-M.L.A.. kindly sent
T me the following re the visit of Matthew
Burnett to his district :
“My first acquaintance with Mr.
S . Burnett was in the month of June, 1863.
($| (®) He had just arrived from England, and
TyT had taken a house at Brighton. He left
<s> Mrs. Burnett there, and came on to the
Scarsdale and Smythesdale Circuit. The Superintendent
Minister, Rev. Wm. Woodall, was a Yorkshireman, and a
cousin of Mr. Burnett’s.
The first week-night service held by Mr. Burnett in the
Wesleyan Church, Scarsdale, only a few persons
assembled to hear the Yorkshire evangelist’s first
sermon. He took for his text Psalm Ixv. sth v. —‘ By
terrible things in righteousness Thou shalt answer us,
O, God of our salvation, who are the confidence of all the
ends of the earth and those afar off upon the sea.”
“ When I look back over the thirty-five years past, I
associate the text with the man, and now see how many
things he received in answer to prayer. He laboured at
Scarsdale about three months. The large Church always
filled to overflowing. Mr, Burnett’s custom was to spend
the forenoon in earnest prayer to God for His blessing
upon the evening services. In the afternoon he visited
the people in the neighbourhood. At night he con-
ducted evangelistic services, and frequently gave
reminiscences of his own early life and incidents of travel.


This secured the attention of the people. He always
concluded with a lively prayer meeting. On Saturday
evenings he held temperance meetings, when some of his
“trophies” in the fight gave the particulars of their
former lives, and the great change since their conversion.
It was some time before (as he said) the “ ice ” broke, and
then about 100 persons were converted, and now, after
thirty-five years, his converts are to be found all over the
district.
Leaving Scarsdale, Mr. Burnett went to Newtown,
then to Smythesdale, Happy Valley, Linton, Rokewood,
Cape Clear, Snake Valley, and Piggoreet. In all these
places he had successful missions; and many souls given
him as the fruit of his labours.
Many remarkable conversions took place in this
Circuit. One in particular, at Happy Valley, a miner
named Mr. Blacket, who kept a billiard saloon, and was
living without the fear of God before his eyes. Mr.
Blacket chanced to call at the house where Mr. Burnett
was staying ; and seeing Mr. Burnett retire to his room,
he looked behind the door to see what he was doing, and
found him on his knees pleading mightily for the
salvation of souls. This incident led to the man’s
conversion. He afterwards became a very popular local
preacher, and on leaving Victoria for Tasmania was
successfully engaged for many years as a hired local
preacher in connection with the Wesleyan Home
Missions.
Another trophy —Mr. Wm. Miller, house painter, of
Smythesdale, now of Adelaide, was at one time on the
stage in Victoria, but addicted to drinking habits, hearing
Mr. Burnett, he signed the pledge, became a reformed
man and an active local preacher, and up to the present
time is still actively working on the Lord’s side.
Another special case was that of Mr. Wm. Sommer-
ville, bricklayer. Drink was his curse, and as a
consequence he spent all he could get in the public house.
He, too, was led by Mr. Burnett to decide for Christ, and
became an active temperance worker.


Though Mr. Burnett did so much good, he had bitter
opposition from many straight-laced. “ unco guid people,”
who objected to what they called excitement and
fanaticism. Mr. Burnett s so-called excitement was his
deep-seated zeal for the salvation of the people. Some
called him a fanatic; others said he was mad. His
facial development when once seen was not easily
forgotten.
Mr. Burnett’s tunes and revival hymns were of the
cheerful kind, and always made a good impression. One
of them read as follows :
The other side, the other side. Its shores so bright.
Who would not cross the swelling tide of earthly toil and care,
To dwell one day when life is past
Over the stream —at home at last —
With all the loved ones there ?
Those hearing the evangelist sing this beautiful song
would almost imagine themselves inside the pearly gates.
The deep respect shown for Mr. Burnett is noticeable in
the fact that in nearly every house in these colonies his
portrait is to be found either in album or hanging on the
wall.
Leaving Smythesdale Circuit he went to Ballarat and
Sebastopol, his great work among the masses preceding
him. He has gone to his rest, but his works follow
him.
I am to-day thankful that I had the privilege of
labouring with him. It gave an impetus to my Christian
life—still present with me.


CDatthecu Bapnett’s
Tpophies.
BILL LONQTON.
R. William Longton, the genial Mining
Hill ill Manager of the Victoria United Mine, Bal-
l^rat East, in course of a chat about Matthew
: Burnett, said—“l was at the first meeting
held by Mr. Burnett at Piggoreet (‘ the
Devil’s Kitchen ’). I and a few of ray mates
(old ‘shell-backs’) went to have a game. I took at first a
regular down upon Burnett, and ridiculed him all I could.
“ Old sailors, as a rule, are not very choice in their
language. So it is just as well Mr. Bui nett aid not hear
our remarks anent Lis first meeting after we returned to
our tents. But I went again and again, rill at last I felt
so miserable I could neither work, eat, drink, or sleep.
“ One day I went out to the bush to cut wood, and
before I was there long something Mr. Burnett said
about the sinner’s doom flashed across my mind in a
second. I dropped the axe and fell on my knees, just
where the tree would likely fall, and I never left there till
I found salvation. I then joined the Burnettites, took
the pledge, and never after tasted intoxicants.”
Bill Longton is a capital temperance speaker, and is
known far and near in this district as a genuine man and
an out and out teetotaler. He still thinks that Matthew
Burnett had no equal in Victoria in getting men to sign


the pledge, and strike out for liberty; and will while he
has breath extol the name of the good evangelist,
Matthew Burnett, who u cooked” him to a turn in 1863
at the ‘‘ Devil’s Kitchen,” near Ballarat.
DR. MITCHELL.
NE of Matthew Burnett’s greatest trophies to
the temperance cause in the Ballarat district
was Dr. Mitchell, a man known by every one
as t^ie worst case 0; f drunken mania or
alcoholism in the colonies. Drunk morning,
noon, and night —in fact, never sober —the
old doctor was looked upon by the community generally
as a “ hopeless case.”
Dr. Mitchell was an educated, well-informed man, a
somewhat —when sober —kind father and loving husband ;
but it seemed with him (as he said himself) as if ten
thousand devils were inside him crying for drink.
Brandy or whisky, and plenty of it, he would have. Two
or three bottle; of brandy a day he drank for months
together. He had brought his family very low indeed.
Every home comfort must give way in order to have his
craving for the drink satisfied. His professional reputa-
tion had gone down below zero, and altogether the
drunken doctor was considered a “ lost ” man.
Mr. Burnett heard of the doctor’s drunken habits, and
made up his mind to, if possible, help if not rescue and
save him. The day previous to Mr. Burnett's visiting
Dr. Mitchell he spent half the night in prayer, beseeching
God, in His infinite mercy, to save the poor drunken
doctor. Mr. Burnett called upon the doctor at his
residence, and was courteously received. Dr. Mitchell,
although a drunkard, was a gentleman in manners and
bearing.


Mr. Burnett began by telling him the story of his own
early life, his fondness and craving for the drink, and his
misery and utter despair. And, then, of his being
influenced by a Christian lady to give up the drink and
sign the pledge. Then he told him of the terrible
struggle he had, and how he, having fallen more than
once or twice, by God’s grace won the victory.
He also told of the efforts and prayers of his Quaker
friends to keep him in the right way ; and, best of all,
when he felt that God was at his hack in the struggle,
how the power came, and the blessed Spirit of God
illuminated his soul, and the crucified Jesus spoke peace
to his heart, and he had the victory.
‘‘ Oh,” said Mr. Burnett, with his eyes and face
sparkling with joy, “ it was then, dear doctor, that I felt
that Christ was mine, and that the cursed drink and the
devil had no longer power over me. Since that blessed
time it has been all glory with me. And now, my dear
doctor,” said Mr. 6.. “ my Jesus will do for you what he
did for Matthew Burnett.” “ Oh,” said he, if you would
give up the drink how happy you would make your dear
wife and daughter. I beseech you, let God work in your
heart, dear friend, while we pray to Him.” Down the
man of God knelt in the doctor’s little parlour, and soon
the old doctor was on his knees, and that prayer was
never forgotten.
Before many days Dr. Mitchell, the once miserable
drunkard, the public-house sponger, the laughing-stock
of the bar-parlour, to the surprise of every one who knew
him appeared on the temperance platform at one of Mr.
Burnett’s meetings in Ballarat, and confessed before God
and men that the devil’s chains had been snapped, that
his soul was free, that Christ Jesus had spoken peace to
his heart, and made the poor drunkard whole.
Hallelujah !
It was impossible not to notice the change in the old
doctor. He had, as Mr. Burnett said, turned right-about-
face, and to the end of his life he kept his pledge and
solemn vow, and glorified God by a life noticeable for its
devotedness to God’s service.


The writer visited the dear old man the day he died.
As he talked of the great change he had experienced, he
said—“ Silverpen, lam going to die to-day, but in sure
and certain hope of a glorious resurrection to everlasting
life.” Then turning round to me, he said —“ My dear
friend, send at once for Mr. Burnett. Wire to him—
‘ Dr. Mitchell is dying. He wishes you to come at once.' ”
I did so.
That afternoon Mr. Burnett reached Ballarat, and was
soon by the bedside of his dying friend, “ The valley of
the shadow of death,” said the dying man, “ has no
terrors for me, for God is with me. His rod and His staff
they support and comfort me.”
As Mr. Burnett prayed, and held the hand of the dear
old doctor, the redeemed and ransomed soul of Dr.
Mitchell, the once miserable inebriate, but now gloriously
saved sinner, passed away to be for ever with the Lord.
Tor years after, every time Mr. Burnett came to
Ballarat, he would visit the doctor’s grave in the Old
Cemetery, and with uncovered head and tear-bedeu ed
cheek tell out to whoever accompanied him how Christ
accepted, and forgave, and kept till the hour of his death
the soul of a poor sinner, who seemed to be lost in the
maelstrom of drink, but who, yielding his all to the
“ Sinner’s Friend,” found in Him a sure hiding-place
from the tempest, and a safe rock of defence in the day of
temptation.
LITTLE JEMMY.
history of Mr. Burnett’s successes would
be nowhere without giving an account of
Little Jemmy. The son of a gentleman in a
high position in one of the cities of the old
country, he arrived in Victoria in the early


fifties, and like many others found himself on the
Ballarat Goldfields. He first took to digging at the
u Eureka,” but did not succeed.
There was about this time much trouble and dissatis-
faction re the frontage system on the Main-road. Every
one did seemingly as they liked. Take all you can and
the Devil look after your neighbour was the then correct
ticket.
But J. B. (or Little Jemmy) thought otherwise, and
notwithstanding great opposition he fought the question
out fairly and well, and in the end was backed up by the
Government authorities, who established strict and
equitable laws with regard to pegging out frontages along
the main line of roads or thoroughfares.
Grog shanties abounded ; they were everywhere
Almost every other piece of land on one side of the
Main-road, Ballarat, was a sly grog shop. It is not to be
wondered at, therefore, that the fussy “ Little Jemmy ”
drank more than was good for him, and eventually
became one of the worst drunkards on the goldfield.
His education helped him to get plenty of “ lush ” on
the cheap ; for if anything was wanted in the scribbling
line here was the “ blooming ” man (as many of the
diggers would say) that could do it.
I believe I am right in saying J. B. was one of the first
men employed in the Telegraph Department, Ballarat,
and afterwards, with Duncan Gillies (now the Honorable)
and others, a member and Chairman of the Mining
Board. When Matthew Burnett reached Ballarat he
heard before long of Little Jemmy ; and just like him,
and his nice way of getting at special cases of this kind,
had a casual chat with J. B. somewhere on the Main-
road.
Mr. Burnett had heard of Little Jemmy’s cleverness
with the pen, and the thought flashed through his
mind—lf I could but get this splendid, clear-headed little
fellow in my wake I would assuredly fix him up, and,
please God, for a certainty rescue him from the drink
curse.


Their first talk was a most interesting one to both
parties, about mining and miners, and the different
modes of getting out the gold. Then about the general
habits of the gold-diggers in the great temptations they
had presented to them in a land where money was so
plentiful. Eventually the drink traffic was touched
upon, and the hopes indulged in by Mr. Burnett that
many of these horny-handed sons of toil would give up
the drink and join the Temperance Army, and thus
establish in this new country sobriety and godliness, as
the true moral standards of a Christian people.
After many casual meetings, Mr. Burnett said to J. B,
one day —“ Now, my good friend, lam sure you, as an
educated man, must see the misery caused by the drink,
and how necessary it is to try by every means in our
power to counteract the evil. Now, will you do me a
great kindness ? I am lecturing here and at Sebastopol
every night, and am so badly off for a reporter. If you
would be so kind as to act for me at my meetings I would
take it as a very great personal favour.”
“ I will do it with pleasure, Mr. Burnett,” said Jemmy
“ Then,” said Burnett, “ come to-night, and make a
beginning as my ‘ Press reporter.’ ”
The promise was given, hands shaken on it, and they
parted.
Little Jemmy turned up at the evening meeting, and
the next morning a really excellent report appeared in
one of the Ballarat dailies.
Before the week was out J. B. had signed the pledge of
abstinence from intoxicants, and eventually became one
of the brightest characters in the crowd of teetotal
advocates on the goldfields.
Well and faithfully he kept his vow, and was the
means by his out and out advocacy of “ total abstinence ”
of getting scores of the most drunken characters on the
field to join the teetotal ranks.
Mr. J. B. (Little Jemmy no more) was, with the writer
and others, one of those who first introduced the Good
Templar Order into Ballarat. He was the Deputy of the
Grand Chief Templar, when the writer was District


Deputy. He acted Chief in opening scores of Lodges,
and did honour to the cause of teetotalism and Good
Templarisrn during his residence in Ballarat.
After a few years he left for Sydney, New South
Wales, was there appointed Secretary of the Temperance
Hall and Good Templar Order, took a most active part in
all branches of temperance work, and as a fitting reward
for his splendid work among the “ masses ’’ was appointed
by the then Government a Police Magistrate for New
South Wales ; lived a sober, God-fearing life, and only a
year or two ago died in harness, respected by the Govern-
ment under which he served and his colleagues in every
department of the Government service.
Was not Matthew Burnett right, dear reader, when he
said—“ If I but get J. B. in my teetotal net I believe he
will keep his pledge, and be one who will be true and
faithful so long as God gives him breath, and bring glory
to God and the temperance cause.


w
•
I
♦ 1+ .
t


BIG BEN, THE WRESTLER.
had so often heard Mr. Burnett talk lovingly
'"l® I of *' Big Ben ’ the Wrestler .” that I felt anxious
J S to hear the particulars of his conversion more
!) than thiity-two years ago under Mr. Burnett’s
< 'Sr preaching.
Mr. Burnett was located when in Clunes at
the house of Mrs. Henry Davies, a very excellent lady,
who during his stay in her house received the
‘‘sanctifying power,” and up to the present day blesses
dear Matthew Burnett for directing her in her aspirations
after the blessing of holiness.
In order to get the information direct anent “Bin
Ben” I wrote him to Clunes, asking him to kindly lee
me know the particulars.
As he could not see me himself he sent his
sister-in-law, Mrs. Davies, to my house, and for over an
hour I listened to the story of “ Big Ben’s ” conversion
“ I will never forget it,” says Mrs. Davies. “ Upwards
of 600 were brought into Church fellowship during Mr.
Burnett’s stay in Clunes, and I really believe if he had
but stayed a few weeks longer there would not have
been an unconverted man or woman in the place.
“ My dear [Mrs Davies is a Cornishwornan ], the place
was on fire with enthusiasm. Every meeting souls were
saved. Many of the worst cases in the township
bowed before the Cross.
“ Dear old ‘ Uncle John ’ did the praying, while I, with
my new found ‘ love.’ helped on the good work all J
could. At one of the evening meetings ‘ Uncle John ’
never ceased praying (I believe he did so night and day),
when all of a sudden, as the meeting proceeded, he
jumped to his feet, and cried— ‘ ’Tis done, glory to God,


’tis done.’ When questioned next day as to his reason
for this ebulition of feeling, he said —‘ My dear, did you
not see the woman and two girls who sat behind me
rush up to the penitent form immediately after I sat
down? Well, I was praying for them all the evening.
I never looked at them, but they were in my mind as I
pleaded with God for their salvation ; and as I jumped
up I felt God had answered my prayers. In fact, I
was just as sure as if the dear Lord had said tome
‘ Uncle fohn , your prayers are answered' and imme-
diately I rose, as you noticed, and cried—* ’Tis done, tis
done ! Glory be to God !’ Do you wonder at it now,
dear Mrs. Davies ? lam sure you do not.’
“ Clunes Methodists,’ says Mrs. Davies, “ have a right
to sing the praises of dear, sainted ‘ Uncle John, the
praying man' while they talk of ‘ Big Ben Angwin ’
and dear Matthew Burnett.”
“ The night ‘Big Ben’ went up to the penitent form
I will never forget,” says Mrs. Davies. “The meeting—
a glorious one—had nearly closed, when up the side of
the chapel walked —or rushed, I ought to say —‘ Big
Ben.’ He was quite a stranger to me, but he rushed
up and fell flat on his face before the penitent-form,
crying for mercy.
“ I could hear the folk saying— ‘ Bless me ;is the
world coming to an end ? If it isn’t Big Ben, the
Cornish wrestler.’ Well, sir, I assure you the little
Chapel shook again, and before long Ben found ‘ peace,’
and shouted aloud —‘ I have it; Glory to God ! Mr.
Burnett. I have it. Christ’s blood cleanseth me from all
The next day the publicans of the town laughed at the
idea of Burnett catching such a ‘ big fish ’ in his net.
“ Big Ben Angwin never did things by halves. That
same morning he went the round of the ‘ pubs.’, and to
each of them told the story of his conversion. At the
same time telling them he had done with the public-
houses for ever, ‘ And,’ said he, ‘ don’t think that I am
going to make this an excuse for not paying up my grog
score. Every penny I owe you, you shall have.'


And before a month had passed away every “ swill-tub
retailer” had to put “ paid” to Big Ben’s grog account —
and, as Big Ben would say, “ If they liked, a big hallelujah
after it.
Before Ben’s conversion he did not know the letters of
the alphabet. Mrs Davies said to Mr. Burnett, “Now,
Mr. Burnett, Ben must be taught to read, and I will
teach him and she did, for, when Mr Burnett returned
to Clunes, twelve months after, Ben could read the new
testament through, and asked Mr. Burnett what chapter
he would read for him. After hearing Ben read a chapter
in St. John’s Gospel, Mr. Burnett jumped from the sofa,
ran into the room where Mrs. Davies was sitting, and
with uplifted hands, he said, —“ It is really wonderful!
Marvellous! Wonderful!” “Yes,” said Mrs. Davies,
“ That is Holy Ghost teaching, Mr. Burnett.”
To-day “Big Ben” still lives in Clunes, a devoted
follower of the Calvary’s Christ, and will, no doubt, end at
last in a triumphant shout of glory to the Lamb who was
slain.




“YANKEE BILL.”
A * W * P ’ Ward was one of a thousand—a
rough diamond, Matthew Burnett called
" When the rollicking, whisky loving Bill
ff first heard Mr. Burnett at a public lecture, he,
' _ with others were there to have a lark. Bill
was so tickled with what he heard that he wrote a ribald
song about the “ cold water fanatic.” It had a couple of
lines something like the following:—
We’ll hang old Burnett on a crab apple tree,
As we go marching on.
Aftei attending several religious and other meetings
“ Yankee Bill ” was captured, and after a while he turned
out quite a popular temperance lecturer, and made as
gieat a stii in the publicans camp as Matthew Burnett had
done.
The tame ot \ ankee Bill was heralded everywhere j
lijs lectures were wonderfully taking, and his stories of the
old drinking days most amusing. He kept his auditory on
the laugh all the time, and in about two years “ Yankee
Bill ” claimed to have taken, on his own account, no less
than twenty thousand pledges from some of the heaviest
drinkers in Victoria.
He still lives in the neighbourhood of Ballarat, and
keeps the temperance pledge inviolate up to the present
hour. Mr Ward issued one or more temperance song
books containing several songs of his own composing, and
by Bis earnest endeavours and enthusiasm “ teetotally ”
gave the Burnett revival movement a splendid push ahead.
A rough and ready speaker, he hit straight out from
the shoulder, and with such common-sense force as to


convince the most inveterate drunkards, and cause
them to give up forever the intoxicating cup, and spend
their hard-earned wages, once put in the landlords’ till,
upon their wives and families, bringing peace, joy, and
prosperity into many a hundred of the homes ofdiggerdom.
Matthew Burnett paraded the reformed “ Yankee Bill ”
almost everywhere he lectured before his great audiences.
The story of the capture of this celebrated and much-
talked-of teetotal trophy, was always listened to with great
attention.
I was not surprised when in England, Ireland and
Scotland to hear the characters I have before named, with
the inevitable A. W. P. Ward trotted out, and reviewed
before large audiences. The recital, thrilling as it always
was, took just as well with English, Irish, and Scotch, folk
as it did in our own Australias.
I rather ieel inclined to hazard the opinion that the
good Matthew Burnett classed ‘‘Yankee Bill” among his
greatest victories.
When Bill turned right round, his own friends could
scarcely believe it. No one ever thought the rowdy,
rollicking, yet warm-hearted, ‘‘Yankee Bill” could ever
be tamed.
Bill was a great dancer ; the publicans when they found
that they had lost one of the great attractions of their bars
and dance rooms, were very wrath, as “Bill” was the cus-
tomer, above all others, who never forgot to pay his grog
score, or stump-up if necessary when he found a mate
unable to do it for himself.
The late Wm. Stitt Jenkins, of Geelong (the Tem-
perance Poet), wrote the following lines in the
Temperance News :
A. W. P. WARD.
“ A brand plucked from the burning” here behold ;
A diaprond in the rough, and speaker bold
For that dear Master he did once defy,
But in whose cause he now will live and die—
Lives for poor trembling sinners still to plead,
Lives for the drunkard’s soul to intercede;
Wanders the earth to save where’er he can ;
A heart of gold—a sterling, honest man.


And Ward no longer drains the cup of woe ;
No more for ever men behold him go
To those dark dens and fell abodes of sin
Where fiends exultant for fresh victims grin.
Ah ! no ; our brother surely now we find
Clothed and erect and in his own right mind ;
And through our land, with earnest voice and pen,
He strives,to save from drink-deluded men.
And he can write, and well can sing his sono- s ,
For many gifts to this our friend belongs ;
His jokes and anecdotes that never fail
“ To point a moral and adorn a tale.”
And thus, with heart resolved, he journeys o’er
A land far distant from his native shore—
Until the time when, placed beneath the sod,
Shall rest in peace this servant of His God.


97/r. 97/. tturnctt, 7567.
(Photo by H. GLENNY).


THE STORY OF “BURNETT’S
FARM.”
FEW years ago I travelled extensively
throughout our Australian colonies. On one
of our very hot, sultry days, I was driving in
rny buggy through a rough bit of country.
The day was a regular “ brickfielder.”
I had driven over twenty miles that
morning, and felt as much inclined for a rest as my good
old horse ‘‘ Gipsy ” did. To my great delight I saw in
the distance signs of life.
On the summit of a small hill I noticed a neat building,
surrounded by a new post and rail fence. Cattle were
grazing about, and the horses were gathered under a
clump of trees to shade themselves from the rays of the
sun. As I drove up I saw a rough but kindly-looking
man taking down the slip-panel.
“ Good morning, sir !” said he
“Good morning !” I replied.
“ Have you come far, sir?”
“ About twenty miles ; and to tell you the truth I feel
tired, dusty, and thirsty.”
“Well, sir,” said the farmer, “ drive up to the stable.
You are heartily welcome to stay and refresh yourself,
and we will look after your horse if you are too tired to
do that yourself. But first let me tell you that this is a
real cold water selection—no intoxicants kept on the
premises .”
I thanked the honest old fellow for his kind invitation,
and soon had the horse unharnessed and comfortably in-
stalled in the stable before a plentiful supply of oats.”


“ Come inside, sir, now that you have seen to your
horse,” said my cheery host. “My wife will soon have a
‘billy’ of tea ready, and that, with a fresh scone, will
help to brighten you up a bit.” It was a typical bush
home.
On the parlour sofa I was glad to stretch ray weary
limbs, and while doing so I congratulated my enter-
tainer on his good fortune in getting such a fine block of
land in such an out-of-the-way place.
“ Oh, sir,” he said, “ God has dealt very bountifully
with me. He is gracious and merciful, bless His name. ’
1 saw at once that, although I had a rough farmer, I
had a good man to deal with, and joined him in saying,
“ Those that trust in the Lord will not want any good
thing ” “That is it, that is it,” said he. “No good thing
will °He withhold from him that walketh up rightly.
Bless His dear name.”
On the table I noticed a large album, and turning over
its pages I came to a portrait that brought a smile to my
face. This is wonderful,” I exclaimed. “ Here, away
out in the Australian bush —almost outside of civilization,
you have the photograph of a very old friend of mine—
Mr. Matthew Burnett, the Evangelist.”
“ Do you know him, sir ?”
“Do I know him ? Why he is one of the oldest friends
I have in Victoria.”
As I said this the old man made for the door, and
called out, “ Mary, Mary, be quick with the tea, and see
that the scone is nicely toasted and buttered, for this
gentleman tells me that he is a friend of our dear
Matthew Burnett.”
Soon a tidy, happy-looking woman of about forty
summers made her appearance, and after a formal intro-
duction she helped me to a cup of tea, and said, “ So you
know dear Mr. Burnett, sir ! John and I thank God
every hour of the day that we ever heard his voice. Do
you know we call this selection of ours ‘ Burnett’s
Farm.’ ”


I expressed my surprise, and asked her to tell me how
they came to give that name to their selection. “ Surely,”
I said, “ there must be some interesting circumstances
that caused you to do so.”
“ Indeed there are.” said she, “ but take another cup of
tea, and while you sip it John and I will try and tell you
all about it.
“It is only a few years since John and I lived in a little
town, not a hundred miles from where we are now
located. We were poor, sad, and miserable. The drink
curse had devastated our once-comfortable home, and left
our cupboard bare. John was always a kind, good soul
when sober, but when the drink was in him he did many
foolish things, and the drink fiend held him tightly in
its grasp. Almost every shilling he earned went to the
public-house. But all that is past and gone, thank
God.
“ Well, sir, we were as low as we possibly could go.
1 here was not an article of furniture in our little home.
We did not know what to do. fohn had been dis-
charged from his employment for drunkenness, and in
my despair I called on the Lord Lr help.
“ Blessed be His holy name ! He heard me, and sent
deliveaance in a way of which I had never dreamed.
“It was Saturday night. Never shall I forget it.
John had been out all day, and I sat at home without a
particle of food in the house. It seemed as if I were
forsaken by my neighbours, my friends, and my God. I
tried to pray, but the words stuck in my throat. All I
could say was, ‘ God be merciful to me a sinner.’ About
nine o’clock I heard a step outside, and looking up as the
door opened (expecting to see my husband drunk, as
usual) I saw John sober. ‘ Something must have hap-
pened,’ I thought to myself. * What is it, John ? Tell
me quickly. Why do you smile, when you know that I
have not tasted food for twenty-four hours ? Oh, for
God’s sake speak to me, or my heart will break.’
“ Just then, sir, I saw the big tears rolling down his
cheeks, and in another instant I was in his arms.


“ ‘ Mary,’ he said, ‘ this is too much for me. God has
pardoned all my sins. I got converted to-night at the
little chapel yonder, and have signed the pledge. There
is no more public-house for me. From this night lam a
new man in Christ Jesus. Mary, I have taken Christ as
my Saviour. He will be your Saviour, too, if you will
only trust Him.’
“I cried aloud, amid my tears, ‘Thank God, thank
God. John !’ In my excitement I shouted and danced
for joy. God had indeed been merciful to me.
“ John was much overcome after making his confes-
sion. and siding down on a box (we had no chairs then,
sir) he told me all about how it happened.
“ Said he, ‘ I had been in the bush all day, and as it
drew near evening I came near the township, and
strol ed about the outskirts, hungry and sad, with not a
farthing in the world, even to buy bread As it grew
darker I went into the town, and wandering up the
street I was attracted by singing, which seemed to come
from a little church close by. I listened. Ah, the words
were well known to me. Often had I heard my dear
mother, now in heaven, sing them—
Depth of mercy, can there be,
Mercy still reserved for me ?
Can my God His wrath forbear ;
Me, the chief of sinners, spare.
I have long withstood His grace,
Long provoked Him to His face;
Would not hearken to His calls ;
Grieved Him by ten thousand falls.
“ Then a voice inside the building said—‘ Poor sinner,
God help you if that be your cry. Oh, friends, let us
sing the words again, said he, ‘ and may God hear the
pitiful cry.
“ The tears were running down my cheeks, and I felt
as if my heart were breaking.
“I crept into a back seat, and listened to the Evange-
list, who said—‘ Ido not care how much you may have
sinned, or how great a sinner you are ; though your sins
be black as hell itself ; though they be in number as the


sands on the seashore, God, for Christ’s sake, can just
now rid you of them for ever. Oh, if you poor,
miserable, sin-sick soul would only believe it.
Weary, sin-burdened one, come along to the peni-
tent form, and kneeling, humbly ask God, for Christ’s
sake, to pardon you now. He will do it. None need
perish , Christ hath died.
“ Then with great earnestness he said, ‘I feel in my
heart that there is some one here to-night who is sick of
sin, some one who is crying out in his heart, ‘ Oh that I
knew where I might find Him.’ Well, my friend the
Saviour is here, ready and waiting to forgive. Come to
him, 1 Just as you are, without one plea, but that the
Saviour died for you.’ Oh, do come, but come at once.”
I could stand it no longer sir. I seizea my hat and
rushed out, but as I walked about in the bush at the back
of the chapel, I could distinctly hear the words, ‘ The
Saviour is ready , and wailing to forgive ,’ ringing in my
ears. ' & &
“ Once more I ventured inside. Mr. Burnett . for it was
he who conducted the meeting), came along and spoke to
me He told me of Jesus, the sin-bearer, ready to receive
me, however sinful I had been. He urged me at once to
decide for Christ, and not quench the Holy Spirit that
was assuredly working in me, and striving to bring me to
Himself. 4 Only trust Him,' he said, 4 He will save you
now.' I followed the Evangelist to the front, and
kneeling down, cried for mercy.
There and then, Christ revealed Himself to me, and
washed all my sins away in His precious blood.
“Well, sir, my wife and T went to the meeting next
night, and when we left, we were both happy in a Saviour’s
love.
“ When it became known throughout the township that
Jack the Cornishman and his wife were converted, great
was the joy among God’s people. Offers of help came
plentifully in. I soon got work, and began to save money.
My wife and I were as happy as t\\ o “ big sunflowers.” for
we both lived up to our privileges, and God smiled upon
us. ■


We attached ourselves to the Methodist Church, and
for years we have both worked for God, telling to every-
one with whom we come in contact what a dear Saviour
we have found.
Step by step we mounted the ladder of prosperity, God
being at our right hand.
“ After a few months I was urged by my old master to
take the management of one of his establishments.
After several years of honest toil, I bought this farm, and
you can see that it is well stocked.
“ Our God has been to my dear wife, and I, both a Sun and
a Shield. He has kept us to this hour, and will keep us
until we are called, to go up higher and see the King in
His beauty.
“ The drink, the curse that once brought ruin to our
happy home, has no place with us. Not a drop of the
vile stuff has ever crossed our threshold, and by God’s
grace never will.
“ Now, sir, when you have heard the story of our rescue
from the clutches of the devil, do you wonder at Jane and
I, calling this little earthly paradise of ours ‘ Burnett’s
Farm ’ ? ”


» *




“COCKNEY TOM.’ 5
N the ist May, 1881, I received by post a volume
entitled, “ The Autobiography of Cockney
Tom.” On the fly-leaf, written by Mr. Matthew
Burnett, is the following—“ To my old and
faithful friend ‘ Silverpen,’ Ballarat, Victoria,
who has raised his voice and pen against the
terrible, dangerous drinking customs of society in Victoria
and the colonies, for more than a quarter of a century, and
whose efforts have been blessed to many of his fellow
colonists, please dear friend, accept the autobiography of
‘ Cockney Tom ’ (Professor Bastard), one of the many men
rescued by my efforts under God from the vortex of intem-
perance in this province. With Matthew Burnett’s kindest
regards and best wishes.”
“ Matthew Burnett, Adelaide, South Australia,
“April 28th, 1881.”
The author, Professor Bastard, had dedicated his
interesting narrative as follows—“ This work respectfully
dedicated to Mr. Matthew Burnett, the great Temperance
Advocate, as a slight token of esteem by his admiring
friend, the author.”
“ Cockney Tom ” was the well known Professor Bastard,
of the Adelaide turkish baths, and swimming master of
to the Government Model Schools. Strong drink had
been the curse of his life. I cannot do better than give a


few lines from the epilogue, at the end of his book. I
don’t say much for the poetic effusion, nor for the correct
rythm of the lines, but it has the right ring about it. He
writes :
Now as an author, I humbly strive to win,
Old pupils help, come, gratify my whim
And float me on the literary tide,
And make your “Old Professor” gratified.
Grant me your patronage, for ’tis most sure
This is the first fruits of my “ Water cure
Before dear Matthew Burnett came, my nose
Did blush and blossom, like the budding rose ;
And conscientiously I took my beer
As well as any in this southern sphere.
With festive glass, I strove to drown my care, —
Reflect upon the past, I scarcely dare ;
Now in the path of temperance, a man,
I sober tread, free from intoxicants debasing ban.
I will, however, allow the professor to speak for himself.
In his autobiography he writes :
“ After I lost my wife, I kept myself alive with a free
indulgence in company, and nobblers , both of which
stimulants I have since discovered were woefully deceiving.
My end seemed to be fast approaching, and I began to
think seriously over my past life, and came to the
conclusion that, to a very great extent, it had been a huge
mistake, and that now it had become a case of life or death
with me, and that, whichever it was to be, rested entirely
with myself. To be, or not to be,” that was the question.
I had no strength of my own left, upon which to act,
and I felt that, unless superhuman help came to me, I
was a doomed man. I secretly, in my own way, prayed
for help, and it came in a way I little expected.
Now, about this time, there arrived in Adelaide, a man
by the name of Matthew Burnett. He brought a good
character for benevolence and self-sacrificing work with
him from Victoria, where he had spent eighteen years of
his life in preaching the word of God, and advocating the
temperance cause. He had many thousands of converts.
Some people in Adelaide looked upon him, at first, as one
of the many adventurers, who had come over from
Melbourne with the idea of doing better here, but they


misunderstood him, as it was quite clear, after listening to
him, that was not his aim. It was no pecuniary or sordid
motive that brought Mr. Burnett to South Australia ;
but the grand object of his life evidently was to rescue
from the grave, and lead to God and everything good,
those who were being allured, step by step, to destruction,
through indulgence in the cursed drinking customs of
this country.
At this time I met an old chum of mine named Dyer.
11 Have you been to hear this man. Hurnett. said he ? ”
“ No,” I replied, “You don’t catch me going to hear such
humbugs spout. Come along, old boy, and let us have a
drink.”
“Well, said he,” I will just have one with you;
but I tell you Pom, and I mean it, I am going to
give up the “ booze.”
“ I went to hear Burnett,” said he, “ and my eyes were
opened. Burnett is, without doubt, a wonderful man.
Why there was one woman there who fainted—his
‘ Life Pictures ’ had such an effect upon her. He (Burnett)
is a great man, and no mistake, and I tejl you once again,
Tom, I intend, please God, to join the teetotaller: next
week.”
“ But just have one ‘ nobbier ’ more with me for
old acquaintance sake,” said Dyer, “ You, Tom, paid for
the last, you know, so that I will pay for this.”
Then turning facing me, he said, “ Will you, Tom. join
‘ scallawags ’ if I do ”
“ I’ll think it over,” said I. I did think it over, but
that was all, until I got so bad that I had to send for my
friend, Dr. Way (son of Chief Justice Way). When he
came and found me in bed, he said, very sadly, “Ah !
Tom, you have been at it again ; ” and I could not deny it,
for it was too true. The doctor gave me good advice
and physic. I swallowed the latter, but forgot to take the
former. I stayed at home for several days, and got a
little better, and tried hard to knock off my bad habit ;
but although I was fully aware of the fact that my frequent
indulgence was the cause of my illness, I had not the
resolution to abstain from the drink.


A few days after this Mr. Burnett paid a visit to the
workmen at the railway works, to give them a short
lecture during the dinner hour.
A great number were present besides the workmen, and
amongst them was the writer, “ Cockney Tom/’ I went
there merely as a looker-on, and to kill time.
The subject of the lecture was “Yankee Bill/’ a man
who at one time wrote some lines to Mr. Burnett,
threatening to hang him on a wattle or a ciab-apple tree.
He afterwards thought better of it, and became one of Mr.
Burnett’s best friends, working with him in the good
cause of temperance.
The life of “ Yankee Bill ” is a lesson most people might
learn. I took a great interest in the lecture, and studied
well the good advice it contained, and it seemed to me to
go down much better than physic. A day or two after
as I was taking a glass of ale, my son Charles came to me
and said, “ bather, there is a gentleman waiting to see you.
He says he don’t want any money, but he wants to give
you “something good.”
“ I’ll be there,” said I, and I went to him at once.
“ Your pleasure, sir,” said I.
“ Well the truth is,” said he, “ I heard you were unwell*
and called to see if you were better. You will remember
Mr. Giles, who used to deliver letters to you some time
back.”
“ I think I do,” said I, and its very kind of you to call.
I have been very ill for some time, but I know the cause
of it. I take too much drink.
“ I thought so,” said he. “ Now if you were to join
Mr. Burnett’s crusade, it would make a new man of you.
I have been a teetotaller myself for the last two years, and
can, therefore, speak from experience.”
“ I have a very good mind to try it,” said I.
“ Why don’t you say, at once, that you will try it ?”
said Mr. Giles. “ You will never repent it as long as you
live. With your permission, I will call in and introduce
Mr. Burnett to you. He is a very pleasant man to speak
to.”


“ Well, you may,’’ said I, “ but, mind, I do not promise
to take the pledge.”
“Good afternoon,” said Mr. Giles, “ keep yourself quiet,
Professor. I can see you are in a very weak state ; but
you will get over that in time, if you follow Mr. Burnett’s
advice.”
The next day, while I was indulging in a “ long
sleever” of ale, my daughter Grace rushed into my room,
and said, “ Here is Mr. Burnett come to see you, Dad. ’
“ Ask him in,” said I. “ I will see him directly.”
At that moment I was engaged in warming my beer.
I, however, left it in the glass on the mantelpiece, and went
to see Mr. Burnett.
“ How do you do ?” said he. “lam so glad to see you.
and have much pleasure in making your acquaintance.
Professor ; for I have heard a great deal about you.”
“ A great deal no good, I fear,” said I, “ unless it has
been to landlords of hotels.”
“You mistake me,” said Mr. Burnett. You have
many good friends who fear that, in your love for society,
you are yielding rather too freely to indulgence in drink,
and positively injuring your health by it They don’t
want to lose you yet, and they tell me, that they are
heartily sorry to see such a marked difference in your
looks ; and I tell you. my friend, it cannot positively last
long. I have witnessed many cases like yours, and
candidly speaking, the remedy rests entirely with yourself.
There are many days of health and happiness, please God,
in store for you, if you will only embrace the present
opportunity. Pledge me your word, now , that you will
give up the drink, and all that I promise is yours—peace
of mind and good health.”
“ Well,” said I, “ Mr. Burnett, its worth trying, but if
the sudden knocking off kills me (as many say it will), I
shall have caused my own death by doing so.”
“ That’s all nonsense,” says Mr. Burnett, “ you try it.
and you will find that I am right, and they are wrong.”
“I have thought over the subject pretty well,” said I,
“ and I think I will give it a trial.”


“ Good ! ” said Mr. Giles, who was present at the inter-
view, “ sign at once."
“Oh ! do, father,” said my daughter Grace.”
“ Will you sign, if I do, Grace,” said I.
“ Yes, father, that I will.”
Mr. Burnett thereupon produced the pledge card and I
signed it, and my three sons and daughters have since
joined, together with my three servants. It is scarcely
necessary to say that there was great rejoicing. I threw
my glass of ale in the fire, and I am glad to say that I have
not touched alcoholic liquors since.”
I then described to Mr. Burnett how the desire for
drink increased, and the more I drank the more I wanted.
“To prevent that craving,” said Mr. Burnett, “I will
give you a very excellent and he gave me the
particulars.”
“ My dear friend,” continued Mr. Burnett, “ I will call
and see you again in the course of a day or two, and in
the mean time, take as much nourishing food as you can.
Good-bye.”
“ Good-bye, I will call in and see you,” said Mr. Giles.
The first day and night was a sore trial for me. “ Oh,
how I longed for beer and nobblers ; but I had given my
word, and I determined I would not break it. I had lost
my appetite, but managed to take a cup of cocoa, and a
small slice of toast, and was so reduced in body, that when
I weighed myself I was alarmed to find I had dwindled
down from 10 stone 4 lb. to 8 stone lb.”
The next morning Mr. Giles came in, “ What sort of a
night did you pass ? ” said he.
“ Very bad,” replied I.
“You will be better to-night, after you have taken the
medicine,which is not nauseous; you will find your appetite
return, and it will make you sleep as well.” I found this
quite true.
*Full particulars re the “Remedy" to stay the “craving” for strong
drink can be had by applying to H. Glenny, ],P., 212 Victoria Street,
Ballarat East, Victoria, Australia.


Mr. Burnett called on the Friday, according to promise,
and gave me a few comforting words, which tended to
encourage and strengthen me under my severe trial.
Every day I improved.
“ In the course of a month I found myself getting the
mastery of the cursed passion that had enslaved me so
long. And alas ! not only me, but hundreds of thousands
besides, and I intend, with God’s help, to continue stead-
fast in my resolution to promote the good cause of
temperance, and to follow the example of Mr. A. W. P.
Ward, one of Mr. Burnett’s converts, the veritable
‘Yankee Bill’ before mentioned, whose warm advocacy
induced no less than 20,000 to take the pledge.”
“ This splendid testimony to the work of Matthew
Burnett I have given word for word as it is printed in the
little volume issued, in 1881. Since then ‘ Cockney Tom’
has joined the majority, and up to the time of his death,
kept his pledge inviolate. His name is therefore worthy
to be recorded in the list of Matthew Burnett's temperance
trophies.”


“DRUNKEN JACK.”
HEARD an incident or two the other day in a
railway carriage from Mr. Glasson, anent Mr.
Pf Burnett’s meetings, at the Black Lead, near
Ballarat.
--ops At one of Burnett’s first meetings there
seemed to be nothing of an encouraging nature.
Poor Burnett was in “cloudland he had preached from
the text —“ the Master is come and calleth for thee.”
The people sat like “ icicles,” and as a consequence he
seemed to be almost tongue tied. He left the pulpit after
the sermon asking one of the brethren to close the
service. Retiring to the room at the back of the chapel,
he prayed for five minutes, then, with tears streaming down
his face, he returned to the body of the chapel, requested
a brother to give out the hymn—
My Jesus I love thee Thee, I know Thou art mine,
For Thee all the pleasures of earth I resign, &c.
Then walking up and down the aisle, he pointed to one
after another and impressively said, “ He calleth for thee ,
He calleth for theef and so all round the chapel. Five
minutes after there was not an occupant of the seats—all
seemed to be impelled by some invisible force to rush to
the penitent form. Then my informant said Burnett’s
face literally shone, and before he left the church there
were but a few of the congregation who had not decided
for God. All that night Mr. Burnett’s room resounded
with praises. “ Glorys ” and “Hallelujahs’ could be
heard as he knelt by his bedside, and it was not before the
morning had come and the sun was high in the heavens
that the weary evangelist lay down on his couch and fell
asleep.
Mr. Glasson drove Mr. Burnett out to Mount Mercer
from the Black Lead, to a squatter’s station (“ Sides’. ")
The congregation numbering about twenty, living in the


Life and Labors of Matthew Burnett. 61
vicinity, was composed of Presbyterians, Church of
England, Congregationalists, and Methodists, all anxious
to hear the evangelist. Before the service was concluded
every personin the “ big kitchen’ where it was held, were
on their knees crying for mercy, most of them left rejoicing.
Just before Mr. Burnett reached there, there was an
exceptionally extraordinary case. A terrible, drunken
fellow called “Jack” resided there in a hut all alone, Jack
was one of the worst drunkards in the place. He 100 had
heard of Mr. Burnett’s work, one evening he heard
singing,, both behind and before him—seemingly in the air.
Jack said he thought he was going mad with the drink ;
but he could not find out where the hymn-singing crowd
were. He turned into his bunk, but the singing continued.
The next day, on his going outside, the singing was again
heard ; getting frightened, he went up to Mr. Glasson’s
and told him the story. It was Mr. Glasson’s opinion
the man was taking delirium tremens. However,
“ Drunken Jack,” in a complete state of unrest, went out
into the bush to cut wood, and it was just the same there
—voices singing in the air, only different gospel hymns.
In telling the story, Jack said, “he could stand it no
longer.” He felt he must decide for heaven or hell, and in
a moment he threw down the axe, fell flat on his face on
the ground, and cried lustily to God to save him. “ And
He did,” Jack would say, “for at that moment ‘it’ came,
and I was happy” —
Just as my all I ventured on the atoning blood,
The Holy Spirit entered and I was born of God.
A six o’clock prayer meeting was started, and for a long
time kept up. Many a morning, Mr. Glasson says, Jack
was there all alone, pleading with God for the salvation
of the Black Lead folk. He did not mind who came or
who stayed away. God the Father was there. God the
Holy Ghost was there. The Blessed Jesus was there—
and Jack was there , “and a blessed time,” he would say,
“ we often have at the morning prayer “ meetin’.”
Jack has long since gone to glory, but those who knew
him in Mr. Burnett’s time, will never forget “ Converted
Jack,” the Black Lead miner.


The ButtPa Bupra Copper
CQioes.
WILL not soon forget an incident in connection
with the visit of Matthew Burnett to the Burra-
Burra copper mines, South Australia.
I had been visiting Adelaide; hearing my
friend Burnett was, figuratively speaking,
turning the Burra-Burra folk upside down, I
determined to go and see for myself how things were
going on.
It is so long ago, that I have almost forgotten how
far I travelled by train from Adelaide to get there ; but I
remember well getting out of the railway cars and taking
my seat in the mail cart, to be driven down to the
township. As I sat on the heap of mail bags, I asked the
driver if he could guide me to where I would find Mr.
Matthew Burnett, the Evangelist.
The old fellow’s face beamed again, as he said, “ That I
will, sur. Why sur, Maister Barnett, God bless him is
revolutionizing the place. Sinners are being saved,
drunkards are giving up the drink (and I am one of them),
and, sur, every blessed night at the Methodist chapel down
there, scores are crying for marcy to the dear Lord, and
getting it too.” The old driver had just stopped his
“ Wehicle,” as he called it, in front of a neat weatherboard
cottage where Mr. Burnett was staying, when I heard a
voice, as if in prayer. “That be he, sur. That be he.
He is a praying for a big ‘ take,’ the night.”
Just then I heard Mr. Burnett’s voice—“ Lord save to-
night by hundreds, let the poor drunkards be saved. Let
the swearers and blasphemers do so no more. Let all the


dear fathers’ and mothers’ hearts rejoice over erring b >ys
and girls accepting Thee as their Saviour. Oh, let Thy
kingdom come and hell o’erpower, and to Thy sceptre all
subdue. Lord hear prayer and answer, for Thy name’s
sake.”
Just then I alighted at the door and asked if Mr-
Burnett was inside—he heard and recognised my voice-
Out he rushed, clasping me in his arms, saying “ My dear
‘Silverpen,’ lam so glad you have come. () bless you,
there is a splendid work going on here. Every night
sinners saved and brought to God. Now come along with
me to the mid-day prayer meeting.”
As we arm-in-arm walked up the street, he told me
of the scores who had already acknowledged Christ as
their Saviour, and signed the temperance pledge.
He instanced several cases, and said—“ I feel there is
going to be a wonderful work in the little chapel to-night.
The place is stirred from centre fo circumference. The
inmates of every house I visited had something to tell me
of the blessed results of my visit. Many of the miners
have been at home to-day, crying for mercy, and scores
of them have been blessedly saved. Glory be to God !
Hallelujah ! ”
I did not go with Mr. Burnett to the afternoon meeting,
but promised I would do so at night.
When I arrived with him at the chapel in the evening
the place was literally packed, the Cornish element had
already started the singing, and things were evidently
going with a swing inside.
We got in by the back entrance. It was impossible
to do so by the front. Such a scene I never before
witnessed. The people male and female were in a high
state of excitement. Amens and Hallelujahs resounded
through the building. Mr. Burnett seemed bubbling up
with holy joy.
After he had spoken for about fifteen minutes, there
was a little confusion at the entrance door, three half-
drunken swagmen, shouting aloud, that they must get in


to see the fun. By sheer force they crushed their way in,
and for a few minutes seemed amused at what they saw
and heard.
Mr. Burnett’s attention was drawn to them by one of
the local brethren. He stopped short in his address and
called to them—“ Come along, my friends lam delighted
to see you. Come right up to the front. The friends
will make way and give you comfortable sitting room, so
that you may have a good time.”
After a little persuasion, they came to the front, and he
left the platform, shook hands, and welcomed them.
By-and-bye he talked to them as if they were the only
persons in the chapel. He showed them the enormity of
sin, the terrible ending to the sinner’s life if he did not
yield to the promptings of God’s Holy Spirit ; spoke of
the love of Christ, the great sin-bearer, “ In that, when we
were sinners, He, the Son of God, died for us,’ till the
three half-drunken men were completely broken down,
and actually bathed in tears. Mr. Burnett then asked them,
if they felt God speaking to them, there and then to make
a start for the new life, and jumping suddenly from the
platform, he begged them to give their hearts and lives to
God from that hour.
It was not long before there was a change in their
demeanour ; they seemed to be miraculously sobered, and
cried out in the anguish of their souls for God to have
mercy upon them; and presently, as I looked on and
wondered, one after the other stood up and testified that
the dark past of their lives was gone for ever ; that the
black catalogue of their offences had been blotted out, and
that Christ had forgiven and pardoned all their sins.
Such rejoicings, such weeping, such glorys and halle-
lujahs I never heard before. The place seemed to be the
very gate of heaven to the excited worshippers, as Matthew
Burnett shouted at the top of his voice—“Now, friends,
let us all praise God for what he has done to-night, by
heartily singing our favourite hymn—
“ Tis the promise of God—full salvation to give
Unto Him who on Jesus, His Son will believe.
Hallelujah ’tis done, I believe on the Son,
I am saved by the blood of the Crucified One.”


And these Cornish folk did sing, with such a one-and-all
shout that might easily be heard all over the little town-
ship.
I afterwards heard that the three swagmen referred to
kept steadfast; out of the three, two were going about
in New South Wales, and one in the other colonies,
telling men and women everywhere what God had done
for their souls.
At the conclusion of the meeting Mr. Burnett adminis-
tered the pledge, and pinned on their coats the “ little bit
of blue.”
Ten years after the circumstance I have related, one of
these men recalled to my mind, in a little township in
Victoria, the revival meeting referred to, and the strange
and wonderful change in the characters and lives of the
drunken trio who went into Mr. Burnett’s meeting to jeer
and laugh and remained to pray; at the same time
blessing God for the day the half drunken swag-men heard
Mr. Burnett speak at the Burra Burra copper mines, South
Australia, of temperance, righteousness and a judgment
to come, as well as denouncing the drink traffic and the
curse attending it in all parts of the world, and in every
shade of society, “ for,” said he, “ Sir, I was one of the
three ”


ffiattheca Barnett’s CQission
at Danolly, Victoria.
T. HANSFORD, Esq., J.P., F.R.G.S., of
. Dunolly, has favoured me with the follow-
ing interesting cases re Mr. Burnett’s visit
there.
There was at the time residing on this
e goldfield a Captain James Alex Fitzherbert,
who had been attached to Lord Gough’s staff in India, and
did splendid work during the Indian Mutiny. The captain
had located at Dunolly, and became quite a wreck with
drink. Mr. Burnett’s mission was not long under way till
the retired army officer attended one of the meetings out
of curiosity. He came a second time, and, to the surprise
of the townsfolk, signed the temperance pledge ; then gave
himself to God, joined the church, and for several years
was one of the most active teachers in the sabbath school.
He died years ago from an accident, leaving a bright
testimony behind him ; never forgetting the good Matthew
Burnett by whose instrumentality he was rescued from the
clutches of the devil. Captain Fitzherbert was one of the
officers of Hudson’s party, who took the King of Delhi
prisoner, and who, rather than allow the king’s sons to
escape as they were making an effort, shot both dead before
the gates of Delhi.
The Captain’s death was a rather tragical one. He
was out in the bush cutting timber; a large tree fell
before he could get out of the way ; he was crushed under
a big branch, and died from the injuries then received.


A TOUCHING CASE.
Another case Mr. Jason C. Lardner, a born gentleman,
attracted to the goldhelds by the great rush of fortune-
hunters. He contracted atheistic notions ; became an
acknowledged and well-known atheist, always to the
front in advocating his peculiar views.
Mr. Lardner, almost the first week Mr. Burnett arrived
in Dunolly, attended the religious and temperance
meetings, took the pledge of abstinence, and before Mr.
Burnett left the township decided to give his life to God
and His service. He joined the Methodist Church and
Sabbath School, and became one of the most loveable of
teachers and conversationalists. He took suddenly ill,
was taken to the Dunolly Hospital, lay for several weeks
at the point of death, was visited daily by his Methodist
friends, who always found him trusting in the Crucified.
The last Sunday of his life he begged the doctor to
allow him, if he could get so far, to go to the Sunday
School, to give his last address to the scholars.
As it was a certainty be would die, the kind Dr.
Wolfe nr! en gratified him. He almost crawled down to
the school, and as he entered, the Superintendent (Mr.
Hansford) could see the death marks in his face.
Mr. Lardner asked to be allowed to say a few words.
Then, amid breathless silence, he spoke to the children,
telling them he believed this was his last Sunday on
earth, and notwithstanding his feebleness he felt he would
like to say a few parting words to them. He spoke so
feelingly that there was not a dry eye in the Sunday
School. He urged them all when young to seek the
Saviour, who, now in his closing days, was the joy of his
heart. After saying good-bye to all, he urged them to
meet him in Heaven.
He was assisted back to the Hospital, and in a few days
his soul returned to God, who gave it. His funeral was a
large one, all the school children and teachers marching
behind the hearse, singing their Sunday School songs, in


which the deceased had so often joined. The name of
Jason C. Lardner will never be forgotten in the Dunolly
Sabbath School.
Mr. Lardner was the son of a naval officer. On the
day he died there were a number of patients in the ward
he was lying in. A discussion arose between two who
were near him in the ward as to the reality or existence of
a God. One of the sick men said—“ There is no God.”
Mr. Lardner felt terribly over this atheistical avowal in a
place where so many were at the point of death. He,
with all the effort he could muster, sat up in the bed to
give his testimony to the truth of existence of the God. As
he sat himself up the effort was too great, and just as he
feebly cried out —“ The Lord He is God ; the Lord He is
God !” he fell back exhausted, and when the attendant
reached his bed his soul had passed away to the skies.
MR. BURNETT MAKES A FORTUNE.
It was at Goldsborough, Dunolly, Mr. Burnett made a
small fortune. One day he asked Mr. Hansford to invest
/70 he had in something that would bring him in fair
interest.
The gentleman referred to was the Superintendent of
the Sunday School, and a much-respected Dunollyite
Mr. Hansford recommended Mr. Burnett to allow him
to buy Queen’s Birthday shares with the money, as he
was the legal manager, and felt sure it would be right.
This was agreed to. Only a fortnight after Mr. Burnett
wrote to Mr. Hansford to say a debt of /6o had been un-
expectedly paid him ; would he mind investing also this
sum ? Mr. Hansford bought Queen’s Birthday shares at
255. each to the extent of the money sent. The shares
rapidly increased in value, till at last they were market-
able at 155., Mr. Burnett for a long time receiving
over /no per month dividends. This lucky venture
gave the Evangelist just the chance he wanted to help the
needy and suffering. He spent his money lavishly on
Gospel work, keeping at his own expense a number of
Bible women and colporteurs. No man ever spent money


for Christian purposes so cheerily as Matthew Burnett ;
and, oh, the pity of it, through no fault of his own, when
death claimed him, his dear wife and family were left in a
sad state monetarily. Mr. Burnett up to the last moment
of his life never refused to give liberally to deserving
casts, even when he could ill afford it.
Had Mr. Burnett but lived a few years longer, and
retained his interest in another mine he was interested in,
it is not impossible the gold mines—which gave him such
a splendid rise—would have again made him a compara-
tively rich man But he is gone to a clime where the
streets of the city are paved with pure gold ; the gates are
studded with sapphires, rubies, and diamonds ; and the
inhabitants are forever shut in with God and holy angels.
There is little doubt Matthew Burnett is near the
Throne, associating with prophets, martyrs, priests, and
kings, joining for ever in the song of Moses and the
Lamb. _____
A CORNISH MINER CONVERTED.
A most extraordinary “ contretemps ’’ look place at
Eaglehawk, Bendigo, in a revival meeting conducted by
Mr. Burnett. •
There was a large number of Cornish folk present.
They had been praying fervently and long for the con-
version of one of their friends —a big, buily, Cornish
miner. As they lustily called upon the Lord to save, the
little weatherboard chapel fairly shook with their
vehemence and wrestling. The much-prayed-for brother
at last yielded, and came out to the penitent-form, or
communion rail, at Mr. Burnett’s request. For a long
time the excitement of the prayer leaders was intense.
At last light broke in upon the penitent seeker’s mind,
and rising to his feet with a loud “ Glory be to God,” he
grasped the circular rails of the penitent-form, and with
one superhuman effort the whole of the raiinlg gave way;
and to the danger and astonishment of everybody, the now
much-saved man, ran round tire chapel holding with his
hands above his head, the whole of the railing, as if it were
a child’s toy, shouting “Glory, glory, glory 1”


Notwithstanding this very irregular proceeding the
Cornish miner referred to, kept from that night a name
void of reproach, and to-day lives one of the most bright
and earnest Christians on the goldfields.
MR. BURNETT AND THE POOR
OUTCASTS.
Mr. Burnett, as a revivalist, had wonderful influence
with women who were looked upon as outside the pale
of civilised society, owing to their drunken habits and
vicious propensities. Hundreds of the worst possible
female characters on the goldfields were saved, and
became thorough Christians.
The unfortunate class looked upon Mr. Burnett as their
God-sent friend. They would tell him all the sorrows of
their heart and life. “ Curse the drink,” as they would
say. “If we did not have strong drink, Mr. Burnett, we
could not live the terrible life we do.” And as the tears
ran down their cheeks they would ask him to pray for
them, that God would take away the longing for brandy
and all intoxicants.
Many a hundred poor Magdalenes Mr. Burnett saved
from a life of misery. His persuasive powers were such
as to get these erring daughters of Eve, frequently on the
spur of the moment, to abandon their evil ways, and take
shelter somewhere he would provide until the great thirst
subsided, and they felt free. Hundreds of cases are known
in the Australias where these repentant lasses after a time
married well, and are now respected wives and mothers of
families, living lives void of offence.
In every case Mr. Burnett would insist upon the
would-be wife telling her past history, concealing nothing
from the man she was about to wed ; and when all had
been said, if they still were of one mind —well ! but if
not, the match broken off, and the whole matter
made a subject of prayer to God, asking His guidance and
direction, while they waited patiently for better days.
Mr. Burnett was a lover of little children. He would


take the tiny prattlers on his knee and give them his
blessing, asking God to shine upon their young lives and
hearts, and endue the dear ones with His Holy "pint.
Many of the children of those early days are now grown-
up men and women, but the kind face and “ God bless
you, children,” of dear Matthew Burnett has never been
forgotten.
In the list of Christian ministers in these colonies, scores
can to-day be pointed out who received their first ‘‘baptism
of fire” as workers in Christ’s vineyard, at the great
gatherings assembled in city and town to hear Matthew
Burnett lecture or preach. The Rev. Mr. Gribble, a Church
of England missionary to the aboriginals, who recently
died in W est Australia, was one of Mr. Burnett’s converts.
No one was too poor or too ;ar gone in sin, wickedness, or
inebriety for Mr, Burnett to tackle; his appeals,were con-
stantly to the wretched and miserable victims of strong
drink. In his own fascinating way he would picture to
them the once happy home, the joy and peace enjoyed in
the good old days of long ago, and contrast them with the
misery and wretchedness of the present.
In his lectures, with the magic wand of eloquence, he
would get at his heart] s by talking to them of the great
love of most fathers and mothers for their children' and
the terrible scenes to be witnessed when the drink curse
got the mastery and entered the family circle. Then he
would tell of one and another whose life had come under his
“ ken” as he journeyed from place to place, and the blessed
change wrought by the accepting of the little bit of blue,
and the giving up of the drink and all its deadly associations.
Matthew Burnett did not use tobacco himself; he was
wise enough not to encounter discussion on the subject,
although always quietly discountenancing its use by young
abstainers. Therefore it is not surprising that thousands
of lovers of the weed were in the train of his supporters.
His life motto seemed to be, “ strike at the root of the
deadly upas tree of intemperance,” and eventually the wis-
dom that Cometh from God will rule and reign in the heart
and life, and all minor evils will be abandoned. What a
loving friend and companion he was ? He had no sooner


visited for the first time a friend’s house with you, than
there seemed to be a spell upon the family group while he
discoursed in his own unrivalled way of topics pleasing to
those with whom he was surrounded, who up to that time
were perfect strangers to him.
His smile was seemingly the index of the fond heart
within; his words were always chaste and pure; his counsel
homely and edifying ; his pleasant laugh infectious ; and
and his manner to those with whom he associated so
courteous and kind that he won upon you until you felt
that Matthew Burnett was a man to be trusted under
every circumstance of life, and as a consequence he was
welcomed everywhere and much prized as a visitor to the
thousands of happy homes in England and Australia.




fQp. ftlattheca Bavnett in
Tasmania, 1883.
BURNETT did splendid work in
111 Tasmania. I happened to be there at the
time. Finding my friend was not so well-
¥ known as in the other colonies I wrote the
following. It was published as a leaflet,
and helped considerably to enlighten the
“ Tassys ”as to the “ coming man
“MATTHEW BURNETT: WHO IS HE?
“ There is just now in Hobart and Launceston con-
siderable speculation anent the coming ‘ temperance
orator,’ Evangelist, and social reformer, Matthew Burnett,
who is to commence a crusade against the drink traffic
during the present month in Tasmania, and yet still more
curiosity to know whether he will succeed.
“ No one who knows Matthew Burnett, and has been in
any way associated with him in his Gospel and tem-
perance mission work, and witnessed the great and
mighty successes following his efforts wherever he has
either preached or lectured, will have the slightest fear
anent the ultimatum of the bloodless fight of the
champion social reformer and temperance crusader.
“Almost unknown Matthew Burnett arrived in
Victoria about the year 1863. He was then, as now,
known as the Yorkshire Evangelist, hailing as he does
from that part of England. His victories and successes in
the good cause were marvellous. Every place he visited
the people thronged to hear him. His intense sympathy
for the working classes gained him the appellation of


the ‘ working man’s friend.’ The poor and destitute had
his best wishes, and from his own priva e purse and big
heart ‘ this man of the people ’ supplied the wants, both
temporal and spiritual, of the wretched and miserable who
were endeavouring to cast off the chains that bound them
so fast to King Alcohol.
“ 1 ens of thousands to-day all over these colonies, as
with one voice can testify, like poor Jo, the crossing-
sweeper— ‘ He were werry kind to me, he were.’
“ Matthew Burnett has fought a one-and-all life battle
against the drinking customs of the people, being con-
vinced, as he is, by his own sad vouthful experience that
cmses follow in the wake of the wine-cup, and that
disease, crime, degradation, and death are associated
directly and indirectly with the use and sale of
intoxicants.
“The result of his labours have been such as have not
been achieved by any other lecturer or evangelist in the
Australian colonies. Go where you will, all over the
Australias, you will find, as I have done, people in every
position of life who have been by his instrumentality
saved from the drink curse.
“ Many occupying iu'portant positions in both Church
and State to-day bless God they ever heard the glad news
from this whole-souled abstainer. Need I say that
thousands in Victoria and South and West Australia have
been rescued from poverty, disgrace, and crime, and are
now filling important positions in society, respected and
loved by those who once despised them for their sin and
folly.
“In carrying on his mission to the masses the York-
shire Evangelist has his own peculiar way of enlisting the
sympathy, and gaining the confidence and love of the
people.
“His Saturday night meetings have been everywhere
wonderfully successful. His mothers’ meetings are on a par
with all his' other herculean efforts as an Evangelist.
His out-door gatherings have been the outcome of results
almost miraculous, especially among the lower strata of
society in Victoria, South Australia, and Western


Australia. His singing bands have always been the envy
of the various denominations, good and true men and
women of all the churches joining heartily both in and
out doors in the service of song.
“ Many a temperance pledge has been taken, many a
poor wanderer has been reclaimed, many a fallen sister
has been restored to home and friends through the singing
of the Gospel by ‘ Barnett’s Singing Bands.’
“The Evangelist has in Mrs. Burnett a powerful helper.
All who have had the pleasure of this lady’s acquaintance
speak good and kind things of her. Full of sympathy,
she nobly seconds her husband’s efforts in the crusade
against drink. Both husband and wife seem to have but
one aim and object in life, and that is to rescue the
perishing, and work unceasingly in the great cause of
social and moral reform.
“ Mr. Burnett never fails to enlist the sympathies of all
classes of the community, and is sure to elicit the hearty
‘ Go on ; God bless you >’ of every section of the Christian
Church, Roman Catholics as well as Protestants uniting
in the cry.
“ The Press, that mighty lever for upholding the weak
and keeping under the strong, who by vile aggression and
slavery would, if possible, gain the mastery, has nobly
aided in this temperance crusade. From the hundred-
eyed Melbourne Argus to the puniest literary effort of the
colonics, all have assisted and aided in the good work
Mr. Burnett so unselfishly plans out for himself as his
life-work, to wit, elevating the masses.
“ I believe Tasmania will be the better for the visit of
the Yorkshire Evangelist, and, as one who knows some-
thing of the zeal and earnest enthusiasm of Mr. Burnett
in his life-work, would bespeak for him and his good wife
the kindly sympathy and co-operation of fair Tasmania.
Matthew Burnett ranks high as a worthy member of the
great universal Masonic brotherhood. He is also a Good
Templar, a Son of Temperance, and a Rechabite. The
late Chief Commissioner of Police, Victoria, during Mr.
Burnett’s campaign there, issued special instructions to


his officers and men, to in every way assist the Evangelist,
and protect him from annoyance at his outdoor
gatherings.
“ The highest personages in the Australias have pre-
sided over Mr. Burnett’s meetings. In Adelaide His
Excellency the Governor (Sir Wm. Jervois), the Chief
Justice, the Chief Secretary, and His Lordship the
Anglican Bishop.
“ One hundred thousand pledges have been taken by
Mr. Burnett since his arrival in the colonies. In South
Australia 33,000 took the pledge, 35,000 invested with the
* blue ribbon.’ ”
THE CRUSADE UNDER WAY.
We’ll roll the old chariot along,
And we won’t drag on behind.
Saturday night, the 29th March, 1883, will long be
remembered by the Hobart teetotallers. By half-past
eight a big crowd of water-drinkers gathered at the
Railway Station, and by the time the “ express ” arrived
there was a vast crowd of good men and true waiting to
welcome Mr. and Mrs. Burnett.
On the arrival of the train an impromptu reception was
given in the gentlemen’s waiting-room, the Rev. Henry
Merriman introducing the friends and workers in the
temperance cause to the newly-arrived social reformer and
his lady. There were present—Messrs. Peter Facy, J.P.,
Alderman Hiddlestone, J.P., Russell Young, G. t!
Taylor, L. Lodge, J. Andrews, E. B. Gawne, Rev. F. E.
Stephenson, T. Cane, H. Glenny, J.P. of Victoria, and
numbers of other workers and lady friends, who one and
all heartily welcomed Mr. Burnett to Hobart. After good
wishes all round, Mr. and Mrs. Burnett and Mr. T. Cane
drove off in a carriage in waiting to the residence of Mr.
Theo. Cane, of Surnett-street, whose guests Mr. and Mrs.
Burnett are to be during their stay.
On Monday night the temperance campaign opened in
the Exhibition Building. A very large audience was
present. The Rechabite Band in regalia discoursed
several stirring airs. The leaders of the temperance


movement were separately introduced to Mr. Burnett by
the Chairman (Dr. Benjafield) Mr. Peter Facy, as
President of the Alliance ; Alderman Hiddlestone, J P.,
Rechabites; Mr. G T. Taylor, the G.W C.T. of the
1.0 G.T.; the Rev. E. Tucker, of the English Templars ;
the Rev. John Gray, representative of the Church of
of England Temperance Society ; Mr. G. W. Ife, repre-
senting the Bands of Hope ; the Rev. H. Merriman. the
Wesleyan Temperance Society ; and Mr. H. Glenny, J.P.,
of Ballarat, the colony of Victoria.
The first meeting was most successful, eighty new
pledges were taken, and one hundred and thirty-five blue
ribbons donned. Lady and gentlemen workers were
appointed and allotted their work in the city, and all the
preliminary arrangements made for the campaign. The
utmost enthusiasm prevailed. Mr. Matthew Burnett
expects 20,000 converts in the “ tight little island.
Hobart, Tasmania, March, 1883.
I now give two cuttings only, out of many from the
I asmanian papers. One the report from Jerusalem, and
the other Mr. Burnett’s farewell before leaving for New
Zealand.
No public man could make himself more at home in all
shades of society than Mr. Burnett.
The wealthiest class soon felt at ease in his company.
He had invitations in plenty in Australia and England,
and when anything special was on he never forgot his
friends, so that he had the double pleasure (as he would
say) of thoroughly enjoying himself as a visitor and at the
same time knowing he had an old friend or two by his
side, to whom he would often refer in his after-dinner
table-talk.
Farewell Entertainment to Mr. Matthew
Burnett, Hobart, Tasmania.
The friends and well-wishers of Mr. Burnett, the popular
temperance advocate, met last evening in large numbers
at the Mechanics’ Hall to wish him God-speed in his


contemplated mission to New Zealand, for which colony
he leaves this afternoon. Tea was served at 7.45, and
while it was being discussed, the hall presented a most
animated aspect. What with theclattering of dishes and the
buzz of conversation, the gathering quite resembled a large
family party. After ample justice had been done to viands,
catered by Mr. C. D, Haywood in his usual efficient style,
the assemblage adjourned to the Wesleyan Church
adjoining, on the motion of one of its pastors, the Rev H.
Greenwood. As the audience was assembling, the organist
played one or two voluntaries very effectively. After a
while, the Bishop of Tasmania (who presided) ascended
the platform, accompanied by some of the leading city
clergy and well-known sympathisers with the temperance
movement. Mr, Burnett occupied a seat to the left of the
chairman. The Rev. W. H. Bowe, on being called upon,
read letters of apology from several gentlemen, including
a telegram from friends at Ballarat, and a letter from the
secretary to Mr. Burnett’s mission at Waraiah. all
breathing good wishes for the future of their friend. The
Bishop said it afforded him great pleasure to preside on
that occassion, to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr.
Burnett s singular devotion, and to thank God that he had
been enabled to accomplish so much hard work. Mr.
Burnett visited Tasmania in a very peculiar lime,
immediately after Messrs. Glover and Booth had completed
their visit, but thinking of nothing except the good of the
cause he so earnestly espoused. Mr. Burnett wentto work
with a will, and his powers of annexation were certainly
wonderful. He penetrated into districts previously
unvisited, and his acquaintance with almost every district
over the length and breadth of the land, constituted him
an authority even to the Minister of Lands as regards the
construction of roads. A prominent feature of Mr.
Burnett’s was that he had always a good word to say about
everyone, and his teachings were not simply those of
social and political reform and economy, but were also
founded on the teachings of the Gospel of our Blessed
Saviour. His mission was a religious mission, and he
(the Bishop) welcomed him as a co-worker, and he


appeared on that platform as a Tasmanian to convey to
Mr. Burnett a formal expression of thanks for his arduous
labors. After a few remarks from Pastor McCullough,
Mr. L. Lodge stepped forward and read an address, signed
by temperance workers in Hobart, which was couched in
congratulatory language. The veteran teetotaller, Mr. T.
J. Crouch, next presented Mr. Burnett with a purse of
sovereigns spontaneously contributed as a mark of the
esteem in which he is held. Mr. Burnett on rising was
received with prolonged applause. He said he was utterly
unable to find words to express bis gratitude for the address
and gift. The heartfelt and earnest expressions uttered by
the Bishop he would treasure in his memory. Twenty-
three years ago he deemed it his duty to leave England
and come out to these young colonies, in order to prosecute
the work of temperance, and from the day he landed in
Melbourne, in August. 1863, he had made" ud his mind to
carry on that work on the broadest possible platform, and
trom that resolve he had never deviated. He had received
during the long years which intervened, a hearty welcome
from men of all classes and positions in society. When
he thought of coming to Tasmania, he was told that there
was very little for him to do, following, as he did, so closely
in the footsteps of Messrs. Glover and Booth, and that
Tasmanians were a slow-going people who could not be
waked up, but the people he met in Hobart, Launceston,
and all over the island were equal to any in the other
colonies. Mr. Burnett then entered into detail regarding
the overtures which were made to him to visit Tasmania,
paying a high tribute to the late Captain Fisher, and
followed up with a resume of the progress of his mission in
the colony. The concluding portion of Mr. Burnett’s
address, was a reiteration of his address last Sunday
afternoon, varied by allusions to the desirability of local
option, the establishment of an asylum for inebriates, and
an appeal to the various temperance bodies to co-operate
together in the good cause. He would never forget the
kindness which had been extended to him in this beautiful
city ; and, before sitting down, he desired to express his
acknowledgments to the Press of Tasmania for its generous


support. (Loud Applause). A collection having been
made to defray the expenses of the meeting, the Rev.
Canon Banks-Smith and Mr. Marsh made a few remarks!
and hearty votes of thanks to Dr. Sandford (the Bishop),
ladies who assisted, and to the energetic Secretary (Rev,
Mr. Bowe) terminated a most successful gathering, an
attractive feature of which was the excellent singing of the
choir.
Jerusalem, Tasmania.
Mr. Burnett held two temperance meetings here ; they
were grand successes, and having been specially asked by
Mr. Burnett to forward to your journal an account of the
proceedings, to which I gladly consented, I must before
entering into details, say a little for the benefit of those
who do not know, as to who really are the pioneers of the
Good Temperance cause in Jerusalem. Mr-. Hugill, after
the opening of the church on 13th March last, induced
twelve to sign the pledge and don the blue ; shortly after
that a Mr. Kilworth, lately from England, in conjunction
with Mr. Baynton, took the matter up warmly, and
convened two very successful meetings, but having other
engagements was obliged to remove from Jerusalem, much
to the regret of all who knew him. The great and good
cause was then allowed to lapse, until a lady worker of Mr.
Burnett's arrived, and by her energy was the means of re-
organising the meetings, and had the honor of pinning the
blue on more than twenty fresh members. The meetings
now being fairly established, Mr. Burnett was asked to
come, to which he gladly responded, and, as I before
mentioned, held his first meeting on Friday evening. The
attendance was not as good as anticipated by many, but
the result surprised as many more. Mr. Luttrell was
prevailed upon to take the chair. Mr. Burnett proceeded
to tell the audience numerous touching incidents he had
witnessed through drunkenness during his twenty years’
career as a social reformer. Mr. Glenny contributed much
to the interest of the meeting by giving a short address,


and singing the well-known song, “ Where is my wander-
ing boy to-night ?” I must not omit to add that several
hymns were sung by the audience, also adding much to
the enjoyment. Our worthy Chairman now addressed the
people, thanking them for their attention, and Mr.
Burnett for his kindness.
On Saturday evening the building was crowded, many
people standing outside. Mr. Burnett gave part of his
renowned Yankee Bill’s history, which was both interest-
ing and amusing. Mr. Burnett also sang two songs of
Yankee Bill’s composition, for which he was enthusias-
tically cheered. Mr. Glenny again came to the front, and
told the ladies an amusing anecdote containing a receipt
to procure a sober husband. He also sang the popular
Irish song, entitled “ The dear little shamrock,” in a very
pleasing manner. Mr. Alexander Robertson, who was
Chairman on this occasion, thanked Mr. and Mrs.
Burnett, and proposed that the audience sing ll God save
the Queen.” Last, but not least, Mr. Burnett with great
pleasure said that thirty-nine had signed at the two
meetings.
I may here state that .Master William Isles, about six-
teen years of age, obtained from Mr. Burnett a worker’s
card, and on Sunday evening the good little fellow had
persuaded ten to join. He well deserved three cheers at
the meeting on Saturday evening.


fl Touching Stopy.
The Late Matthew Burnett and the
Clergyman’s Fallen Daughter.
HEN in England, in 1893, I attended many
of the great “ May Meetings ” in Exeter
Hall and elsewhere, accompanied by my
dear old friend Matthew Burnett.
One night, during the winter months, I
had accompanied him partly across
Blackfriars Bridge on his way home As we
jogged along we passed hundreds of those who
who are usually called “ night-birds,” who do not sleep in
beds, but sit the night out on doorsteps, or in the deep
recesses of merchants’ warehouses, or in casks or barrels,
or under the arches of the bridges over the River
Thames.
About half-way across Blackfriars Bridge we noticed a
poor, miserable-looking object, clad in a few rags, with an
old shawl partly covering her head and face, shivering
with cold. It was a young, good-looking woman.
Mr. Burnett turned quickly round, and in his usual
impulsive way said, “ I must speak to that poor girl ; she
is evidently in trouble.”
In a few minutes she was sobbing aloud as she told
good Matthew Burnett her sad tale.
A clergyman’s daughter from one of the northern
counties of England, she had run away from home at
the instigation of her betrayer, came to London, and was
soon left to get a living as best she could. Strong drink
and the allurements and vices of the streets soon left her
destitute and hopeless, and that night, she said, “ she had
wandered down past St. Paul’s Cathedral to Blackfriars
Bridge in order to end her troubles in the muddy waters
of the River Thames.”


She was, as she told Mr. Burnett, utterly destitute and
starving, had had nothing to eat all that day, and very
little the day before, and felt so miserable and God-
forsaken that death would indeed be to her a relief.
Matthew Burnett took her first to an adjacent coffee-
stall, and made her drink a cup of hot coffee, then led her
to an eating-house over the bridge, and after arranging to
see her on the following day, gave her all the money he
had in his pocket, and with a hearty u God bless you,” as
only Matthew Burnett could give, he bade her “ Good
night.”
The following day Mr. Burnett told me he had that
morning met the poor wanderer, and said he—
‘ Silverpen,’ the tale of sin and sorrow she told me was
such as to make my very heart ache.”
Brought np in a Church parsonage, with all the
advantages of the prayers and pious example of a loving
father and mother, she had kept company with a man,
who called himself a gentleman (?) This fellow had
seduced her, and then urged her to fly with him to
Dondon, promising her marriage. But the marriage
never took place. Soon he deserted her, and left her a
miserable human wreck on the streets of the Modern
Babylon. She confessed the love of strong drink,
acquired since she left her home, was her besetting sin.
She drank to drown her sorrow and thoughts of home
and God, and but for the excitement given by the drink
she would have long before committed suicide.
Mr. Burnett told me the painful recital had quite
unmanned him ; he wept like a child, and begged of the
poor girl to return to her father’s God. He arranged for
lodging and food for her for a few weeks, and had the
happiness of seeing this outcast girl a thoroughly changed
character, and had also the joy of leading her eventually
to her old home and friends, as well as to her Saviour’s
feet.
It would not be right, now that the good, kind-hearted
Matthew Burnett has passed away, to omit saying that
the night we met the poor, outcast would-be suicide on
Blackfriars Bridge he gave her every penny he had, and


had not as much as a “ ’bus fare ” when he pul his hand
in his pocket, so that he had to plod along through those
midnight hours to his home, while the snow and sleet
beat in his face.
“ But,” said he, “ ‘ Silverpen,’ all the way I was
praising God, and thanking Him that He had put it into
my heart to speak to this poor prodigal daughter, and it
maybe save a precious life, and possibly be the means of
leading an erring sister ro return to the heavenly fold.
This is but one of many instances of the tender heart
and sympathising soul of this “ Prince in Israel,” who has
so recently gone to his reward. Matthew Burnett had a
passion for the salvation of the people. His life was one
great sacrifice of self. His charity was unbounded; few
knew of the hundreds of pounds sterling he gave to those
in poverty and want when he was in good circumstances
in Australia. It mattered little to him, to what church
you belonged ; if you were in want of a friend he was
always ready with the needed help.
Matthew Burnett might well say with the poet Cowper;—
In such a world, so thorny, and where none
Find happiness unblighted, or, if found,
Without some thirsty sorrow at its side,
It seems the part of wisdom, and no sin
Against the law of love, to measure lots
With less distinguished than ourselves—that thus
We may with patience bear our moderate ills
And sympathise with others suffering more.”
Mr. Burnett during his last illness suffered no pain.
“ Only tired,” said he to his daughter, “ and want rest.”
And so, after a few days’ illness, the life machinery within
stood still —the pulse ceased to beat, his work was done on
earth —and Matthew Burnett, “the trusty and much loved
friend of all men,” was in the presence chamber of his God,
to go out no more for ever.—As in life, so in death —loving
and good —he passed away, with the words “Mama!—
Jesus !” —on his lips.
His widow informs me that the last letter he ever wrote
was to the writer. He wound up as follows : “ Good-bye,
old and trusty friend, till we meet in the presence of the
‘ King.’ ”


fnc*. fDattheca Barnett, the
Yorkshire Evangelist,
Among the Freemasons—lB72.
EFORE Mr. Burnett sailed for England in 1872,
ex P a wish when staying for a few T
days at the writer’s home, to be initiated a
L Freemason.
By special dispensation from the Grand
' Master of Victoria, Matthew Burnett received
the three degrees of Masonry on the night of his entry —
a most unusual proceeding.
A short time after his arrival in England he was
promoted into the Royal Arch ; and everywhere he
visited always took great interest in the “ universal
brotherhood.”
A most interesting incident in his Masonic career
occurred after he left Victoria, and on his arrival in
England. Mr. Burnett was travelling on the London
and North-Western Line of Railway. In the same
carriage there sat opposite him an elderly gentleman, who
after some time noticed a Masonic ring on his finger.
Mr. Burnett had a great habit of pulling at his beard,
and stroking it down. The old gentleman, believing that
Mr. Burnett was a Freemason, made several signs.
After some time Mr. Burnett recognised a special sign,
and replied to it. They then held out to each other the


hand of friendship, and passed the Master Mason’s sign, or
grip. Then, they talked after a time as brothers, and
greatly enjoyed their confab, anent Masonry in England
and Australia.
The train stopped at a small wayside station ; before it
had done so, the old gentleman Freemason told Mr.
Burnett he was the Earl of -, on his way to his
country mansion, and if Brother Burnett would but
accompany him as his guest he would guarantee him a
few weeks’ shooting and fishing—not better “ sport ” to be
found in England.
Mr. Burnett, after heartily thanking the “ Earl, ’ told
him that his life had been spent in a fishing excursion , but
it was men and women he caught in his net. He then
disclosed to the Earl that he was en route to the city of
B on a religious and temperance lecturing tour, and
that his “ life work ” was “ rescuing the perishing.”
The Earl was greatly delighted with the information
given, and promised to write to Mr. Burnett, and send a
donation to help on the good work. This came to hand
in good time, and so impressed was Mr. Burnett with the
incident that he always afterwards spoke of the indirect
advantage of being a “ Free and Accepted Mason ” in such
a kind and enthusiastic way as to cause several of his most
intimate friends and associates to apply for admission to
the “ craft,” believing, as he said, that his connection with
the mystic tie had added greatly to his other qualifications
as a social reformer, by giving him a degree of influence
with his brethren of the Masonic Order he never before
possessed.
MATTHEW BURNETT’S INITIATION.
From a Ballarat Paper.
Never in the history of Ballarat Masonic Lodges has
such a numerous and influential assemblage of members
of the Craft come together for Masonic business as
appeared at the St. John’s Lodge, 427, 1.C., last evening.
Twelve or more Masters, with about sixty or seventy of
the brethren from different parts of district —Buninyong,


Smythesdale, Clunes, Sebastopol, and several other
Lodges were represented on the occasion. Two brethren,
visitors from Sydney and Queensland were also present.
The object of the meeting (a special one) was the initia-
tion, passsing, and raising of Mr. Matthew Burnett, the
“ Australian Evangelist.” By what we have gleaned
from different sources, a special dispensation for the
occasion was granted by the Grand Master of Victoria,
the Hon. John Thomas Smith. Acting upon this
Brother Wm. Robertson, the Worshipful Master of St.
John’s Lodge, assisted by several Past Masters present,
duly performed the work allotted to them. The follow-
ing Past Masters and Worshipful Masters took part in
the proceedings :—Brothers Henry Davies, W.M., and
Joseph Josephs, P.M., of the Yarrowee Lodge ; Brother
T. Aldred, P.M. of St. John’s Lodge and W.M. of the
Sebastopol Lodge. The Rev. Brother Lawson Wilson
officiated as Chaplain.
The three degrees were given in splendid style. Many
old Masons present expressed their great satisfaction and
gratification at being permitted to see for once the
working of the degrees in a Lodge that is a credit to the
institution. The visitors present were loud in their
praises of the furniture of the Lodge and the tracing
boards, the equal of which are not to be found in any
Lodge in the colony.
After the Lodge had been duly closed, and brethren
invited by the W.M. to the supper-room, the usual
Masonic toasts were given. Brother H. Glenny, the
Junior Warden, and the proposer of Mr. Burnett, pre-
sented through the Worshipful Master to Brother
Burnett a very neat Masonic gold ring, engraved as
follows :—“ Presented to Brother Matthew Burnett on
his being raised to the high and sublime degree of a
Master Mason, by Brother H. Glenny, J.W., St. John’s
Lodge, 427, IC. 26th March, 1872.” Brother Burnett,
in very feeling terms, replied, and expressed his entire
satisfaction with the evening’s proceedings, and hoped, as
he had been made a brother of the “ Mystic Tie,’ and


initiated into the mysteries of Freemasonry, he would
always prove himself w rthy of the great honour conferred
upon him that evening.
He thanked the W.M. and officers present fo» their
kind attention to him, and said, though he would shortly
be journeying to his fatherland, he should never forget
the occurrences of that evening, and the happy time they
had spent together. He also stated that, although long
anxious to become a Freemason, he had no idea of the
grand sublimity of the degrees in this ancient and
honorable institution He thanked his friend and brother
the junior Warden for the very appropriate and valuable
gift, and would always associate this little souvenir with
his first night in the Masonic Brotherhood.
All present joined heartily in wishing Brother Burnett
bon voyage , Worshipful Master Robertson hoped he
(Brother Burnett) would soon return to Victoria with
renewed health, and he could assure him none of his
(Mr. Burnett’s) friends would give him a heartier welcome
back than the members of the Craft associated with St.
John’s Lodge, Ballarat, Victoria.


flip. Barnett’s Second Trip
to England.
1890, after Mr. Burnett’s rough experiences of
labour and travel in New Zealand, he deter-
mined to take Mrs. Burnett and his two
daughters to England for a year or two. The
Burnett family sailed in the R.M.S. Cuzco,
c When Mr. Burnett reached England he was
greeted by all the temperance notabilities, and had an
introduction for the second time at Exeter Hall to an
enthusiastic and crowded gathering. His few days’ holi-
day and the sea voyage did him a world of good.
Before he had been many days in London he had invita-
ions to different parts.
His usual plan was to follow the English custom of
taking ten days’ mission work in a locality. In all his
meetings he was very successful.
In Glasgow (Scotland) he had quite an exciting time at
the “ Cow Caddins.” A splendid mission was held under
the presidency of the Rev. Wm. Ross, M.A., Presbyterian
minister, Windsor Terrace, Glasgow. Mr. Burnett
assured me he never felt so much at home. Crowds
gathered nightly ; the reverend gentleman before named,
who gave him the invitation, ably backing up the
Evangelist in his work. The number of pledges taken,
and the good done spiritually, far exceeded the expecta-
tions of the Glasgow friends.


REPORTS FROM ENGLISH PAPERS.
I give now from English papers reports, sketches, &c.,
published there. It was plain to every one that Mr.
Burnett was overrating his powers. The terrible strain
upon his nervous system was such as to keep him awake
at night. Sleep left him for hours while in bed. This
alone would have pulled down the strongest constitution ;
but he bravely bore up amid it all, keeping in his own
breast his ailments and fears.
I was with him after he returned from Scotland to
London, and often for hours at a stretch listened to his
heart breathings. “ Let me die in harness,’’ he once said,
“ with my face to the foe, and the banner of temperance
waving over my head, for I am more convinced than
ever nothing will do but total abstinence, and eventually
prohibition. We will have to wait long, friend ; but it
must come.” Sir Wilfred Lawson was one of Mr.
Burnett’s great ideals as a temperance reformer. We
heard Sir Wilfred at Hyde Park address an immense
multitude, and several times in the City of London.
Lady Henry Somerset and Francis Willard we heard
together at the Queen’s Hall during the W.C.T.U. Con-
vention, when 350 American women were present. He
sat between Mrs. Burnett and myself, and I don't think
I ever saw Mr. Burnett so excited and joyous.
The splendid orations of the American women cheered
him immensely. ‘‘ Oh,” said he ; “ when will the
women of England rise to their privileges, and fight the
liqnor traffic like these brave sisters from America.
Surely Lady Somerset and Francis Willard after this
display, will fire the enthusiasm of our English sisters and
wives, and their daughters and sons. If they but take the
present tide of public favour at its flow we shall see such
an upheaval of King Alcohol’s fortresses as will astonish
the world. We must,” said he, “ have a sober world
before the reign of Christ. Let us work to this intent,
and it will come so sure as the night follows the day


General H ea f Doua’s 90th
Birthday.
A 6
BURNETT wrote to the United Kingdom
Alliance, London, who were sending con-
gratulatory cable messages, &c., to the ven-
erable American teetotaller, as follows :
‘y ‘ “It has occurred tome that among
d\ the wreaths that will be placed on the brow
Ay A of the grand old man. General Dow,
throughout this kingdom and the United
States on the occasion of his 90th birthday that Austral-
asia, one of the most loyal, though the most distant, of the
Queen’s British possessions, should also place its wreath on
the old warrior’s brow, who has fought not only for the
freedom of millions of slaves in his own country, but
fur millions of his fellow men and women who are
bound body and soul by the slaves of intemperance, the
tyranny of which no tongue or pen can adequately
portray. Perhaps in no part of the Queen’s dominions
is the life work of the veteran prohibitionist more
appreciated than at the Antipodes. Tne Australian and
New Zealand Governments, realising the devastating
effects of intoxicating drinks upon the native races (a
small remnant of what they were), have absolutely
prohibited any publican selling or offering them what the
natives call ‘ fire water,’ ‘ spirit of the devil.’ Among the
4.0 000 Maories in New Zealand, one-twentieth uf whom
took the pledge at my hands, including sixty chiefs, not a
single public house is to be found.
“It was the dream of my life since I took the pledge
from my venerable friend, William Rowntree, of Scar-
borough, thirty-seven years ago, to see and hear the
Father of Prohibition. On the occasion of my visit to


this country, twenty-one years ago (through the courtesy
of the United Kingdom Alliance), I had the privilege of
attending a public breakfast given to General Neal Dow
at the Trevalyan Hotel, Manchester, of extending to him
a loyal Australian welcome, and subsequently of com-
paring notes with him re matters of great importance
affecting both hemispheres, from a total abstinence point
of view. The General wrote in my album— ‘ I believe in
the distant future your great country (Australia) bids
fair to outstrip my great western home. You have a great
territory y illimitable resources. May Heaven 1 s choicest
blessings be yours) Among those who were present at
that meeting was the late indefatigable Secretary, Mr.
Thos. H. Barker, and the genial and eloquent J. H.
Raper. I have before me a letter which I received from
the General in reply to one addressed to him on his 89th
birthday. It is dated Portland, U.S.A., i6th April, 1893,
in which he says—‘ Since I was last in England our cause
has made great progress, at which lam delighted. The
work done in your country by our friends has been
herculean, of which it requires an immense amount to
break down old prejudices, old customs habits, prece-
dents, and lines of thought. Of that we have far less in
this country, and so our work is easier, though not so
good—not so persistent and able as yours. Half the
labour you bestow on this matter would in America have
extinguished the liquor traffic long ago.’
“ I cannot close this letter without assuring General
Neal Dow, through your widely-circulated paper, that
there are multitudes connected with every branch of the
great Temperance Army all over the Australian Con-
tinent, Tasmania, and New Zealand who will join
heartily with England and America in offering their
heartiest congratulations on the auspicious event of
Tuesday, the 20th, an event comparatively few are per-
mitted to see. Apologising for the increased length of
my letter by sending what I thought would be interesting
to your readers, I am, dear Sir, yours fraternally,
MATTHEW BURNETT.
10, Finchley-road, St. John’s Wood, London.”


The Home of Host, Bisley,
1894.
R. BURNETT’S eldest daughter has been for
v a long time connected with the West-End
Central Mission, London. She has charge
(1898) of the “ Bisley Home of Rest,” and is
doing good work. Miss Burnett is known
l as “ Sister Constance.” The following from
the Methodist Times will give somewhat of’ her good
work there. Mr. Burnett always reminded his friends of
his great love for his dear wife and family.
“*What has the West London Mission to do with far
away Bisley ?” I answer by giving in my own way the
substance of what Sister Constance told me.
The cottage was a free gift to the Mission, and it was
opened as a “ home of rest” and convalescence for the
many victims of London life amongst whom the
missioners work. The wonderful story of how Mr.
Josiah Nix was led to choose Sister Amelia as its first
head will be fresh in the minds of some of our
readers.
It was found that distance and other circumstances
made the cost of sending a continuous stream of non-
paying inmates to the home from London more than
the finances of the Mission would bear. Outlets for such,
it was felt, must be provided for closer at hand. The
happy idea of using the cottage ”to bring a country
holiday within the reach of all ” was then entertained,
and Sister Constance is faithfully working to carry it out.
For the small charge of ten shillings a week visitors
are received here, getting board and lodging, amidst the
loveliest surroundings out of doors and with the brightest


and most helpful companionship within. The prevailing
characteristic of the house, and the source of much of its
influence, is a deep, abiding cheerfulness, founded upon
faith in the love of Christ, and love to Him in return.
“We are all of one mind in this,” said Sister
Constance, including in her thought her excellent
working housekeeper, as well as other helpers. The
social element is very wonderful, many caste distinctions
being levelled by the magic of love and goodwill. “We
blend beautifully,” Sister Constance said, after naming
some varieties of the social state which Christian workers
do not always find harmonious. A step from door to
door brings you to the Mission Hall, which is very bright
and pleasant. Some kind of meeting goes on here every
night, most of them planned, held, or supervised by Sister
Constance herself.
Men and women, boys and girls, ate catered for
together or separately, and not the least encouraging
feature of this womanly work is the effect which it is
having upon the big country lads, whose only notion of
humour is being troublesome.
But time would fail me to tell of the many aspects of
this beautiful work. Let me say to my readers, go to
Bisley and see for yourself; or, better still, send some one
to Bisley who cannot go without your help.
When the writer was in England, Mr. Burnett wrote
me to say he had been to Bisley to see his daughter,
Sister Constance, and from his report the place is indeed
an ideal home of rest. Mr. Burnett was delighted with
all he saw. He gave the inmates several services in the
Mission Hall, and greatly delighted all who heard him.
He writes :—“lt is indeed a ‘restful place.’ All around
you speaks of rest and home. It must be grand for the
tired and wearv Londoners to come here to recuperate,
and breath fresh life and health. How sweet a country
life must be to the fagged-out city worker. Here it is
that we find it—in all its simplicity and in active work
most enjoyable.
The Kev. Hugh Price Hughes, M.A., of Lcndon, had
a wonderful hold upon his heart. Mr. Barnett would


descant upon the marvellous, telling utterances of the
head of the West Central Mission.
“ There was,” Mr. B. said, “in the man such grit,
such stubborn doggedness in his splendid efforts to reach
London’s West-End sinfulness.”
As a consequence, the services at St. James’s Hall,
Piccadilly, had great attractions for the Yorkshire
Evangelist. The big crowds—so like his own gatherings
in Australia and the colonies. The modes of spiritual
warfare so like those he himself adopted in the years gone
by, and the effects following so gloriously successful.
Oh, how his blood would tingle in his veins as he saw
the droves of seekers rush into the enquiry rooms, as the
powerful pleadings of the great preacher seemed to urge
them to decision, and push them into the kingdom ; and
as he would leave the building how he would pray that
the opportunity would be his once more, to work upon
the “ masses ” in Australia who were still outside the
kingdom on these lines. Then he would return to his
home, and wrestle with God—often all the night
through—for souls.
Mr. Burnett had a long list of names he always remem-
bered in his prayers —never forgetting his old friends who
had in any way helped him in his life work —praying God
to bless and keep them.
When he arranged for a mission anywhere he pleaded
with God days and nights beforehand for success. “ Not
unto me ; not unto me ; but to Thy name, oh, Lord, be
the glory,” was his constant cry.
The Rev. Dr. Parker, of the City Temple, London,
Mr. Burnett loved with a great love. When in London
in 1890 to 1895, every Thursday he could possibly get
away at noon you would find him there, listening to the
great preacher, drinking in the new thoughts and ideas of
(as he would say) the Bible Expositor of England.
When not engaged in mission work on the Sunday he
would seek out the churches of the “ pulpit kings ” of the
metropolis, and fairly revel in the things new and old
from their treasuries of knowledge.


The late Rev. Peter McKenzie was a special favourite
with Mr. Burnett. He never missed an opportunity of
hearing this eccentric and popular preacher.
I heard the Rev. Peter McKenzie, in company with
Mr. Burnett, lecture on the “Tribute Money.’’ The
audience were convulsed with laughter.
Taking out a large white handkerchief, in a second he
had twisted it into the shape of a fish. Then he quickly
put it under his left arm, and with both hands he
seemingly opened the fish's mouth, and took out between
his finger and thumb a piece of silver. It was equal to
anything I ever saw a conjurer perform. The laughter
was so great that it was several minutes before he could
continue his lecture.
Mr. Burnett, by post-card, constantly urged me to not
leave England without hearing Moody and Sankey, C. H.
Spurgeon, John McNeil, Dr. Allen, W. J. Dawson, Hugh
Price Hughes, M.A., and other great preachers. Thanks
to Mr. Burnett’s “ daily post-cards.” I did hear most of
the clerical and lay preachers and evangelists then in
England.
The Rev. James Haslam, author of “ From Death
to Life,” Mr. Burnett spoke highly of. He would have
me go to the Soldiers’ Institute, Westminster, to hear
Mr. Haslam, and I certainly was not disappointed.
Although there was not the fiery eloquence in his
sermonising I was led to expect, nor did he stiike me as a
man who would cause a big stir among the dry bones of
a congregation.
How frequently is it the case, that men a head and
shoulders above their fellows in any one special Christian
characteristic, although during life greatly honoured and
made much of, with shoals of supporters and admirers,
when death claims them the admiration and eulogisrns
lavished on the live man often seemingly die with him
in the breasts of his at one time reckoned dearest friends.
How fickle is popularity ! No matter who he is, or
what good he by his life and labours has accomplished,
history often repeats itself in the cry, “ The King is dead !
Long live the King!”


How evanescent is all human praise! A mere air
bubble, a prick with a pin will explode. One day the
masses are with the much belauded one, to a man; a year
or two after they seemingly have forgotten such a man
ever existed.
But it was not so with Matthew Burnett. In Victoria
and other parts of Australasia, Tasmania, and New
Zealand, the name of Matthew Burnett is now (1898) and
will be held in reverence for ages to come. Thousands
upon thousands to-day testify of his persuasive eloquence,
his “ ever-at-it ” efforts in the cause of temperance and
religion, and his herculean efforts as a social reformer.
No wonder he was called the Australian Father
Matthew and Yorkshire Evangelist. Wherever he was
known he was loved. His victories in the cause of truth
and righteousness were acknowledged by high and low,
rich and poor.
Bishops and their clergy, Methodists, Presbyterians,
and all the other sections of the Church of Christendom,
o-ave their testimonials to his work.
No other Christian man ever achieved such spiritual
and moral victories, and gained such laurels as a
“ getter-at ” the “ masses.”
Churches and school-rooms, public halls and theatres
were pushed into his service.
Members of Parliament, Premiers, Governors, and
Chief Justices one and all said—“ Matthew Bnrnett is a
wonderful power in the community he visits. He has the
knack of laying hold of the worst cases, and rescuing the
most depraved from (as one enthusiastic friend said) the
very pit of hell, as well as convincing the most hard-
headed debaters and logicians that the great evil and
curse of these fair Australian colonies, and the old
country, is the too free indulgence in intoxicants.
Mr. Burnett’s converts are to-day by the thousand.
His little badge of blue has been pinned to the coat of the
highest dignitaries of both Church and State
Mr. Burnett was the friend of everybody. The poor
besotted drunkard acknowledged him as a man and a
brother.


His big, sympathising heart beat loudly for the woes
and tribulations of the cast down and depraved victims of
strong drink. His appeals, both public and private had
soul in them. The listeners felt that every word uttered
by the people’s champion was true, and they almost
worshipped the “ man,” while they gave in to his what
some folk called sophistry , but what common-sense men
called Gospel Truths.


Sketch of Olattheta Bapnett,
And His Labours in Victoria.
March 2oth, 1872.
the whole of Victoria there is
no public man better known among the
wealthier, as well as the working classes, than
t^ie Yorkshire Evangelist. All through the
aD Ballarat district Matthew Burnett is known
and loved by thousands of the horny-handed
sons of toil. In the digger’s tent and rich man’s home
alike his untiring and never-ceasing labours in connection
with “ Temperance Reform,” and his noble efforts for the
raising of the fallen sons and daughters of Australia, has
won for him the well-merited confidence and esteem of
thousands of our colonists, who. it may be, differing with
him in creed and almost everything else, at the same time
viewing his herculean and wonderfully successful work of
saving men and women from the curse of intemperance,
overlook all minor points, and uniting with the u masses.”
who almost idolize him, place him on the highest
pinnacle of fame as a public benefactor, and one well
entitled to the name of the Australian “ Apostle of
Teetotalism.” In short, his working men’s meetings
are now, and, I believe, for many a year will be, the
mainstay of those who are waging war with the drinking
customs of society ; and if Matthew Burnett had done
naught else but establish these weekly re-unions amongst
us, his name as a great social reformer deserves to be
handed down to our children’s children.


It would be a sheer impossibility to try to convey
to those who have not listemd to his earnest appeals
any idea of the peculiarity of his manner, or the wonder-
fully sympathetic influence he invariably has over the
thousands he addresses. No doubt there are those who
object to his original style and excitable temperament. I
say original advisedly, for I believe Matthew Burnett has
many imitators. If Mr. Burnett were to heed the
thousand and one critics who object and find fault with
this, that, and the other, to them, eccentricities, he would
possibly thereby lose the great vantage power he has
gained, and weaken his never-failing stronghold on the
sympathies of the working classes, for whose special
benefit he seems so desirous. “ Oh,” said a poor fellow
who was leaving the theatre on Sunday last, “there is
no doubt, sir, whether right or wrong he is thoroughly in
earnest.’’
Who can listen to his thrilling recital of his early
career as a youthful victim of the cup, and follow him
through the harrowing scenes of those sad, weary days
and not feel with him a lasting, bitter hatred to the cause
of all his misery and wretchedness? His seemingly
futile attempts to curb and check the demon appetite
within him; his falls and his repentings; and when, as
he says, almost driven to despair at his own weakness and
inability to contend and successfully overcome the
gnawing at his vitals for the liquid fire, how, in the
strength of God, he vows and promises to taste not,
touch not, handle not the accursed thing ; and with
words of burning eloquence he tells from that hour to the
present he has not only kept faithfully his heaven-
registered vow, but by God’s help has devoted his life, his
talents, and all his bodily powers in trying to save
others from the drunkard’s hell and the drunkard's grave.
One scene from real life like this is more convincing than
a bushel of State platitudes, that go no further than the
ear, but never reach the heart.
Make the people feel, Mr. Preacher, if you want to
succeed. Drive your subject home by truthful, natural,


undisputed pictures of every day life, and you will soon
find a solution to the problem of the astonishing successes
achieved by Mr. Matthew Burnett wherever he goes.
It must have been exceedingly gratifying to Mr.
Burnett the mon ter houses,” if I may use a
theatrical phrase, which greeted him on his re-appearing
on Ballarat.
There was a regular “ cram ’’ on Sunday night. An
old stage manager Mr. Mathews, whispered to the writer
—“ Burnett licks the lot, sir ; none of the English theatrical
stirs ever drew a house like that. One house like that,
sir, to a young actor would make his fortune.”
Never has so many people been gathered in the Alfred
Hall, Ballarat.
At the conclusion of the meeting on Monday evening
Mr. Burnett held a kind of levee. Young and old, rich
and poor, in single file made their way in front of the
platform to say farewell, and to receive a parting word of
encouragement from their friend, scores having come
miles to say good-bye and Godspeed to the guest of the
evening. I have taken some trouble in gleaning correct
information from various sources re Mr. Burnett’s work
up to date.
I find Mr. Burnett commenced his labours in Victoria
amongst the working classes in September, 1863, at
Drysdale, near Geelong. From October, 1863, to March,
1864, he was in the Western Port district. In April,
1864, he made his first appearance on the goldfields, at
Piggoreet,” near Smythesdale (now called the Devil’s
Kitchen), and also at Rokewood. In 1866, at dunes,
where he stayed five months. Leaving Clunes he visited
Creswick, and spent four weeks there, lecturing every
week night and preaching three times on the Sunday.
November, 1866, he opened the temperance campaign
at Sebastopol, and worked the whole of that district.
Then Ballarat, where in twelve months’ incessant lectur-
ing, visiting, and holding mothers’ and other meetings, he
obtained 8,600 adherents to the total abstinence pledge.
In 1868 he was at Geelong, where 5,300 signed the
pledge. Next he visited Sandhurst; 3,000 signed the


pledge there. In 1869 Mr. Burnett visited the Western
District, taking the country between Camperdown and
Hamilton, where 6,000 signed the pledge, in spite of the
fierce opposition of the editrr of the Belfast Banner and
his pot-valiant friends. He again visited Creswick, and
gained a further accession to the teetotal ranks of 530.
CHILDREN’S SERVICES.
The children have not been forgotten by Mr. Burnett.
He has from time to time given a series of interesting and
instructive readings. Crowded meetings of the little ones
have been held. Thousands of the children (the future
men and women of our colony) have signed the pledge.
Mr. Burnett in his life work has received assistance
from ministers of all denominations —Roman Catholic
and Protestant. . Ministers of the Crown, too, have come
nobly forward, and gave their countenance and help to
the good work.
Mr. Burnett loves good, hearty singing. ]E very where
during his stay he has started temperance choirs, often
numbering as many as seventy members. If I were asked
to give a phrenological chart of Matthew Burnett I should
do so in very few words, and reveal to his friends all over
Victoria the grand secret of his unrivalled successes,
where, during his brief stay, he has added 27,000 names
to the roll of the “ temperance cause.”
I would, as my friend A, W. P. Ward says, “ reckon
him up ” thus ; —Decision of character , indomitable
perseverance , wondei ful push and tact in thoroughly
adapting himself to the circumstances and position ot
those amongst whom he labours. One who studiously
avoids personalities, and hard sayings about those who
differ from him in their views on the temperance question.
And, lastly, an unwavering faith in God , that what He
has promised He will certainly do. If I have not given a
faithful pen and ink sketch ot Matthew Burnett, the
Australian Father Matthew, it is not a lack of remi-
nescences of Mr. Burnett’s career in Victoria, nor a want
of sympathy with the great social reform in which he is
so industrially and successfully engaged.


flip. CDoysep, Stopekeepep,
CDapybopough, Vietopia.
HEN standing on the Maryborough Railway
1|| M |l Station a few days ago (December, 1898) a
Hg) Mr. Moyser, whom I had never previously
seen, said to me, “You, sir, are I believe,
Jl one of Mr. Burnett’s friends. Let me tell
m ® you that I have reason to thank God all the
TOT days of my life that Mr. Burnett ever
came to Sebastopol.
I was a publican when he commenced his great work
there. Another publican, called P—*—ly, urged me to go
and hear the Temperance Spouter. I did go, and got
converted. It is thirty-five years since then, but lam
still a teetotaller and a church member. I mourned
greatly when I heard of my dear friend's death. No man
in this colony I loved more than Matthew Burnett ; he
was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost. Strange to
say, the publican who urged me to go and hear Mr.
Barnett is long since dead. His life ended badly —com-
mitted self-murder when in delirium tremens. How true
is the old saying, ‘ One taken, another left.’”


Matthew Burnett’s Last
Hours.
FEEL sure there are few persons who knew the
good Matthew Burnett, who will not shed a
tear as they read the following letter received by
me just after Mr. Burnett’s death, and I am
confident all who read will sympathise with the
much-bereaved wife and family of our ever dear
friend and brother
THE AUSTRALIAN FATHER MATTHEW
Mrs. Burnett’s letter giving the particulars of her
husband’s last days on earth :
“ Hovingham, Yorkshire, England.
“ January 29th, 1896.
“ My Dear Silverpen,
“ I know you are sorrowing for your old friend—
for you loved each other so. Did you think you would
see him no more, when you left him ? When I came back
from Yorkshire 1 saw a change in him, on September 21st.
‘* Helooked sothin I was quite startled, and set to work
to nurse him up. Ido not know what he told you, but
while I was out he wrote to you on Friday, 13th Decem-
ber, and it was his very last le ter ; for he did not write
himself, after he got to Staintondale —his sister wrote
re his arrival, and then Polly did the writing. He went
on the 16th ; I followed on the 30th, after I heard of his
collapse on Xmas eve, and had heard from the doctor.
“ Oh, he was so patient, so grateful ; only complained of
being tired , always took what we gave him ; and the


doctor thought as he did this, we should pull him through.
He had to the very last hour his egg and milk in alter-
nation every hour, besides meat essences and other things.
Nothing disagreed with him. There was no disease the
doctor said, just nervous exhaustion. So, we hoped on.
“ Even the morning he passed away, the doctor thought
him slightly better —it seemed a crisis. The result,
syncope, and he went. He opened his eyes (he had been
sleeping), we were all there watching him, they had a
light in them I never saw before or since. A look of
rapture. He looked lovingly at the girls and his sister
and her husband, and then turned to me and said quite
loudly, ‘ Mamma Jesus.’ We could not catch the
intervening words. He softly breathed a few times more
and was gone , but, oh, the expression on his face —it
seemed full of glory, and it abode; he had it even in his
coffin, he looked young and radiant. We could hardly
go from looking on his dear face. He was so lovely in
death.
“ His last meetings were among his very best —a mission
ten days at Aylesbury of which the Rev. F. B. Swift
writes:—
“It exceeded our most sanguine expectations, its results
are far-reaching, the organisations started are doing such
good service, as well as the pledges taken, and the souls
won to Christ at the Sabbath services. ‘That was his last
mission from Oct. 6th to the 16th.’
He rested and was nursed up, and one Temperance
Sunday, November 24th, spoke in Bermondsey Town
Hall to over 3000 people. In the evening he preached
from the “ Prodigal Son ” to about 1400 in Locksfields
Chapel, South London Mission. Monday evening he
spoke at the public meeting, same place ; and this was his
last Sunday’s work. The doctor ordered him away to
the country, but he said he must stay for a meeting at
Penge (it had been promised months). I felt anxious, and
went with him, and I was glad I did, for it was his last
meeting on earth, and I had not been to one for a long
time. He was ready then to go to the country, having
promised them a fortnight’s mission as soon as he was


better ; a deputation waited on him to ask him in the
vestry while he was getting a glass of milk before leaving
for home.
“ He got through the meeting with the greatest ease.
We went by bus to Ludgate Circus, and from St. Paul’s
to Penge had a cab. He had tea and a rest and it did
not seem to tire him at all. The meeting was most
enthusiastic— 2500 present; and he said to me—‘Wasn’t
it grand ; quite like old times in Australia.’ Numbers
took the pledge.
‘“On Xmas eve he had a relapse. Pollie was with him.
He never rallied from it; never was out of bed after;
never took any solid food; but slept nearly all the time.
When awake he used to say—‘Oh, darling you are so
good to me;’ and he would talk a little, not much, and
sleep again. The first week his brain was so active; he
used to address meetings, offer prayers, point souls to
Christ. I asked him once, when he was sensible, about
friends. He said —‘Oh, yes, Silver pen—poor, dear
Silverpen.’ Another time he said —‘ David, tell them
all to pray for me at the Saturday night meeting. Oh,
yes, nothing like prayer. Nothing!’ I told him I was
going to write to Willie. Had he a message ? He said
—‘Yes, tell him to make his father’s God his God, and
He will never fail him.’
“ I do not think he then thought he was going to die,
or even until the Friday before his fifty-seventh birthday.
He said to me when I gave him his milk—‘l think I
shall die to-night, dear.’ 1 said—‘No, dear, the doctor
thinks you better.’ He said—‘ 1 think 1 shall go home
to-night. I said— ‘ Darling, you have Jesus with you.’
He said —‘ Oh, yes, so wondrously near , so wondrously
precious .’
“We watched him all the time ; after that 1 never left
him for twenty-seven hours. On Saturday afternoon they
made me go and lie down. I had only been asleep about
an hour, and he was sleeping, Lillie came and said she
thought he was not so well. I slipped on my dressing


gown and went in, altered the position of his head, gave
him his milk, and he slept again, I then went and dressed
and never left him again.”
“ He rests from his labours and his works follow him.”
“ With love to Mrs. G and family, and any old
friends you see,
“ Yours in deep sorrow,”
“ANNE BURNETT.”
W


*• 1
f
u
~r
1 1


CDatthetu Barnett’s Death.
HE death of dear Matthew Burnett (cabled from
London) came as a great surprise to his
numerous friends in these colonies, Tasmania,
and New Zealand. I shall not easily forget
his last adieus as he stood on the pier at
Tilbury Docks (September 1895) and beckoned
to me as the great ocean steamer “ Oroya” moved out to
sea. Ever faithful and true, there he stood, tears rolling
down his cheeks as he shouted aloud —“ It may be the
last time you and I, dear friend, will meet on earth. If
so, good-bye, a long good-bye ; but we will meet in our
Father’s house above.” Then pointing upwards, he said
“ Keep looking up. God, our Father, will not leave us
comfortless. Only be faithful.”
Dear, kind fellow, it seemed like as if he felt the
parting was for ever in this world, as it proved to be.
Now he has gone. T can truly say never a more true
and devoted friend lived than Matthew Burnett, and I
can with all sincerity say that Matthew Burnett was as
pure minded a soul as ever lived on earth.
I knew all about the man ; he confided in me his most
secret wishes and desires, and I always found that the
main principle of his life and labors was the good of his
fellow men and the glory of God.
He was a high-mind‘ed, yet humble disciple of Jesus, who,
in every transaction of life, put this test on his actions —
Will ray conduct in this matter please God. If not, then
I decline to compromise myself to please any man, though
I should be benefitted by thousands of pounds ! He was
a man honorable in all his dealings —one who “ did to
others as they would he should do unto them.”


Matthew Barnett was the soul of liberality. When
money was plentiful with him, he kept at his own
cost,colporteurs and bible-women going about Melbourne
and suburbs seeking to do good to the masses.
Mrs. Varcoe (the mother of Livingstone Home) one of
his bible-women, could tell of his big-heartedness to the
poor and needy.
Money to Mr Burnett was but a channel whereby he
could help others, and often and often again would the
cunning of swindlers and self-styled Christian professors
get round Mr Burnett for monetary loans never to be
repaid. He once told me of a case. Said he, “ I lent a
man (giving his name) fs°< who said it would save his
family from misery. He gave me a promissory note.
When I examined it, I found it was made payable thirty
days after the Day offudgment.
Poor Burnett said—“No doubt the fellow laughed
at my simplicity in not examining the document ; but,
never mind, I don’t envy such a man his roguish trick.
God judge between him and me, and bring him to
repentance.” It was a common saying with those with
whom Mr. Burnett located occasionally, when a knock
came to the door to say—“ Another of poor Burnett’s
hangers-on, asking for help.” And that was something
he never refused. Only tell a good, sympathising, tearful
story, and when you had the tears coming in his eyes, your
suit was gained.
This I had from an inveterate loafer, at one time the
editor of a Christian paper (1 he War Cry) , but whose
life was a series of “drunks,” conversions, and back-
slidings, and who, after many falls and recoveries, died a
miserable death.
It was really at one time, in Melbourne, no kindness to
give Mr. Burnett money. He, would most likely give all
he had in his pockets to the first poor wretch he found
in needy circumstances.
The open-handedness of Matthew Burnett was pro-
verbial, and known to all his friends—self was entirelv
put out of the question. “The Lord will provide,” was


his motto, and “ sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof,’
his cheery answer, when his friends would tell him of
provision for the future.
He often said to the writer—“ Better err on the safe
side—better give to ninety-nine rogues—than allow the
hundredth, who is deserving, to want.”
The Australian Father Matthew :
His Life and Work.
From the Andover Advertiser, England.
It is not possible within the limited space at our disposal
to do more than furnish our readers with a miniature
sketch of Mr. Matthew Burnett, who has just recently
visited Romsey and addressed large and enthusiastic
meetings at the Town Hall. A mass of literature has
been written about this God-fearing and philanthropic
aentleman ; but below will be found most of what is
original. Mr. Burnett is known amongst the followers of
Sir & Wilfred Lawson in England as “The Australian
Father Matthew.” by reason of the great and glorious
work which he has achieved in that vast continent; but
Mr. Burnett delights in calling himself “The Yorkshire
Evangelist and Social Reformer,” and he has every right
to lay claim to that designation. He was born on the
10th of January, 1839, at Cloughton, near Scarborough,
in Yorkshire, of parents who belonged to the yeoman
class. When scarcely 14 years of age he entered the
largest drapery establishment in Scarborough—W.
Rowntree and Co.’s During his youthful days he fell a
victim to England’s greatest bane to many—drink. The
chief instrument in the hands of God in effecting his con-
version was a pious and devoted young lady, who after-
wards became his wife. This great event took place on
the 19th of May, 1857, when he experienced that change
of heart which the Scriptures describe as being “born
again.” Old things had passed away, and all things had


become new. On the same date Mr. Burnett took the
total abstinence pledge from a distinguished member of the
Society of Friends, the venerable William Rowntree, J.P.,
of Scarborough, who is still living, in his 89th year, and
of whom, together with Mrs. Rowntree, Mr. Burnett
speaks in terms of the deepest affection and gratitude, and
who have been his truest and most loyal friends from that
day down to the present. On his conversion Mr. Burnett
became a member of the Wesleyan Church, and set about
to work in Christian service with that energy and earnest-
ness which have characterised the whole of his life. It
was at this period chat Mr. Burnett discovered one great
fact —that intemperance, gambling and other vices formed
the chief barriers towards the social, moral, and religious
elevation of the masses of the people. He. at this time
regarded total abstinence as the one great lever that would
help the masses to attain a nobler, purer, and better life,
and as a stepping-stone to the higher life which awaited
them. After laboring with unfailing energy in the North
at Whitehaven, where his ministry, both in the pulpit
and on the temperance platform, and especially amongst
the colliers, was abundantly blessed and rewarded with a
rich harvest, his desire to visit Australia ripened into
determination. His friends did everything possible to
dissuade him, but he “ saw a hand they did not see, and
heard a voice they did not hear.” Under this impression
he declined pressing overtures to remain at home, believing
that God had called him to a work at the Antipodes.
After several farewell meetings he, with his devoted wife,
set sail in May, 1863, for Melbourne in the good ship
“ Norfolk,” and arrived at his destination on the roth of
August.
The land was all before them
Where to chose their place of rest, and
Providence their guide.
His work throughout Australasia had two aspects. In
one he appeared as a fervent preacher of the Gospel, a
religious awakener, on whose lips the people, especially
the working classes, hung with delight, and he found his


happiest sphere in special evangelistic work In one he
could attract men and women to the world’s marvellous
Redeemer, and in the other aspect of his work he was a
successful pleader for total abstinence from intoxicating
drink. Both have been carried on simultaneously and
each have reacted on the other. Though cherishing an
affectionate loyalty to his own branch of the Christian
Church, and carrying on his spiritual ministration as one
of its recognised agents, he was the means of supplying
large numerical accessions to the membership of all evan-
gelical denominations. For the first nine years in Victoria
alone he delivered between four and five thousand
addresses. Such an herculean task resulted in great
physical exhaustion and loss of voice Acting on the
advice of the leading doctors of Melbourne he revisited
his native land. This was in 1872. He was invited then
to attend the annual meeting of the National Temperance
League, and he was accorded a very gratifying reception ;
but owing to his physical debility he only rose and bowed
his acknowledgements and resumed his seat. He formed
the acquaintance of many eminent ministers and philan-
thropists during the two years he remained in England
before returning to Australia.
It may here be of interest to state that Mr. Burnett is
a very old Rechabite, a Son of Temperance, a Good
Templar, a prominent leader in the Blue Ribbon Gospel
Temperance movement, and he also ranks as a “ Royal
Arch Mason ” in the great Brotherhood of the World.
When engaged in mission work this veteran advocate
spoke from ten to twelve times each week, and never less
than three times on Sundays in the different churches, and
to mass meetings for all classes and creeds, in parks,
recreation reserves, and other public places. The value
and genuineness of Mr. Burnett’s work has been acknow-
ledged in high places, governors, judges, premiers, and
leading colonists taking part in his meetings.
Before going into detail of his labours in the Southern
Hemisphere a description of his personality may be of
interest.


Mr. Burnett is one who ever since the beginning of his
public career has been faithtul to society in regard to the
burden of his calling. His personal appearance is in his
favour, commanding and stately, standing about sft. roin.,
of slender build and apparently muscular and wiry, his
voice powerful, with an intellectual head, well-shaped and
sharply-cut features, bearded, and his hair iron-grey, with
an earnest and loving expression of face. He has not,
perhaps, the powers of a cultivated orator, and he does not
resort to any platform tricks or clap-trap to gain a hearing.
Of a highly nervous temperament—characteristic ol
Torkshiremen—of rapid utterance, with few but forcible
gesticulations, and correct in expressing himself, he quickly
impresses his audience with the commanding importance
of his subject and purpose; and as he hurries on one feels
that there is before him a true man in deadly struggle with
a giant evil, whose whole being-soul and body —is bent
on rescuing his fellow men from its grasp. Man physical
is a true machine, capable of only a certain amount of
work ; but Matthew Burnett seemed up to any amount
of work whilst in Australia, and was always on the “go.’’
Though his hair is sprinkled with “ the churchyard
flowers,” and though, as the result of ceaseless toil in
speaking, his voice has lost some of its ring and flexibility,
his eye and face glow with as much earnest benevolence,
and his soul is filled with as much holy fire and stirred
with as much nervous power as when he first started.
His platform is broad, and in the enunciation of his views
he neither passes into extremes nor does he hazard any
statement which is not absolutely true in respect of fact.
In no sense does he ever approach religious sectarianism
or party politics. It is with humanity and its sufferings
he deals ; sufferings the outcome chiefly of one cause, and
best expressed, as the late Dr. Guthrie said, by the Saxon
word drunkenness. To aid in the rooting out of that
curse he has consecrated his life. Neither the theology nor
the creed of any denomination comes within the scope of
his teaching and effort on the platform. His texts are
taken from the lives of men, and his theories and illustra-
tions are drawn from these lives as seen before and after


they have come under the reconstructive power of sobriety
and godliness. The ground he takes is that the human
mind is a magnificent ruin, and that in restoring it to its
original grandeur a first and all-important step is to
impress men with a holy horror of tampering with the
seductive cause which has wrought so much disaster upon
families. Upon a platform so broad Protestants and
Roman Catholics should stand with him, and they may
do so without the shadow of a fear that their denomina-
tional feelings will be either approached or touched.
That has often been testified to in the fact that Episco-
palian and Roman Catholic bishops and priests, and the
clergymen of every Protestant denomination, have
occupied a place on his platform at his meetings and
presided as chairmen. In most towns in the Australian
colonies he has held meetings, where the breadth of his
platform has been recognised and acted on by all the
denominations.
But we have diverted from the actual results of his
work. To return to his voyage back to Australia, after
having visited England for about two years in search of
health. When off the Canary Islands the vessel became
dismasted, which led the captain to go to Gibraltar, where
they were detained for seven weeks, until the ship was
thoroughly repaired to start afresh. This was regarded
as providential, because it afforded Mr. Burnett the oppor-
tunity of access to Her Majesty’s regiments who were
stationed there. During his seven weeks' stay there he
had the honour of addressing five regiments, and, through
the courtesy of the officers of the Admiralty, addressed
several meetings on board Her Majesty’s warships then
anchored in tire bay. As a result of this work among the
red and bluejackets large numbers of the men took the
pledge at the hands of Mr. and Mrs. Burnett, and when
they left for Melbourne they were presented by those who
had experienced good results from their labours with a
silver medal and other tokens of the sailors’ and soldiers’
affection. On Mr. Burnett’s arrival in Melbourne he was
welcomed in the large Town Hall by the Good Templars
then in session, numbering 4000 people. He resumed his


work with improved strength, and in 1875 he became
general missioner of the Wesleyan Home Missionary
oociety ot Victoria, in which capacity he laboured until
1*79. 1 hen ms labours in Victoria terminated, after
which he visited South Australia, every part of which
heard the sound of his voice, and where he gave the pledge
and the ribbon to more than 35,000 people. He then
proceeded to Western Australia, which at this moment is
occupying the attention of the whole civilised world on
account of the rich discoveries of gold. Mr. Burnett was
the first evangelist and social reformer who visited that
distant part of the Australian colonies, where he was
welcomed, as in the Eastern Colonies, by the Governor
and Bishop and many of the leading colonists. After
prosecuting his work through a large portion of that great
western territory he returned to Melbourne and then
passed on to Hobart, the capital of Tasmania. Every part
of that beautiful little island he visited in the prosecution
ot his two-fold mission. From Tasmania he proceeded to
New Zealand, the Great Britain of the South, the land of
mountains, rivers, lakes, &c. Here he commenced his
work amongst the Maoris, and delivered 1250 addresses,
and gave the pledge to upwards of of the people.
While carrying on his mission work he had special faci-
lities for forming his own unbiassed opinion of them. A
hner race of men and women, physically, it would be
difficult to find. They are patriotic, fond of their children,
cute and shrewd. The men are clever in debate, many of
them are intelligent, some of them are powerful orators
and great mimics When Mr. Burnett left Tasmania for
New Zealand in March, 1885, he determined to devote a
portion of his time to the Maoris. It was not until the
middle of June, 1886, that he was brought into direct
contact with them at the close of a long tour in the Middle
Island. His first meeting was held at Wairau, near
Blenheim, in the province of Marlborough The Rev.
Thomas Grace (Episcopalian), w*ho ranks among the best
Maori linguists, acted as interpreter. After his address,
Rore, chief of the tribe, asked him a number of questions,
and then, amidst great cheering, advanced to the table,


signed the pledge, and took the blue ribbon, his example
being followed by all the tribemen, women, and children.
The following letter was forwarded to the chiefs in the
North Island : —“This is my word to the chiefs and all
the people of the country called Te Ika a Mani (North
Island). My friends. —All my people have joined the Blue
Ribbon Army. You must all support that which will
produce right and prosperity. Tawhiao, whom you and
I respect, has joined. Enough from Rore Puke Rowhatu
Ngatirama.” Mr. Burnett’s second native meeting was
held at Te Wai Poappoa, in the Wairarapa Valley beyond
Wellington, on the 19th of July, in connection with a
Land Court, when crowds of Maoris were gathered
together from a radius of twenty miles. The meeting
was held in a large house, which was crowded. One of
the natives acted as interpreter. The principal chief, a
large landed proprietor, first welcomed him, according to
Maori custom. Then the visiting chiefs from the
neighboring tribes offered their salutations ; all, however,
declining to commit themselves to any definite line of
action until they had heard his address. When he rose
to speak the scene was to him altogether unique, the
entire company seated on both sides of the building in
their ordinary posture. After his address the leading chief,
who had presided, rose to his feet and said, “What our
friend has told us is true. Drink has been the Maori’s
greatest enemy. Our fathers, mothers, brothers, and
sisters’ friends had died through it. Our land has been
taken from us. The white man has got it. This Blue
Ribbon is life to the Maori. God has sent our friend to
us across the sea to deliver us from our greatest curse.”
After explaining the nature of the obligation which the
pledge imposed, the chief rose a second time and signified
his intention to take the blue ribbon. Three other
influential chiefs followed his example. Subsequently
nearly all the people did so, and before returning from
the pah the chief called for three cheers for Matiu Panetu,
the minister of the Blue Ribbon as they called him. At
Waipawa, in Hawks Bay, the residence of Hori Ropihi, a
meeting was held in the Oddfellows’ Hall. After the


usual Maori welcome, Hori Ropihi advanced to the table,
on which was spread some presents from the Maoris, and
said : “ This mat, this spear, these green stones, and these
pound notes are presented by the Maoris of Waipawa
as a token of respect and gratitude towards Mr. Burnett
for the good work he is doing among the Maoris.” As
the result of that meeting 120 signed the pledge. He
visited among other places too numerous to mention the
once famous and rich Thames Goldfield, where the chiefs
and scores of their people joined the movement. From
there he travelled overland to Rotorua, within thirteen
miles of Tarawera, the scene of the recent eruption. Mr.
Johnson, the Government representative, offered him
every facility for carrying out his native work, and as an
example to the Maoris, who had suffered more in that
part of Wonderland, perhaps, than any other through
drink, took the blue ribbon along with the sergeant of
police and native constable. A meeting was held in the
Runanga House, one of the finest native houses in the
island ; when all the chiefs, their wives, and nearly all the
people signed.
Native meetings were held at Upper Wairarapu, Foxton,
Fielding, and Wanganui, the last mentioned being the
terminus of his West Coast tour. He had the good
fortune to be in Wanganui during the sittings of the Land
Court, when a large number of influential chiefs and their
people were collected together from near and far. The
judge courteously adjourned the Land Court during the
afternoon sitting, in order that he might address the
natives. The Hon. J. Ballance, native minister, presided,
and the Rev. A. Williams acted as interpreter. As the
result of that meeting 15 chiefs took the blue ribbon, and
hundreds of the people. We have mentioned a few of the
many of the places which Mr. Burnett visited during his
campaign amongst the Maoris, and as the result of the
mission 60 chiefs and 2000 of their people became
abstainers ; while five hundred families received “family
cards.” A number of influential chiefs were appointed
deputies to introduce the blue ribbon to tribes which Mr.
Burnett found it impossible to visit. The question has


been repeatedly asked what proportion of the Maoris
remain faithful to their obligation. Tavvhio, the late
Maori King, and a large portion of those who, through his
influence, gave up all intoxicants, remained true to their
pledge. Hon. Rophihi, whom the native minister regards
in the light of an apostle of temperance, assured Mr.
Burnett that only a very small percentage of the 11,000
who took his pledge had broken it. The Rev. A. Williams
of Wanganui, stated at his farewell meeting that out of
500 who had become members of the movement, he only
knew of two or three who had broken their pledge, and
and then had manifested their great sorrow, and desired
to take it again. In all his intercourse with Maoris as well
as Europeans, in private and public, Mr. Burnett pointed
out hov weak and impotent human nature was to stand
before the fierce blasts of temptation unless sustained by
the matchless strength and power of God. Amongst those
who rendered invaluable help to Mr. Burnett in his native
work, were the Hon. J. Ballance, late Premier and native
minister, Sir George Grey, ex-governor (now in England),
the Bishop of Auckland and Waiapu, the Venerable Arch-
deacon Clarke, Mr. E. C Baker, Sheriff of Wellington,
and the Revs. Grace, Williams, Jennings, and Goodyear
(Episcopalians) Revs. Gittis, Read, Williams, and Booser
(Wesleyans); also the Northern Secular Press and New
Zealand Methodist.
After New Zealand Mr, Burnett went to Sydney, the
capital of New South Wales, and traversed every part of
that great colony, which occupied him above two years
continuous travelling. From New South Wales he
proceeded to Queensland, working his way up as far as
Cooktown, one thousand miles from Brisbane on the great
coast line. This terminated Mr. Burnett’s Australasian
tour and work, which occupied him years.
To give our readers some idea of the magnitude of his
campaign we may mention that the vast Southern Empire
which this indefatigable worker visited would, in point of
distance, represent more than thirty-five times the extent
of Great Britain and Ireland. During these years of
continuous work Mr. Burnett delivered no less than 7500


evangelistic addresses to all classes, creeds, and nationalities
represented beneath the Southern Cross, whilst 5000
addresses were delivered on total abstinence, which Mr.
Burnett has regarded as forming part of his great life
work, to reach the masses of the people. These addresses
were delivered not only in churches, but in theatres and
all kinds of buildings, in addition to which multitudes of
people were addressed in the streets and parks, and thus
were reached many who otherwise might possibly never
have heard his message. Mr. Burnett also addressed work-
men connected with the great Government railways during
dinner hours, also representatives of every kind of labour
in factories, workshops, &c., as well as policeman, prisoners
in gaol and other large penal establishments. He has
devoted one afternoon of each week for twenty-five years
in speaking to women only, and this is not to be wondered
at when Mr. Burnett owes his early conversion to the
direct influence of woman. As a result of these meetings
it is computed that more than 20,000 women had taken
the pledge at his hands, apart from those who had
received spiritual blessings. One direct outcome of his
work in Victoria was the establishment of a refuge for
fallen women at Ballarat. At this latter place a once cele-
brated brewery (the Charlie Napier) became the mission hall
of the popular and successful town mission (caried on so
successfully for 21 years by the late Martin Hosking), itself
the result of Mr. Burnett’s campaign.
In Melbourne, where he laboured for twelve months, a
home for fallen women was also established, through
which 800 have passed. Another outcome of his work
in Victoria was the opening of the first coffee palace
in the Southern Hemisphere, the foundation stone of which
he laid in conjunction with the Mayor of Melbourne and the
Chief Justice of Victoria, and latterly opened two others.
From the inception of his work in Australia until
its close Mr. Burnett’s platform, like that of the late
Father Matthew, was as broad as humanity itself. Among
those who presided at his great temperance gatherings all
over the country may be mentioned Her Majesty’s repre-


sentatives, Governors of several of the Colonies, Premiers,
Judges, Bishops (Anglican and Roman Catholic), and
representatives of all classes and grades. Among the
many who took the pledge, amounting to .upwards of
200,000, might be included a number ot foremost colonists,
and many who through signing the pledge have become
respectable members of society, and who are to-day occu-
pying all sorts of positions in the colonies. Since Mr.
Burnett returned in 1890 his health has been restored and
his voice has come back again, and he has conducted
missions in various parts of the kingdom. The most
remarkable mission which reminded him of his working
the Colonies was a six weeks’ mission which was con-
ducted in the North of Ireland —Belfast and district—two
years ago. He delivered upwards of too addresses and
gave the pledge to 5,000 people, x,ooo of whom were
known to be victims to Ireland’s great curse, whisky.
Latterly Mrs. Burnett’s health has broken down, pre-
venting his return to Australia at present. She was one of
his greatest helpers in connection with his work, both
evangelistic and temperance, and for a series of years both
in Australia, and as far as practicable in England, she had
assisted him in his women’s meetings. Throughout the
whole of his career Mr. Burnett has received the utmost
courtesy and co-operation from all the great metropolitan
and provincial papers throughout the colonies and he
speaks in unmeasured terms of thankfulness and gratitude
for the incalculable service which the press had always
rendered him. Since their return to England they had a
public welcome accorded them in Scarborough, their native
town, by the Mayor, ministers of churches, and 37 temper-
ance societies. A similar welcome was accorded them in
Whitehaven, Cumberland, rhe scene of his former labours
32 yeais ago. The United Kingdom Alliance honoured
him with an official welcome at Exeter Hall, London,
where all the temperance societies in London were
represented, and the Venerable Archdeacon Farrar pre-
sided. He was also welcomed in Manchester by the
Countess of Carlisle at the annual Alliance meeting. In


addition to the above welcomes he also received one from
His Eminence the late Cardinal Manning, whom he had
twice had the pleasure of meeting in his palace at West-
minster. At the Cardinal's request Mr. Burnett spoke at
the annual fete of the League of the Cross at the Crystal
Palace. That was the last year of the Cardinal’s life, 1892.
Mr Burnett was the only Protestant who spoke on behalf
of Australia, and he referred to the invaluable help which
he received in all parts of the great Continent from
bishops, priests, and prominent laymen, who had presided
at his meetings when he gave his lecture on the late
Father Matthew, and who were doing similar work in the
southern lands to that done in this country by the League
of the Cross.
The direct result of Mr. Burnett’s efforts are simply
prodigious. The institutions which he has been chiefly
instrumental in establishing are noble tributes to his
unselfish and self-denying toil. Mr. Burnett has not only
power, but in his earnest yearning for the good of his
fellow men he has actually created the opportunities for
using it grandly. In his temperance and other social
enter >rises he is bound by no denominational restrictions,
and left untrammelled to take his own course, form his
own plans, and rally to his side willing helpers from every
quarter. In these he calls no man master ; he rules his
associates and the thousands who gather round him with
an imperial power; he is governed by no recorded laws,
except those of wisdom, truth and love; he imitates no
man ; no man will ever succeed in imitating him ; in
short, he is a law unto himself, and to all who work with
him. There is a general impression about that he has
been almost exclusively a temperance advocate. This is
not so, as the above reference to his work in Australia
will show. Mrs. Burnett has proved not only a true
helpmate to Mr. Burnett, but her wise counsels and help
in his work, both evangelistic and temperance (notably at
his women’s meetings), are known to those were eye-
witnesses of her rare devotion in this and of every other
good work.


From the Scarborough Mercury, England.
Deep regret was expressed in Scarborough on Sunday,
when the news was received that Mr. Matthew Burnett,
the well known temperance reformer, widely known as
the “ Yorkshire Evangelist’' and the “Father Matthew
of Australia, ’ had breathed his last. About a month ago,
Mr. Burnett, who was suffering from nervous prostration,
was advised by his doctor in London, that with a period
of entire rest and country air he might recover sufficiently
to take up his work again. He accordingly visited his
sister, Mrs. Emmerson, at Stainton Dale, where his wife
and daughters joined him. About Christmas his con-
dition became much worse, but even on Saturday, no one
thought for a moment that the end was so near After
midnight on Saturday he became much worse and died
about half-past four Sunday morning. Not only in
Scarborough and district, but throughout the United
Kingdom and Australia, Mr. Matthew Burnett will be
long remembered as one of the most earnest of tem-
perance advocates. He was born at the White House,
Cloughton, on the 10th of June, 1839. After finishing
his school life in 1852, he entered upon a commercial life,
being taken as an apprentice into the business house of
what was then known as the firm of “ William Rowntree,”
in Newborough. Speaking of this period of his life, Mr.
Burnett, when interviewed in 1890, said “ I became
addicted to drinking habits, which quickly told upon me
and my health, and consequently affected to some extent
my*business habits. Mr. Rowntree was very considerate,
and bore with me and my habits with great patience,
while I, when taken to task, as I was at times, signed the
pledge again and again, breaking it as often as I took it.
At last on the nth of May, 1857, I was truly awakened
to my sad position and the inevitable fate that awaited
me if I did not reform, not only from drink, but unless I
resolved to lead a better life. I had never felt so serious
about my condition before, but I was convinced that my
former mode of life was wrong and wicked. Yes, thirty-
three years ago, I first felt a need for a strength and grace I
had not formerly possessed. Indeed it was the date of my


awakening to a newer, brighter, happier, and what had
also proved a better and more useful life. Mr. Rowntree
was delighted to hear the news of my conversion, and he
manifested then, —indeed he had always done—the most
sympathetic interest in my welfare. In his presence
during the following week I signed the pledge once more,
this time in God’s name and strength, and Mr. Rowntree
kept a duplicate of that pledge, and I believe he has it to
this day. I soon began to speak at small meetings, my
name being added to the Methodist plan as an exhorter
and member of the singing band. Subsequently I was
appointed a local preacher, and what with speaking at
temperance meetings and preaching at Methodist chapels
my spare time was fully occupied. I remained with Mr.
Rowntree in all about six years, and at the end of that
lime I gave myself to travelling with goods, and in the
evening speaking at meetings, which proved successful,
and taking Sunday services, which were always well
attended. This went on for some time, until I found the
demands upon my time too great to permit of my follow-
ing my business, and in the year 1861 I abandoned
commercial pursuits and went to Whitehaven, in
Cumberland, to devote the whole of my time to Gospel
Temperance work. Here I laboured for sixteen months,
although my first intention was but to remain six weeks.
But the work grew and prospered, and many were led to
live reformed lives, signing the pledge, joining the church,
and working for God in various ways. In Whitehaven I
received my training for the subsequent work to which
my life has been devoted abroad. When I first went to
Whitehaven the condition of things among the colliers
and iron-ore workers was deplorable, but I threw in my
lot with them, visited them in their homes, addressed
large crowds of them in the pits during dinner hour, from
time to time, and by and by a change came over the
district, and soon sobriety and contentment reigned,
where formerly drunkenness was not solely the cause of
so much distress among these people, for I found
gambling prevailed among them, and was in numerous
cases the origin of the downfall of many who might have


been, and many who had been in good circumstances. I
loved my work, and in 1863 I felt impelled to go to
Australia, believing I should find greater scope for my
labours in Gospel Temperance. My departure from
Whitehaven was in some respects a sad and yet a joyous
one, for many hundreds testified to their having been
reclaimed from the ways of a drunkard, and consequently
the sorrows of such. I had delivered in that sixteen
months over four hundred addresses, and visited upwards
of 3,000 families. I arrived in Melbourne in August,
1863, in the clipper ship Norfolk, having left England in
May. I arrived there almost unknown. One or two
persons I do remember, among whom were the late Mr.
George Jefferson and Mr. Charles Wilson, and the latter
I find has recently returned from Australia Victoria
was the colony to which 1 determined to give my energies,
and for nine years my whole time was devoted to the
prosecution of the good work there. Constantly speaking
often before large audiences taxed my strength to the
utmost, and at the end of nine years I was ordered to
return to England, which I did in 1872. My health —as
many Scarborough people know —was completely broken
down, and many thought I should not recover. I was
absent some two years, going back to the colonies in 1874,
and re-opened my campaign at once, and continued in the
work with unvarying success until 1879. I commenced
with a monster meeting at Easter in the Melbourne
Town Hall, where I had an audience of over 4,000
persons, while about me were all the most distinguished
members of the community. For several years I was
acting under engagement to the Wesleyan Home Mission
in the extension of the gospel throughout Victoria,
reserving, however, as before, my Saturdays for working
among the masses, and my Mondays for the mothers’
meetings At this period also I started the ‘ Bible Women’s
Society,’ the members of which went about among the
sick, dying, and the fallen and degiaded of their own sex.
I went all over Victoria, holding torchlight demon-
strations with the most encouraging and gratifying success.
One of these meetings promised to be so great that there


was found to be no building sufficently large to contain
all the peo )le, and I addressed some 10,000 people in the
open air at Collingvvood Flat. I was no less successful in
Emerald Hill, Sandridge, South Yarra, VVilliamstovvn,
and indeed in all the various suburbs. During one twelve-
month alone I succeeded in getting no less than 20,000
persons to sign the pledge, and the result of my labours
up to the close of 1879 —when I was accorded the honour
of a great farewell meeting at the Town Hall, Melbourne,
presided over by Sir William Clarke, M.L.C., Hon. James
Munro, and Hon. W. M. K. Vale, being also present—was
that over 60,000 persons took the pledge, and 10,000
donned the Red Ribbon of total abstinence. But I need
not enumerate the details of my work here or elsewhere,
since it was something after this fashion. Monday after-
noons I devoted to mothers’ meetings, and as the result of
this phase of the work alone during my stay in Victoria,
in all about seventeen years, no less than 60,000 persons
signed the pledge. Ten thousand took the Red Ribbon,
which was the temperance badge in my work in Australia
at that time, while 1,000 families, chiefly in Melbourne,
received what we called * family cards.’ One outcome of
the work, I am pleased to say, is the establishment of what
is known as the Ballarat Town Mission, which is doing a
goid work, Collingwood Coffee Palace, and the South
Yarra Home for the fallen and destitute. Saturday
nights were always devoted to mass meetings, which was
the custom wherever I might be. These gatherings were
full of interest, and the new converts there declared their
allegiance to the cause, and we wt-re all encouraged for
another week's work I always spoke on temperance on
these occasions, except any circumstance arose which
might change the tone of the meeting South Australia
was my next field, every part of which I visited in three
years. This Mission field yielded 33,000 new names to
the temperance pledge, and no less than 35,000 took the
Red Ribbon Badge. It was a most glorious time through-
out, and our meetings were singularly successful in every
way. Next I pushed my way into Western Australia,
and found I was the first evangelist and temperance


advocate who had visited the colony up to that time. I
toiled on for six months, and the same success rewarded
my efforts. My attention was then turned to Tasmania,
where I had ten months of hard labour, but it was
encouraging in the extreme, and no less than 15,000 fresh
pledges, and 16,000 Blue Ribbons, which was the color
recognised then. New Zealand was next opened to me,
and I traversed it from end to end, and again, as before,
crowds were reclaimed from the evil habits of drunken-
ness. But I will not weary you with any further
narration of my work,” said the reformer, “but at your
leisure you may glance at these papers which may interest
you, and perhaps give you in brief a good outline of my
subsequent labours. With respect to my visit to New
Zealand, however, permit me to say that I penetrated far
into the King country, and, by means of skilled inter-
preters, delivered many addresses to the Maoris, upon
whom I made so much impression that thousands
including several of the most important chiefs, signed the
pledge, and used their influence to get others to follow
their example. Then I was presented with several
exceedingly handsome and valuable mats, beside green
stones, a rare spear and money. I spent about two years
going all over that beautiful colony, and delivered alto-
gether about 12,000 addresses, and travelled 1,000 miles.
In my work I was always assisted by the Bishops, and the
most influential men in the colony. I found ready sym-
pathy everywhere, and no less among the Maoris than
our own people, while the Maoris were especially kind
and interested in what I said and did. Many times the
great chiefs took the pledge and ribbons as examples to
their people, and I have good reason to believe that very
few indeed of them ever neglected their obligations. I
gave the ribbon to some 2,000 natives, and continue still
to hear that the good work is progressing satisfactorily
among them. The result of the two years in New Zea-
land was that 35,000 ribbons were given away.
In the early portion of 1890, Mr. Burnett’s voice and
health completely broke down, and acting upon the advice
of his doctor, he, together with his wife and family paid a


visit to England. On his return he received a public and
hearty welcome from the late Cardinal Manning, Arch-
deacon Farrar, the Rev. Charles Garrett, and a host of
other eminent philanthropists. He was welcomed at a
great meeting in Scarborough, and also in Whitehaven,
while the United Kingdom Alliance held a reception in
his honour at Exeter Hall. He has since conducted
numbers of large and successful evangelistic and gospel
Temperance Missions in various parts of the United
Kingdom, and was actively engaged until, as stated above,
his health gave way about a month ago. He went to
Australia in 1863, and so energetic and successful were
his labours, that an old Australian magistrate (Henry
Glenny, Esq., J.P.), now in London, writes, “Matthew
Burnett has done more for religion and temperance in
the Australian Colonies than any living man. His con-
verts are by tens of thousands. Scores of our ministers
in every church owe their conversion to his wonderful
efforts.’ The funeral service will be held in the West-
borough Wesleyan Church on Wednesday at one o’clock,
and will no doubt be attended by a large number of
Christian and temperance workers and friends.
THE FUNERAL.
SERVICE AT WESTBOROUGH CHAPEL.
Amidst tokens of sincere sympathy and regret the body
of Mr. Matthew Burnett, the “Father Matthew” of
Australia, was on Wednesday conveyed to its last resting
place in the Scarborough Cemetery. The funeral cortege
left Stanton Dale about half-past ten and journeyed by-
road to Scarborough, arriving at the Westborough Wes-
leyan Chapel a few minutes past one o'clock. The coffin,
which was surmounted by three beautiful wreaths, was
received at the main entrance to the chapel by the Rev.
J.M.Wamsley, superintendent of the Circuit. Immediately
behind the coffin followed the chief mourners, and as the
mournful procession moved along the aisle, the opening


words of the Burial Service were read by Mr. Warnsley.
The coffin was of plain oak, with brass mountings, the
breast-plate bearing the following inscription :
Matthew Burnett.
Born, January 10th, 1839.
Died, January 12th, 1896.
“ He sleeps in Jesus.”
When the service commenced with the singing of the
hymn, “ Come let us join our friends above,” the bod}' of
the large chapel was crowded. the principal mourners
were Mrs. Burnett, the widow, and her two daughters.
Miss Burnett, of Manningham, sister of the deceased; Mr.
and Mrs. Philip Burnett, Birdsall; Mr. and Mrs. Emmer-
son, Stainton Dale; Mrs. R. Jackson, Miss Haider, Mrs.
and Miss Sowray, York; Mr. P, Burnett, junr.; Mr.
Charles Burnett, Mr. S. Wright, York; the Rev. RJ.
Cooper, Robin Hood’s Bay; and Major Scoby. Amongst
those also present were the Mayor (Alderman Cross. J.P ),
Mr. Thomas Whittaker, J.P., Mr. W. Rowntree. J.P.,
Mr. John Stephenson, J.P., Mr. F. Ness, J.P., Mr. W. S.
Rowntree, J.P., Councillor S. N. Smith, J.P., and
Councillor J. Sinfield, and Messrs. J. H. Rowntree, E. R.
Cross, G. Harrison, A J. Tugwell, W. B. Richardson, A.
Atkinson, T. Parnell, W. Robson, A. O. Kirkness, G.
Walker, John Tonks, W. Wilson, J. M. Gibson, F.
Stephenson, J. Swanwell, S. Woodhouse, W. Lyth, W.
Bishop, T. Oakley, John Darling, Allan Rowntree, S.
Rawlings, Cloughton, C. Stubbs, C. Leng, Scalby, W.
and Alfred Gibson, and T. Moore.
At the conclusion of the first portion of the Burial
Service, the Rev. J. M. Wamsley, reminded the congre-
gation that that was no ordinary service. A prince of
great men had fallen, and they were gathered reverently
around his bier to offer their tribute of respect to his
memory. He felt honoured on being called upon to say
a few words on that mournful occasion, but however deep
his sense of the honour conferred might be, his sense of
the responsibility it entailed was very much deeper. The


name engraved on that breastplate was a household word
in many lands, and when the history of the great evangel-
istic, temperance, and social movements —that were the
crowning distinction and glory of the latter part of the
nineteenth century —was written, the name of Matthew
Burnett would stand honourably associated with the
names of such heroic champions for truth and righteous-
ness as Joseph Livesey, Dean Farrar, John B. Gough.
Father Mathew, Charles Garrett, Sir Wilfred Lawson,
and others, some of whom had passed away, and some of
whom were still alive and labouring in our midst. It was
no easy task to present an appreciative and just estimate
of
MR. BURNETT’S CHARACTER AND WORK.
Both were alike luminous with the light of Christ-like
sacrifice, and fertile with noble blessings to mankind.
Mr. Burnett was born at Cloughton in 1839, and last
Sunday, when just at the time of life when a man was in
full vigour and pride of manhood, he was called to lay down
his sword and spear at his Captain’s feet. Mr. Burnett’s
plans for future work had been carefully and prayerfully
arranged. He had many friends and many admirers,
but no greater friend and truer admirer than the Rev.
Hugh Price Hughes, M.A., who in July last expressed the
wish that Mr. Burnett’s autumnal campaign for 1895 and
1896 might be the most successful he had ever known.
All his friends hoped he had still before him years of
useful service, during which the magnificent victories won
by him as a temperance orator, and as a social reformer,
might be still further blessed and multiplied. But it had
been otherwise ordained. Ihe Lord gave and the Lord
had taken away and blessed be the name of the Lord.
As a boy Mr. Burnett removed to Scarborough, and was
apprenticed to the drapery business in a house that had
long occupied a prominent and respectable position
amongst the commercial establishments of the town, apd
in which the moral and spiritual interests of all employed
were then, as they ever had been, safeguarded and scrupu-
lously cared for! Notwithstanding the influences, for
good that surrounded him, young Burnett, at that time


gave way to temptation, and sowed his wild oats. No
doubt in after years the memory of those days gave zest
to his efforts to rescue the perishing and care for the
dying. Whilst yet in his teens, the great and blessed
crisis in his spiritual life occurred. Between the years of
1856 and 1859, the Rev. F. R. Griffiths was one of the
ministers stationed in the Scarborough Circuit, and his
earnest and powerful preaching was the God-honoured
instrument in leading young Burnett to repentance. His
repentance was sincere, and his solicitude for salvation
was fervent and most intense. There was living four
miles away at Seamer, at that time, a holy man of God,
who had since passed to his reward, but whose name at
Seamer, and throughout the length and breadth of the
circuit, would long be remembered He referred to the
late John Boggett, mention of whose name would bring
back precious memories to many minds. The character
of Mr. Boggett had a great fascination for Mr. Burnett,
who at this crisis in his life paid a visit to Seamer to that
good man’s house. That on May 6th would be exactly
38 years ago, but their friend, Brother Sharp, who was
present, would well remember the occasion. In the
evening after a day of prayer, Mr. Burnett went with Mr.
Boggett and Mr Sharp to a little chapel and while they
were wrestling in prayer Matthew Burnett believed and
stepped into the glorious liberty of the children of God.
He journeyed home that night with a joyful heart, for h~
had gone out in the morning burdened with sin, and he
came home in the evening exulting in the praise of God.
The speaker hoped that house in Seamer, where the
memorable meeting of Matthew Burnett and John Boggett
took place, would long remain, for if there was a dear spot
in the country it must be such a place as where a champion
like Burnett found peace with God. The next time he
(Mr. Wamsley) visited Seamer he hoped he might be able
to enter the house and bow his head, as did Matthew
Burnett thirty-eight years ago. Continuing, Mr. Wam-
sley said Matthew Burnett’s first experience as a Christian
worker was at Clayton, where they had still vivid recol-
lections of his devotion. As a local preacher he found his


true Christian vocation. May, 1857, the month in which
Mr. Burnett found peace with God, was a month signa-
lised by another great act of his life—he signed the
temperance pledge, and began at once to identify himself
with that great and glorious movement. He went forth
preaching the Gospel and advocating temperance prin-
ciples. At last he abandoned his commercial pursuits, and
devoted himself to his great life work in the evangelistic
and temperance cause. His persuasive appeals aroused
attention. Crowds gathered to hear him, and many souls
were led from sin and induced to take the pledge of
abstinence. Leaving Scarborough Mr. Burnett found a
wider sphere of labour as an evangelist and temperance
reformer in Cumberland, where he was the means of
rescuing many miners and ironworkers from the terrible
curse of intemperance and gambling. In 1863 he felt
called upon by the voice of God and the sense of duty to
go out to Australia, in order to carry on his grand crusade
against intemperance and vice and sin in every shape and
form. For nine y-ears Victoria was the scene of his
activity. 1 hen his health gave away, and for two years
he visited his native country. He then returned again
to Australia. In Victoria
60,000 PERSONS SIGNED THE PLEDGE,
and on an average 500 meetings \,ere held annually. He
next visited South Australia, giving 1500 addresses in
three years, and registering 33,000 pledges. He then
passed to Western Australia, where like results awaited
his labour, after which he visited New Zealand, and there
conducted services of a most unique and remarkable
character. If intelligence of that service could have been
flashed across the waters to Australia and New Zealand,
tens of thousands of the inhabitants would be at that
moment, in solemn thought and with dimmed eye,
thanking God that they ever saw the face and heard the
voice of Matthew Burnett. Matthew Burnett was dead,
but his character still spoke. It was such work as his
that consolidated and strengthened the empire. There


was more force in a life lived like that of Matthew
Burnett than in all the military glory and grandeur of
which they heard so much to-day.
Sir Wm. Fox, who was twice Premier of New Zealand,
and who was the “ Sir Wilfrid Lawson’’ of the Southern
Hemisphere, in addressing the Natives and Europeans of
the colony, said—“ For nearly twenty years I have
watched Mr. Burnett’s career in the cause of Gospel
Temperance in Australia, long before that phrase was
adopted. I have never failed to appreciate and admire
the earnestness and zeal which have marked his incessant
labours. The Australian Colonies all owe him a debt
they can never repay; and I think I can predict that the
honoured name of Matthew Burnett will be remembered
as long as the colonists of these seas continue to respect
and esteem whatever is good and self-sacrificing for the
great cause of human redemption.”
Rev. Thos. Spurgeon, of the Metropolitan Tabernacle,
in introducing Mr. Burnett to his people in August,
1894, said—“ Everybody knows, or has heard, of my
friend, Matthew Burnett, at the Antipodes, not only as a
faithful exponent of Temperance, but also as a successful
preacher of the Gospel. lam more than glad to find that
his voice, lost through his excessive labours, is now
restored. I pray that he may long be spared to use it in
the cause so dear to his heart.”
Colonel Barker, in introducing Mr. Burnett to a crowd
of working men in East London, said—“ I have travelled
all parts of the five colonies of Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand, and found ‘ Matthew Burnett’s name a
household word,’ not only as a Social Reformer, but as an
Evangelist ; and among the thousands converted to God
throughout the colonies are great numbers of ministers
and earnest Christian workers, now in the front ranks
labouring for God and the people.’
Mr. Sydney Watson, the popular writer of Horner’s
famous stories, &c., speaks of Mr. Burnett as “ the great


apostle of the Temperance cause in Australia
The story of his life-work for God is one great record of
nineteenth century miracles of grace.’
Rev. John B. Smith, Conference Letter Writer, on
behalf of the Victorian and Tasmanian Wesleyan Con-
ference assembled in Melbourne, also bears testimony to
the long and favorable record made by Mr. Burnett in
Australia. He says —“ His praise is in all the churches.
With unsparing devotion and signal success he has
pleaded the cause of total abstinence in these lands. He
is more than welcome in all our pulpits, and is commended
to the Christian public as a ‘ brother beloved.’
Rev. Chas. Garrett writes as follows : —“ lam glad my
friend, Mr Burnett, has so thoroughly recovered his
strength and that England will receive the full benefit of
the gifts which God has given him. We want somebody
to inspire us.”


fDatthecu Barnett’s hast
better.
Mrs. Burnett tells me this was the last letter written by
her dear husband, just before he left London :
“10 Finchley Road, St. John’s Wood, London, N.W.
“December 6th, 1895’
“ My Dear ‘ Silverpen ’
Since I last wrote to you I have been compelled to
consult a West End doctor, who said, after examining me,
that there was nothing organically wrong with my lungs
but that I was run down, the result of so many years
incessant labor. I was really suffering from nervous
exhaustion, and rest was indispensable, where I could be
free from all worries.
“ I have lost flesh the last few months to such an extent
that lam nearly all skin and bones. The doctor gave me
first the strongest iron mixture, and then a very powerful
tonic. I have, in addition to my ordinary food, plenty of
milk, but no alcohol. I sometimes wake up in the
morning bathed in perspiration, every part of the body as
hot as fire. I think this has pulled me down. lam
driven in my extremity to my God , who notwithstanding
all my unfaithfulness, has never once failed. lam
for divine guidance re the future. The doctor says two
or three months will suffice ; if I can only get away to
some farm-house and have everything possible to get —
that the quiet and the building-up process will begin. It
was not until last Friday the doctor pronounced on my
care, though I saw him twice before. Poor Mrs. Burnett
is naturally very anxious, and does her utmost for me.


Mv great trouble is restlessness at night; for hours I try
in vain to sleep, and then rise and return again. Sorry,
dear old friend, to have to write so much about myself;
but I know you will be anxious to have the information
direct. I hope in due time to send you better news. You
see, 14,000 addresses represent a great deal, and the
many years of travel and exposure in the Australias and
New Zealand, no doubt, tell their tale, and have left their
mark. You will ask my Australian friends to pray for
me, won’t you ? that if God wills I may get strong to
labor ten years longer. I should like, of course, to go away
to several places, but just now dare not entertain the
thought on account of the expense. I love, dear friend, to
live, just this day. I fear this will put ycu out, but,
remember, I can’t help writing to you I spoke a fortnight
ago at South London W. Mission in the evening, 30,000
present; twelve prodigals returned home ; numbers signed
the pledge. The only engagement I have this month is
on the 10th near the Crystal Palace, where the manager
of the Christian Herald resides. It will be my last address
for some time. I had to get the doctor’s special permission
for this engagement. Howard Haywood has in his lime-
light entertainment made special reference to my work in
London, saying he had met with fruits of my labours
everywhere. Bishop Taylor is in Sunderland just now.
Dear Peter McKenzie is dead, d.ed suddenly, aged 71,
result of a chid after preaching.
“No man in this kingdom can take his place. Thomas
Champness said, ‘it was imoossible to over estimate his
worth and work.’ I have written to Champness and D.
Young re writing a popular edition of his life.
I must close to save the maiL lam very tired; had no
rest last night. Now I must say, good-bye; may peace,
joy, and love unbounded, be yours and mine more and
more, until we meet in the presence of the King.
“ From your old friend,
“M. BURNETT.


The Matthew Burnett
Memorial Service.
From the Wesleyan Spectator , April 3rd, 1896.
HE following is a short report written by the
writer of the memorial service held at the
Lydiard Street Wesleyan Church, Ballarat.
after t^ie news of Mr - Burnett’s death had
J . reached Victoria.—
<§) \M The Rev. Samuel Knight, an old and tried
A yT friend and fellow worker in South Australia
<s> and Victoria of the late lamented Matthew
Burnett, held a memorial service on the evening of March
25th in the Lydiard Street Wesleyan Church, Ballarat.
The service was one of the most solemn, sanctified
gatherings 1 ever attended. Many a tear was shed, many
a sigh heaved, and I doubt not many a good resolution
was formed, as the rev. preacher told little incidents in
connection with the sainted life and painless death of the
good Matthew Burnett.
At times during the service there was a strange feeling
of unrest noticeable over the audience. So much so that
several of those present cried out occasionally, “ Glory be
to God!” “Hallelujah!” “Praise God!” and seemingly
felt some difficulty in keeping quiet.
The rev. gentleman was full of deep sympathy and
kindly feeling for the “ dead temperance and religious
warrior ” and his bereaved family.
The eloquence of pathos interlarded his choicest
allusions, when recounting his own personal recollections
of the life story of the sainted dead.


When those who were of the audience stood up one
after another to testify as to the benefits they received
from Matthew Burnett’s ministrations, the church seemed
diffused with that weird, strange, holy influence, so seldom
nowadays felt by a Methodist congregation. A higher
power was evidently working, and if tears were shed, well,
they were real and genuine heart flutterings, evoked by
the remembrance of the holy, pure, unselfish life, and
seemingly untimely death, of one who had no rival in the
years gone by in these colonies, as a devoted servant of
the Lord Jesus Christ.
No wonder an old Methodist saint said, as he was
leaving the church, “ Thank God for such testimonies.
It warms up my old blood and heart, and gives me to feel
that Methodist worthies, if they live well, assuredly die
well.”
When, as if to It off the pent-up feeling of the sorrow-
ful, yet rejoicing hearts, the preacher struck up one of Mr.
Burnett’s favourite hymns—
Hallelujah ! ’tis done, I believe on the Son,
I’m saved by the blood of the Crucified One —
it was like the turning on of an electric current ; every
voice was heard, and everyone seemed to be glad of the
evident relief, and sang with a will.
The “ Obituary,” as read by Mr. Knight, was listened
to with painful attention. It was well worth reproducing,
and is, I believe, to be published in extenso.
I, for one, am glad to hear that there is a probability of
a life of Matthew riurnett being published in England, and
you may be sure a colonial edition will be called for. So
that we all, who loved the man, may be able to read and
tell our children of the good Christian gentleman, “ the
Yorkshire Evangelist and Australian Father Matthew,”
who for thiity-eight years, lived a holy, pure life, and
sacrificed himself in his efforts to raise the fallen, and
make the world better for his living in it.
Sebastopol, Creswick, Clunes, and a number of other
places were represented at the service.


It was an exceptional time, and one never to be forgotten;
the only pity is that the church was not crowded to its
utmost capacity.
And so he died, the devoted, weary labourer, in the
Master’s cause, after the toil and burden of the day, lay
gasping out his last breathings with the whispering words,
“Only tired, no pain—mamma —Jesus,” and when he
said this the life machinery within, so full at one time of
electric, nervous energy, stood still, and Matthew Burnett,
the Christian ambassador from the court of heaven, was in
the presence of his God and King.
Extract of Letter received from Rev. D. Daley, Bible
Christian Minister, Footscray, Victoria, Australia.
“ Footscray, February 14, 189 b.
“Dear Sir, —Seeing your appeal in the Wesleyan
Spectator on behalf of the Matthew Burnett Memorial
Fund—a brother beloved —I was constrained to forward
a donation.
“ Dear Brother Burnett was the instrument under God
of the conversion of myself and wife many years ago. It
was during a mission he conducted at Echuca that we
found the Saviour. In memory of that ‘happy day’ and
the love we feel for our dear friend, we now forward the
enclosed cheque.
“ Believe me, sincerely yours,
“D. DALEY.”
I give this as one of the many received, from every
part of Australasia.


WRITTEN ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF MATTHEW
BURNETT’S DEATH.
“/ never met him without a certain degree of delight ,
nor parted from him without regret'' 1
I think this is a pleasant reflection when soliloquising
over the departure from this life of a dear friend ; and it
is true Matthew Burnett was one among a thousand.
Why he always felt so kindly to the writer I never could
well make out; but I begin to feel now that he is gone
that there was an affinity between us recognisable to both.
From the first day we met in Kyneton, Victoria, till our
last shake hands at Tilbury Docks (1895) I always felt on
my part that Mr. Burnett was a genuine man —good to
the core —and one with but one object in life, and that
was, to follow in the steps of his great Master and Lord.
Again, he confided in me, and I now believe he told me
from time to time secrets in his life’s career, unknown
even to his wife and family.
You could not help respecting and loving him for the
simplicity of his nature and the thoroughness of his
friendship. The good fellow knew nothing of the baser
motives some so-called Christians, in their show of
good fellowship and kindly feeling, exhibit towards each
other. I could name a score or more of men who call
me friend, but their sham friendship is not worth a brass
button. If I want a helping hand in a time of need,
either for body or mind, give me a Matthew Burnett to
advise and befriend, and yet in our long intimacy neither
of us ever asked the other for the value of a brass farthing.
The t'ue excellence of a Christian gentleman like
Matthew Burnett must shine out, and be seen by even
his quondam friends. Some of these during my canvass
for the Burnett Fund gave evidence sufficient to me that
their high falutiir talk during the Burnett revivals was
merely “ popularity hunting ” for themselves, or, in other
words, ‘‘ basking in the sunshine” of the good Burnett’s
extreme friendliness with the masses of the people.
Matthew Burnett was, as I have heard many .thought-
fulness and courtesy personified , coupled with that great
love for fellow man exemplified in every action of his life.


The Evangelist’s pihends.
R. MATTHEW BURNETT during his stay in
the Australian Colonies made hosts of friends.
When at Piggoreetand Scarsdale, Mr. David
Ham (now the Hon. David Ham M.L.C.),
helped on the gospel mission in every way he
possibly could. For nine weeks Mr. Burnett
was entertained by Mr. and Mrs. Ham, and through the
years following, the closest friendship was maintained.
The late Rev. Dr. Waugh, Revs. H. B. Macartney, M.A.;
W. H. Fitchett, M.A.; S. Knight, J. B. Smith, H. Green-
wood, Wm. Burridge, W. Woodall, J. W. Crisp, E. S.
Bickford, H. Merryman, James Bickford, and bather
Watsford, Martin Hosking, Town Missionary, Ballarat
East ; together with hundreds of other ministers ot
all denominations, remained to the last. Matthew Burnett’s
fast friends, and always spoke of the Evangelist’s great
work as a blessing to the colonies. Henry Berry. Esq., J.P.,
and M. L. Hutchinson Esq., Publisher, &c., of Melbourne,
were great admirers, friends, and supporters of the people’s
friend. It is not really necessary to individualise, for all
who met Matthew Burnett loved him much. His social
qualities as well as his Christian graces shone out con-
spicuously wherever he went, and gave an insight to those
with whom he associated, of the devoted life and pure
soul within.


Addenda.
DEATH OF “YANKEE BILL.”
From “The Ballarat Star.”
Each man in his time plays many parts. A few years ago the
colony rang with the fame of the subject of this notice. Next to the
• late Matthew Burnett, the Yorkshire evangelist and temperance
reformer, A. W. P. Ward, otherwise known as Yankee Bill, was the
bright particular star of the temperance firmament. When Matthew
Burnett was crusading in the Creswick district Ward was a staunch
soldier in the enemy’s camp. He drank copiously and persistently,
and suffered all the inconvenience and physical disadvantage which
such habits entail. When Ward joined Burnett’s band he was
regarded as one of the reformer’s greatest trophies, and shortly after
he toured Victoria and South Australia as a reformer himself. For
several years he lectured and preached to the people, and was
successful in making thousands of converts to temperance. Yankee
Bill, as he was familiarly known, was a ready and forcible speaker,
very smart at repartee , and a capital mimic. He had also a strong
resonant voice, and what with spoken eloquence and musical
eloquence he was well nigh irresistible. For over thirty years he
was a pledged abstainer, and during the whole period he was a most
active and zealou ■ worker for the cause. Ward was born at Boston
on the 25th September, 1822, and was in his seventy-seventh year
when he died. He came of the good old Puritan stock on both
sides, and was very proud of the fact that his direct ancestors were
easily traced to the brave and enterprising company of the May-
flower. When he left his home he spent seven years at sea, and
was right around the world several times. After a cruise in a whaler
Ward left the ship at Portland and went inland to a sheep station
where he married the good, honest, and faithful woman who survives
him. Ward arrived in Victoria in the year 1847, an d took a very
active part in the Eureka riots. He was in several skirmishes, and
was twice wounded. After varying fortunes on many of the gold
fields of Victoria, Ward took to the forest, and as he had some
experience as a raft and lumberman in America was considered to be
an expert axeman. He settled down to timber cutting, and after
the timber region was denuded for sawmill purposes, he farmed a bit
of land and became a butcher in addition. It was during Ward’s
residence in Dean that he made his periodical trips to the metropolis
and other parts in the cause of temperance. A more jovial, and
warm-hearted, cheerful fellow than Yankee Bill it would be difficult
to find One conld not be in his company and be depressed. He
was a man of mirth and sunlight; melancholy and darkness vanished
when he was about. When he died, an old colonist, a model citizen,
a kind husband, and faithful friend left troops of relatives, friends,
and neighbours to mourn his departure.


Haisman and Gazzard, Printers, Camp Street, Ballarat.


3 1508
01697452


