

REMNANTS
FROM
RANDWICK
WRITTEN AND ILLUSTRATED
BY PATIENTS AT NO. 4 A.G.H. RANDWICK


MAKE
McILRATH’S
YOUR
SHOPPING
CENTRE
FOR
GROCERIES
DURING
1919
The First Line of Defence
of a nation as well as an army is good,
wholesome, nourishing food. The house-
wife’s problem is to get supplies that
give maximum nutriment at minimum
prices. Mcllraith’s grocery values render
valuable aid, as they assure satisfaction
and saving. We offer a full selection of
Quality Groceries
at Single Profit Prices
Now is the time to prove the merit of our
splendid values. With a New Year on the
threshold you will doubtless be making good
resolutions and planning to do better in the
coming year. Make your dreams come true
by purchasing groceries from our large and
varied stock. It will pay you handsomely—
because you will get full satisfaction at saving
prices. A trial order will prove our statement.
Call or Send your Orders
McILRATH’S LTD.
Head Office and Country Order Department:
Cor. Pitt and Goulburn Sts., Sydney
Branches in all Principal Suburbs


Remnants from Randwick
FOREWORD
By MAJOR C. L. S. MACINTOSH, D.S.O.,
Late A.I.F.
0.C., No. 4 A.G.H., Randwick.
It is now over four long years since Aus-
tralia first sent the flower of her man-kind
to defend her homes, her mothers, her wives
and her children, and now after these long
years the first real soldiers magazine pub-
lished in Sydney is about to appear under
the title of “Remnants from Randwick,
being solely the writings from returned sol-
diers. Perhaps a better title would have
been “Remnants from Randwick for Rem-
nants at Randwick,” for the whole of the
proceeds from the sale of this magazine will
be devoted towards the purchase of special
beds for those bed-ridden heroes who have
risked their all for Australia and have helped
to prove the quality of the Australian as a
fighter second to none in the world. An ap-
peal is now made to the public to help give
this volume the success it deserves, and if
the energy spent and the pains taken by
those responsible in collecting material are
justly rewarded then the success will be very
great.
If any person be in doubt let him or her
pause for a moment and think what these
beds will mean to those unfortunate men.
In the first place they could be mo ved about
the grounds of the hospital without any
pain, away from the monotonous confines
of the ward. And what is more than it is
possible for people to realize, they would be
able in many cases to be sent in one of
these beds for a short spell to their homes
which they may not have seen for over four
years. Needless to say this will greatly
brighten their lives. At the present moment
there are in Randwick Military Hospital men
who have been bed-ridden for years, and
their prospects of ever putting a foot to the
ground are, in many cases, unfortunately
very remote. There is one unfortunate who
has been paralysed ever since a few days
after the landing at Gallipoli, when he was
shot through the spine. This is only one of
many such cases.
The real Australian soldier is a man with
a temperament of his own, quite unlike that
of other men as will be seen in the folllow-
ing pages. He never talks of the part he
has played in this great war, he never com-
plains of his own misfortunes. When ques-
tioned he merely says he did his bit, and is
willing to put up with what has come to him.
The intense and severe fighting too must
not be overlooked, and during the battle
the soldier frequently fights for days without
a moment’s rest, eight hours a day—Sun-
days and holidays being unknown on the
field of battle.
It is absolutely impossible for anyone in
this, our own ideal country, to have the
slightest conception of what these heroes,
whom the proceeds from the sale of this
volume will benefit, have gone through, and
in every case voluntarily.


o
A*
V
4^
Incorporated
by
Royal Charter
AD. 1720
um
%
c
*
Invested Funds
exceed £9,000,000
Income exceeds
£4,000,000
Head Office—Royal Exchange, London
Fire, Marine, Workmen’s Compensation
Personal Accident and Sickness, Motor Car, Fidelity Guarantee,
Burglary, Third Party, Live Stock, Plate Glass, and all other
classes of Insurance effected at lowest current rates.
The security offered by the “Royal Exchange is undoubted,
and its reputation for liberality in the settlement of claims is
world - wide.
Applications are invited for Agencies at places where the
Corporation is not already represented.
Chief Office for Australia - 75 Pitt St., Sydney
Local Board of Directors :
J. W. Gillespie,Esq. (Chairman)
W. S. Cook, Esq. J. A. Thompson, Esq.
A D. Spence, Local Manager W. H. Locke, General Manager for Australia


VMS TMWAK
tJUe rugged. keigUs of a. SGtWt coast. They toere Clustraka s raw recnnftft
Loomed, faurfc wn the conavn-g dawn, Tke men coko could rud
Clfc >iWfely nearer ike coarsVups dreu>, Vet toko volunteered jor Weir rnotherlaricL j
On tkat fateful CLpriL mom. cause of Justus ‘FtigK.t .
CWL the Wnan freights of t&W ic Ji/L Only CUvstraLvan-
04 the danger- that lay ahead J ' h Bat they gave that neune the lie
wvfck “tense expectant faces waicrwed On- Gaba. Jepe s gory h.«tgh.ts
For tke svgKt of cu 'Jvrkvsk. Lead/. % XObere tkey landed to cum. or ue -
k |
Uto the axatmc, boat, they farmed, : StVegght to the jours oj- deatk they «uv
and scarcely a sound, teas heard ■ a mom. <-uas there arho d hvrk
iave the uLspered orders of ogteirs they arere only «»!»• tL til
urhdst the hearts of the nin iiere stirred. But they sjnovoed. that they kneio their uxjrk,
J Nl 1 JLz ip "i %*£& ' I
UyWok uienr iHc Uvvng fretgkis ctj ikese skips Q-nd - J/°u
Ond loVmt toa& iketr ikere Of "tke 3ourtsbs tkak cue.n-X awav
Orv -ikat iCrktvh coast at tke break of day ' Juvfc Wnd tkem- tk« roll Roll of Tumour
In tke clear cool momma avr ? CUnd ask tuKal ikzy’e got to say.
i fc ,VP
a*/4.


Fatigue One
My bed mate and I were sitting on some
straw yarning when we were interrupted by
the platoon sergeant yelling, “Men on fat-
igue to-night Wonders and Sandes. Six
o’clock, bandolier, rifle and gas-bag; report
to Two-Pips.”
“We were on duty last ”
“You’re on again to-night.”
Sandy hummed, “When this war is
over, oh how happy I will be!”
“Dam it, Sandy, we are the only two that
do fatigue duty in the whole army?”
To add insult to injury the Second Pipper
told us we were in rest billets! We ‘rested’
to the front line, in the dewy eve, each carry-
ing a duck board. In addition we carried
heavy hearts and a big grouse which we re-
lieved by cussing freely. The usual jabber
was going on such as “The —th Battalion
have a raid to-night; they’ll come home with
wet-tails; there’s bosker light. God, it’s
bad enough to walk in this slush without
fighting for it; I’d willingly give it away.’’
“Put that smoke out!” yelled Two-Pips.
At last the trench supplies are dumped
and we homeward ploded our weary way
thanking our lucky stars that the old Hun
had not shot away our appetites.
Now for billets and tucker. Arrived
back. Cook house smashed in, dixies full
of holes, hot tea soaked into cobblestones
and all considerably dirty. Hearty cusses
filled the air.
“Please God keep Kaiser Willie’s ears free
from such language for fear this war will end
too quickly.”
Fatigue Two
“Another fatigue to-night, Steve,” said
Sandy, but by the Grace of God and the
ability to keep out of the sergeant’s way, I
was not one of the party. Pte. Murphy,
whose chief passion was Johnny Walker and
whose pet aversion was work, was with him.
The work was to carry rations to a battalion,
holding up a hot position of a forward area.
Murphy drowned his pet aversion, and as
a consequence was three sheets in the wind.
He came on parade, solemnly declaring that
he had not quarrelled with Fritz and saw
no reason for taking a rifle.
Finally Murphy’s equipment was carried
by Sandy and the Sergeant, and the bibulous
one placed in a dug-out, despite his pro-
tests, till they would return with a stretcher.
On their return, the dug was a ruin, noth-
ing but pieces of metal and broken match-
wood. Poor old Murphy gone, no tools to
dig for his body. They trudged away with
their stretcher.
“Say, Sergeant,” began a plaintive voice,
from a nearby shell-hole.
Both men rushed over.
“Murphy,” they cried, “You’re killed,”
A weak voice answered, “Not yet, Dig-
gers, some pushed it on me!”
C. Wegg
THE BREAKING POINT.
Lady Artist: “Won’t any of you boys
come and join my handicrafts class?”
Soldier : “What do you teach?”
Lady Artist: “I teach drawing.”
Soldier: “Oh! I ought to be good at that
—my family all went in for it.”
Lady Artist: “It’s interesting, isn’t it?”
Soldier: “Yes, it is interesting. You
never know when the cork will break.
MIXED MARRIAGES.
Regret expressed for the number of brave
soldiers missing on the arrival of their Eng-
lish wives.


By Private Bryant, “Hut 7”


Dear Steve, —
I was gassed in the last big push, at Vil-
lers Bretonneux. I will tell you about a
Munster Fusilier, whose battalion was fea-
turing a stunt, on the right of
our brigade. The hop-over was timed at 5
a.m., zero hour, and old Nutcracker, our
new 0.C., took me along, to see if all ar-
rangements were in order.
The wild Irish men were talking to their
bayonets, “Bide Thee, Biddy, ye 11 haf a
dhrink soon,” and they fondly stroked their
blades, while testing their edges.
A quarter of an hour before Zero the
Lewis-gun teams of the left company of
Munsters went out and took up positions
200 yards in front of the new line—Fritz’s
reserve line. The Munsters pasted that line
feverishly and threw everything except
their money at the Huns. Wave after wave
of grey came on only to fall away before the
Irishmen, but weight of numbers sorely de-
Soldier to a Slacker
I aint no good at figures, neither can I spell.
But I guess at playin’ solgers, I can do things fairly well.
I aint no six-foot hero, that could beat the devil through,
Yet I guess with all me failin’s, I done better work than you.
I cannot skite like some blokes,
I cannot scrap at all;
But I took me gun and sailed away
Prepared to stand or fall.
I didn’t stop here waiting, with me feet as cold as clay,
I went and helped me cobbers, and I am glad of it to-day.
I do not want to argue, n I do not want to fight,
But I’d kinder like to tell you—and I hope you think me right—
That it aint no use o’ talking, there’s deeds that need be done.
And you’d be a better figure, dressed in Khaki, wid a gun.
G. T. GAVAN. “4 Hut”
Letter to Steve
pleted the Irish ranks. Three gun teams
were knocked out—one man only remained
to man the other gun. He carried it back
to the consolidated line and had several
men filling his magazines with bullets. The
waves of grey kept swinging on and the
Munsters were ordered to fall back. The
lone gunner refused to leave his position, he
had been wounded above the left eye and
blood was flowing down his cheek but he
kept on firing.
When last seen he was seen rubbing some
blood from his face with his coat sleeve as
he jammed another magazine on. An hour
later, when the ground was taken by a
fresh battalion of Munsters, the Lewis gun-
ner was found beside his gun, with two head
wounds and I 0 bayonet stabs in his body.
Two hundred dead Germans lay before his
position. A good morning’s bag, eh?—Bet-
ter love—you know.
Your pal, SANDY.


Wounded
On a blazing hot day on the Peninsula a
ration party was making slow progress up-
wards towards the lines. Below them
stretched a broad expanse of sea which
merged in the distance into a combination
of haze and sea and sky. An odd shrapnel
cracked overhead while shells fell into the
shallow water in a smother of spray and
froth. Billy Compton—otherwise Pte. Wil-
liam Compton—was making bad progress
in the climb upward, for he was fat—ab-
normally fat. He was literally melting in the
heat. One could almost imagine a gentle
sizzle as of fat in a frying pan. A halt be-
ing called, Billy, not seeing the stoppage,
lurched blindly into the fellow in front of
him and then went sprawling full length. By
a miracle he saved himself from going over
the cliff but his load of cheese went bound-
ing merrily downwards towards the water.
Billy’s luck was out. Everything seemed to
go wrong that day. He was already the butt
of most of the Company jokes and here was
another theme for their play.
“Look out, boys, quick! Under cover!”
It was Dick Burgess who yelled as he him-
self dived for a dug-out. One glance up-
ward was sufficient to send the fatigue party
in all directions for cover. One man re-
mained. He was a new man and had only
landed amongst reinforcements a few days
before.
He talked big and—well it was a bad
lookout for Johnny Turk when he got into
the line. Meanwhile he seemed to be chaf-
ing at the fatigue work on the beach day
after day.
He had glanced upward with the rest
when the warning was given and saw a
couple of objects bounding through the
furze and stones. Bombs! He had caught
the word muttered by one of the party as
they passed him in their flight for cover.
The new man was transfixed. It seemed
as though someone was dropping ice-cold
water down the length of his spine.
Suddenly he fell with a scream just as the
bomb shattered itself in pieces. He felt
himself hit. He must be bleeding badly.
Then he lost consciousness.
The sun went down. The new man wak-
ened to find that he was lying in the shade.
He could see the glare of the sun on the
sand close at hand. What had happened?
Why was he there? Ah! The bomb! He
was wounded. Somehow he felt delightfully
comfortable —so much so that he did not
care to move. He heard a laugh at his side
and turning, he saw one of the fatigue party.
“Where was I hit? —was anyone else hit?”
asked the new man.
“No! No one else was hurt,” was the re-
ply as the man turned on his heel. The new
man wondered at his mate s coldness, but
anyway he felt no pain and certainly he felt
comfortable. Gradually he became cons-
cious of a light weight on his chest. He
lifted his head slowly, fearing what the
weight might be. Long and wistfully he
looked at the object. He was still looking
at it when his mate came back.
“What is it?” asked the new man.
"What, that? Why, I thought you would
like a piece for a souvenir. Most of the fel-
lows would eat their hats to get a piece of
the Turkish stuff which wounded them.
You’ve got a souvenir already.”
The new man looked again at the pre-
cious object. It was different to most sou-
venirs. Of course he did not know—not
then anyhow—but his souvenir had come
from the ration party. It was a piece of
Billy Compton’s lost cheese.
E. W. EDWARDS.
“M" Ward.
Home Seems Best
Home ain’t like it used to be, at least it seems to me
To have a brighter aspect, since I’ve sailed across the sea.
Once I found it irksome, things never seemed too right.
But I somehow have a notion, it’s a bonny place to-night.
Things have changed here somewhat, or maybe that it s me
That sees things somewhat different, now I m back from o er the sea.
The old folk seem more cheerful, in fact all seems at rest
Somehow that now I’ve wandered. Of all, my home seems best.
A. T. GAVAN “4 Hut.”


FLIES IN THE OINTMENT


Mules
(With apologies to Rudyard Kipling).
/
I never would ’ave done it if I’d known what it would be,
I thought it meant promotion an’ some extra pay for me;
I thought I’d miss a drill or two with packs an’ trenchin’ tools.
So I said I’d ’andled ’orses—an’ they set me ’andlin’ mules.
Now orses they are orses, but a mule e is a mule
(Bit o’ devil, bit o’ monkey, bit o’ blooming fool)
Oh, I’m usin’ all the adjectives 1 didn’t learn at school
On the prancin’, glancin’, rag-time dancin’ mule.
If I’d been Father Noah when the cargo walked aboard.
I’d ’ave let the bears an’ tigers in an’ never spoke a word,
But I’d 'ave shoved a placard out to say the ’ouse was full,
An’ shut the Ark up suddent when I saw the Army mule.
They buck you off when ridden, they squish your legs when led;
They’re mostly sittin’ on their tail or stand in’ on their ’ead;
They reach their yellow grinders out an’ gently chew your ear,
An’ their necks is indiarubber for attackin’ in the rear.
They’re as mincin’ when they’re appy as a ladies ridin’ school.
But when the fancy takes ’em they’re like nothing but a mule—
With the off wheels in the gutter an’ the rear wheels in the air,
An’ a leg across the traces, an’ the driver Lord knows where.
They’re ’orrid in the stable, they’re worse upon the road,
They’ll bolt with any rider, they’ll gib with any load;
But soon we’re bound beyond the seas, an’ when we cross the foam
I don’t care where we go to if we leave the mules at ’ome.
For ’orses they are ’orses, but a mule ’e is a mule
(Bit o’ devil, bit o’ monkey, bit o’ bloomin’ fool)
Oh, I’m usin’ all the adjectives I never learnt at school
On the rampin’, raw-boned, cast-steel-jawboned Army Transport mule.
Punch, 9th Field Ambulance
At Base Hospital Somewhere in France


Officer Jim Pinches a Kitchen
(By Skribne.)
Jn very truth our kitchen had travelled
before we got it! A portion of it had sud-
denly left the Menin-Hooge Road when a
Whizz Bang from the Boche had hit it and
that is how Jimmy got his chance. But let
me tell the story from the beginning. Jimmy
is an Officer and a good scout! short in
stature but well proportioned with bluey-
green eyes that are either twinkling with
Australian good humour or else positively
emitting hot sparks of Irish temper. There
is no middle course with Jim s eyes. The
Irish part of him came from his grandparents
but it stuck, so much so that it is good fun
to rouse his ire, providing that you can keep
your own temper and there is nothing break-
able to throw.
As a Naval Cadet in Sydney he evidently
received training that encouraged the pro-
per consideration of good problems and dis-
couraged a strict observance of the Bth Com-
mandment. As a Matlow in New Guinea
in the early days of the A.I.F. he lived well,
but only well enugh to convince him that
an Officer’s stars would suit him better in
the next stage of the So he took them
and in due course Jimmy and we others
found that some months of Commissioned
Service in France with the Australian
Machine Gun Corps were well behind us.
Some months and still our Company was
without a Travelling Kitchen or Cooker.
Three of us, Steve, Jim and I, were shelter-
ing from bombs and rain near our waggon
lines; the shelter was sufficient protection
from the rain but being only the remnants
of a tarpaulin stretched above three sand
bag walls we were liable to move elsewhere
when the three whistles signalled the arrival
of a Bosche plane.
A raider having been driven by our
“Archies” we felt that by the grace of God
we might have a half-hour yarn. Jimmy
opened the ball. “I say we ought to have
a cooker.”
“We ought” said the other two of us
solemnly. “You know,” continued James,
“it fairly gets my goat! Here we are an
Emma Gee Company (Machine Gun Com-
pany) just the same strength as a Company
of Infantry—they have a cooker and we
haven’t.” “We concur —we haven t,
we said in unison. Oh why don *
you say something, stead of sitting
there like stuffed owls!” exclaimed Jim:
“’Cause we feel you’ll say something new
and fresh if we give you time, I put in
sweetly. Besides, added Steve, it s your
beer we are drinking and we like it. Yes,
and if it wasn’t for me there d be no beer
in the darned hole of a bomb-pestered place
and you fellows Jimmy, said I,
soothingly, “you’re the best little mess sec-
retary we have ever had, and if ever you
get hurt at the war we’ll be in an awful fix,
officers and men. Now tell us about the
Cooker.”
“Well as I was saying, we haven’t got one
just because some d fool of a Staff bug
can’t show a Kitchen Travelling, one, on the
establishment of an Emma Gee Coy; why
can’t we pinch one?
“Struth,” answered Steve, and refilled his
glass. “It will be interesting Jimmy.” said
I, “but supposing every blessed cooker
wasn’t going full strength around here day
and night cooking tucker for carrying par-
ties and fatigues who come back late o
nights and early morning from Ypres; and
supposing you could also pinch two horses
to pull it, for we haven’t any spares, how
do you suppose Brigade Staff are going to
take it when they see us on the road some
day, with a Cooker cooking full swing
steam up, sparks flying from the chimney
pot and all that? Can’t camouflague it, it is a
limber you know, cause it wouldn t be any
use unless it had a hot meal ready for the
boys at the end of a day's march. And sup-
pose .” “Oh, suppose this and suppose
that!” Jim burst out. “Staff ’ull be too dam-
busy counting our remains after we ve done
these stunts to worry us when we start
marching around a ruddy circle of mud and
dust once more to rest. They 11 see our
cooker without seeing it, and by the time
they have got time to tell us how to brush
our teeth and polish our chains they 11 be
sort of used to it.
“That sounds right,” said Steve, and
we’ll certainly want one badly again if ever
we move out of here before peace comes."


XMAS 1914
XMAS 1917


“Well, we’ve got to get one, finished
Jim. “How about writing to Australia to
some kind ladies and telling all about the
boys’ blisters and fire wood fatigues, how
the tucker cooks whilst you march. ll
get one then with a nice brass plate on it!
You know, “Presented by the Ladies of Bog-
gaanddribri”—“Yes, more blasted brass for
the boys to polish if ever we get it and we
want it now, you fathead, said Jim explo-
sively. “Let’s have one more beer and
sleep on it,” and so saying Steve poured
oil on the troubled waters as usual.
Although we got little sleep, because of a
steady bombing that played Old Harry
in the horse lines, next night found us going
up for the battle of Passchendale. But
once I spoke to James in that stunt, then he
casually remarked, Saw the rear half of a
Cooker down there by the Menin Gate at
Ypres. Did you see it? On the Engineer’s
dump left side of the road, you know.
“Yes, but how about ammunition?” I
asked. Still, even though I had no time to
think of Cookers I saw that Jimmy had and
was still turning the matter over in his mind.
Before that stunt was over a wound gave
me free passage, varied class, to England,
and Steve collected a bullet some days later.
Strange as these things are in war we were
not mightily surprised to find each other in
the same London Hospital. We fought the
stunts over together, took our medicine,
massage and sundries dolefully, went to bed
early and were generally bored until Steve
at the end of a month announced, “Letter
from Jim. He’s coming over on leave.”
Two days later Jim arrived. We took him
to our bosoms and then we took him to the
Club—three of us in the taxi with a “Mind
my arm,” and a “Mind my leg.” “Well,
you cripples, here we are again? was Jim s
summing up of the meeting. You missed
a sticky stunt!”
“Tell us,” pleaded Steve and he told.
“Tell me how Steve got his cross.” (M.C.) I
asked; and to Steve’s confusion Jimmy told.
A silent toast, and then from Steve:—“Did
you ever get that cooker Jim? Lord yes
didn’t you know? Oh yes.’ Pinch it,
Jimmy?” I put in. “Had to, simply had to
—fair dinkum,” and Jim’s eyes bubbled
and glistened with the familiar humour
lights. “Out with it!” we demanded sett-
ling down into leather chairs and Jimmy
told.
“ ’Member there was half a one on that
dump? Well, I took a ride up from Dic-
kebusch after the stunt, when I got to the
ramparts in Ypres the Hun was pouring in
Gas Shells and I went like a scalded cat
through the town, never pulled up till I got
to the Y Emma. Got through Menin Gate
O.K. and had a look at the cooker—rear
half only, front half blown to glory. Dug
out the Engineer bloke acting O.C. dump.
Found him in a dug-out cursing his job and
darned cold. Said he couldn’t think of
parting with his blinking cooker as his Dump
Return Lad gave in or something. Anyway
he wouldn’t give it up and he had two sen-
tries on his dump. Lah-de-dah sort of chap
you know! Beastly cold—eh—that sort
of chap you know ! Decent enough
though, for he listened to my
hard luck story and then said,
“But I say, old thing, a rear half by itself
isn’t any good, what?” * Oh, you leave the
front half to me,” I told him, but there was
nothing doing. You see, I couldn t tell him
that I’d fixed up with the Quarter Master of
Battalion to have his front half cooker
blown up by shell fire one night if I could
find a rear half.
“Strutheen!” interjected Steve, “how ever
did you fix him?” “Oh, I’d got them sup-
plies for their mess one time they were stuck
and got ’em brass polish and sand paper and
they were darned grateful,” explained Jim.
“Continue, dear Shylock,” I pleaded.
“Well, to have their front half blown up on
paper one night was quite easy ’cause they
took every front half way up past BIRR
cross Roads after you fellows deserted!
(We excused the “deserted” in order to get
the rest of the yarn). “And so there was
only one thing to do. I talked to the En-
gineer in Charge of Dump about the cold. I
told him how much colder it was going to be,
I pitched him a “furfie” (white lie or false
rumour) about how I knew coal and coke
was going to be cut down soon. His mar-
row was frozen still in his bones when I d
finished and then I slung at him, “Could you
do with any coal?” He fairly jumped at
me. “Why, my dear old top, it s rare as
diamonds just now.”
“I knew it was and I didn’t know how I
was going to get him any because two or
three of the “Diggers” from the Coy. had
been sent up for pinching lumps only from
the nearest dump to our lines. Well, I said


I’ll give you a little if you’ll give me the
cooker!’’ “Can’t really. Couldn t think
of it, was all he said. “Look here,
how about a limber load—a double limber
load of nice black coal, delivered here to-
night? Would you shut your eyes while my
fellow stuck that rear half cooker on the
lumber, holus-bolus and away? It would look
like salvage, you see! He bit, he shook
hands on it and he gave me a beautiful snif-
ter of bonzer Scotch.
“Well I went like the devil back to our
lines and I called up our three prize thieves
and your batman, son!’’ I acknowledged
the compliment with a smile and a pull of
smoke and a murmured “I trained him!
“Yes,” said Jim, “I explained to them a bit.
When I asked where they were getting their
coal they thought I was hunting for trouble
and shut up. But I explained that coal
meant a cooker and they were with me
heart and soul.
Your Batman said, “Oh, we ve been
drawing on the Froggies’ dump lately,
Sir, last few nights, anyhow, but you have
to be slick as they’ve got two crimson sen
tries on.’’
“How about a limber load?” “No ruddy
hope in life Sir,” they said. “If I join in?”
“We’ll give it a fly, anyway.” So just
on dusk I went to the dump and in a casual
way I walked well ahead of the limber and
a party of six tres bon diggers. I blew up
to the sentry and asked the way round the
corner of the dump to Ouderdom in my
best French. The sentry, polite as pie, came
round to show me. And I had him there
for the agreed ten minutes. Quite simple!
“Jimmy,” said I, “the Company ought to
write a circular letter of thanks to Marie,
Jenne, and the others you’ve made love to
for teaching you French!” “Shut up,” said
Steve. “Tell the rest Jim.”
“Oh, once the boys had made a hole in
the side of the dump and a quiet get away
I went towards Ouderdom and then
home. It was risky, but it worked. Talk-
ing to that sentry I could feel my stars sort
of melting on my shoulders. Sent ’em up
after dark to the Engineer and they brought
back the rear half cooker. Next day col-
lected the front half cooker from the Q.M.
and the action was completed as per plan
without loss.”
“What was our own C.O. doing Jim?”
we asked. “He wanted a cooker worse than
Heaven.” “He shut his eyes and looked nice
and surprised when I showed him the com-
plete cooker with the horses we had salved!
“The best of the joke,” said Jim
slowly, “is that I’d sweated and risked my
Com. I’d nearly got brain fever and when we
reached rest came a memo from Staff—ln
view of new Machine Gun Battalions forma-
tion each Company may now indent for
Kitchen, Travelling, one, Complete.”
Camp Fire Parodies
(Tune —In Tennesse.)
In Nineteen Twenty Three
Just try to picture me.
Down where I’d like to be.
In—Aussie —o’er the sea.
All I can think of to-night
Is another five years fight.
Machine guns going—
Freezing! Snowing!
Berlin! —out of sight!
The Fritzies in the trench
Behind them leave a stench,
I want to see my wench,
(Not the one that parleys French),
She’ll be right there to meet me
If she’s not too old she’ll meet me,
When I get back, when I get back,
In the year One Nine Two Three,
—Punch, 9th Field Ambulance.
(Tune —“Are you from Dixie.”)
Let’s fetch the Dixey,
The greasy Dixey,
Where the soldiers stew is humming to me.
The tucker’s ready,
So all get steady.
And who’ll be mess-orderly?
It’s made of Pork and Beans, Machonocie
and bacon rine,
Water, Spuds, and Bully-sacks and lumps o’
twine.
Here is the Dixey!
The greasy Dixey!
Now, then, who’s the next for stew?
—Punch, 9th Field Ambulance.


A Grave in Flanders
There’s a lonely field in Flanders, where the snows of winter fall,
And the chilly winds blow ever, through the trees so bare and talj;
’Tis there, the pride of a mother’s heart, and a father’s hope and joy
Is laid to rest, ’neath a snowy crest. —-their well-loved soldier boy.
But a crude little cross, to mark their loss, and tell of a comrade’s fall
Alone on the field, no fence to shield, the bravest of men all.
Just a twisted broken rifle, with a bayonet tied across
And a helmet for a headstone, left to mark a nation’s loss.
When the stormy winds go fleeting ,o’er this gallant hero’s head,
There are always angels meeting, to guard his lonely bed.
For the shells that scream above him, seem to know his lonely grave,
Is guarded by the angels, for the life he freely gave.
When the darkness gathers over, and the stars peep from above,
From the distant gates of Heaven, come the messenger of love;
And the birds when flying homewards, o’er the fields of gleaming snow,
Send a plaintive cry to Heaven, for a hero far below.
G.T.G.
Mrs de Burgh, Honarary Librarian.
Two’s Company.


Suez
A quiet, drowsy, hazy place,
A sea like glass, from want of air;
Queer clad figures, dark of face,
Move in dingies everywhere.
Durky scamps with shoddy gear
Swarm around like hungry crows,
And pay no heed to pest or jeer
But dread the ship’s unerring hose.
Rugged hills all rock and sand,
Endless plains a dirty brown —
A few sea boats like sentries stand
Before an ugly ancient town.
G. T. GAVAN.
4 Hut


Matron’s Dreadnought
are never pleased, though.”
"What’s the trouble?" I inquired, for on
more than one occasion she had told me
little personal matters which she wasn’t
likely to impart to the sisters or the doctors.
She gurgled happily. "It would have
done you good to see her; her bulk was
enormous. I felt like a destroyer alongside
a Dreadnought compared with her,’’ matron
murmured. Ves, that’s a fair comparison,
1 think. She butted into the hall and I hap-
pened to be passing. She laid a huge hand
on my shoulder and said ‘Where do I make
inquiries about my boy in France?’ ‘Not
here, I told her. You should write to the
Central Inquiry Office in London; they can
let you know by return.’ They told me I’d
never get any information here,’ said the big
woman, ‘but as my boy is wounded the pro-
per place to inquire is at the hospital, sez I,
and now all my time s wasted for nothing.
Why don t you put a notice up outside. We
don t know anything here, or something
like that so’s not to waste folk’s time?’’
I saw it was no good arguing with that
sort,’’ went on matron, “and just at that
moment who should be coming down the
She was a little dot of a
woman, was matron, but
she had the spirit of a lion
or she would not have
been in charge of that
huge hospital in the
Shires. Also she had a
sense of humour, which is
a saving grace in a wo-
man.
She came and sat on
my cot one morning and I
saw that she was bubbling
over with something out
of the common and dying
to tell someone about it.
“Have you got all you
want?” she asked, and
when I replied in the affir-
mative she said, “You’re
easily pleased. Some folks
stairs but the O.C. This gave the Dread-
nought her chance. "Are you married,
nurse?’’ she asked, and when I shook
head and tried to look sorry for my state of
single blessedness, the Dreadnought raised
her voice till it resembled a fog horn and the
O.C. could catch every word. “Well, my
dear, she boomed, "You set your cap at
one of the doctors. I’m told some of them
make quite a decent living cutting folks up
and then curing them. Personally, I can’t
abide doctors. Purple pills for pimply people
’ll do me all the time without paying away
guineas galore. Me and my husband does
a fair trade, but there s no sense in wasting
money when you can buy what you want
ready to take at any chemist. You’re got a
good chance of settling yourself for life if
you play your cards well, and if you take
my tip you 11 nab an old one. They’ve gen-
erally got more money than the younger
ones and you’ve a better chance of becom-
ing a widow sooner.
"Though you couldn’t tell me what I
wanted to know, Ive told you something
for your good. Collar a doctor, nurse and
here’s my business card in case you follow
my advice and want furnishings. Though
they’re second-hand, they’re good even if
I sez so,’’ and off she went at last.
"She thought we were alone after the
O.C. had entered his office,’’ went on mat-
ron, but the old boy had left the door ajar
and was standing just inside and heard
every word, and now I suppose he’ll tell the
whole staff at quarters and I’ll never hear
the end of it,” this last with a plaintive little
sigh.
I don’t like the Dreadnought’s advice,”
I said, at any rate as far as marrying a doc-
tor is concerned.
"Why not?” she asked. "If I don’t end
up by marrying one of the old ones, who
will I marry?”
“Me,” I replied.
“Hush,” said matron. "Plere’s the
0.C.”
MANNAMDAD


From Randwick to the North-West Convalescent Home, Moree.


Mr. Blandy who devotes his time to helping his
wounded countrymen at No. 4.
Mr. J. T. Lane, President of Voluntary Corps of
Barbers, renewing his youth.
Sapper Healey, of Canary Cottage—No. 4’s first cot case- who can still grin and bear it.


Miss R. Storey who dispenses 1200 cups of
tea per day for the Red Cross.
Miss Helen Farmer, Red Cross Representative.
The wood carving class at No. 4, run by voluntary workers for the last 3 years.
Misses Evens, Makinson and King in charge.


A Profitable Revenge
By Harley Matthews.
last he could never explain properly
—even to himself. When, as a little
boy, he waited with his mother s wed-
ding ring round at Old Mo s, and saw all the
old clothes behind hanging so silent and
ghost-like above him he wanted to scream,
So affected was he once that he had to buy
an ice cream on the way home—with the
pawn ticket. He felt that he had done
wrong, particularly when he got home.
Funny thing, he always blamed the pawn-
broker, never the ice-cream merchant.
Still—habits again. When he joined the
army Stony popped his suit of civvies.
But, ruled by his aversion, he first sprinkled
the suit with suphuric acid. Before it had
dropped to pieces Stony was at sea on
Transport A 1 4.
There was no pawnshop in the army. But
the Crown and Anchor board took its place.
You could always get enough on a razor to
have a game with. The only difference was
that in the old civilian days you backed
horses with what you got at the pawnshop,
in the army you backed a queen or a spade.
The machine gun corporal who ran the
Crown and Anchor board had that morning
allowed Stony five francs on a German hel-
Stony always reckoned he
had one claim on a seat in
Heaven—his continual pov-
erty. Sometimes a rich book-
maker bought that claim
from him, but the next race
thought better of the deal.
There are people who be-
lieve that the army changes
a man altogether. Yet some
how if a man has a squint, a
thirst or a good opinion of
himself he will have it still
when he has become a sol-
dier. Indeed if it is either of
the last two it will have be-
come intensified, if anything.
Ever since he could remem-
ber, Stony had been poor.
He took the habit with him
into the army. Also an av-
ersion for pawnshops. The
met. They had just let go with a burst of
1 0 rounds at one of Fritz’s ration parties and
were now sitting down to play again. Stony
thought he would try the anchor with his last
franc—it hadn’t turned up lately. He can
still wonder whether it would have turned
up that time, or not. Just as he was put-
ting his money down there was a shriek in
the air and his arm was knocked aside so
strongly that he was twisted around.
He remembers stooping to get his money
but the shell had gone clean through the
board—through the anchor and taken the
coin. He had reached for it with his left
hand; it was only then that he noticed that
his right wrist was hanging by a shred of
skin.
While he was in the hospital in London
there was one place that people who took
him out for drives could not get him to —
Petticoat Lane—anywhere where there
might be a pawnshop. He still felt the old
thrill of fear and loathing whenever he
passed one. If people wanted money why
couldn’t they borrow it on a Crown and An-
chor board, the same as soldiers?
Poor—he was poorer than ever. It would
not have mattered if anybody had run a
board in the hospital. He had nothing to
raise on it—not even a razor. But the
money in his paybook was accumulating all
the time. He was always looking forward
to the day when he would get his furlough
and could draw the whole lot.
At last it came. This was the one time
in his life that he had ever been rich. He
felt that this new arm of his was going to
bring his luck. He used to get treated to
pint after pint to let people see how well he
could manipulate a glass with it. Darky
and the other fellows he was putting in his
furlough with, said he ought to salute officers
with it too, but it didn’t sound to him a
paying proposition.
One evening he had shown so many peo-
ple the capabilities of his new arm that he
coudn’t tell into what part of the city they
had got in the end. He knew that the pint
mugs had handles to them and that some of
the faces in the crowded bar had an old fam-
iliarity. He even felt several times like


looking round to see if there were any old
clothes hanging on the wall.
They had just filled the pints again when
there was a great noise up the street. Some-
body burst into the bar. “Old Jacob’s
pawnshop is afire,” he shouted. Nearly
everyone rushed to the door. Stony was
just rushing off, too, when he remembered
that his pint was still unswallowed. Never
do to leave that, here. Some of these queer
looking individuals might take it.
Darky and the others had gone. The
noise up the street was still louder. He
could hear the fire engines now. Standing
with the pot in his hand he remembered that
he had never seen a pawnshop afire, yet. It
was a gratification not to be missed. He
knew what he’d do. Unscrew his arm and
leave it with the hand still grasping the
handle of the pint-pot. No one would
touch it then.
He had never guessed that a pawnshop
could burn like that. Old clothes and all
the other horrors went flaming upwards like
tortured, dispossessed devils.
The fire was only a smoulder when Darky
pulled him away. “You’re not at the pic-
tures,” he said.
Stony had not thought that the bar they
were drinking in was quite so far down the
street, but they pushed through the door at
last. “Suppose the beer is flat,’’ he said.
He pushed through the crowd toward the
bar. He looked up and down it but his pint
pot was gone. “Miss,” he said to the girl.
“Did you see anyone take my beer, I left it
here a while ago.”
She shook her head. “But I left my
wooden arm to mind it,” he cried, “And
that’s gone, too.”
“Gone,” she replied. “I should think it
would have gone. Do you know where you
are? You’re in the East End. That fire
was in Petticoat Lane.”
But Stony reckons he has wreaked re-
venge on the pawnbroking class, though it
doesn’t know it yet. When he came home
a couple of months ago he got a new arm.
He promptly pawned it for £l5.
He found out that according to the law it
is illegal for a pawnbroker to take a soldier’s
artificial limb in pawn. When Stony wants
that arm he is just going to take a policeman
with him and get it, and pay no £ T 5 or in-
terest, either.
The Menu
A menu sheet showing meals to be provided in units and hospitals,
will be drawn up in advance by the Q M. and Sergeant Cook, in
consultation, once every fortnight.— Military Orders.
In the trenches it is “Iron," and we re glad to get it too;
Maconachie’s our biggest friend when things are looking blue.
But when we’re back in Aussie it is cream and game for us.
Yes, it’s when we’re back in Aussie that they start to make a fuss.
In hospital it’s “Take it!" or “The best that is to hand
In Blighty you’re a “Digger, and accept whate er is planned.
For your comfort and your tummy, but Australia’s waking up,
And the menu now arranged for you should mention champagne cup.
The Q.M. and the sergeant cook are not two flamin’ fools—
They know what’s good for them (and us), and wink the eye at rules—
And every fortnight these two blokes as got to write the slate.
And work the bloomin’ menus out. My oath! I’ll pass my plate.
They have got to obey orders, and the orders they are plain—
A fortnight’s grub’s their order, and we’re fond o’ terrapain;
We have learnt to know a menu while in France a little while,
And we hope the quartermaster can prepare us one in style.
’Orse dove and soup, and entree, with a cut of joint as well.
With sweets and cheese and coffee, is our little “Bong, ma’zelle!
We’re accustomed to such rations, and we’d like it understood
When we come back to Australia, the menu must be good.
"MANNAMEAD.”


20 BELOW ZERO
Frozen Billjim: “Gawd ’elp the next bloke wot sends me a Xmas Card.”


ADVERTISEMENT.
If Lieut. Grey I 7th Bn. desires to com-
municate with Mr. Body, late Tel. City 6500
please note Mr. Body has changed his ad-
dress and is now living at Rookwood. Ring
up Celestial Exchange and an Aerial Mes-
sage will be delivered.
LINES FROM A PARALYTIC PATIENT
TO HIS MASSEUSE.
(With apologies to Rupert Brooke).
For moveless limbs no pity 1 crave,
That never were swift! Still, all 1 prize.
Laughter and thought and friends, I have;
No fool to heave luxurious sighs
For the woods and hills that I never knew.
The more excellent way’s yet mine! And
you
Battery-laden come to my clean white cell,
And we talk as ever —am I not the same?
With our hearts we hate, immutable.
You without pity, I without shame.
We talk as of old; as of old you go
Out under the sky, and laughing, I know
Flit through the streets, your heart all me,
Till you gain the world beyond the town.
Then—l fade from your heart, quickly;
And your fleet steps quicken. The strong
down
Smiles you welcome, there; the woods that
love you
Close lovely and conquering arms above
you. •
O ever-moving, O lithe and free.
Fast in my linen prison I press,
On impassable bars, or emptily
Laugh in my great loneliness.
And still in the white neat bed I strive
Most impotently against that gyve;
Being less now than a thought, even
To you alone with your hills and heaven.
R. E. HUGHES.
Newspaper Headings Illustrated
“THE LATEST GERMAN BLOW.”
TAKING LIBERTIES.
I took a walk, I took a girl.
She took a kiss, I took her home.
I took her watch, a policeman took me.
I was taken to the Station,
The magistrate said, “Young man, you ve
very taking ways”—
I said, “Yes, your Honor, thank you, I
have”—
“Well, take six months!”


HOSPITAL NOISES, 2 a.m.
New Patient: “Eh, Digger, is that thunder ?”
Sleeping Beauty: “No, yer dope, its only the Orderly takin’
the temperatures.”


THE IDEAL HOME
The ideal home is that which is furnished in comfort and taste. It
is not necessary to have a whole lot of things crowding a room, for
you may rest assured that this will give you no comfort and will he
in the worst possible taste. •
Select your furniture with the utmost care, for you will have to live
with it for many a long day. In fact, you should exercise as much
care and judgment in choosing your furniture as in choosing your
wife. Of course, there’s this difference, that if you get tired of the
furniture you can break it up with the axe and get some more, but
the law wont allow you to do this with your wife.
With the object of helping those about to furnish to do so with taste
and discrimination, we have transformed the basement of our
Mammoth Furniture Building (situate at 827-31 George Street,
facing the Postal Parcels Office) into a suite of
Twenty-two Fully Furnished Rooms
leave to state that there is nothing
better to be found in Australasia.)
Others, again, are furnished with
high-grade goods at less cost; while
in all will be found everything
necessary for the home.
The all-pervading principle is to
give the maximum value for the
money spent.
You are cordially invited to come
and inspect the display, and see
for yourself how far our ambition
has been realised.
each completely fitted for its indi-
vidual purpose —be it Dining-room,
Drawing-room, Bedroom, Hall,
Library or Kitchen —and the aim
has been to assemble articles which,
while fulfilling all the requirements
of a modern home, shall harmonise
in style. color, and general
appearance.
We cater for all classes, and the
rooms are furnished accordingly.
Some contain the choicest
creations of the world’s Master
Craftsmen. (And here we beg
MARCUS CLARK & Co. Ltd.
The Home of Ideal Furniture CENTRAL SQUARE, SYDNEY


THINGS WE WANT TO KNOW.
Doctor: “And what is your description of a “Number Nine ?”
Dispenser: “Well sir, something that you’d give a Muscovy Duck to turn it into
an Indian Runner.”


KODAK
pictures
tell your life’s story
With a Kodak you can
make interesting records
of all the special events of
your life ; in the years to
come, the merest glance
through your Kodak album
will recall with surprising
accuracy of detail, those
incidents and happenings
that once meant so much
to you.
Make little gifts of Kodak
pictures to your friends.
They will be highly appre-
ciated because of their
unique personal value.
Anyone can learn to use a
Kodak in half -an - hour,
and the daylight-all-the-
way method of finishing
the pictures is simplicity
itself.
There are Kodaks from 40/-
to £l5/2/-
The No. 2c Autographic Kodak junior is a splendid camera for
amateurs —makes the small postcard pictures, size 2s x 4 Jins. 75/6
Of all Kodak dealers, and
K O DAK (Australasia) LT D.,
379 George Street, Sydney And all States and New Zealand


The Colonel
Jimmie da Rodge.
Though only an N.C.O. he was always
known to the battalion, from the C.O. down-
wards, as the “Colonel.” Tall, well-built
and always neatly dressed and possessed of
a first-class education, he fully justified the
title and the whole command often won-
dered why he had not attained commis-
sioned rank, but a secret lay behind.
Though he could always refuse a “dare”
he was always open to take on any bet in
reason. When warned for his second trip
to France, after a long convalescence in
Blighty, a fellow N.C.O. wagered him that
he could not get leave to London. “Done,”
said the “Colonel,” and straightway had
himself paraded to the C.O. “Well, Colonel
and what do you want?” asked the C.O.
“If you please, sir, I would like 30 hours
leave to go to London.” “Can’t be done,”
snapped the Adjutant who was standing by,
“You’re on draft for France.” Without
taking any notice the Colonel went on. “Y ou
see, sir, 1 have not seen my young brother,
who is in the artillery, for three years or
more, and I would like to see him before 1
go over.” “But, I tell you,” burst in the
Adjutant—The “Colonel” calmly but regi-
mentally saluted the C.O. and said, “I beg
your pardon, sir, I thought you were the
C.O. The C.O. stifled a smile and replied
“I’m sorry I cannot see my way to grant the
leave as you’re due for France.” Here the
“Colonel” with a piercing stare of his steel
grey eyes remarked with a sigh, “By jove,
it is a cruel war that won’t let me see my
brother.” “Well, see me in the morning,”
said the C. 0., and the Colonel regimentally
withdrew. “Do I win?” asked his opponent
in the bet. “Let you know in the morn-
ing,” was the rejoinder.
Morning came and found the “Colonel
at orderly room. “What was it you wan-
ted?” asked the C. 0., and before the re-
quest could be repeated, the Adjutant flung
out, “Yes, you can have your leave. Your
pass is in the R.S.M’s. room.” “I think I
collect on this,” said the “Colonel” as he
waved his leave pass and railway warrant
before his adversary’s face. “But I wouldn’t
have if he asked where my brother is.”
“Your brother?” “Yes, I told him 1 would
(with a mighty emphasis on the “would”)
like to see my brother, but where my brother
is I’m blowed if 1 know . But,” and his
voice sank, “I really would like to see him.”
Another rash individual, when the carrier
for home was nearing Capetown and the
prospects of leave were dark, on hearing the
“Colonel” say that he would get ashore
and be one of the first to do so, offered a
rather substantial wager against this and was
promptly taken up. That night the
“Colonel” approached the CO. of the ves-
sel, and after a conversation got the re-
quired permission and to the rash bettor’s
dismay, when the vessel tied up at Cape-
town, the ‘Colonel’ calmly walked down the
gangway and the military police’s argument
was cut short by the C.O. himself, who was
on the upper deck. “That’s alright,” he
shouted, “Let that man pass.”
Four hours later, meeting the “Colonel” in
Adderley Street, the C.O. said, “Well, what
did the cable say?” “A boy, and both do-
ing well,” replied the “Colonel.” “Congratu-
lations,” said the C. 0., and passed on with
his companion and second-in-command,
Major McLeod, V.C., D.S.O. “What’s the
congratulation for?” asked the latter with
some surprise. “Well, you see,” re-
plied his senior, “the ‘Colonel,’ as you call
him, has some friends in Capetown, and as
the great event was to happen to his wife
shortly after he sailed, and in the event of
the vessel calling at Capetown his friends
there would receive the cable from Eng-
land.” “But he isn’t married; why I know
him better than anybody on the ship, and it
was his not being married that kept him out
of commissioned rank,” the Major said.
“How was that?” asked the perplexed O.C
“Well there was another chap and the
“Colonel” due for promotion, but when he
found the other was a married man he
waived his claim with the remark, ‘You’ll
need the cash more than I shall, old man,
and your wife will get the bigger allotment
and, I hope not, the bigger pension.” Next
morning he was found spread across
the newly created officer with the wound
that is now bringing him home. He got the
D.C.M. for that.” “And the officer?”


queried his companion. “Back in Aussie
these two months.’’
After the ship had left Capetown the C.O.
sent for the “Colonel” and said, ‘‘What do
you mean by telling me such a cock and
bull story?” “It was quite true,” retorted
the Colonel. “It is not,” thundered the offi-
cer, “Major McLeod told me you are not
married.” “Major McLeod is wrong then,
for I married three months before I went to
Weymouth Convalescent Depot. I see.
said the other with a knowing smile, but I
did not think you were that kind of chap un-
less the birth was super premature. “Stop
thundered the other, a nasty look in his eyes
and he half advanced, his nails digging into
the palm of his hands. I am not that
kind of a fellow, and I am not going to have
my wife insulted with your thoughts, and
neither was the birth premature when I ap-
plied to you for leave. I told you an in-
crease in the family was expected, but I did
not say my wife would contribute it . It was
her sister who has added to England’s popu-
lation, and she was so delicate and so be-
loved by us all that I asked them to send
this,” and here the Colonel thrust into his
officer’s face a yellow slip with words, “A
boy, Ada doing well, love, Anita. My
wife’s name is Anita,” he explained. lam
sorry,” said the 0.C., “and I heartily apolo-
gise. Will you shake hands?” “Sure, was
the reply, and all was well. But the Colonel
kept out of all bets for the rest of voyage,
but it must be said to his credit that he re-
fused the stakes of his last bet.
Arrived at Randwick he was operated on
and drafted to a convalescent ward. Coming
home one night he found the night sister
nearly crazy. “What’s up, sister,” he asked.
“Oh that awful orderly did not draw the
rations and we’ve no milk, no sugar, and no
tea.” “That’s bad,” said the Colonel, but
we’ll soon fix that,” and catching up a jug,
he went to one of the other huts
and said to the sister. Sister G
sends her love, and could you spare us a
drop of milk? You see the day was so hot
that ours turned sour.” “Turned sour, did
it? Oh, well, in that case I’ll let you have
some. The general cry is that the orderly
forgot to draw it. Here you are.” He next
went to a distant hut and requested sugar.
“You use an awful lot of sugar at No. —.’
"We do, sister, but if you were there we
would not require any at all.” “Why not?
queried the nurse. "Why if you were only
to stir the tea with your finger and smile
into the porridge there would be no need for
sugar,” said the unabashed ‘Colonel.’ Go
on with you. Here, take this and get out,
pushing a pound of sugar into his hand.
"Gee, what a face,” he said to himself as he
got out and returned to his own hut. Here
you are, sister, milk and sugar, and now for
the tea.” "I have found some tea,” said
the sister. Right ho, said the Colonel,
“now we ll have supper.” And supper they
had. The last I saw of the "Colonel was
at Coogee, gazing out to sea, and soft-
ly singing, For me and my gal, and
in response to my query as to his look of in-
tent he replied, "I am watching for the ship
that will bring my little girl out to me.
AN EVASIVE ANSWER.
Padre: Now Murphy, I am going to write
my sermon, this morning, and don’t want
to be interrupted. I don’t want you to tell
a lie and say I am out —just give an evasive
answer.”
Later.
“Well Murphy, did anyone call? and
what did you say?”
Murphy: “Well, yer honour, he asks if
yer honour was in, and 1 gives him an eva-
sive answer, like you said.
Padre: “Tell me just what you did say.”
Murphy: “He said, ‘Was yer honour at
’ome,’ and I said ‘Was yer mother a mon-
key?’ and I shuts the door in his face.’
MOST UNCALLED FOR.
M.O. (to patient, after operation):
“Well, how do you feel now?”
Soldier: “Pretty sick, sir. Do you think
the operation will prove a success? And
shall I be able to go home soon?”
M.O. “Well! Considering that you are
getting all this free of charge, I think you
are most ungrateful and your idle curiosity
is quite uncalled for.”
H. E. SHEEN.




The Song Everybody will shortly be Singing
When the Boys Come
Marching Home
CHORUS
For there’ll be smiles and cheers and miles of tears
When the Boys come marching home ;
There’ll be tears enough, you know,
To make a dozen rivers flow.
Dressed in their torn and tattered suits of tan,
From battlefields across the foam ;
Hearts will beat with joy for every boy,
When the Boys come marching Home.
Price complete, 2/1 posted
Copies can be had from
NICHOLSONS
342 GEORGE ST, SYDNEY


VISITORS !


REMNANTS FROM RANDWICK may be procured at No. 4
A.G.H., from Sapper Healey at “Canary Cottage,’’ also at the
Red Cross Hospital Handicrafts Shop in Camden Buildings,
418 George Street, where the staff have kindly consented to include
it in their other hospital wares. Visitors are invited to call at Camden
Buildings and see the high standard of work there displayed every-
thing from Church Reading Desks and Honour Boards to Glove
Boxes in carved wood work ; Leather Bags of all variety down to the
daintiest Purses, Wrist Watch Straps, Bead Ornaments, Fancy Work,
Calendars and Caskets.
Purchase the Work of Returned Soldiers
Help them to Help Themselves


BO
iEfR
m
DUNIOPRIiPatUf"
vr I®>||B
AUSTittgASiA ||e
B B «
Made in Australia
By Austral iahs _-•*■
Unequalled for
Quality £ Price
ff
FEW AUSTRALIANS rean«
the variety of Goods we manufacture
at our Australian Mills. Our
Goods comprise :
Dunlop Dose (Engineering and
harden); Dunlop Belting (Rubber
and Balata’,; Dunlop Packings,
Insertions and Sheetings; Dunlop
Heels; Dunlop Sporting Requisites
(Tennis and Qoif Balls, Handle
Grips, Football and Punching Ball
Bladders); Dunlop Mats, Matting
and Tiling; Dunlop Hot Water Bags,
Air Cushions, Air Beds, Wringer
Rollers, etc.; Ounlop-Kelly Vehicle
Tyres; Dunlop and Oceanic Cycle
Tyres; Dunlop Motor Tyres; Dunlop
Driving and Motoring Coats, Rugs,
etc.; besides every description
of general Robber
Goods.
WKyP RUBBER CO. OF At IST. LTD.
I OH fIINDRS STnltT. MtLdOURN,
1
4LL DUNLOP GOODS
Are of the highest duality,
sold at a reasonable figure,
and guaranteed the best
obtainable. When purchas-
ing Rubber Goods always
specify ‘‘DUNLOP’ Brand,
then you will be sure of
satisfaction; besides con-
serving your interest by
keeping your money in the
country, and not paying it
away for foreign work.
TENDERS SUBMITTED
Catalogues and Price List* a.
application
'••.AU'*, °CRTM. GRIS’* 'NI
H RfSTOMORLe-


Australia’s Greatest
Sports Outfitters
and Tobacconists
“Quality Goods at Honest Prices’’
Specialists in all kinds of
SPORTING REPAIRS
Mick Simmons Ltd.
Headquarters - - Haymarket, Sydney
Branches;
City, Suburbs, Newcastle and Brisbane
TO A COBBER.
We ve been to war, old cobber, and strafed
the hateful Hun,
We’ve worn our bloodstained clobber and
been galled by pack and gun;
We’ve slept in snow and slurry, in the most
unholy cribs,
While the shells fell thick around us, and
the chats assailed our ribs.
We’ve been cold and weak with hunger and
craved a roaring fire.
But our hearts spoke loud within us, “Hang
on, and don’t retire.’’
We were no splendid heroes, no medals did
we gain.
But God above bears witness, we bore our
share of pain.
And maybe, some day, cobber, in the distant
bye and bye—
There’ll be a record written of the deeds of
you and I.
G. T. GAVAN.
THE ORDERLY OF OUR WARD.
Jimmie da Rodge.
You may talk of old John Bunny or Ar-
buckle of the Fat,
You may tell of Charlie Chaplin and his
trousers, stick and hat.
How you viewed them at the pictures till
your face with smiles grew broad,
But they cannot hold a candle to the ord’ly
of our ward.
He’ sas funny as a circus. Well, of course,
I mean the clown.
With his stately prancing, swanlike gait as he
goes up and down.
It is sure to raise the envy of a Rolls Royce
or a Ford,
For they cannot cut the capers of the orderly
of our ward.
If you ask him for a soda, he is sure to bring
you milk,
And although you try to argue his answering
tone’s like silk.
“Did yer say yer wanted soda? Well yer
needn’t look so bored.’’
H e is a holy terror is the orderly of oui
ward.
Diggers say his name is “Daylight,” but of
course that cuts no ice.
As a rose by any other name is sure to look
as nice.
For his name if it were Fauntleroy, Augus-
tus, or plain Claud,
It couldn’t change the tactics of the orderly
of our ward.
But there’s one great thing about him. Yes,
he took the biggest chance;
He buckled on his fighting gear and sailed
away to France.
Though at times there’s many of us often
wished he’d stayed abroad.
He proved himself a trier did the orderly
of our ward.
Said the medical captain to me —
You’re for Aussie, I marked you C. 3;
But remarked General Ryan—
“ Why, lad, you look fine.”
And that’s how I came a big G.
J. da R.


M
A %
4i
W
<r
U,
Aik
?
Install G*E Electric
FANS
for the Summer heat.
G.E. ELECTRIC FANS are inexpensive, attractive in appearance
and low in operating cost.
We stock these fans in various sizes and styles, adjustable to
any angle,
Visit our showroom or write us for particulars.
WENTWORTH AY SYDNEY.
s




You
returned
men
You want good tailoring
and good materials when
you place your order for
a civilian suit.
You are assured of good
tailoring by our guaran-
tee of perfect satisfaction
or money at once
refunded.
In materials you have
your choice of the
woollens that were part
of our £32,000 purchase
from the Government
Controller of the Standard
Wollen Company. No
finer fabrics are offered
by any tailor in Australia
to-day.
Grace Bros Ltd.
Broadway, Glebe.
“Sure to get it at Grace Bros.’ ,
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
BLIGHTY LEAVE.—No, we have no
knowledge of how to get rid of hair on the
chin without shaving—try sandpaper.
TIRED TIM.—We quite agree that you
might make a better soldier than Napoleon
He’s dead, you’re not.
MRS. WIGGS.—Yes. Bald or shaven
topped soldiers are obliged to keep their
caps on, at all times during sunshine, as the
reflection of the sun’s rays, on the shining
scalp, might be mistaken for a heliograph
message, and cause much confusion.
R.A.N.R.—Yes. When crossing the line
every care must be taken to avoid the ship’s
propeller fouling it. What ho she bumps.
H.M.A.S.—No. Flying fish do not roost
and build nests in trees. Their young lose
their feathers very early. The cock fish can
be heard crowing each morning at or about
reveille.
ANXIOUS ALDERMAN.—If an ostrich
ate a bag of cement, or any part thereof, it
would not necessarily follow that the bird
would lay a foundation stone.
DIRTY DICK. No. You are not com-
pelled to drink your bath water.
ANXIOUS BlLL.—Blue arm bands need
not be worn when surfing.
BENEDICT.—The next boat load of
wives will arrive 19 umpteen. We hope
yours is on it.
Q. When is a rifle a drunk?
A. When it is loaded, well-oiled and the
foresight is crooked, not at the “order,” and
can’t “slope.”
“By cripes! What next! Orderly’s gone
and washed that dixie, and it was clean.”
A TRYING ORDEAL.
Hun : “Ahl hal you didn’t catch me.”
Ghurka (with a knife) : “You’ll know all
about that when you try to move your
head.


Qillnm-’ fjytc
~ J *r x^JL^-


Staff of No 4 entertaining the patients on Nov 13 in celebration of peace.


HEENZO FOR ASTHMA
To be candid, there is no definitely-known aure for asthma. The most that can honestly be promised is
something that will facilitate breathing and afford relief from the distressing paroxysms which, if
unchecked, so completely exhaust the patient from time to time. Opiates, though often used,
ultimately do more harm than good, as the dose has to be continually increased, till, sooner or later, the
opium habit—a worse affliction than asthma itself—is often created.
Most gratifying relief from asthma may be obtained from the use of Heenzo (registered name for Mean’s
Essence), which has the added advantage of exercising no ill after-effects. That is much to be thankful for.
LIEUTENANT A. McASKILL, late 3rd Battalion, A.I.F. (an original
Anzac), of 2 1 Ounmbali Road, Mosman, says : “ When on active service I
contracted what, I am sure, is one of the most distressing complaints—Asthma, with
which 1 was invalided home. Determined, if possible, to cure myself, I tried all sorts
of medicines, both prescribed and patent ; but found nothing to equal Heenzo. 1 feel
better since commencing to use Heenzo, which practically cured me, and I would
strongly recommend its use to any one suffering from chest complaints. 1 find Heenzo
my most faithful friend.’’
Hundreds of other letters tell of the benefit derived from the use of Heenzo.
COSTS 21- SAVES POUNDS.
Each bottle of Heenzo when diluted and sweetened as per easy directions printed on the label produces
a family supply of superior quality mixture for Asthma, Bronchitis, Colds, Influenza, Catarrh, and other
chest and throat troubles. A like quantity of ready-made remedies would cost anything from 12/-to a
couple of pounds, according to quality. Heenzo is best quality.
OBTAINABLE FROM ALL LEADING CHEMISTS AND STORES.
The Mediow Bath Hotel-de-luxe —Hydro Majestic
THE HYDRO, as hotels go, is unique. From its promenades you gaze straight down into the magnificent
Kanimbla Valley and from thence to the rugged hills beyond. From a beautiful Banqueting Hall, through
part of a quarter mile long Art Gallery, two or three minutes’ walk finds you in the midst of some of
Australia’s grandest scenery,
*5l
mm
. - • -,y
y
£
*u.
TARIFF—
Single Rooms from
£3 ss. per week or
16s 6d. per day.
Double Rooms from
£lO lOs per .week or
335. per day.
Full information may
be had by communi-
cating with
Manager, The ‘Hydro,’
Medlow Bath, Blue
Mountains. Telephone
29 Katoomba.
or
The Sydney Office,
19 Imperial Arcade,
Sydney, N.S.W. Tele-
phone, 7154 City.


AT THE IMPROVISED HOSPITAL.
Voluntary Maid: “But don’t yer know his name ?”
Anxious Visitor: “No ! All he told me was that he was run over with a tank.”


“Bully beef and biscuits,
Tinned stew and ration rum,
Are apt to make our fighting men
Feel ‘squalmy’ in the turn.
A dose of Castor Oil,
And pills called number nine,
Are what the Army people give
Our heroes in the line.
So when you write again
To Billjims o’er the seas,
Send some of Dr. Morse’s Pills —
Australia’s best to please.’’
LOWE
R
FOR
A
C
P
R
E
1 his maxim so well known and so implicitly believed in by the great buying
public of this State, stands as a beacon light to overtaxed purses, guiding careful
shoppers into the safe waters of true economy in footwear.
Fay’s four fine footwear stores offer abundant opportunities to save —each line
offered being maximum value for the price asked. INSPECTION INVITED
T7TMA7 A Pi T 7 A V I nPTA “The Big Boot Block,” Corner of
EjU VV rill, LIU. Pitt and Liverpool Streets, Sydney
Also at George St., Haymarket. Broadway, Glebe. Bridge, Newtown.


V
Osman
Sheets and Pillow Cases
In Hospitals, Hotels and Homes where there are
children, bed linen must be laundered frequently
and women know that Quality means Economy.
Bed Sheetings that wash as thin as cheese cloth are
wasteful, as they will not stand ordinary wear and tear.
The best judges of house linen will tell you that for
quality goods at reasonable prices you cannot do better
than the well known “Osman” brand of Sheets and
Pillow Cases.
Look for this label
on the corner of each Sheet


“SLEPT WELL.”
Bill—(who suffers badly from insomnia,
and who has been forced to make his own
bed at least six times during a sleepless night
while the orderly slumbered peacefully)
when he hears the doctor read out the order-
ly’s report in the morning: “I’ve been repor-
ted ‘missing’ and ‘killed,’ but—‘slept well!’
No—l’ll be chloroformed first!”
E. W. E. “M” Hut.
Driver Z— was stuck upon the road be-
hind Armentieres. His motor would not
“gee.” He was near fever heat as he dis-
mantled his carburetter. On looking into
the air inlet he fished out a dead cock-
roach.
“Why, no wonder the “Bus” won't go,”
chipped in his driver mate, “the bally en-
gineer is dead.”
E. W. EDWARDS, “M” Hut
The thanks of the Organisers are due first of all to the generous help accorded
them by.the Advertisers, and also to Miss Maud Russell, Honarary Manager, and
Mr. E. J. Hill, a member of the R.V.A., who has acted as Honarary Editor.


Drawings by Privates Edwards, Alcock, Sharman, Bryant and Hughes.


Sister: Have you had your number 9?”
Jimbill: Yes, and I have just passed the
Medical Board.’’
D.O.S. (Dear Old Soul). — I suppose you
saw quite a lot on your journeys.
Digger: Lor bless your ’eart, ma’am,
I m quite an aperient traveller, tho’ we did
go sewerage.
Member of the Board: “Take off your
coat.”
Digger: “But, sir ”
M. of B.: Do as I tell you, don t argue,
(after an examination), Deferred for two
months:”
Digger: But, sir, I was discharged two
years ago and am only one of the orderlies.”
Digger (with inebriated comrade, minus
blue bands, of course) : “Come on, yer
blanky ruddy crimson blank. Feel yer scar-
let feet.”
Old Lady; My good man, you must not
use awful language to your fellow man.”
Digger: “That’s orl right, mum, e’s deaf,
copped it at Ypres, and the only thing e can
ear is, Could you do a drink,’ and strike
me pink, es been earing it all day .”
Jim Jim: Say, Bill, wot s a hanthem?”
Bill: Well, if I was to say, ‘Ere, Jim, ’and
me that Baynet, that wouldn t be a han-
them. But if I was to say, ‘Ere Jim, ’ere
Jim, ere Jim, Jim, Jim, and me, and me,
ere Jim, and me that bay, ere Jim and
me that bay, baynet, amen, amen, a-a-men,
and me, ere Jim, and me that baynet,
amen,’ why that would be a hanthem.”
LIFE’S LITTLE IRONIES.
Major (of Quacks) : Now, my man, you
are to take this medicine and smoke one
packet of cigarettes a day, only.”
(The following week.)
Major: Well, how are you to-day?”
Soldier: Much better sir, but I find the
cigarette stunt very hard.”
Major: How s that? Why one packet a
day is ample for a man in your condition.”
Soldier: But I never smoked before in
my life"!
H. E. SHEEN.


g Established 1820 -
LAS SETTER’S
“The Home of Confidence’’
Where you can buy anything
from a
Yard of Ribbon
#
to a Ship’s Ci
Send for Catalogue
3 1508 00247907
F. Lassetter & Co. Ltd,
George York and Clarence Sts.,
Sydney


Johnson & Sons
Leather Merchants
Large Stocks of Fancy and
Suede Leathers
203 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Branches at Melbourne, Sydney, London, Leicester, Northampton
ft
G
“FEATHER” has won
the unqualified appro-
val of good housewivca
throughout the Com-
monwealth.
IT NEVER FAILS
TO RISE
For making light, dainty
and _ delicious cakes,
pastries, scones and
home-made bread it is
unsurpassed.
SAVE THE
COUPONS FOR
CASH PRIZES
Send I sid. stamp to
cover postage, and re-
ceive a free cook book,
containing scores of
useful recipes.
If you prefer to use the ordinary flour, then do
not fail to use
“GOOD SHOT
Baking Powder
It is always pure, sweet, dry and fresh because it
is packed in air-tight, lever-top tins.
Home-made Bread, Scones, Cakes, and Pastry
made with “Good Shot” rise perfectly at every
baking. Save the Coupons for Cash Prizes.
Send Hd. to cover postage, for large sample of
“Good Shot.”
Ask your grocer for these other Mitchell Pure Food Products
Mitchell’s Custard Powders
Mitchell’s Green Tomato Pickle
Mitchell’s Curry Powder
Myfa Tea
Mitchell’s Special Worcester Sauce
Mitchell’s “Blue Ribbon” Coffee Essence
YOU WILL FIND THEM PERFECT
D. Mitchell & Co. Ltd.
153 Clarence Street, Sydney.


pc
it
I
Vi
o
m
7
llflf
>
a
7
m
-m
mm
i
■
M
tram
'fr*-.
*1
Anfhony Hordern &■ Sons
&
Onfy Universal Providers
Nejy Palace Emporium,
Brickfield nill,~-^
M
mi
N
TV
Sydney
1
f tftr
V.
im
m
Issued by permission Of the Repatriation Department 6t N.S.W.
Wholly Sfet up and printed in Australia by Arthur McQuitty & Co., 451 a Kent St., Sydney
