

60th
Anniversary
of
Renmark Congregational
(Wilkinson Memorial)
Church
1889
1949


Ministers of Church
Rev. W. T. Kench 1890-1892
Rev. T. B, Logie 1892- died 1898
Rev. G. Williams 1898-1904
Rev. R. J. Rose 1904-1906
Rev. A. W. Gordon 190S-1907 j
j Rev. J. T. Dunstan 1907-1908 j
Rev. A. S. Meldrum 1908-1909 j
Rev. W. Jarrett 1909-1910
j Rev. J. Casley 1911-1914
Rev. F. Wheen 1914-1917
Rev. A. E. Francis 1918-1924
Rev. C. A. Hawke 1924-1927
j Rev. W. H. J. Turner 1928-1932 f
Rev. S. W. Parker 1932-1939 |
Rev. H. R. Ballard 1939-1941
Rev. L. G. Kay 1942-1947
Rev. II. R. Ballard 1947.


Souvenir Bookler
Renmark Wilkinson Memorial
Congregational Church
60th Anniversary
Compiled by the Church History Committee :
(oTKCrs. r U. c (d. eTSlcLean, eJTCiss (fM.. ctMillar
and e! Messrs . < 5Ht, C Dix and L. Humphries)
“They which seek their own, and not that which is
Christ’s depart from the Unity of the Spirit; and in an
earthly city, the Unity of that is gone, when the citizens
study their own, and not the public good.”
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60ih ANNIVERSARY


CHURCH HISTORY
On the 4th June 1889 (according to the Minute Book) “A Meeting
of Christians was held in Mr. H. O’Sullivan’s house for the purpose of form-
ing a Congregational Church at Renmark.”
The Rev. John Chapman, of Hamley Bridge, occupied the chair.
“The Chairman having clearly and forcibly explained tne Constitu-
tion the following signed the Covenant and agreed to form
themselves into a Church to be known as the ‘Renmark Congregational
Church’: — viz. Gibson Badger, Dugald and Allan McLachlan, Annie Badger,
Ada M. Oldham, Henry Arthur Badger, Thomas? Laxton Acason, Horatio
E. A. O’Sullivan, Marguerite O’Sullivan, Edward E. Thompson, Henry
Evans, Douglas H. Fiimer, Rice Kelly, A. Laidlaw, Jane Laidlaw, Hugh
Oldham, Braidwood Evans, Thomas Halliday, J. Halliday.”
This is the first portion of the Minutes of the first Church Meet-
ing. It then continues:— The election of officers was then proceeded
with and resulted as follows: Secretary—Mr. D. A. McLachlan; Trea-
surer, Mr. Gibson Badger; Auditors —Mr. Hugh Oldham and Mr. E. Thomp-
son; Deacons —Mr. Thomas Halliday, Mr. Thomas Laxton Acason, and
Mr. Henry Evans.” ,
At the first meeting a building site was discussed but nothing
definite was decided upon.” After a Building Committee of three was
elected (viz. “That the Secretary, together with Messrs. Hugh Oldham and
A Crossley form the Building Committee.”) the question of obtaining
an organ was raised. “The Chairman mentioned that the old organ at
the Kapunda Church could be bought for about £lo.’ The matter
of the organ was deferred. But at the next meeting, in August, (the Rev.
Geo. Herrington, chairman from Milang) it was reported that a second-
hand Estey Organ could be purchased for about £l5, but was again
postponed.
At this meeting the Secretary was instructed “to write to Mr.
Martin Burgess re loan of £lOO for erection of Church, and ascertain
full particulars of same.”
From this rapid progress in a month it can be realized that this
little band of Christians was progressive. Although the Church was
not formed until June 1889, it must be realized that meetings had
been held for some time previously. In October 1889 the Secretary
received information from the Committee of the Congregational Union
that £l5O had been placed to the credit of the Renmark Congregational
Church “for the purpose of the erection of a Church building.
It is worthy of note that the Parkin Mission had held only
two meetings when they received a request from the Secretary of
the Congregational Union on behalf of the Renmark sub-committee
that Christian work be initiated there as soon as funds were available.
Tenders were called for the erection of a building and the success-
ful entrants were G. &H. Badger at a cost of £175. The site chosen
was one facing the river on Murray (now James) Avenue North.
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


Let us now leave the deacons and have a glance at our ministers
from the beginning and see what occurred and how they gave their
service to the Church. Beginning with August 1889 when Rev. George
Herrington came to assist in the formation of the Church, each month
a different pastor came, viz. T. S. Williams, John Chapman, A. S,
Devenish, Alfred Hodge and E. Hampden-Cook. During his stay Alfred
Hodge, at the request of the Governors of Parkin Mission, crossed the
border and visited Lake Victoria in N.S.W., but reported that the
distances were too great to allow work there from Renmark as a centre.
Meanwhile the Rev. J. C. Kirby, of Port Adelaide, had brought
Rev. W. T. Kench to the notice of the Governors, and so in March 1890,
Mr. Kench arrived and commenced service as our first pastor, and was
the first permanent Minister in Renmark.
In July 1891 the Rev. W. Roby Fletcher journeyed to Renmark
to dedicate the new building for worship, on a site presented by the
Chaffey Brothers.
During his tenure Rev. W. T. Kench kept the church together and
many new members joined.
The minutes of the meeting held Nov. 4th 1891 read: “Mr. Halliday
prop., Mr. Kelly sec. that we send and procui’e a bell (carried).” The
receipt is dated Nov. 20, 1891, from Geo. P. Harris, Scarfe and Co.,
Mr. Kench bought a horse to visit the settlements along the River,
making journeys as far as Overland Corner. This entailed hardship but
Mr. Kench has written from Neutral Bay telling of his happy times in
Renmark.
He tells of his trip to Renmark in 1890 and of a few of his early
experiences here: —“At 83 years of age my memory of events nearly 60 years
ago is rather dim. Early in 1890 I left Adelaide as an agent of the Parkin
Mission and from Morgan went on board the little steamer ‘Gem’ and
arrived at Renmark at dark. I was met by Mr. Kelly who took me to
my lodgings—a small room with my landlady, Mrs. Murchland, next door
in a log hut. Our first services were held in an iron building, with doors
front and back. One Sunday morning as I was preaching, a pet cockatoo
came in and perched on my shoulder —much to the amusement of the
children (and adults —Ed.). We continued our services there until our
first Church was opened in 1891. The Rev. Fletcher came up to dedicate
the building. I recall taking him for a long ride on horseback to an
outback station up the river where I celebrated a wedding. Many of the
guests were under the “influence” —so we left after the ceremony. I can’t
remember names, but I do recall two friends who were members of the
church —Mr. and Mrs. Hough.
“One of the first things I did on arrival at Renmark was to buy
a pony, and I rode out to different stations, etc. The Robertson Bros,
of Bookmark and Chowilla stations were very good friends of mine. one
of my trips was down the river in a boat calling at wood-cutters’ camps,
etc. Renmark was supposed to be a prohibition settlement, but there
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


were sly-grog shops, and “Pink Eye”, an inferior wine, was brought up
from Adelaide. One night the natives held a corroboree in the town—
they were plied with liquor—and the sergeant and I were up most of the
night trying to keep the peace. I suppose those River blacks have vanished
long ago! Yes—I recall the night when the sly-grog keeper was incinerated.
We formed a chain with buckets to the River, but could not put out the
Are. Next morning the corpse, a charred mass, was found inside the place.
A feature of Renmark of those far off days was the number of English
settlers.
“After three happy years I was invited by the S.A. Mission to
reopen the Broken Hill Church. In severing my connection with the Parkin
Mission, the Secretary, Rev. P. W. Cox, wrote:— ‘Your work . . . . has
been chiefly that of laying the foundation for future building-up. it
MRS. V. T. McLEAN, who
was received into the Church
Fellowship on 28th April 1910,
and whose parents were the first
couple married in our church
(1895).
has often been of a trying nature
requiring both faith and patience,
and the Governors very gladly tes-
tify that you have shown zeal and
diligence in doing the work of an
evangelist, and that the Lord has
graciously owned your work with a
good measure of success.’
“Well—I am glad that uoon
that ‘foundation’ such a beautiful
church has been built, and I shall
always have a tender memory of
Renmark and my first charge.
With all good wishes. I remain, sin-
cerely yours,— W. T. Kench.”
We need no further evidence
of the pioneering spirit of the early
settlers in this place to realize why
progress has been made so rapidly,
and that such a delightful district
has grown in such a desert place.
We deeply regret that Mr.
Kench, owing to his advanced age
and physical disabilities, is not able
to be with us at our Jubilee Celebra-
tions.
The Rev. Thomas B. Logie
arrived in September, 1892. How-
ever, ill-health hampered him from
the beginning, but he worked when-
ever possible and even when he should
not have attempted to do so, and in
1894 visited Lyrup Village Settlement, finding but little prospect for work
there. Mr. Logie married in that year, but he also had to defen
himself against charges of partiality in his pastoral visitations.
In 1893 came the depression and great anxiety following the
failure of the Chaffey Brothers when the banks in Victoria crashed. On
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


24th December 1895 the Chaffey Brothers closed their offices at Mildura
and Renmark; the S.A. Government made a loan of £3,000 to help put
Renmark on an even keel. During these times, Mr .Logie laboured
faithfully, but his health finally took a turn for the worse and he died
on February 28th 1898. His grave is in the local cemetery.
The Rev. George Williams was appointed as Missionary at Ren-
mark in July 1898. He expressed his surprise at the depraved conditions
both spiritual and temporal which existed in the town. During his six
years of faithful service he gained the confidence and respect of the
people.
He was succeeded by the Rev. R. J. Rose in May 1904. After
two years’ ill health of Mrs. Rose, and on the advice of the doctor, Rev.
R. J. Rose tendered his resignation. A farewell social was held in his
honour and was attended by a “thoroughly representative meeting of
the Church and local societies.”
Mr. A. W. Gordon was appointed for a period, but after nine
MR. AND MRS. C. R. MIL-
LAR, oldest members of our
church. They both joined the
church on August 1st 1900 and.
have been active members for
almost half a century.
months he resigned to enter the Ade-
laide Congregational College. This
is what the Rev. A. W. Gordon wrote
to us concerning his brief stay at Ren-
mark: — “I was at Renmark for about
a year, 1906-7, and lived with Mr.
Harry and Mrs. Taylor at the Manse,
in whose company and under Mr.
Taylor’s keen and informed mind I
spent a very happy and profitable
time. Mr. Taylor was an enthusiast
for the Church and a fine Christian.
Mrs. Taylor too, was wonderfully help-
ful. We had great support from Mr.
Jenner, the Head Teacher of the
school (he was a deacon and secre-
tary), Mr. Pitt sen., the Gibbons fami-
ly, Ted, Ned and May. Ted had a fine
tenor voice and was choir-master:
Ned played the organ.
“The congregations were
splendid: generally a full church. The
Baseys and Howies came while I was
there and were regular and always
helpful. The King family too were
great stalwarts.
My trips up-river to Mr. Wil-
kinson’s and Mr. Smith’s of Warrakoo
were epics. Often Ned Gibbons and
I biked up—visited and held services
at Warrakoo to a housefull. The
singing was memorable; Mr. and
Mrs. Smith were lovable people.
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


“The Paringa people attended Renmark. The Stoeckels well sup-
ported the Church. They were very helpful to me, and I could always
anticipate a warm welcome in their homes. Indeed I remember my
Renmark experiences as among the happiest of my life. I owe a gieat
THE REV. W. T. KENCH
(our first Pastor). At 84 years,
Mr. Kench lives in retirement
at Neutral Bav. N.S.W. Our
thoughts go with him at this
time, and we regret that he
could not be with us in person.
deal to Mr. and Mrs. Taylor, the Wil-
kinsons, Smiths and Stoeckels.”
The Rev. A. W. Gordon was
the Chairman of the Congregational
Union last year and we were pleased
to welcome him to conduct our 59th
Anniversary service. He renewed
many old friendships.
Following Mr. Gordon’s de-
parture, Mr. F. J. Dunstan arrived in
March 1907; after eighteen months re-
signing to enter the College, from
where he was appointed to take charge
of Kilkenny Church.
During the short term of Mr.
A. S. Meldrum from Tumby Bay (he
stayed less than one year) steps were
taken to remove the building to a more
central site. The position of the
church-building had been much de-
bated over a period of years.
Then followed the Rev. W.
Jarrett (who served for one year)
called from Tasmania. Prom here
he accepted a call to Rutherglen in
Victoria.
At the close of his pastorate
here, the Governors of Parkin Mis-
sion expressed their wish to contri-
bute only £100, expecting the Church
to make up the promised stipend to
£150.
But when, in September 1910, the Rev. J. Casley was appointed
Missionary, the Church could guarantee only £3O. During Mr. Casley s
stay the site of the old Church was sold to Messrs. Dridan and James
for £4O.
It is interesting here to note the devious methods of extracting
financial assistance from the members. The first method noted was that
at all “teas” the charge for bachelors was always double the amount
of that charged to married folk. Then there was what was called a
“pound tea.”. We are not certain of the significance of the word “pound,
but believe that those who were able and willing were expected to donate
a pound; but this is not at all certain. Another method was, The Golden
Offering” and social. One of these functions during Mr. Casley s stay
realized £23.
During his stay, Mr. Casley visited Bern and Lyrup, besides main-
6


taining the work at Murtho and Paringa. It was during Mr. Casley’s
MISS M. MILLAR, who join-
ed the church on September
4th 1914 and has served as
deaconess and S.S. teacher al-
most ever since. At present
Miss Millar is our Children’s
Superintendent.
term here that the famous strike oc-
curred at the height of the 1911 fruit
harvest.
The Rev. F. Wheen was ap-
pointed to the Renmark District early
in 1914, and he, his wife and daugh-
ter were given a welcome social at
the end of May 1914. During the
difficult years of the First World War
Mr. Wheen conducted the affairs of
the Church here. It was at the end
of 1914 that the services of this
church were discontinued at Berri
owing to the advent of the Church
of Christ, Anglican and Methodist
Churches.
There was an interim of al-
most a year after the departure of
Mr. Wheen in 1917 till the arrival of
the Rev. A. E. Francis. From Mr.
Wheen’s departure until April 1928
the written records are scant as the
Minute Book for this period has been
lost. However, the Rev. A. E.
Francis wrote from Bookable, on the
West Coast and gave us a summary
of his term in our Church.
Mr. Francis arrived in Febru-
ary or March and served for just
over six years. During that time
he commenced services at Lone Gum
and Renmark West. Just before
his departure he was asked by the
Governors to conduct services at
Block E, Block A and Murtho.
“The late Mr. Sanders was the real founder of 'che Renmark Mest
Union Church, though from days pre-dating the erection of the church
building we were co-pastors.”
It was during the time of Mr. Francis that the Church here
and the Governors raised profound opposition to the erection of an
electric power station opposite the church building.
Mr. Francis says: “Your mention of the power station recalls
7


a stimulating little party contention in which at the time I took an
active and profoundly serious share,
but which across the backward abysm
of the years I remember with an im-
partial smile.” (Would that the op-
position of his had been successful.)
(.The late Mr. Syd. Dridan also was
of the same mind at Mr. Francis.)
Mr. Francis writes: “How I
should miss certain faces! Pre-emi-
nent among those absentees is H. S.
Taylor—for me, and surely for many
more, an outstanding figure of a
life-time.”
The Rev. C. A. Hawke arrived
from Lower Hutt Street Church, New
Zealand, to take charge of the Ren-
mark Church. Services were con-
ducted at Murtho in the school build-
ing. lire Wilkinsons and the
Stoeckels were very interested in our
work at those centres. I had noth-
ing to do with any services at Block
A and Block E. I think services
at Murtho ceased when Mr. Turner
was at Renmark I conducted
MRS. M. E. TRANTER, who
was organist for 31 years and
also served for many years on
the diaconate and as treasurer.
several services at Lyrup, but nothing permanent resulted. I had a very
“SHIFTING DAY’.’ An old-time “traction engine” mov-
ing the first church from its original site —in one piece.
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


happy time at Renmark and regarded it as the most progressive country
town in South Australia.” Mr. Hawke left here in 1927 and is at present
in the Subiaco Congregational Church, W.A.
Mr. H. J. Turner took over the services in 1928 and remained in
charge till 1932. It was in 1929 that
Mr. H. S. Taylor tendered his resig-
nation as Treasurer and Assistant
Secretary of the Church. It was
accepted with deep regret. As a
token of the esteem with which he
was held, an illuminated address
was prepared and presented to Mr.
Taylor.
The Rev. S. W. Parker follow-
ed Mr. Turner. The outstanding
event in Mr. Parker’s term was the
building and opening of the new
church. The erection of this fine
building was due to the generosity
of the late Mr. James Wilkinsfi.
This fine building is one of which
we are proud and to the Rev. S. W.
Parker goes much of the credit; his
keen assistance and oversight were
tireless.
The Rev. H. R. Ballard arrived
in the latter half of 1939. Soon after
his arrival the Second World War
broke out. After two years with
MR. H. DIX, who is a staunch
member of the church. He has
served as a deacon for 20 years.
us, Mr. Ballard enlisted as an Army Chaplain. During his brief stay
Mr. Ballard had been responsible for a forward movement in the Church
and Town. The youth of the Church had been organized and those
who were willing joined the Toe H movement. This latter was something
entirely new to this town and still is a progressive and virile movement
here. If Mr. Ballard had done nothing else of note, these two organiza-
tions would have been sufficient to have justified his stay.
While Mr. Ballard was serving overseas the Rev., L. G. Kay gave
us his service. We well remember some of Mr. Kay’s inspiring addresses,
his versatility as a lyric tenor, and organist and entertainer at our
socials.
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


On the return of the Rev. H. R. Ballard Mr. Kay received a call
from Reevesby, near Sydney, N.S.W. We are sorry to hear that his
health has failed him somewhat since his arrival there.
During his service overseas were were proud to hear of the an-
nouncement that the Rev. H. R. Ballard had been awarded the Military
Cross. He is still with us for our 60th
Anniversary.
The Committee feels that
an explanation is necessary for the
very numerous omissions of interest-
ing episodes and lovable personalities.
But a selection had to be made and
adhered to rigidly. The Pastor is the
leader of the Church, and so it is
around the activities of the leaders
that this small booklet has been writ-
ten. Prom this brief, unfinished
story of our fellowship we feel that
we must recognize the great debt we
owe to those pioneers of the early
days of Renmark and of our Church.
For it is as part of the Town that
the Church exists and it is for the
good of the Town if the Church is
active, and the fault of the Town if
its churches are moribund. Let us
then, each one, support his Church
and its Leader, Jesus Christ, to the
limit of his ability.
OUR PRESENT PASTOR,
Rev. H. R. Ballard, M.C.
Early days of the present
church-building
Nearing completion
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60ih ANNIVERSARY


MR. and MRS. ARTHUR
WILKINSON. From the earliest
days the “Wilkinsons” and the
“Smiths” have been associated
with our church at “Murtho”
and “Warrakoo” stations.
OUR CHURCH TODAY. -Renmark Wilkinson
Memorial Congregational Church. It was possible
to build such a lovely church because of a generous
bequest by the late Mr. James Wilkinson.


THE LATE MR. H. S. TAYLOR, in his garden. Mr.
Taylor was for many years a pillar of the Church,
and served for a long period as treasurer and assis-
tant secretary.
RENMARK CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH’S 60th ANNIVERSARY


Church Officers-
Diaconate— H. Dix, V. T. McLean, G. Smith (Trea-
surer), J. Davidson, A, Weir (Assist. Treasurer),
L. Humphries (Hon. Sec.), Mrs. A. Wilkinson, Mrs.
G. Patterson, Mrs. V. T. McLean.
Life Deacons— Mrs. E. M. Tranter, Mr. A. Wilkinson,
Mr. J. Evans (Sr.), Mr. C. R. Millar,
Organist— Mrs. H. Smith.
Sunday School Supt.— Miss M. Millar.
Communion Stewards— Mrs. L. Humphries, Mrs. R.
Beckmeyer, Mrs. G. Patterson, Mrs. T. Dixon.


Name
Year cf Joining Church
—
>
3 1508 0(
5494651 8
L
J
“Pioneer” Print, Renmark
Autographs
