

REPLY
TO
FATHER O’LEARY;
ADOBESSED TO THE
POOR IRISH CATHOLICS
OF
ST. GILES'S.
SONS OF ERIN, AND DESCENDANTS OF
ST. PATRICK !
You honour your country by the con-
cern you show for the welfare of your chil-
dren. You know that the children of the Irish
have capacities to receive instruction quite
equal, if not superior, to those of the’Eng-
lish. You have, therefore, acted worthy of
the Irish name, to embrace every opportunity
of getting education for your children : such
an opportunity has been afforded you in the
Schools conducted by Mr. and Mrs. Finigan.
Several hundreds of your children have been
taught in these Schools to read and write,
and have thus been fitted for business, by
which they may procure a comfortable sup-
port for themselves,, and perhaps for you in
your old age; but Father O'Leary (or some
person in his name) tells you that the sup-
porters of these Schools are “ the bitterest ene-
mies to your country and your creed” You have
S. Gosnell, Printer, Little Queen Street, London.


had sufficient proof, daring the two years and
a half, since the Schools were established,
that there is no truth in this bold assertion.
Can those persons be “ the bitterest enemies
to your country,” who, during a late severe
winter, distributed, among the children of
the Schools and their parents, upwards of five
hundred pounds, in bread, potatoes, oatmeal,
coals, money,. &c.P Cdn those persons be
“ the bitterest enemies to your country,” who
also employed an eminent physician to attend
your children, when they were dying every
day with the measles, * and by whose skill
(through the blessing of the Almighty) many
of their lives were preserved? Can those
persons be “ the bitterest enemies to your
country,” who have expended upwards of
seven hundred pounds, in giving education to
nearly six hundred, and in clothing, during
the past year, one hundred and seventy-five
of your children, besides sixty, who received
new clothing last Christmas, and one hundred
and forty-five who had old clothing?
If the'writer of Father O’Leary’s address
knew of these circumstances, it is wonderful
how he could utter such a barefaced falsehood,
as to say that “ the supporters of these Schools
are the bitterest enemies of your country!! !”
He calls these Schools “ receptacles of hy-
pocrisy,” and says, that the grand object of
those who support them, is “ proselytismf or
an attempt to draw away your children from
the religion of their fathers! If any hypocrisy


has been practised, you have surely had suf-
ficient sense to discover it. But has there
been one instance in which any person at the
Schools ever said any thing to your children,
against either your priests or your religion ?
Has any child been asked to attend a Pro-
testant place of worship ? So far from this,
have not your children been taken to St. Pa-
trick’s chapel? You know that nothing can
be more false than the assertion that the grand
object of the supporters of these Schools is
to proselyte your children!!! If this had
been the grand object , would not a Protestant
Catechism have been used in the Schools?
would not a Protestant clergyman have been
employed to instruct your children in Pro-
testant principles? would not some attempts
have been made to entice your children to
Protestant churches ?
Be assured, fellow-countrymen, and let facts
be attended to, that the “ grand object ,” and
the “ only object ,” is, to teach them to read and
write, and to make them obedient to their pa-
rents, and honest to their employers; to raise
them above poverty and want, to make them
respectable members of society, loyal subjects,
and a credit to their country.
The only pretence offered by Father
O'Leary is, that in Schools no Cate-
chism is taught, and that the Bible, without
note or comment, “ is the only School-book
for reading.” But should not this be consi


tiered as a demonstrative proof that the
Schools are not supported for the purposes of
proselytismf And, till it can be proved that
the teaching the Bible, without note or com-
ment, is “ kidnapping your children out of
their faith,” there is no fear of your being
such monsters as to become “spiritual mur-
derers of your children !!!”
I conclude by entreating you not listen to
the ; insinuations of those who prove them-
selves no real friends to your children, by ad-
vising yon to withdraw them from the Irish
Catholic: Free Schools. These haye insultingly
told you, .that* in .sending them hitherto,
“ you-have acted u through ignorance;” but
Voir will, i trust, shdw that you are sensible of
<th& advantages.derived by your children from
the Schools, by constantly sending them.
I. remain.
Your hearty, friend and well-wisher,
A REAL CATHOLIC.
Jan. ’26, 1816.
9. Gotnell, Printer, Little Queen Street, London,
