





A pamphlet marked “ For private use only,” and bearing the
title of “ Testimony in behalf of Mr. Auguste Benjamin Sackville
West, a Candidate for Holy Orders,” has lately been pretty gene-
rally circulated. Though not bearing the name of the Author,
nor having an Episcopal Seal attached, the publication manifests
very definitely that it has emanated from Bishopthorpe.
What, it may be enquired, can be the object of this unusual
eulogy on behalf of Mr. West ? An English proverb says “ Good
wine needs no bush.” The character of this singular production
inclines to the belief that there may be a striving to patch up some
defect. The French have a proverb “ Qui s’excuse, s’accuse.”
It may be well at the outset, to observe the announcement of
the birth of Mr. Auguste Benjamin Sackville West, a son of Colo-
nel West of the Guards. No mention however is made of the
gallant Colonel having had two wives, which involves an anachron-
ism, for it is known according to Mr. West’s statement that Mr.
Auguste Benjamin Sackville West, now about 24 years of age, is
the son of the second wife, while it is also known from other sources
the first wife died within the past two years.
No allusion is made to a statement of Mr. West that Lady
in England, who gave him while there a bible, was his
Godmother. If that titled lady had been one of his Sponsors,
why was he christened so recently by the Bishop of Goulburn ?
This unexplained circumstance is the more remarkable as the late
Colonel West is represented as “a genuine Christian,” which
favors the presumption that this rite of Christening ought not to
have been omitted.
No allusion is made to the fact, that until his arrival in Goulburn
Mr. West was in the habit of writing his surname Sackville-West
(with a hyphen), thereby leading to the supposition that he be-
longed to the family of Lord De la Warr, to leading members of
which family he was accustomed to refer as his near relatives.
Mr. West’s right to the assumption of that name has been disowned
by his reception at his recent baptism of the Christian name of
Sackville ; and the former use of the hyphen is now defended by
the assertion of Mr. West that such a mark as used in the French
language is to dissez’er words. It is needless to point out the
sagacity of such an explanation, or the credulous ignorance of
anyone believing it.
Experience shnws how that the hopes entertained even of the


most promising bud, or young fruit, is sometimes destroyed by
adverse winds or frost. Let us, with that knowledge, go on to
follow the history of this “ God-fearing, Christian young gentle-
man ” in the battle of life, and his contests with truth.
Two asterisks in the margin of some copies marked with pen
note the presentations of “ one gold watch ” besides “ a compass
and opera glass.” Mr. West informed several persons that he had
been presented with “ three gold watches ” from as many places
in this country, remarking at the time what a strange fashion it
was always to present watches. But as these questionable pre-
sentations, as narrated by Mr. West, together with the several in-
cidents connected with that gentleman, are to be determined, it
is hoped, by enquiry, and as they will so materially affect “ the
highest opinion of him for truth and honor,” the attention of the
reader is not now specially invited to this, and many other astound-
ing inaccuracies and inconsistencies in one who “ was never known
to do anything unworthy of a gentleman or of his cloth.”
Reference is made in the appendix of the pamphlet to letters
marked A and B, which are simply affectionate letters, mostly of
old dates, from friends in England, and have nothing to do with
Mr. West’s life or conduct in this country. As to letters marked
(C) they arc the testimony of clergymen and others in N. S.
Wales : these letters shew that Mr. West may have good points
(which are conceded); but they have nothing whatever to do
with the circumstances which have occurred since he left the
Newcastle diocese, and which have led to the protest against his
ordination. Moreover no reason appears why Mr. West left the
Newcastle diocese, or why several important letters from clergymen,
unfavorable to Mr. West, which the Bishop of Goulburn is known
to have received, do not appear among the letters quoted from.
In a letter bearing date 14th May, 1877, at page 13, from a
clergyman, the probable intention by the Bishop of Newcastle to
ordain Mr. West is mentioned in this wise : '• but only that he
thought it probable and that much would depend upon himself
whether, that is, when examined he should be found sufficiently
prepared.” Mr. West continued in that diocese till 17th Septem-
ber following, when his resignation to the Bishop of Newcastle
was made; the question naturally arises, why was Mr. West not
ordained ? Does this imply from the terms of the letter last quoted
that he was unfitted for ordination ? The appendix then concludes
with a letter from the Lord Bishop of Newcastle expressing his
willingness that Mr. West should resign, and His Lordship’s readi-
ness to reply favorably to any questions which the Lord Bishop of
Goulburn might make respecting him. No letter however appears
from the Bishop of Newcastle in terms of commendation, but “is
conspicuous by its absence.”


A possible solution of the question why the pamphlet entitled
“ Testimony, &c., &c.,” was published, may be found in the fol-
lowing ;
The whole of the difficulty which has arisen may be summarised
in a few words, though the correspondence in extenso would fill a
large volume. Mr. West has made so very many statements,
which are to the mind of F. R. L. Rossi and others, so much at
variance with facts, and so repugnant to truth, that he felt it his
solemn duty to protest against the ordination of Mr. West. Upon
this the Bishop of Goulburn, who had previously prevented Mr.
West from meeting F. P. L. Rossi for explanation (as requested
several times), informed . R. L. Rossi that a Court of Enquiry
would take place; when his Lordship was advised again by
F. R. L. Rossi that he could, if permitted to see Mr. West, have
matters righted. Again the Bishon gave no heed; but sent
F. R. L. Rossi a no'ice purpoiting i have been prepared by the
learned Chancellor of the Diocese.
The general conditions of the proposed Court of Enquiry
appeared to be of such a character as to preclude evidence of the
utmost ii. .ortance and to prevent necessary explanations. The
further cv cumstance of the Bishop being judge was regarded as
Iv 1; of, • ionab'e, s.eing that his Lordship had involved himself
’■, . repetition ana circulation from Bishopthorpe of the un-
Te ■tcmenis of Mr. West. This being but the investiga-
i ut a preliminary matter, die objection tin-s made in no way
called into question the Bishop's sole prerog cto decide finally
t. • >*. •„><.*. a candidate.
in.: ;r relation to that Court of Enq. it should be more-
over 5 lated that the Chancellor of the Diocese has throughout
shewn himself a violent partisan. He informed F. R. L. Rossi, by
an i Jicial letter, that if the Bishop had consulted him about the
protest in the first instance he would have recommended that it
should have been thrown in the fire; and that if F. R. L. Rossi
had made a similar reference to him as he had to Mr. West, it
would be “ solely by the grace of God that he should be restrained
from washing out the gratuitous insult in his (F. R. L. Rossi’s)
blood.” This eminent gentleman was selected by the Bishop to
consider and determine upon the charges which impeded Mr.
West’s ordination, and he evinced his extraordinary peculiarity and
partiality by informing F. R. L. Rossi, also in same letter, that
“ white lies” were of no account.
The Chancellor had anticipated the case, and F. R. L. Rossi
objecting to the conditions of the Court as being so one-sided, the
matter lapsed; but lest it should thereby be misapprehended by
the Bishop that the protest had lapsed or had been withdrawn,
F. R. L. Rossi, upon the refusal of the Bishop to reply to his


letters, which indicated either incompetcncy to reply, or contempt
on the part of the Bishop in not doing so, wrote the letter of the
10th instant (vide appendix). The Bishop then intimating that
he would neither receive or answer any further letters on the sub-
ject of Mr. West, it was felt necessary by F. R. L. Rossi to send
his Lordship a last communication now published, of the same
date, which the Bishop returned unopened and without one word of
explanation. This unaccountable conduct of the Bishop not only
shews the marvellous bias in favour of Mr. West, but it has nega-
tived the Bishop’s professions that nothing on his part should be
done to diminish or affect his friendship with F. R. L. Rossi.
As the subject matter which has led to a protest against Mr.
West’s ordination, must be considered “ sub judice,” this would
not be the time or place to detail what are the circumstances which
have given rise to the charges adverse to that gentleman’s ordina-
tion ; and it is sufficient to say Mr. West’s case may fairly be
regarded as quite unexamined, for no enquiry has been made as
to whether Mr. West or F. R. L. Rossi speaks the truth, while
every effort of the latter to have this determined, is repelled by
the action of the Bishop, who refuses to receive any further com-
munication on this business. His Lordship thereby, unintention-
ally, is producing what he must deplore, a scandal in the Church,
by his absolute rejection of every suggestion to have the affair
settled, while he has invoked public curiosity to enquire the object
of his pamphlet; and causes a wound which, in its infliction, must
pierce himself also. It may properly be asked what encroachment
upon Episcopal dignity could his Lordship apprehend would arise,
that he should so gratuitously repel the reasonable proposition and
earnest solicitation so frequently re-iterated by F. R. L. Rossi to
be heard in his exposition of facts. “Fair play,” so loved by
Englishmen, is quite ignored.
The motive and spirit by which F. R. L. Rossi has been actuated
throughout his procedure with Mr. West, and the method which,
as before stated, he would have adopted had not the Bishop
persistently prevented it, is strikingly elucidated by the following
exposition of Matt, xviii, 15, by the distinguished commentator,
Barnes :
“Go and tell him his fault." In the original it is “go and
“reprove him." Seek an explanation of his conduct; and if he
“ has done wrong, administer a friendly and brotherly reproof.
“This is required to be done alone. Ist. That he may have an
“ opportunity of explaining it. In nine cases out of ten, where
“ one supposes he has been injured, a little friendly conversation
“ would set the matter right and prevent difficulty. 2nd. That he
“ may have the opportunity of acknowledging his offence, or
“ making reparation, if he has done wrong. Many would be glad


“ of such an opportunity, and it is our duty to furnish it by calling
“on them. 3rd. That we admonish them of their error, if they
“ have done an injury to the cause of religion. This should not
“be blazoned abroad. It can do no good. It does injury. It
“is what the enemies of religion wish. Christ is often wounded
“ in the house of his friends ; and religion, as well as an injured
“ brother, often suffers by spreading such faults before the world.”
If faults are now made public, with whom does the responsibility
rest ? not with those who have sought a private explanation, but
with those who have persistently resisted it.
APPENDIX.
Extract from letter, May, 1878, from F. R. L. Rossi to Bishop
of Goulburn.
“ In a letter received not very long ago from your Lordship you
were pleased to say “if Mr. West has made any statement con-
trary to truth he alone bears the blame.” It was in pursuance of
the justness of such a course that I took it upon myself, by.letter
of r 4th May, to renew a suggestion to your Lordship, of that which
I have so unceasingly attempted to bring before Mr. West, viz.,
the propriety of his explaining himself and apologising for the
painfully distressing positions into which his conduct has drawn
your Lordship,myself, and others. Encouraged by your Lordship’s
expression of a wish that I had sent to you the form of proposed
apology for Mr. West, I lost no time in forwarding it; but I admit
having the feeling of dismay at learning that your Lordship had
simply passed the paper into Mr. W.’s hands without even a
recommendation to Mr. West to adopt it, as indicated by your
Lordship.
You will be ready to forgive me I am sure, when I say I am
certainly disappointed in this, for I am aware that your Lordship’s
counsel and direction have throughout caused Mr. West to refrain
from meeting me, and I had formed the reasonable hope that your
Lordship would have exercised a corresponding pressure to induce
Mr. West (who possibly from his youth and imperfect education
might require direction) to pursue to the end, with the honorable
spirit which is said to be his characteristic, and acknowledge at


least that he is human, and has committed grievous errors to the
injury of others and the wounding of their feelings.
Perhaps your Lordship will perceive there is but one alternative
construction, viz., that / have departed from truth and that I have
lied. Are you willing then I would seriously ask, from your
lengthened knowledge of me, that I should tactitly accept such as
your view of my statements. Before you decide this, I would
respectfully emphasize the fact of the broad distinction which
ought to be drawn between truths which are definitely established
by unquestionable proof, and ideas which your Lordship may have
entertained of Mr. West, which are as yet mere problems or
opinions.”
Bishopthorpe, Goulburn,
2 ist May, 1878.
My Dear Mr. Rossi, —I am sincerely desirous of closing this
correspondence with you; and I wish to satisfy your mind, so far
as I am concerned, by saying that no one could believe that you
would designedly depart from the truth, or state anything which
you do not believe to be true.
You seem disposed to complain that I have not exercised a
pressure to induce Mr. West to do what you wish : you also at-
tribute to me things which are not true, and which I have already
denied.
Feeling, when I wrote the letter, that you had often alluded to
something which you desired to propose to Mr. West, but which
as I understand you had not made known to him, I wrote thus :
“ It is a pity you did not long ago send your paper that he might
know what is proposed,” I did not mean that it was to be sent to
me ; and I am sure that you are the last person to expect me to
dictate to any man’s conscience.
You have again written “ I am aware that your Lordship’s coun-
sel and direction have throughout caused Mr. West to refrain from
meeting me f this, as I have previously said, is most incorrect
and untrue ; and I regret to see it repeated after my direct denial.
May I be allowed to say that I am equally sensitive about attacks
upon my own honor and truthfulness.
I hope that we now fully understand one another, and that a
correspondence of this nature may be considered no longer
necessary.
Mrs. Thomas has expressed a wish to write upon other points
of your letter.
I am, my dear Mr. Rossi,
Very faithfully yours,
M. GOULBURN.
F, R. L, Rossi Esq.


Rossiville, 27th May, 1878.
My Dear Lord, —
While I can cordially say I concur very fully in your Lord-
ship’s desire to close this correspondence, I hope I shall be allowed
to say that your Lordship would hereafter feel considerable regret
that the door should be closed, as it were, without some practical
turn being given to the assurances which you have been so good
as to give me of the desire for the perpetuation of our heretofore
friendship, as well as belief in my truthfulness.
If I am believed, Mr. West’s assertions are not to be believed,
for it is indubitable, as I am accredited with the opinion that I
would not “ designedly depart from the truth, or state anything
which I did not believe to be true,” that when I assert Mr. West
told me and others such and such facts it cannot be questioned.
In reference to portion of paragraph 2, which says in your
Lordship’s letter “ you seem disposed to complain that I have not
exercised a pressure to induce Mr. West to do what you wish,” I
certainly should feel relieved if I could persuade myself that I
ought not to look to your Lordship for such assistance ; for Mr.
West told me on the night he went to your Lordship at Yass, that
he could not meet me in consequence of his going to your Lord-
ship ; and by a letter received on the following morning from Mrs.
Thomas, she told me that you had directed Mr. West not to meet
me unless in the presence of Mr. Abbott (solicitor.) And again
when I wrote to your Lordship my letters of March, asking your
Lordship to let me see Mr. West, you were pleased not even to
give me a reply.
Pursuing paragraph No. 2 to the end, your Lordship says “ you
also attribute to me things which are not true and which I have
already denied.” Pray extend patience towards me, when I say I
never have attributed, that I am aware of, anything towards your
Lordship which is not true; nor have I, that I can recall, received
any other denial of anything asserted by me beyond what is con-
veyed by your Lordship’s letter of 10th May in reply to mine of
May sth. It runs thus—“ It is a great mistake to suppose that I
“ have been his guide and adviser in any course which he, Mr.
“ West, has followed (except in the one instance named), or in any
“ letter which he has written ; or that I have ever meddled with
“ or expressed approval of any of his letters.”
This exactly contains what I would bring to your notice, viz.,
the admission on your Lordship’s part that in one particular you
had advised Mr. West; for impliedly I suppose the exception
spoken of, in the one instance, relates to the counsel that Mr.
West should not meet me. With anything else, at present, I have
nothing to do, for I am sure, if your Lordship have preserved the
correspondence, that you will find I have not at any time alluded


in my letters to that part which you have denied, about your
advising or meddling with Mr. West’s letters ; so as I point out, I
am justified in stating (and I take your Lordship’s own previous
letter to bear me out) that your Lordship has certainly advised
Mr. West in one particular, and I shall be excused from adding
that I cannot be chargeable with attributing to your Lordship
“ things which are not true.”
Paragraph 4 says “ you have again written I am aware that your
“ Lordship’s counsel and direction have throughout caused Mr.
“ West to refrain from meeting me; this, as I have previously
“ said, is most incorrect and untrue, and I regret to see it repeated
“after my direct denial.”
I must pass by without much notice the discrepancy existing
between the first page of your letter of the 24th instant, wherein
you say that I would not “ state anything which I did not believe
to be true,” and the following page of the same letter as above
given, in which / am charged with saying that which is “ most
incorrect and untrue.”
I proceed to say, I am from your Lordship’s correspondence
utterly ignorant of such heretofore denial, and I have reviewed
every letter with which your Lordship has favoured me; can your
Lordship kindly tell me where to find it ?
To refer to paragraph No. 3, your Lordship is inaccurate in the
quotation of a paragraph from a preceding letter from yourself,
thereby implying that you had long ago advised the sending of an
apology, which is not the case; and in continuation of paragraph
3it adds —“ and lam sure you are the last person to expect me
to dictate to any man’s conscience.” When, my Lord, may I
enquire, have I asked you to do so ? I have besought only your
Lordship’s direction of Mr. West’s conduct, not his conscience.
I have been and continue to be surprised, that when a young
man residing in your house, and countenanced by you, is accused
of such ungentlemanly conduct you should not insist upon his
either giving or defhanding an explanation of such accusations,
more particularly if an imperfect education should prevent such
an obvious course from arising in his mind.
In view of my continuing protest, I think your Lordship must
have observed the weakness on the part of Mr. West in avoiding
an interview with me. I had asked him by letter to give me this
at the first occasion, to which he informed me, as I have already
said, that he had to attend your Lordship at Yass. Mrs. Thomas
wrote to me, it was your wish that Mr. West when meeting me
should be protected by Mr. Abbott (Solicitor).
Again I wrote to Mr. West, pressing the same invitation, to
which he did not deign a reply. I also wrote to your Lordship,
asking you to be so good as to urge Mr. West to meet me, to


which you gave no reply ; I was, however, upon my protest
threatened with an action forsooth by Mr. West. I have advised
that lam ready; why is the action not proceeded with ?
I am not ashamed that the whole of my procedure shall become
publicly known, for it will then be established that I have not
uttered anything which is “ most incorrect and untrue,” while it
will manifest the kind purposes and honest intention I really had
towards all parties, and it will shew not only my desire to effect
peace, but that I had striven to the utmost to prevent the outbreak
of war. As Mr. West has never said one word of explanation,
but everything has been anticipated for him by such kind friends,
I shall continue to press that the proposed apology as sent shall
be signed and returned to me ; but as there is much other matter
to explain, I would, if preferred, propose that an interview may take
place, at which shall be present your Lordship and Mrs. Thomas,
Mr. West, Mr. Gray, and myself, together with witnesses; while
Mr. West shall on his behalf elect a clergyman, and I a layman,
who shall be the arbitrators, and the latter shall have the election
of an umpire to decide if necessary.
I am, my dear Lord,
Yours very faithfully,
F. R. L. ROSSI.
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop
of Goulburn, Bishopthorpe.
The above letter having elicited no reply, the following corres-
pondence took place ; — "
Rossiville, roth June, 1878.
My Dear Lord, —
I write a line to say, as I am fully resolved, if necessary,
even to the last moment, publicly in the church to resist Mr. West’s
ordination, that I ask your Lordship to make choice of which
course you would prefer me to pursue : either to carry out the
purpose I have now indicated of re-iterating in public my protest,
or that Mr. West shall without undue delay meet me with a
clergyman named by him from the Sydney Diocese, and I, a
layman nominated by myself, w'ho shall elect their umpire as
already proposed.
I hope it will not be necessary to invite the attendance of your
Lordship and Mrs. Thomas.
Your Lordship will please distinctly to understand that this com


munication is in no way intended to relieve your Lordship and
Mrs. Thomas from answering my two letters of 27 th May.
I have directed bearer to wait for a reply to this letter.
I am, my dear Lord,
Yours very faithfully,
F. R. L. ROSSI.
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop
of Goulburn, Bishopthorpe.
Bishopthorpe, Goulburn,
roth June, 1878.
My Dear Mr. Rossi, —
I have already stated to you all that I desire to say on the
re-iterated subject of your last note ; and I must now say finally,
that I wish you to understand (what I intimated in my last letter)
that I cannot undertake to write or to receive any further letters
thereon.
I remain, faithfully yours,
M. GOULBURN.
Rossiville, roth June, 1878.
My dear Lord, —
I shall not attempt to describe the acute sense of pain
caused by your Lordship’s letter received from your hands this
evening.
You have deeply offended and grieved us all, beyond expression,
in yqur action in this unhappy affair, and by declining to bring it
to a satisfactory conclusion.
Your Lordship but adds to our distress, in shewing such uncon-
cern as to refuse even to receive or answer my letters on the
subject. I have therefore very candidly to inform your Lordship
that our personal friendship must necessarily (in the absence of
replies) cease.
I am, my dear Lord,
Yours faithfully,
F. R. L. ROSSI.
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop
of Goulburn, Bishopthorpe.


The whole matter therefore stands thus:—
F. R. L. Rossi informs the Bishop of some alleged misconduct
on the part of Mr. West, and requests a meeting with the latter, in
the hope that the matter may be explained or an apology given.
Subsequently a similar request is again made to Mr. West, neither
of which is complied with.
F. R. L. Rossi then makes to the Bishop a formal protest
against Mr. West’s ordination unless he can be permitted to meet
him; interview is disallowed.
When the Bishop suggests an Enquiry in pursuance of the
protest, F. R. L. Rossi says an interview with Mr, West will be
quite sufficient; again no meeting is allowed, no enquiry takes
place, and none offered except under impracticable conditions.
F. R. L. Rossi’s charges were made to the Bishop, and no
publicity given to them by F. R. L. Rossi. The Bishop upon
this circulates a pamphlet headed “Testimony in behalf of Mr.
A. B. S. West,” the testimonials therein contained being all
antecedent to the date of the misconduct alleged by F. R. L.
Rossi, and utterly useless as affecting the particular matter in
question. This final step of the Bishop compels F. R. L. Rossi
to place the above facts before his friends, and it should be parti-
cularly mentioned that the Bishop has twice been advised in
writing that the course pursued by him in issuing a pamphlet would
lead F. R. L. Rossi to do the same. These last intimations the
Bishop has equally disregarded.
Thomas Daniel, Steam Machine Printer, Goulburn.
