

REP0RT
OF THE
Committee on Procuring Ministers
AND ON
CHURCH EXTENSION,
TO THE
SYNOD OF EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
MDCCCLIX.
MDCCCLIX.




REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON PROCURING MINISTERS, AND ON CHURCH EXTENSION,
TO
THE SYNOD OF EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
MDCCCLIX.
This Committee received its last re-appointment at the Synod’s
M eeting in May last; and they proceed to report their efforts for
the furtherance of the important objects contemplated in their
appointment, viz., the Procuring of Ministers, and Church
Extension.
In June last the Convener received from the Rev. James
MacCulloch, as Clerk pro tempore of the Presbytery of Maitland,
a letter, instructing the Convener to make application to the
Colonial Committee of the Free Church of Scotland, that three
Ministers or Probationers should be selected by that Committee
to come out to this Colony, to be engaged within the bounds of
the Presbytery of Maitland, in the work of the ministry; the
Presbytery of Maitland making provision for their outfit and
passage ; and the said letter intimating its being necessary that
one at least of the said three Ministers or Probationers should be
able to preach in the Gaelic Language. The Convener regrets
the said letter not having reached him in time to enable him to
write to the Convener of the Colonial Committee of the Free
Church by the homeward Mail of June; but on the 13th July
last he did so write to the said Convener, the Rev. Dr. Bonar,
Edinburgh.
A Meeting of your Committee was held on the 2nd August
last. The Convener intimated, that feeling the want of additional
labourers to be so pressing, he had written to the Convener of
the Colonial Committee of the Free Church of Scotland, request-
ing him, as he should see cause, to appoint the Rev. William
Leishman to come out to this Colony ; and that he should draw
upon this Committee for the ordinary amount of passage money
and outfit. This was approved by the Committee.


The Committee proceeded to consider the necessity of efforts
being made towards actively prosecuting the great work of
Church Extension throughout the bounds of the Synod; and the
deliverance of the Synod on this subject at its last meetmg,
having been read, it was unanimously felt and -admitted, that the
great hinderance to such efforts being made was the want of
additional labourers, or supernumerary ministerial services, to
be fallen back upon, when Senior Ministers were called to
leave their Congregations for one or two Sabbaths or more, in
order to prosecute this great work. It was unanimously agreed,
after conference upon this subject, that the Convener of this
Committee should write to the Convener of the Colonial Committee
of the Free Church of Scotland, requesting that that Committee
might endeavour with all convenient speed to send out three
Probationers or Ministers, to be employed respectively within the
bounds of the Presbyteries of Sydney, Maitland, and Illawarra, to
be helping, by their labours within those Presbyteries respectively,
to the Brethren, in making those efforts which are so evidently
demanded for the pomoting of Church Extension. And it being
evident that the sustentation of those additional labourers must
fall chiefly upon the Presbytery within the bounds of which each
of such additional labourers shall be placed, this Committee
judge it to be expedient that the above instruction to their
Convener with respect to such additional labourers, should not be
transmitted to the Colonial Committee of the Free Church, until
the mind of the several Presbyteries shall have been obtained
upon the subject; and the Convener is requested to obtain this
with all convenient speed : and he was further authorised to write
to the Convener of the Colonial Committee of the I ree Church,
to draw upon the Treasurer of the Synod of Eastern Australia
for the amount of necessary expenses incurred in the sending out
to this Colony of such three Probationers or Ministers ; it being
understood that the sum of Eighty pounds sterling shall be
allowed for each Probationer’s or Minister’s expenses if unmarried,
and one hundred and twenty pounds if married.
The Committee have now to report that the Presbytery of
Sydney, on the second day of August last, did unanimously re-
solve, that the services of a Probationer were required within their
bounds ; and with special reference to the object set forth in the


preceding minute of this Committee ; and agreed that the Con-
vener of this Committee should now authorize the Colonial
Committee of the Free Church of Scotland to send out a Proba-
tioner or Minister to labour accordingly within the bounds of the
Presbytery of Sydney. And a similar deliverance of the Presby-
tery of Maitland was transmitted to the Convener, in time to be
transmitted to Dr. Bonar by the homeward mail of September last:
and deliverance to the same effect from the Presbytery of Illa-
warra, though not in express terms guaranteeing the full payment
of such Minister’s or Probationer’s annual stipend,—reached the
Convener, in time to have it intimated to Dr. Bonar, by the
homeward mail of October last. To any of those communications
addressed to the Convener of the Colonial Committee of the Free
Church of Scotland, no answer as yet has been received; nor
indeed is any yet due, unless to the Convener’s communication
despatched in July last. Immediately on receiving such answers,
the Convener will not fail to transmit them to the Clerks of the
Presbyteries interested.
The Committee beg further to report that the Convener of
your Committee received communications from the District of
Clarence River, during the month of June last, requesting him to
visit that District, so as to have communication with the Presby-
terian people in, and within reach of the township of Grafton, and
along the valley of the Clarence River, relative to the obtaining
of the services of a Minister in connection with this Synod ; and
those communications bearing that such minister should be able
to preach in the Gaelic language. Such communications the
Convener having felt it to be his duty not to slight, he accord-
ingly did make a visit to that District,—a visit in which he
experienced very great satisfaction. The people do very earnestly
desire a minister to be placed among them ; anxious and earnest
as many of them truly appear, to enjoy the privilege of a preached
Gospel with its accompanying ordinances, and your Committee
now understand that since the date of the said visit, the Presby-
terians in that District have collected and lodged in Bank the
sum of £64 sterling, towards defraying the expenses of a minister
coming out to them: and the said District being within the
bounds of the Presbytery of Maitland, the Convener did not
consider it his duty to interfere in the matter of a minister for


the Clarence River, judging it probable that it formed one of the
three Stations which that Presbytery has had in view for the last
two years, desiring to see them supplied with ministers. The
Convener, in reporting on the District of Clarence River, and
township of Grafton, desired to impress upon your Committee
very strongly his own sense of the deep interest in their religious
welfare which the Presbyterians of that very important District
demand. Already the population is very considerable, highly
respectable, and many of them of deeply interesting character.
And the opening up of the industrial resources of that region,—
its amazing fertility, its healthful climate, and its noble river, with
the mineral riches also which its neighbourhood of late has begun
to present, —all combine in rendering it more than probable that
that region will become, and that very speedily too, one of the
most important and most populous of New South Wales. The
Educational efforts already made by the people bordering on the
township of Grafton, will fall to be considered rather in the report
of another Committee than in this: but it may be mentioned
here that those efforts are highly creditable to the people, and
exemplary to every district of this Colony. The Convener begged
of your Committee that the District of Clarence River should
continue to form to the Synod a special object of its earnest
regard. And your Committee beg further to report, that there
are many important Districts bordering upon that of the Clarence
River appearing to demand the early and earnest attention of
your Committee: —such as the District of the MacLeay River,
the District of the Richmond River, the Hastings River, and the
Macquarie River. Opportunities of extensive usefulness are
presented to us as a branch of the Church of Clirist in those very
important portions of this Colony. And there is good prospect
of the facilities of steam communication with all those districts
being improved. And your Committee seek that it should be
impressed upon their own minds and upon the mind of the
Synod, that without those opportunities being speedily acted
upon, they may soon be rendered not available; and doors that
may be almost said at present to be both wide and effectual may
soon be shut.
About the same time as the date last referred to, the
Convener of your Committee had communications made to him


personally and by letter, relative to the religious wants of the
Presbyterian population of the townships of Eclen, Pambula, and
Bega; while several requests had been personally made to him
also, to visit the District of Maneroo; and he reports to your
Committee his having been enabled to make out these several
visits ; and he has sought to submit to your Committee, and
through it to the Synod, the result of those visits, so far as they
have appeared.
It may be well here to state, that the township of Eden lies
at the entrance of Twofold Bay, that place being prospectively,
and indeed already a situation of considerable importance, as
connected with the most commodious harbour on the coast of this
Colony; that the township of Pambula is about eleven miles
distant from Eden, along the sea-coast line towards Merimbula,
another shipping port likely to increase in point of importance,
the traffic between Sydney and the interior in that direction being
likely, at present, to tend towards Merimbula:—and that the
township of Bega is twenty-five miles distant from Pambula, in
an inland direction ; the said township, and the picturesque district
around it forming a scene exceedingly beautiful, of high fertility,
and promising speedily to become a very populous district and
township.
Having preached twice at Eden, and twice at Pambula, and
spent one Sabbath in Bega, and Committees having been formed
in each of these places as means of promoting the business of
having a Minister settled among them, the results already
intimated are, that at Eden the sum of £IOO a year is guaranteed
toward the supporting of a Presbyterian Minister; £62 sterling
at Pambula, where the Presbyterian portion of the population is
less numerous ; and £IOO sterling at Bega, the scheme contem-
plated being that the three townships of Eden, Pambula, and
Bega, meanwhile, shall unitedly form one ministerial charge, the
Minister officiating at each of those townships successively, as
may be arranged among the people themselves with the Minister’s
concurrence. That these guarantees of income shall be made good,
the Convener has stated to your Committee to be altogether
beyond doubt; there being an earnest, intelligent, and well-condi-
tioned people throughout those districts : and it has been the
Convener’s statement to your Committee, that he would not be


doing justice to the people of those several localities, without his
stating the deep impressions made upon his own feelings while
visiting them, of their being very earnest indeed in seeking the
services of a Minister of our Church, and that their earnestness
in many cases amounts to enthusiasm; and that a thorough
heartiness in the cause prevails among them. And further, the
Convener did very earnestly desire to impress upon your Commit-
tee, the great importance of occasional services being henceforth
extended to those districts ; and as frequently as it may be in the
power of the Presbytery of Illawarra especially to render such
services. The Ecclesiastical arrangement here suggested, and
sought to be sanctioned by the Synod, of Bega, Pambula, and
Eden being constituted into one Pastoral charge, it may be men-
tioned, has been the arrangement of the Episcopal Church in the
same districts for some years past: and at an earlier period, it
is believed, that the whole of the district of Maneroo was an
addition to the same charge, (no insignificant one, certainly,)
Maneroo being a district of upwards of one hundred miles in
length, and perhaps of equal breadth, its limits, in part, it is
believed, being geographically uncertain; and the same district
being accessible from the sea-coast line only by a very steep
ascent of four thousand feet, to its magnificent table land.
The District of Maneroo, while it is of the extent now
intimated, has within its bounds two townships,—Bombala, to-
wards the limit of the district nearest to the sea-coast line ; and—
Cooma, lying towards the opposite extremity, nearly sixty miles
distant from Bombala. The Convener has expressed his great
regret to your Committee, at his having found himself unable to
extend his journeyings to Cooma,—his whole tour having caused
him an absence from home of five successive Sabbaths, —a longer
period than which he could not spare, in justice to his own con-
gregation, to whose liberality and kindness he considers himself
to stand indebted for his having been at that time supplied with
an assistant, without whose presence and labours at home he
could not have accomplished the little he has overtaken of this
greatly needed species of labour, —the visiting of such compara-
tively distant localities. The Convener did visit, in the District
of Maneroo, the township of Bombala, the station of Delegate,
and to the distance of twenty miles beyond that place, and hold-


ing meetings at Bombala and Delegate, at both which interim Com-
mittees were named, to engage themselves in promoting the
means necessary for their having a Presbyterian Minister in con-
nection with this Synod settled among them. He was sorry to
have to report to your Committee his having not yet received
definite information from those Committees of the necessary
steps having been yet completed that are necessary to the per-
manent and satisfactory settlement of a Presbyterian Minister in
that extensive District. At the same time, yonr Committee can-
not but entertain the strongest hopes that the completion of such
arrangements will be intimated to them, and in due time to the
Presbytery of Illawarra, and to the Synod. There is, it appears
from the Convener’s statement to your Committee, much Presby-
terian feeling among the Presbyterian people of the part of the
extensive District of Maneroo visited by him : and he states his
having no reason to think it to be otherwise in Cooma, and the
neighbouring parts of Maneroo. The Convener moreover believes
that the desire in each of those districts to have the whole services
of a Presbyterian Minister to themselves, may be the circum-
stance specially hindering at present the necessary arrangements
being completed in the District of Maneroo throughout.
The Committee would now respectfully pray the Synod to
grant to its Committee, and to the Presbytery of Illawarra, all
authority necessary to sanction the arrangement proposed, and
such as may be yet further found necessary towards a Minister
being permanently settled in the District of Eden, Pambula, and
Bega; and in the District or Districts of Maneroo, according as
the way may be opened up in the good providence of God for the
accomplishment of those important objects. And your Com-
mittee would further, very cordially and earnestly, seek that the
Synod would be pleased to recommend that the hands of the
Presbytery of Illawarra should be strengthened by all means
competent and possible, in their endeavours to attend to the wants
and necessities of the District within the southern extensive
bounds of that Presbytery. The Presbyterian population of those
Districts, for a very long period, have been separated from the
stated ordinances of the Gospel in connexion with the church of
their Fathers ; and the people have still strong leanings toward
it, which surely it is both the duty and high privilege of us all,


both as ministers and members of the Church, or courts of the
Church, to cherish and encourage. The people of those Districts
have strong desires to be organized as congregations, and to have
the ministrations and ordinances of the Gospel in connexion with
the Church of their Fathers established permanently among them :
and there is full willingness on the part of the people, to contribute
of their temporal substance towards this. And, meantime, so far as
it is possible, it is most desirable, that ministerial visits should be
made to those districts. And there are within the bounds of the
Presbytery of Illawarra, other districts of great importance, not
yet named in this Report, whose circumstances urgently demand
visitation at our hands ; and to which our brethren of the Presby-
tery of Illawarra, have already been paying attention : —such as
the township and district of Moruya, of growing population and
importance; the district of the Clyde River, containing the
townships of Relligen, and Currowa, and the settlement ofUlla-
dulla; and the very important section of this Colony at and
around the Gold Fields of which Braidwood may be said to be
a centre : so that within the whole of the range of the Southern
extensive bounds assigned to the Presbytery of Illawarra, —it
appears to your Committee to be no extravagant or groundless
expectation, that, under the blessing of God, upon the labours of
that Presbytery, not merely may congregations be formed,
but in course of time, Presbyteries, containing a goodly
number both of congregations and ministers. It is truly
a missionary field of arduous labour, to which our brethren
of the Presbytery of Illawarra have been called; but a
field of deeply interesting promise. There does seem to
be opened up to them a door both wide and effectual,- —a
breaking up of their way ; and of our way as a church in those
interesting territories ; and where, it is surely our duty to pray
that entrance may be given us; and to be improved by us with
earnestness and zeal; so that by God’s favour, Gospel blessings
may be made yet to abound in the manner most profitable to
them, among those sections of our population who have been so
long excluded from those blessings, so far as respects the Church
of their Fathers and ours. Our call is clear, both according to the
word of God and the voice of His holy providence, that we should
be up and doing, in fields such as those, both as individuals and
as a Church.


Your Committee would now direct the Synod’s attention to
one or two objects of very pressing importance; the first being
that of Finance. Your Committee are not at this date prepared
to report what may be the amount of the collection appointed to
be made at the last meeting of Synod, on behalf of your
Committee’s Scheme: while, no doubt, that will form a part of
the General Treasurer’s Report, to be submitted to the present
meeting in due time. But looking to the extent of the demands
likely to be made upon us as a branch of the Church of Christ in
this Colony, and the very inadequate means at our disposal to
have the number of additional brethren, of whose services we
stand so urgently in need, conveyed to our shores; it is most
manifest, that some means or scheme must be originated, to
increase the funds necessary to the carrying out of your Com-
mittee’s operations, under your sanction. It is equally clear
that these means must be pressed forward by the brethren, in
their Congregations respectively. Any definite or special form
of a scheme for this purpose, it may not be judged the province
of this Committee, in present circumstances, to suggest. Your
Committee would rather desire to feel this to be the origination
of the Synod itself in its collective capacity, and they have hopes of
some such scheme being propounded in course of the Synod’s
present meeting. Any such suggestions from members of this
Synod, or from any other quarter friendly to our prosperity, may
well be considered of value.
The other equally important object pressing itself on your
Committee’s anxiety, is the difficulty of obtaining adequate supply
of additional Ministers and Probationers from our parent Church.
While the current supply of Probationers in that Church has not
been on the increase, of late years; it is now supposed to be so,
within the last two years, with prospect of such increase continu-
ing. But the demands made upon the Free Church of Scotland
for Probationers, and Ministers, and Missionaries, it may be said,
almost from every part of the world, are very numerous. And it
is to be supposed that comparative distances from their own
Fatherland cannot but be looked upon by many at least of our
youthful friends and brethren in Scotland as an element in the
biassing of their choice or determination, when they arrive at the
very important and solemn stage in their life’s history, of selecting


01' seeking a sphere of future labour. In their looking forward*
in other words, to their occupying stations in the Lord’s vineyard
under His care who is the great Husbandman, and under His au-
thority who is, Himself, indeed, “the true vine;” and who has told
His servants, that “ The field is the world,” —our Colony may not
appear, to the apprehension of our younger friends in the
ministry, as possessing claims or attractions equal to those
which other portions of the general field may be thought to
present. But this renders it all the more a duty on our part,
to be faithful, on behalf of our friends, our “ brethren accord-
ing to the flesh ” in this Colony, in stating the inducements
to enter upon the work of the ministry which this Colony does
assuredly present. And there are such, your Committee do think
which, when adequately known, might well be sufficient to balance,
and to outweigh, in the judgment and in the affections and
in the zeal, of our brethren whose aid we seek, —the rather
adverse element of mere geographical distance. Inducement to
undertake the labours and work of the ministry in this
Colony is largely to be found in the spiritual destitution
prevailing among Presbyterians still in Hew South Wales.
The danger of such destitution spreading, if there be not speedy
succour vouchsafed; and the evil results which must follow, in
consequence of present neglect of the souls of our own kindred,—
is surely what may well operate as inducement, in the minds of
godly young men, professing to place themselves at the Lord’s
disposal, to serve Him in the ministry of the Gospel. The
growing, advancing importance of every district in this Colony,
—its nascent state, raised, and rising up, evidently, to fill a
most important position, to bear yet with powerful influence for
good or evil upon the history and destinies of a whole Hemis-
phere ; —this is surely an inducement, —a claim presented by this
country, that its wants deserve, and demand to be considered,
and that there may be, in time coming, a generation to serve
God, in these distant lands throughout. The important future,
appearing to be opening up before this land, and the incalculable,
the unspeakable importance of its having, and now, its national
character nurtured, and formed, and moulded, upon Christian
principles;—and these can be commended, and inculcated, and
morally enforced, alone by those means which the adorable


Saviour lias commanded ; —“ teaching them (says the Lord
Jesus,) “to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you 5” and His own gracious promise, His faithful and true
promise “ and 10, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the worldthese surely are strong inducements, persuasions,—
arguments of constraining power to gracious minds, when the
command is “go ye into all the world—the command, and
the promise from Him who has “ all power given unto Him in
heaven and in earth this, surely, may well diminish to the
eye of Faith, the element of physical distance, even were it more for-
midable than it actually is, to the eye of sense. The progressive
opening up of the resources of this Colony, —both the extraordinary
number and variety of those resources, must undoubtedly con-
tinue to attract to our shores, increasing accessions of an immigrant
population ; and such accessions, in considerable proportion at least,
coming forth from our Fatherlands, especially of Piesbyterian
Scotland, and Presbyterian Ireland —at least Presbyterian Ulster ;
this is surely another additional element calculated to tell upon oui
younger friends at home, seeking the work ot the ministry, m
the bonds of the Gospel. If there be lack of preaching and
teaching, even of those “ all things * commanded, the people
will perish for lack of knowledge.” And surely your Committee
may be permitted to suggest, —nay, may it not lawfully press the
claims of kindred, which the Gospel does not teach us to disown.
Are there not claims of a common descent, of a national origin ;
and of a national Ecclesiastical origin too ? There are claims of a
national history, claims of a “ common Faith,” and of a common
and national ecclesiastical polity, all of which have their deep and
their almost devout associations, their deep remembrances and
memories, — concerning common trials, common perils, common
persecutions, common pains and penalties, and tortures inflicted
for the maintenance of the truth, in generations past, and of
confessorships, and martyrdoms, upon the face of our Fatherland
soils ; —remembrances imbibed from every page of our national
histories; and which waken up more powerfully than ever
before, in the minds of emigrants from their fatherlands —
distance but giving to those memories the more effect in their
minds ; while that distance assumes but the aspect of repulsive-
ness to the minds of friends and brethren “ at home,” as if they


counted us lost! Surely there is cumulative force to be felt in
all these considerations, which ought to have their own influ-
ence ; these are some of those inducements which our Australian
Colonies present; and which under the still higher authority
of primary Gospel motives, may well have their weight. And
the testimony which your Committee have borne already, and
not one nor two of its members, to the cordial and hearty
liberality and kindness which, in this Colony, labourers in-the
Gospel would receive,—we feel bound still to repeat. And
indeed the more that members of your Committee have entered
into intercourse with our brethreu scattered abroad over the face
of this Colony they feel themselves all the more prepared to
reiterate that testimony on the part of the Presbyterian popu-
lation of ISTew South Wales. Let ministers of our Church,—
Presbyterian ministers, be but found faithful, zealous, and
persevering in duty, and we believe, that in no part of the
world would they meet with more acceptance, respect, and
liberal kindness.
Finally, your Committee desire to express to the Synod their
conviction, that both the Synod itself, and their Committee in
the duties assigned to it, are, comparatively, but entering upon a
field of most important and extending labours, in the prosecuting
of which they have increasing need of that wisdom which is from
above, and which is profitable to direct. This Colony itself,
important as has been its past history, and the labours of our
brethren, —and of others, within its territories, —the Colony
itself is but comparatively entering upon a progress and a history
which cannot fail to be all-important to the future weal or wo,
of all those especially who have committed the welfare of their
families and their descendants, as well as their own, to the
Colony’s future rise or fall. Your Committee cannot doubt but
every year will present additional demands upon this Synod for
ministerial services and labourers, and for the establishing of con-
gregations in localities and districts hitherto almost unpeopled,
and almost unknown to ns. Your Committee cannot but deeply
feel how little they have been able to overtake or accomplish
during the past six months ; but they hope that by God’s favour
and blessing, more may be accomplished in time to come.
Sydney, November 7th, 1859. M. MACKAY, Convener.


At Sydney, the Seventh day of November, Eighteen hundred
and fifty-nine, which day the Synod of Eastern Australia
being met and constituted, inter alia,
The Rev. Dr. Mackay brought up and read the Report of the
Committee on Procuring Ministers and on Church Extension.
On the motion of Mr. Jambs Cameron, the following Deliver-
ance was agreed to, viz. :
The Synod having heard the Report of the Committee for
Procuring Ministers, and for Church Extension, unanimously
approve the same, and resolve that the thanks of the Synod be
given to the Committee and its Convener, for the labour bestowed
by them upon the objects committed to their care: and the
Synod resolve as follows :
1. That, seeing the imperative necessity of provision being made for the
procuring of ministers from Scotland, the Synod' hereby appoint'collections to
be made in all its congregations on this behalf; the proceeds to be forthwith
paid into the hands of the Treasurer.
2. The Synod, rejoicing to find that additional labourers are wanted both
for the special purposes set forth in the Committee’s Report, and also for
additional Districts hitherto wholly unsupplied, the Committee is hereby
instructed to urge upon the Colonial Committee of the Free Church of Scotland,
to send out another additional Minister or Probationer, with a view to supply the
townships of Eden, Pambula, and Bega ; and to do the same with respect to the
District of Maneroo, whenever the requisite information shall have been
received therefrom.
3. That, with respect to the townships of Eden, Pambula, and Bega, proposed
in said Report to be erected into a ministerial charge, the Synod approve the
same, and instruct the Presbytery of lllawarra so to do, as soon as circumstances
in Providence may permit, according to the rules of the Church.
4. That, with respect to the District of Maneroo, whenever information
shall have been received of due arrangements having been completed for the
settlement of a minister therein, due notice of the same shall be given by the
Committee to the Presbytery of lllawarra; who are hereby empowered and
directed, upon their being satisfied with the said arrangements in said District,
to proceed toward the settlement of a minister therein, whenever circumstances
in Providence may permit, according to the Rules of the Church.
5. That it be an instruction to the Presbytery of lllawarra, in the meantime,
to use their best efforts to supply occasional ministrations as frequently as
possible to the important Districts last named, until a minister shall have been
settled in one or more of those places; and that such attention be also paid by
the said Presbytery to the other Districts within their extensive bounds, needing
or asking ministerial services, or additional labourers to be settled among them,
at the hands of this Synod, as may by the blessing of God. tend to the spread
of the Gospel amongst us.
6. That as it is evident how entirely the progress of this cause, as well as of
all the operations of our church, depends, under God’s blessing, upon the joint
and hearty co-operation and liberalities of all our people, it becomes a primary
duty on the part of our Synod, to instruct their people in the knowledge of facts
and circumstances demanding prayerful consideration and increased liberality at
their hands; and with a view to said duty, the Synod Resolve, that the above
Report of the Committee be printed and circulated in sufficient numbers among
all the Congregations of this Church
7. That the Committee be re-appointed, with the addition of the Rev.
H. MacKail.


It having been a subject of earnest consideration, what might
be the best mode of raising Funds within the bounds of the
Synod, to meet the necessary expenses attendant upon Ministers
and Probationers coming out to this Colony from Scotland, the
Synod were greatly encouraged by having the following Scheme
laid before them ; and especially in its having come from one of
the Elders of the Church: and the Committee on Procuring
Ministers, and on Church Extension do now, with all earnestness,
commend this Scheme to every member and adherent of each of
the congregations of this Church. It is a Scheme which will
burden no one intolerably, while, if all conscientiously joined in
it, we should soon see our Church lengthening its cords and
strengthening its stakes in this Colony; and the blessing of God
would be seen coming upon us.
The following Deliverance of the Synod makes the nature of
the Scheme to be very easily known and understood at once :
At Sydney, November Bth, 1859, the Synod of Eastern
Australia, being met and constituted, inter alia,
Mr. Waugh, according to previous intimation, brought before
the Synod a Scheme for providing funds toward the outfit and
passage of'ministers to this Colony, and moved its adoption. It
was seconded by Mr. MacKail, and unanimously agreed to;
(being of the following tenor,) viz.:—
SCHEME.
1. That each of the Subscribers to this Scheme shall pay One pound
sterling, upon the arrival in the Colony of every Minister or Probationer, who
comes to labour in connection with our Church.
2. That the subscriptions be collected, and remitted to the Treasurer of the
Church, on receiving due notice from the Committee on the Procuring of
Ministers, of each such arrival.
3. That Kirk Sessions shall be the agency for the obtaining of Subscribers’
names, and the collecting of Funds; and that where there are no settled
ministers, lay associations be formed, for the attainment of the same object.
4. That Presbyteries be instructed to have such agencies and associations
formed, and put into action as speedily as possible, within their respective
bounds, and superintend the working of the same.
