

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
METROPOLITAN MILK SUPPLY.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
51076/25.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by His Excellency’s Command.
[SECOND SESSION OF THE TWELFTH PARLIAMENT.]




REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON
THE METROPOLITAN MILK SUPPLY.
'J° His Excellency Colonel Sir William Robert Campion, Knight Commander of the Most Distin-
guished Order of St. Michael and St. George, D. 5.0., Governor in and over the State of Western
Australia and its Dependencies, in the Commonwealth of Australia.
llcq/ it please Your Excellency ,
The Order in Council appointing the Commission
was published in the Government Gazette dated 16th
January, 1925.
The terms on Avhich the appointment was made
were: —•
(a.) To inquire into the milk supply of the
metropolitan area, having regard to its
production, quantity and quality, and its
transport, handling, and distribution.
(b.) To consider Avhether the methods of pro-
duction, transport, handling, and distri-
bution can be improved, and, if so, to
make recommendations accordingly,
(c.) And generally to make such other recom-
mendations as you may consider would
lead to improvement in the milk supply.
From these terms it will be seen that a compre-
hensive charter Avas bestowed on the Commission.
At the request of the Com'mission returns Avere
furnished by all local health authorities of the milk
producers and vendors registered Avith them; by all
producers of their herds and the amount and destina-
tion of the milk produced; by the depot keepers of
their dealings, and by the of the amount and
source of their supplies.
The majority of the dairies supplying milk to the
metropolitan area were inspected, and other centres
from which milk could be obtained were visited.
Depots and other distributing establishments were
inspected.
Sixty individual Avitnesses were examined, and depu-
tations representing the producers’ and the retailers’
associations waited on the Commission and sub-
mitted interesting and helpful statements.
Included in the Avitnesses were: —
Dr. EAmritt Atkinson, Commissioner of Public
Health.
Dr. Douglas Kerr, Chairman, Health Committee,
Fremantle Municipal Council.
F. Murray-Jones, B.Y.Sc., Chief Veterinary
Officer.
A. E. Weston, B.Y.Sc., Veterinary Surgeon,
formerly Lecturer in Veterinary Science,
W.A. University.
P. G. Hampshire, State Dairy Expert.
L. R. MacGregor, Director of the Council of
Agriculture, Queensland,
G. A, Greenhill, Chief Health Inspector, Depart-
ment of Public Health.
P. Higgs, Chief Health Inspector, Perth City
Council.
W. Dow, President of the Health Inspectors’ As-
sociation.
R. G. Lapsley, B.Sc., Analyst, and Member of
the Health Inspectors’ Association.
R. Adam, Food Inspector, Perth City Council,
and Member of the Health Inspectors’ Asso-
ciation.
E. G. Paddison, Railway Inspector, representing
the Commissioner of Railways.
R. C. Kerr, Manager Dairy Farm, Hospital for
Insane.
J. C. Armstrong, Agricultural Adviser to the
Department of Agriculture.
Mrs. Bell, President of the Housewives’ League.
W. R. Clarke, representing the Westralian
Farmers, Ltd.
Wm. Traylen.
R. S. Sampson, M.L.A.
In addition to the above there were examined seven
depot keepers, twelve producers, and twenty-four dis-
tributors, some of whom were also producers.
It will be readily understood that among such a
wide range of witnesses much diversity of opinion
would exist. There was, however, unanimity among
the Avitnesses regarding the present unsatisfactory
condition of the industry.
The successive sections of this report deal with the
existing conditions of the milk supply under the fol-
loAving headings : —•
Legislation, Control, Quality, Quantity, Produc-
tion, Transport, Handling, Distribution and
Economics.
Thereafter folloAvs a summary of conclusions and
the outline of a scheme for the organisation of the
industry.
Finally are presented the recommendations of the
Commission, arrived at as a result of careful con-
sideration of the evidence submitted, the knowledge
gained by personal inspection, and the investigations
carried out under its direction.
LEGISLATION AND CONTROL.
Existing legislation is contained within “The
Health Act, 1911-19,” and the by-laws made there-
under. The Stock Diseases Act is of little value in
connection Avith the milk supply, and the Stock De-


partment is dependent on the health legislation foi
its powers in relation thereto.
The Health Act and by-laws are administered by
the Department of Public Health in localities outside
the boundaries of a local health authority, and by
the local health authorities within their own boun-
daries.
The powers conferred by the Health Act are ex-
tensive and, except for one or two minor matters,
ample for the purpose of providing for such matters
as registration, cleanliness, conformity to standaid,
inspection, etc.
The legislation, however, fails to be effective —a
failure due to a break-down in its application.
The Department of Health, in theory, exercises
supervision over the work of local authorities, but
in practice such supervision is very irregular.
The department has not in the past been able to
exercise efficient supervision over the dairy premises
under its own jurisdiction, much less pay adequate
attention to the position elsewhere. In fact, the
control of dairies by both the department and local
authorities consists of the annual registration of the
premises concerned plus occasional and more or less
perfunctory inspections. Some dairymen have de-
scribed the inspections as a “look round,” and there
has been little real enthusiasm displayed, neither
have the visits been of much educative value. It is
true that in some districts supervision may not be so
ineffective as in others, but there is conclusive evi-
dence that, judged by the standards of real cleanli-
ness, satisfactory methods, proper water supply, etc.,
the level attained is nowhere a high one.
So far as the department is concerned it appears
that sufficient staff is not available to permit of this
work being carried out thoroughly. The staff is small
and has very varied duties to perform over most of
the State.
The officer of the local authority in many cases is
allotted such a multiplicity of duties that little time
is available for supervision of dairies. It must be
remembered also that a local authority has no juris-
diction outside its own boundaries, and is therefore
only in a position to exercise partial control. Thus,
though a local authority may be dissatisfied with the
cleanliness of the milk sent into and distributed with-
in its district, it can deal only with the question of
the chemical quality. It has no control over the
dairies outside its boundaries, and could not take
effective steps to deal with any defects existing
thereat.
It is clear that there is no authority or officer
whose particular duty it is to exercise control over
the milk supply. Everyone has something else to
do, and the work has been neglected.
An inspector dealing Avith the milk supply must
have special knowledge and qualifications and be free
to apply these. There is no doubt that many, indeed
most, dairymen are in need of advice as to how best
to conduct their business, but the capacity to instruct
demands extensive knowledge and enthusiasm.
Standard, for chemical composition.
The existing standard in this State for fresh milk
is contained in the Food and Drug Regulations.
These regulations have been made on the advice of
the Food Standards Advisory Committee, appointed
under the Health Act. The regulations setting up
the standard read as follows: —
28. — Milk.
'“1. Milk is the lacteal secretion of the cow. It
shall be clean and fresh, and shall be obtained by com-
pletely emptying the udder of the healthy cow, properly
fed and kept, excluding that got during fifteen days
immediately before, and ten days immediately follow-
ing on, parturition. It shall contain not less than eight
and five-tenths parts per centum of milk solids not fat,
and not loss than three and two-tenths parts per centum
of milk-fat and not less than eleven and seven-tenths
parts per centum of total solids. ’ ’
This standard was arrived at after a State-wide
survey, extending over a period of twelve months,
carried out in 1911-1912, and, so far as can be dis-
covered, there has been no reasonable demand for
any variation, nor does it appear that any alteration
in respect of the standard itself is desirable.
The Commission considers, however, that a valuable
addition to the existing methods of examination can
be made by the introduction of what is known as
the “freezing test,” which has been used for many
years by the Government Analyst of Queensland. It
seems that the test is of great value in ascertaining
whether water has been added to the milk. It is
based on the fact that the addition of water to milk
raises the freezing point, and shows whether a poor
sample is natural milk of poor quality or milk of
good quality to which water has been added.
The test would, therefore, assist in certain cases in
deciding whether a prosecution should be undertaken
or not. If it Avere found that the milk had been
adulterated the offender would be prosecuted. If,
however, the test showed that the sample was natural
milk of poor quality, steps could be taken to improve
the supply, which could be excluded, if necessary,
until the improvements were effected. Fnder existing
circumstances, a prosecution on account of poor
quality carries an implication of fraudulent dealing
on the part of a person who may be perfectly inno-
cent thereof, and this may tend to keep conscientious
persons out of an industry in which conscientiousness
is so desirable.'
During the twelve months ending 91st December.
1924, a total of 1,733 official samples were obtained
by local authorities within the metropolitan area and
examined by chemical analysis. The control exercised
by some local authorities in this regard has certainly
been very efficient. The results of the analyses of
these samples showed that the milk supplied to con-
sumers was generally well above the standard, par-
ticularly in respect of the butter-fat content. Never-
theless, of the samples taken a considerable number
w’ere below the standard, and this lack of conformitv,
having regard to the reasonableneSvS of the standard,
must in the main be regarded as the result of delib-
erate adulteration.
In this connection the leniency of magistrates
towards offenders against both the law and the pub-
lic good is a matter for comment. Too often the
bench has lamentably failed to realise the serious
nature of the offence. No doubt there are many cases
in which the circumstances are such as to justify
leniency, but when such circumstances are absent,
The infliction of the minimum penalty emphatically
does not meet the ease.


THE QUALITY OF THE MILK SUPPLY.
The quality of milk must be considered from several
difierent points of view, including those of its food
value, its safety as regards infection, its cleanliness,
and its stability or keeping qualities.
Food Value.
The food value of milk depends on its make-up,
that is, on the amount and proportion of its constitu-
ents. These can be ascertained partly by chemical
analysis, but this method is useless for the estimation
of its content of vitamins, those imponderable con-
stituents or properties of foods in the absence of
which the ordinary gross constituents of a diet are use-
less to the consuming animal.
Judged by the standard of chemical analysis, the
metropolitan milk supply is of very good quality.
The analyses carried out for the various health au-
thorities show that the average milk is well above
the standard and compares very favourably with milk
supplies in other parts of the world. This is a
matter of great importance. The food value of
genuine milk, estimated in terms of its “calories” or
energy-producing value, varies within such wide
limits that, if the value of one sample be 3s. a
gallon, the value of another may be as much as
3s. lOd. The variations occur, as stated, chiefly in
the fat content of the milk, and there is clearly much
to be said in favour of the purchase of milk on the
basis of its fat content.
The estimation of the “biological value” or vitamin
content of milk is a matter of great difficulty, in-
volving very prolonged and tiresome experiments in
the feeding of animals. Apparently no such experi-
ments have yet been carried out with milk anywhere
in Australia, and the quality of the local milk in
this regard is not known.
it is, however, generally agreed that milk is an ex-
tremely valuable foodstuff, especially for the young,
and milk is often stated to be one of the “protective”
foodstuffs, because by its “positive qualities” it pro-
tects a population from the “negative qualities” or
deficiencies of its ordinary diet. Among these posi-
tive qualities are the vitamins which have been re-
peatedly proved to be present in the milk of well-fed
cows. But it has also been proved that the vitamin
content is dependent on the food of the cow. No
animal can manufacture vitamins, and if cow’s milk
is to contain them they must be supplied in her food.
It is impossible here to discuss the question fully; it
suffices to say that the local milk may be deficient,
especially during certain seasons of the year, in the
vitamins known as “A” and “C.” Even so, it would
be a very valuable food, but not so valuable as it
might be. The Government Bacteriologist has, at the
request of the Commission, initiated some experi-
ments designed to throw light on the question; and
it is very desirable that the whole matter should be
fully investigated.
Safety.
The safety of a milk supply implies the absence
therefrom of micro-organisms capable of causing
illness in man. The germs may get into the milk
from the cow (germs of bovine tuberculosis, actino-
mycosis, and streptococci capable of causing sore
throat), from the water used in washing utensils
(germs of the enteric group), from the person
handling the milk from hands or sputum (germs of
the enteric fever group and of the respiratory group,
such as scarlet fever and diphtheria), and from Hies
(germs of the enteric group).
The danger may obviously be reduced by elimin-
ating these sources of infection as far as possible,
and existing legislation regarding the health of the
cows and of persons handling milk, cleanliness of
premises, water supply, is designed to effect this,
if infection has occurred, tlie milk may be made safe
by heating under certain conditions, as in pasteurisa-
tion, boiling, or sterilisation.
There is very little evidence that infection of the
metropolitan milk has been a cause of disease, al-
though one small outbreak of typhoid fever was traced
to an infected milk some twelve years ago.
Human tuberculosis of bovine origin manifests it-
self chiefly in young children. The extent to which
it may exist in this State is not known, and is ap-
parently not discoverable under present conditions,
it seems to be more prevalent in Great Britain than
in Australia, and in parts of Scotland than elsewhere
in Great Britain. Variation in prevalence depends
probably on a number of factors, which include the
extent to which the dairy cattle are affected and the
degree of resistance offered by the children to the
attack of the tubercle bacilli, a resistance which
seems to be adversely affected by bad social and
hygienic conditions, such as improper feeding, lack
of fresh air, and sunlight. Western Australia, and
indeed the whole continent, is fortunately situated in
respect of both these factors. The conditions of life
both for the cattle and for the children may be re-
garded as more favourable in Australia than in many
parts of Great Britain. Ricketts in human beings is
a disease believed to be due to much the same factors
as are responsible for lack of resistance to tuber-
culosis, and ricketts is certainly far less prevalent
in Australia than in Great Britain, Tuberculosis
of bovine origin does, nevertheless, occur among
children in Australia, as is proved by the re-
cognition of nine strains of bovine origin among
52 cultures of tubercle bacilli recovered from
post-mortem examinations of children in Mel-
bourne (see “M.J.A. Supplement,” 19th July,
1921). Some eases probably have occurred and
do exist in Western Australia, but the extent of the
disease in this State has not been sufficient to call
urgently for investigation as to the presence of
tubercle bacilli in the milk and the prevalence of
tuberculosis among the dairy cattle.
At the request of the Commission a number of
samples of milk were examined in the laboratory of
the Health Department, and one infected specimen
was. discovered. Ample evidence does exist that in-
fection is present among dairy cattle. Grossly in-
fected dairy cows are not infrequently discovered and
destroyed at the abattoirs, and infected animals are
found from time to time in the herds during inspec-
tions by the veterinary officers of the Agricultural
Department.
The extent to which tuberculosis exists among dairy
herds may be decided with a fair degree of accuracy
by the application of the tuberculin test. This has
not been carried out on any large scale, but tests of
individual herds have shown varying proportions up


to 30 or 40 per cent, of infected animals. The chief
veterinary officer estimates tffat the proportion among
the herds generally would be o to 10 per cent. It is
clear, therefore, that the metropolitan milk supply
is infected in some degree with tubercle bacilli.
In various American cities, where infection among
the herds is possibly greater than is the case here,
and where eases of bovine infection among children
were certainly more evident, it has been enacted that
all milk that does not come from certified tubercle-free
herds must be pasteurised. This is equivalent to a
suggestion recently made by Dr. Penfold, Director of
the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, that the
tuberculous cow should be officially recognised, and
that the dairy farmer should be compelled either to
free his herd from tuberculosis or to bear the ex-
pense of pasteurisation of his milk.
In the absence of more information as to the pre-
valence of bovine tuberculosis both in the herds and
among children, it is doubtful if the adoption of this
recommendation is urgently called for at the moment.
More knowledge of local conditions is required, and in
the meantime parents who are alarmed at the possi-
bility of infection of their children may be advised
to bring the milk to the boil. On one point a definite
recommendation is necessary—namely, that the prac-
tice of keeping one or two cows for home supply, or
in connection with an institution, especially where
there are children, should only be permitted when the
pow or cows are certified to be tubercle-free. The
reasons for this are, on the one hand, that the tuber-
culous cattle are, as was stated in evidence, specially
liable to get into the hands of private householders,
and, secondly, that the milk of an infected cow is,
owing to the relative concentration of the germs
therein, believed to be more dangerous than the mixed
milk of a large herd, a few members only of which
may be giving infected milk.
Cleanliness.
The word cleanliness suggests dirt —foreign mat-
ter. This is commonly present in milk in two forms,
visible or gross, and invisible or microscopic.
The gross dirt consists of particles derived from
the feed and manure, of hairs, and of dust of
various kinds. A small amount of this gross dirt
will find its way into milk even under the best con-
ditions. It can be removed by careful straining.
The invisible dirt includes many micro-organisms.
It is practically impossible to obtain milk that is
free from them, though it is probable that the milk
in the udder is usually almost germ-free. Under
actual conditions the number of living germs that can
be demonstrated in one cubic centimetre (18 drops)
of freshly drawn milk varies from a few hundreds
under the best conditions to a few millions under the
worst.
Significance of ordinary bacteria in milk.
These germs must not be confused with the “speci-
fic” or special germs of the infectious diseases, also
called pathogenic organisms, which have been men-
tioned above in dealing with the safety of the milk.
These ordinary germs belong to that vast world of
invisible life which the microscope has shoAvn to exist
everywhere in conjunction with the visible forms
the ordinary animals and plants.
These germs play, of course, a great part in the
scheme of nature, a part that is not yet fully under-
stood, but it is now known that they are the principal
agents of decomposition—in other words, their work
is to break up the dead bodies and products of the
visible animals and plants and “return them to the
dust” —a very necessary function. Most of our food-
stuffs are dead organic matter, and they all sooner
or later tend to decompose. The public is beginning
to realise that the “keeping good’’ of foodstuffs is a
question of keeping germs off foods (protection) or
of preventing their growth (refrigeration, preserva-
tives), or of killing them (pasteurisation, boiling,
cooking, sterilisation), and that “going bad” and the
degree of “badness” indicate the growth of micro-
organisms in food and the extent to which decom-
position has taken place.
So with milk, it is dead organic matter intended by
nature for immediate consumption. Germs gain
access to it from the same sources as, and to a great
extent together with, the gross dirt mentioned above.
The durability of fresh milk depends upon the
number of germs that have gained access to it and
the conditions under which it is kept. Milk that is
procured under the best conditions of cleanliness and
is kept cold will “keep good” for days and weeks;
Sterilised milk and dried milk will keep for months;
pasteurisation will give dirty milk a new lease of
“life,” whereas milk that is procured under dirty
conditions and is not properly cooled and kept so
will “turn” or “go bad” within twelve hours.
The counting of germs in milk is, therefore, a mai-
ler of importance. Gross dirt can be removed by
straining; germs cannot. The bacterial count of a
fresh milk gives a good indication of the cleanliness
or lack thereof, under which it was produced, and it
gives an idea of its probable keeping qualities, though
the keeping will depend, of course, upon the condi-
tions under which it be kept. The bacterial count of
milk that is not fresh gives an idea of its history, a
high count indicating either that it was obtained under
dirty conditions or that it has not been protected
and kept cold, or both.
A high count of any milk indicates the fact that
it is to a certain extent damaged or spoiled, and these
terms have been freely and rightly used in this con-
nection.
1 here is, however, no clear evidence that milk with
a high bacterial count is in any way injurious to
health or that its food value is necessarily or appre-
ciably diminished.
As the ordinary germs grow in milk and their num-
bers increase to millions per c.c., its acidity usually
increases, and when there are many millions it be-
comes sour and clots. On the other hand, according
to the species of the predominant germs, it may be-
'Oome putrid and stink, or it may become viscid or'
ropy, or it may develop colour.
Some pebple like sour milk, some intentionally add
cultures of germs thereto in order to prolong their
li\es, or remove joint pains or improve their com-
plexions. Some races, whose virility is largely to be
ascribed to the part which milk plays in their diet,
habitually allow it to clot- naturally, after the de-
\ elopment of very many millions of organisms per


c.c. Moreover, some foods are consumed in an ad-
vanced state of decomposition.
On the other hand many medical men have stated
that in their opinion milk with a high count, which
is, therefore, well on the way to obvious souring, is
unsuitable for young infants, and members of the
laity generally have assumed that the bodies alive or
dead of millions of organisms cannot do them any
good.
In any event it is undesirable that milk on delivery
to the consumers should contain large numbers of
germs, bueh milk will not keep as well as milk with
a relatively low count, and is suggestive of dirty con-
ditions at the dairy and of improper handling.
As soon as the Commission was appointed a survey
of the bacteriological condition of the milk supply
was instituted. The results are set out in the special
report (see addendum). They show that much of
the milk does contain a large number of germs at the
time of delivery. The figures averaging, though they
do, many hundreds of thousands, compare quite fav-
ourably with similar figures obtained in other popu-
lous centres in Australia and Great Britain. The
actual figures are not of great significance since there
is no agreed standard method of counting, and dif-
ferent methods give rather different results, and it
must be remembered that a milk giving a count of
half a million might give, after two hours’ keeping
under certain conditions, a count of eight millions.
Of greater significance are the facts disclosed in the
survey that some of the milk is much better than the
average, and that by careful and inexpensive methods
it is possible to produce and deliver milk with a low
count and consequent good keeping quality. The
Commission believes that it would be possible, with
the adequate education and supervision which it re-
commends, to ensure that the whole supply would be
of similar good quality.
Ihe survey mentioned should be continued in order
to determine the possible influence of seasonal changes,
and thereafter a constant bacteriological control
should be maintained. Should it prove eventually to
be impracticable to ensure by simple inexpensive
means that the whole supply be satisfactory in this
respect, it may be necessary to resort to pasteurisa-
tion of the unsatisfactory milk.
Pasteurisation as mentioned above kills the greater
number of the organisms and gives the milk a new
lease of life, and in this connection it must be noted
that proper pasteurisation also destroys all disease-
producing organisms, and that should the further
investigation of the tuberculosis problem, which is
recommended, indicate its desirability, the method
may have to be introduced on that account. Many
communities now pasteurise the greater portion of
their supply with the double object of making it safe
and of reducing the number of organisms.
QUANTITY OF MILK CONSUMED.
From figures supplied by the State Statistician the
population of the metropolitan area is estimated to
be 176,467 persons. On the basis of a daily con-
sumption of 8,000 gallons it will be seen that the
amount consumed equals 0.36 pints per head.
An average consumption of slightly over 7ozs. of
fresh milk per person per day certainly cannot ba
regarded as sufficient, and indicates that there is
urgent need of intelligent propaganda regarding the
virtues of milk as an article of food. Propaganda
along these lines, however, should be preceded by cer-
tain reforms in the method of production and distri-
bution, in order that the public may be assured that
the article is clean and of good chemical composition.
Elimination of wasteful methods in production and
distribution should bring about a reduction in price,
and this should certainly have the effect of encourag-
ing greater consumption.
Extreme difficulty was experienced in estimating the
number of occupied tenements in the metropolitan
area, but from the ligures supplied by local authori-
ties the figure 41,626 was arrived at.
This gives the average number of occupants per
tenement as 4.2, and the average quantity of milk
consumed per household is therefore 1.5 pints.
The quantity of milk consumed varied considerably
in different districts, ranging from an average of 2.5
pints in West Perth to 1.25 pints per household in
North Fremantle.
It is probable that the quantity of milk from
house cows, which has not been estimated, would
increase the consumption figures slightly.
It is believed that the resources of production could
ensure a constant supply greatly in excess of the pre-
sent quantity of 8,000 gallons per day.
the area of coastal lands between Perth and Ban-
bury oi Busselton is capable of and is now producing
large quantities of milk, much of which is separated
for the butter trade. It is evidently intended that
milk production should be a chief activity of the set-
tlers on the Peel Estate, which is within a short dis-
tance ot the metropolis, and in the Harvey district
there are at present some 50 dairy farmers chiefly
engaged in butter-fat production.
fhe possibility of establishing depots in country
centres, where milk could be brine-cooled before de-
spatch to the metropolis, will have to be considered.
In no district supplying milk at present, however,
is the quantity sufficient to warrant the expenditure
involved.
PRODUCTION.
Source of Supply.
Ihe milk is drawn from 313 dairies, situated as
follows: —
(1) M ilhin the boundaries of the following health
districts (249) :
Fremantle, Fremantle Road District,
East Fremantle, Melville Road District,
North Fremantle, Cottesloe Beach, Cot-
tesloe, Claremont, Claremont Road Dis-
trict, Subiaco, Perth, Osborne Park, May-
lands, Bayswater Road District, Bassen-
dean Road District, Guildford, Midland
Junction, Belmont Road District, Canning
Road District, Gosnells Road District,
Armadale-Kelmseott Road District.
The above health districts are within the
metropolitan area, and dairies within these
districts are under the supervision of the
respective local health authority.


(2) Outside the boundaries of the above districts
but adjacent thereto, and under the super-
vision of the Department of Public Health
(34).
(3) Along the South-West Kail way system, situated
at the following centres (30) :
Mundijong, Mardella, Serpentine, North
Dandalup, Pinjarra, Waroona, ialup
Brook, Wagerup, Hamel;
also under the supervision of the Health
Department.
The total average number of cows in milk at the
above dairies is 5,404, distributed thus: —
At dairies within the health districts specified
above —3,965.
At dairies adjacent to the metropolitan area
and under the supervision of the Plealth Depart-
ment —900.
At dairies along the South-West Railway —539.
Prom returns furnished by local authorities and
from other data at the disposal of the Commission, it
is estimated that the quantity of milk consumed in
the metropolitan area is about 8,000 gallons per day.
It will thus be seen that the average daily yield per
cow in milk is 1.47 gallons. Taking 292 days as a
reasonable period of lactation, the total number of
cows necessary to maintain a daily supply of 8,000
gallons amounts to 6,755, of which 1,351 are dry.
The average daily yield per cow throughout the
year, therefore, amounts to 1.18 gallons, not a very
satisfactory figure.
Generally, operations in connection with the pro-
duction of milk are based on family effort, that is to
say, the dairyman, his wife and family, perform all
the necessary duties; but there are, however, a con-
siderable number of dairies, practically all within the
metropolitan area, at which some outside labour is
employed.
The work is hard, continuous and, under existing
conditions, unprofitable, to say nothing of the un-
certainty as to the disposal of the product.
Dairy Premises.
Many dairy farms were visited by the Commission,
and reports were submitted by the secretary regarding
others.
From these visits and reports it is clear that the
buildings are in the main structurally satisfactory,
having regard to the relative importance of the part
played by same in the production of clean milk,
but scarcely any were found which did not require
some attention.
The milking sheds generally w'ere found to be
sound, but in many cases the floors were not properly
cleansed, nor was adequate provision made for drain-
age. The superstructures were fairly satisfactory,
but many were festooned with cobwebs and dust.
The milk rooms rarely complied with the regula-
tions, inasmuch as few were found to be fly-proof,
and in many the w 7 alls and ceilings w r ere not clean.
Yards, with few exceptions, were littered with
manure which, when dry, doubtless contributes to the
bacterial content of the milk.
Stables usually provided accumulations of manurb,
in which flies breed in vast numbers. Proper manure
bins are seldom provided.
Sanitary conveniences were not sanitary. Struc-
turally they were defective, not liy-proof, not clean,
and usually no deodorant was provided.
The water supply, an extremely important matter,
was in many cases such as to warrant it being re-
garded with suspicion, and, in some cases was dis-
gusting, if not dangerous. A number of shallow
wells, not covered nor properly lined, were found, in
which the water was covered with a film of dust and
manure. In a number of cases the well was close to
the milking shed and yards, and consequently must
be highly polluted, in one case the water supply
consisted of a large soakage pool, situated just below
the milking shed and other buildings. The pool was
devoid of covering. A sample of this water was ex-
amined and found to contain bacihus coli in un-
countable numbers, conclusive proof of extensive
pollution from the cowshed and yards. This case was
certainly not typical, but has significance when con-
sidered in conjunction with the conclusions arrived
at regarding inspection and control.
Where the premises are not structurally sound
they may be made so without much expense, and there
is no necessity for sweeping condemnation and demo-
lition. In a few isolated cases it may be necessary
to amend the buildings almost to the point of re-
construction, but this could be done gradually.
Cleanliness of Premises.
In only a few instances real cleanliness was ob-
served, Certain portions of a dairy may be found to
be clean, but there were usually places to which the
practice did not penetrate. The floors of the milking
shed and milk room may be washed but the yards
allowed to remain littered with manure and the privy
left without proper attention. Indeed it was evident
that the average dairyman did not consider anything
further than the washing of the floors necessary, and,
judging from the condition of many of the floors,
and the fact that in a number of eases water was not
laid on to the milking shed, it is doubtful if the floors
are really properly cleansed.
Drainage of premises, and particularly that of the
milking shed, was not satisfactory, the liquid wastes
merely discharging on the surface of the ground just
outside the building.
Generally, the management of the dairies left much
to be desired, but this is due to the absence of intelli-
gent and instructive supervision and to lack of know-
ledge, more than to deliberate neglect, on the part of
the farmer.
Herds.
The animals are generally in good condition and
of a mixed, and in some eases nondescript, breed.
There are, of course, variations in the degree of
purity of breed, but in no case is there a pure-bred
herd engaged in the production of milk for the city.
Several cross-bred herds exist, and where care has
been taken in the selection of the bulls, the result is
a more valuable herd of greater productivity. Some
two years ago an Act was passed making the regis-


tration of bulls compulsory, but the effect of the
legislation, excellent as it eventually should be, is, of
course, not yet evident.
Apart from this special Act, little if any official
action has been taken with the object of improving the
class of stock, although it is clear that many dairymen
are anxious to be advised as to the best lines to follow
in building up and improving their herds. In fact
many of them feel that they have been neglected in
this respect. Advisers have been made available for
assisting dairymen producing butter-fat, but so far
as the dairymen producing milk for domestic con-
sumption are concerned little has been done.
Further, milk producers require educating as to
the best methods of caring for their herds. They
are faced with difficult problems as to methods of
feeding, culling their herds, testing individual animals,
selecting new cows, etc.
It will perhaps be said that information regarding
these matters is available in the form of books and
pamphlets. That may be so, but it must be remem-
bered that dairymen, from the very nature of their
business, generally have not the time for reading these
publications, while some of them have not the in-
clination to do so. Instruction by means of the
spoken word and demonstration is called for.
Methods of Milking and Handling.
In the majority of cases the practice of hand milk-
ing is followed, but there are a fair number of milking
machines in use.
Where the first method is adopted the cows are
milked into open pails and the milk is then trans-
ferred to the milk room, where it is poured into a re-
ceptacle and allowed to run over a cooler into a drum
beneath. It is then either taken to a depot or de-
livered retail to the consumers.
The methods adopted generally are far from satis-
factory in many respects. In many dairies the wash-
ing of the cow t ’s udder is done in a casual manner,
usually by dabbing it with a damp rag. Proper
ablutionary appliances, clean water, soap and towel,
are in the main absent, and the milker’s hands, if
clean when operations are commenced, cannot and do
not remain so for long. These methods are not uni-
versal, but unfortunately they obtain at the majority
of dairies.
The precautions taken at the dairy to prevent con-
tamination are inadequate (see under “Dairy Pre-
mises”). Prom the section dealing with the produc-
tion of clean milk based on the investigations and
experiments of the Commission, it will be seen that
the methods necessary are simple and inexpensive.
When milking machines are used the matter of
cleanliness is not so simple. Even when extreme care
is taken the initial bacterial content is greater than
when clean hand-milking is followed. There is evi-
dently great difficulty in keeping the machine clean,
and unless it is kept so the production of clean milk
by this method is impossible. There is no doubt that
rigid supervision is required where machines are used.
TRANSPORT.
Milk is transported from the place of production to
the metropolitan area by means of motor lorries,
carts, and the railway system, the latter being re-
sponsible for the carriage of about 2,500 gallons daily.
On certain trains a special van is attached for this
purpose, but on others no such provision is made,
in the latter case the regulations of the Railway De-
paitment require milk to be placed in one end of
the van and to be kept separate from ail other mer-
chandise. This regulation is, however, frequently de-
parted from, despite instructions that it must be
strictly obeyed.
There are no specially constructed vans or re-
frigerated trucks provided. The quantity of milk
carried on several trains from stations between Mun-
dijong and Wagerup inclusive amounts to about 800
gallons per day, and this amount is not sufficient to
warrant the construction of special vehicles. Some
of this milk is carried a distance of seventy-four miles
and takes some seven hours to reach Perth.
Ultimately the production of milk along the South-
West railway for consumption in the metropolitan
area is likely to assume greater proportions, and the
question of the methods by which this is transported
should receive attention from time to time.
From stations Byford to Queen’s Park inclusive
approximately 1,700 gallons of milk are picked up
daily, but the journey is short and the provision of
a refrigerated van would, therefore, not be justified.
Under the railway regulations consignors of milk,
if it be contained in ten-gallon drums, are required
to assist in loading the drums into the van or be
charged full parcel rates for freight. Provided that
the train runs to its scheduled time this regulation is
reasonable, but instances have occurred in which the
dairyman has been compelled to wait a considerable
time because the train was late. This regulation
should be modified so as to provide that if the train
be more than half an hour late the loading shall be
done by the servants of the Commissioner of Rail-
ways without extra cost in freight to the consignor.
On arrival at its destination the milk is picked up
without undue delay and taken to be dealt with ac-
cording to the requirements of the consignee.
The containers in which milk is handled during
transport consist of ten-gallon drums. This is a suit-
able size capable of being conveniently handled. They
are subjected to rough usage, and should be of the
Seamless kind fitted with a Hanged lid and provided
with some means of locking, or should be sealed.
This latter provision is recommended, for the reason
that the containers are sometimes ullaged on the
railways. If the lid he removed from a drum and a
quantity of milk taken out during transit, a consider-
able proportion of the cream may be removed and
the milk may fail to comply with the standard for
butter-fat content—a very serious matter for the
consignee or retailer, in view of the fact that he is
liable to prosecution if the milk is found to be below
the standard.
HANDLING.
There is some variation in the methods by which
the milk is handled, according to the nature of the
business of the consignee.


Vendors.
Total
Carts.
Motors.
With 1
cart
... 113
113
„ 2
carts ... ...
... 24
48
„ 3
„
... 10
30
„ 1
cart and motor
... 2
2
2
„ 4
carts
2
8
„ 2
„ and motor
... 2
4
2
„ 5
carts
... 2
10
„ 3
., and motor
1
3
1
„ 4
1
4
1
157
222
0
If the milk is received by a depot keeper, it is at
once brine-cooled and returned to the drums. If not
immediately disposed of to retailers it is stored in a
cool chamber.
Where a producer retails the product himself, it
is in a few cases taken to a depot and brine-cooled
before delivery, but as a rule the milk is only water-
cooled in the usual manner.
In three cases a retailer has a brine-cooling plant
of his own, and approximately 300 gallons daily are
dealt with by such in this manner, while in a few
instances a retailer takes the milk to a depot for
cooling as soon as he receives it.
Of the quantity of milk consumed daily in the
metropolitan area more than half is brine-cooled. The
balance is water-cooled.
The rapid reduction of the temperature of milk is
important. Several tests were made during Febru-
ary and March, and it Avas found that by means of
the usual water-cooling appliances it Avas impossible
'to reduce the temperature of the milk to less than
75deg. F. The question of effecting improvement in
cooling methods should receive attention.
Depots.
There are in the area nine depots where milk is
bought from producers, cooled and sold to retailers.
These depots, with a few exceptions, are unsuitable
structurally and inadequately equipped. As a matter
of fact, in some cases their condition is a reflection on
both the proprietor and the local health authority.
This applies to such a degree as to warrant the use
of the unsuitable depots being discontinued for this
purpose.
None of the milk sold in the metropolitan area is
pasteurised.
DISTRIBUTION.
The distribution of milk to consumers is carried on
by 157 vendors with vehicles, and 217 shops licensed
with the appropriate health authority for this pur-
pose.
The licensed vendors utilise 222 carts and six motor
lorries, these vehicles being apportioned as follows:
It Avill be seen that about 72 per cent, of vendors
work single-handed, and it is assumed that these em-
ploy little or no labour, although sometimes a boy is
engaged to assist. The remainder of the vendors
employ what labour is necessary in addition to their
own effort. There is nothing in the way of any ex-
tensive operations by one man, nor is there any com-
pany operating.
The quantity of milk distributed by a motor lorry
is about equal to the output of two carts, and on this
basis the average quantity delivered per cart, after
making an allowance for milk delivered by hand and
tnat distributed in bulk, is 29 gallons approximately.
Differences ranging from 10 to 58 gallons exist in
tne actual quantity delivered by a cart.
As a rule the milk is carried in 10-gallon drums,
one or two of which are provided with taps. The
distributor utilises a hand can with a more or less
tight-fitting lid in which to carry the milk into pre-
mises, and the milk is dipped from the hand can by
a measure and transferred to the customer’s recep-
tacle. There is no system of delivery in sealed con-
tainers such as bottles.
The existing practice is open to the objection that
it conduces to contamination by dust and dirt, but
this can be minimised if proper precautionary mea-
sures are taken. The delivery of milk in sealed bottles
is desirable and must be considered in the future.
During the summer, for a period of four or five
months, there are usually two deliveries per day, but
this is not by any means universal; while during the
remainder of the year there is only one delivery daily.
The vendor usually commences his round at about
2 a.m. and finishes the morning delivery by about
8 a.m. Much of the work is carried out in the dark,
and this is one of the drawbacks of the occupation.
There seems no good reason why delivery should not
be carried out in daylight during the winter months,
and even during summer much of it could be so ac-
complished. In the hot weather, however, it is prob-
ably more pleasant to commence this work shortly
after midnight rather than to be so engaged during
the daytime. In the wet months it would certainly
be an advantage, from the retailer’s point of view, to
commence at, say, 5 or 6 a.m. The keeping qualities
of the milk would not be impaired and the consumer
should not be inconvenienced.
There is need for education of some consumers re-
garding the treatment milk should receive in the home,
as it must be admitted that the condition of the re-
ceptacle put out for the milk is often not all that can
be desired.
Under existing haphazard conditions, the time taken
to deliver the milk on an average round is excessive.
Ihe vendors are willing to travel great distances to
serve new customers, and in consequence they travel
many miles serving a few customers in each street


Vendor.
Gallons
of milk
delivered.
No. of
streets.
No. of
customers.
No. of
customers
per street.
Average
quantity
per
customer.
Locality.
Distance
travelled
No. 1 (4 rounds) —
Total of three rounds
115
248
565
2-14
pints.
1-6
Perth, North Perth, Feeder-
miles.
Fourth round
35
100
181
1-8
1-54
ville, Subiaco, West Perth,
Mt. Hawthorn, Mayiands
Perth, North Perth, W T est
18
No. 2 (2 rounds) —
First round
24
36
108
30
1-7
Perth, Leederville, Subiaco
North Perth and Perth ...
Second round
19
43
90
2-9
1-68
Leederville and Subiaco
No. 3 (2 rounds) —
Total
GO
91
307
3-3
1-5
North Perth, Perth, Mt. Law-
No. 4 (2 rounds) —
Total
38
30
219
7-3
1-4
ley. East Perth, Leederville
Perth. East Perth ...
No. 5 (2 rounds) —
38
90
185
20
1-6
Leederville and Subiaco
No. G (5 rounds) —
Total of four rounds
13G
55
440
8-0
2-47
Perth, West Perth, Feeder-
One round
31
25
130
5*5
1-9
ville
Subiaco
No. 7
23
31
102
3-3
1-8
Perth, Leederville, Subiaco
No. 8
33
2G
137
5-2
1-9
Claremont
9
No. 9 —
First round
10
GO
1-33
Cottesloe Beach, North and
10
Second round
30
190
1-26
East Fremantle
In nearly every street in North
not
No. 10
27
150
1-4
Fremantle
Leederville, Perth, West
measured
21i
No. 11
40
245
1-3
Perth, Subiaco
Beaconsfield, South Fremantle,
17
No. 12
58
48
285
5-9
1-6
Fremantle, East Fremantle
Leederville, Perth. Subiaco
No. 13 (2 rounds) —
Total
90
18G
435
2-9
1-4
North Perth, Leederville,
No. 14
45
160
2-25
Subiaco, West Perth, Perth,
East Perth, Mt. Lawley
South Perth ...
and delivering 1 a few gallons only per mile. Details are given in the following table:
With regard to Nos. 9, 10, 11, the number of streets
was not obtained. The distances were measured by the
secretary by means of a speedometer on a car, and
he was accompanied either by the vendor or one of
his employees, who indicated the route.
It has been pointed out under another heading that
the average consumption per household is 1.5 pints
per day: thus one gallon of milk supplies 5.3 houses.
The average number of customers per street of 21
rounds is 3.1.
The five rounds measured averaged 15 miles per
round, the number of customers being 10, and the
number of gallons two per mile.
ECONOMICS.
In this section an attempt is made to summarise
the evidence as to the cost of production, handling,
and distribution under local conditions.
In addition to the evidence there was available a
considerable amount of information as to the costs in
other places, such as that given in the report upon
milk of the New South Wales Board of Trade, 1923.
Production.
The cost of production of milk varies chiefly with
the cost of feed, the quality of the cows as milk pro-
ducers, and the skill of the farmer. The two latter
factois can be slowly influenced by education. The
main expense is the cost of feeding the cows, which
has been estimated, in the case of the entirely hand-
fed animal, to be b 8.7 per cent, of the total cost
(Cornell University Bulletin, No. 364, page 115), a
figure which may be regarded as approximately
correct for this State.
Variations in cost of feeding depend very largely
on the extent to which the cows can be pasture-fed,
and to which fodder can be produced on the farm.
The cost of pasture-feeding and of food production
on the farm varies with the locality: the value of
land, other things being equal, being greater near the
metropolis; but this variation is offset by difference
in freight costs.
Most producers for the metropolitan market are
compelled to hand-feed all through the year, al-
though during several mouths the value of what the
cows can “cut for themselves” is a considerable factor.
in hand-feeding in this State bran is a principal
item, and the cost of this has, during the last few
years, shown a variation of at least 50 per cent., re-
presenting in some eases a difference of 2d. per gallon
in the cost of production.
Reliable evidence of the actual cost of production
was very difficult to obtain. In the absence of a pro-
per system of book-keeping, the statements made by


producers regarding their costs could only be regarded
as approximate.
From information which, although not submitted as
evidence, was obtained from sources regarded as re-
liable, some details of cost in regard to tw'o cases were
available.
In the case of a cow entirely hand-fed, which aver-
aged two gauons per uay lor Hak nays and. was iiand-
tea ror me dry period of /A days, the cost of feed
was appioximateiy Is. 2d. per gallon over the year,
giving, ii the cost of feed be taken as bj per cent, ox
totai, a total cost of is. 9d. per gallon, in tile
other case, a dairy of oU cows, whicu were turned into
tne busu every uay, the coA of feed actually pur-
cnased o\er tne year amounted to 11.7 d. per gallon
or milk produced. This represents a probable total
cost of about is. sd.
Of the producers who were examined by the Com-
mission, one submitted hguies covering the whole year
wmeh showed tne cost of feed and labour only was
is. dd. per gallon. Another calculated that the cost
per gallon over the year, exclusive of wages lor him-
self, inleiest and depreciation, was Is, 2d., or a total
cost, less depreciation, of Is. lid. A third witness
gave tiie cost of production per gallon over the year
as Is. exclusive of wages for himself and in-
terest and depreciation.
These figures are considered, however, to be un-
reliable and to rather over-estimate the cost. A num-
ber of producers stated that a net return of Is. dd.
per gallon all the year round would be satisfactory.
A number of balance sheets were received showing
that, without any allowance for interest on capital
and depreciation, the amount received provided only
the barest wages for the farmer himself. The Com-
mission found the families of a number of dairymen
living under conditions that w 7 ere strong presumptive
evidence of insufficient income. Furthermore, it was
Stated in evidence that health inspectors of the Cen-
tral Department refrained from urging the carrying
out of desirable improvements on dairy farms because
they were satisfied the farmers could not afford the
expense involved.
, At present the Retailers’ Association is the dominat-
ing factor in determining the price received by the
producers. Owing to the nature of the industry and
the vast area over which dairy farmers are scattered
they have little chance to organise for their protec-
tion, and they are therefore at the mercy of the
organised distributing interest and must accept the
terms and conditions decided on by these or lose
the sale of their product.
It was stated by some witnesses that the producers
determined the price. However, on closely investigat-
ing these assertions, in no instance was it shown that
the producer was successful in deciding the price he
should receive for his product, although attempts had
been made along these lines.
It has been insistently urged in certain quarters
that the main factor in determining the price the
producer should be paid tor milk is the amount lie
would receive for butter-fat.
The requirements of the milk trade are, however,
far more exacting than those of the cream trade. The
departure of the trains from the nearest railway
station decides the hour for milking in the country
districts; in fact, the circumstances peculiar to the
milk trade as a whole necessitate milking being car-
ried out at most inconvenient hours. This is a draw-
back that is not experienced by those engaged in pro-
ducing milk for butter-fat.
Further, the supplier of milk must despatch his
product to the market without delay, and is always
faced with the possibility of some, if not the whole,
of his milk being rejected, whereas it is only necessary
to forward cream two or three times a week to the
factory without the fear of any being rejected through
excessive supply.
The milk producer under contract must maintain a
constant supply, whilst the butter-fat producer can
turn his cows out when natural pasture is not avail-
able, thus avoiding the expense of purchasing feed.
The cream supplier has also the advantages of re-
duced labour cost, lower freight bill, and lesser cost
of plant, and, in addition, his work can be performed
during more convenient hours.
Unless a fair margin over butter-fat parity is
allowed to the dairy farmer supplying milk, there is
no inducement for him to continue in a branch of the
trade that is abundant with difficulties.
The amount the dairyman has actually received for
his milk at the depot or retailer’s store varies from
Is. BV£d. downwards. This was the figure fixed by
the Prices Regulation Commission, 1921, and by an
independent arbitrator in 1924. This price has also
been paid over a number of years to a few producers.
The vast majority, how 7 ever, receive considerably less.
The price paid at the principal depot, which may
be said to govern the price of milk, has varied during
recent months from Is. 2d. to Is. and is now
Is. sVbd. Some dealers have paid Is., and sometimes
even less during the flush season.
The average price received at the farm by pro-
ducers during the last tw 7 elve months is probably
below’ Is. 3d. per gallon.
The Commission believes that Is. 7d. at the depot
all the year round would give a reasonable return to
producers in the metropolitan area, and that a low 7 er
price would attract a considerable quantity of milk
from the relatively favourable areas of the South-
West.
Distribution.
The present price of milk to the retailer at the
depot is Is. 7V 2 d. per gallon, and the bulk of this is
sold at 3s. per gallon. A considerable amount, chiefly
in the suburbs, is retailed at 2s. Bd., and a small quan-
tity at 2s. 4d. An average based on ten rounds was
found to be 2s. IGd.
Ihe cost of delivery is unnecessarily great. The
long distances covered entail much wear and tear of
horse-flesh, carts and appliances generally, and in-
volve much waste of time.
A arious statements of the cost of distribution under
existing conditions were presented, showing the cost
per cart, inclusive of wages, to vary from £6 10s. to
£8 per week. The Commission considers the figure
£7 10s. to represent a fair average.


Accurate details of 27 rounds are recorded in the
section dealing with distribution. In these the amount
distributed per cart varies from 10 to 58 gallons, the
average being 31.5 gallons. Taking the average cost
of running a cart as £7 10s., which includes a sum of
£4 10s. for wages, the average cost of distribution on
the 27 rounds amounts to 8.2 d. per gallon, with a
maximum of 25.7 d. for the 10-gallon round and a
minimum of 4.4 d. for the 58-gallon round, whilst the
cost of distribution on the amount of milk, 20 gallons,
which is calculated as an average round for the Avhole
metropolitan area, is S.9d. per gallon.
At the present price of milk to the retailer, viz.,
Is. 7 1 /2<i> and at a sale price of 2s. 10d., the average
profit, after allowing for wages and all other costs,
on the 27 rounds is 6.3 d. per gallon, equal to
£5 15s. 9d. per round per week, and on a similar
basis the profits on the average 29-gallon round of
the metropolitan area amount to 5.6 d. per gallon and
£4 14s. 9d. per week.
CONCLUSIONS.
Existing Legislation and Control.
The provisions of the Health Act and by-laws are
sufficient to safeguard the quality of the milk supply,
but these are not enforced in practice.
Responsibility is shared by too many authorities.
Veterinary inspection has been irregular and in-
complete.
Standards.
The present legal standard of chemical quality is
satisfactory, but methods of examination of samples
are inadequate in that no means exist of distinguish-
ing between natural milk of poor quality and adult-
erated milk.
The penalties imposed by the courts upon persons
convicted of selling milk below the standard have
frequently been insufficient.
No bacteriological standard exists,
j \
Quality.
The chemical quality of the milk is good; the
biological quality (vitamins) is unknown.
With regard to safety, there is little definite evi-
dence that harm has arisen from contamination with
pathogenic organisms. Germs of tuberculosis are
present to an extent which is unknown, but is prob-
ably less than in Great Britain. There exists here,
as elsewhere, the possibility of infection with other
pathogenic organisms. In order to eliminate this
danger pasteurisation mav be found necessarv. but
further information is needed before a definite opinion
can be formed.
The keeping qualities of the milk compare favour-
ably with that of other cities, but considerable im-
provement is possible, especially in regard to milk
produced' by machines. It may be necessary to adout
pasteurisation on account of bacterial growth, but not
until better methods of production and handling have
been tried and have failed.
Quantity.
The daily average consumption of milk per head is
slightly over 7 ozs., and this is regarded as too low.
In some parts of the metropolitan area the quantity
is considerably below even this figure.
The quantity supplied is adequate to the demand,
and could be increased without difficulty.
Production.
The milk is produced chiefly within or adjacent to
the metropolitan area, but some is supplied from
country districts. Most dairy farms are run on a
family basis.
Premises and methods generally are capable of
considerable improvement.
The milk producer suffers from lack of skilled
advice.
Handling.
Slightly more than half the milk is adequately
cooled.
The depots include two or three which are specially
constructed and run on good lines, hut the remainder
are in the main unsatisfactory.
Distribution.
There is much economic waste entailed owing to
overlapping of rounds and excessive distances tra-
versed. The methods of handling milk during de-
livery can be improved.
Economics.
Accurate information as to costs of production is
not available.
There is necessity for hand-feeding to some extent
all the year round, whilst from January to August
the cows are almost entirely hand-fed.
Bran is a principal item in hand-feeding, and some
form of price control over this commodity should be
exercised.
The producer is unable to influence the price of his
product and must accept whatever is offered by dis-
tributors. There is ample evidence that most pro-
ducers have not in the past received fair treatment
in the matter of price.
The average cost of distribution can be more
accurately determined.
The cost, including wages, of running a retail cart
at present is approximately £7 10s. per week, and the
average profit over and above that amount, if the
average sale price be taken as 2s. 30d. only, is equal
to £4 14s. 9d. per week.
When the price to the producers has been reduced
by the retailers there has been no reduction in the
price paid by consumers.
Some equitable system of adjusting prices from
producer to consumer is desirable.
A BASIS OF ORGANISATION.
Our findings show that the milk supply is in a dis-
organised and unsatisfactory condition.
Milk is an essential article of human diet, especi-
ally for infants; it is highly perishable and easily
contaminated. It should, therefore, be produced and
distributed under strict hygienic conditions, and
should be made available to the consumer at the
lowest possible price consistent with a fair return to


those engaged in its production and distribution.
To-day the consumer is paying a high price, whilst
the return to the producer is so low that he is scarcely
able to carry on. The hygienic and economic condi-
tions under which the industry is carried on demand
drastic improvement.
Milk supply can be regarded as a public utility
comparable to water supply, and in order to en-
deavour to organise the industry on a basis as such
it is necessary that some form of control, more effec-
tive than that hitherto prevailing, should be instituted.
This is not to be regarded as a reflection on those in
responsible positions in the departments concerned,
for the multifarious duties of the officers render it
difficult for them to give to (he milk supply that
attention which its importance demands. Direct
governmental control is not likely to be a satisfactory
solution of the problem, even if a special department
or branch were set up to deal with it. Municipal
control is not recommended, principally because such
a large number of local authorities are concerned and
because each local authority has no jurisdiction out-
side its own boundaries. Any attempt to confer on
one local authority the right to exercise its powers
in the district of another would present great diffi-
culty. It is necessary that the controlling authority
should have complete control and should not be sub-
jected to interference.
It is considered that the situation can best be met
by the creation under special Act of Parliament of
a board or trust to be appointed by (he Government
and to be constituted as follows:
One representative of the consumers, who shall
be chairman.
One representative of the producers.
One representative of the vendors.
A medical officer of health designated by the
Commissioner of Public Health.
The chief veterinary officer for the State.
The board should have powers which would enable
it—
(1) to safeguard the quality of the milk supply;
(2) to encourage the consumption of milk;
(3) to reduce waste;
(4) to adjust prices so that each interest shall re-
ceive equitable treatment.
Suggested Powers and Functions of the Board.
The board should be the only authority controlling
the metropolitan milk supply, and should have con-
trol over all premises concerned wherever situated.
Hie powers of the board should include the follow-
ing : —•
(I.) To appoint inspectors and other necessary
officers.
(2) To license milk producers, under conditions to
be determined, and prohibit the sale of milk
unless produced under license.
(o.) To buy, sell, and deal in milk and milk pro-
ducts.
(4.) To establish and conduct such premises as may i
be required. ‘ (
(p) To license persons to distribute milk, either
wholesale or retail, under conditions to be
determined, and prohibit the sale of milk
except under license. i
(G.) To inaugurate a block system of milk distri-
bution, determine the boundaries of such
blocks, vary or alter such boundaries from
time to time when deemed necessary; allo-
cate blocks to distributors in such manner
as may be determined.
(7.) To determine the minimum price the producer
shall receive for his product; the charges to
be made for handling and treatment, and the
maximum price to be paid by consumers, and
vary such prices from time to time.
(8.) To make regulations for the efficient control
of the industry and impose penalties for
breaches of the regulations.
Finance.
In order to provide the necessary revenue to en-
able the board to carry out its functions and to pro-
vide a sinking fund for the redemption of loans and
payment of interest thereon, it should have power to
levy a sum of money on each gallon of milk sold
within the metropolitan area and to charge and col-
lect license fees.
It is difficult to estimate the exact amount of the
feuggested levy. One half-penny per gallon on the
Quantity of milk at present sold would give an ap-
proximate return of £5,800 per annum. This sum
should be sufficient to meet all the ordinary expenses
of the board. Adjustments could be made from time
to time until the amount levied plus revenue from
other sources would return the exact amount repaired.
For the purpose of providing premises, plant, etc.,
the board should have power to borrow money on
iei ms and conditions approved by the Governor in
Council.
Certain existing depots might be found suitable,
but even if this were so, a considerable amount of
capital would be required. The business of depot
keeping should be distinct from the other functions of
the board, and revenue should be obtained from the
charges for handling milk. These should be sufficient
to provide interest and sinking fund on money bor-
rowed for the purpose.
The introduction of a block system of distribution
would not. it is thought, be one of the first steps
which the board would take. But as the system were
introduced it would naturally follow that the exist-
ing milk-vendors’ rounds in any area concerned would
( ume to exist. Some of the vendors thus d'snlaced
would presumably become distributors in the blocks
under the conditions laid down bv the board whilst a
< on. idt rable number, at least one-third, would have to
\seek other means of livelihood. Thus seme of the
existing vendors would have lost their rounds, and if
those who continued to distribute milk in the various
’locks had no Proprietary interest therein, all the
existing vendors would have lost their rounds. Since
a milk-round has come to be regarded as personal
property, and since they have been bought and sold
m some instances for considerable sums, the motion
of compensation arises and must he considered.
Is the displaced vendor entitled to compensation.
1 "hat manner are the amounts to he
assessed and provided? In this connection the fol-
lowing facts must not be lost sight of:-


Distribution is the phase of milk supply in which
the most obvious waste is occurring. It is safe to
say that under a properly regulated scheme two men
could do the work of three and one horse the work
of two now engaged therein, whereas it would be im-
possible even to suggest such a thing in connection
with production. The distributors are the section of
the trade which has been and is able to make a good
thing out of it. In the favourable situation of middle-
men, it has been possible for them to combine effec-
tively, and so to fix in practice both the price which
they shall pay to the relatively unorganised and
struggling producers and the price at which they shall
sell to the unorganised consumers.
Various attempts have been made by the producers
to obtain a fairer share of the returns of the in-
dustry, as witness the recent producers’ strike, and
the recent entry of some producers into the business
of distribution. Owing, however, to lack of organisa-
tion, the former attempt has achieved no success and
the latter no stability. Similarly, a section of con-
sumers under the aegis of the Housewives’ League
has been impelled to try to organise the distribution
of milk on more favourable terms, but this attempt
also has proved of small account.
The amount received by the retailers has certainlv
been out of all proportion to that received by the
producers in view of the relative sendee rendered by
each section and the amount of capital required hy
each.
On the basis of a price to the consumer of 3s. per
gallon, which has obtained in the greater part of the
metropolitan area over a number of years, the re-
tailer has been paid for his services a sum varying
from Is. to Is. per gallon, according to
the price of milk at the depot.
The cost of distribution under existing circum-
stances has been shown to be approximate!v £7 10s.
per cart per week, including wages on a scale of
£4 10s., and this represents R.od. per gallon on the
average round.
Under these circumstances it is not to be wondered
at that the number of persons engaged in the retail-
ing of milk is large, that milk rounds extend over
many miles wherever the retailer can secure a few
customers, and that well-established rounds, particu-
larlv in well-to-do districts, are eagerlv sought after
and command a ready sale at as much as £lO per
gallon.
Despite the relatively good returns secured by the
milk vendor it cannot be maintained that the sendee
has. on the whole, been verv satisfactorily carried out.
A few vendors have carried on their business without
anv cause at all for complaint, except in regard to
price. They have taken pains to secure and deliver
milk of a high qualify and cleanliness and to oblige
their customers in every way. But generally it must
he admitted that it is onlv bv unremitting activity on
the part of its officials that the public has been able
to check the practice of adulteration and secure the
onality of its milk supply.
The question of compensation, therefore, requires
very careful consideration. It is possible to argue
that the vendors have been fortunate in the past in
occupying a position of vantage which enabled them
to combine to secure what has been shown to be an
unusually good living, despite the somewhat trying
and continuous labour involved, and that they are not
morally entitled to any compensation whatsoever. It
is possible to say in effect: ‘‘These are they who
have been getting the cream of the business for years;
why give them butter now?” There occurs also the
reflection that the bucking mule does not stay to com-
pensate the displaced rider, except perhaps with a
well-placed kick; also, that he who makes hay while
the sun shines is already compensated when it rains.
1 he average man who may be deprived of his means
of livelihood in the maelstrom of commercial life re-
ceives as a rule no compensation.
On the other hand, it would be absurd to maintain
that the average retailer has played the part of the
conscious villain in the piece. Either he has entered
into the business by the purchase of an existing
round, or he has built up his round gradually, a pro-
cess which made demands on his time and labour-
equivalent to an outlay of capital. And in his round
he possesses an asset which has as definite a value
and is as readily convertible into pounds, shillings
and pence as any other asset he may possess.
The value of rounds has varied considerably, some
being readily saleable at £lO per gallon, or even more,
and others at so many shillings. The more valuable
rounds have been, of course, those which were compact
and those in w-ell-to-do districts where the quantity
of milk delivered to each house was large. But even
in these eases the value of the round did not depend
solely on the proximity and relative affluence of the
customers. The vendor was exposed to keen competi-
tion, except perhaps in the matter of price (an im-
portant exception, competition therein having only
recently been instituted), and the value of the round
depended very largely therefore upon the care, pati-
ence, and skill of the vendor, and, to some extent, no
doubt, upon his reputation. Thus, though the con-
sumers themselves have created the value of rounds
in general, that is, of all rounds, yet the owner of the
good rounds has himself been responsible for the fact
that a relatively large slice of the general value has
come to him.
The position is a very difficult one. The Commis-
sion is loth to recommend the confiscation of what has
been actually and legally purchased by many vendors,
and is a means of livelihood to all, and are prepared
to agree to recommend that the principle of compen-
sation should be recognised. In view of what has
been said above, to the effect that the more careful
and conscientious vendors are likely to have the better
rounds, and consequently the more secure means of
livelihood, it would be more equitable that compensa-
tion should be paid in proportion to the existing
values of the rounds, provided that the proposed
board were able to assess them fairly. If that were
impossible, payment at a fiat rate would be the alter-
native.
In considering the total amount of compensation,
however, the interests of the long-suffering consumers,
who must also pay this bill, are paramount. It is in
Australia a recognised right of the community to
legally “fix” the prices of essential commodities, with
due regard to all interests concerned, whenever this
may be necessary.


Receipts.
£ s. d.
To sale of 315 gals, of milk at 2/dd.
... 39 7 6
£39 7 6
Expenditure.
£
S.
d.
Purchase of 325 gals, of milk at l/10d.
. 29
15
10
Feed and Shoeing one Horse
. 1
0
0
Depreciation on Plant valued at £100—5 years
0
8
0
RepairsHo Plant ... ... ... ...
. 0
5
0
Stationery
. 0
1
6
Lamps and Kerosene, brushes ...
. 0
2
0
Cost of washing Cans
. 0
4
0
Bad Debts
. 0
5
0
Contingencies and Holidays
. 0
12
3
Balance ... ... ... ...
0
13
11
£39
7
6
The Commission regards one of the most important
functions of the proposed board of control to be the
fixing and periodic adjustment of the price paid for
milk by the consumer and those paid during the
stages of its journey to him; it believes that the pre-
sent price of milk is too high and should be reduced
considerably, and that a substantial reduction in the
amount received by the distributor would be made
even if the block system of delivery were not insti-
tuted. It is recommended, therefore, that the amount
of compensation to vendors should be assessed, not
on the present value of the rounds, but on what their
value would be when the board had adjusted the
various prices.
The average value of existing rounds at present
prices is estimated as a result of general inquiries and
information concerning actual sales effected to be ap-
proximately £5 per gallon. Under the proposed new
conditions, and after the inevitable adjustment of
prices, it is estimated that the sale value of the rounds
would be reduced considerably, and that the average
sale value of rounds would not exceed £2 10s. per
gallon, exclusive of the plant.
The block system wmuld probably be introduced in
areas, that is, the Perth-Maylands-Subiaco district
would be dealt with at one time, and subsequently
other districts would be blocked. In Perth, Subiaco,
On a 50-gallon round the balance would be £7 17s. 3d. per week.
The statement shows that on a 45-gallon round on
the block system the return, after meeting all ex-
penses, would amount to £6 13s. lid., and on a 50-
gallon round to £7 17s. 3d. per week.
It has been contended that a return of £7 17s. 3d.
per week is insufficient to attract men of a suitable
type.
It must be remembered that the labour required is of
the unskilled class and the capital involved amounts, at
the most, to £lOO. It is pointed out also that included
in the expenditure is an amount of 12s. 3d. per week
for contingencies. This is considered sufficient to
provide for holidays and relief in the case of illness
of the vendor. The annual return of the vendor
amounts to £4OB 175., after allowing £3l 17s. for
holidays, etc., or a total income, above all expenses of
running his business, of £440 14s.
The Commission believes that the amount provides
for a very good living.
and Maylands there are approximately 5,000 gallons
of milk distributed at present, and compensation for
that area would amount to, perhaps, £15,000.
Compensation might be paid in a lump sum to
vendors who go out of the business, Avhile those who
acquire rounds on the block system could have the
amount of compensation due to them placed to their
credit with the board, payments to be extended over
a number of years. In the event of a vendor operat-
ing on the block system desiring to go out of business,
then the balance due to him -would be paid.
It is considered that a levy of one half-penny per
gallon on the milk distributed in the area which had
been blocked would produce sufficient revenue to make
provision for all compensation claims to be paid
within a few years.
The Commission is satisfied that a great reduction
of the waste now occurring in distribution would be
effected by its organisation on a block system. It is
estimated that a vendor would deliver at least 45 gal-
lons on a block.
A statement of the estimated weekly receipts and
expenditure of a distributor handling on this system
45 gallons bought at Is. lOd. and sold at 2s. fid. a
gallon is shown hereunder: —•
General.
A board constituted on the lines indicated would be
able to exercise complete and effective control from
the producer to the consumer. Representing all the
interests concerned, and having only the one duty to
perform, it should certainly be in a position to or-
ganise the industry in a satisfactory manner.
The appointment of special dairy inspectors and
of veterinary officers should have the effect of achiev-
ing uniformity of methods. Tire duties of these
officers would be chiefly educative and advisory, and
to see that the regulations were carried out.
To ensure the success of the block system of de-
livery it would be necessary that the milk should be
all of one- —the best —quality, and for this reason all
milk must pass through depots conducted by the
board. Such control would lessen the temptation to
extract portion of the cream content. Uniformity
of quality cannot be obtained ■whilst a number of
depots exist, each conducted independently and by
different methods.


The result would then be as follows:
s.
d.
Producer
1
7
Depot, ordinary rate . .
0
IV2
Depot, special rate
0
h l /2
Board, general rate . .
0
0 l /2
Board, compensation rate
0
0 V2'
Distributor
0
8
• ' ' * "
Price paid by consumer
2
6
When the depots are brought under the direction
of the board, annual contracts should be arranged
between the board and the producers for the supply
of milk sufficient to meet the normal requirements of
the community. Any surplus above that specified
in the contract should be pooled and disposed of to
the best advantage. Such surplus milk might be sold
to schools or institutions, or separated for table cream
or for butter making.
Delivery on the block system would eliminate the
waste of existing methods. The Retailers’ Associa-
tion was in complete accord with the proposal, and
its introduction was ably advocated by the president
and secretary of that body. The proposal received
also the commendation of a majority of the retailers
examined.
Under the block system it is estimated that a round
would be not less than 45, probably 50 to 60, gallons
daily, and that at least 70 carts would be no further
required. Under this heading alone saving to be
effected is considerable. .
Other features of the proposed system are the
saving of time and energy, the better condition of
the milk as a result of being quickly delivered and
not subjected to the agitation occasioned by its rapid
conveyance over long distances, and the minimising of
the annoyance caused to householders by the rattle
of carts and the clanging of milk cans during practi-
cally the whole of the early hours of the morning.
The allocation of blocks under the proposed scheme
should be carried out with the utmost care. Persons
whom the board might consider unsuitable should be
excluded from the industry. A rigid system of con-
trol should be enforced and exemplary punishment
meted out to those who commit breaches of the regu-
lations, serious offences being punishable by the can-
cellation of the license.
Milk shops, for trading over the counter only,
should also be licensed.
The fixing of prices Avould be an important func-
tion of the board. Many witnesses testified to the
equity of the control exercised by the Prices Regula-
tion Commission and urged that a similar system
should be again introduced.
The adjustment of prices would take some time,
and should be subject to continued investigation by
the board. It is suggested, however, that the pro-
ducer should receive Is. 7d. per gallon, less freight,
all the year round; that the depot should receive
lV 2 d. per gallon for ordinary trading purposes, plus
i/ 2 d. per gallon, until the loan for its establishment
be redeemed. The board should receive per
gallon for administrative purposes, and one half-
penny for redemption of loans for compensation.
Eightpence per gallon should be the amount receU ed
by the distributor on the block system.
It is very doubtful if the adjustment suggested
would give justice to the producer as compared to
the retailer.
As stated in the section dealing with economies it
has been impossible to arrive at a satisfactory esti-
mate of the cost of production. Supposing, however,
that an estimated cost of Is. 2d. per gallon for feed
land labour only be taken as approximately correct,
it is possible to draw up rough comparative balance
sheets of the operations of a retailer vending fifty
gallons a day and a farmer producing forty-five gal-
lons a day.
These show for the vendor a profit of £3 7s. 3d.
after allowing for expenses, holidays, and wages at
current award rates, and for the producer a profit of
£2 12s. fid. without any allowance for contingencies
and holidays.
Bearing in mind the greater capital required by
the latter, the greater risks, and the greater skill re-
quired, and the longer hours worked, such a dis-
crepancy is obviously unfair. This is a matter that
should occupy the attention of the proposed board,
with a view to a more accurate estimate of producers’
costs and a re-adjustment of prices.
The figures suggested above, however, represent an
immediate increase to the producers and a reduction
to the majority of consumers, and further reductions
are possible with the system in complete working-
order. The conditions of distribution Avould be con-
siderably improved. The improvement of herds and
the more scientific methods resulting from the better
education of the dairy farmer should have the effect
of lowering the cost of production. When this time
arrives the cost to the consumer would be reduced.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That a Board or Truest constituted as outlined
in the preceding section be appointed to control the
metropolitan milk supply, and that the board be
given power:—
(a.) to appoint inspectors and other necessary
officers;
(b.) to license milk producers, under conditions to
be determined, and prohibit the sale of milk
unless produced under license;
(e.) to buy, sell, and deal in milk and milk pro-
ducts ;
(d.) to establish and conduct such premises as may
be required;
(e.) to license persons to distribute milk, either
wholesale or retail, under conditions to be
determined and prohibit the sale of milk ex-
cept under license;
(f.) to inaugurate a. block system of milk distri-
bution, determine the boundaries of such
blocks, vary or alter such boundaries from
time to time when deemed necessary; allo-
cate blocks to distributors in such manner as
mav be determined;
(g.) to determine the minimum price the producer
shall receive for his product; the charges to
be made for handling and treatment, and the
maximum price to be paid by consumers, and
vary such prices from time to time;


(h.) to license the keeping of one or more cows
for the supply of milk to private households
or institutions, and to prohibit the keeping
of such coav or cows unless the animals be
certified as tubercle-free;
(i.) to institute a bacteriological control of the
milk supply;
(j.) to conduct a system of propaganda for the
purpose of increasing the consumption and
improving the methods of treatment of milk
in the home;
(k.) to make regulations for the efficient control
of the industry and impose penalties for
breaches of the regulations.
2. That the “freezing test” be included in the
methods of examination of milk samples.
3. That the attention of Magistrates and Justices
be drawn to the serious nature of the offence of milk
adulteration with a aucav to the imposition of more
adequate penalties.
4. That steps be taken to further investigate the
quality of the milk supply in respect of its biological
properties, and the possible presence of pathogenic
organisms.
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servants,
J. W. BURGESS,
Chairman.
JOHN DALE,
*F. J. ROBERTS,
Commissioners.
D. G. STEWART,
Secretary.
22nd .Tune, 1925.
* Signed subject to the following reservations :
I am in complete agreement with my colleagues on
all matters dealt Avith in the report so far as the
following are concerned:
Legislation, control, quality, quantity, produc-
tion, transport, handling, distribution, economics,
and conclusions.
I agree also with the recommendations, with the
exception of Clauses (c) and (d) of recommendation
No. 1.
I do not concur in regard to that portion of the
i eport dealing Avith “A basis of organisation” in re-
spect of—
(a) the suggested poAver of the board to buy, sell,
and deal in milk, etc.;
(b) a suggested ownership by the board of depots
and of rounds;
(c) the suggestion that all milk should pass through
depots;
fd) suggested method of compensation;
and I differ also with certain conclusions given in the
addendum.
fal 1. In regard to depots, I consider that the in-
terests of all concerned can be best served by allowing
tins phase of the industry to remain in the hands of
private enterprise.
It is admitted that a few of the existing depots are
structurally satisfactory and well conducted. One
such depot has been erected at a cost of about £3,000.
and is capable of handling approximately 4,000 gal-
lons per day. This indicates that private enterprise
is able and willing to render satisfactory service.
Under the board’s supervision all depots could be
made satisfactory. By leaving the handling of milk
in private hands the necessity of raising money by
the board for the purpose of establishing such pre-
mises and paying compensation is obviated.
2. In regard to Clause (f) of recommendation
No. 1 I consider that when blocks are being allocated
there should be no restriction as to the number of
blocks which may be operated by one distributor.
The cart delivery of milk is work suitable for young
men only, and therefore supervision is necessary.
There are many men now engaged in distribution
who have been in the business for upwards of twenty
years and are no longer able to personally deliver
milk on a big round. It should be possible for these
men to remain in the business and supervise the
rounds as they are doing at present. If a number
of blocks were allocated to one man it would enable
him to keep an emergency man and horse or to act
in an emergency himself.
It should also be possible so to allot the rounds
that consumers continue to receive milk as far as is
practicable from the dairymen now supplying them.
(b) I differ also with the view that all milk must
pass through a depot.
A great deal of the milk is delivered to consumers
immediately after milking, and the treatment which
it would receive at a depot would not, in my opinion,
compensate for the additional expense and the loss
of freshness resulting from the delay involved. Since
milk is intended by nature for immediate consump-
tion, any interference with quick delivery 7 should be
avoided. The handling of this milk could be super-
vised by the inspectors of the board without its being
compelled to pass through the depot.
If brine-cooling be considered necessary, a retailer
or producer-retailer should be permitted to instal the
necessary plant himself, provided that the work is
done in a manner satisfactory to the board. Several
retailers have already done this and subject all milk
handled ter this treatment.
(c) I consider that the question of compensation
can be best dealt with in the following manner: —
Those vendors who are forced out of the business
through the introduction of the block system of de-
livery should be compensated by those vendors who
continue to operate under the new system. This
would obviate the necessity of raising a loan by 7 the
board For this purpose. The vendors still operating’
would have a substantial stake in the industry, and
this would tend to improve the service rendered to
consumers, as more responsible men would remain in
the business. I consider also that compensation should
be paid on the existing: values of the rounds, plus 25
per cent.
It seems to me that to merely compensate for the
value of the business lost is unjust, inasmuch that it
es the unfortunate vendor who has been stood
down faced with the necessity of securing: other
means of livelihood and also leaves him with certain


equipment on his hands. Eor this equipment there
would be little or no market, as so large a numl>cr
of turn-outs would cease to operate.
The amount involved in compensating all the
vendors would be, if the principle of ownership by
the board be admitted, not less than £60,000 at ex-
isting values. There is at present a ready sale for
rounds at from £6 to £lO per gallon. In many case's
these rounds have been bought on terms and have yet
to be paid for.
Those vendors who continue would willingly pay a
good price for the additional business —as witness the
ready sale at good prices of protected newspaper
rounds—and the consumers, represented by the board,
would hear none of the expense of compensation.
With regard to the preliminary survey of the bac-
teriological condition of the milk as described in the
addendum, 1 consider that the conclusion relating to
milking machines is misleading. The number of ex-
aminations made was small, and the results do n )t
tally with experience. The whole of the witnesses,
including the Chief Dairy Expert, were in favour of
the use of machines, and it is possible to select seven
samples from one of the machines tested which gave
an average count of 27,000, one count being as low
as 12,000, a very satisfactory figure. I consider,
therefore, that further careful investigations should
lie made before any sweeping conclusions are drawn.
I cannot agree also that the count of the milk as
delivered under existing conditions to consumers
should be called high, since it is easy to show that,
in comparison with figures for other British cities,
and even with standards suggested elsewhere, it is
relatively low. Defects in the present milk supply
as dealt with in the report should undoubtedly be
remedied, but their over-emphasis may reduce the
consumption to a figure even lower than that pre-
vailing, namely, 1.5 pints per house; whereas it is
most desirable for the health of the community that
this amount should be increased.
F. J. ROBERTS.


Month.
Mean
Max.
Highest.
Mean
Min.
r
Lowest.
February
(Average, 23 years)
82-1
84-6
98-0
60*5
63-3
51-1
March ...
(Average)
80-1
81-1
94-1
62-4
60 7
54-0
April
(Average) ...
75-2
75-8
87-9
56-
57-
44-0
May (1st—15th)
(Average) ...
70-6
68-6
81-2
53-2
52-3
L--
44-1
ADDENDUM.
A PRELIMINARY SURVEY OF THE BACTERIAL CONDITION OF THE METROPOLITAN MILK
SUPPLY AND SOME EXPERIMENTS IN CLEAN MILK PRODUCTION.
SUMMARY.
Examinations were made of samples taken at
various points between the cow and the consumer
and investigations were carried out in order to com-
pare the results of hand-milking with those of
machine-milking and to determine the influence and
importance of various factors involved in the pro-
duction of clean milk.
Counts were made of total colonies on plain agar
and on McConkey-bile-salt-lactose-agar plates after
three days’ incubation at 37deg. C.
The averages of the counts recorded are as fol-
lows :
1. Of milk as delivered to the consumers under
existing conditions: total, 580,000; eoli, 1,000
approx.
2. Of country milks on arrival at Perth station:
total, 72,800; coli, 387.
3. Of milk as produced at hand-milking dairies
under existing conditions: total, 52,100; coli,
135.
4. Of milk produced at a hand-milking dairy of 20
cows under good conditions; total, 2,278;
coli, less than 1.
As delivered to consumers (average of four
samples): total, 3,900; coli, 40.
5. Of milk produced by hand milking of single
cows, by careful owners, under ordinary con-
ditions: total, 900; coli, nil.
6. Of milk as produced at machine-milking dairies
under existing conditions : total, 694,504;
coli, 1,000 approx.
7. Of milk as produced at machine-milking dairies
under specially clean conditions: total, 60,000;
coli, 197.
All samples were taken by one of two persons, both
carefully trained in the necessary technique. Unless
delivered within an hour to the laboratory the
samples were placed in an ice-box or in a refrigerat-
ing chamber.
The investigation was made between Ist February
and 14th May, 1925. The temperature during the
period was slightly below the average for the last
23 years—tbe mean maxima and minima being as
shown below:—■
Methods.
The samples of milk were examined in the Govern-
ment Laboratory by Dr. McGillivray in order to de-
termine the total number of organisms and the number
of organisms of probable fseeal origin (b. eoli group).
At the first the counts were made both by the so-
called direct method and by the plate-culture method.
The former method, though possessing the possible
advantage that all organisms present are countable,
including any that may be dead and any such as
amcrobes which though alive may not develop in the
ordinary plate culture, was nevertheless found un-
satisfactory, owing principally to the fact that, on
account of the dilution employed, each organism recog-
nised has to be multiplied by several thousands in
arriving at the linal result. Recognition of organisms
is not always certain, and moreover since clean
samples contain only a few hundreds or thousands
of bacteria the method is not applicable to them.
The plate-culture method may be accepted as giv-
ing a very good idea of the total number of organ-
isms which would have continued to grow in the milk
under the ordinary conditions of handling, despite
the facts that some kinds of bacteria may not grow,
and that organisms which are linked together in
groups or clumps give rise to one visible colony only
and are counted therefore as one.
For the total count two agar plates were poured
(Containing 0.5 c.c. of dilutions of 1 in 10 and 1 in 100
respectively. The agar was cooled before the plates
were poured to 40deg. C., and the counts were made
after three days’ incubation at 37deg. C.
The bacillus coli group count (germs of probable
excreta! origin) was not made in the usual fluid cul-
tures containing 1.0, 0.1, etc., c.c. of milk, but by
pouring 0.5 c.c. of undiluted milk in a plate of
McConkey-bile-salt-lactose-agar medium and counting
the colonies thereon. This method was found very
satisfactory; a large majority of the relatively few
colonies which appear on such plates have the naked
eye characters of bacillus coli and many were con-
firmed by further investigation; and in view of the
nature of the medium and the circumstances of the
case all the colonies developing thereon may fairly
be presumed to be of faecal origin and of specially
undesirable character.
Examinations were made:—
A- Of milks at point of distribution to the con-
sumer.
Of milks on arrival at Perth station from
country suppliers.
0- Of milk produced in dairies in the metro-
politan area by hand-milking, taken at
time of milking.
O- Of milks produced in dairies in the metro-
politan area by machine-milking, taken at
time of milking.
E- Of milks dealt with in the course of experi-
ments in clean milk production.


Date.
No. of
sample.
Organisms per
c.c.
B. Coli. per c.c.
11-2-25
1
112,000
680
23-3-25
2
771,200
several thousands
Do.
3
710,800
do.
27-3-25
4
2,275,200
do.
Do.
5
86,400
216
Do.
6
over 2,000,000
several thousand
Do.
7
over 2,000,000
do.
Do.
8
over 2,000,000
do.
Do.
9
561,600
84
3-4-25
10
16.200
128
Do.
11
387,200
1,700
TV,
1 9
04 7 9AA
-Uo.
oQc i ,ZUU
scveiai Liio usstncls
Do.
13
250,000
do.
Do.
14
104,800
1,000
20-4-25
15
158,400
256
Do.
16
132,800
several thousands
1-5-25
17
37,960
24
Do.
18
76,800
160
Do.
19
71,120
10
Do.
20
55,504
40
8-5-25
21
252,000
5,072
Do.
22
918.400
several thousands
Do.
23
13,600
256
Date.
No. of
sample
Temp,
at time
of sam-
pling.
Organisms
per c.c.
B. Coli.
Approxi-
mate
hours
since
milking.
15-2-25
A. 1
68°F.
5,800
40
8 hours.
4 3-25
A. 19
68°
5,530
96
8
9j
9-3-25
A. 24
70°
25,000
90
8
15-2-25
B. 2
68°
28,000
120
9
4-3-25
B. 21
69°
15,500
280
9
15-2-25
C. 3
68°
Uncountable
on account
of spreaders
620
9
99
2-3-25
C. 18
00
o
331,200
several
thousands
9
”
15-2-25
D. 4
68°
7,540
320
9
}>
4-3-25
D. 20
68°
2,400
Nil.
9
9-3-25
D. 23
69°
9,500
16
9
18-2-25
E. 5
72°
185,920
240
9
2-3-25
E. 15
78°
212,800
1.936
9
18-2-25
F. 6
72°
13.480
Nil.
9
2-3-25
F. 17
77°
53,600
176
9
18-2-25
G. 7
72°
11,120
40
9
2-3-25
G. 16
80°
143,200
1,232
9
20-2-25
H. 10
68°
3,400
Nil.
9
4-3-25
H. 22
69°
160,000
344
9
20-2-25
8
68°
49,920
60
6
20-2-25
9
68°
13,520
20
8
23-2-25
11
82°
286,400
2,272
4
Do.
12
78°
7,680
6
4
Do.
13
83°
199.200
14
3
Do.
14
79°
153,600
1,936
3
1(5-3-25
25
68°
50,560
38
9
Do.
26
70°
82,400
568
9
Do.
27
67°
5,960
8
9
Do.
28
70°
160,800
160
6
99
A. — Milk at point of distribution to consumer.
Samples were taken from the hand-cans of vendors,
the milk being poured from the measure into a sterile
bottle. The samples were delivered to the laboratory
within two to four hours and were plated at once or
alter a short sojourn in the ice-chest.
The results are shown in Table I.
TABLE I.
Bacterial Counts of Milk taken at the points of delivery
to Consumer.
Excluding the five worst samples which had a
count of over 2 millions, the average total count of
19 samples is 266,525.
It will be seen that on the whole a high total count
is accompanied by a high coli count. Thirteen
samples in which satisfactory counts of both total
organisms and coli were made give averages of
148,700 total and 740 coli—a proportion of 200 to 1.
B. —Country milks on arrival at Perth station.
Samples were taken from the drums on arrival
at the station in ordinary closed luggage van.
The milks all came from hand-milking dairies and
had been passed over ordinary coolers or cooled by
standing containers in a running brook, in many
cases the drum was surrounded by jackets of sacking
which was still damp- —a precaution probably of con-
siderable value. The contents of the drum were
thoroughly stirred, the temperature ascertained, and
the samples taken by dipping a sterile container and
pouring into a sterile bottle. The majority were
taken during the day time, and were delivered to the
laboratory immediately and plated at once, and the
remainder, Nos. 11, 12, 13, and 14, were taken at
8 p.m. and kept until the following • morning in the
ice-chest.
The results are shewn in Table IT., on which are
recorded also the temperature of each sample and the
number of hours that had elapsed since milking.
Twenty-eight samples were examined, and these
came from eighteen producers. More than one
sample was taken from each of eight producers,
whose samples are therefore bracketed together in the
table.
TABLE 11.
Bacterial account of Country Milk on arrival
at Perth.
In connection with twenty-six of these samples
satisfactory counts were made of both total organisms
and coli, the averages being 72,801 and 387 respec-
tively, a ratio of 190 to 1.
Reference to the temperatures shows that twenty
samples were within a range of 67deg. to 72deg. F.,
the other eight of 77deg. to 83deg. F. The relatively
cool samples give average counts of 44,000 and 131
with a ratio of 334 to 1, whilst the warmer samples
give averages of 173,460 and 1,081 with a ratio cal-
culated on seven of the samples only of 140 to 1.
It seems, as is to be expected, that a higher tem-
perature of the milk during transit results in a rela-
tive increase in both counts and that it favours the
development of the coli group as conpmred with the
other organisms.
Many of the counts are surprisingly low consider-
ing that no special care had been urged on the dairy-
men concerned, who were quite unaware that the
tests were being made. Eight of the best . samples
w ere sent to the Analyst to be examined for preserva-
tives, no trace of which was discovered.
C. —Samples produced by hand-milking—taken at
time of milking.
Nine samples from different dairies are dealt with
under this heading. Milking was carried out by the
dairyman’s usual method. Samples were taken from


Date.
No. of
Sample.
Organisms
per c.c.
B; Coli per c.c
1925.
February 6
1
30,000
February 6
2
70,000
February 6
3
48,000
► Not counted.
February 13 ...
4
28,000
February 13 ...
5
13,600
February 26 ...
6
12,040
14
March 2
7
122,400
50
March 30
8
161,600
392
April 1
9
13,640
86
Date.
No.
Organisms
per c.c.
B. Coli
per c.c.
1925.
February 26 ...
1
227.200
Thousands
March 5
2
567,000
176
March 5
3
768,000
472
March 6
4
352,000
736
March 11
5
1,596,800
Thousands
March 17
6
1,264,000
Thousands
March 17
7
947,000
Thousands
March 24
8
248,640
446
March 27
9
350,400
Thousands
March 27
10
624,000
1888
Date.
No.
Organisms
per c.c.
B. Coli.
11 Deb. 1926
1 Gow A.
170
Nil.
2 March 1925
2 Cow B.
2130
Nil.
12 March 1925
3 Gow A.
400
Nil.
Dairy
No.
Date.
Organisms
per c.c.
13, Coli per c.c.
1
13 Feb. 1925
A. 28,000
thousands
B. 1 300
40
2
13 Feb. 1925
A. 13,000
thousands
13. 6,500
110
3
2 March 1925
A. 122,400
50
13. 11.840
Nil.
4
1 April 1925
A. 13,640
86
13. 1,390
Nil.
T
. _
the receiving drum beneath the cooler and kept on ice
until plated.
The results are shown in Table 111.
Table 111.
Bacterial Counts of Milk from Dairies where Hand
Milking is followed. Ordinary conditions.
The average total count is 52,120 and average coli
count of four of the samples is 135. The ratio of
total count to coli calculated on four samples is
570 to 1.
D.— Samples produced hy machine-milking —taken at
time of milking.
Ten samples from different dairies Avere examined.
In view of the results, it is hardly necessary to say
that the milking Avas conducted by the usual methods
without any special notice or advice. Samples were
taken from the receiving drum under the cooler and
kept on ice until plated.
The results are shoAvn in Table IV.
Table IV.
Bacterial Count of Milk from Dairies in Metropolitan Area
at which a Milking Machine is in use (Ordinary Conditions)
No. 9 was milk as it was delivered to a large public insti-
tution.
No. 10 was from a dairy where a new machine had been
installed ten days previously.
The average total count is 694,504. The dilution
employed in plating the samples for coli estimation
was too loav in five instances to allow of a satisfactory
fount. The average eoli count of the other five
samples Avas 743, and the ratio of total count to eoli
was 688 to 1.
E. Samples taken under experimental conditions.
The work undertaken under this heading included
the sampling of milk from one-eoAv dairies, several
experiments at hand-milking dairies, and lavo more
prolonged investigations into the possibilities of
clean-milk production at a hand-milking and a
machine-milking dairy respectively.
El.- —Single cow dairies. —Two members of the
staff of the department who milked their own cows
submitted samples for examination. In the case of
cow A the udder and teats were wiped with wet and
dry cloths, and the flank was wiped with a damp
e l oth. Vaseline was used on the hands. No other
special precautions were taken. In the case of cow B
the teats were wiped with a damp cloth. In each
case the first jets were rejected and the pail Avas
rinsed Avith boiling water before use. Samples Avere
taken from the pail and brought direct to the labora-
tory.
Results are as folloAvs:
Bacterial Counts of Milk from Private Cows.
Sample No. 3 stood in the laboratory at room tem-
perature from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. before being plated.
The average count of the three samples was 900;
eoli, nil.
E2. —Single experiments at hand-milking dairies.
Four dairies were visited with the object of ascer-
taining what immediate improvement could be
effected at dairies where band milking was practised.
One sample was taken from a drum as produced
by the dairyman’s method.
Three cows were then selected and the flank of
each cow was rubbed down with a damp cloth. The
udders were well washed and dried, and the first jets
of milk were rejected.
The milker’s hands and forearms were then
thoroughly washed in clean water with soap and nail
brush, then dried on a clean towel. He then donned
a clean overall and the three cows were milked into
a partly covered bucket which had previously been
rinsed in boiling water. A sample was taken from
the bucket. The samples marked “A” represent the
milk as produced by the dairyman’s method, and those
marked “B” the milk as produced under the conditions
described.
Having regard to the results obtained at the dairy,
where extensive tests were made as described later,
it is highly probable that the results were not ma-
terially influenced by the fact that the bucket was
covered or by the use of the clean overalls.
The results are shown in Table 6:
Table 6.


In considering these results it must be remembered
that the “A” samples had been passed over the cooler,
whilst the “B” samples Avere taken direct from the
milk pail, and were therefore not exposed to con-
tamination from and on the cooler.
The average total counts of the “A” samples is
44,160, and of the “B” samples 3,112. In two of the
“B” samples the coli group Avas absent in 0.5 c.c.
E 3- -Investigations at dairy using the hand method
of milking.
The dairy Avas of the usual kind in respect of the
buildings. The milking shed was of the lean-to
pattern, completely open at one side, had a sound
floor and reasonable drainage. A few square yards
outside the shed were paved with sleepers. The yards
consisted of deep loose sand, from which the manure
Avas removed regularly as far as this Avas practicable.
The food shed and stable for one horse were un-
paved, and adjoined the milking shed. No proper
manure bin was provided, but the stable Avas kept
free from accumulations. The herd consisted of 17
cows in good condition, entirely hand fed, quiet and
well handled. The water supply Avas obtained from
the main. The milk room was well constructed, not
quite fly-proof, the door self-closing, and the room
and utensils Avere clean. The method of milking was
superior to that usually adopted. The oAvner of the
dairy did this himself. He folloAved the dry method
and Avas very clean. The udders of the cows were
Avell washed with clean water and dried. The milk
was transferred to fhe milk room after each pair of
coavs was milked, this being done by the dairyman’s
wife. The milk room was about thirty yards distant
from the milking shed.
Effective cooling of the milk Avas not practicable
owing to the high temperature of the Avater from the
main, which ranged from 76° to 80° F. No special
facilities for washing the hands Avere provided in the
milking shed.
The dairyman retailed his oAvn milk on a round,
examination of the milk up to the time of delivery
to the consumer being thereby facilitated. The re-
sults of all examinations are collected in Table Y.
and are described individually hereunder.
The first samples Avere taken under the usual con-
ditions of the dairy.
Sample No. 1 Avas obtained at the evening milk-
ing (as Avere all others except where specified)
from the mixed milk after cooling.
No. I—Organisms. 49,600; Coli, nil.
Sample No. 2 Avas obtained next morning during
delivery, the milk having been herd at the
dairy all night at ordinary temperature, and
was 15 hours old AAdien plated.
No. 2—Organisms, 504.000; Coli, 1,300.
Certain alterations in the methods were then in-
stituted. A partly coA 7 ered bucket was used for milk-
ing and its use continued for some time; the animal’s
tail was secured ; the udders were washed as before
and dried with a separate clean cloth; the flanks of
the animal Avere brushed Avith a damn brush, and
these precautions were carried out during the Avhole
period.
Sample No. 3 represents the mixed milk as ob-
tained under the altered conditions.
No. 3—Organisms, 5,800; Coli, nil,
Clean overalls were worn by the dairyman, and the
use of these was continued for some time. The hands
were washed and dried before milking each cow, and
for this purpose a basin of clean water, soap, nail
brush, and towel were provided. The practice was
continued throughout the duration of the experiment.
Sample No. 4 is a sample of the morning’s milk
obtained at the dairy at 4 a.m. and delivered
to the laboratory at 9 a.m.
No. 4 —Organisms, 20,400; Coli, nil.
Sample No. 5 is a duplicate of No. 4 and was,
in fact, taken from the same drum.
No. s—Organisms, 9,180; Coli, 4.
The next point investigated was the effect of pass-
ing the milk over the cooler.
Sample No. 6 taken from the bucket before-the
milk was passed over the cooler.
No. 6—Organisms, 3,120; Coli, 2.
Sample No. 7 is the same milk as No. 6, but the
sample was taken after the milk had passed
over the cooler.
No. 7 —Organisms, 132,000; Coli, 2.
Sample No. 8 represents the mixed milk of live
cows before passing over the cooler.
No. B—Organisms, 1,800; Coli, nil.
Sample No. 9 is the same milk after [ assage over
cooler.
No. 9—-Organisms, 8,000; Coli, 2.
Samples Nos. 10 and 11 were obtained under simi-
lar conditions as Samples No. 8 and 9, being
raken before and after passing over the cooler.
No. 10 —Organisms, 7,110; Coli, nil.
No. 11—Organisms, 105,000; Coli, 2.
The milk pail was then sterilised immediately be-
fore use.
Sample No. 12 represents the mixed milk of each
of six cows before cooling.
No. 12—Organisms, 1,790; Coli, 2.
Sample No. 13 is the same milk after cooling.
No. 13 —Organisms, 41,000; Coli, 20.
Phe effect of sterilising all the utensils immediately
before use was then investigated.
Sample No. 14 represents the mixed milk of six
cows before cooling.
No. 14—Organisms, 950; Coli, nil.
Sample No. 15 represents the remainder of the
milk after having been put over the cooler.
The cooler, receptacle over same, and the drum
into which the milk was passed had just pre-
viously been treated with boiling water.
No. 15—Organisms, 1,430; Coli, 8.
Sample No. 16 represents milk before cooling.
The sample was obtained at 7.30 p.m. but was
not plated until 4.30 p.m. next day after stand-
ing at ordinary room temperature from 10 a.m.
No. 16 —Organisms, 3,180; Coli, 4.
Sample No. 17 represents the milk after being
put over the cooler.
No. 17—Organisms, 3,500; Coli, nil.
These results were considered very satisfactory. In
order to discover if certain of the precautions were
unnecessary it was decided to revert to some of the
original methods. The special bucket and overalls
were discarded, the dairyman’s clothing being as usual
clean, and the ordinary open pail was used for milk-
ing. The udders were dried with the same cloth which
was used for washing, it being merely wrung out.
Throughout the remainder of the experiment all
utensils used were dipped into a copper of boiling
water just before milking was started,


Date.
Xo.
Organisms per
c.c.
B. Coli per c.c.
10-2 25
i
49,600
XU.
10-2-25
2
504,000
1.300
14-2 25
3
5.800
XU.
28 2 25
4
20.400
XU.
28-2 25
5
9,180
4
4-3-25
6
3.120
2
4-3-25
7
132.000
2
11-3-25
8
1.800
XU.
11-3-25
9
8.000
2
13-3-25
10
7,110
XU.
13-3-25
11
105.000
2
20-3 25
12
1.790
2
20-325
13
41.000
20
24 3 25
14
950
XU.
24-325
15
1.430
8
30-3-25
Hi
3,180
4
30- 3 25
17
3.500
XU.
5—4-25
18
1.280
XU.
6 4-25
19
33,760
3.152
14-4-25
20
2,920
2
15-4-25
21
123.000
3.680
23-4-25
22
1.540
Xu.
24-4-25
23
6,000
144
24-4-25
24
3,420
10
27-4-25
25
1,360
XU.
28-4-25
26
5.440
14
28-4-25
27
1.280
XU.
9-5-25
30
910
XU.
10-525
31
4.800
2
10-5-25
32
11,200
12
It was then decided to test the evening’s milk during
delivery on the round next morning, in order to ascer-
tain the effect of conditions of storage in the milk
room.
Sample No. 18 is from the bulk milk of the herd
after the milk had been put over the cooler.
No. 18 —Organisms, 1,280; Coli nil.
Sample 19 is a sample of the same milk as No.
18, but taken on delivery next morning after
having been kept at the dairy overnight. The
cooling which it received at the dairy reduced
the temperature to S2deg. F.—the sample re-
ceived no other cooling treatment.
No. 19 —Organisms, 33,760; Coli 3,152.
Samples Nos. 20 and 21 are a repetition of Nos.
18 and 19.
No. 20—Organisms, 2,920; Coli 2.
No. 21 —Organisms, 123,000; Coli 3,680.
Since the effect of standing overnight was clearly
deleterious, treatment by means of ice tubes was in-
stituted.
Sample No. 22 is bulk milk immediately after
passing over cooler.
No. 22 —'Organisms 1,540; Coli nil.
Sample No. 23 is from same bulk milk as No.
22. It had been put over the cooler at the
dairy which reduced the temperature to SO
deg. F. It was then further cooled by means of
an ice tube to a temperature of 56deg. F. in 45
minutes. The milk was kept at the dairy all
night and the sample taken during delivery
next morning. It was kept at ordinary room
temperature until plated some five hours after
the sample was taken. Temperature at the
time of sampling 50deg. F.
No. 23—Organisms 6,000; Coli 144.
Sample No. 24 is a sample of the morning milk-
ing taken at delivery. It was plated seven
hours after milking and was never ice-cooled.
No. 24—Organisms 3,420; Coli 10.
Sample No. 25 represents bulk milk immediately
after passing over cooler.
No. 25 —Organisms 1,360: Coli nil.
Sample No. 26 is a sample of the same milk as
No. 25 taken during delivery next morning,
not having been ice-cooled. Temperature after
passing over the cooler 78deg. F.
No. 26 —Organisms 5,440: Coli 14.
Sample No. 27 is the same milk as Nos. 25 and
26, but after passing over the cooler in the
dairy it was further cooled by means of ice
tube which reduced the temperature to 56deg.
in 40 minutes.
No. 27—Organisms 1,280; Coli nil.
Nos. 26 and 27 remained at room temperature
until plated five hours after the samples were
obtained. No. 26 had therefore endured 15
hours standing without ice-cooling.
Nos. 30, 31, and 32 are samples taken under the
same conditions as Nos. 25, 26, and 27, No. 31
having been additionally cooled by means of
an ice tube.
No. 30—Organisms 910: Coli nil.
No. 31—Organisms 4,800; Coli 2.
No. 32—Organisms 11,200; Coli 12.
The striking result of this investigation is the
effect of sterilisation of all utensils immediately be-
fore milking.
Seven samples taken after passing over the cooler
into a drum, after mere “cleaning” of reservoir cooler
and drum gave the following counts: —
Total 45,000; Coli 4.
Eight samples taken after passing over the same
utensils after they have just previously been dipped
in boiling water gave the following:—
Total 2,045; Coli 2.
The effect of ice-cooling of the evening milk during
storage overnight in the mil krooni was naturally con-
siderable. Four samples of the evening’s milk stood
overnight without ice-cooling, and gave on delivery
next morning the following averages:—■
Total 43,300; Coli 1,714.
Whereas three similar samples of evening’s milk after
standing overnight with ice tubes in the drums gave
on delivery next morning the following averages:—
Total 4,026; Coli 48.
With these simple precautions—namely, reason-
able cleanliness on the part of the milker, washing of
the udders, rejection of first jets, scalding of all
utensils, and the use of ice tubes in milk which had
to be stored overnight—it was possible for this dairy-
man to deliver milk to consumers which as sampled
from the hand-can on delivery gave an average count
on four samples:—
Total 3,900; Coli 40.
The dairyman was pleased to observe the precau-
tions suggested which entailed practically no addi-
tional expense and very little extra trouble. The
principal and most valuable change in his methods
was the bringing of his copper to the boil immediately
before instead of after milking. The milk he de-
livered was undoubtedly of very high quality and
most of the samples kept good for some days at
room temperature.
TABLE Y.
Bacterial Counts of samples of Mill- from Hand Milking
Dairy.


Date.
No.
Organisms
F>. Coli
per c.c.
per e.c.
«
Dairy “ R
February 9, 1925
1
16,000
Nil.
February 25, 1925
2
33,600
192
March 10, 1925 ...
3
19,000
2
March 20. 1925 ...
4
12.080
448
March 20. 1925 ...
5
51.800
128
March 30.. 1925 ...
6
395,200
1,792
March 30, 1925 ...
7
124.800
28
March 31, 1925 ...
8
27 200
84
March 31. 1925 ...
9
30,960
176
Dairy “ W " —
April 2, 1925 ...
10
30 800
24
April 2, 1925 ...
11
44,000
74
April 2. 1925
12
129,600
208
April 14, 192 . ...
13
10,740
Nil.
April 15, 1925 ...
14
38,960
224
April 22, 1925 ...
15
16,400
56
April 22. 1925 ...
10
38 400
60
April 29, 1925 ...
17
55.240
36
April 29. 1925 ...
18
59.200
26
April 29, 1925 ...
19
27.200
April 29, 1925 ...
20
75,2 0
April 29, 1925 ...
21
36.000
E 4 at dairies using machines.
The two dairies concerned in these investigations
were both of considerable size, employing well-paid
labour under the control of an intelligent manager
who was undoubtedly anxious to produce milk of as
high a standard of cleanliness as possible.
In the following account are detailed the methods
followed in cleaning the machines. It was not pos-
sible to be certain that the methods were scrupu-
lously followed in each instance, but there is very
good reason to believe that they were.
The collected results are shown in Table VI., de-
tails being given below;—
Table VI.
Bacterial Counts of Milk from Dairies where milking
machine was in use and special measures were taken .
Conditions at the Dairy “B.”
The milking shed was open at one side; the floor
was sound and clean. The yards were sandy but
were kept free from manure. The milk room was
well-kept and utensils were clean, the business gener-
ally being well conducted. The cows' udders were
well washed and dried before the machine was ap-
plied.
The machine in use was a “Simplex,” releaser type.
The method of cleaning the machine was as fol-
lows
After each milking, cold water, followed by hot
water and soda, followed by hot water, was drawn
through the appliance. The movable parts were then
placed in the milk room until next morning. The
long tube through which the milk passes to the cooler
was scrubbed by a brush during the passage of the
hot water and soda.
Two or three times a week the cups were com-
pletely dismantled and cleansed with hot water and
brushes.
Sample No. I.—Taken from drum after the milk
had been passed over the cooler.
No. I—Organisms 16,060; Coli nil.
Sample No. 2 —The first jets of milk were re-
jected before the machine cups were applied.
The cups had been taken apart two days pre-
viously.
No. 2 —'Organisms 33,600; Coli 192.
Sample No. 3. —No alteration in methods.
No. 3 —Organisms 19,600; Coli 2.
Sample No. 4 represents mixed milk of the first
eight cows milked. New cups were used on
the machine.
No. 4 —Organisms 12,080; Coli 448.
Sample No. 5 is the mixed milk of the second
eight cows, received into another drum which
had just previously been rinsed by the dairy-
man with boiling water and then with cold
water.
No. s—Organisms5—Organisms 51,800; Coli 128.
Sample No. 6. —Mixed milk of first eight cows.
No. 6 —Organisms 395,200; Coli 1,792.
Sample No. 7 —From the second eight cows. The
receiving drum had been rinsed with boiling
water and then allowed to cool.
No. 7—Organisms 124,800; Coli 28.
The machine was not working well on this day.
Sample No. 8. —Mixed milk of the first eight
cows. The machine, reservoir, cooler and
drums were treated with boiling water just
before milking. The movable parts of the
machine had been kept in a solution of stabi-
lised chloride of lime (20 percent. Cl. approx.),
to one gallon of water, since the pre-
vious milking. Some of the cups fell off dur-
ing operations and could only be rinsed with
cold water. The sample was taken when the
drum was quarter-full.
No. B—Organisms 27,200; Coli 84.
Sample No. 9. —Taken from the same drum as
No. 8, but when the drum was three-quarters
full.
No. 9 —Organisms 30,960; Coli 176.
All the above samples were placed on ice and plated
within two hours of the time they were taken. This
dairy then went out of production. The tests were
continued at another dairy, “W.”
Conditions at the dairy “ IT.”
The premises were similar to and quite as good as
those at dairy “R.” The machine used was of the
same make but of the bucket type.
The method of cleansing the machine was as fol-
lows : —After one milking cold and then boiling water
was pumped through and the parts placed in the milk
room. After the next milking, cold and then boil-
ing water was pumped through and the machines were
then completely dismantled, washed with brushes, hot
water and soda, and then immersed in ordinary cold
water until assembling for next milking. The washing
process was very thoroughly done.
Sample No. 10 was taken from a bucket to which
the strippings had not been added.
No. 10 —Organisms 36,800; Coli 24.
Sample No. 11 of the same milk, but including
strippings (hand milked), after being passed
over the cooler.
No. 11 —Organisms 44,000; Coli 74.


Total.
Coli.
No. 1
.. 270,400
238
No. 2
.. 150,080
904
Sample No. 12 is the same milk as No. 10, but
taken after passing oxer the cooler.
No. 12-—Organisms 129,600; Coli 208,
All the following samples were taken from the
buckets before cooling. The afternoon’s milk was
kept on ice overnight and the morning’s milk was not
cooled at all. The afternoon’s milk was about 18
hours old when plated and the morning’s milk about
4 to 5 hours old.
Sample No. 13. —Afternoon’s milk.
No. 13—Organisms 10,740; Coli nil.
Sample No. 14. —Morning’s milk.
No. 14 —Organisms 38,960; Coli 224.
The following methods of cleaning the machine
were then adopted;—
After each milking the buckets and all pails Avere
scrubbed first with cold then Avith hot Avater and soda
and scalded with boiling water. After the morning
milking the cups and tubes had first cold Avater
pumped through, followed by hot water and soda.
They Avere then placed in the dairy. Just prior to
the commencement of the afternoon’s milking boiling
Avater was pumped through and the buckets scalded.
AVhen the afternoon milking had been completed cold
Avater was pumped through the cups, tubes, etc., and’
the parts were then taken adrift and cleansed Avith
hot water and soda by the use of brushes. They Avere
then rinsed in boiling Avater, dried, and assembled for
use next morning.
Sample No. 15. —Morning’s milk.
No. 15 —Organisms 16,400; Coli 56.
Sample No. 16 —Afternoon’s milk.
No. 16 —Organisms 38,400; Coli 60.
The following alterations in the instructions for
cleansing the machine Avere then given;—
After the morning’s milking, the machine to have
cold water draAvn through and then to be taken apart
and allowed to soak in soda Avater. Cleaning by the
brush to be done just before the afternoon milking,
the machines to have boiling water drawn through
each after assembling and before being put on the
COAVS.
After the afternoon’s milkins’, the usual drawing
through of cold water, Avarm soda Avater, and finally
boiling water to he carried out immediately, and the
machines placed in the dairy.
Sample No. 17.—Afternoon’s milk.
No. 17—Organisms 55,240; Coli 36.
Sample No. 18.—Morning’s milk.
No. 18—Organisms 59,200; Coli 26.
Sample No. 19. — Morning’s milk, hut the vessels
had been Avashed Avith hot water and “Clensol”
instead of hot water and soda.
No. 19—Organisms 27,200.
Sample No. 20.—Afternoon’s milk.
No. 20 —Organisms 75,200.
Sample No. 21.—Afternoon’s milk. The vessels
had been washed with “Clensol.”
No. 21—Organisms 36,000.
It will be observed that the suggestions offered to
these dairymen did not result in any improvement in
the counts. Nine samples from dairy “R” give aver-
age counts of <9,000 and 316. Excluding the sample
taken on the day when the machine was not working
properly, the remaining seven samples give aAmraoes
of 27,000 and 150.
Twelve samples from dairy “W” give average
counts of 47,000 and 78.
The average of all samples is —
60,000 and 197.
The ratio of total count to Coli is 304 to 1.
The average is in startling contrast with that ob-
tained from ordinary machine-milking dairies as
described in Section D, namely—
Total 694,504; Coli 743,
but compares by no means well with results that were
obtained at a hand-milking dairy where similar care
was taken, and from which milk with counts of 3,900
and 40 was delivered to the consumer.
The difficulty of obtaining milk of low count by
means of a milking machine is further illustrated by
an experiment made at a one-man dairy where a Ridd
machine was in use. The dairyman was especially
interested and was more than ordinarily careful in
his methods. A random sample taken from the bucket
of his machine gave the following count: total,
947,000; Coli, thousands. The cups of his machine
had not been dismantled for many days. The dairy
was revisited, the machine was dismantled and the
parts treated, just prior to milking, in the following
way: The parts were scrubbed by brushes in water
at 170° F., the parts remaining in this water for
several minutes. The buckets were well w r ashed with
w r ater of a temperature of 200° F. and allowed to
cool. Two samples taken from the milking which
followed immediately, gave the following figures;—
Had it been possible to further assist this dairy-
man with regard to the cleaning and maintenance of
his machine better results could, no doubt, have been
obtained, but the experience illustrates the difficulty
involved.
Conclusions.
it must be remembered that the investigations on
which the following conclusions are based were
carried out during the latter part of the summer.
Seasonal changes may exercise considerable influence,
and it is desirable that further examinations be made
in order to determine the extent thereof.
1. Milk as delivered to consumers under existing
conditions shows a high bacterial count.
2. Country milk on arrival at Perth station and
milk produced at hand-milking dairies in the metro-
politan area under existing conditions gives a rela-
tively low count.
3. By the use of simple inexpensive methods it
was possible at a band-milking dairy to produce milk
of an extremely satisfactory degree of cleanliness,
and to deliver it to the consumer in the same condi-
tion.
4. Ihe most important factor in the production of
clean milk under the usual conditions is the sterilisa-
tion of all utensils. This can be well accomplished
by the dipping of all utensils in boiling water im-
mediately before use. This necessitates the bringing
of the water to the boil before instead of after milk-
ing, and makes it desirable that, instead of the usual
round copper, a rectangular boiler, capable of taking
a 10-gallon milk drum laid on its side, should be in-
stalled.


5. The use of milking machines under existing
•conditions give very unsatisfactory results.
6. The results obtained by the use of milking
machines under very good conditions are no better
than those obtained by hand milking under ordinary
conditions, and do not approximate to those obtained
by hand milking under the best conditions.
7. The counts of the bacillus coli group show that
these undesirable organism? are practically absent
from the milk as produced under the best conditions
of hand milking; that they are more numerous abso-
lutely in any samples with a high total count than
in those with a low count, and that they are more
numerous relatively in milk that has been kept for
a number of hours at ordinary temperature than in
the same milks at the time of production.
J. W. B.
J. D.
F. J. R.
By Authority : Fred. Wm. Simpson, Government Printer, Perth.


