

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
APPOINTED TO SURVEY
SECONDARY EDUCATION
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, NEW SOUTH WALES




REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE APPOINTED TO
SURVEY SECONDARY EDUCATION
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
1957
PARLIAMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
BY COMMAND
Ordered to he printed , 20 November, 1957
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
A. H. Pettifer, Government Printer, Sydney, New South Wales.
7543—1 1957—97
1957
[Us. 6<?.]




Submitted to the Hon. R. J. Heffron, M.L.A., Minister for
Education, October, 1957.
We have to submit, for the consideration of the Minister for
Education, our Report on Secondary Education in New South Wales
in accordance with the terms of the Minister's reference to us of
September, 1953.
H. S. WYNDHAM, Chairman.
H. F. HEATH.
A. W. HICKS.
W. G. HILLIARD, Bishop.
C. R. McRAE.
P. G. PRICE.
J. F. SLOWEY.
C. G. STEVENSON.
M. A. TELFER.
E. H. VINES.
28 th October , 1957


The findings and recommendations of this Report
are submitted by the Committee as a whole.
Reference is made in the text to some matters
about which there have been differences of opinion
or emphasis on the part of individual members of
the Committee.




MEMBERS OF THE SURVEY COMMITTEE
Mr. H. F. Heath, 8.A., B.Ec.
Mr. A. W. Hicks, M.C., M.A.
Rt. Rev. W. G. Hilliard, M.A.
Professor C. R. Mcßae, M.A., Ph.D., Dip. Ed.
Mr. P. G. Price, B.Sc.
Rev. Father J. F. Slowey, 8.A., Dip. Ed.
Miss C. G. Stevenson, B.Ed.
Miss M. A. Teller, 8.A., Dip. Ed.
Rt. Rev. E. H. Vines, M.A., 8.D., Dip. Ed.
Dr. H. S. Wyndham, M.A., Dip. Ed. (Chairman).
Mr. L. S. Thompson, Secretary until September, 1954.
Mr. H. L. Yelland, 8.A., Dip. Ed., Secretary thereafter.
Mr. T. J. Conway, Assistant Secretary until February, 1956.
Mr. P. E. Jones, 8.A., Assistant Secretary thereafter.
Terms of Reference
1. To survey and to report upon the provision of full-time day
education for adolescents in New South Wales.
2. In particular, to examine the objectives, organization and
content of the courses provided for adolescent pupils in the public
schools of the State, regard being had to the requirements of a good
general education and to the desirability of providing a variety of
curriculum adequate to meet the varying aptitudes and abilities of the
pupils concerned.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER I
Page
HISTORICAL REVIEW 12
Nineteenth Century. The “ Elite” Concept of Secondary Education 12
The Public Instruction Act, 1880. A New “ Elite” 14
Knibbs-Turner Report .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..15
Peter Board. The Reorganization of 1911-12 17
The High School: Systematic Provision for the New Elite .. .. 19
The Superior Public School: Provision for other Adolescents .. 20
Tht Intermediate Certificate—The Common Goal 20
The Basis of Selection for Secondary Education .. .. .. 21
The New Secondary School Population 22
Review of Secondary Education 24
Legislative Amendments of 1936 24
Recommendations of the Board of Secondary School Studies .. 25
A New Approach 26
Developments in the Department of Education 27
SUMMARY 28
CHAPTER II
THE PRESENT SITUATION 30
I. Schools and Courses 30
(a) Department of Education .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
(i) Entrance to secondary school .. .. .. .. 30
(ii) Types of secondary schools and courses —Metropolitan 31
(iii) Recent developments .. .. .. .. .. 32
(iv) Country ... .. .. .. .. .. 33
(b) Non-Departmental Schools .. .. .. ~ .. 34
11. Examinations and Standards 34
111. Some Administrative Features 35
(i a ) Size of the task .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
(b) Examinations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
( c ) History of a school generation .. .. .. .. .. 37
(d) Present trends .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
(e) The senior years .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
(i) Too small a minority in the senior years .. .. 40
(ii) Quality of Fifth Year study .. .. .. .. 40
(iii) Length of school life .. .. .. .. .. 42
SUMMARY.. .. 43
CHAPTER 111
AIMS 46
1. Health 47
2. Mental Skills and Knowledge 47
3. Capacity for Critical Thought 47
4. Readiness for Group Membership 48
5. The Arts of Communication 48
6. Vocation 48
7. Leisure 49
8. Spiritual Values 50
CHAPTER IV
APPRAISAL AND RECOMMENDATIONS 51
The Central Problem 51
Method of Approach 51
Transition to Secondary Education 52
Transition as Normal Promotion 53
The Nurture of Talent 53
The Demands of University Studies 54
Types of Organization of Secondary Education 56
1. Extension of the Primary School .. .. .. .. .. ~ 56
2. The “ 6-3-3 ” Organization .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 56
3. The New Zealand Intermediate School .. ~ .. .. .. 56
4. A “ Transition ” Year .. .. .. ~ .. .. ..51


Page
MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS 57
Discussion .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • .. 58
I. Transition from Primary to Secondary School .. .. .. 58
(a) Completion of the primary school course .. .. .. 58
( b ) Age of transition .. ,. .. .. .. .. .. 59
(c) Liaison between primary and secondary school .. .. 60
(,d ) Class-teaching in First Year .. .. .. •. .. 60
(e) Tests and their use 62
II. Secondary Education for All Adolescents 62
(a) Size of School .. .. .. •. .. .. .. 62
( b ) Co-education .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 64
III. The Common Core of the Curriculum 65
(a) The nature of the core subjects .. .. .. .. .. 65
Social Studies .. .. .. .. .. •. .. 65
Science .. .. .. .. .. .. • • .. 66
Mathematics .. .. .. .. . • • • .. 66
Religious Education .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
(b) Class organization in relation to the core curriculum .. .. 66
IV. Electives 67
(a) Principles of election .. .. .. .. .. .. 67
(b) Relation of electives to the common core 68
V-VI. The School Certificate 69
(a) The educational programme 69
English .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 70
Curriculum Patterns .. .. .. .. .. .. 72
(b) School Certificate Examination .. .. .. .. .. 74
(i) Nature of the examination .. .. .. .. 74
(ii) Scope and standard 74
(iii) Examining body 75
VII. Early Leavers 75
VIII. Higher School Certificate 76
CHAPTER V
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .. 78
First Term of Reference 78
Second Term of Reference 81
APPENDICES
A. Evidence presented by Dr. K. S. Cunningham (Director) and Dr. W. C.
Radford, Representatives of the Australian Council for Educational
Research .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88
B. Evidence presented by the Lecturing Staff of Sydney Teachers’ College 101
C. Evidence presented by Arthur Denning, Director of the New South
Wales Department of Technical Education .. .. .. ..114
D. Sources of Evidence .. .. .. .. .. ., .. .. 129
LIST OF TABLES
Pag*
Table I. Enrolments in First Post-Primary Year, 1915-1955 .. 22
Table II. (a) Enrolments in Secondary Schools and Courses, 1915-1955
lb) Estimated Enrolments, 1956-1965 .♦ 36
Table III. Enrolments in Successive Years of the Secondary School;
The History of a School Generation 37
Table IV. Progress of School Generations through Departmental
Secondary Schools, 1948-1956 39
Table V. Distribution of Ages of Fifth Year Pupils, Departmental
Schools, 1920-1955 42


INTRODUCTION
In September, 1953, the Minister remitted to the Committee:
1. To survey and to report upon the provision of full-time day
education for adolescents in New South Wales.
2. In particular, to examine the objectives, organization and content
of the courses provided for adolescent pupils in the public
schools of the State, regard being had to the requirements
of a good general education and to the desirability of provid-
ing a variety of curriculum adequate to meet the varying
aptitudes and abilities of the pupils concerned.
Since that time, the Committee has met on ninety-two occasions, of
which fifty-seven were public hearings held in Sydney, Newcastle and
Armidale. The Committee has considered oral and written evidence
submitted by two hundred and twenty-six persons and institutions, and
has had prepared for it some forty-nine special reports on specific
questions associated with its Survey.
The Committee has assumed that the ultimate objective of the Survey
was that, after due consideration, action be taken to ensure the provision
of a scheme of education which, in organization and content, would be
appropriate for adolescents living in this, the second half of the Twentieth
Century. The Report has therefore been designed so that an appraisal
of the present position and recommendations for the not distant future
might, with the approval of the Minister, be read and discussed as widely
as possible as a prelude to action.
This objective has determined the form of the Report. From among
the wide variety of evidence upon which the Report is based, the
Committee has deemed it wise to present, in an appendix, certain material
of more than ordinary significance for the discussion which, it hopes,
will take place. At the same time, the Committee wishes to place on
record its conviction that, despite the amount of research carried
out specially for this Survey, there are particular features of secondary
education which require further investigation and upon which little
systematic research has yet been completed.
The Committee has accepted the fact that, in regard to one major
issue, its position has in large measure been determined by its terms of
reference. Having been invited to examine the educational provision
made for adolescents in this State, the Committee has assumed that
secondary education is to be regarded as “the education of the adoles-
cent” and that its concern was with the whole of the teenage population,
not some selected part of it.
It will be noted that, in respect of the second of its terms of reference,
the Committee has not made recommendations in detail as to the con-
tent of the curriculum in public secondary schools. Certain principles
have been enunciated in the Report, which should serve as the basis for
curriculum construction. The Committee has considered that the de-
tailed work thereafter should be the task of appropriate syllabus com-
mittees. The Committee is unanimous in its opinion as to broad prin-
ciples, but it assumes that in regard to the curriculum, as in regard to
some other matters, there must be room for variation in the determina-
tion of matters of detail.


CHAPTER I
HISTORICAL REVIEW
In order to set in proper perspective our appraisal of the nature and
scope of secondary education in New South Wales today, and to avoid
retracing our steps in regard to specific matters, we have thought it
desirable briefly to review the history of secondary education in this
State.
The most vivid impression arising from any dispassionate review of
our educational history is one of the extent and variety of what has
been achieved in a comparatively short time. Secondary education of
any kind in New South Wales is less than 150 years old and Depart-
mental secondary schools which now enrol the majority of adolescents
are, for the most part, less than 50 years old. Yet today, by law, all
boys and girls attend school to the age of fifteen; during their last
three years at school they may follow a variety of secondary school
courses, and 10,000 of them stay on to present themselves for examina-
tion at the end of five years of secondary education.
It is significant that within the relatively short span of Australian
history falls a period of unprecedented expansion in public education
in many parts of the world. This was the period, furthermore, during
which the whole concept of secondary education was the subject both
of experimentation and of controversy in many countries. Secondary
education in Australia has in many respects benefited from these de-
velopments overseas, but the fact that secondary education in New South
Wales can in any sense be compared with secondary education in other
countries—in Great Britain or the United States of America for example
—sometimes leads both professional critic and the general public to
overlook the fact that so much has been achieved in a young country in
so short a time.
Nevertheless, it may fairly be said that only gradually and implicitly
are we developing a characteristically Australian secondary school. In
New South Wales, as in other Australian states, we have drawn heavily
upon ideas and practices from overseas, particularly from Great Britain.
The derivative nature of our secondary education is the outcome of
our history, but it has its dangers. We have not only inherited or adopted
ideas from other countries, but we have also tended to reproduce their
forms and practices. Few educational practices can be transplanted
successfully to a new social soil. Moreover, when the idea upon which
the practice was originally based becomes outmoded, either through the
passage of time or by social change, or is modified in its new environ-
ment, the practice is likely to become sterile. For example, although
conditions in New South Wales have changed considerably since the
re-organization of secondary education in the State in 1912, the out-
ward forms of secondary education, transplanted at that time for the
most part from Scotland—the Qualifying, the Intermediate and the
Leaving Certificates, for instance—have persisted here years after their
disappearance in the land of their origin.
The persistence of the practices adopted in an earlier day has had
other effects. New and native growth has taken place in secondary
education in this State, but it is not always readily discernible to the
layman, nor can it fully develop amid the dry stems of an earlier
planting.
Nineteenth Century. The “Elite” Concept of Secondary Education.
During the Nineteenth Century, few people in New South Wales or
elsewhere would have spoken about “secondary education”. The term
itself belongs more to the Twentieth Century. Certainly it betokens a
concept of public education which began to emerge, in British com-
munities at least, only as the Nineteenth Century drew to a close. As
a phrase in general use today, “secondary education” assumes that
primary education of some kind has been made available as a definable
first stage in a longer sequence of schooling.
Especially during the first half of the Nineteenth Century, the chief
concern of those interested in education in New South Wales, as in
England, was illiteracy. Even when the scope of the curriculum had
broadened with the years, the extent of schooling provided for most
children was best described in the English term “elementary education”.
For most of the century, so far as education was concerned, public
attention was absorbed in the recurrent controversy in regard to the
relationship of the Government to the schools maintained by the
churches.


Nevertheless, by 1840 there had been firmly established in New South
Wales three schools O which can be regarded as the pioneers of
secondary education in Australia. It is important, however, to bear in
mind the fact that these schools were not “secondary” schools in the
sense that they provided a stage of schooling distinct from and following
upon “primary” schooling. The King’s Schools proposed by Bishop
Broughton( 2 ) were to enrol boys from the age of nine to sixteen. They
were indeed “Grammar” schools in the contemporary English sense
of the term. Their purpose was to give “a good classical, scientific and
religious education to the sons of parents in the middle and higher ranks
of society”. ( 3 )
Secondary education, in this sense, had two chief characteristics. First,
within its milieu of religious education, it was predominantly academic.
The founder of the King’s School looked forward to the day when the
colony would have its own university; the grammar school would
provide the path to that university. The second, and perhaps more
significant, characteristic was that such a school was designed to
serve and reproduce a social as well as an intellectual elite.
This purpose, so far as Bishop Broughton was concerned, was explicit;
he advanced it as one of his arguments in claiming Government subsidy
for the school.
It is true that in some schools, as they developed during the century,
the lines were not so sharply drawn. The personal influence of notable
headmasters and the fluctuating financial position of many of the schools
were enough to ensure this. Yet the assumption that secondary educa-
tion, classical, or later, scientific in content, was a type of schooling
to be enjoyed by the few, was in accord with the educational thought
of the day and in keeping with the socio-economic pattern of the com-
munity. Archdeacon Scott’s early proposal (*) of free places in his
Grammar School for needy children showing ability and industry, had
met with objections typical of Sydney society in 1825. While this atti-
tude of exclusion, against which Scott protested, was not consistently
maintained, the background of secondary education in New South Wales
for the next fifty years was the general assumption that those children
received secondary education whose parents were prepared, and in a
position, to pay for it. This assumption was shared by the Government
which, under changing forms of administration, concerned itself entirely
with elementary education.
Throughout the century, private schools under headmaster-proprietors
were established, often by men of outstanding calibre, but they all
tended to succumb once the initial stimulus of their establishment was
spent, Sydney Grammar School is the unique example at this time of
a school which, after the vicissitudes of its early years, emerged as an
independent, corporate school. The main stream of the history of
secondary education during the remainder of the century, however, is
the story of the foundation and development of schools in nearly every
case under the auspices of a Church,
As a group, these schools owed almost everything to the spirit and
tradition of contemporary English secondary education. They were,
of course, influenced by the increase in number and by the crystalliza-
tion of the tradition of the English public school, which were significant
features of the years after 1840. While it was inevitable that, in a
society less stratified or stable than that in England, this influence should
be modified, it served further to emphasize both the selective nature of
the schools and the classical bias of their curriculum. These schools
enrolled the sons of parents who prized what the schools had to offer,
and who could afford to pay the fees. Their avowed purpose was to
produce the educated Christian gentleman. During most of the century
under review they were the only schools with this avowed purpose.
That they produced, and still produce, many of the leaders in the com-
munity, is their lasting monument.
O These were the King’s School, Lang’s Australian College, and Sydney College,
forerunner of Sydney Grammar School. Note that two King’s Schools were
established, one at Sydney and one at Parramatta, but by 1840 that at Sydney
had been closed.
(*) The first Anglican bishop in Australia.
(*) Johnstone, S.M.: History of the King’s School, p. 77.
(*) Thomas Scott, who first came to Sydney at Secretary to Commissioner Bigge
(1819-21), returned to New South Wales as Archdeacon in 1825. His
proposed school was an attempt to put into effect his plan for the establish-
ment of church schools endowed by a Crown Land grant.


The Public Instruction Act, 1880. A New “Elite”.
In the community at large, the outstanding educational issue continued
to be that of the provision of and responsibility for elementary educa-
tion. The passing of the Public Instruction Act of 1880 meant that
the provision of elementary education was recognized as the responsi-
bility of the whole community, to be discharged through a Minister
of the Crown. At the same time, the Act left churches and other
bodies free to establish and maintain their own schools.
Despite this preoccupation of the public mind, the Act of 1880 did
provide legislative authority for an extension of public school facilities.
In so doing, the Act reflected a change in the socio-economic pattern of
the community and recognized a growing, if sporadic and ill-defined,
demand.
Between 1840 and 1880, the population of New South Wales had not
only increased in numbers, but had changed in composition. Transpor-
tation had been abolished in the former year. In swift succession, the
discovery of gold had brought new and varied elements into the com-
munity, fresh opportunities had attracted artisan migrants, the assisted
migration schemes between 1851 and 1870 had added not only to the
size of the population but also to its variety.
Against this social background, the Public Instruction Act of 1880
provided that, under certain circumstances, a public school might be
proclaimed a “superior public school” in order to provide additional
lessons in higher branches of education. The Act further provided
for the establishment of high schools for boys and for girls.
It must be borne in mind, however, that the passing of the Act did
not mean the establishment of a system of secondary education. The
superior public school provided an ill-defined extension of elementary
education; the high schools were thought of as a not very considerable
supplement to the group of Church and independent schools which
hitherto had provided by far the greater part of senior school facilities.
On the other hand, it must be remembered that, before 1880, in many
schools both public and denominational, where the age of the pupils
and the scope of the curriculum had been limited only by the interest
of the parents and the willingness and capacity of the teacher, many
boys, at least, had pursued studies which today we would regard as
secondary, some even to matriculation level. Thus, from its institution
in the ’sixties, successful candidates at the University Senior Examina-
tion had come from schools which were ostensibly elementary schools.
After 1880, it was from the superior public schools that these candidates
came. Indeed, towards the end of the century, Fort Street School was
presenting more matriculation candidates than all those from the four
high schools.
The brief and precarious life of half the high schools established
between 1880 and 1884 was the result of a complex of immediate
causes, but, in the larger perspective, the history of these schools is to be
recognized as evidence that, for all the aspirations of the few, there did
not yet exist a consistent demand in the community as a whole for
secondary education as it was understood at the time.
In 1883 six high schools had been established, two each, one for boys
and another for girls, in Sydney, Bathurst and Goulburn. In the follow-
ing year, two schools were established in Maitland, But, in 1886, the
high schools in Goulburn closed, followed in the next year by the
Bathurst Boys’ High School. By 1895, only the high schools in Sydney
and Maitland remained.
The immediate causes were not far to seek. In the first place, the
Department of Public Instruction itself was hesitant. It was taken for
granted that a high school should be large, yet the demand for such
schools did not appear to exist. When the first high schools were estab-
lished, they were housed in borrowed or temporary buildings. More-
over, the Department sought to avoid building up enrolments by “im-
properly withdrawing senior pupils from Public Schools”. An entrance
examination was instituted, an examination which proved exacting for
many candidates. Parents who could afford to do so preferred to enrol
their children at the established schools with their greater prestige
and their lack of an entrance examination. For some parents, the high
school fees were still an obstacle, despite the institution of a scholarship
scheme. Such parents were* attracted towards the superior public school
which, with its nominal fees, offered pupils the possibility of success at
the Junior, the Senior and the Public Service examinations.


Behind these circumstances lay more fundamental issues. These early
high schools, in some respects patterned on the Royal Edinburgh High
School, provided for an :lite—an elite of scholastic ability and interest
rather than of social status. They lacked the social appeal of the estab-
lished schools, yet they were too far removed from the predominantly
vocational interests of the general population. Their curriculum, fol-
lowed by pupils at high pressure under the stimulus of examinations
set by the University, offered no special inducements to those parents
who wanted a broad, general education for their children.
The Public Instruction Act of 1880 has been justly regarded as a land-
mark in the history of education in New South Wales. The circum-
stances under which the measure became law and the atmosphere in
which it was administered for the remainder of the century were bound
to throw its weakness into high relief.
The chief preoccupation in 1880 had been the achievement of some
solution of “the denominational issue” and the provision of an adequate
number of public schools throughout the State. The Act made no
provision for an articulated school system, its stages defined and the
smooth transition of pupils assured. Regulations governing the estab-
lishment of superior public schools failed, even by exclusion, to define
primary education. The term “primary school” is not used in the
Act. In the Act and in practice the high schools stood in isolation.
If there is any relevance in the frequent description of the Act, during
later years, as a measure which provided “the ladder from the kinder-
garten to the university”, it must be said that it was a ladder into which
some of the lower rungs had been fitted, but in which there were wide
gaps placing the higher rungs beyond the reach of some climbers.
What is equally significant is that it was a ladder with no firm resting
place at the top.
It was not unnatural that an administration confronted with a task
of great dimensions and full of new problems should have concentrated
upon the administrative aspects of that task. Nor is it surprising that the
officers concerned tended to measure their success in quantitative terms.
School enrolments, pupil attendance and examination results provided
ready criteria. In terms of enrolments, which increased steadily, the
Act was successful ; in terms of consistent attendance of pupils, either
at public or private schools, the Act was a failure. Meanwhile, despite
the misgivings of individual teachers, examination results tended to
become ends in themselves. There was no real scrutiny of the curriculum
or of the methods employed in obtaining examination results. Under
such conditions, the success of schools attended by adolescents, what-
ever the type of school, came to be measured in the public mind by
the achievement of pupils in examinations, especially the Junior and the
Senior Public Examinations.
Knibbs-Turaer Report.
For two decades, there was little public criticism of this situation.
In 1901, however, under the leadership of Francis Anderson, (*) there
was an outburst of criticism and education once more became a political
issue. A Royal Commission was appointed in 1902, the Commissioners
being Messrs. G. H. Knibbs and J. W. Turner.(*)
The Report of the Commissioners was published in two sections. The
first examined in detail the serious defects of the elementary education
provided in New South Wales, It is of interest to note that the second
section was the first public report on “secondary education”, as such,
in this country.
For secondary education, the significance of the report on elementary
education was twofold: not only were pupils ill-prepared for secondary
education, but there was a lack of co-ordination between the two stages
of education. By way of contrast, the Commissioners pointed to France
and Germany where “the whole educational machinery has organic
unity”. ( 3 )
O Professor of Philosophy in the University of Sydney. He had already
exercised a great influence upon a number of teachers and officers of the
Department of Public Instruction who were his students.
(*) Mr. G. H. Knibbs had been a lecturer at the University of Sydney and Mr.
J. W. Turner Headmaster of Fort Street Model School and Principal of the
Teachers’ Training College. After their Report had been submitted, Knibbs
was appointed Superintendent of Technical Education and Turner Assistant
Under Secretary of the Department of Education. Within a short time
Knibbs resigned to become Federal Statistician and Turner was appointed
Superintendent of Technical Education in his place.
( 8 ) Report of the Commissioners, Mainly on Secondary Education. Summarised
Report, p. 6.


This lack of co-ordination they found not only between primary and
secondary education, but also within secondary education itself. “The
only factor really tending to give unity to secondary teaching is a com-
mon endeavour to meet the requirements of the Public Examinations
held by the University and the matriculation standard of that Uni-
versity”. O In the absence of a clear recognition of the aims and
spirit of secondary education, concentration on attaining success at such
examinations led to “cramming” and to a distortion of the curriculum
as well as of the method of its teaching. ( 2 )
Secondary education in New South Wales, considered the Commis-
sioners, had failed to achieve the virtues of leading education systems
overseas. On the one hand, it lacked the scope and depth of secondary
education in some European countries; on the other, it had none of the
spontaneity and interest of American secondary education. Even if
preparation for the University were the sole purpose of secondary edu-
cation, the defects of the schools were apparent. “At the present time
the state of preparation of the average students on entering the Univer-
sity leaves much to be desired and valuable time is frittered away and
opportunity wasted by the necessity of imparting elementary forms of
knowledge which should have been acquired in the secondary school.
No one who has given the question the slightest thought will assume
that the remedy lies in the University arbitrarily raising the standard
of entrance. What is needed, is the intermediary school, sufficiently
equipped as regards the personnel of its teaching staff and as regards
its scientific and other educational apparatus to properly discharge the
functions of secondary education.” ( 8 )
In both sections of their Report, the Commissioners deplored the lack
of properly trained teachers, both primary and secondary, in schools of
all types.
The Commissioners envisaged a scheme of education which would
provide “elementary” education for all pupils to the age of ten years,
followed by two years during which pupils would either be afforded
“primary” education or be prepared to undertake “secondary” educa-
tion at the age of twelve. There would be a measure of interchange
between the two streams. Those who, at twelve years of age, proved
unsuitable for secondary education would proceed to “higher primary”
education extending to the age of fourteen. These pupils would provide
the artisans and workmen of society. There should be “characteristic
differences” between this education and the junior stage of secondary
education. Secondary education should provide the pathway for those
whose prospects lay either in the higher levels of industrial and com-
mercial life or in the professions.
The tidiness of the Commissioners’ scheme was made possible by
the assumption, common even in Australia at the turn of the century,
that it was appropriate to determine in advance the social and eco-
nomic future of adolescents. The Commissioner manifestly accepted
this view though, in other parts of their Report, they also expressed the
view, natural in a new and vigorous society, that secondary education
could offer “a career open to talent”. Because they were untroubled
by modern knowledge of the significance of interests and special apti-
tudes and because they had at their disposal only the traditional methods
of assessing scholastic ability, the question did not arise as to whether
such pre-determination of the future of young people, even if acceptable,
was possible.
“To a limited extent” they wrote, “the higher forms of education
of all countries lend themselves to the accentuation of social differences
—a feature most intensely marked in the English ‘Public School’. Edu-
cational reform in countries where it has been most conspicuous tends
rather in the direction of segregating the talented portion of the popula-
tion, without reference to their origin; and it endeavours not only to
afford a cultivation of the intellect and will but also to stimulate courtesy
of manner and distinguished address. The ideal aim of secondary and
higher education in a State such as this will, of course, tend rather
toward the establishment of an aristocracy of intellect and character,
than to the maintenance of an exclusive caste founded upon birth or
wealth.” O
(’) Full Report, p. 31.
( 2 ) Cf. Summarised Report, pp. 52-53.
( 3 ) Summarised Report, p. 37.
(*) Summarised Report, p. 10.


The Commissioners saw in the development of a system of State
secondary schools the hope of the future. The State, they pointed
out, could establish and maintain an adequate scheme of teacher train-
ing for their schools, in this, as in other matters, Departmental schools
providing a pattern for all. f 1)
Peter Board. The Reorganization of 1911-12.
That there was no immediate administrative response to the Com-
missioners’ Report in the field of secondary education was, in part, an
outcome of the order of emphasis in the recommendations of the Com-
missioners. The first task was clearly that of reorganizing the administra-
tion of education. The next was that of defining the scope and purpose
of the primary school and of infusing a new vitality into its curriculum.
The reorganization, indeed, it could be said, the new beginning, of
secondary education within the Department of Public Instruction took
place in 1911-12. In part, that reorganization was derived from the
Knibbs-Turner Report but, to a greater extent, it sprang from the
views of Mr. Peter Board, the new Director of Education. Board had
been one of the officers within the Department who had been critical
of conditions and practices at the end of the century. His report, as
Inspector of Schools, in 1896, marked him out as a man of imagination,
with clear ideas as to what should be done. These ideas were modified
and developed by his experience overseas in 1905 and 1909. It was
fortunate that, in 1905, as part of the reorganization within the Depart-
ment following the Knibbs-Turner Report, Board was appointed Director
of Education.
In 1905 “district schools” were established in fifteen country towns.
These schools were primary schools to which was added a secondary
stage. The secondary classes were designed to provide two years of
secondary education for pupils drawn from primary schools in the sur-
rounding district. Perhaps their first purpose was to afford boys and girls
in country districts the opportunity of preparing to enter the teachers’
college. The curriculum provided academic subjects. Manual Arts and
Physical Science and, in addition, activities such as Agriculture, regarded
as being “in harmony with the local industry”. By 1910 these schools
numbered twenty-eight.
From the outset, Board’s view of secondary education was wider than
that exemplified in the existing high schools. He looked forward to being
able to provide secondary education for all boys and girls who were
willing to stay at school. The majority would not wish to proceed to
the University or would be unable to remain at school for four or five
years beyond the primary stage. Even of those who remained to com-
plete a full course some would not intend to enter the University. It
was necessary, he declared, “to guard against such a course of instruc-
tion as will produce a drifting of young people into merely clerical or
professional occupations. . . In a young country calling for the develop-
ment of its natural resources and with its manufacturing industries yet
in their infancy, the aim of secondary education should be to combine
the liberal elements of a curriculum with such studies as will furnish
the student with a body of knowledge, habits of thought and trend of
interests that have a distinctly practical outcome.” ( 2 )
It was inevitable that, despite his very real interest in higher educa-
tion, Board should have fought against the assumption that the require-
ments of the university entrance examination should determine the
content and orientation of the secondary school curriculum. He insisted
that the University was “not necessarily an authority on the highest
form of education represented by the secondary school”. He repeatedly
expressed the view that a curriculum of adequate depth and with its
width determined by the interests of pupils should, in turn, determine
the nature of the examination. In 1905 the reverse was the case. In
particular, Board criticised the retention of Latin as a compulsory sub-
ject for matriculation since it was of interest to, and of significance for,
only some of the few who would proceed to the University.
Board’s view of the curriculum and spirit of the secondary school was
based on the belief that its greatest contribution lay in the building of
character and in preparation for a responsible citizenship. Part of that
(*) Summarised Report, p. 56.
( 2 ) Annual Report of the Under Secretary and Director of Education, 1905, p. 31.
* 7543—2


character-building lay in work. During his visit to the United States
he had been impressed by the public support of secondary education
as an. integral part of the necessary education of every boy and girl,
but he was not so impressed by the quality of the work done. He
observed that “there should be no room in a Secondary School, especially
a public supported Secondary School, for the boy who fails to put his
best effort into his work”.C)
In 1910, new regulations, drawn up to become effective in 1911,
introduced certain important changes in secondary education:
The Qualifying Certificate was instituted as the basis of entry to
high school. A course of four years was established leading, at the
end of two years, to the Intermediate Certficate Examination and,
at the end of the fourth year, to the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion. Fees in high schools were abolished, and a system of scholar-
ships providing textbooks and materials was established.
The institution of the Qualifying Certificate reinforced the new prim-
ary school syllabus in defining the scope of primary education. At the
same time it provided the means of at least administrative co-ordination
between primary and secondary education. It is to be noted, however,
that while a secondary school curriculum could now be drawn up on the
assumption of the attainment of the Qualifying Certificate by the pupils
concerned, it was to prove a curriculum designed in large measure
without reference to what had gone before in the primary school.
The Courses of Study for High Schools published in 1911, implied
the establishment of different types of high school and of “sides” within
a high school —general, technical, commercial and domestic science. At
the same time it emphasized the fact that, whatever the extent of
differentiation between the several types of course, the same core of
liberal studies was to be maintained in each high school.
Board’s Introduction to the Courses of Study is the most significant
feature of the publication. Its significance lies both in its exposition
of Board’s conception of the spirit and purpose of the high school and
in the fact that later events conspired to defeat some of his hopes.
“The purpose of the High School is the education of boys and
girls from 13 to 18 years of age. It fulfils this purpose by enabling
the pupil to acquire such knowledge and skill, combined with train-
ing in their use, and such habits of thought and conduct as will
form the foundation for the private and public responsibilities of
adult age.
“Pupils will be admitted to the High Schools upon completing the
primary course of instruction and obtaining the Qualifying Certifi-
cate testifying to their fitness to enter upon higher instruction.
“It should be understood by pupils who thus pass into the
higher school that the transition is one that imposes on them a
new set of obligations differing in character from those which
marked the passage from class to class in the Primary School. The
transition is marked by the call for more self-reliant effort on the
part of the pupil, and with each succeeding year of the higher
course, the character of the school should be such as to demand
from him a steadily increasing degree of self-dependence.”( 2 )
Whereas Peter Board had not only written the preface, but had also
contributed much of the body of the new Course of Instruction for
Primary Schools, he wrote only the preface for the Courses of Study
for High Schools. The individual courses of study were written by
subject-matter specialists plainly aware of the university entrance require-
ments. Read in isolation, the several syllabuses became little more than
a series of prescriptions for the new Intermediate Certificate and Leav-
ing Certificate Examinations.
It is of interest therefore to note that, within two years of the first
publication of the Courses of Study for High Schools, new editions con-
tained a much reduced version of Board’s Introduction and that, not
long after his retirement, it disappeared altogether. The secondary
curriculum became, and in respect of the Leaving Certificate has re-
mained, a collection of syllabuses of study of separate subjects.
In the same year, 1911, Board took up with the University of Sydney
the question of the new Leaving Certificate and, with both the University
C) Board, P.; A Report following upon Observations of American Education
(1909), p. 26.
( a ) Courses of Study for High Schools, 1911, p. 5.


and the independent schools, the question of the constitution of a volun-
tary body to co-ordinate secondary education, including the determina-
tion of the content and standards of examinations and the qualifications
of secondary school teachers. The discussions were concluded while
Board was absent overseas, and, although his main purpose was
achieved, it was not without some concession to university opinion. The
University was prepared to recognize the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion, provided that “the University should have the right to nominate
for appointment by the Minister of Public Instruction, the examiners
in the matriculation subjects, and that an Advisory Council be formed
to deal with the work of secondary schools, in which Council a propor-
tion of the members be representatives of the Senate”.O
In 1912 the University Amendment Act gave statutory status to the
agreement. It provided, inter alia, for;
(1) The recognition of a pass in required subjects at the Leaving
Certificate Examination as qualifying a candidate for matricu-
lation.
(2) The constitution of a Board of Examiners of eight persons
comprising four representatives of the Department of Public
Instruction and four of the University.
(3) Representation of the Government on the Senate of the Uni-
versity.
(4) The institution of one hundred public exhibitions for matricu-
lants.
(5) An increase in the statutory endowment of the University.
In the same year, the Bursary Endowment Act was passed. Under
this Act, a fund was established to enable bursaries to be awarded at
the secondary and at the university level. The award of these bursaries
and the responsibility of administering the other provisions of the Act
were placed in the hands of a board comprising representatives of the
Department, and of the University and the schools. The Act enabled
non-Departmental schools both to present candidates and to enrol bur-
sars provided that they were registered by the Bursary Endowment
Board. Registration was based on inspection on behalf of the Board.
The High School; Systematic Provision for the New Elite.
The two Acts of 1912 provided, for the first time in New South
Wales, the statutory basis for an administrative framework of secondary
education throughout the community. First, a statutory link between
Departmental and non-Departmental secondary schools was provided.
Second, the way was opened for some co-ordination of curriculum and
standards among secondary schools of all types on the basis of what
was ostensibly a school rather than a university examination. Third,
the new administrative structure of secondary education, already based
on the defined completion of the primary school course, was firmly
linked with the University. These were noteworthy achievements.
At the same time, two facts cannot be overlooked. First, this ad-
ministrative structure provided the means of secondary education for
a small minority of talented pupils whose ability could be measured
in terms of academic attainments. This was most apparent in Depart-
mental secondary schools where incoming pupils had had to gain the
Qualifying Certificate. Of 22,000 pupils in the last primary school year
in 1911, 2,465 entered high school in 1912. The First Year enrolment
in high and intermediate high schools did not reach 4,000 till 1920, and
in that year it was drawn from a generation leaving primary school which
exceeded 46,000.
Secondary education was still the education of an “elite”. The criteria
of selection during the Nineteenth Century had been the ability and
willingness of parents to pay fees, though many of those enrolled were
pupils of high ability. The pupils entering the new high schools estab-
lished by Board were selected on the basis of their scholastic attain-
ments and ability, irrespective of means. The benefits of the Bursary
Endowment Act, the abolition of high school fees and the establishment
of university exhibitions went some distance towards ensuring that a
career was open, through secondary and tertiary education, to “the lad
o’ pairts”, even of poor circumstances. He and his fellow pupils in
high schools constituted a new “elite”.
C) Minutes of the Senate of the University of Sydney, May, 1911.


In the second place, the educational outcome of these major develop-
ments was that, while in both Departmental and non-Departmental
schools it was recognized that the majority of pupils embarking upon
secondary education would not enter, indeed attempt to enter, the
University, the Leaving Certificate, preparation for which had become
the dominant consideration in the requirements of the syllabus, took
the place of the University’s matriculation examination.! 1 ) The terms
of the University’s agreement to the new regime ensured that this aca-
demic emphasis would be strong. Furthermore, the establishment of
schemes of bursaries and exhibitions implied both the central significance
of external examinations and a high degree of concentration on the
requirements of those examinations. The latter, for all their short-
comings, are the only form of test which appears to be acceptable to
the public, especially when that public are anxious parents of strenuously
competing candidates.
This problem remains with us today. How can a system of bursaries
or other grants to assist able students in need be administered without
the maintenance of examinations which are external to a particular
school? If even some of the members of a year or form are competitors
for such awards, how can a school avoid the pressures upon the content
and spirit of its curriculum which are exerted, not only by the require-
ments and procedures of the external examination, but also by the very
real interests of the pupils and parents concerned?
Before passing on from 1911-12, it is of interest to note, in the light
of a recommendation later to be made by the present Committee, that
another element in Board’s plan for the high school quickly disappeared.
The significance of the following paragraph from the Introduction to
the Courses of Study for High Schools is to be found in the fact that,
originally, only four years were required for the Leaving Certificate
course;
“When it is found practicable, a course for a fifth year may, with
the sanction of the Director of Education, be provided for students
who have gained the Leaving Certificate and wish to make more
advanced study of one or more subjects. This course will as a rule
be possible only in the largest schools, and it will be necessary for
pupils who desire such instruction to attend for the fifth year at
such schools. Such an extended course will be specially serviceable
to those who propose to follow up specialised courses of study
afterwards at higher educational institutions.”
The Superior Public School: Provision for other Adolescents.
Simultaneously with the reorganization of the high schools, the regu-
lations of 1910 gave more definite form and purpose to the work of the
superior public schools.
In 1912 a syllabus for these schools was published. They were re-
garded as day continuation schools but their curriculum, while laying
stress upon the importance of English, Arithmetic, History and Geo-
graphy, clearly had in mind the fact that the boys and girls concerned
would, in two years’ time, be earning their living in industry and
commerce or, in the case of many girls, be engaged in home duties.
The certificate awarded on the completion of the course, especially
the Commercial Certificate, soon raised doubts in the minds of em-
ployers. Were such certificates equivalent to the Intermediate Certi-
ficate? As a result, the syllabus of work of the commercial superior
public schools was revised in 1917. The course was extended to three
years, at the end of which the Intermediate Certificate, embracing
commercial subjects, was awarded.
The Intermediate Certificate—the Common Goal.
In 1925, arising out of the same question from employers, and the
anxiety of those concerned with this rapidly growing group of post-
primary schools for some parity of status with the junior stage of
secondary schools, the courses of the junior technical and domestic
science schools were extended to three years, and the Intermediate
Certificate, with appropriate variations in course requirements, was
awarded to all pupils who completed the three-year course.
O The Junior and Senior Public Examinations were abandoned in


The change did much to give status to the post-primary school.
Nevertheless, the apparently simple procedure of instituting the Inter-
mediate Certificate as the terminal examination for these schools created
its own problems. Though the Intermediate Certificate Examination
had, in practice, become the terminal examination for many high school
pupils, it had been designed to mark an intermediate point in a complete
high school course and the content of the syllabuses of work continued
to reflect that intention.
Yet the pupils who were allotted to the super-primary schools were
those who, in the majority of cases, had been judged to be unable to
attempt a high school course. In 1923 the Qualifying Certificate Ex-
amination had been replaced by two tests —the High School Entrance
Examination and the test known as the “Permit to Enrol”—which all
other pupils must satisfy if they were to be enrolled in a junior technical,
commercial or domestic science school. The candidates for this test were
generally of lower scholastic ability than those who had passed the
High School Entrance Examination. Having been so differentiated,
they passed on to study, in accordance with the syllabus for high schools,
English, History, Geography, Mathematics and Science, though they
were not required to study foreign languages. It is true that the wind
was tempered to the shorn lamb by discerning teachers; it is equally
true that the orientation of the syllabuses in the subjects mentioned,
overshadowed as they were by the subsequent requirements for the
Leaving Certificate Examination, did not provide the most suitable
course which could have been devised for pupils who were largely of
non-academic bent. Part of the reason for the measure of success gained
by these pupils at the Intermediate Certificate Examination was the skill
and industry of their teachers; part of it, however, derived from the fact
that a number of pupils of good ability failed to pass the High School
Entrance Examination or, having passed it, would not commit them-
selves to pursuing the full high school course.
The Basis of Selection for Secondary Education.
At this point, it may be of interest to trace the history of the attempts,
from 1911 onwards, to devise a satisfactory method of selecting pupils
for secondary education. As we have seen, the Qualifying Certificate
was established in 1911; it was intended to indicate fitness to undertake
high school studies. The increasing number of pupils remaining at
school beyond the primary stage, who were clearly unfit to undertake
studies in the selective high schools led, in 1923, to the replacement of
the Qualifying Certificate Examination by two examinations—the “Per-
mit to Enrol” and the “High School Entrance” Examinations.
By 1930, the continued increase in the numbers of candidates and
the administrative difficulties of providing two examinations and satis-
factory means of marking the scripts, led to the institution, once more,
of a single examination. All candidates for enrolment beyond the
primary stage sat for the “Primary Final Examination”. The scripts
of candidates seeking admission to high school and for the award of
bursaries were marked externally; those of all the others were marked
in their own schools.
Though introduced on each occasion on administrative grounds, the
changes in procedure arose, in part, from dissatisfaction of a more sig-
nificant kind. None of the examinations proved effective as a means of
selecting those pupils who were likely to be successful in secondary
school studies with any considerably academic content. It was not
uncommon for as many as one-fifth of the entrants to a high school,
selected on the basis of these tests, to fail at the end of First Year and
it was common for others to proceed to Second Year only by abandon-
ing the study of Latin,
It was perhaps not until after 1930 that it came to be recognized that
this problem was not peculiar to New South Wales and that the predic-
tive value of a single examination at the end of the primary school course
must always be low. Research studies which were inaugurated in the
Department of Education after 1935 demonstrated that that predictive
value could be increased by combining the examination with the results
of an intelligence test. The same studies revealed a considerable degree
of unreliability in the form and administration of the Primary Final
Examination itself.
In 1938, the Department reverted to a dual form of test. The examina-
tion was retained as the High School Entrance Examination, in Sydney
and Newcastle, for candidates who sought admission to high schools


Year
Last
Primary
Grade
High
Super-
Primary*
Unaccounted - ) -
Number
Percentage
1915
30,741
3,567
2,635
24,539
80
1925
56,267
6,300
16,752
33,215
59
1935
55,218
12,320
20,252
22,646
41
1945
36,434
15,808
19,746
880
2-6
1955
42,572
16,998
26,572
-998
-2-3
where places were limited, and the entrants were selected. For all
other candidates, irrespective of the school or course they sought to
enter, admission was based upon the results of an intelligence test, com-
bined with an assessment of their attainments in the Sixth (i.e., the last
primary) Grade. Especially in borderline cases, the cumulative record
of the pupil throughout his primary school course was taken into ac-
count. With experience, this combination of criteria was reduced to a
formula and, in 1940, was applied to the High School Entrance Examina-
tion also.
Finally, in 1943, the High School Entrance Examination was discon-
tinued and the selection of candidates, where that was necessary, was
made on the recommendation of committees comprising the inspectors
and head teachers in each high school area. Taking the wishes of
parents and the recommendations of primary school principals into
account, the committees based their recommendations upon the primary
school attainments of candidates in English and Mathematics, the re-
sults of intelligence tests and any special features indicated in the school
record of the candidates. Parents had, and still have, a right of appeal
to the Department of Education for a review of the decisions of these
committees.
It is fair to say that the method adopted in 1943 has proved more
effective than any earlier method, but it must also be said that the
method still falls short of the standard of effectiveness necessary to
justify selection of pupils at the end of the primary school stage. Too
many pupils admitted to “selective” high schools prove to be ill-placed
and there is a considerable number, excluded at the point of selection
who, admitted to non-selective schools, later prove their suitability
for academic secondary school studies by qualifying to enter Fourth
Year and by proceeding to gain the Leaving Certificate. The irony
of the situation is that, in order to do so, many of these pupils obtain
admission to the Fourth Year of the very schools they were not allowed
to enter in First Year.
In a later chapter we will examine the question of whether the root
of the problem lies deeper than the form and method of any selection
test.
The New Secondary School Population.
The 1925 decision O was made at a time when significant changes
were taking place in post-primary enrolments. Both the development
of the post-primary schools and the 1925 decision itself contributed to
these changes. In the table below, First Year enrolment figures are
given for high and intermediate high and for other post-primary schools
in the Department of Education, for each tenth year, 1915-1955. With
each of these enrolments is given the enrolment of the last primary
grade for the preceding year.
Table I
Enrolments in First Post-Primary Year, 1915-1955
In 1915 the high schools had not long been established and the
superior public schools were relatively few and undeveloped. The great
majority of pupils at the end of their primary school course either
remained in primary school or left school altogether. Eighty per cent,
of the pupils leaving primary school in 1914 were otherwise unaccounted
for. Within ten years, the development of the super-primary schools
and the more effective administration of the compulsory attendance law
* Until 1943; thenceforward termed “secondary”.
t Left school or repeating last primary year; in 1955 probably repeating first
secondary year.
t 1) See p. 20.


were reflected in the unprecedented expansion of enrolments in the
super-primary schools. Though high school enrolments doubled during
the same period, their entrants remained a select minority of those
leaving primary school.
During the period 1925-1935, there was an increase, within the Depart-
ment of Education, in the number of post-primary schools and in post-
primary enrolments, but no major changes took place in curricular
organization. Transition to the common Intermediate Certificate was
not abrupt; as late as 1932 candidates were presented for the Superior
Public School Certificate Examination. Nevertheless, in the same year
the first candidates from domestic science and from technical schools
were presented for the Leaving Certificate Examination, having com-
pleted a course of five years’ secondary school studies.
By 1935, the effects of the adoption of a common Intermediate Cer-
tificate Examination were fully manifest. That certificate had come to
serve three purposes. First, in high schools and in many non-Depart-
mental schools it continued to serve its original purpose of marking an
intermediate stage,in the full secondary course; second, it served as a
basis of transfer from intermediate high schools and, increasingly, in
junior technical and domestic science schools to senior courses of
secondary study; third, the examination served as a terminal examina-
tion for all those who could attempt it but who thereupon intended to
leave school. In this connection it is of interest to note that, with
the statutory school leaving age then at fourteen, many pupils remained
at school in order to obtain the certificate.
By 1935, the growth in the “non-academic” secondary school popula-
tion was reflected in the Departmental schools, not only by the increase
in enrolments in super-primary schools, but by an increase in the num-
ber of country high and intermediate high schools which enrolled post-
primary pupils of all types. The same trend was also to be seen in
non-Departmental schools, especially in those maintained by the Roman
Catholic Church.
Considerable strain was therefore imposed upon the secondary school
system. The main stream of secondary education had been designed to
provide for a selected group with academic talent, but secondary schools
now had to provide in the junior years for a greater number of pupils
who, while they would never attempt the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion, had to face the Intermediate Certificate Examination in company
with their more able fellows. This situation was met in part by an
increase in the number of subjects recognized for examination purposes
for the Intermediate Certificate. It was also met by more diligent
teaching of pupils of average ability.
It is not surprising that there had been a growing demand at this
time for a review of all the problems associated with secondary educa-
tion, Traditionally, however, interest concentrated in the secondary
schools preparing pupils for examinations under the authority of the
Board of Examiners. There were those who were critical of the standards
attained at the Leaving Certificate Examination. On the other hand
there was a more general feeling that the requirements for university
entrance, through their effect upon the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion, exercised too great an influence upon the whole secondary school
curriculum. These critics pointed to the increasing number of pupils
entering secondary schools whose abilities and interests would never lead
them to the University. Even then it was not fully realized that the
development of the super-primary schools was one sign of the growth
of a secondary school population not contemplated in the reorganization
of public secondary schools little more than twenty years before. The
junior technical school, for example, was still officially known as a
“super-primary” school, and there was a tendency to regard the question
of its place in the total pattern of schools merely as an administrative
problem for the Department of Education. The fact was that schools
and courses for adolescents had developed in New South Wales after
the First World War without any comprehensive review of the implica-
tions of that development. It is unfortunate that, when the review of
secondary school problems 'Was ultimately made, it was undertaken
predominantly from the point of view of the established secondary
schools, i.e., those presenting candidates for the Leaving Certificate
Examination.


Review of Secondary Education.
In 1933, the Minister for set up a committee to examine
problems associated with secondary education. The committee sub-
mitted its report in the following year. Though a number of matters
were discussed, the only positive recommendation made by the com-
mittee was that a board, on which schools should be represented, should
be established for the control and development of secondary education.
A provisional council was constituted pending the passage of legisla-
tion. It comprised twenty-nine members, including members of the
Board of Examiners. It was also widely representative of the profes-
sions, industry, commerce and the teachers. The provisional council
recommended as the basis of amending legislation the replacement of
the Board of Examiners by a Board of Secondary School Studies. It
further recommended:—
“That the organization of the secondary school curriculum should
be directed towards the giving of a general secondary education in
four years, with provision for further advanced study in subsequent
years.
To this end certain modifications are now advisable, viz.:
(a) Without changing more than is necessary the names of
existing examinations and with consequent avoidance of
confusion in the mind of the public, there should still be
an Intermediate Certificate Examination and a Leaving
Certificate Examination, but the latter should be divided
into two parts called respectively the Leaving Certificate
and the Higher Leaving Certificate, of which parts the
first should be taken at the end of the 4th year of the
school course and should be a pass examination only,
and the Higher one not earlier than one year after.
The Intermediate Certificate Examination should bS
continued for pupils whose schooling does not extend be-
yond the Third Year. For these, such modifications as
may be deemed necessary should be made.
(b) The possession of the Leaving Certificate should be evi-
dence of a good general secondary education completed in
a regular school course of at least four years.
( c ) The possession of the Higher Leaving Certificate should
imply an advanced study pursued in subjects selected as
most appropriate to the individual intelligence, taste and
interests of the pupil. That study should have lasted
for a period of at least one year after the Leaving Certifi-
cate grade has been reached.
The University should be asked, if the above modifications are
adopted, to specify the conditions under which the revised form of
Leaving Certificate will be accepted as qualifying for matriculation
and the award of exhibitions.”
Legislative Amendments of 1936.
In 1936, the University and University Colleges Act was amended to
provide for a Board of Secondary School Studies. ( 2 ) In terms of this
amendment the Board comprised representatives of the Senate of the
University of Sydney, the Department of Public Instruction, and teachers
both from Departmental and non-Departmental secondary schools. The
first of the duties of the Board as defined in the Act is:—
“(«) To make recommendations to the Minister in relation to mat-
ters connected with or concerning the conduct of examinations
for the leaving certificate and the higher leaving certificate,
and the award of such certificates.”
At the same time the Public Instruction Act, 1880, was amended so
as to constitute an Advisory Council of Education. ( 3 ) The membership
of this Council comprised the Vice-Chancellor of the University of
Sydney, the members of the Board of Secondary School Studies, the
President of the N.S.W. Teachers’ Federation, the Director of the
N.S.W. Conservatorium of Music, the Apprenticeship Commissioner,
one representative of each Technical Education Advisory Council,
together with ten members appointed by the Governor. This section
of the Act was proclaimed in 1937 and the ten appointed members
C) Hon. D. H. Drummond.
( 2 ) See University and University Colleges Act, 1900-52, Va,
( s ) See Public Instruction Act, 1880, Section 18c.


proved to be representative of commercial and industrial interests,
women’s organizations, the professions and the Federation of Parents
and Citizens’ Associations.
The Advisory Council held only two meetings and thereafter fell into
disuse. The precise reasons why the Council became moribund are
difficult to determine. It is possible that there was a lack of lively
Government interest in the potentialities of the Council. In practice,
the Council seemed unable itself to raise matters for discussion. On
the other hand, the composition of the Council limited the number
of matters which could be remitted to it. The majority of the Council
were ex officio members whose responsibilities limited their freedom
of action, whilst most of the members who were appointed by the
Governor were representatives of associations which already had direct
access to the Minister.
From the point of view of this Survey, the significance of the 1936
amendments lies in the establishment of the Board of Secondary School
studies. Since the question of the institution of the Leaving Certificate
and the Higher Leaving Certificate remained a matter for debate, a sig-
nificant feature of the new Board lay in the representation given to
schools, though it was a representation less comprehensive than had
been recommended by the Provisional Advisory Council.
It must also be borne in mind that, although the Board later became
involved in discussions concerning the Intermediate Certificate Examina-
tion, the specific task of the Board was to advise the Minister in regard
to the final examinations for the full secondary school course, to deter-
mine the syllabuses of work for those examinations, and to conduct
them. In short, “secondary school studies’’ were still being thought of
as studies leading to an examination which would be accepted by the
University for purposes of matriculation. While it was inevitable that,
with the Intermediate Certificate in common use in both secondary and
super-primary schools, the decisions of the Board should affect all
pupils who remained at school for the third post-primary year, the
Board was not constituted in a manner that would enable it to advise
the Minister or to assume any responsibility for the education of the
whole range of adolescents.
Recommendations of the Board of Secondary School Studies.
One of the immediate concerns of the Board of Secondary School
Studies was the basis upon which the University of Sydney would be
prepared to recognize the new Leaving Certificates as satisfying the
requirements of matriculation. It was not until 1942 that the Board knew
that, if the two certificates were introduced, it would be the Higher
Leaving Certificate that the University would accept as meeting matricu-
lation requirements. The Board therefore submitted proposals in re-
gard to the machinery of the Leaving and Higher Leaving Certificate
Examinations. These proposals involved the discontinuance of both the
Intermediate and the Leaving Certificate Examinations then in operation.
Intermediate Certificate. In its consideration of the recommenda-
tions of the Board, the chief concern of Cabinet seems to have been
with the effect of these recommendations upon the Intermediate Certifi-
cate Examination, By 1943 the trends already noted O had become
well-established. The Intermediate Certificate Examination had, in
practice, become the terminal examination in secondary education for
a large proportion of the adolescent school population. Cabinet was
reluctant to approve the discontinuance of this examination, even if that
discontinuance would open the way to a more satisfactory secondary
school course for those who would proceed to the Leaving Certificate
Examination. ( 2 )
At the same time, with the possibility of the two Leaving Certificate
Examinations in mind. Cabinet was sensitive to the need for reducing
the total burden of examinations likely to fall upon school pupils. It
therefore sought the opinion of the Board of Secondary School Studies
regarding the possibility of organizing some form of internal examination
for both the existing Intermediate Certificate Examination and the pro-
posed new Leaving Certificate Examination.
O See pp. 20-21 and pp. 22-23.
( 2 ) It should be observed that in 1943, Cabinet did not have before it the results
of a comprehensive survey of the who’e post-primary situation. In terms
of its constitution, the chief concern of the Board of Secondary School
Studies was, especially in its early years, with the pupil who was likely to
proceed to the Leaving Certificate Examination.


The Board debated these proposals and advised the Minister that
modified forms of examinations were possible at these levels. It recom-
mended that at these examinations, three subjects, including English,
should be tested by external examination and the remainder accredited
by schools. Under these conditions, candidates would pass the exami-
nation as a whole by meeting requirements in a total of four* subjects,
a minimum of two being passed at the external examination.
Though Cabinet deferred consideration of the introduction of the new
Leaving and Higher Leaving Certificate Examination, it accepted the
Board’s further proposal as applied to the Intermediate Certificate
Examination. The revised form of this examination was introduced in
1944 and at the same time the grading of passes at “A” and “B”
standards was discontinued.
During the next few years, schools gained experience in the exercise
of their new responsibilities, and the machinery of the examination took
a definite form. The mixture of internal and external examinations,
however, was considered by the schools to involve too great a dis-
ruption of their work and, after discussions which commenced in 1948,
the Board approved of a wholly accredited examination to commence
in 1949.
From time to time thereafter, problems associated with the institution
of the two Leaving Cerificates were discussed by the Board of Secondary
School Studies. The Board was aware of the growing number of candi-
dates at the Intermediate Certificate Examination; it was also concerned
with the question of standards at the matriculation level. It considered
that a secondary school course leading to the Leaving Certificate must
be based on principles different from those which would underlie studies
designed to prepare for university entrance.
A New Approach.
As a result of these discussions, the Board in 1946 again presented to
the Minister ( x ) and Cabinet proposals in regard to the institution of the
two Leaving Certificates. The 1946 recommendations differed from
those of 1943 in that they were based on an explicit statement of the
nature of secondary education as it had come to be accepted by many
people.
“Throughout the discussions,’’ the memorandum stated, “the Board
has meant by ‘Secondary Education’ the education of all boys and
girls from about the age of 12 till the time when they leave school for
work or for some form of tertiary education. Throughout the discus-
sions, too, the Board has agreed that the main principles which should
govern the secondary curriculum are probably jour in number:—
(1) Secondary education should be adapted to the needs and
capacities of adolescents.
(2) It should be related closely to the interests and experiences of
life.
(3) It should be ‘all round’, at the same time providing adequate
opportunities for the pursuit of individual interests.
(4) It should not be regarded merely as preparation for tertiary
education; it should stimulate in all pupils a desire to go on
learning.”
The Board then submitted, as the basis of a new approach to secondary
education, the following proposals:—
“(1) Secondary education should be organized in the two stages —
general secondary education and higher secondary education.
(2) The first or general stage should be four years in duration, i.e.,
from about age 12 to about age 16.
(3) The first stage should be based for all pupils on a core cur-
riculum comprising English, Social Science, Mathematics,
Science, Physical Education, Music, Art, Crafts.
(4) In addition, in the first stage there should be optional subjects
such as foreign languages, technical, home science, agricultural
and commercial subjects, and subjects of the core curriculum
taken to a higher level.
O Hon. R. J. Heffron, Minister for Education.


(5) There should be no external examination earlier than the
fourth year, i.e., the Intermediate Certificate Examination
should be abolished.
(6) At the end of the fourth year, there should be an external
examination restricted to English and optional subjects. Not
less than five and not more than seven subjects should be
taken.
(7) The period of higher secondary education should normally be
two years.
(8) At the higher secondary level the only compulsory subject
should be English.
(9) At the end of the period of higher secondary education there
should be an external examination in five or six subjects, of
which one should be English.”
The Board’s memorandum then went on to consider in some detail
the consequences of these proposals. The most obvious one was that
they would involve the attendance of some secondary school pupils for
an additional year.
No decision was made as a result of these recommendations.
Developments in the Department of Education.
Meanwhile, it had become obvious that in the first three post-primary
years there were many pupils whose needs were not being met either by
the courses recognized for the Intermediate Certificate Examination or by
such modifications of those courses as could be made in individual
schools. Many of the pupils concerned were leaving school before at-
tempting the examination. More significant than this was the fact that,
for many, their experience in secondary school meant a record of
failure and, for an even greater number, an experience which had
little relevance in terms of their abilities and interest.
In 1939, a series of discussions initiated in the Department of Educa-
tion led to the organization of classes specially designed to meet the
needs of the least able boys and girls about the age of thirteen. A special
curriculum, which later was termed The General Activities Curriculum,
was devised, and has been kept under review ever since. Experience
has shown that this new approach has met a real need. The curriculum
now covers at least two years and has been introduced into an increasing
number of secondary schools. In 1957, 11,835 pupils were enrolled in
classes following The General Activities Curriculum, i.e., 13.8 per cent,
of First and Second Year enrolments.
Provision for retarded adolescents, valuable though it was, left the
central problem untouched. It was clear to all observers that, while
many pupils in the super-primary schools were capable of meeting the
requirements of the courses for the Intermediate Certificate Examina-
tion, there were many pupils, of at least average ability, whose special
interests and aptitudes were not met by the relatively academic emphasis
of the standard courses, especially in the Third Year,
As the result of a series of studies by inspectors and teachers in the
Department of Education, an Alternative Curriculum for Secondary
Schools was devised for this group of secondary pupils and was intro-
duced in 1951. The curriculum was designed to challenge the interest
and ability of the pupils of average capacity who did not possess the
aptitude for a more academic approach and who did not propose to
stay at school beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage.
This Alternative Curriculum was examined by many employing
authorities and their response was such that the curriculum was accepted
as meeting the requirements of the Intermediate Certificate Examination
in cases where the latter was a terminal examination. This curriculum
is now followed by pupils for whom it is appropriate, not only ig junior
technical and home science secondary schools, but in corresponding
courses in many country high schools. It was also made generally avail-
able, and has been adopted, for appropriate classes, in a number of
non-Departmental schools.
Two comments which may be made about the Alternative Curriculum
serve to indicate the difficulties which attend any ad hoc or piecemeal
attack upon the general problem of secondary education. In the first
place, it has been said by many of those who have used it that the
courses provided in the Alternative Curriculum would be of value in
the junior stage of the secondary education of many more adolescents


than can at present be allowed to follow that curriculum. Not only
have the courses adequate content, but they have greater reality for boys
and girls under the age of fifteen. Under present conditions, however,
they cannot provide a basis for studies beyond the Intermediate Certi-
ficate stage, since the major determinant of any further study is the
standard of matriculation, and this standard begins to make itself felt
as early as Third Year.
In the second place, allocation to a class studying the Alternative
Curriculum involves pre-determination of a pupil’s future at the outset
of his secondary school course. Many pupils whose needs would be
better served by the new curriculum attempt, and must be advised to
attempt, the standard secondary course in case they may wish to proceed
past the Intermediate Certificate stage. Such a pre-determination is
contrary to the opinion expressed later in this Report and to much
current thinking about the problem of the early secondary school years.
The fact that the pre-intermediate Certificate requirements of the Leav-
ing Certificate course affect the life of all secondary schools, at present
limits the possibilities of the Alternative Curriculum.
The last two years have witnessed a further extension of the activities
of schools once known as “super-primary”. The increasing tendency
within the Department of Education to recognize the latter schools as
an integral part of secondary education v/as reflected in the official
adoption in 1943 of the term “secondary” for junior technical and for
home science schools. Since 1935 some home science and junior
technical schools have presented selected pupils for the Leaving Certi-
ficate Examination. The tendency, however, has been, as the number
of their Leaving Certificate candidates increased, to constitute certain
of these schools as high schools, that is, schools organized on a five year
basis providing courses approved by the Board of Secondary School
Studies, including one foreign language for some pupils. In 1955, how-
ever, two secondary junior technical schools were authorized, without
formal reconstitution as high schools, to provide courses for their
pupils who wished to remain beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage.
These were pupils who had not studied a foreign language. In 1956,
these schools presented, with some success, their first candidates for the
Leaving Certificate Examination.
The significance of this development lies in the fact that the pupils
concerned failed, on leaving primary school, to qualify for entrance to
a high school; they entered a school originally designed to cover only
the first three secondary years. Awakened interest and developed talent
made them potential senior secondary pupils. Their only avenue of
advancement would formerly have been by transfer to the senior (and
more selective) years in the very high schools which they had not been
allowed to enter at the age of twelve. Continuing at their secondary
junior technical school, many of them demonstrated that, in appropriate
subjects, they could meet the requirements of the Leaving Certificate
Examination.
Once again, however, an ad hoc development, wise though it may be,
is proving to be limited in its scope. It is serving to emphasize the
need for a more comprehensive review of the purpose, structure and
content of secondary education.
SUMMARY.
In this chapter we have traced the history of secondary education in
New South Wales. While few comparative statistics have been given,
that history has perhaps served to indicate the substantial achievement,
especially of the last forty years, in providing secondary education for
an increasing number of adolescents. It may have served, too, to
demonstrate the fact that the problems and shortcomings of to-day,
which none can deny, have their origins in that same history of develop-
ment.
During the last century, secondary education was almost entirely the
privilege of a social elite. Towards the end of the century, efforts were
made to provide secondary education for selected pupils of talent,
irrespective of means. The response at that time was not encouraging.
The reorganization of secondary education in 1912 was a specific ex-
pression of the new point of view: secondary education was the
education of the elite of potential scholarship among adolescents. In
the circumstances, it was natural that the path of these secondary school
pupils should lead to the Leaving Certificate Examination and to
University entrance, the nexus between secondary school and University
being provided by the Board of Examiners.


After the First World War, a renewed interest in education, a more
efficient administration of the compulsory attendance law, and a marked
growth in the enrolments and the scope of super-primary schools com-
bined to create a new situation. Educational authorities were confronted,
in a manner and to a degree not known before, with what has been
termed “the dilemma of secondary education”. Together with the
adolescents for whom secondary education was then intended —the
minority with scholastic aptitude—appeared, in increasing numbers,
adolescents for whom a course leading to the University was unreal,
even if it were within their ability.
It is significant that it was at this time that educational opinion was
becoming hospitable to a conception of secondary education which meant
that the community had an obligation to both groups of adolescents.
It was in 1927 that, in England, the phrase “the education of the
adolescent” was first officially used to describe secondary education.
In this view, secondary education must serve the needs not only of the
few of scholastic inclination, but of all boys and girls in their teens.
The implications of these changes in the post-primary school popula-
tion and in educational thinking did not receive full expression in the
1936 amendments to the University and University Colleges Act. It
is of interest to note that the history which we have traced from 1912
onwards made it inevitable that legislative provision for a change in
secondary education should have to be effected through an amend-
ment to the University Act. The constitution of the Board of Secondary
School Studies did not make provision for the new “non-academic”
adolescent school population though, by 1936, that population had come
to constitute the majority of the secondary school enrolment. Nor does
it appear that the scheme of examinations embodied in these amend-
ments took adequate acount of the capacities and prospects of that
majority of adolescents who would never attempt to enter the University.
It is likely, however, that, had the recommendations of the Board been
accepted in 1943, a more coherent programme of secondary education
could have been developed in high schools and in all secondary schools
presenting candidates for the Leaving Certificate Examination. At the
same time, it is not certain that, without a more comprehensive review
of the situation, the 1943 proposals would adequately have met the needs
of the larger group of pupils who were spending at least three years of
their adolescence in schools and courses which, in large measure, lay out-
side the scope of the Board of Secondary School Studies.
The new conception of secondary education was more clearly reflected
in the Board’s proposals of 1946, proposals which the Board has been
unable to translate into practice.
Meanwhile, within the Department of Education, schools have been
organized and curricula developed, by means of which it has been
possible for the Department to meet the needs of the generality of
adolescents in a fashion not provided for in the legislation of 1936.
Experience has shown the value and promise of these developments, but
it is clear that they cannot be carried to their logical conclusion or made
to yield the results of which they are capable, while they remain piece-
meal modifications of the status quo.


CHAPTER II
THE PRESENT SITUATION
The first task remitted to the Committee was “To survey and report
upon the provision of full-time day education for adolescents in New
South Wales’’. We have therefore not included in our Survey the
secondary education provided in evening colleges or in technical colleges.
Nor have we systematically examined the vocational training being pro-
vided for adolescents by the Department of Technical Education.
Neither medical nor psychological evidence has been of great assis-
tance in defining the age limits of the term “adolescence”. We have
therefore interpreted our task as embracing those years which lie
between the age at which most boys and girls complete their primary
education, namely twelve, and the age at which the oldest of those who
remain at school present themselves for the Leaving Certificate Ex-
amination—about eighteen years. Both these age limits are arbitrary,
of course, on account of differences in ability among pupils and varia-
tion among schools as to the basis on which pupils are promoted from
grade to grade.
In the present Survey, we have not taken into account the provision
made for adolescents who are markedly subnormal in mental ability or
those who must receive their education under special conditions because
of physical handicaps. Both these groups, in our opinion, represent
community responsibilities, but the manner in which those respon-
sibilities should be met has appeared to us to constitute a special prob-
lem which might well be examined after the findings of this Survey
have been considered.
The present position, then, is that all pupils who complete their
primary schooling in New South Wales pass on to some form of secon-
dary education. Of these pupils, 78 per cent, complete their primary
education in schools conducted by the Department of Education. Beyond
the primary school stage, the proportion of pupils in Departmental
schools during recent years has been approximately 72 per cent. O
Differences in school organization, rather than in curriculum, make it
necessary to describe separately the provision of secondary education
in Departmental schools on the one hand and in non-Departmental
schools on the other.
I. Schools and Courses.
(a) Department of Education.
(i) Entrance to secondary school :
In Departmental schools, pupils commence their secondary education
at an average age of twelve years six months, though the range of ages
is as much as two years. None is admitted before the age of eleven
years.
The method of allocation of pupils to type of secondary school or
course has already been described. ( 2 ) It will be recalled that the
allocation is determined on the basis of the wishes of the parents, and
the results of scholastic tests in schools and of two intelligence tests
conducted two years apart. Use is also made of a cumulative record
of personal and non-scholastic factors of the pupil’s career throughout
the primary school.
If it is assumed that it is possible to determine, in advance, the type
of secondary school course a pupil should follow, it must be agreed
that the method adopted in public schools in New South Wales affords
a better prognostic basis than would be afforded by any single test.
This conclusion is based upon follow-up studies made over a number
of years. We consider that, in itself, the procedure adopted by the
Department of Education for the allocation of pupils to secondary
courses is as satisfactory as can be devised under the circumstances.
( x ) As will be pointed out later, (p. 37 ff.), enrolments in Departmental secon-
dary schools fall off rapidly in the senior years; these schools present a little
more than half the candidates for the Leaving Certificate Examination.
( 3 ) Chapter I, pp. 21-22.


However, for reasons set out in a later chapter, we do not consider
that the initial assumption is sound. The faults of present practice
lie, not in the details of the procedure adopted, but in the attempt to
determine the educational future of pupils at so early a stage and in so
final a fashion.
Any discussion of a form of examination or assessment at the end of
the primary school stage involves a discussion of the level of attainments
which might be expected of pupils leaving the primary school. It is
necessary, however, to make a distinction between this important ques-
tion of reasonable attainments and the question of the basis upon which
the future schooling of pupils is to be determined as they enter the
secondary school.
On the question as to the standards attained by pupils leaving the pri-
mary school, opinions of qualified witnesses differed and a full examina-
tion of the matter would involve a review of the content, spirit and
purpose of the Curriculum for Primary Schools. We are of the opinion,
however, that consideration should be given to the development and
use of standardized tests of basic skills, particularly towards the end
of the primary school stage. We make this observation, fully aware of
the danger which could arise if such tests were used in a manner which
would disturb the balance of the curriculum, or rob the primary school
of the spontaneity and interest that the present curriculum has made
possible.
(ii) Types of Secondary schools and courses — Metropolitan :
In Sydney and Newcastle, the pupils deemed most suitable on the
composite basis of selection are admitted to high schools. In both
Parramatta and Wollongong there is a high school where admissions
are also made on this competitive basis. The majority of such “selec-
tive” high schools offer courses which include English, Mathematics,
one or more sciences. History and/or Geography, and languages.
Pupils in these schools must take one language (usually French) but
the more able tend to take Latin also, A minority may commence a
third language in their second year. It is to be noted that the curriculum
of these schools, in common with that of other secondary schools,
includes Music and Physical Education and at least one year of home
science or manual arts. All of these high schools provide a five-year
course leading to the Leaving Certificate Examination.
In addition to these general high schools, there are, in Sydney and
Newcastle, technical and home science high schools, entrance to which
is competitive. Such schools normally omit Latin, substituting on the
one hand, full courses in Woodwork, Metalwork and Descriptive Geo-
metry and, on the other, a range of home science subjects. The home
science high schools also provide a commercial course.
In Sydney, the Conservatorium High School enrols pupils who mani-
fest a particular aptitude in Music and who receive musical tuition from
members of the staff of the Conservatorium. This high school provides
courses leading to the Leaving Certificate Examination in English,
French, History, Geography, Mathematics and Art.
In the Sydney Metropolitan area, as in the country, there are inter-
mediate high schools. In Sydney these schools provide the first three
years of the high school curriculum, the courses differing within each
school according as pupils study two, one or no foreign languages.
Generally speaking, intermediate high schools enrol pupils who appear
to have less academic aptitude than those who have gained places in
full high schools. Nevertheless, a significant number of the pupils of
these schools not only gain their Intermediate Certificate, but also pass
on to complete further years of secondary education at the nearest full
high school.
In Sydney and Wollongong it is possible for boys who have gained
their Intermediate Certificate and who show aptitude for the skilled
trades, to complete a fourth year in which a programme of general
secondary education is linked with specific technical training to provide
a systematic introduction to a wide range of skilled trades. The boys
are selected on the basis of school record, personal qualities, general
ability and special aptitudes, and placed in classes known as pre-
apprenticeship classes. The academic curriculum embraces English,
History, Mathematics and Physics, designed so as to be articulated
with the Qualifying and Matriculation courses of the Department of
Technical Education. The trades courses are provided in a neighbouring
technical college.


Pupils who arc admitted neither to the selective high schools nor
to intermediate high schools, and those who elect not to follow the
more academic course of these schools, are admitted to junior technical
or to home science secondary schools. These schools generally provide
a secondary course of three years to Intermediate Certificate standard.
In regard to the courses in English, History, Geography, Mathematics
and Science, pupils in junior technical and home science schools may
follow either the courses provided for the first three years of the high
school—courses drawn up and approved by the Board of Secondary
School Studies—or the Alternative Curriculum, to which reference has
been made in Chapter I( 1 ). In addition to the foregoing subjects, the
curriculum provides for junior technical schools courses in Woodwork,
Metalwork and Drawing, and, for home science secondary schools,
Needlecraft and Home Economics. After the first year, girls in home
science schools may elect to choose between home science subjects and
the commercial subjects: Business Principles and Practice, Shorthand
and Typing. Where there is a sufficient demand, a similar election is
possible in junior technical schools.
In these schools also, special provision is made through the general
activities curriculum for pupils of less than average ability, many of
whom may not have attained full Sixth Grade standard but who, on
account of age, are better taught in a school for adolescents.
We have seen, in Chapter I,( 2 ) that the orientation and purpose of
junior technical and home science secondary schools have been modified
since the superior public schools, out of which they grew, were re-
organized in 1912. While of many of the pupils of these schools it can
be said, with some certainty, that they will leave school to find places in
commerce and industry, Peter Board’s clear distinction of purpose
between these schools and high schools would not be made today.
Despite their title, they are not vocational schools. Rather are they
designed to provide a general education for those adolescents whose
abilities and interests are less academic than those of their contem-
poraries, especially in the study of foreign languages. The extent of
the school achievement of some of the pupils of these schools beyond
the Intermediate Certificate stage and the measure of their later success
in the adult community, may be regarded as evidence of the difficulty
of achieving reliable selection at the point of entry to secondary school,
but must also be accepted as a tribute to the atmosphere of the junior
technical and home science schools themselves.
(iii) Recent developments:
It is necessary to draw attention to the fact that, especially in Sydney,
there are some variations of our general statement of the present
position and that the position is not static. Thus, for example, for some
time boys attending secondary junior technical schools who wished to
stay at school beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage have been pro-
vided for either in Fourth and Fifth Year classes in junior technical
schools or in non-language classes in certain high schools. We have
pointed out in Chapter I( 3 ) that at least two schools, originally junior
technical schools, have recently been recognized as five-year high schools.
Again, comprehensive high schools designed to provide the full range
of secondary subjects over a five-year course have begun to appear in
the fast developing outer areas of Sydney. While, by tradition, the high
schools at present under review ( 4 ) have been separate schools for boys
and for girls, some of the new schools in the outer suburban area are,
in effect, “twin” schools. In these, separate buildings for boys and for
girls are placed on the one site so that facilities such as assembly halls
may be shared in common and the pupils may combine for certain
activities.
These developments do not, however, dispel the doubts we feel as
to the wisdom of segregating adolescents in different types of secondary
school in so final a fashion at the age of twelve years. Evidence tendered
to the Committee, both educational and psychological, indicates the
large margin of error which attends any forecast of the standard or
pattern of achievement of an individual pupil, even three years ahead, if
that forecast is made before he enters the secondary school. We are
also aware of the feelings aroused in many families by this segregation.
(*) See Chapter I, pp. 27-28.
( 2 ) Pp. 20-21 and p. 25.
(’) P. 28.
( 4 ) With the exception of Parramatta and Wollongong High Schools.


especially as it is based on measures of ability which, though valid, afe
not readily understood by many parents. These considerations will be
taken up again in a later chapter of this Report,
(iv) Country:
In country centres in New South Wales there are sixty-nine high
schools and twenty-seven intermediate high schools. In three ways these
schools stand in contrast to similar schools in Metropolitan areas. First,
with the exception of the historic high schools in Maitland, they are
all co-educational in the sense of enrolling both boys and girls. Second,
they provide as much of the full range of secondary courses of all types
as is justified by local demand or made possible by availability of staff.
Thus, in a country secondary school, one may expect to find courses as
diverse as Latin and Metalwork, French and Art. Third, all the pupils
of the district who have completed the primary school course, together
with those whose needs are best met by the General Activities course,
are enrolled in the same school. Entry to such secondary schools thus
carries v/ith it no sense of social stratification; as communities of adoles-
cents, they embrace the full range of ability and interests.
It cannot be said, however, that these schools are, in the full sense
of the term, “comprehensive” secondary schools. Within the schools
themselves. First Year classes are organized on a basis similar to that
adopted for determining entrance to metropolitan high schools. There-
after, pupils tend to proceed through the school in “streams” which
can be recognized as providing two-language, one-language, junior tech-
nical, home science or commercial courses. It is true that, because
transfer from one school to another is not involved, it is possible for the
headmaster to make adjustments of courses to suit individual pupils,
but this possibility is limited by discrepancies in syllabus requirements
and the need to make an early decision in regard to language study.
In eleven country centres( 1 ), district schools, now called district rural
schools, remain. These schools have carried on the tradition initiated
in 1905; they provide three years of secondary education leading to the
Intermediate Certificate, including general cultural courses as well as
courses with a local bias. Special courses for girls are not easily dis-
tinguished from those provided in home science schools but, for boys,
Agriculture —both theoretical and practical—is a prominent feature of
a course which also includes Manual Arts and Business Principles.
Entrance to these schools is elective but, in two or three country
centres, their existence makes enrolment in the neighbouring high school
seem more selective than would otherwise be the case.
It is to be noted that, in a number of country primary schools, post-
primary classes are maintained where there are not enough pupils to
justify the establishment of a separate secondary school. These classes
provide as much as possible of the range of secondary courses. In
general these schools lead to the Intermediate Certificate Examination,
but a few of them also present candidates for the Leaving Certificate
Examination.
Generally speaking, the pattern of the small country school at the
secondary level reflects a desire to extend to the pupils concerned the
opportunities available to those in larger towns.
The Correspondence School, which caters largely for the isolated
pupil, provides courses in all Intermediate Certificate subjects except
those involving laboratories or workshops, and in English, Mathematics,
Latin, French, History, Geography, Art and Economics to the Leaving
Certificate standard.
To the foregoing country schools must be added the three agricul-
tural high schools —Farrer, Hurlstone and Yanco. These schools select
pupils from applicants in their respective areas in the State. All are
boarding schools, though some day boys are accepted. They are five-
year high schools offering a choice of one-language or non-language
courses leading to the Leaving Certificate Examination, together with
a compulsory training in the elementary theory and practice of farm-
ing.
Again, it must be said that these schools, whatever the original pur-
pose of the first of them, Hurlstone, are not narrowly vocational schools.
Some of their pupils return direct to the land, others proceed to agri-
cultural colleges or to a university and ultimately make their contribu-
tion to rural technology. There are some, however, who, in later life,
are not associated with rural pursuits.
F) Also at Carlingford in Sydney.
*7543—3


( b ) Non-Departmental Schools.
In a typical year, 28.5 per cent, of the secondary school population is
enrolled in schools other than those conducted by the Department of
Education. Most of them are registered under the Bursary Endowment
Act, 1912.
Among the non-Departmental schools, those maintained by the Roman
Catholic Church differ from the remainder. In the first place, the num-
ber of Roman Catholic schools is much greater and they enrol 20.5
per cent, of the total secondary school population. In the second place,
only in the Roman Catholic system is there a specific organization of
types of school and course comparable to that in the Department of
Education. In the third place, the Roman Catholic schools maintain
their own schemes of inspection in addition to the visits paid by in-
spectors of the Department of Education under the relevant Acts.
Finally, there is in these schools a more definite separation than in
other non-Departmental schools between the primary and the secondary
stage of education.
Non-Departmental secondary schools provide courses leading to the
Intermediate and Leaving Certificate Examinations as approved by the
Board of Secondary School Studies. Differences of ability and interest
among pupils result in their separation into different courses which may
be described as two-language, one-language or non-language courses.
The last of these includes technical, home science or commercial sub-
jects according to the size and nature of the school. In a few schools,
Agriculture is also studied.
In cases where Board of Secondary School Studies courses prove un-
suitable for pupils, variations in curriculum and in the organization of
courses are to be found in individual schools. In some of these schools,
use is being made of the Alternative Curriculum for Secondary Schools.
No registered non-Departmental secondary school in this State is
co-educational. A large proportion of these schools are boarding
schools, though nearly all of them enrol day pupils as well.
11. Examinations and Standards.
The history of the development of secondary education in this State,
which we have sketched in Chapter I, will have indicated that, during
the past thirty years, there has not only been a great increase in the
number of pupils in schools beyond the primary level, but that there
has also been a change in the connotation of the term “secondary educa-
tion”. In 1912, only a minority of pupils were enrolled in schools
regarded as secondary schools; today all pupils beyond the primary
stage are enrolled in secondary schools or courses. The diversity among
these pupils has been reflected, to some extent, by the development,
within the Department of Education, of new courses at the secondary
level, O and in other schools, by the modification of existing courses.
The two examinations established as part of the reorganization of
1912, the Intermediate Certificate and the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tions, have survived these developments. We have already referred to
the abortive attempt, in 1925, within the Department of Education, to
provide some means of public recognition, at the “Intermediate” level,
for pupils who have not completed the academic course for the Inter-
mediate Certificate Examination. ( 2 ) It will also have been noted that
both the nature of the new secondary school population and a proper
anxiety that the weight of formal examinations should not become
excessive, were part of the reason for the reorganization in 1949 ( 3 ) of
the Intermediate Certificate Examination as an internal examination.
There is little doubt that there is a considerable degree of variety in
the content and standards of work done in the junior classes of secon-
dary schools. To the extent that this indicates that the system has
attempted to adopt itself to the varying needs of pupils we would regard
it as desirable. On the other hand, the consequences of the history of
secondary education in this State since 1912 cannot be ignored. One of
them has been that elasticity of courses has been restricted by the
examination system.
t 1) See Chapter I, p. 27.
( 2 ) See Chapter I, p. 20.
( 8 ) See Chapter I, pp. 25-26.


Whatever the scope for initiative enjoyed by the Departmental and
non-Departmental schools, the only body with general authority in the
field of secondary education, as it is now understood, is the Board of
Secondary School Studies. ( x ) Yet, in terms of the Act, the function of
that Board is “to make recommendations to the Minister in relation to
matters connected with or concerning the conduct of examinations for
the leaving certificate and the higher leaving certificate, and the award
of such certificates ... to determine the course of study to be
followed in secondary schools by candidates for such certificates and to
authorize the issue of such certificates . . . .” In practice, this
means that the decisions of the Board of Secondary School Studies not
only determine the content and orientation of the senior years of
the secondary school course, which have the Leaving Certificate as an
obvious goal, but have a major influence on the work of the junior
years. ( 2 ) It is not surprising then, that, because of its concern with
the earlier stages of the studies of candidates for the Leaving Certificate
Examination and because of the absence of any other authoritative
body, the Board of Secondary School Studies is also the governing
authority in regard to the award of the Intermediate Certificate. ( 3 )
To anyone ignorant of the history of the past fifty years, it would seem
strange that, in order to obtain recognition at the Intermediate Certificate
Examination for its Alternative Curriculum, it was necessary for the
Department of Education to submit it to the Board of Secondary School
Studies. A curriculum designed for pupils certain not to be candidates
for the Leaving Certificate had to be recognized by a Board responsible,
by statute, for the determination of courses for the Leaving Certificate
and for the conduct of the examination for the award of that certificate.
That the Board of Secondary School Studies has functioned successfully
during the past twenty years, amid the rapid growth in numbers and
variety in the secondary school population, has been due to the wisdom
of its members, to the degree of latitude made possible by the intro-
duction of the internal Intermediate Certificate Examination, to the
initiative of those who have developed variations in courses of study,
and to the professional understanding and commonsense of teachers
in schools. The fact remains, however, that the structure of public
examinations, and the constitution of bodies for their control, have not
kept pace with the changing situation in schools. Only by elasticity
and understanding has it been possible to develop a broader pattern
of secondary education under legislative provisions which substituted
for the earlier Board of Examiners a body which, while it included
teachers among its members, still has for its ostensible purpose the
control of courses and examinations acceptable for purposes of univer-
sity entrance. It seems clear that, before further progress can be
made, both the examination structure and the constitution of the authori-
ties concerned must be reviewed on the basis of a frank re-assessment
of the task which schools must undertake to meet the needs of the
very diverse adolescent school population now enrolled.
111. Some Administrative Features.
The present situation may be surveyed from a third point of view,
that of certain administrative features considered as indicators of the
achievement or of the shortcomings of the existing regime.
(a) The Size of the Task:
A description of schools and courses providing secondary education
in this State does not convey an adequate impression of the magnitude
of the task which has already been undertaken, or of the extent to which
the community is likely to be committed, through its school system, in
the near future.
O It is a common misconception that the Department of Education controls
the Leaving Certificate Examination. This is the function of the Board of
Secondary School Studies, though, through its membership, the relation-
ship of the Department to the Board is close and the Department provides
secretarial and administrative services in connection with the work of the
Board. In making recommendations as to the registration of schools under
the Bursary Endowment Act, inspectors of the Department of Education act
as agents of the Bursary Endowment Board. Similarly, in regard to their
other activities in non-Departmental schools, inspectors act as agents of
the Board of Secondary School Studies.
( 2 ) Cf. Public Instruction Act, 1880 —Reg. No. 5 (Part II) : “A Leaving Cer-
tificate shall be awarded to a pupil who has complied with the conditions:
(1) That he has graduated through the whole course specified for High
Schools . .
( 3 ) See Public Instruction Act, 1880 —Reg. No. 3 (Part II).


Year
Departmental
Non-
Departmental
Total
1915
11,415
4,420
15,835*
1925
40,169
12,279
52,448
1935
65,451
17,234
82,685
1945
86,492
32,662
119,154
1955
109,034
43,514
152,548
Year
Departmental
Non-
Departmental
Total
1956*
117,211
48,469
165,680
1957
126,500
52,000
178,500
1958
136,000
58,000
194,000
1959
146,000
60,000
206,000
1960
158,000
65,000
223,000
1961
162,000
66,500
228,500
1962
165,000
67,500
232,500
1963
168,000
69,000
237,000
1964
171,500
70,500
242,000
1965
174,500
71,500
246,000
Trends in secondary school enrolments on the basis of the existing
organization are indicated in the following table.
Table II
(a) Enrolments in Secondary Schools and Courses, 1915-1955
(b) Estimated Enrolments, 1956-1965
The figures reported in Table II set present secondary school enrol-
ments in proper perspective. Since the beginning of the First World
War, secondary school enrolments have multiplied tenfold. In itself,
this is a great achievement, over a period of forty years, on the part
of a community which has seen two wars and an economic depression.
The next decade, however, will present a still greater challenge. While
the rate of growth in enrolments will not be as great as during earlier
years, the very numbers to be coped with will make great demands upon
the financial resources of the community and the ingenuity and imagina-
tion of those immediately concerned with education.
One feature of secondary school enrolments during the coming years
is not made clear by the statistics in Table 11. In that table, the number
of new pupils is, to some extent, offset by the number of pupils leaving
secondary schools. In 1959-60, however, there will be an upsurge of
new enrolments because in that year children born in 1947 will turn
twelve. Whereas, in 1939, the birthrate in New South Wales was 17.46
per thousand, in 1947 it rose to 23.26 per thousand and has remained
greater than 21.0 per thousand ever since.
The whole situation points, once more, to the urgency of a decision
as to the nature and structure of the secondary education to be provided
in the years so close upon us. Any adequate provision will be costly,
but to attempt to make that provision by means of a structure whose
basic design has not been altered for a generation is likely to prove
not only unsatisfactory, but more costly.
( b ) Examinations:
While examinations are a means, not an end, in any educational
programme, their conduct constitutes an administrative task which must
always be taken into account. The statistics presented in Table II
therefore have a further significance. They raise the question as to
whether it will be possible, quite apart from any consideration of de-
sirability, to maintain the Leaving Certificate Examination in its present
form for many years longer.
In 1925, 1,468 candidates sat for the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion; by 1955 this number had risen to 7,050. The 1925 candidates
represented 2,79 per cent, of the total secondary enrolment; the 1955
candidates 4.62 per cent. In Departmental schools, from which we
were able to obtain detailed statistics, there is a small but very consistent
tendency for a greater proportion of each school generation to remain to
become Leaving Certificate candidates. In 1956 the total number of
candidates was 8,054; it is estimated that by 1960 that number will have
risen to 12,000.
* Estimate, including post-primary.
* Actual.


Year
Enrolment
Per cent.
1952
50,575
100 0
1953
42,225
83-5
1954
28,050
55-5
1955
9,730
19-2
1956
8,120
16-1
Already, the Board of Secondary School Studies is concerned at the
magnitude of its task. When every available device has been used to
simplify and to facilitate the clerical work involved in the examination,
the central problem of marking the scripts remains. The urgency of
this problem is increased by the fact that the calendar imposes strict
limits upon both the time at which the examination can be held and
the time by which results must be available. Every addition to the
panel of examiners in any one subject increases the difficulty of retain-
ing a standard of reliability which is recognized by the Board as being
fundamental to the examining system. Extraordinary safeguards are
adopted, but it is difficult to see how they can be maintained if the
number of candidates facing the one Leaving Certificate Examination
rises to 12,000.
Yet it is certain that they will. One obvious solution would be to
divide the task and to cease attempting to examine, by means of the
one instrument, pupils who seek recognition of the completion of their
secondary schooling and those who seek entrance to a university.
(c) History of a School Generation:
Even in terms of enrolment statistics, the record of a generation as it
passes through the secondary school throws much light upon the group
of problems which has been the concern of this Committee and of
which, we feel, the community should be aware.
In Table 111 is set out, in successive years, the history of the group
of pupils who, entering secondary schools in 1952, provided the candi-
dates for the Leaving Certificate Examination of 1956. The statistics
cover pupils of both Departmental and non-Departmental schools. They
conceal a degree of error, which cannot be calculated, caused by those
pupils who repeat a year at some stage of their secondary school course.
The pattern is so consistent with the records of other generations, to
which we had access, that we are convinced that Table 111 can be read
as a representative record.
Table 111
Enrolments in Successive Years of the Secondary School:
The History of a School Generation
The most arresting feature of Table 111 is the rapid wastage of the
school generation as it passes through the secondary school. By Third
Year, a stage which we might expect pupils to have reached in their
fifteenth year, little more than half remains of the group that entered
the secondary school. The reason is not to be found in any laxity in the
administration of the compulsory attendance law. In the great majority
of cases, these pupils who have left school before the Intermediate
Certificate stage have left at, or close to, the age of fifteen.
An examination of the distribution of ages in each grade of the school
system confirms this view. Here we may cite statistics from Depart-
mental schools, in respect of the generation reviewed in Table 111, not
because they are exceptional, but because they have been available to
us in greater detail. By the time of the annual school census, that is six
months after the beginning of the school year, 56 per cent, of the First
Year pupils were over the age of thirteen. Already, 315 were over the
age of fifteen in First Year. In Second Year, the Departmental schools
retained 1,760 pupils over the age of fifteen, but 2,200 of the same
age-group left school at the end of First Year, The cumulative effect
is that, even if we set aside the pupils following the General Activities
course in organized classes, the ages of a typical Third Year throughout
the school system range from thirteen to over eighteen years.
This situation may be assessed on a more exact basis. If we accept
as normal a range of ages within any school grade of the order of one
and a half years, we would expect to find most First Year pupils in
Second Term with ages ranging from twelve years three months to
thirteen years nine months. This is, in fact, what we do find. But we
also find that 32.5 per cent, of First Year, 29.3 per cent, of Second
Year, and 24.0 per cent, of Third Year are older than the expected


age-range. The major contributing factor in the wastage of a school
generation over the first three years of its secondary school experience
would therefore appear to be scholastic retardation. Pupils leave secon-
dary school before the end of Third Year because they are old enough
to leave and despite the fact that they have completed only part of a
recognizable course of study.
We cannot but feel that the common explanation of the fact that
many pupils leave secondary school at an early stage, namely because
they are attracted to jobs at which they can earn a wage, probably
reverses the order of events in many cases. The reasons why a pupil
leaves school are rarely simple, even in the individual case. Yet, while
it is true that the possibility of earning a wage is, in itself, a potent lure
in many cases, we believe that, if an adolescent is among the 24.32 per
cent, of retarded pupils whom we have noted, if his record at school is
one of failure and if he has reached the age of fifteen, many of the causes
of his leaving school have already begun to operate; they have served
to make the most “dead-end” job alluring.
In short, the statistics of the ages of secondary school pupils which
lie behind the first three rows of figures in Table 111, appear to us to
emphasize the need for a review, first, of policies of promotion of pupils
from primary to secondary school, second, of the type of curriculum
provided in the junior years of the secondary school, and third, of the
organization of courses during those years.
Our views have been both confirmed and amplified by the results of
a close examination carried out by the Research Division of the Depart-
ment of Education into the histories of 516 pupils who lived in a repre-
sentative metropolitan area, and who entered secondary school in 1949.
Beyond the facts already revealed by Table 111, this study indicated
that the more intelligent the pupil, the more likely he was to complete
Third Year. More than one factor may be at work here. It may be that
the more intelligent pupil has a better appreciation of what the school
has to offer; it may be, however, that, despite their apparent variety,
the courses available in the junior years of the secondary school are
better suited to the more intelligent pupil.
Indeed, when the data is examined from the point of view of type of
course taken, this study does indicate that the more intelligent pupil
is better served by existing courses. It demonstrates also that satisfac-
tion gained from a course is a real factor in retaining pupils in the
secondary school. This satisfaction arises both from the feeling that
the most appropriate available course has been chosen, and from actual
success at school examinations.
Among the pupils studied, few girls repeated a secondary school year
but almost a third of the boys repeated at least one year. 'This repetition
did not seem to be followed by ultimate success in secondary school; on
the contrary there was a marked association between the repetition of
a year and leaving school early.
The study demonstrated the need for further research into the multiple
causes of early abandonment of secondary school studies. It served to
indicate, however, that while more needs to be done to adjust the con-
tent and organization of secondary school studies to the needs of the
variety of adolescents, the shortcomings are not all to be found within
the schools. “Apparently early leavers have unfavourable home back-
grounds, are poor in attendance, frequently lack ‘application’ and are
not very well adjusted to school and to their fellows.”o
Returning to Table 111, we note that its second major feature is the
sharp decline in numbers once the Intermediate Certificate stage has
been passed. Less than one in five of the generation continue to under-
take senior secondary school studies. This fact throws into relief the
comments we have already made( 2 ) in regard to the significance of the
courses approved by the Board of Secondary School Studies and to the
function of that Board. Among the generation under review, the Leav-
ing Certificate course proper was attempted by only 19 per cent. Yet
the requirements of that course had already made themselves felt in the
earlier years and, in a variety of ways, had affected the studies of that
great majority of pupils who did not remain beyond the Intermediate
Certificate stage.
At this point, we may take the story told in Table 111 one step farther.
Of the 8,120 reported as Fifth Year pupils, 6,455 gained the Leaving
Certificate. Of these successful candidates, 59 per cent, matriculated.
O Report of Research Division, Department of Education.
( 2 ) See Section II above, pp. 34-35.


Year of
Entry
1st
Year
2nd
Year
3rd
Year
I.C.
Sat
I.C.
Pass
4th
Year
5th
Year
L.C.
Sat
L.C.
Pass
1948
100 0
79-1
46-3
42-9
38-4
13-2
9-4
9-2
7-4
1949
100 0
78-8
47-3
43-4
391
13-6
100
9-8
8-2
1950
100 0
80-8
49-1
461
41 0
14-8
10-7
10-5
9-1
1951
100 0
82-4
51-9
48-0
41 -9
14-5
10-5
10-4
9 0
1952
100 0
82-8
51-5
49 0
426
15-3
11-6
11-5
9-7
1953
100 0
83-1
52-4
50-2
43-8
16-3
1954
100 0
85-8
56-7
51-2
456
1955
100 0
87-2
1956 ..
100 0
• •
• •
This means that of 100 pupils commencing secondary education in
1952, 7.5 qualified for entrance to a university in 1957. We have been
unable to ascertain, with accuracy, how many of these matriculants
actually entered a university in that year, but our impression is that far
from all of them did so. We know that the total first year enrolments
of all three universities in the State represented only 4.4 per cent, of the
total seventeen and eighteen year age groups in the community.
Even if all the 7.5 per cent, mentioned above actually commenced
university studies, this final stage of the history of the 1952 secondary
school entry challenges the older concept of the purpose of secondary
education. Here again the facts of the situation emphasize the need
for viewing the curriculum and organization of the secondary school
in proper perspective.
(d) Present Trends:
The senior years of the secondary school pose their own special
problems. Before considering them further, it may be of value to add
to the record of Table 111 a somewhat more comprehensive analysis of
the progress of school generations in secondary schools within the
Department of Education, This analysis is set out in Table IV.
Table IV
Progress of School Generations through Departmental Secondary Schools, 1948-1956
It will be recalled that Table 111 reported the progress of one genera-
tion (the 1952 entry) for all secondary schools. In Table IV the pro-
gress of a number of generations is reported in respect of Departmental
schools alone. The similarity in trend is obvious; the differences may be
discerned by reference to the 1952 entry in Table IV. The wastage of
the generation within Departmental schools is greater than that of the
generation taken from all schoolsO; on the other hand, a higher pro-
portion of the generation in Departmental schools gained their Leaving
Certificate,
The new and interesting feature of Table IV is the small but consistent
increase, at all levels, in the holding power of Departmental secondary
schools over the last decade. The causes of this overall trend are
difficult to determine with accuracy. It is not the result, as we will show
later, of any decline either in ability or in attainments among pupils
in the senior years. It does point, however, to an increasing readiness
on the part of pupils to undertake a longer secondary school course, and
of parents to agree to their doing so.
( e ) The Senior Years:
It will have been apparent from our examination of the progress of
a generation through the secondary school, that any attempt to provide
a sound general education for adolescents, even to the end of the
statutory period of schooling, must, under present conditions, be seri-
ously affected by the fact that so many pupils leave secondary school
at an early stage. We have seen that, when due account is taken of other
factors, educational retardation stands out as a major cause of this loss
of adolescents from the secondary school. Despite what has been done
to provide a variety of courses of study, the prestige of the courses
authorized by the Board of Secondary School Studies and the need for
caution on the part of pupil, teacher and parent in electing to depart
from them at an early stage, has meant that it is the pupil of high
average ability who is most at home in the secondary school at present.
If, then, it must be admitted that the curriculum and organization
of the junior secondary years call for review in terms of the needs of
the generality of adolescents, can it be said that, nevertheless, adequate
provision is made for the minority who remain to become candidates for
•he Leaving Certificate Examination and for university entrance?
(’) This may be seen more clearly by reference to Table 111. Of the 100 in First
Year, 30 were in non-Departmental schools, yet they produced 8 out of the
16 in the final secondary school year.


(i) Too small a minority in the senior years :
We do not propose to examine the question as to whether a general
extension of school life would be good, in itself, but we would draw
attention to the fact that there is, in our community, a growing demand
for young people who have gained a Leaving Certificate and who will
occupy positions or undertake courses of training which do not involve
attendance at a university. On these grounds alone, we consider that a
survival rate of only 16 per cent, to the final year of the secondary school
course, if it is to be the pattern for the future, will not provide for the
needs of our community and is likely to produce frustration and dissatis-
faction among a significant number of young people.
Even if we were to adopt the traditional view that most Leaving Certi-
ficate candidates might be expected to be “of university calibre” the
number of pupils in the final secondary year appears to be dangerously
small. We have been reminded by our witnesses of the increasing need
for university graduates and for young people who have completed
other forms of tertiary education. While we may feel that part of the
answer to the problem lies in what happens to students at the university,
we consider that part of it lies in the fact that the “pool” of Leaving
Certificate candidates is not large enough. The task of providing an
adequate supply of teachers serves as an illustration of this fact. We
have noted that, during recent years, one in four of those who have
gained a Leaving Certificate has entered a teachers’ college. If there is a
need, as appears obvious, to increase the number of qualified teachers,
it cannot be met, in our opinion, by drawing upon a still greater pro-
portion of the restricted number of those who pass the Leaving Certificate
Examination.
From the point of view of university graduation, the number of
Leaving Certificate candidates is too few. Studies in the University of
Sydney and in other Australian universitiesO have demonstrated that
students who ultimately graduate generally have an Intelligence Quotient
in excess of 115, the mean being about 125. Factors such as industry,
special interests and favourable study conditions, are obviously important
elements in university success, but the pattern of general ability among
undergraduates is significant for our present discussion. In the com-
munity in general and in a complete age group, the percentage of persons
with an I.Q. of 115 or better may be taken to be 16 per cent. That this
happens to be the same as the survival rate of a typical secondary school
generation, we consider, provides a warning rather than any reassurance.
To be assured that all secondary school pupils of the requisite ability
were reaching the stage at which they could present themselves for uni-
versity entrance, we would need to know that all pupils in their final
secondary year were in the top 16 per cent, of general ability and that
they all matriculated at the end of the year. Neither of these assump-
tions can be made. We know, in fact, that only 7.5 per cent, of a school
generation matriculate and evidence from Departmental schools indi-
cates that while, over a decade, the average Intelligence Quotient of
Fifth Year pupils has remained remarkably constant at 119, in a typical
year 32.4 per cent, of them fall below an Intelligence Quotient of 115.
These pupils constitute 6 of the 16 reported in the final year in Table
111. In short, not all secondary pupils in their final year, under present
conditions, are likely to succeed at the university on the basis either of
attainments or ability. On the other hand, one of the most significant
aspects of the “wastage” of a school generation is the number of puoils
who have the ability to succeed at the university but fail to complete
their high school course. In the study to which reference has already
been made, 22 per cent, of the individual cases examined were in this
category.
(ii) Quality of Fifth Year study :
Our conclusion that the proportion of pupils in the final secondary
school year is too small and that it includes pupils who cannot be ex-
pected to undertake university studies, was arrived at after we had
accepted, for the time being, that entrance to the university was the
primary goal of senior secondary school studies. It is perhaps necessary
to make clear our opinion that there are other reasons why secondary
school pupils should be encouraged to complete their senior years. If
tbs opinion is accepted, it is even more obvious that too few puoils re-
main beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage.
( J ) See, for example, Sanders, C.: Student Selection and Academic Success in
Australian Universities —Sydney, Commonwealth Office of Education, 1948.


We are aware of an opinion held by some, that the quality of senior
secondary school studies has declined. Our experience has been that this
opinion was implied, or stated in general terms; no specific evidence
was submitted by our witnesses. We have found evidence on this matter,
however, in a study carried out by the Research Division of the Depart-
ment of Education. An analysis was made of the results of the Leaving
Certificate for every tenth year from 1926 and for each of the years
since 1946. Over the thirty-year period, the percentage of passes at the
examination has risen from 71.7 to 76. A closer examination of the
results in representative subjects showed no decline in either the standard
of marking or in the marks gained by candidates; on the contrary there
has been rather a moderate but definite improvement.
This analysis was accompanied by an examination, from the point of
view of scope and difficulty, of both the courses of study and of the
examination papers for each of the years under review. Here the
evidence pointed to, the fact that, in what might be termed the “Arts”
subjects, the tendency has been to produce both syllabuses and examina-
tion papers that demand more mature thought and greater discrimination
and understanding than was formerly the case. On the Science side,
the work has not only expanded in scope, but now involves concepts
of which pupils were unaware thirty years ago. This evidence, taken
with the fact that the average mental ability of Leaving Certificate can-
didates has not declined, leads us to the conclusion that there has not
been a decline, but in fact an improvement in the standard of the Leav-
ing Certificate over the past thirty years. Indeed, we feel that the
extent of the demands made upon the candidate today is not fully
appreciated by many people.
Some of our witnesses drew attention to the degree to which students
fail in their university studies, especially in their first year. It is clear
that an adequate examination of this problem would need to be initiated
within the universities and that it is a task v/hich lies beyond the scope
of our Committee. We cannot, however, ignore suggestions that the
causes of university failure lie in lack of ability among students, lack
of background knowledge, poor habits of work, and unsatisfactory
attitudes.
Nevertheless we feel that, when due account is taken of the short-
comings of students, no solution to the problem can be given without
some examination of the nature of university teaching and of the extent
of facilities for study within the university. From the point of view
of the readiness of students for university study, we would say, first,
that two-thirds of students passing from the secondary schools do not
lack the requisite mental ability. Second, in regard to attainments, we
would point to the results of the Leaving Certificate Examination and
would observe that the close liaison between the University of Sydney
and the schools made possible through the Board of Secondary School
Studies, especially by the appointment of Chief Examiners and the
constitution of syllabus committees, should have afforded the university
the opportunity of safeguarding university entrance standards. Unless
the universities require higher entrance standards than those they have
established, the schools would seem to have satisfied their require-
ments.
On the other hand, the view has been expressed that something more
than the attainment of matriculation standards is necessary for successful
work at the university. Attention is drawn to the university failure
rates. In the University of Sydney, while these vary from faculty to
faculty, the tendency is for more than 30 per cent, of students to fail in
their first year. We will return to a consideration of this problem in a
later chapter, but would say here that we have been unable to assess
the significance of these failure rates or to determine their cause. We
would agree that the transition from the life of the school to that of the
university presents a problem, indeed, a variety of problems, for many
students. We would agree, too, that both school and university should
take steps to make the transition less difficult for the young people con-
cerned.
Our examination of the course of secondary education at present pro-
vided over five years leads us to the conclusion, however, that more
cannot be done, within that course, to safeguard the interests of those
proceedings to the university. Rather do we fed that, having the
generality of adolescents in mind, the needs of those who may pro-
ceed to the university exercise perhaps too great an influence upon the
general pattern of secondary education. It is possible that, as the result
of the events traced in our earlier chapter, the secondary school system


Year
14.0-14.11
15.0-15.11
16.0-16.11
17.0-17.11
18...
Total
1920
•3
5-4
27-9
41 -6
24-9
100 0
1925
6-3
31-1
361
26-4
1000
1935
•2
8-8
37-2
33-8
200
1000
1945
•1
8-5
566
29-8
50
1000
1955
4-6
60 6
300
4-8
100 0
is attempting, with too little elasticity of curriculum and organization,
to meet the needs of dissimilar groups of adolescents and that, in the
circumstances, the needs of none are fully met. If this were so, the
proper approach would be a comprehensive review of the whole task,
not an attempt to alter conditions for one group. Indeed, we have come
to the view that the present pattern of secondary education is so closely
knit that to attempt to alter one part of it will inevitably lead to a review
of the whole,
(iii) Length of School Life’.
In our examination of this senior stage of the secondary school, two
sets of facts have become apparent. In the first place, the repetition of
at least one year in the secondary school seems to be more common
than has generally been supposed. It has not been possible to obtain
exact statistics on the matter, but a number of enquiries yield results
which point in this direction. Reference has already been made to repeti-
tion of years in connection with the case-study of school leavers. Of
the cases studied, 19 per cent., nearly all boys, repeated at least one
year. An estimate made throughout Fifth Year in Departmental schools
indicates that 4 per cent, are repeating their final year. We do not
think that the proportion would be less in non-Departmental schools.
We have been informed that the records of the University of Sydney
show that rather less than half of first year students qualified at the
Leaving Certificate Examination of the year before. When students
entering on the basis of the Matriculation Examination and those who
can be regarded as “special entries” are set aside, it would appear that
20 per cent, of first year university students spent more than five years
in secondary school.
The incidence of repetition has obvious significance in relation to the
ability of secondary students, and secondary standards and courses.
This is another avenue of research which we have not been able to
explore. We would point out, however, that if a significant number
of pupils is spending six years in secondary school, often as the result
of inadequate achievement, the lot of these pupils could be improved
if the whole system were reviewed.
The second set of facts was brought to our notice following discussion
of the statement from some of our witnesses that students who entered
the university were often too young and immature. Though we are
inclined to the view that, in individual cases, the “young bright” student
should be allowed to progress at his own pace, we appreciate the fact
that relative maturity is an asset in making the transition from school
to university.
With this idea in mind, an examination of the distribution of ages
of pupils in the Leaving Certificate year in Departmental schools was
made. At first sight, there seemed to have been little change in regard
to the age of pupils over the years: over a period of thirty years the
average age of entry (twelve years six months) and the average age
in Fifth Year (seventeen years two months) have fallen, at the most,
by two months. A closer examination, however, threw a different light
on the situation. This examination is reported in Table Vin terms of
percentages of the total candidates for a series of years.
Table V
Distribution of Ages of Fifth Year Pupils, Departmental Schools, 1920-1955
Table V demonstrates that the maintenance of the same average age
for Fifth Year pupils arises from a compensating shift in the distribution
of ages. Whereas, thirty years ago, one quarter of Fifth Year was
eighteen years of age or over, today only about one in twenty has
reached that age. At the same time, the group between the ages of
sixteen and seventeen has changed from being less than one-third to
becoming the predominant group in Fifth Year. In short, since the last
war, the most common age for proceeding to the university (six months
later than the time at which these statistics were recorded), is now little
more than seventeen years.


It is possible, we consider, to attach too much significance to chrono-
logical age in itself, but we cannot escape the feeling that the trend
recorded in Table V must result in an increasing number of relatively
immature, though academically qualified, students entering the univer-
sity.
Another aspect of this situation may be mentioned here. The com-
munity may well have become accustomed to their children leaving
secondary school about the age of seventeen. It is worth noting that
this was not always so and that it is only since the last war that a
fifth of the final secondary school year did not stay at school until
they were about eighteen and a half years of age. Even now, as an
analysis of the 17.0-17.11 group would show, approximately 15 per
cent, are eighteen years of age by the end of the year and another 5
per cent, as much as a year older.
SUMMARY.
Our task in this chapter has been “to survey and report upon the pro-
vision of full-time day education for adolescents in New South Wales.”
Our findings may be summarized thus:
Enrolments.
1. At present, more than 175,000 pupils are enrolled in secondary-
schools and courses in New South Wales. About 72 per cent, of these
pupils are enrolled in schools conducted by the Department of
Education.
2. This enrolment represents more than a tenfold increase in the
secondary school population over a period of forty years. In itself, the
provision of schools and teachers to meet this growing demand is a
noteworthy achievement.
3. A total enrolment of approximately one-quarter of a million
secondary school pupils is to be anticipated by 1965.
Schools.
4. In 1956, there were 323 secondary schools or departments main-
tained by the Department of Education. In the same year, there were
137 non-Departmental schools registered as secondary schools under
the Bursary Endowment Act.
Organization.
5. Within the Department of Education, the organization of secondary
schools differs as between city and country. In Sydney and Newcastle,
and in respect of one high school in Wollongong and one in Parramatta,
the pupils deemed most suitable from among primary school applicants
are admitted to high school. These high schools provide a five-year
course leading to the Leaving Certificate and the policy has been to
require their pupils to study one foreign language (usually French),
though the more able tend to study Latin also.
The other pupils pass from the primary school, either to another
secondary school offering languages or, in the majority of cases, to a
secondary school in which languages are replaced, for boys, by manual
arts and descriptive geometry, and, for girls, by domestic arts and com-
mercial subjects. With some exceptions, these are three-year schools,
those pupils who wish to go farther transferring to the senior years of
a high school.
Junior technical and home science schools are secondary schools;
despite their titles, they are not vocational schools. Their development
over the past forty-five years has been significant. The success of many
of their pupils at the Intermediate Certificate Examination and beyond,
raises in our minds the question of the reliability of the selection of
pupils before the commencement of secondary education.
6. In the country, where the majority of high schools are now found,
all pupils passing from the primary school are enrolled in the local
high or intermediate high school. There they are allotted to courses
corresponding to the different types of secondary school in the city.
Though there is some opportunity for adjustment within the country
secondary school, pupils tend to remain in the courses to which they
have been allotted. The country secondary school houses a number of
separate courses under one roof; it does not provide the elasticity of
the “comprehensive” school overseas.


7. Among the non-Departmental schools, those maintained by the
Roman Catholic Church are generally organized in specific courses
somewhat akin to the pattern of Departmental organization. In the
remainder, variations in the pattern of courses are to be found but,
since they are individual schools, no general statement of the details of
their organization can be made.
Selection for High School.
8. Behind the method adopted for selecting pupils for admission to
high schools in metropolitan areas lies a history of dissatisfaction with
a number of types of attainments tests used for this purpose between
1911 and 1943. The present method combines the results of primary
school attainments, and of intelligence tests, with the overall school
records of the pupils concerned. Due weight is given to parents’ choice
and to the judgment of teachers.
In itself, the method is as satisfactory as could be devised in the
circumstances. We do not consider, however, that a fully satisfactory
method of determining, in advance, the secondary school course for a
pupil of about twelve years of age can be devised, especially if the
organization of the secondary school thereafter makes it difficult for a
pupil to change his course.
Courses of Study.
9. School principals may vary courses, but the opportunity of doing
so is limited. Furthermore, the general pattern of the secondary cur-
riculum is largely determined by the requirements of syllabuses approved
by the Board of Secondary School Studies. These syllabuses are de-
signed, in their senior stages, to prepare candidates for the Leaving
Certificate Examination, which may also serve as the basis for university
entrance.
10. The effect of this situation is twofold. On the one hand. Leaving
Certificate requirements have an anticipatory effect upon the work of
junior years, though many of the pupils involved have no intention of
being Leaving Certificate candidates. On the other, the regard which
has had to be paid to less academically inclined candidates for the
Intermediate Certificate has probably restricted the scope and content
of work for the more able,
11. Under present conditions, when all adolescents proceed to the
secondary school, the extent of the influence of the Board of Secondary
School Studies is, in view of its limited authority under legislation, some-
what of an anomaly. That the anomaly has not become more apparent
has been due to the wisdom and understanding of the Board over the
past twenty years.
12. In addition to the general pattern of secondary schools described
in (5) above, there are high schools, termed “technical”, “home
science”, and “agricultural high schools”, in which a group of courses
corresponding to the title of the school is substituted for a second
language in the curriculum. The Roman Catholic Church maintains a
small number of agricultural secondary schools.
13. The Department of Education has developed two courses at the
secondary level, designed to meet the needs of pupils for whom post-
intermediate studies are not contemplated. The first, the General
Activities course, is designed for the least able group of adolescents; the
second, the Alternative Curriculum for Secondary Schools, is designed
for pupils of average ability who seem likely not to remain in school
beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage. Variations are made in
courses to meet the needs of similar groups of pupils in non-Depart-
mental schools, though not necessarily by means of these organized
courses of study.
14. Despite all that has been done in so many schools, the predomin-
ant pattern of organization makes it difficult for the secondary schools
of the State, as a whole, to provide a programme of education com-
pletely satisfactory for all types of adolescents.
Examinations.
15. In Departmental schools and in approved non-Departmental
schools, candidates who are not applicants for bursaries and scholarships
gain their Intermediate Certificate on the basis of conduct and attend-
ance and an “internal” examination on an approved course of study.
The “internal” examination is set and marked within the school. Other
candidates sit for an external examination, the arrangements for which
are approved by the Board of Secondary School Studies.


16. The Leaving Certificate Examination, conducted by the Board
of Secondary School Studies, is an external examination. In view of
the steady increase in the number of candidates and of the expectation
that that number will reach 12,000 by 1965, doubts are felt as to
whether, solely on administrative grounds, that examination can continue
to be maintained much longer in its present form.
Holding Power of Schools.
17. The consistent feature of secondary schools in New South Wales,
as in other states, is the small proportion of the group entering the
schools in any year which remains to complete the course. Pupil wastage
is more marked in Departmental than in non-Departmental schools.
Though the former enrol almost three-quarters of all First Year pupils,
they present only half the candidates for the Leaving Certificate Examina-
tion. Since the last war, however, there has been a small but consistent
annual increase in the holding power of Departmental schools.
Perhaps the more significant aspect of the fact that little more than
one-half of pupils entering secondary schools complete three years of the
course is that, among those who leave during the junior years, there is a
considerable number of pupils of undoubted talent.
18. Our analysis of the background of early leaving casts some doubt
upon the common assumption that it is almost entirely the result of
economic pressure upon parents. The most obvious fact disclosed is
that, although few pupils leave before the age of fifteen, they turn
fifteen before they have progressed very far in the secondary school.
19. This, together with the fact that many pupils repeat at least one
secondary school year, leads us to the conclusion that the situation
reflects some measure of retardation of progress in the primary school
and a need for a review of the nature and organization of studies in the
secondary school.
Relation to the University.
20. We have not questioned the assumption that universities in Aus-
tralia should be selective institutions and that their matriculation require-
ments should reflect this fact. We point out, however, that there is a
growing demand in our community for young people who have remained
at school to the Leaving Certificate stage, but who may not wish to
proceed to the university.
21. Taking both points of view into account, we consider that a
“survival rate” of 16 per cent, to the final year of the secondary school,
if continued, is likely to deprive the community of sufficiently educated
young people and to produce serious dissatisfaction among young
people themselves.
22. From what we know of the order of ability demanded by univer-
sity graduation, the number remaining until the last secondary school
year represents the smallest number we might expect if all of them were
of high ability, all wished to proceed to the university and all, in fact,
matriculated. Our evidence, however, is that many able pupils leave
before the final secondary school year and that some who have no
more than average ability remain. Only 7.5 per cent, of a typical
secondary school entry matriculate.
23. We are informed that as many as one-third of those who proceed
to the university fail in their first university year. The reason for this
failure is not to be found in any decline in the standard of the Leaving
Certificate Examination over a considerable period. The evidence points
rather to the fact that the pressure of that examination upon pupils and
schools has increased over the years.
24. We are not in a position to assess the degree to which the
responsibility for this incidence of failure at the university rests upon
the schools, the university or the undergraduates themselves. The great
majority of matriculants from schools are of sufficient general mental
ability to pursue university studies and we have noted the major part
played by members of university staff in determining and maintaining
matriculation standards. We have observed a marked tendency over
the last twenty years, for pupils to gain their Leaving Certificate at a
younger age. Under pressure of examinations, the survival of the
scholastically fittest tends to be the survival of the youngest. To some
extent, it may also produce immature undergraduates. Our impression,
however, is that a large part of the answer to our question may be
found in what happens to students at the university. At the same time,
we feel that any assessment of the situation must take into account the
nature and conditions of the senior years of the secondary school.


CHAPTER III
AIMS
We have felt bound, at this stage, to set down, as briefly as we may,
the background of opinion or belief as to the aims of education, against
which we have examined the present provision of secondary education
in this State and have made recommendations as to its future develop-
ment.
There are certain features of human nature and of the several social
patterns within which boys and girls live which we would regard as
postulates, rather than aims, of education.
They should, therefore, be stated here:
(a) Any conception of a school must assume marked diversity among
individuals in any group of children. Differences in general mental
ability are manifest as soon as a sufficiently large group of children are
brought together. Differences in aptitudes and interests reveal them-
selves even in a group whose members are similar from some other
point of view.
( b ) Not only do children differ from one another, but within each
child is to be found a diverse pattern of aptitudes, interests and needs.
(c) Especially during adolescence, this pattern within the individual
is not static. Beyond the fact of their differences from one another, the
most significant fact is that children grow. With that growth, new needs
arise, new interests emerge, new abilities manifest themselves. The
atmosphere, methods and immediate purposes of the school should
change to accord with the chief stages of this personal growth.
( d ) Life, at any given stage of his schooling, is important for the
child, and should be for his teachers. Adults are apt to talk about
education as a “preparation for life”. In one sense, they are right. But
if they would also be wise, they will recognize that true education must
concern itself with living now, at whatever stage the “now” may be.
(e) Neither child nor adult lives to himself; each must find his life as
a member of a social group. Such living is exploratory; it is an experience
of trial and error, out of which grow the compromises between his own
interests and those of others which make possible- the individual’s
satisfaction as a member of the group. The school’s opportunity lies in
the scope which is offered teachers to provide example and guidance to
young individuals who have so much to learn of the art of living with
their fellows.
With these postulates in mind, we can examine the question of pur-
poses in education from several points of view. One statement of pur-
poses may well differ from another simply because of a different method
of approach.
For example, the question could be answered in terms of the function
of the school. If we were asked to answer the question in those terms,
we could find no more succinct a statement than that made by the Eng-
lish Board of Education some years ago:
“We may sum up the function of the school as being (1) to pro-
vide the kind of environment which is best suited to individual and
social development; (2) to stimulate and guide healthy growth in
this environment; (3) to enable children to acquire the habits, skills,
knowledge, interests and attitudes of mind which they will need for
living a full and useful life; and (4) to set standards of behaviour,
effort, and attainment, by which they can measure their own
conduct.” O
There are some advantages to be gained, however, from examining
the aims of education from another point of view and in rather more
detail. We may ask ourselves: What are the components of a life
which the community will recognize as worthwhile and what contribu-
tion may the school make towards their development? This question
O Board of Education: Handbook of Suggestions, p. 15, London, His Majesty’s
Stationery Office, 1937.


is asked at the risk of becoming involved in a discussion of personal
philosophies of life. As posed here, it assumes that the standard of
the educational programme will not be determined on the lowest
accepted level of contemporary practice. On the other hand, the pro-
gramme of the school can only be carried out if it is accepted by a
significant proportion of the community in which the school will function.
If this be our method of approach, certain objectives emerge clearly
enough:
1. Health.
Most people will agree that health and physical fitness are a worthy
component of life and that their achievement and maintenance should
be one of the purposes in programmes of education. In so far as the
school is an agency in achieving this purpose, it has a threefold function.
It must provide and maintain physical conditions conducive to healthy
development. It must provide a measure of organized training. Especi-
ally at the secondary level, it must offer an appropriate background of
information which will enable pupils to appreciate the significance of
health and understand the basic means of achieving it.
2. Mental Skills and Knowledge.
There is a tendency among those who, with ample justification,
emphasize the importance of the development of the individual in the
social pattern, to pay scant attention to what has been termed the
“conservation” role of the school. Yet, if there is any reason why
children go to school, it is because, through its teaching, they may
enter upon their mental inheritance. The school and its teachers make
it unnecessary for each newcomer to climb painfully up every step of
the ladder climbed by earlier generations.
The basic skills of reading, writing and computation are part of
this inheritance. These are necessary skills; they are part of the tools
of living. Training in their use is a major task of the primary school, but
we would emphasize the fact that that training must be consolidated, and
in some directions extended, in the secondary school. If these skills
are tools, it is clear that the extent of their development will be justified
by the use to which they are likely to be put. Copperplate writing has
little justification in an age of typewriters, but legible and fluent hand-
writing will be an essential aim of the teacher until writing is outmoded
as a means of personal communication.
Part of the heritage to which children are entitled is the world of
knowledge opened to them in Literature, History, Geography and
Science, None of this enormous body of knowledge and experience is
innate in the child; what he comes to share of it, he must learn. In
some measure the home, but in greater measure the school, must teach
him.
The school’s task in this respect is much more than the transmission
of facts. Even if the individual were capable of acquiring encyclopaedic
knowledge, facts alone would not provide the opportunity for the per-
sonal development that lies in the various fields of human experience.
Thus, in addition to enjoyment, literature affords opportunity for the
cultivation of taste and critical perception. In addition to an under-
standing of the world around us, science inculcates a mode of thought
and appreciation of a particular scale of values. It is through studies
like these that the school makes its unique contribution to the character
of the young, as well as to their knowledge.
3. Capacity for Critical Thought.
While ignorance is an obvious handicap both to the individual and to
society, knowledge in itself is not enough. One of the elements of a
full life and one of the means by which the individual contributes to
the life of his fellows, is a capacity for self-reliant thinking. Such
thinking is reflected in personal standards of taste, in the exercise of
discrimination and in a healthy habit of scrutinizing new facts and
judgments. In the absence of these habits, the individual falls short
of a full measure of personal growth and, as a member of the social
group, he falls prey to the worst devices of “mass communication”.
One of the purposes of the school must therefore be to cultivate, within
the limits of each pupil’s mental capacity, habits of thought which will
enable him to develop into a self-reliant individual, ready, in so far as
he is able, to form his own judgments.
This task is ever before the school, but at the secondary level it
acquires a greater significance as the emerging interests and aptitudes
of the adolescent give the world in which he lives a richer content and
a deeper meaning.


4. Readiness for Group Membership.
Since man is both an individual and a social being, one of the aims
of education is to make young people, as they grow up, capable of
living with and for their fellows. If he lacks this element in his
education, the individual is stunted and the life of the community to
which he belongs, suffers in consequence.
This aspect of the task of the school is the more significant because
it must be undertaken side by side with action which, on the surface,
seems to move in the opposite direction. In striving to cultivate self-
reliant individuals, informed yet critical, each with the mental resources
for a satisfactory life, the school is discharging part of its obligation.
Emphasis upon achievement of excellence, whether it be in study or
some other school activity, is a valuable part of the pupil’s training.
Yet that very emphasis tends to set him apart and in competition with
his fellows. It is one of the apparent contradictions in education that
the school must never lose sight of the individual, yet must strive to
make the individual forget himself.
Perhaps at no stage of education is this more true than at the secon-
dary level. Adolescents are beginning to discover themselves in all
aspects of their living and that discovery is reflected in a variety of
forms of self-expression, in some cases approaching the aggressive.
They are anxious to win the approval of their fellows and, surprisingly
perhaps, even that of their elders. In a spirit of exploration, crude
trial and error though it may be, they challenge their expanding world,
yet they constantly crave a sense of certainty, even the certainty which
comes from the precept and example of their seniors. Their self-
assurance, superficial and provocative though it may often appear, is a
symptom of this conflict between a determination to be themselves and
their essential need for reinforcement. Only by a wise discretion is
the adolescent to be guided in his growth towards a genuine individuality
and the art of living as a member of a group. In the absence of sound
precept and consistent example in all aspects of the life of the school,
the adolescent is likely to fail to find his place as a stable and effective
member of a larger society.
5. The Arts of Communication.
Since he must live with his fellows, each individual is dependent upon
the arts of both spoken and written communication. A person’s thought
and aspirations are his own, insulated from direct contact with those
of other persons. Yet if the individual is not to be isolated, he must
be able, in some measure, to comprehend the thoughts and feelings of
his fellows and, above all, to convey his own thoughts and feelings with
clarity and precision. It is true that much of the intercommunication
within groups is emotional, intuitive and only partly conscious, but it
is also true that one of the contributing factors to lack of mutual under-
standing is the inability of individuals properly to convey to their fel-
lows what they have in mind. So significant are the arts of communica-
tion —in speech, in reading and in writing—that their cultivation must be
cited as one of the aims of education,
6. Vocation.
The fact that young people must live in a material world, with its
economic necessity, provides the most obvious grounds for including in
the aims of education preparation for some form of occupation. Though
in the highest sense it is not the most important part, earning a living
must be part of living a life.
It is in the secondary school that this purpose of education makes its
first real impact upon the life and activities of the school. True voca-
tional training, even specific pre-vocational training, are not proper
elements of a general education. Yet, with each year of adolescence, a
complete separation between school and future occupation becomes not
only unreal, but impossible. For all his indecision, each year brings
the adolescent closer to the point of vocational choice. As part of the
process of growing up, moreover, the adolescent plans, and should be
encouraged to plan, what occupation he will follow as an adult.
The secondary school will not provide vocational education, but it
has an important function to fulfil in assisting the adolescent to make a
smooth transition from classroom to vocation. It may discharge this
function in several ways.


While it should be said that the school’s most significant contribution
is to ensure that the adolescent has enjoyed a sound general education,
it may make its contribution first by maintaining a parity of esteem
among the subjects of the curriculum, having due regard for the ability
and aptitudes of its pupils. Traditionally, some subjects of the secondary
curriculum have been given pre-eminence. The effect of this tradition
has often been to designate other subjects, by implication at least, as
subjects which no pupil of merit will be encouraged to study. Thus,
it is possible for the school to hinder rather than to help the adolescent
to discover the fields in which he can excel, and through that excellence,
solve part of this problem of choosing a career. The task of the school
is to ensure that, in whatever subject it offers, good standards are main-
tained and pupils are encouraged to develop their abilities to the full.
Secondly, in teaching many of the subjects of the curriculum, the
school has the opportunity to relate its teaching to the facts and practices
of everyday life, including the life of commerce, industry and the pro-
fessions. The teaching of Science, for example, can never be complete
if confined to the school laboratory.
Thirdly, no secondary school can ignore the increasing significance of
its responsibility for the pastoral care and guidance of its pupils. The
discharge of this responsibility may well be one of the chief functions
of the school principal. He will be fortunate if he is assisted by a mem-
ber or members of staff specially trained to help pupils with their prob-
lems. Among adolescents, this guidance will increasingly involve some
consideration of a future career.
Fourthly, as the pupil approaches the point of leaving school, choice
of courses and the method of treatment of some of them may come
to have a more definitely pre-vocational bias. It may be a matter of
debate as to whether, at this stage, such work should be done in the
secondary school, in a vocational school, or by collaboration between
them. The needs of pupils will differ in this respect, but the inescapable
fact is that the transition from secondary to vocational education should
not be abrupt.
Since one of its purposes is to guide adolescents towards a worth-
while citizenship, the school has a function to perform which is more
significant than any we have yet mentioned. In countless ways, the
school may teach its pupils the dignity of labour. More than that, the
school will, in part, have failed if it sends into the adult world pupils
lacking a sense of personal responsibility for equipping themselves to
take their place as adults. It is not given to all to find their complete
vocation in the occupation by which they earn their living, but it is
possible for the school to give to many of its pupils an ideal of service
and self-dedication which, while not making them ignore such considera-
tions as congeniality of the task or its material rewards, becomes a
major determinant in their pursuit of a career.
7. Leisure.
Most communities would assume, as one of the components of a satis-
fying life, the opportunity for adequate leisure for enjoyment and per-
sonal culture. It is clear that the Australian community would neither
deny such an opportunity, nor tolerate economic conditions which
would seriously abridge it. One of the aims of education, then, must
be the preparation of young people for the use of leisure.
The task which confronts the secondary school in the coming years is
one of special significance. The years of adolescence see the emer-
gence of abilities and interests which provide the motivation and oppor-
tunity for encouraging young people to use their leisure with real satis-
faction to themselves. At the same time, the adolescent years, especially
those spent in school, are short, and the contribution of the school
must therefore be purposeful. Furthermore, adolescents now in school
are likely to be adults in a world where technical advances will, for
some groups at least, make available a greater degree of leisure. Many
of these adolescents are likely to earn their living under conditions in
which the task will convey little personal satisfaction in itself. The
need is therefore urgent for education to provide the means by which
these young people may build up reserves of interest and competence
of mind and body upon which they may draw in hours which will other-
wise be barren. For rarely will the hours be altogether idle; if they are
not occupied in worthwhile activity, they will be invaded by what is
cheap.
*7543—4


At the same time, the fulfilment of this task calls for discretion. While
the school must set about it purposefully, it must avoid a significant
danger. The earnestness of the teacher must never be allowed to betray
him into making provision for leisure occupations which is too pre-
scriptive or closely regulated. One of the secrets of the use of leisure
is relaxation from the pressures of obligatory work. Provision in the
school for closely scheduled “extra-curricular activities” may well in-
hibit spontaneity and so fail to prepare fully for the use of leisure. The
inner secret of leisure, the absorption which comes upon one through the
satisfaction of interest and skill, is only gradually to be learnt. The
school may be doing well if it kindles that interest and enables the
adolescent to lay the foundations of that skill.
There is danger, too, in the phrase “the proper use of leisure”. The
question may legitimately be asked: “proper” for whom? In the
effort to ensure that leisure hours may be spent with satisfaction to the
individual and yet with ultimate benefit to the community, it is im-
portant that the school avoid the pitfall of being too didactic. Adoles-
cents are inclined to suspect activities which are said to be “good”
for them. They may conform to the programme of the school as pupils,
only to cast aside some “leisure activities” with relief once they leave
school. Should they do that, the school will, in some measure, have
failed in its endeavours.
Finally, there are good grounds for the belief that some aspects of
education can come to full development only among adults. The leisure
which is sought in the Twentieth Century is adult leisure and, in one
sense, its worthy use can be learned only by adults. The task of the
school is therefore to awaken interests, to keep mental horizons broad,
to discover and cultivate skills, and accustom its pupils to use the hours
free from lessons in a profitable and satisfying fashion.
8. Spiritual Values.
It is clear that any analysis of what might be considered to be the
components of a life recognized as worthwhile, cannot stop short of a
recognition of values which are best termed “spiritual”. Whatever
one’s philosophy or system of beliefs may be, a programme of education
which, while recognizing the significance of the individual, seeks to pre-
pare him for group membership, which seeks to give him a sense of
responsibility in regard to his choice of and preparation for a vocation,
and which makes provision for an experience in the appropriate use of
leisure, must be based on a recognition of values higher than the in-
terests of the individual himself.
It is clear, too, that in so far as the aims examined above are
accepted, they involve the formation of habits and attitudes. These
habits and attitudes, in turn, are inevitably associated with, indeed
become part of, the personality or character of the boy or girl concerned.
Without entering into the discussion as to the legitimacy of “indoctrina-
tion” in schools, we would assume that the nature and atmosphere of
his experience in school will be a potent force in the development
of the pupil’s character, and that a responsibility rests upon the school
to ensure that its influence is conducive to the development of the
highest standards of personal conduct and character.
We assume that most members of the community believe that these
higher values cannot be fully attained save on the basis of religious
belief and in terms of man’s relationship with God. The views of the
Committee are reflected in the later discussion of the curriculum of the
secondary school. Here it may suffice to say that we consider that no
programme of education can be based on the assumption that man lives
to himself.


CHAPTER IV
APPRAISAL AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The brief account of the history of secondary education in this State
given in Chapter I will have drawn attention to the fact that the
responsibility undertaken by the community in the field of secondary
education has altered radically, both in scope and purpose. Within the
last fifty years, it has come to be accepted that not only will all children
complete an organized programme of primary education, but that they
will all pass on to some form of secondary education, remaining at
school at least until the age of fifteen years. To-day, almost all pupils
do attend school until that age.
It is true, as our examination of the present situation has shown(‘),
that for a pupil to remain at school until fifteen does not necessarily mean
that he will have completed the Intermediate stage of a secondary school
course. Indeed, the outstanding characteristic of secondary school enrol-
ments has been shown to be the rapid falling off in numbers in successive
years of the secondary school course, until only a small minority remain
in the final year. Yet it is also true that secondary education is available
to all who seek it, up to the age of seventeen or eighteen. This was not
true fifty years ago.
The Central Problem.
The most significant feature of this changing conception of secondary
education has manifestly been the emergence of the view that secondary
education is the education not of a select minority, whatever the basis
of selection, either social or intellectual, but of all adolescents, irrespec-
tive of their variety of interests, talents and prospects. This is the
conception of secondary education implied in our terms of reference.
Yet to accept this point of view of secondary education is only to
pose the problem in another and more difficult form. When secondary
education was conceived as the education of an elite, almost the only
point that could be at issue was the criterion upon which that elite
should be selected. Organization, curriculum and method, all flowed
largely from that determination. To-day, the issue is not so simple.
“The education of all adolescents” implies a proper provision for all
types and levels of ability and for the wide variety of interest and need
to be found in any entire school generation. What is sometimes over-
looked is that this very definition of secondary education makes it
obligatory for the community to provide suitable education, not only
for the “average” adolescent, but also, and on the same social and
moral grounds, for the adolescent of talent and for the adolescent who
is poorly endowed. In particular, we feel, no community can afford,
in making general provision for all its adolescents, to lose sight of the
need for identifying and cultivating talent of every kind, wherever it
may be found among its youth. This cultivation of talent was perhaps
the outstanding feature of older concepts of secondary education.
To-day’s problem is that of meeting the needs of all adolescents with-
out impairment to the potentialities of any.
It is against the background of this central problem that we propose,
in this chapter, to take up the second of our terms of reference, namely—
“ln particular, to examine the objectives, organization and con-
tent of the courses provided for adolescent pupils in the public
schools of the State, regard being had to the requirements of a
good general education and to the desirability of providing a variety
of curriculum adequate to meet the varying aptitudes and abilities
of the pupils concerned.”
Method of Approach.
It has seemed to us that this problem can best be attacked in terms
of the organizational framework within which schools are to be estab-
lished and maintained. It is true that the heart of the matter lies in the
curriculum and method of the school, but it is clear that decisions in
regard to both curriculum and method are bounded by considerations
of organization.
C) See Chapter 11, especially pp. 37-40.


Assuming that there is agreement as to the purpose of secondary
education, we consider that its organization should be determined, in
the first instance, by the nature and needs of the pupils for whom it is
to be designed, however significant may be the other factors which may
have to be taken into account.
Transition to Secondary Education.
With the foregoing considerations in mind, the first aspect of our
problem to which we have directed our attention is the conditions under
which pupils in Departmental schools pass from the primary to the
secondary stage of their education. The method of selection for secon-
dary school and the allocation to courses has already been described. O
Briefly, it takes into account parents’ wishes, primary school attain-
ments and general record, and the mental ability of the pupil. It was
adopted after a succession of forms of the customary type of examination
had proved unsatisfactory. We have agreed that the present method
is an improvement on those which have preceded it and has much to
commend it as a basis of guidance. The fact which gives us concern is
that the procedure adopted is used, prior to admission, as a basis of
determination of the secondary course a pupil is to follow. Furthermore,
despite the provision of a variety of secondary courses and a measure
of elasticity in their organization, it is, in the majority of cases, a final
determination.
Our review of the present situation in Chapter II has demonstrated
the extent to which pupils drop out of secondary courses. The evidence
before us has indicated that one of the factors of this loss of pupils is
that many of them fail in the courses to which they have been allocated.
Further, we have observed that pupils who, at the outset, were not
allocated to five-year secondary schools have demonstrated their suita-
bility for the full secondary course by remaining at school and gaining
their Leaving Certificate.
In addition to this administrative evidence we have had placed before
us a considerable body of evidence, drawn both from research studies ( 2 )
and from the experience of practising teachers, which throws grave doubt
upon any attempt to determine, at a relatively early age and in so final
a fashion, the pattern of the secondary school course a pupil should
follow. Our opinion, therefore, is that such selection for specific types
of secondary education should not take place prior to admission to the
secondary school. We do not assume that the change from competitive
entry can be fully effected immediately. Administrative and other diffi-
culties are foreseen in some localities in which the .desirability of a
gradual transition is recognized. We urge, however, that the present
method of competitive selection for particular schools be abandoned at
the earliest possible moment.
The issue, however, goes deeper than one of a proper allocation to
any particular course of secondary school study. Unless the transition
from primary to secondary education is unduly postponed, it will take
place at a time when a child’s interests and aptitudes are only beginning
to become manifest. In these circumstances, any procedure designed to
guide pupils into appropriate courses of secondary education must not
only take into account differences in native ability, of which some
measure may be obtained, but it should also make provision for differ-
ences in rate of maturation. At the age of about twelve, the latter
differences are difficult to discern and almost impossible to measure.
Nor is a measure of a pupil’s scholastic attainments an adequate guide
to the future. These attainments are the outcome of a variety of factors
and, like other measures, they fail to forecast the complex of personal
qualities which will prove so significant to adjustment within school
during the years of adolescence. In short, it must be admitted that many
of the factors which should determine the ultimate content and shape of
secondary education for the individual boy or girl develop during
adolescence and are not adequately discernible at its threshold.
It follows, therefore, that any determination of the course of study
best suited to the adolescent boy or girl must be progressive. Any
procedure, which, at the outset, selects pupils to follow a particular pat-
tern of courses either in a separate school or in rigid streams within
the one school, denies this need for progressive adjustment of the
curriculum.
( x ) Chapter 11, p. 30. See also Chapter I, pp. 21-22.
( 2 ) See Appendix A.


Quite apart from this consideration of the problem from the point
of view of the capacities and needs of children, the Committee has
been made aware of other undesirable effects of selection for particular
secondary schools in Sydney and other metropolitan centres. We recog-
nize that the situation in Sydney, particularly, is the outcome of more
than half a century of history, but, in a day when there is growing
interest in the educational future of children, the disappointment of the
parents of pupils not selected for enrolment in certain schools is not
unnatural. In individual cases, the feeling is one of deep resentment,
often reflected in the attitude of the children. Too much can probably
be made of children’s reactions to the situation, but the sense of failure
or inferiority engendered in the minds of some who do not gain places
in selective high schools is not lightly to be discounted. For many of
those who have aspired to gain a place in high school, but have failed
to do so, secondary school life is commenced under the worst auspices.
Transition as Normal Promotion.
From the point of view, then, both of the individual pupil and of the
community, we feel that the organization of secondary education should,
at the outset, be based on two assumptions: first, that in any given area
all pupils who have completed the primary stage of education should
pass into the secondary school without prerequisite test or examination;
second, that the secondary school should be organized so as to make
possible postponement of a final determination of the course or pattern
of courses the adolescent should follow.
The Nurture of Talent,
As has been indicated above, account must be taken of the views of
those who stress the need for discovering and cultivating talent within
the school community as quickly and as assiduously as possible. Some
of our witnesses were inclined to fear that too much thought might be
given to the mediocre and to the dull, with consequent neglect of the
gifted minority.
Most of the witnesses who expressed this point of view based their
representations on the growing demands of the present day for young
people of the highest quality in science and technology. Behind this
demand lies the rapid expansion of knowledge in all fields and the con-
sequent increase in demands upon both learner and practitioner. In
some fields, what was once relatively advanced work has become
little more than a preliminary to the type of study modern knowledge
and practice require.
We consider that these increasing demands, especially upon the more
able of adolescent students, are real and inevitable. It is our opinion,
furthermore, that no scheme of secondary education dare ignore the
obligation to make provision for the cultivation of talent among adoles-
cents in whatever field it may express itself. It is to be noted, however,
that while the obligation to provide conditions which will encourage the
development of talent, and the need to meet the contemporary demand
for higher standards of knowledge and achievement in many fields are,
in practice, closely associated, they constitute separate educational
objectives. Even if the state of knowledge were static, the obligation
to cultivate talent would remain.
We have already expressed the opinion that this obligation is not
to be met by the segregation of selected pupils in separate schools or
courses at the outset of their secondary education. Here we would add
that the special talents which become manifest during adolescence are not
all to be measured in scholastic terms or to be nurtured by the more
traditional academic studies. The secondary school must accept res-
ponsibility for the nurture of talents in Music and Art, for example.
It is true that, in some boys and girls, talent does manifest itself
early and in a fashion which is not to be denied. Faced with the obliga-
tion of meeting the needs of these boys and girls, the school system must,
we feel, be organized so that courses of study can be taken up when
pupils are ready for them. The needs of these pupils and those of able
pupils who develop later can all be met if a determination of the pattern
of studies which each may follow can be made progressively within the
secondary school. Only by this means, within a programme of secondary
education for all adolescents, can the obviously talented pupil be afforded
the opportunity of a relatively early commencement of studies which
are likely to be different, both in kind and degree, from those under-
taken by his less able fellows.


The Demands of University Studies.
If it is agreed that all pupils, on completion of their primary school-
ing, should pass on to a secondary school, there to have the opportunity
of progressively deciding the pattern of courses they will follow, the
second aspect of our problem which calls for examination is to be
found in the concluding stages of the secondary school. How are the
demands of university studies to be met?
It is clear, from our examination of the present situation^ 1 ) that this
question concerns a minority of secondary school pupils. We believe
that, though that minority is at present too small, in terms both of the
ability of pupils and the needs of the community, the number of pupils
with the ability and the ambition to proceed to a university will always
be a relatively small proportion of those entering the secondary school,
especially if that entry comprises almost the complete range of ability.
No university tendered any evidence of its experience or views to us.
However, we received evidence from a number of members of staff.
Speaking as individuals, they were not unanimous in their general obser-
vations, and they were even less in agreement upon more specific
matters.
In general, however, these witnesses tended to emphasize the need for
the attainment of higher standards of knowledge, especially in certain
fields, before young people begin university studies. We appreciate the
anxiety of these witnesses and are aware of the body of university opinion
which they seem to represent. Nevertheless, we consider that there are
no reliable grounds for the view, sometimes expressed, that the standard
of the Leaving Certificate Examination has fallen. Indeed, we feel that
the demands made upon secondary pupils at that examination have
increased with the years.
While we were not able to examine the histories of secondary school
pupils who proceed to the university, we believe that the successful
completion of secondary school studies, as measured by Leaving Certi-
ficate results, does not of itself guarantee success in the early stages of
university work. Nor does a matriculation examination conducted by a
university provide a reliable basis of prediction. We are convinced
that there is no single solution to the problem of removing this dis-
crepancy. It is as certain to us now, as it was to the Royal Com-
missioners in 1902, that the solution is not simply that of raising the
standard of university entrance ( 2 ).
Any complete examination of this problem would involve a careful
study of what happens to students after they enter the university. From
the point of view of secondary education, however, we are convinced
that, in so far as the standards demanded by the university are a
reflection of the expansion of knowledge and of the rise in standards in
many fields, they must be met. Yet they cannot be met at the cost of
endangering the provision of a sound general education for all adoles-
cents.
Nor are the demands of university studies to be met, even for the
minority of pupils concerned, solely by an increase in content or duration
of the secondary school course. In this connection, it is of interest
to note that, despite ample testimony as to the growth of knowledge
in many fields during recent years, no witness suggested that there should
be any increase in the time required for university graduation. We are
aware for example that, although there has been a remarkable expansion
of knowledge and necessary study in mathematics and in the sciences,
there has been no increase in the number of years of study required of
the candidates for the pass degree in the one university of long standing
in the State.
If knowledge has expanded so rapidly in the last fifty years in some
fields and standards of attainment have also risen, it is reasonable to
suppose that the next fifty years will see a further, though not necessarily
similar, expansion. There must be a point at which the demands of
tertiary education upon the secondary school must stop, even for the
minority of pupils concerned. We are of the opinion that, in terms of
chronological age, that point is reached at about the age of eighteen.
Beyond that point, if its needs are not then met, the university must
review the nature and organization of the courses it provides for its
own undergraduates.
C) See Chapter 11, p. 40.
( 2 ) See Knibbs-Turner Report, quoted p. 16 above.


We have reached this conclusion on two principal grounds. First, we
agree that part of the task of meeting modern standards should be
achieved before students enter the university. Second, we believe that,
as a general rule, a degree of personal maturity is necessary for the
successful pursuit of university studies, even at the undergraduate level.
On both grounds, namely the desirability of higher standards and
the need for maturity, we have taken the view that an additional year
should be provided. Further, we believe that there would be a real
advantage in providing this additional year within the school system.
Continuity of teaching would be an advantage in itself and we have
no doubt that the quality of teaching for this senior level would be
available. We consider, too, that the task of transition from general
secondary studies to the more mature work of the university would not
only be more effectively carried out, but would be in the best interests
of the pupils, if performed, under appropriate conditions, in school. An
institution such as the American Junior College, which has been com-
mended by certain of our witnesses as a satisfactory link between secon-
dary school and university, would, in our opinion, be likely to lack
the tradition and background of either.
In making any comment upon our proposal, it is necessary to set
that proposal in proper perspective. In the first place, it should be noted
that we do not recommend the general extension of school life by one
year, but its extension for a minority of pupils. The pupils we have in
mind are those who propose to proceed to tertiary education directly
from school. Accepting the selective nature of universities in the
British tradition, we do not anticipate that more than about 16 per cent,
of any school generation would be involved, even if all adolescents of
the requisite ability had the necessary interests and aptitudes to lead
them on to university studies. On the basis of present secondary enrol-
ments, if all able pupils could be persuaded or assisted to remain at
school, our proposal would affect about 5,000 of the 35,000 in a com-
plete age-group in Departmental secondary schools. Of that 5,000,
10 per cent, already stay at school until eighteen years of age. In the
second place, our proposal would, in terms of years, be a frank recog-
nition of what now takes place in the life of many young people who
seek to graduate at a university in New South Wales.
The realities of the present situation become more apparent when
secondary pupils pass on to the university. Full statistics of university
failure were not available to us, though several of our witnesess stressed
the incidence of undergraduate failure in their criticism of university
entrance standards. We are aware, however, that in one university (set-
ting aside the Faculty of Arts, in which students may progress from one
year to another while repeating a subject in which they have failed) the
average failure rate of students over the past five years has been 32
per cent. Even though it may be argued that the cost of this repetition
falls upon the students themselves or upon their parents, there are
unseen costs which fall upon the universities and ultimately upon the
public purse. In any case, we consider that, to the extent to which
failure at the university is a result of inadequate preparation, an addi-
tional well-spent year in secondary school would be better for all con-
cerned than failure at the university.
To sum up, then, our view is that it is necessary to make definite pro-
vision for an additional year of study for the minority of secondary
pupils who wish to proceed to the university. We consider that this
year should be provided, under appropriate conditions, in secondary
schools. We emphasize the fact that our proposal would furnish only
part of the solution to the problems of the maintenance of university
standards and of student success in accordance with those standards.
The universities must assume their share of the responsibility for a full
solution. In particular, we consider that no further demands should
be made on the secondary school which would extend school life beyond
the age of eighteen. We appreciate the fact that our proposal will
involve additional cost both to parents and to education authorities.
Some of the cost to parents may be met by the extension of existing
provision of scholarships and bursaries, but we are convinced that, owing
to the incidence of failure or the repetition of years of study between
the ages of sixteen and twenty, the community, though it may not be
aware of the fact, is already paying a significant proportion of the cost
of an additional year’s education. Our proposal would both recognize
the need for this year and make provision for a more profitable use
of it.


Types o£ Organization of Secondary Education.
If it is assumed that all pupils in a locality will proceed to the same
secondary school without selection and that those who wish to proceed
to the university will pursue their secondary school studies for six years,
it is necessary to examine the total pattern of secondary school organiza-
tion within which our proposals would best operate. In that examina-
tion, we have borne in mind the two aims implied in the second of our
terms of reference. The organization chosen must be such as to make
possible, for all adolescents, “a good general education” and, at the same
time, provide “a variety of curriculum adequate to meet the varying
aptitudes and abilities of the pupils concerned”.
1. Extension of the Primary School.
Having in mind the problems associated with the early selection of
pupils and the differentiation of courses of study, we recognize that
one method of approach might be to allow pupils to remain in a primary
school for a longer period, perhaps to the stage at which many are
ready to leave school, the secondary school thereafter making provision
only for those with the ability or interest to continue at school. We
dismissed this possibility, not so much because we considered that such
an approach would create as many problems as it might solve, as
because it ignored a principle which we believe to be of paramount
importance.
While it is not possible to indicate exactly when adolescence is reached
by the individual pupil, and while much that is exaggerated has been
written about this stage of personal development, we are convinced
that the change from the atmosphere and “mores” of the primary
school should not be delayed beyond the age at which most pupils
become pubescent. Patterns of secondary education in most countries
have been determined in large part by administrative considerations, but
we are of the opinion that there are sound psychological reasons for
providing a stage or type of schooling which is specially designed to
establish the milieu in which adolescents may be helped to find them-
selves and to develop. Prolongation of primary school life is not the
answer to the needs of the adolescent.
2. The “6-3-3” Organization.
The American Junior High School has attracted attention because
it provides a stage of transition from the activities and organization of
the primary school to those of the senior stage of the secondary school.
The junior high school, however, is the first part of a pattern of secon-
dary education which, after six years of primary schooling, provides
three years of junior secondary followed by three years of senior secon-
dary education. It is to be noted that this organization assumes that
all pupils will enter the junior high school at about the age of twelve
and that provision is to be made for a school life extending to eighteen
years. Many of the American states have fixed the latter point by
statute.
We have considered the question of the upper limit of statutory
school life in this State. Sound arguments may be advanced for raising
the permissible leaving age, arguments which may v/ell be strengthened
by future changes in industrial practice and conditions. On the other
hand, with the school leaving age now at fifteen, the problems which
still face the school system, especially the significant increase in secon-
dary school enrolments, make it difficult for us to contemplate a general
increase in the statutory length of school life at the present time.
Yet we are convinced that three years is too short a time in which
to complete a programme of secondary education which can claim to
provide a satisfactory background of training and experience for those
who will have no further opportunity of full-time schooling. For that
reason, we would not recommend the adoption of v/hat is known as the
“6-3-3” type of school organization. It is felt that to do so would be to
postpone indefinitely the possibility of developing a satisfactory pro-
gramme of secondary education in a country which is unlikely, for many
years, to consider the raising of the school leaving age to eighteen years.
3. The New Zealand Intermediate School,
The New Zealand “intermediate school” does not appear to offer
any real solution to the problem. This is a school providing for two
years (ages eleven to thirteen) interpolated between the primary and
the secondary school. The virtues of this type of organization are that
it provides a school in which children achieve, in part, the transition


between the conditions of the primary school and those of the secondary
school, but, even more, that it can provide libraries and facilities for
Art, Craft, and Music beyond the capacity of the individual primary
school. Yet the “intermediate school” would appear to be suspended
between the primary and the secondary school and to be properly
integrated with neither. Especially where it is not linked with either
primary or secondary school for administrative purposes, the inter-
mediate school seems to confront the pupil with the task of commencing
at a new school twice between the ages of eleven and thirteen.
4. A “Transition” Year.
The proposal most frequently made by witnesses interested in this
aspect of our problem was that the existing organization of secondary
education in New South Wales should be amended by making the first
secondary school year a “transition” or “orientation” year. These wit-
nesses in general assumed that the secondary school would have received
all the children in its area who had passed out of the neighbouring
primary schools. The chief purpose of the transition year would be to
enable the pupils to adjust themselves to the conditions of the new school
and, in particular, to afford them some opportunity of determining the
ultimate pattern of their courses of study. Some witnesses also saw,
in this year, the opportunity for pupils to consolidate the skills which
they had acquired, or should have acquired, in the primary school. Most
of the witnesses also expressed the view that, as part of this transition,
pupils should, as far as possible, be taught by class teachers in an
accustomed room, rather than by subject teachers in a number of rooms.
The arguments advanced by these witnesses were, in the main, those
set out in the earlier part of this chapter, namely that selection of
pupils for secondary education is undesirable; that even if it were desir-
able, no method will be found to be fully satisfactory; that adolescence
is a period of personal growth in which provision for adjustment is most
necessary; and that, in terms of the curriculum, a period of exploration
is necessary before decisions can be made either by pupil or teacher.
With these views we agree, but we are of the opinion that the proposal
for a “transition” year does not go far enough.
The very arguments which have been advanced in this connection
throw doubt upon the possibility that, within the space of three school
terms, a majority of pupils will be able finally to adjust themselves to
the life of the secondary school or to make a satisfactory final choice of
courses. The more comprehensive evidence available to us has served
to emphasize the fact that not only do children differ markedly in
ability, aptitudes and interests, but that their rates of development are
different. Thus, while in the case of some children the patterns of
ability are so clearly defined and the degree of maturity is so obvious
that almost final decisions as to type of secondary education can be
made quite early, in the case of other children no such decision can
be made by the end of the first secondary school year. For some indeed,
we feel, final choice may need to be further postponed.
If, as some of our witnesses suggested, the transition year is to be
followed by definite allocation to courses, this proposal, whatever its
merits in providing a period of orientation, would appear to be for
many pupils but a postponement, by one year, of the relatively final
decisions at present to be made at the end of the primary school stage.
The allocation of pupils to different “streams” in a comprehensive
secondary school at the end of the first year would obviously avoid some
of the undesirable results of current practice in regard to selection for
Departmental secondary schools in metropolitan areas. It would not,
however, constitute a marked improvement on current practice in
country secondary schools and, in general, it would fail to achieve the
best possible solution of the problem of adjusting the school to the
wide variety of children.
MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS.
We have therefore come to the conclusion that a more elastic type
of provision must be made. Setting aside certain features of our pro-
posals for later examination, we recommend the following pattern of
organization:—
I. On completion of the primary school course and, in general, about
the age of twelve years, all pupils should proceed, without examination,
to secondary education organized consistently with the recommendations
which follow.


11. The organization and curriculum of the high school should be
such as to provide a satisfactory education for all adolescents and should
be designed to cover four years, to the age of about sixteen.
111. The curriculum should be designed to provided a core of subjects
common to all schools, together with a progressive increase in the
proportion of elected subjects. On this basis, the greater part of the
curriculum for the first year should be allotted to the common core.
IV. Under teacher guidance, election of subjects should progressively
be made in the light of pupil achievement or potential.
V. On satisfactory completion of the four-year course, a School
Certificate should be issued on the basis of the result of an external
examination.
VI. This examination should be designed as a terminal or retrospec-
tive examination and the Certificate as a formal indication of the
successful completion of a satisfactory course of secondary education.
VII. No external examination should be held, nor any certificate of
general status issued, before the end of the fourth secondary school
year.
VIII. Pupils who wish to proceed beyond the School Certificate level,
including those who aim to matriculate, should remain at school to
follow a course or courses leading to the Higher School Certificate
Examination. The type and content of this examination should be
such as to make it acceptable as a test for university matriculation. The
further course of study should be designed to cover two years.
DISCUSSION.
It is obvious that the foregoing recommendations raise a number of
issues, upon the determination of which much of the significance of our
major recommendations will depend. While some of them will have
significance in the total pattern of our proposals, the observations which
follow have been numbered to correspond with the recommendations
which most directly occasion them. It should, perhaps, be recalled that,
throughout this chapter, we have confined ourselves to the second of
our tasks, namely an examination of the conditions which obtain in the
public schools of the State.
I. Transition from Primary to Secondary School.
(a) Completion of the primary school course :
Any proposal that all children should pass, without selection, from
the primary to the secondary school raises the question either of the
standard or of the age of entry into the secondary school.
In regard to current standards of achievement at the end of the
primary school, we received conflicting evidence, though we are aware
that there is a body of opinion which supports the view that standards
have declined. Research reports do not support this opinion or, at
least, return a verdict of “not proven”. The reason is' not far to seek.
Some criticisms of primary school achievements are based on reliable
standards, but others spring from what is recollected of achievements of
earlier days. Yet, with whatever point in time present achievement is
compared, reliable comparison is frustrated by the fact that curricula
have changed and the test of even a decade ago is no longer wholly
relevant to-day.
It must be borne in mind also that some, at least, of the current
criticism of standards of achievement in schools is based on experience
with youths who have left school at the age of fifteen, some of whom,
as we have seen, have had not more than two years of secondary educa-
tion. If an answer has to be found by the school system, it is not only
the primary school which may have to provide it. The maintenance of
standards in the fundamental skills of reading, writing, spelling and
arithmetic demands practice, and there is evidence of a need to continue
this practice beyond the primary school more systematically
than appears sometimes to have been the case. Furthermore, those who
have left school at the age of fifteen and are often judged as the total
product of the school, tend to represent the less able members of their
generation, although they may, of course, include young people of
real ability.


In contrast to those who criticized primary school standards, some of
our witnesses attested that the objectives of the primary school of today
are of greater value than those of former days, and that the standards
now set in the fundamental skills are more relevant and appropriate to
the age and needs of the pupils.
We are inclined to agree with the latter point of view. While we con-
sider that no curriculum may be regarded as finally satisfactory, we
are of the opinion that the present Curriculum for Primary Schools f 1 )
provides a thoroughly suitable basis for the work of a modern primary
school. It is a curriculum which, if properly used, provides ample
opportunity for the attainment of satisfactory standards in the funda-
mental skills. There is evidence, however, that the aim of the curri-
culum is not always being achieved in some cases, perhaps because of
the inherent difficulty of combining some modern methods with the pur-
suit of systematic knowledge and the attainment of well-grounded skills.
Nevertheless, it is clear that a reorganization of secondary education
along the lines we have recommended will affect the upper levels of
the primary school and will present those responsible with both a
challenge and an opportunity. On the one hand, it will be essential that
the unquestioned transition of pupils from primary to secondary school
shall be accompanied by a continuing scrutiny of the standards achieved
by the average pupil in the final year of primary school. On the
other, an opportunity will be afforded of reviewing the scope and stan-
dards of the curriculum for that year, in concert with a similar review
of the curriculum for the initial year of the secondary school. In the
spirit of our recommendations, entry to secondary school will be but a
transition from one phase of common schooling to another, with all that
that implies.
One of the implications of our Recommendations I and 111 will be
that, during the first secondary school year, opportunity will be taken
to consolidate the work done in the primary school. We are aware
of the fact, moreover, that a high school receiving pupils from a number
of primary schools,- each with its own variations of curriculum and
method, is confronted with a heterogeneity of background and a varia-
tion of standards among its First Year pupils which is hardly to be
appreciated by the lay observer. We consider that a sounder basis for
the work of later secondary school years is laid when provision is
explicitly made in First Year for the fact that from each primary school
there will come pupils with marked differences in ability and in in-
dividual attainments. Recruitment from a number of primary schools
serves to multiply these differences.
(b) Age of transition :
It is clear that whatever features characterize adolescence in con-
trast with other stages of personal growth, no sharp lines can be drawn
across a continuous history of development. Especially in terms of
educational needs, no date can be set for the onset of adolescence. More-
over, in this as in other phases of living, individuals differ. It is not sur-
prising, then, that the average age at which secondary education com-
mences has so often been determined on administrative rather than on
psychological grounds.
We accept current practice in the public schools of New South Wales
as reasonable on both grounds. At present, pupils pass on to the several
types of secondary school at an average age of twelve and a half
years. We have found no evidence which would seriously challenge this
practice.
It is clear, however, that the phrase, “completion of the primary
school course” must be modified in the case of pupils of low ability.
While the due regard which must be paid to attainments will result, at
any stage, in a measure of retardation among these pupils in relation to
their more able fellows, there is a limit beyond which the progress of
pupils from grade to grade cannot be deferred. On social grounds,
it is necessary that even retarded pupils should pass from the primary
school to life among other adolescents. In the nature of the case, they
will do so later than their more able fellows, but it would appear to
be desirable that they should not be retained in primary schools beyond
the age of thirteen and a half years. It is perhaps not necessary to
add that the secondary school, in receiving these pupils, must provide
them, as at present, with a suitably designed curriculum.
O Curriculum for Primary Schools, issued under the authority of the Minister
for Education, 1952.


(c) Liaison between primary and secondary school :
We consider that public schools in an increasing number of districts
in this State are fortunate in having the services of school counsellors.
These specially selected and trained members of staff are, in themselves,
a form of liaison between primary and secondary schools. We believe
they are still inadequate in number and the increase in the secondary
school population is certain to make even greater demands upon their
services.
We have noted with interest the use of individual pupil records which
are cumulative and comprehensive and pass with the pupil from primary
to secondary school. In professional hands, these pupil records form a
valuable means of assisting in the smooth transition from one school
to the other.
However, the contribution of school counsellors and the use of cumula-
tive records do not exhaust the possibility of liaison between primary
and secondary school. There is need for their respective staffs to know
more about each other’s objectives and problems. Personal visits of
staff between schools, conferences, and panel discussions are obvious
means of cultivating this exchange of experience. We understand that
in some centres these methods are being adopted with profit.
Reference has already been made to the opportunity offered by com-
prehensive entry into secondary school, for a review of the adjacent
areas of the curricula of the primary and the secondary school. Indeed,
while there will be a real difference between the two curricula, both
should be reviewed so as to ensure that together they will provide an un-
interrupted progress of experience for the children concerned.
We consider that more remains to be done to ensure satisfactory
grade placement of tasks during these years of transition. We also
consider that a review of the curriculum before and after the point of
transfer would facilitate and make more effective the proportion of
recapitulation and consolidation v/hich is appropriate, especially during
the first secondary school year,
(d) Class-teaching in First Year :
In the opinion of many witnesses, one means of achieving a smooth
transition from primary to secondary school would be the organiza-
tion of as much as possible of the teaching in the first secondary school
year on the basis of class groups rather than of subjects. Pupils leave
primary school, where they have been under the care of one teacher
in their accustomed classroom, and enter a secondary school where they
may meet six or more teachers in the day and move from room to room.
The extent of this unsettlement varies with the size and type of secon-
dary school, but it constitutes a general contrast with the atmosphere
of the primary school, and, for some pupils at least, it cannot but
impede smooth transition from one stage to the other.
It is clear that some specialist teaching and movement to and from
laboratories, workshops and other specialized rooms is unavoidable,
even in the first secondary school year. It is to be expected, too, that
both will increase in the later stages of the secondary school. Here, then,
is one aspect of the whole problem of transition from primary to secon-
dary school. The question at issue is the degree to which the “home
room” atmosphere of the primary school and the continuing “pastoral
care” which can be exercised by a single class or form teacher should
or can be retained in the secondary school, at least in First Year.
We have not been unanimous in our answer, though the weight of
our opinion would support, to the fullest extent possible during the
first secondary school year, an organization of class teaching in a “home
room”.
There are, of course, two questions here. The first is one of location.
Should First Year pupils spend as much time as possible in one room,
or should they move not only to laboratories and workshops, but to
rooms specially equipped for other subjects such as History and Geo-
graphy? The balance of opinion in regard to junior secondary pupils is
that they should remain in the same room as far as possible. It is a
matter of regret that in some schools the consideration of accommoda-
tion, rather than the provision of specialist rooms, causes junior classes
to move from room to room and-to lose the stabilizing influence of a
regular “home room”.


The second question relates to specialist teaching. It is clear that in
subjects such as Science, Manual Arts and Music, specialist teaching
as well as special rooms is desirable from the beginning of the second-
ary school stage. To what extent should English, Mathematics, the
social studies and foreign languages be taught by specialist teachers at
this initial secondary school stage? Most of our witnesses would say
that, in the first year at least, English, Mathematics and the social
studies should be taught by the same teacher. There are those, how-
ever, who would stress the importance of the early influence upon
secondary pupils of the teacher with specialist knowledge and insight in
each of the subjects mentioned.
Some of the evidence on this issue implied a misgiving which, while
rarely put into words, challenged our attention. The distrust of the
specialist seems to arise from a feeling that there is a tendency for such
a teacher to have more regard for the subject than for the pupil. We
consider that this is not necessarily the case, but we are aware that a
sense of perspective can be lost if a teacher sees a pupil only in one
aspect of his total life in school. Moreover, under conditions where the
pupils of a school are a selected group, a teacher’s perspective can be
further distorted. (The “average” pupil of such a group is, in fact, far
above the average of his contemporaries in ability, and probably in at-
tainments.) Specialist teaching casts upon the teacher an added respon-
sibility that he remain sensitive to criteria of excellence other than
achievement in his special subject, criteria which, in the general education
of the pupil, may well be of paramount importance.
It was perhaps this consideration which moved some witnesses to
emphasize the significance for the secondary school teacher, especially
at the junior level, of having had recent experience of teaching pupils
manifesting a range of ability and a variety of talents. Some witnesses
expressed the opinion that secondary teachers should also have had
experience of teaching in the primary school.
In our view, it is unfortunate that the problem has been posed in
terms of arguments for and against specialist teaching. This has been
the general method of approach of our witnesses; it is the mode of
thinking common in the teaching profession. The essential problem,
however, is that of ensuring that a school shall be conducted and teach-
ing carried out so that pupils are perceived as individuals, each with his
own pattern of abilities, interests and needs, and afforded what has
been termed “pastoral care” as individuals and as members of a group.
The most serious charge against specialist teaching is that, under some
circumstances, it can result in a pupil being perceived and taught only
within the framev/ork of a school subject. On the other hand, there are
those who question whether the teacher of several subjects can bring
to each of them the background of knowledge and insight necessary
not only to teach the junior classes, but also to establish a firm founda-
tion for later work.
It is clear that a decision in this matter must, in the absence of syste-
matic experimentation, depend upon the opinion of those with experi-
ence in the field. Setting aside those subjects such as the sciences, the
manual and graphic arts, in respect of which it is generally agreed
special facilities and specialist teaching should be provided even at the
junior secondary level, the weight of opinion, we consider, is against
deliberate specialization in the teaching of the remaining subjects at the
junior stage of the secondary school.
We are not prepared, however, to make a recommendation to be
applied generally and without modification. Quite apart from conditions
peculiar to individual schools, so much depends upon the teacher, his
professional qualifications, the nature and variety of his teaching experi-
ence, his personality and capacity for establishing “rapport” with his
pupils, that we consider the establishment of any invariable rule would
be unreal. Furthermore, there are grounds for considering that, particu-
larly in a school enrolling pupils with a wide range of ability, there
might well be some variation in the organization of teaching, even within
the same Year or stage. It seems certain, for example, that pupils who
at an early stage demonstrate academic interests and abilities will be
ready for specialist teaching earlier than some of their contemporaries.
The need for making effective provision for the “pastoral care” of
pupils is a matter of paramount importance and goes beyond the more
immediate need of ensuring a smooth transition from the primary
school to the secondary school. The need for pastoral care persists
throughout the school life of every pupil; it is not limited to his early


years in the secondary school. The provision of the means by which this
need is to be met is one of the most significant responsibilities of the
school principal. In discharging that responsibility, he must make the
best use of his staff, of the organization possible in his school, and of all
the other facilities at his disposal. We consider that, in so far as he judges
a measure of specialist teaching to be necessary in the junior years, he
assumes a greater obligation to ensure that its possible ill effects are
offset. In such circumstances, he might, for example, in addition to
making one teacher generally responsible for the affairs of one class,
ensure that the total number of teachers concerned with that class is
kept as small as possible.
(e) Tests and their use :
It has already been pointed out that our recommendation that there
should be no selective test for admission to secondary school was not
based on any aversion to tests in themselves, whether they be tests of
ability or tests of attainment. Our recommendation sprang, first from
the belief that at an appropriate stage all pupils should pass on to
secondary school and, second, from the conviction that a single pro-
cedure of differentiation among these pupils before they pass on to the
secondary school was both unreliable and inappropriate.
We hope, however, that there is no doubt in any quarter as to the
value of such tests, provided their results are properly used. From
the point of view of the secondary school, the results of tests of ability
and attainments, together with all the significant data about a pupil
brought together in a cumulative school record, can perform two
functions. First, they can provide part of the liaison between primary
and secondary school to which reference has already been made. Second,
they can provide essential data for the organization of First Year classes
and for the guidance of pupils after they have entered secondary schools.
Reference has already been made to the conflicting opinions expressed
by witnesses in regard to the standard of attainments at the end of the
primary stage. We do not accept the view that a formal examination
should be instituted at this point. The spontaneity of the primary school
of today and the vitality of its curriculum derive, in part at least, from
the absence of such an examination over the past twenty years. On the
other hand, to the extent to which current criticism of primary school
atainments is justified, primary school teachers and their pupils need
the corrective influence of tests more broadly based than is possible
within an individual school. Testing is, of course, standard practice in
the primary school, but we are of the opinion that there is a real need
for tests which will enable teachers to assess the attainments of their own
pupils, not only in comparison with pupils in the same school, but on
the basis of norms for age, and perhaps for grade, established for all
schools. Consequently, while we appreciate the cost in staff and money
involved, we consider that the construction, supply and systematic use
of standardized tests of attainments at the primary level should be
increased. In expressing this view, we are aware that the value of these
tests will depend upon the professional judgment with which they are
used and their results interpreted.
Tests of general ability known as intelligence tests have come to be
accepted as part of the apparatus of the modern school. We are aware
of criticisms voiced both before the Committee and in other places, but
it is our opinion that tests of general ability, as used in the public schools
now under review have, in general, been used and interpreted in a pro-
fessional manner. In practice, tests of this type are administered at
three stages of a pupil’s school career and their results have come to be
accepted as the best single measure of his general ability. There have
been individual deviations, but the general consistency in the results of
the series of these tests in respect of a particular child is remarkable.
We therefore commend the use of tests of general ability, together with
tests of attainments, not as criteria of selection for secondary school,
but as valuable evidence for the guidance of pupils within the school.
11. Secondary Education for All Adolescents.
Taken together, the first and second of our major recommendations
raise two issues which were the subject of considerable evidence from
our witnesses:
(a) Size of school :
The question of the size of the secondary school is one of the first
to arise as soon as the admission of all the pupils leaving primary schools
in a given area is considered, or the establishment of “omnibus” or


“multi-lateral” secondary schools proposed. In every country where
such proposals have been made, education authorities have been con-
fronted with the dilemma of establishing a school large enough to pro-
vide an adequate range of curriculum with class groups of reasonable
size, and at the same time of avoiding a school so large as to impair
those personal relations from which it derives its vitality. In the United
States, the number of large secondary schools is much smaller than is
generally supposed, but there has been a readiness to accept an enrol-
ment of 1,000 to 1,200 pupils, with all its problems, as a price worth
paying for the advantages of the comprehensive school. By contrast,
the Advisory Council on Education in Scotland, while admitting the
desirable features of such a school, rejected it, inter alia, on the ground
that for efficient operation its enrolment must exceed the 600 pupils
which the Council considered to be the desirable limit.
Our own witnesses differed as to the exact numbers for the limiting
enrolment of a school, but the great majority advocated the organization
of schools of from 500 to 700 pupils. The chief ground upon which this
testimony was offered was that it is impossible for a school principal
to know his pupils personally if the enrolment exceeds 600 or 700. A
school larger than this, the witnesses considered, lacks the degree of
intimacy necessary for the development of cohesion and a sense of com-
munity. The physical size of the school, the complexity of its time-
table, and the sheer turmoil of large numbers were all cited as warnings
against the development of schools with an enrolment of more than 700.
We are in sympathy with these arguments. We regard as most
important those factors which threaten the development of a real sense
of community within a school. However, as to the argument most
frequently advanced, that the enrolment of a school should be limited
to the number of pupils who can be personally known to the school
principal, we take the view that this personal knowledge must be a
matter of degree and we do not believe that enrolments of the order
of 600 or 700 always enable a principal really to know all his pupils.
Indeed, we have gained the impression that the quotation of such figures
for optimum or limiting enrolment was, in fact, the result of an
inevitable compromise between the theoretical basis of the argument
and a realization of the practical necessities of the situation.
On the other hand, we are of the opinion that an enrolment of 1,000
or more pupils is not the inevitable corollary of the establishment of
an omnibus secondary school. We find support for this view in the
opinion expressed by the Advisory Council on Education in Scotland
that a satisfactory organization can be achieved with an enrolment of
about 800. The view is also supported by widespread practice in the
United States, where the majority of high schools have enrolments
generally less than 800, and by the experience of New South Wales
country secondary schools which, while not truly omnibus schools,
already illustrate many of the advantages and problems of such an
organization.
Our general position is, therefore, that the arguments both against
selection and segregation at the point of entry, and for a progressive
determination of the shape of a pupil’s course, are so strong that we
recommend the provision of a type of secondary school, which may
best be called “comprehensive”, even though such provision may mean
having schools with enrolments in excess of 600 or 700.
We take the view that once an enrolment of 300 is passed the point
of compromise has been reached. We can see little virtue in differences
between 600, 700 or 800 pupils as limits for enrolment. Once the
number that is within the compass of one person’s pastoral care is
exceeded, explicit provision should be made in the organization of the
school for sub-groups of reasonable size. It would be possible, for
example, to organize a school of 600 pupils on the basis of two groups
of 300. An increase in the enrolment of that school to 900 could be
reflected in the organization of another group of 300. The same practice
could be followed if it were considered desirable and possible for a
school to be built up of units of approximately 200 pupils. There are
developing country towns in New South Wales where a further extension
of this principle might well be preferable to the establishment of two
separate secondary schools in the same town.
We would agree that the enrolment of secondary schools should be
kept as small as is consistent with the organization we have suggested.
In this connection, account has to be taken of the fact that, for some
years at least, it cannot be anticipated that all pupils will remain at


school until sixteen years of age to gain the proposed School Certificate.
Even if they did, the necessary range of electives is likely to necessitate
the organization of classes, at least in the final year, which would be
too small in terms of staff and facilities, unless the first year enrolment
approached 200,
Once an enrolment exceeds the 300 to which reference has already
been made, the organization will doubtless differ with the conditions
of the school and the professional ingenuity of the principal. One form
which we have considered is an organization into “houses”, each limited
to the number which one housemaster can get to know personally. It
would be essential that this organization should provide the basis for
the development of a real sense of community within the house, itself
part of the larger unity of the school. An organization on paper, such
as is sometimes adopted in connection with intra-mural sport, is not
what we have in mind. A house might well be made up of a cross-
section of the school, but it would need to have not only a housemaster
to whom all members could turn, and for whom pastoral care and
the oversight of his house would be a major duty, but also a physical
house, which would be the centre of its corporate life. We recognize
that such an organization would make considerable demands upon the
personality and professional skill of the head of the school for, beyond
the house, there must be established and maintained a wider sense of
membership of the school as a whole. We do not believe that the public
secondary schools of the State lack men and women of personal stature
adequate to this task.
( b ) Co-education :
There were few topics on which we heard such positive expressions
of opinion as “co-education’ and, perhaps, in regard to which there
was so little conclusive evidence. Almost all of the witnesses who ten-
dered evidence on this topic spoke with personal conviction against the
separation of boys and girls in school. It was not possible for us to
determine, however, the extent to which our witnesses were truly rep-
resentative of public opinion on the one hand, or teachers’ opinion on
the other.
So far as public opinion is concerned, it appears to us that it is
divided, with perhaps a majority in favour of co-education. Teacher
opinion, as reported to us, generally favours co-education, but certain
groups either oppose it or give it only modified support. Teachers in
non-Departmental schools, so far as we can determine, are much less
inclined to favour it than teachers in Departmental schools. Many of
the latter have had experience of co-education in secondary schools in
country areas and vouch for its success in these schools. There were
witnesses who urged that no general rule should be established, but that
either the status quo in New South Wales should be modified gradually,
or that parents should be offered the choice between co-educational
schools and those in which either boys or girls only are enrolled.
It was apparent to us that there was no general agreement as to the
precise meaning of “co-education”. For many witnesses, it seemed
to mean the enrolment of boys and girls in one school, despite the fact
that they might sit apart in class and be segregated during recess periods.
In this connection, we consider that some of the issues might well be
resolved if more attention were given to the question as to how a school
is conducted, rather than to whether or not it should be designated
co-educational.
We derived little assistance from the sparse research information in
this field. An examination of practices overseas served only to empha-
size the fact that the maintenance of co-educational or of segregated
schools is the outcome either of tradition, or of decisions on adminis-
trative grounds. Few co-educational schools have been established
explicitly on psychological grounds, much less on the basis of experi-
mental evidence.
While acknowledging the inconclusive nature of the evidence placed
before us and the lack of unanimity on the part of the Committee, we
record that professional and lay opinion as expressed to us is that, as
new secondary schools are established by the Department of Education,
they should, generally speaking, be co-educational schools similar to
those already existing in country areas. We are aware that conditions
in a particular locality may be such as to call for some modification of
this general rule, especially if there is a real difference in public opinion
on the matter. We consider that, under such circumstances, the recent


practice of the Department of Education of establishing “twin schools”
(that is, separate schools adjoining one another with common use of
certain facilities and association in some school activities) is to be
commended.
111. The Common Core of the Curriculum.
Our recommendation that there should be a “core” of subjects to be
studied by all pupils in secondary schools obviously raises a number of
questions of detail which, nevertheless, are of great significance.
(a) The nature of the core subjects:
We are aware of the danger which attends the use of terms which,
by common usage or continued debate, may have come to possess
special meanings. We appreciate the fact that the term “core curricu-
lum” has been used in more than one sense in New South Wales for over
a quarter of a century. Our later discussion (*) will indicate that while
we propose a group of subjects which will be the common experience
of all secondary school pupils and so provide the “core” of the curricu-
lum, we do not propose that that core will remain unaltered for every
child. We propose that if any of those subjects is taken as an elective,
it will disappear from the “core curriculum” of the pupil concerned.
Our chief concern is that every pupil will have experience in the subjects
we include in the core curriculum.
Our recommendation that the curriculum of secondary pupils should
include a core of subjects common to all, is based on the conviction
that there are certain fields of thought and experience of which no
adolescent should be ignorant as a person or as a citizen, irrespective of
his level of ability and of the situation in life in which he may later
find himself.
Such a common curriculum, in our opinion, could be defined in terms
of the following subject fields:
English.
Social Studies.
Science.
Mathematics.
Music.
Art.
Crafts.
Physical and Health Education.
Religious Education.
Defined in these traditional terms, the core curriculum which we have
in mind calls for further comment. We do not propose to set out
exhaustive arguments in support of the inclusion of individual subjects
but. to avoid possible misunderstanding, we consider it necessary to
make the following observations.
Social Studies. —Here is an example of the danger that may attend the
use of a term which has come to have a special connotation. We are
aware of the fruitful programme of study which may be based on central
topics drawn from History, Geography, Economics and allied fields.
There are those, however, who doubt whether “Social Studies” should
ever be used save as a generic term for the group of specific studies men-
tioned. There are doubts, too, as to whether all teachers can bring to
the subject “Social Studies”, or pupils take away from it, anything but
knowledge which is too limited and a background of ideas which is
slight.
However that may be, we take the view that “Social Studies” describes
a field of human thought and experience against which a course can be
designed and taught in the spirit of the general purpose of the core
curriculum. We are of the opinion that, designed and taught in this
spirit, subjects called History and Geography could serve the purpose
which we have in mind. On the other hand, w'e acknowledge the possi-
bility of a course being designed under the title “Social Studies” so as
to lead either at a later stage of the common core, or as electives, to a
more systematic study under the titles History and Geography.
C) See pp. 72-74.
*7543—5


Science. —We have avoided the use of the term “General Science”,
again because of the danger of fixed patterns of thinking. Many of the
syllabuses of study entitled “General Science” appear to us to be unsatis-
factory because they prove to be selections of work from separate
sciences, lacking coherence and any evidence of integrating principles.
We do not believe that it is impossible to devise a satisfactory course in
General Science; we are convinced that it is more easily talked about
than done.
We consider that the neglect of Biological Science is a significant
limitation of the experience of ordinary citizens, and that, whatever
the title given to Science in the common curriculum, it should embrace
some biological study. Indeed, there are grounds for adopting the view
that the work of the early years of the secondary school might well be
an extension of the work commenced in the primary school under the
heading “Natural Science”, Here again, however, we do not wish to be
too specific, since we are aware that, under the stimulus of a gifted
teacher, pupils in the Science class can be led to see implications and
to appreciate relationships throughout the world of science, irrespective
of the title given to the course they are following.
Mathematics. —In this field, we have in mind the type of experience of
Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry which the ordinary citizen of today
needs in the conduct of his everyday life. It is clear that this essential
mathematical experience will embrace concepts and processes which will
differ from those appropriate for an earlier generation; it is equally clear
that it will be different from the study of Mathematics in the more
academic sense which we would include among the electives. While
anxious not to limit this subject to Arithmetic, we hesitate to use the term
“General Mathematics” since there seems already to be too much con-
fusion in the public mind caused by the use of this term.
Religious Education. —This subject has been the earnest discussion by
the Committee. We include Religious Education in the common core by
way of affirming our view that education has a spiritual basis and that
parents have a right to expect that instruction in religion should be
provided for their children. In doing so, however, we wish to make it
clear that, in the respect that Religious Education cannot be regarded
as mandatory, it differs from the other subjects to be shared in common.
On the question of responsibility for the instruction, the majority of
us consider that, if the secondary school provides the facilities for such
instruction, it should be left to the churches to avail themselves of those
facilities. We wish to record that a minority opinion favoured an
arrangement whereby specially trained school teachers who were willing
to do so, should assist the clergy or their accredited representatives.
We note that in some parts of Australia certain secondary pupils are
grouped for religious instruction, not according to denomination, but
according to age or grade, the teaching being based on an agreed syllabus.
Our majority view is that there is no objection to such a practice in New
South Wales if the churches think it desirable. At the same time it is
considered that the morning assembly, including an act of corporate
worship, is of inestimable worth in the life of the school, and that the
extra-curricular activities of religious groups within the school afford
valuable experiences to the participants.
(b) Class organization in relation to the “core ” curriculum:
One assumption in our recommendation that the subjects listed above
should be adopted as the core of a general secondary curriculum is
that the syllabus in regard to any of those subjects should be set out in
quite general terms. A statement for each subject which is a sufficient
guide to teachers, but which is not narrowly prescriptive, should be
drawn up by a representative panel working within the framework of
a general statement of the aims and spirit of the new curriculum as a
whole. Freedom should thus remain with teachers to select topics and
to organize their actual programmes of work, so as to adapt the
syllabus to the needs and capacities of their pupils and to the conditions
of a particular school.
School principals should have the same opportunity for organizing
classes as seems best to them. We suggest, however, that there are
advantages in First Year classes being organized so that from the


common core a class will be taught English, Social Studies, Science and
Mathematics by the same teacher. It is clear, too, that if these groups are
organized primarly on the basis of ability, a large degree of variation
between classes in the content of the programme and in the method of
treatment will be made possible. Thus, in a First Year of six or seven
classes, while “English” will appear on the time-table as a subject
common to all, as the year goes on its content and emphasis will differ
markedly between the most able and the least able classes. The benefit
to both, in terms of their capacity, should be the same.
Music and Art might well be regarded as subjects to be taken with-
out any basic class reorganization. Other patterns of organization might
commend themselves, however, to the principals of some schools. It
would be possible, for example, if no electives were provided in First
Year, to organize the teaching of Art in a school so that even in First
Year the most gifted pupils, having manifested their talent, could be
brought together, irrespective of their home room, and afforded full
scope for that talent. That is, the teaching in this field could be
organized on the basis of ability or interest in Art, independent of the
basic class organization. It might well be felt, too, that the teaching of
Crafts and of Physical and Health Education could most effectively be
carried out when separate classes are organized for boys and girls.
IV. Electives.
(a) Principles of election:
In addition to the common curriculum, we propose that pupils will
select, under the guidance of the principal, other courses in accordance
with their ability, aptitudes and interests. The provision of these
“electives” has a threefold object. First, it is desirable at the adolescent
stage that there should be as comprehensive a choice of courses as
possible. While it is essential that secondary pupils should share a
common background of thought and experience, there is ample evidence
to justify the provision, at the same time, of a variety of experience in
accordance with the emerging interests and aptitudes of youth. Second,
the provision of electives enables the secondary school, while offering a
general education within and without the classroom, to provide the
means whereby the most able pupils may progress to the top of their
bent in the fields of their special abilities. Third, while the selective
secondary school affords scope for the able pupil, its organization and
curriculum tend to set a premium upon excellence in a relatively narrow
range of subjects. Yet it is a minority of adolescents who cannot excel
in some one field, given adequate encouragement. The third object of
the provision of electives, therefore, is to make the opportunity for the
achievement of a measure of real success in some aspect of school
work on the part of those adolescents who tend, in other circumstances,
to become submerged.
Before suggesting a range of electives, it is necessary to emphasize
that our conception of elective courses is that they must be courses of
study of adequate duration and demanding adequate standards. We do
not intend that there should be election from among a variety of short-
term subjects lacking adequate content and making small demands upon
pupils. On the other hand, we are anxious that there should be a dis-
tinct break from the habit of thinking about, or describing, the several
patterns of high school courses as “two-language”, “one-language” and
“non-language” courses. In our conception of .a general secondary
education, it is necessary to make a distinction between the significance
of a course as an element in a programme of general secondary educa-
tion, and a course under the same name specified for some external
purpose such as matriculation.
Indeed, at the risk of being misunderstood, we say that there should
be parity of courses within the secondary school and that the value of
a course to a pupil will, in large measure, depend upon his abilities and
needs. Some of our witnesses have emphasized the need for Mathe-
matics and Science in the curriculum of the present century. The very
circumstances which have influenced these witnesses might move others
to plead that the school, by emphasizing other fields of human ex-
perience, should offset the current emphasis and so achieve some of that
balance of experience which is one of the marks of an educated person.
We would prefer to say that we recommend a range of electives which
would enable a selection to be made in terms of a pupil’s ability and
interest. The most significant question to be asked in connection with
this selection, we feel, will be: Does this course challenge to the full
the abilities and the interests of the pupil concerned?


It will be seen that the list of electives could be quite extensive,
though in practice it is likely to be limited by facilities available in a
particular school. The following list is therefore not prescriptive, but
indicates a range of subjects most or all of which a comprehensive
secondary school might be expected to provide:
Art, Commercial Principles and Practice, Geography, History, Home
Science, Languages (Ancient and Modern), Manual Arts ( e.g.,
Drawing, Metalwork, Woodwork), Mathematics, Music, Science
{e.g., Agriculture, Biology, Botany, Chemistry, Geology, Physics).
English has not been included in the elective courses on the ground
that to follow a course in English appropriate to the ability and in-
terests of a boy or girl should not be a matter of election in a satis-
factory plan for general secondary education. In this sense, English is
part of the common core of the curriculum. This is not to say that a
uniform course should be provided for all classes. Given appropriate
grouping of pupils throughout a Year, necessary variation in scope,
emphasis and academic standard can be achieved.
{b) Relation of electives to the common core :
The problem of the relation betv/een elective courses and those com-
mon to all pupils is not to be solved by a simple and arbitrary allocation
of time to the respective groups throughout the four years of the general
secondary course. The problem is, indeed, a direct reflection, in terms
of curriculum, of the basic problem discussed at the outset of this
chapter.
We have already indicated that we share the view that determination
of the final pattern of secondary education for the individual pupil
should be progressive. This view arises from the conviction that pupils
change with the emergence of interests and abilities during adolescence,
and that a measure of exploration within the curriculum, under guidance,
is to be preferred to any a priori determination of the content of a
pupil’s complete course. Yet, if our recommendations are accepted,
only four years will be available in which to complete the course of
general secondary education; final determination of the pattern of
that course cannot be postponed indefinitely. Nor need it be post-
poned unduly in the case of those pupils who, at a relatively early
age, reveal abilities and interests which justify final selection of courses
and promise success in more advanced studies, either academic or
technical.
Our general view of the four years of secondary education is, there-
fore, that they should provide for an increasing proportion of time to
be allotted to elective courses. This is a different view from that which
supports a “transition year” on entry to high school, at the end of
which a final determination of courses for all pupils would be made.
The first secondary school year should be devoted almost entirely to
subjects common to all pupils. This is a year of adjustment to ex-
periences and conditions which are to some extent new; it should be a
year of exploration by the pupils and of assessment and guidance of
pupils by the staff. For most pupils it should afford opportunities for
consolidating skills taught in the primary school and for remedying
individual weaknesses.
While no specific subject will necessarily be listed in this year as an
elective, it is desirable that the allocation of time to the several sub-
jects, or the organization of classes, should be such as to permit pupils
to go beyond the general requirement in some field or fields of special
interest to them. Thus, while some pupils will, from the outset, wish
to do more work in Art or in Craft, others intending or hoping to elect
a language, might well add to the English of their common course
work in elementary language or preliminary work in a foreign language.
There is no reason why similar exploratory and preparatory work should
not be done in Mathematics, Science or Social Studies.
Beyond this first year we propose that the time devoted to the non-
elected portion of this common “core” will depend upon the ability
of the pupils but might, in successive years, be approximately 75, 65
and 60 per cent, of the allotted time. We do not intend that these
percentages should be other than an indication of our view of relative
time allocation. From the point of view of the number of subjects, we
propose that, by the fourth year, pupils may be studying three elected
subjects in addition to the common subjects of the curriculum.


Y.-VI. The School Certificate.
(a) The educational programme’.
At this point, while refraining from any detailed specification of
syllabuses of work, it is necessary for us to indicate more specifically the
content of the educational programme we have in mind. It is clear that
the considerations which have determined our recommendations as to
the organization of secondary education in this State must be among
those which will determine our views as to its orientation and content.
It might be useful, then, if we recalled the most significant of them.
We have accepted the view that all children, as a matter of right, will
continue their schooling beyond the primary school, as far as their needs
and the resources of society may determine. We consider that, at
about the age of twelve years, a change in the needs of pupils can be
discerned, which means that something different from the curriculum and
atmosphere of the primary school is demanded. Our definition of
secondary education, then, is simply “that stage of education which fol-
lows primary”. The view of secondary education referred to above
implies that all children, representing the complete range of abilities,
should, in the secondary school, be afforded the most fruitful experi-
ence of which they are capable. Two characteristics of young adoles-
cents in the early secondary years determine both the nature of school
organization and the content of the curriculum. First, these adolescents
are growing; many of their abilities are nascent. To the informed
observer, these children change with the years in ways which make a
final determination of secondary school courses impossible at the point
of entry. Second, while their general ability remains much the same,
their emerging aptitudes and interests are likely to be diverse in nature.
Hence we have insisted that both organization and curriculum should
facilitate choice from a variety of courses of study and that courses
should enjoy a parity of esteem.
Without looking into a more distant future when the span of school
life may be further extended for all pupils, we have taken the view that
all boys and girls should be encouraged to remain at school for four
years beyond the primary school. It is this four years which we now
have under review.
School organization and curriculum during these four years must take
account of the fact that, for the great majority of pupils, this is their
last opportunity of full-time day attendance at school, though some of
those who leave the secondary school will pass on to courses of
technical training and other types of part-time education. The minority
will continue at school and, in some cases, pass on to university studies.
For all of these pupils, however, the secondary school faces the dual
responsibility of providing the means whereby they will develop as
self-reliant, competent individuals and, at the same time, acquire a true
sense of citizenship. The school can fulfil much of both of these obliga-
tions through the vitality of its corporate life and through the quality and
spirit of its teaching staff. The facilities and physical environment of
the school must also be taken into account as significant means to the
same ends.
From the point of view of the curriculum, however, we have recom-
mended that there be a group of studies which all pupils should follow,
not only because they may provide experiences worthwhile in themselves,
but also because, we feel, they are studies which should be shared lay
all young citizens in the making. To avoid possible misconceptions, we
have already commented on certain of these subjects, but as a guide to
those who may be called upon to translate our general recommendations
into more detailed syllabuses of study, we would quote the observation
of a recent Scottish committee:
“The content of each subject should be determined not by
academic conceptions of the subject but by such criteria as these:
(i) Are the things to be taught likely to be of use to the pupil,
now or in the future, in the sense either that he will
actually apply the knowledge or skill they provide in his
daily life, or that they will help him to develop as a person
or to understand better and appreciate more fully his
physical, mental or spiritual environment?
(ii) Are they capable of presentation in such a way as to arouse
the pupil’s interest, assuming a reasonable effort on his part?


(iii) Are they within his powers of comprehension at the stage at
which it is proposed to teach them and at the level of treat-
ment to be adopted?”O
The other courses of study, which pupils will choose as far as possible
in terms of their abilities and interests, must also be designed with the
foregoing criteria in mind, but increasingly they will provide a coherent
and systematic study in the respective fields of knowledge. It is in
this area of the curriculum that opportunity must be afforded every
pupil to follow some study or group of studies to the top of his bent.
The parity of esteem upon which we have insisted is significant here;
there are fields of worthwhile achievement other than languages, mathe-
matics or science, in which adolescents may excel and for which the
secondary school of today should make provision.
If our suggestion of ability grouping is adopted, it should be possible
for the school to provide different courses in the same subject to allow
for variety of standard and content. This possibility should be recog-
nized by the range and elasticity of any syllabus of work which may be
devised.
In respect of the elected subjects, we feel that the new syllabuses that
will be needed should allow for the fact that the School Certificate is to
be the mark of the completion of a sound general education for adoles-
cents, but that some of those who gain the Certificate should be ready
to pass on to work which is more academic in its content and more
demanding in its standards. In short, we believe that it is possible to
devise courses of study which will challenge the ability and engage the
interest of most adolescents, but which will enable teachers to extend
their most able pupils to the full range of their ability. Wise curriculum
planning, followed by competent teaching, should enable the school to
avoid the evils of insufficient challenge on the one hand, and over-
pressure on the other.
At this point we must emphasize that, in our view, a common failing
of many secondary school syllabuses is that they are too detailed and
specific. We consider that detailed prescription is out of place in a
syllabus for schools. We doubt, furthermore, whether the best results
are obtained by the rather narrow specification of set texts in many
secondary school subjects in Australia. We have seen examples of
secondary syllabuses from other countries, where, despite the absence
of set texts, the quality of the school product is beyond question.
Controversies have developed in regard to the relative significance of
different subjects in the secondary curriculum. Up to the School Certi-
ficate level we do not favour any particular group of subjects. We
would repeat that the major determinant of the pattern of subjects
for any pupil beyond the common core should be his particular com-
bination of abilities and interests.
It is important, however, that the study of any subject or group of
subjects should be recognized as part of a general education to which the
study of the common core, the pupil’s extra-curricular activities, and all
the intangibles of school life will make their contribution. No syllabus
for any single subject should impede the achievement of this major
objective.
English. —We are bound to offer special comment upon the subject
of English, both because of what we believe is its central significance
and because it appears, without comment, as part of the common core
of subjects as set down in earlier pages.
We consider that in the schools of a country like Australia there is
no task more urgent or more pervasive of all activities than the achieve-
ment of good standards in the understanding, appreciation and use of
English. To be incompetent in Mathematics may be a handicap in this
modern age; to be incompetent in the mother tongue is to lack one
of the basic needs of civilized living.
In our view, any conception of the place of English in the secondary
school is inadequate if it does not recognize a threefold opportunity and
responsibility. First, English is the medium of instruction and of
communication throughout the school; second, there is the duty of
ensuring that all adolescents can understand and use both spoken and
O Scottish Education Department: Junior Secondary Education. Edinburgh.
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1955. pp. 18-19.


written English as members of a community assumed to be literate;
third, there is the opportunity of providing an experience in English
which will differ from one group of pupils to another but which will
enable each pupil to explore the infinite resources of the language to
the full extent of his intellectual and emotional capacity.
As the common medium of instruction and communication, English
has a place in the school above and beyond its place in the curriculum
as an examinable body of knowledge taught by experts. To the extent
to which lucid and correct English is needed by all, it is the responsibility
of all, and we cannot agree that the dictum “every teacher a teacher of
English” represents an impracticable ideal. We believe that it is reason-
able to expect all teachers not only themselves to write and speak good
English, but to take a conscious and planned part in achieving acceptable
standards among their pupils. In particular, correct spelling, punctua-
tion and composition, and clear, accurate and effective speech are a
collective responsibility. If this responsibility is conscientiously acknow-
ledged, an important contribution will be made not only to the general
development of the pupil, but also to his proficiency in individual sub-
jects.
Much can be achieved in the course of normal lessons, but the con-
tribution to good English which all might be called on to make can
also operate very effectively in extra-curricular activities. While not
unmindful of the excellent work already being accomplished by devoted
teachers, we regard as desirable a more general staff participation in
school activities such as debating, dramatic work, public speaking, school
magazines and even announcements or reports, which demand accurate,
forceful or graceful expression, both written and spoken.
We would agree, however, that when the teacher of Mathematics,
and Geography, and Woodwork, and all the other subjects in the
curriculum, has done all that he can do, by example and instruction,
to improve his pupil’s spoken and written English, the systematic cam-
paign of the trained specialist will remain the chief means of combating
weaknesses.
At this point it is well to consider that the English specialist, at least
in Departmental schools, is a teacher who has been trained at university
level in English language and literature, generally too in History, and
sometimes in Latin and Philosophy, but seldom to any significant extent
in the more technical aspects of speech or even in the allied field of
drama. Spoken English is so closely allied to written English that,
excepting where pathological defects call for clinical attention, it should,
in our view, be the special concern of the English teacher. If this policy
is accepted, English teachers must receive adequate speech training and
their work must be supplemented by clinics and consultant advisers. We
understand that a comprehensive plan for speech improvement along
these lines has been prepared by a special committee.
According to many of our witnesses, written English has suffered rapid
deterioration in recent years and now falls below the standard required
by university, employer and society in general. Whether such charges
are valid or not, the fact that they are so often made is an indication
of the esteem in which the community holds its literacy, and they cannot
be ignored by the schools. In analysing the charges, it is interesting
to note that the faults most frequently found are the easiest to correct.
If the content, particularly the imaginative and creative qualities, of
current written composition were attacked, it would be a much more
difficult and subtle task for the schools to effect improvement, but the
much-criticized formal defects in spelling, punctuation, grammar and
sentence structure must yield to drill and discipline. This means the
provision of ample opportunity for completed and corrected compo-
sition.
As it received so much prominence, a special word should be said
about spelling. The extent to which it might have deteriorated is
beside the point; there is undoubtedly room for improvement, and we
believe that improvement would come if the schools devoted sufficient
time and energy to teaching, drilling and testing. It might be argued
with truth, however, that thefe is a stage of proficiency in this one skill
beyond which the schools should not go if, in doing so, other more
desirable skills and attitudes were sacrificed. We would be prepared
to accept reasonable standards brought about by consistent attention in
all subjects to the widening of useful vocabulary by the addition, as
need arises or is created, of words the pupil can understand, pronounce
and spell.


Another aspect of formal English that requires scrutiny is grammar.
We note that in recent years the emphasis in the teaching of grammar
has changed so that it is now taught functionally and in close associa-
tion with composition. We agree that this is the logical and proper use
of the mechanics of the language, but the almost automatic and uncon-
scious application of the test of grammar in speech and writing will
come only if the pupil has, in the primary school, been thoroughly
grounded in its rules. Like the multiplication tables, the parts of speech
and their inter-relationship must be mastered at an early age.
At the beginning of these notes on English we affirmed that every
pupil must be given the opportunity of exploring the resources of the
language to the full extent of his capacity. While this involves the
personal use of English, not only as the normal medium of everyday
communication, but also for creative expression, it involves, too, the
appreciation of what others say and write.
We hear much these days of the art of listening, and we commend
those secondary school activities like drama, verse speaking and oratory,
in which pupils are given not only the opportunity of using the spoken
word with force or beauty, but also of listening to it so used. We
believe that the schools have a duty to foster an awareness of the rich
possibilities of the language. It cannot be expected that they should
become academies for the training of performers, but they should pro-
duce listeners of some discernment and sensitivity.
With regard to the written word, we note the recent introduction into
teaching and examining of the exercises in comprehension. This would
appear to be necessary in an age when there are so many distractions
and so much sensationalism that the tendency is to read carelessly for
superficial interest. Any effort to develop the habit of reading with
conscience is to be maintained. At the same time, thought must be
given to the choice for school study of such literature as will, by its
very suitability, capture and hold the full mind of the reader.
The secondary schools of this State have inherited the tradition of
basing their literary studies on the older English classics. We are aware
that in the past few years modern books closer to the interests of pupils
have been prescribed, and we believe that this is a desirable change
provided that, once the reading habit has been created by such means,
pupils are encouraged to explore our literary heritage more deeply. It
should not be necessary to emphasize the need to study any literature,
at least in senior years, against a background of the nature and develop-
ment of the literary form to which it belongs.
On the question of the breadth and depth of literary study, we would
observe that this depends on the type of pupil being taught. In earlier
pages we have presented a scheme of “core” and elective subjects
designed to provide for the varying and developing abilities of secondary
pupils, and we envisage a situation in which, while all pupils in the
one year may study the same subject, they will pursue the study at
different speeds and to different levels. Nevertheless, in general, we
would favour in the earlier years the extensive, rather than the intensive,
reading of literature, with a gradual intensification of the field as in-
terests develop. This implies the study, by examination as well as
non-examination classes, of a considerably wider range of books than
has been customary. We can see no good reason, except possibly the
added difficulties of examining, which should not be regarded as the
deciding factor, why pupils should not be offered a choice from a wider
range of books, fictional and non-fictional, creative and purely factual.
In such a range many Australian books would, by their merit, undoubt-
edly recommend themselves.
Special reference must be made to poetry. It would appear that there
is some tendency to avoid the study of the poetry text. Whether this
is due to the unsuitable nature of the text, to its presentation, or to the
triumph of a prosaic world, we are not prepared to conjecture, but
we must deplore any decline in the standing of what is undoubtedly
the chief ornament of our language. We cannot believe that, given
suitable texts and sensitive presentation, particularly in the reading,
poetry would fail to appeal to the minds and feelings of most pupils.
Curriculum Patterns. —We have already suggested (*) an overall alloca-
tion of time for the core of common subjects in each of the first four
O See p. 68.


years of the secondary school course. It will be noted that the propor-
tions we suggested were only approximate. Within this general allocation
we are reluctant to specify definite time allocations for individual
subjects, though we realize that, before syllabus committees could take
up their tasks, such time allocations would be necessary. A possible
allocation for the common first year might, however, be;
English one-quarter.
Social Studies
Science
Mathematics
one-half.
Music
Art
Crafts
Physical and Health
Education
Religious Education
one-quarter.
This allocation is based on thirty-six forty-minute teaching periods
each week, and would assume three periods in addition to be set aside
for sport, and one period, so far as the time-table is concerned, to be
devoted to school clubs or similar activities. For subsequent years, this
time allocation might have to be reviewed on account of the increasing
proportion of time to be devoted to elective courses.
We must observe, here, that we have taken a view different from
that of most of those witnesses who gave evidence in regard to the
curriculum and the time allocation of subjects. O There seems to have
been a general assumption in discussion of the curriculum that the
time allotted to the common core and that devoted to electives should
be almost mutually exclusive, in this view, while some curtailment of
time for the common core would be inevitable, the electives would be
subjects added to a relatively stable core of common subjects. Under
these conditions, a pupil could elect to study Mathematics, but this
study would be in addition to General Mathematics; similarly. History
could be in addition to Social Studies.
We consider that such an interpretation of the common core is un-
necessarily rigid. We have already drawn attention to the unique posi-
tion of English and have assumed that, while for some pupils what
might be termed “core” English will represent the limit of their ability,
as many as possible will be given the opportunity of further experience
in English as rich as their ability and interest will allow. The position
can perhaps be more clearly demonstrated in regard to Mathematics.
“Core” Mathematics should be designed so as to ensure that no boy
or girl leaves school without the competence in this subject necessary
for the ordinary citizen. At the same time, the course in First Year will
afford pupils and teacher the opportunity of discovering those who have
the aptitude and interest for a more systematic study of Mathematics.
At the end of that year, the pupil should be allowed to elect accordingly,
but once he has elected Mathematics, he should not be required also to
follow the course in “core” Mathematics. The same choice, we con-
sider, can and should be made in respect of such subjects as History,
Geography, the sciences. Art, Music and Crafts.
This means that our earlier suggestion (p. 68) as to the propor-
tion between the common core and the elected subjects is not only a
general indication, but will vary in individual cases. At the same time,
our proposal ensures that the pupil whose election is predominantly one
of languages will, throughout his four years, study Mathematics and
Science according to the core curriculum, and that the pupil who elects
the Mathematics-Science pattern will continue to work in Social Studies,
both of them continuing to follow an ample course in English. Though,
in order to provide for electives, periods will need to be subtracted from
all subjects in the common core, none of those subjects will disappear
from a pupil’s “core plus electives” curriculum throughout the four
years. Since the patterns will differ —for example, a pupil studying no
foreign languages should maintain the fullest possible course in English,
whereas the pupil studying two languages might well need less English
—we have not set out in detail possible time allocations after the
common first year.
On the basis of this interpretation of the “core plus electives” pat-
tern, we have taken the view that up to tv/o electives should, in general,
be taken after the completion of First Year and a third at the beginning
O The most systematic evidence of this kind, presented by the staff of Sydney
Teachers’ College, is given in full in Appendix B.


of Third Year. At least five periods a week should be devoted to each
elective though, for reasons already given, that allocation might well
be greater. On the other hand, there will be some pupils, generally of
low ability, whose course will throughout be based upon a maximum
allocation for the subjects of the core curriculum.
At this point, we would make two observations, both springing from
the realization that, if our recommendations are adopted, it will be
necessary for schools to have some time in which to become accustomed
to the new pattern and, indeed, the opportunity to modify that pattern
in the light of their experience.
First, we would draw attention to the fact that is inherent in all our
thinking on this problem, that the opportunity for choice of courses
should be kept as open as possible. Where practicable, there should
be no objection to a pupil being allowed to attempt an elective course
and then to change it, or revert to the core subject if his first choice
proved unsuitable. The obvious administrative problems arising out
of such a trial will be more easily solved when schools become accus-
tomed to the new regime; at first, school principals might well be
cautious about sanctioning such a procedure. It is partly for the reason
that genuine and reliable choice of courses will often be difficult to make
that, as a general rule, we have recommended the postponement of a
third elective until Third Year.
Our second observation is that, in our view, further election of courses
will be possible beyond the School Certificate stage. We have heard
conflicting evidence, for example, as to the minimum time required to
bring able pupils to university entrance standard in Physics and
Chemistry. We are not prepared to assume that this could not be
achieved in two years following a sound course of four years in “core”
Science. Here, experience in the schools will probably be the best guide,
but we would hope that, at a stage when aptitudes and interests are more
clearly discernible—that is, about the age of sixteen—senior pupils will
still be able to embark upon some courses which are new, though not
unrelated to work they have already done.
(h) School Certificate Examination :
We propose that successful completion of the four years of general
secondary education shall be recognized by the award of a “School
Certificate”.
(i) Nature of the examination : After careful discussion of the ques-
tion, we have come to the view that the School Certificate should be
awarded on the basis of an external examination. It has appeared to
us that the first task in regard to the School Certificate under the new
dispensation must be the establishment of the status of the Certificate
in the public mind. We consider that the public is not yet ready to
accept other than an external examination as a basis for the award of
the School Certificate, whatever doubts may be entertained by many
in regard to such an examination. We have felt that we have also
had to take account of the fact that there will be some diversity among
the schools which will be presenting candidates, and that, in the absence
of much more comprehensive inspection of schools than we would con-
template, there is almost no other way in which standards may be
safeguarded.
However, we look forward to the day when, with the School Certi-
ficate firmly established, modifications in the type of examination might
be explored along the lines, for example, suggested in the Fyfe
Report. O
(ii) Scope and standard : The scope and standard of the examination
we have in mind will be determined by our observations and recom-
mendations in regard to the curriculum of the first four years of general
secondary education. ( 2 ) In relation to the School Certificate Examina-
tion itself, we therefore wish to emphasize three of our earlier observa-
tions.
First, whatever the outcome of the work of the panels which will
prepare the syllabus for separate subjects, the paramount consideration
must be the achievement and maintenance of a balanced curriculum.
O Advisory Council on Education in Scotland: Secondary Education. Edinburgh,
1947. p. 44 et seq.
( 2 ) See p. 65 et seq.


conceived as a whole and providing a sound education for all adoles-
cents. The examination for the School Certificate should reflect this
intention. Not only will there be subjects in the common core such as
Art, Music and Physical Education, which will not be included in the
School Certificate Examination, but the requirements of that examina-
tion should not come to determine, in every detail, what happens in the
secondary school.
Second, the syllabus in each subject should avoid detailed prescrip-
tion and should afford scope for variation in matter and treatment. We
would repeat that we have evidence of the fact that it is possible to
achieve satisfactory standards and to set examinations without pre-
scribed textbooks and on the basis of syllabuses of work which are
much less specific and prescriptive than those at present in use in
public examinations in New South Wales.
Third, since our basic intention is the provision of four years of
education for all adolescents, the curriculum as a whole and each
syllabus of work in the common core should be pitched at the level of
the pupil of average ability. In the elective subjects, account must be
taken of the fact that both the scope and standard of work should
provide opportunity for the most able. At the same time, since all
pupils will follow some elective courses, provision must also be made
for the less able. The fact that some pupils will pursue their studies
beyond the School Certificate stage should not mean that the examina-
tion for that Certificate will, as a whole, be pitched at their level of
ability.
(iii) Examining body : We recommend that the School Certificate
should be issued by the Director-General of Education and that the
examination should be conducted by the Department of Education.
To assist the Department and to maintain liaison with the schools, we
recommend that a board, to be known as the Secondary Schools Board,
be established, principally representative of the Department of Educa-
tion, the several groups of secondary schools, and such other authorities
in subject matter fields, from the university or elsewhere, as may be
determined.
VII. Early Leavers.
It is clear that, since pupils will enter the secondary school at about
the age of twelve, those who remain at school to qualify for the School
Certificate will face the examination for this Certificate at about the
age of sixteen.
In making no provision for any formal recognition of the completion
of an earlier stage of secondary education, we have been moved by
the conviction that, under existing conditions, a satisfactory general
education for adolescents cannot be achieved in less than four years.
We consider that there is virtue in the fact that such a four-year
course would enable adolescents to make a smooth transition to ap-
prenticeship and to specifically vocational courses of training at the age
of sixteen. Moreover, we feel that, with proper liaison between the
secondary school and technical education, and in the absence of any
formal credential before the award of the School Certificate, an in-
creasing number of young people will be encouraged to complete a
coherent course of secondary education and pass, with less hesitation
than at present, to the variety of types of further education.
At the same time, we have taken account of the fact that, especially
at first, a considerable proportion of adolescents will continue to leave
school at fifteen years of age. Some of these school leavers will be
adolescents whose ability holds out little prospect of success in technical
and other forms of vocational training. Others will be capable of only
the most routine tasks.
We therefore recommend that pupils who leave school without gaining
their School Certificate should be given by the principal of their school
a formal statement of their attainments, attendance and conduct. There
would, of course, be nothing to prevent principals from adding personal
testimonials at their discretion. The institution for these pupils of a
credential with any higher status would, we feel, involve the acceptance
of standards which would endow the credential with a false value, and
would present the double danger of affording formal recognition to those


standards in all secondary schools and of encouraging too many pupils
to regard the gaining of such a credential as a terminal point in their
education.
We look forward to the day when adolescents will remain at school
until the age of sixteen. However, that day may be far in the future
and we may first see the institution of a scheme of part-time schooling
for the less able of any generation. We take the view that it is better
first to build up a system of general secondary education providing
interest and challenge to adolescents of all types of ability, which would
encourage them voluntarily to remain at school and gain their School
Certificate, rather than to wait until the school age may be raised to
sixteen by legislation, before instituting the four-year course. We can-
not ignore the possibility that part of the complex of reasons why
pupils leave school is that it has ceased to attract them.
The problem of helping the pupil who might otherwise be forced,
largely because of economic circumstances, to leave school before gain-
ing his School Certificate should be met by a review of the number and
condition of the award of bursaries beyond the statutory school leaving
age. We would observe, however, that the reasons why pupils leave
school at the age of fifteen are rarely solitary. The economic reason may
be paramount in many cases, but lack of parental interest, lack of pupil
interest (sometimes through attempting unsuitable courses), together
with the lure, during recent years, of attractive wages paid for unskilled
work, are reasons which must all be taken into account, often several
of them in the same case.
We have noted the interest of the Government in the educational
welfare of the country child, in particular its encouragement of secondary
classes to the senior level even in many of the smaller towns, and of the
provision of hostels either under State control or with State assistance.
We have also noted the policy of non-Governmental authorities in set-
ting up secondary schools to serve country areas.
It is clear that difficulties would be encountered by the smaller country
schools in providing the specialized senior courses and instruction re-
quired by the proposed extension of secondary schooling to six years.
The probability is that the needs of the majority of pupils would be
satisfied by the School Certificate course of four years and that the
problem of providing the extra two years would be confined to individual
pupils of high capacity who should enjoy the same right of senior
secondary education as that of city pupils. We consider that the solution
of this problem might well lie in the concentration of Fifth and Sixth
Year pupils in the larger country towns. Such a solution would be
associated with the award of bursaries, the establishment of boarding
facilities and subsidized conveyance of pupils.
State bursaries are at present awarded at the commencement of the
secondary school course for a period of three years up to the Inter-
mediate Certificate Examination and, on the results of this examination,
for a further period of two years. The organization of examinations
at the end of the Fourth and Sixth Years would involve an adjustment
in the system of awards. Since a smaller group would proceed after
Fourth Year than now proceeds after Third, the same number of senior
awards would cover a greater fraction of the senior school population.
This factor would compensate, to some extent, for the greater demand
on bursary funds made by pupils who might need to board away from
home.
Some extension of the hostels and conveyance schemes would also be
necessary but, in our opinion, adequate provision could be made on
the present basis of Governmental assistance.
VIII. Higher School Certificate.
The School Certificate is designed to recognize the completion of a
sound course of secondary education, that is, a course of education for
all adolescents. There will be some, however, who, before reaching the
School Certificate stage, will have begun to aspire to some form of
tertiary education. Progressive selection of elective courses will, to a
considerable extent, already have been provided for this minority in the
secondary school before the School Certificate is reached. For these
pupils, however, we recommend that a further stage of two years of
secondary education be provided, the satisfactory completion of which
shall be recognized by the award of a Higher School Certificate.


We further recommend that the universities be invited to accept a
pass (of an approved pattern) at the Higher School Certificate Examina-
tion as meeting matriculation requirements.
For this reason we recommend that authority for the conduct of the
Higher School Certificate Examination, including courses of study and
the issue of the Certificate, be vested in a Board of Senior School Studies,
comprising representatives of the Department of Education, the univer-
sities, and secondary schools both Departmental and non-Departmental.
While details of the requirements at this stage would be recommended
to the Minister by the proposed Board and would doubtless be influenced
by the matriculation requirements of the universities, we recommend
that the following considerations should be taken into account by
the Board, having in mind the fact that all the pupils concerned will
already have gained their School Certificate:
(i) This stage of schooling is designed to meet the needs of the most
able adolescents between the ages of sixteen and eighteen years.
(ii) While the objective of tertiary education will be clearer in the
minds of these pupils because they have elected to remain at school
beyond the School Certificate stage, these two senior years are to be
regarded as an integral part of secondary education. In other words,
the time should not be regarded simply as a period of preparation for
matriculation.
(iii) Although the number of subjects in the curriculum might there-
fore be less than that at present prescribed for the Leaving Certificate
Examination, due regard should be paid to the need for balance in the
choice of subjects. Moreover, provision should be made for school
activities which are essential to the education of adolescents but which
do not involve preparation for examinations.
(iv) We anticipate, however, that both the selective nature of this
group of pupils and the fact that they will remain at school until the
age of eighteen will make possible the provision of courses of study
which will afford matriculants a better prospect of successfully under-
taking the early stages of university study.


CHAPTER V
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
In this chapter we set out, in summary form, our findings on the
two terms of reference remitted to us.
Concerning the first of these, namely “to survey and to report upon the
provision of full-time day education for adolescents in New South
Wales”, we find as follows:
Enrolments.
1. At present, more than 175,000 pupils are enrolled in secondary
schools and courses in New South Wales (p. 36). About 72 per cent,
of these pupils are enrolled in schools conducted by the Department of
Education (p. 30).
2. This enrolment represents more than a ten-fold increase in the
secondary school population over a period of forty years. In itself,
the provision of schools and teachers to meet this growing demand is
a noteworthy achievement (p. 36).
3. A total enrolment of approximately one-quarter of a million secon-
dary school pupils is to be anticipated by 1965 (p, 36).
Schools.
4. In 1956, there were 323 secondary schools or departments main-
tained by the Department of Education. In the same year, there were
137 non-Departmental schools registered as secondary schools under
the Bursary Endowment Act.
Organization.
5. Within the Department of Education, the organization of secondary
schools differs as between city and country. In Sydney and Newcastle,
and in respect of one high school in Wollongong and one in Parramatta,
the pupils deemed most suitable from among primary school applicants
are admitted to high school. These high schools provide a five-year
course leading to the Leaving Certificate and the policy has been to
require their pupils to study one foreign language (usually French),
though the more able tend to study Latin also (p. 31) .
The other pupils pass from the primary school, either to another
secondary school offering languages or, in the majority of cases, to a
secondary school in which languages are replaced, for boys, by manual
arts and descriptive geometry, and, for girls, by domestic arts and com-
mercial subjects. With some exceptions, these are three-year schools,
those pupils who wish to go farther transferring to the senior years
of a high school (pp. 31-32).
Junior technical and home science schools are secondary schools;
despite their titles, they are not vocational schools. Their development
over the past forty-five years has been significant. The success of many
of their pupils at the Intermediate Certificate Examination and beyond,
raises in our minds the question of the reliability of the selection of
pupils before the commencement of secondary education (p. 32).
6. In the country, where the majority of high schools are now found,
all pupils passing from the primary school are enrolled in the local
high or intermediate high school. There they are allotted to courses
corresponding to the different types of secondary school in the city.
Though there is some opportunity for adjustment within the country
secondary school, pupils tend to remain in the courses to which they
have been allotted. The Country secondary school houses a number
of separate courses under one roof; it does not provide the elasticity
of the “comprehensive” school overseas (p. 33),
7. Among the non-Departmental schools, those maintained by the
Roman Catholic Church are generally organized in specific courses
somewhat akin to the pattern of Departmental organization. In the
remainder, variations in the pattern of courses are to be found but, since
they are individual schools, no general statement of the details of their
organization can be made (p. 34).


Selection for High School.
8. Behind the method adopted for selecting pupils for admission to
high schools in metropolitan areas lies a history of dissatisfaction with
a number of types of attainments tests used for this purpose between
1911 and 1943 (pp. 21-22). The present method combines the results
of primary school attainments, and of intelligence tests, with the overall
school records of the pupils concerned. Due weight is given to parents’
choice and to the judgment of teachers (p. 30).
In itself, the method is as satisfactory as could be devised in the cir-
cumstances. We do not consider, however, that a fully satisfactory
method of determining, in advance, the secondary school course for a
pupil of about twelve years of age can be devised, especially if the
organization of the secondary school thereafter makes it difficult for a
pupil to change his course (pp. 30-31 and 32-33).
Courses of Study.
9. School principals may vary courses, but the opportunity of doing
so is limited. Furthermore, the general pattern of the secondary curri-
culum is largely determined by the requirements of syllabuses approved
by the Board of Secondary School Studies. These syllabuses are
designed, in their senior stages, to prepare candidates for the Leaving
Certificate Examination, which may also serve as the basis for univer-
sity entrance (p. 35).
10. The effect of this situation is twofold. On the one hand. Leav-
ing Certificate requirements have an anticipatory effect upon the work
of junior years, though many of the pupils involved have no intention
of being Leaving Certificate candidates. On the other, the regard which
has had to be paid to less academically inclined candidates for the
Intermediate Certificate has probably restricted the scope and content of
work for the more able (pp. 34-35).
11. Under present conditions, when all adolescents proceed to the
secondary school, the extent of the influence of the Board of Secondary
School Studies is, in view of its limited authority under legislation, some-
what of an anomaly. That the anomaly has not become more apparent
has been due to the wisdom and understanding of the Board over the
past twenty years (p. 35).
12. In addition to the general pattern of secondary schools described
in (5) above, there are high schools, termed “technical”, “home
science”, and “agricultural high schools”, in which a group of courses
corresponding to the title of the school is substituted for a second
language in the curriculum (pp. 31 and 33). The Roman Catholic
Church maintains a small number of agricultural secondary schools
(p. 34).
13. The Department of Education has developed two courses at the
secondary level, designed to meet the needs of pupils for whom post-
intermediate studies are not contemplated. The first, the General
Activities course, is designed for the least able group of adolescents; the
second, the Alternative Curriculum for Secondary Schools, is designed
for pupils of average ability who seem likely not to remain in school
beyond the Intermediate Certificate stage (pp. 27 and 32). Varia-
tions are made in courses to meet the needs of similar groups of pupils
in non-Departmental schools, though not necessarily by means of these
organized courses of study (p. 34).
14. Despite all that has been done in so many schools, the pre-
dominant pattern of organization makes it difficult for the secondary
schools of the State, as a whole, to provide a programme of education
completely satisfactory for all types of adolescents.
Examinations.
15. In Departmental schools and in approved non-Departmental
schools, candidates who are not applicants for bursaries and scholar-
ships gain their Intermediate Certificate on the basis of conduct and
attendance and an “internal” examination on an approved course of
study. The “internal” examination is set and marked within the school.
Other candidates sit for an external examination, the arrangements for
which are approved by the Board of Secondary School Studies (pp.
25-26, 34 and 35).


16. The Leaving Certificate Examination, conducted by the Board of
Secondary School Studies, is an external examination. In view of the
steady increase in the number of candidates and of the expectation that
that number will reach 12,000 by 1965, doubts are felt as to whether,
solely on administrative grounds, that examination can continue to be
maintained much longer in its present form (pp. 36-37).
Holding Power of Schools.
17. The consistent feature of secondary schools in New South Wales,
as in other states, is the small proportion of the group entering the schools
in any year which remains to complete the course. Pupil wastage is
more marked in Departmental than in non-Departmental schools.
Though the former enrol almost three-quarters of all First Year pupils,
they present only half the candidates for the Leaving Certificate ex-
amination. Since the last war, however, there has been a small but
consistent annual increase in the holding power of Departmental schools.
Perhaps the more significant aspect of the fact that little more than
one half of pupils entering secondary school complete three years of the
course is that, among those who leave during the junior years, there is
a considerable number of pupils of undoubted talent (pp. 37-40).
18. Our analysis of the background of early leaving casts some doubt
upon the common assumption that it is almost entirely the result of
economic pressure upon parents. The most obvious fact disclosed is
that, although few pupils leave before the age of fifteen, they turn fifteen
before they have progressed very far in the secondary school (p. 38).
19. This, togther with the fact that many pupils repeat at least one
secondary school year, leads us to the conclusion that the situation re-
flects some measure of retardation of progress in the primary school
and a need for a review of the nature and organization of studies in the
secondary school (p. 38).
Relation to the University.
20. We have not questioned the assumption that universities in Aus-
tralia should be selective institutions and that their matriculation re-
quirements should reflect this fact. We point out, however, that there
is a growing demand in our community for young people who have
remained at school to the Leaving Certificate stage, but v/ho may not
wish to proceed to the university (p. 40).
21. Taking both points of view into account, we consider that a
“survival rate” of 16 per cent, to the final year of the secondary school,
if continued, is likely to deprive the community of sufficiently educated
young people and to produce serious dissatisfaction among young
people themselves (p. 40).
22. From what we know of the order of ability demanded by univer-
sity graduation, the number remaining until the last secondary school
year represents the smallest number we might expect if all of them
were of high ability, all wished to proceed to the university and all, in
fact, matriculated. Our evidence, however, is that many able pupils
leave before the final secondary school year and that some who have
no more than average ability remain. Only 7.5 per cent, of a typical
secondary school entry matriculate (p. 40).
23. We are informed that as many as one-third of those who pro-
ceed to the university fail in their first university year. The reason for
this failure is not to be found in any decline in the standard of the
Leaving Certificate Examination over a considerable period. The evi-
dence points rather to the fact that the pressure of that examination upon
pupils and schools has increased over the years (pp. 40-42).
24. We are not in a position to assess the degree to which the respon-
sibility for this incidence of failure at the university rests upon the
schools, the university or the undergraudates themselves. The great
majority of matriculants from schools are of sufficient general mental
ability to pursue university studies and we have noted the major part
played by members of university staff in determining and maintaining
matriculation standards. We have observed a marked tendency, over
the last twenty years, for pupils to gain their Leaving Certificate at a
younger age. Under pressure of examinations, the survival of the
scholastically fittest tends to be the survival of the youngest. To some
extent, it may also produce immature undergraduates. Our impression,


however, is that a large part of the answer to our question may be
found in what happens to students at the university. At the same time,
we feel that any assessment of the situation must take into account the
nature and conditions of the senior years of the secondary school (pp.
40-43).
With regard to our second term of reference, namely “in particular, to
examine the objectives, organization and content of the courses provided
for adolescent pupils in the public schools of the State, regard being had
to the requirements of a good general education and to the desirability of
providing a variety of curriculum adequate to meet the varying aptitudes
and abilities of the pupils concerned”, our conclusions and recommen-
dations may be summarized as follows:
The responsibility undertaken by the community in the field of secon-
dary education has altered radically for, within the last fifty years, it
has come to be accepted that all children will pass on to some form of
secondary education and will remain at school at least until the age of
fifteen years (p. 51). The central problem of secondary education to-
day is that, while “the education of all adolescents” implies a proper
provision for all types and levels of ability and for the wide variety of
interest and need to be found in any entire school generation, no com-
munity can afford to lose sight of the need for identifying and cultivating
talent of every kind (p. 51). The special talents which become manifest
during adolescence are not all to be measured in scholastic terms nor
to be nurtured by the more traditional academic studies (p. 52).
We are therefore of the opinion that, although the present method
of selection of Departmental school pupils for secondary courses is as
effective as can be devised under the circumstances, all pupils who have
completed the primary stage of education should pass, without pre-
requisite test or examination, into the secondary school (pp. 52 and 53).
We have also come to the conclusion that any determination of the
course of study best suited to the adolescent boy or girl must be pro-
gressive (p. 52), and that the secondary school should be so organized
as to make it possible to postpone a final determination of the pattern
of courses an adolescent should follow (p, 53).
Because of the expansion of knowledge and the rise in standards in
many fields (p. 53), and the significance of maturity in the successful
completion of university studies, a sixth secondary year should be pro-
vided primarily to meet the needs of the minority who intend proceeding
to tertiary education (pp. 54-55), but not at the cost of endangering
the provision of a sound general education for all adolescents.
Our specific recommendations are set out below, together with obser-
vations as to the consequences of these recommendations as seen by
the Committee.
I. Transition from Primary to Secondary School.
On completion of the primary school course and, in general, about the
age of twelve years, all pupils should proceed, without examination, to
secondary education organized consistently with the recommendations
which follow (pp. 57 and 58-62).
Completion of the Primary School Course.
The unquestioned transition of pupils from primary to secondary
school should be accompanied by a continuing scrutiny of the standards
achieved by the average pupil in the final year of the primary school
and the consolidation of primary school work in the first secondary
school year, as there is evidence of a need to continue practice in the
fundamental skills more systematically than appears sometimes to have
been the case (pp. 58-59).
Age of Transition.
The present practice whereby pupils enter secondary school at an
average age of twelve and a half years should continue and, as there is a
limit beyond which a pupil’s progress cannot be deferred, pupils of
low ability should not remain in the primary school beyond the age of
thirteen and a half years (p. 59).
*7543—6


Liaison between Primary and Secondary School.
Staffs of each type of school should know more about each other’s
objectives and problems. For smoother progression, especially during
the first secondary school year, the curricula of both primary and secon-
dary schools should be examined conjointly (p. 60).
Class-teaching in First Year.
Class-teaching in a “home room” might be organized during First
Year although, in subjects such as Science, Manual Arts and Music,
specialist teaching as well as special rooms is desirable from the begin-
ning of the secondary school (pp. 60-61).
Effective provision for the pastoral care of pupils is a matter of
paramount importance, not only to ensure their smooth transition from
the primary school, but also their progress throughout the secondary
school (pp. 61-62).
Tests and Their Use.
Although we do not believe there should be any examination at the
end of the primary course specifically for selection for secondary
school, we consider that the construction, supply and systematic use
of standardized tests of attainments at the primary level should be
increased. The results of tests of ability and attainments can assist in
the organization of First Year classes and the guidance of pupils through-
out the secondary school (p. 62),
11. Secondary Education for all Adolescents.
The organization and curriculum of the high school should be such
as to provide a satisfactory, education for all adolescents and should
be designed to cover four years, to the age of about sixteen (pp. 58 and
62-65).
Size of School.
We recommend the provision of “comprehensive” secondary schools,
even though it may mean having schools with enrolments in excess of
600 or 700, as the necessary range of electives is likely to require classes,
at least in the final year, which would be too small in terms of staff
and facilities unless the first year enrolment approached 200.
Explicit provision would have to be made for sub-groups of reasonable
size, which might be achieved by an organization into “houses”, each
limited to the number one housemaster could get to know personally.
Such an organization would make considerable demands upon the prin-
cipal, who would have to establish and maintain a wider sense of mem-
bership of the school as a whole (pp. 62-64).
Co-education.
Despite the inconclusive nature of the evidence placed before us and
the lack of unanimity on the part of the Committee, we record that
professional and lay opinion as expressed to us is that as new secondary
schools are established by the Department of Education, they should,
generally speaking, be co-educational schools, although we are aware
that conditions in a particular locality may call for some modification
of this general rule, e.g., “twin schools” might be established (pp.
64-65).
111. The Common Core of the Curriculum.
The curriculum should be designed to provide a core of subjects
common to all schools, together with a progressive increase in the
proportion of elected subjects. On this basis, the greater part of the
curriculum for the first year should be allotted to the common core
(pp. 58 and 65-67).
The Nature of the “Core” Subjects.
Recommendation 111 is based on the conviction that there are certain
fields of thought and experience of which no adolescent should be
ignorant. The common curriculum should therefore include English,
Social Studies, Science, Mathematics, Music, Art, Crafts, Physical and
Health Education, Religious Education (p. 65).
The interpretation we would place on certain subjects is set out in
the body of the Report (pp. 65-66),


Class Organization in Relation to the "Core” Curriculum.
The syllabus of any of the subjects in the “core” curriculum should
be set out in quite general terms. A statement for each subject which
is a sufficient guide to teachers, but which is not narrowly prescriptive,
should be drawn up by a representative panel working within the frame-
work of a general statement of the aims and spirit of the new curriculum
as a whole.
Teachers should have freedom to adapt each syllabus to the needs
and capacities of their pupils and to the conditions of a particular school.
If class groups are organized primarily on the basis of ability, a large
degree of variation between classes in the content of the programme
and in the method of treatment will be made possible (p. 66).
IV. Electives.
Under teacher guidance, election of subjects should progressively be
made in the light of pupil achievement or potential (pp. 58 and 67-68).
Principles of Election.
Elective courses should not consist of a variety of short-term subjects,
but be of adequate duration and demand adequate standards.
Assuming parity of esteem of courses within the secondary school,
we recommend a range of electives which would enable a selection to
be made in terms of a pupil’s ability and interests (pp. 67-68).
The following list indicates a range of electives most or all of which
a comprehensive secondary school might be expected to provide: Art,
Commercial Principles and Practice, Geography, History, Home Science,
Languages (Ancient and Modern), Manual Arts (e.g. Drawing, Metal-
work, Woodwork), Mathematics, Music, Science (e.g. Agriculture,
Biology, Botany, Chemistry, Geology, Physics) (p. 68).
Relation of Electives to the Common Core.
While no specific subject will necessarily be listed in the first secon-
dary year as an elective, the allocation of time to the several subjects, or
the organization of classes, should be such as to permit pupils to go
beyond the general requirements in some field or fields of special
interest to them.
Beyond this first year the time devoted to the common core will
depend upon the ability of the pupils but might, in successive years,
be approximately 75, 65 and 60 per cent, of the total school time.
By the fourth year, pupils may be studying three elected subjects in
addition to the common subjects of the curriculum (p. 68).
V.-VI. The School Certificate.
V. On satisfactory completion of the four-year course, a School
Certificate should be issued on the basis of the result of an external
examination.
VI. This examination should be designed as a terminal or retrospec-
tive examination and the Certificate as a formal indication of the
successful completion of a satisfactory course of secondary education
(pp. 58 and 69-75).
The Educational Programme.
There are fields of worthwhile achievement other than languages,
mathematics or science in which adolescents may excel and for which
the secondary school of to-day should make provision. We believe it is
possible to devise courses of study in many fields which will challenge
the ability and engage the interest of most adolescents, but which will
enable teachers to extend their most able pupils to the full range of
their ability (pp. 69-70).
There is no task more urgent than the achievement of good standards
in the understanding, appreciation and use of English. The schools
have a duty to foster an awareness of the rich possibilities of the
language.
We believe it is reasonable to expect all teachers not only themselves
to write and speak good English, but to take a conscious and planned
part in achieving acceptable standards among their pupils.
In general, we favour in the earlier years the extensive, rather than
the intensive, reading of literature, with a gradual intensification of the
field as interests develop (pp. 70-72),


For the common first year, a possible time allocation (based on
thirty-six forty-minute teaching periods each week) might be:
English
Social Studies
Science
Mathematics
one-quarter.
one-half.
Music
Art
Crafts
Physical and Health
Education
Religious Education
one quarter.
This time allocation would have to be reviewed in subsequent years
because of the introduction of elective courses.
Where a pupil elects a certain subject, he should not also be required
to follow the “core” course in that subject. Thus, though periods will
need to be subtracted from all subjects in the common core in order
to provide for electives, none of the subjects of that core will disappear
from a pupil’s “core plus electives” curriculum throughout the four
years.
Two electives should, in general, be taken after the completion of
First Year and a third at the beginning of Third Year. At least five
periods a week should be devoted to each elective. On the other hand,
there will be some pupils, generally of low ability, whose course will
throughout be based on a maximum allocation for the subjects of the
core curriculum.
The opportunity for choice of courses should be kept as open as
possible. There should be no objection to a pupil attempting an elective
course, and then changing it or reverting to the core subject if his
first choice proved unsuitable.
Further election of courses should be possible beyond the School
Certificate stage, for senior pupils should be able to embark upon some
courses which are new, though not unrelated to the work they have
already done (pp. 72-74),
School Certificate Examination.
To establish the status of the School Certificate in the public mind
and to safeguard standards, wc recommend an external examination at
the end of four years of general secondary education. However, we
look forward to the day when, with the School Certificate firmly estab-
lished, modifications in the type of examination might be explored.
The scope and standard of the examination should be such as to
ensure that schools will be free to provide a sound programme of general
education for all adolescents up to the age of sixteen. The examination
should therefore be devised without reliance upon prescriptive syllabuses
of work.
So far as the examinable subjects of the common core are concerned,
the standard of the examination should be pitched at the level of the
pupil of average ability. In the case of the elective subjects, account
should be taken of the fact that both the scope and standard of work
should provide opportunity for the most able.
The School Certificate should be issued by the Director-General of
Education and the examination should be conducted by the Department
of Education.
To assist the Department and to maintain liaison with the schools,
we recommend that a board, to be known as the Secondary Schools
Board, be established, principally representative of the Department of
Education, the several groups of secondary schools and such other
authorities in subject matter fields, from the university or elsewhere, as
may be determined (pp. 74-75).
VII. Early Leavers.
No external examination should be held, nor any certificate of general
status issued, before the end of the fourth secondary school year
(pp. 58 and 75-76).


We feel that, in the absence of any formal credential before the award
of a School Certificate, an increasing number of young people will be
encouraged to complete a coherent course of general secondary educa-
tion.
However, since a considerable proportion of adolescents, especially
at first, will continue to leave school at fifteen years, we recommend
that pupils who leave school without gaining their School Certificate
should be given a formal statement of their attainments, attendance
and conduct.
We take the view that it is better first to build up a system of general
secondary education which would encourage children to remain volun-
tarily at school and gain their School Certificate, rather than defer the
introduction of the four-year course until the school leaving age is
raised by legislation to sixteen.
The problem of helping the pupil who might otherwise be forced,
largely because of economic circumstances, to leave school before
gaining his School Certificate should be met by a review of bursary
awards beyond the statutory school leaving age. We would observe,
however, that the reasons why pupils leave school at the age of fifteen
are rarely solitary.
In country areas, the problem of providing for highly intelligent senior
pupils might well be met by the concentration of Fifth and Sixth Year
pupils in the larger country towns, and an adjustment in the system
of bursary awards. Some extension of the hostels and conveyance
schemes would also be necessary (pp, 75-76).
VIII. Higher School Certificate.
Pupils who wish to proceed beyond the School Certificate level, includ-
ing those who aim to matriculate, should remain at school to follow a
course or courses leading to the Higher School Certificate Examination.
The type and content of this examination should be such as to make it
acceptable as a test for university matriculation. The further course of
study should be designed to cover two years (pp. 58 and 76-77).
Authority for the conduct of the Higher School Certificate Examina-
tion, including courses of study and the issue of the Certificate, should
be vested in a Board of Senior Schools Studies comprising representatives
of the Department of Education, the universities and both Departmental
and non-Departmental secondary schools.
While this stage of schooling should be designed to meet the needs of
the most able adolescents between the ages of sixteen and eighteen,
the two senior years are not to be regarded merely as preparation for
matriculation; they are an integral part of the education of these young
people. It follows that provision should be made for school activities
which are essential to the education of adolescents but which do not
involve preparation for examinations.
The number of subjects in the curriculum may be less than at present
prescribed for the Leaving Certificate Examination, but there should be
a balance in the choice of subjects a pupil studies.
The selective nature of this group of pupils and their greater maturity
by the age of eighteen years should make possible the provision of
courses which will afford matriculants a better prospect of successfully
undertaking the early stages of university study (pp. 76-77),




APPENDICES


APPENDIX A
Evidence Presented by Dr. K. S. Cunningham (Director) and
Dr. W. C. Radford, Representatives of the Australian Council
for Educational Research,
Document I
PROBLEMS OF GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND DEFINITION.
( a ) Should secondary education be defined in terms of the nature of the
studies undertaken, or in terms of the ages of children concerned?
( b ) If the former, what amount of emphasis, if any, should be given to the
achievement of a satisfactory standard in primary school studies, and what
should that standard be? Again, is the term “secondary” to be applied to
all forms of education above the primary standard whether it follows the older
secondary tradition (including at least one foreign language), or whether it has
a technical, commercial, or other bias?
(c) If an age range is used in connection with secondary education, what
should that range be?
( d ) Should “secondary education”, however defined, be differentiated into
different courses from the outset or at some later stage? In other words, when
should specialization commence?
( e ) What different kinds of courses shou’d be provided? Are these best
provided in one school or in different schools?
(/) Should the solution to such questions differ as between city and country
children?
Opinions on the foregoing.
In all countries the tendency is to abandon the older idea of_ a secondary
education for a selected few, and in one form or another to provide secondary
education for all.
This becomes inevitable if the school leaving age is raised beyond fourteen
years, and if the termination of primary schooling is regarded as being reached
at 11 or 12 plus. Most of the present difficulties and uncertainties about second-
ary education today arise from the fact that it has not been clearly recognized
that an entirely new situation arose when it was decided to provide secondary
education for all.
This applies particularly to the fact that provision has to be made under the
new system for an almost unrestricted range of talent and interest. One of
the major problems of the primary school is to cater for a wide range of varia-
tion in the talents and learning rates of individuals. When the whole population
moves on to secondary schooling, the problem becomes even more marked
because the gaps between individuals tend to increase with age rather than
to diminish.
One is forced to the conclusion that it is no longer possib’e to say that
secondary education is to be limited to those who, according to one criterion
or another, are “fitted for it”.
It must simply become, as primary education already is, all the education,
whatever form it takes, given to children between certain ages—let us say
between 12 plus and 16 plus.
There appears to be gradual recognition of the idea that each stage of educa-
tion must have its own set of values, and must not be subordinated to some
future stage. The outstanding educational success of this century has been the
kindergarten, precisely because it has thought in terms of the natural interests'
and abilities of children at that stage, and because it has avoided any temptation
to encroach on the work of the primary school and force an ear.y mastery of
formal work. It can be demonstrated that much damage has been done at the
primary stage by too early a plunge into the abstractions more appropriate to the
secondary stage.
The situation at the secondary level becomes even worse through the effects
produced by the public examinations used for guarding admission to the univer-
sities. Many students who have no intention and no likelihood of going on
to teritary education are prevented from doing satisfactory terminal courses. It
may further be claimed that the universities themselves are not well served by
the studies which at present are directed towards satisfying entrance requirements.
A period which should be used for developing broad interests, good study habits,
capacity for independent thinking and so on is often devoted to early specializa-
tion, to cramming and the, acceptance of knowledge on the basis of authority.
(The Committee wi 1 presumably have brought to its attention the well known
Eight-Year Study, which throws much light on these problems.)
We conclude that both in the interest of those students who do, and those
who do not go on to tertiary studies, secondary education' up to 16 years
should be regarded as an end in itself. The final two years (14-16 years), should
have a definitely exploratory character, but specialization should not be allowed
to an extent that would involve any irrevocable decisions before the age of 16
years. For example, a serious student, wishing to take up a foreign language
for the first time at 16 years, should be under no handicap because he had not
started ear ier. The years 16 to 18 should be occupied by full-time study for
those wishing to go on to a university, and by full or part-time technical or trade
training for the remainder.
It may, of course, be regarded as outside the scope of the present enquiry to
consider the question of university entrance as such. It is, however, challenging
to note that whereas in some subjects no previous training is required before


commencing work at the university, other departments require a standard of
preparation which can be attained only by five or six years of fairly intensive
study. Some variation may be expected because of the fact that certain abstract
studies do not seem suitable for secondary students. The matter, however, goes
far beyond this, and a large element of arbitrariness seems to be involved. It is
worthy of mention that Dr. James B. Conant, who in his time was a distinguished
professor of chemistry, preferred students who had had no systematic training in
chemistry before coming to him.
Assuming, then, that secondary education will be given to all children from
12 plus to 16 plus, and that it will refuse to be in any way dominated by univer-
sity requirements, what form should it take?
It appears obvious that the first couple of years at least should take the form
of a common course with as little differentiation as possible in the subjects
studied, though there may well be need to vary the amount of ground covered
in a given subject by different children. The years 12 to 14 should be used to
encourage free expression in various media, to arouse interest in social problems,
to open up the vast rea’m of books. It should be a period during which the
attitudes and abilities of the pupils are seriously studied, so that adequate guid-
ance can later be given to them. From 14 to 16 years, a wide range of experiences
should be available, and pupils should be encouraged especially to study the
various vocational opportunities open to them.
The exploratory courses envisaged above can be satisfactorily given only if the
secondary school is multilateral in character. Even if a student eventually decides
on an academic course leading to professional life, he some oppor-
tunity of developing the beginnings of skill in the use of wood or metal, he
should be able if he wished to master the rudiments of electricity, or learn how a
motor engine works.
The whole question of selection of pupi’s for different schools or courses is
dependent on the acceptance or rejection of ideas, such as the foregoing. The
views advocated take it for granted that it is wise to defer all such decisions
until as late an age as possible.
The*secondary school should undoubtedly be linked more with its environment
than is typically the case. The present domination of State wide examinations
tends far too much to uniformity of curricula. The possibilites for local
adaptation are set out convincingly in the book dealing with the work of the
Rangiora High School, New Zealand (Strachan’s The School Looks at Life).
Document II
SOME CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING THE ORGANIZATION
OF EDUCATION
Summary.
A critical stage in the educational progress of any child is that of transfer to
secondary education. There appears to be no agreed upon best age for
transfer.
Many reasons, each one debatable, have been advanced for making the transfer
at the age of II plus or 12. Certain arguments relating to differing vocational
preparation have led to the establishment of types of secondary school catering
particularly for different vacations.
We have _ examined the evidence available to us on two matters of vital
importance in a discussion of such schools.
(1) Can children be classified into types at these ages?
(2) Do specific abilities begin to appear at these ages with sufficient clarity
to be measurable, and if so do they increase in importance relative to
general ability?
The first of these questions is of very great concern to educators in England
at present, because of the attempt of the Norwood Committee to make such a
classification.
Our opinion, after examining a good deal of research material (of which some
examples will be given) is that it is not possible at such an early age as 11 plus or
12 to make a firm decision about the potential vocation of a boy or girl, or to
predict, except for a very small percentage, the true bias of interest, or the
potential academic competence in areas of studies leading to different voca-
tions.
On the other hand, there is sufficient evidence that measures of interest can
be devised, and that tests already in existence can give measures —or indications
—of potential ability in other than theoretical subjects, to enable us to recommend
that use be made of both at as early an age as 12 or 13 in connection with
guidance programmes and orientation courses, etc., in the junior years of
secondary schools.
Attention needs to be given, in considering this, to two features;—
(1) There is an apparent difference between the sexes.
(2) Abilities, and interests, will not reveal themselves unless given oppor-
tunities to do so.
There is some conflict of evidence on the question of whether, with increasing
age, specific abilities, such as spatial judgment or mechanical aptitude, become
more important in a person’s success at school subjects or vocations.
Our opinion is that the particular abilities and interests that develop in
children after 11 plus are in large measure determined by the particular ex-
periences that they have, and the opportunities given to them to explore areas
of possible interest to them in which, they may show competence.


Full Statement.
Children are required in New South Wales to receive efficient and regular
instruction between the ages of 6 and 15. At some particular stages in that age
progression, educational practice at present requires that a child should move
from one kind of school, organized and directed in a certain way to attain
certain ends, to a school of another kind, often with a different organization
and with different objectives. There are at present two such stages of critical
importance: that of transfer from an infant department to the next higher
department of a primary school, and that of transfer from a primary to a
secondary school. There is no exact agreement in Australia or elsewhere about
the right age for either, whether age be thought of in units of chronology, mental
development, or general social development.
AGE OF TRANSFER.
So far as the second of these stages is concerned there are several reasons
advanced for deciding to transfer children from one type of school (primary)
to another type (secondary), at a chronological age somewhere between 11 and
13.
(1) Up to age 11 the spread of mental ages found in children of the
same chronological age can be fairly readily dealt with in the grades of the
primary school; after that age, the spread is so great that the primary
school has insufficient grades to deal with it, unless it is very large. (Burt:
British Journal Educational Psychology, November, 1943, Volume XIII.
Part 3, p. 127.)
(2) At this age, children are beginning to enter upon the period of
adolescence; it is inappropriate that they should be in constant association
with younger children, and far more appropriate that they should be
grouped with children well advanced in this period (Nunn: 1929, Education.
Its Data and First Principles.)
(3) Most children of this age have only three or four more years of
compulsory schooling ahead of them, at the end of which they should have
certain specialized competencies, which can be acquired most economically
at school. Special schools fitted to give them such competencies are needed.
(4) At about the ages of 16, 17 or 18, children wishing to go to tertiary
education are required to take an examination to qualify for this. To pre-
pare them adequately for this examination requires specialized instruction
for certain minimum periods. (Certain occupations regard passes in this
examination as qualification for entry.)
(5) Somewhere between the ages of 11 and 13 there is reached for
most children, a point in general mental development at which certain par-
ticular abilities, aptitudes and interests are developed to such a point that
they are sufficiently stable and adequate in quantity to be measured. They
can consequently be used to predict success in fields of school study, includ-
ing those with a vocational bias. Success in those fields of study is essen-
tial if the child is to enter particular vocations, or go on to higher studies.
All of these reasons could be debated with strong arguments for and against.
The facts and principles which must be kept in mind in any discussion of them
seem to be:
(1) That for every child there should be adequate opportunity to develop
all major aspects of native ability.
(2) That, at a certain minimum age, children are exempted from further
attendance at a formal education institution.
(3) That, at this age, the majority of pupils are considered fitted to take
their places in a world controlled by adults and to perform—helped by the
informal and uncontrolled educative influences of that world—some essen-
tial functions in that world.
(4) That for some others, looking forward to performing certain other
functions, further attendance at school is required.
The different functions involved in points (3) and (4) above have led in
recent years to a differentiation in the kinds of school provided for children above
age II or 12. This differentiation rests on several kinds of assumption. The
main ones are as follows:
(1) It is held that the different vocational destinations of children are
sufficiently clear at age II or 12 to make a good separation possible; that
is, it is believed that it is possible to select children at that age for the
different kinds of education which should fit them best for their probable
vocation.
(2) It is believed that it is possible to measure the abilities and aptitudes
of children sufficiently at these ages to give them the kind of education
which will best develop those abilities and aptitudes.
(3) It appears to be assumed in certain countries that at about this age,
the broad general ability and interest that determined success at the pri-
mary school begins to branch out as it were into abilities and interests that
are more specific, but these specifics determine success or failure in par-
ticular kinds of studies, and that they are best exploited in separate schools.
We have therefore concerned ourselves in this presentation of opinion with two
main and inter-related matters, which have been the subject of considerable
research:
(1) Can children be separated by any practical devices at the ages of
11, 12 or 13 into types?
(2) Do special and specific abilities begin to appear at these ages with
sufficient clarity to be useable? And if so, do they increase in importance
relative to general ability as age increases?


Can children be separated, by any practical devices, at ages say 11 to 13,
into types? There is a considerable number of studies devoted to the ques-
tion, particularly in England, since the late 1930’s and early_ 1940’5. The later
work arises directly from the system of secondary schools adopted there, which
in turn rests on the assumption made by the Norwood Committee that there
are three types of mind relevant to secondary school education, and that these
can be distinguished as early as the age 11 plus.
Type 1, called the grammar school type, is “interested in learning for its
own sake”, interested in causes, connected reasoning relationships, and
coherent knowledge, and finds its best means of development largely
through book learning and study.
Type 2, called the technical school type, finds its principal interest in dealing
with the fields of applied science or art, and has a much greater flare for
mechanisms than for language.
Type 3, called the modern school type is quite frankly what is left over
after the first two types have been selected, even though it may be dig-
nified by such descriptions as that it “deals more easily with concrete
things than with ideas.”
Hence, the public educational system in England has been faced with the
necessity of selection, from the total age group at 11 plus, of a certain proportion
which is considered suitable for the type of education at present given in
grammar schols and another proportion suitable for the technical schools (where
these exist). For the remainder the secondary modern school is supplied. There
are many different kinds of examination procedures used to assist in this selec-
tion. The outstanding need everywhere is still, because of the prestige that was
involved, as well as because of building facilities, to select the “cream” for
grammar schools (from 8 per cent, to 50 per cent, according to the areas
concerned). Many such grammar schools include technical subjects just as
some technical schools include a foreign language.
It has not been found difficult to fashion examinations, the results of which
will give a reasonably good prediction of success in various kinds of school, if
success is considered to be the passing of certain external examinations after a
certain number of years of secondary education. (Correlations of .80 are fre-
quently reported between such criteria and results at entrance examinations.)
If the problem is put in a form at present most common in England—for
example given X places available in grammar schools, can an examination be
devised which will select X children from Y aspirants, with an assurance that the
majority of the X will be successful? The answer is undoubtedly Yes. (Emmett
and Wilmott 1952, British Journal Educational Psychology, Volume XXII. Part
1.) The current types of examination in English, Arithmetic and intelligence
are making just such a selection with a high degree of skill. (Despite this, the
Central Advisory Council in England is at present engaged in a survey of the
problem of serious wastage of students from the grammar schools.) Similarly,
the success of children in the secondary modern school appears to be closely
related to their performance in the “selection” examination. (We have not
found any similar evidence for technical schools of which there are still few
of the type envisaged by the Norwood Committee.) But if the problem is
put in the more critical form: given X children of the age of 11 plus, is it
possible to determine with an acceptable degree of accuracy those children with
strong and stable biases of aptitude for and interest in the types of education
given in grammar and technical schools? The best answer at present available
is that this is only possible at the most with about 5 per cent, of children of each
type; that even with these, it is by no means certain that experience in the
opposite type of school might not change the bias; and that for the remaining
children with the ability needed to pass an external examination at the age of
16 plus, after five years of secondary education, it is impossible to make any
allocation to types of school which would not do gross injustice to the majority
by depriving them of the opportunity to develop talents still latent at this stage
The success of the attempt to select children for grammar school education
depends on what is now common knowledge, that success there depends, under
present conditions in primary and secondary schools, on:
(1) a high level of general ability;
(2) adequate attainment in primary school work;
(3) a high level of ability in verbal and/or number skills.
It is possible to assess all these fairly accurately by the age of 11 plus. To
deal successfully in England with a course in secondary technical schools as
these are envisaged, would require the same levels of skill and attainment in
primary school studies, the same level of general ability, and almost the same
level of skills, verbal and number, as in the grammar schools, as well as skill
in certain abilities which appear to play some part in what are thought of as
specifically technical subjects, such as technical drawing, shop work and mechani-
cal manipulation. An analysis of the content of those tests and examinations
which appear best to predict success in these specifically technical areas, indicates
that there may be three particular abilities involved:
(1) a capacity for good judgments of space (probably requiring good visual
imagery);
(2) a capacity to handle complex problems by performing operations with
materia], as opposed to handling those if expressed verbally:
(3) a mechanical ability showing itself in the handling of mechanisms and
associated with this a considerable degree of information about them.
It has not yet been shown that these abilities are sufficiently distinct one from
another at age 11 plus, or that they form a sufficiently distinct “aptitude structure”
to be of much help in deciding upon allocation to technical schools or technical
courses. Nor has it yet proved possible to devise tests which clearly indicate the
presence of one or all of them at age 11 plus in sufficient quantity to justify
allocation upon this basis alone. It is even doubtful whether, if not accompanied
both by a good general ability and a specific ability for a particular job, they
are of great importance for selection for technical vocations.


This is our own summary of the evidence available to us from English
sources. Its essence is confirmed, in our opinion, by three authoritative English
sources:
(1) In its report on Transfer from Primary to Secondary Schools (1949),
the National Union of Teachers, reviewing the evidence given to it on
aptitude tests, came to these conclusions:
Para. 83. “The psychologists who have appeared before us are
unanimous in their scepticism as to the psychological realities of the
aptitude implied by these tests. The weight of opinion seems to be that
successful performance in such tests is determined largely by interest and
experience, and that it is susceptible to rapid variation under educational
influence.”
Para. 84. “On the more practical point as to whether these tests yield
any result that is significant for our purpose,” (viz., deciding on just pro-
cedures for selection) “the most favourable view that has been expressed
to us is that a significant result is obtainable for a very small proportion
of children at the age of 11; and that the proportion is somewhat larger
but still small at the age of 13.”
(2) In concluding a symposium in the British Journal of Educational
Psychology that had drawn contributions over a period of three years from
1947 to 1950, Sir Cyril Burt wrote ( British Journal of Educational Psycho-
logy, February, 1950) : “On the weight of evidence as summarised in all
these contributions, it is highly doubtful whether such tests will ever be able
to demonstrate any marked bias, latent or developed, in any larger number
of cases at so early an age as 11 plus.”
(3) In his summary of evidence regarding the similarity of various statis-
tical factors isolated by various workers from the results of varied testing
programmes, P. E. Vernon {The Structure of Human Abilities) writes of
performance tests (page 112: “It is likely tfiat ‘g’ is the major common
factor in all except the simplest manipulative performance test, hence it is
impossible to differentiate any large proportion of children, at 11 plus, into
academic and practical types.”
Vernon is prepared to accept the presence of an ability in spatial judgment
and visual manipulation of shapes as early as 11 plus (p. 68). As he argues
elsewhere that this ability is closely related to practical and mechanical abilities,
it might be held that the above view is inconsistent. The emphasis, however, is
on differentiation of large proportions of children, and on stability of the bias
under different conditions.
The following brief summary of a number of relevant researches will show
the nature of the work done on a topic which is a continuing vexation to educa-
tors and parents in England.
United Kingdom.
Earl and Kilgour ( A Vocational Guidance Research in Fife. 1935. National
Institute of Industrial Psychology), as a result of studies for the National
Institute of Industrial Psychology from 1928-32, concluded that the kind of
mechanical and practical abilities measured by their tests developed late, and
could not be measured by these tests before 12 or 13.
Slater {Occ. Psych. 1941. Vol. XV. No. 1) accepting the proposition that for
work in grammar schools verbal ability (v) is important, and spatial judgment
(K) important for work in technical schools, tested 82 children in an L.C.C.
Junior school, aged 10 to 11, during 1940, with a group of tests including four
verbal tests of general ability (g), one test of non-verbal ability free from
verbal ability or spatial judgment, and Squares and Figure Perception tests
believed to test spatial judgment. An analysis of the resulting inter-correlations
of tests showed that they could be adequately accounted for by assuming that
the only abilities involved in answering them were (g) and (v). The spatial
tests and the non-verbal test appeared to measure the same ability.
(P. E. Vernon, The Structure of Humal Abilities, p. 68, claims that a third
factor can be discovered in this study, linked to both spatial and non-verbal
tests.)
Following up this work some years later, Slater tested 211 children aged 11
to 12, and 161 children, 13 to 14. Earlier, he had tested 29 trade apprentices
aged about 18. Only in the apprentice group did he find evidence of an ability
to make spatial judgments affecting the results on his tests. {Occ. Psych. 1940,
Vol. XIV; 1943, Vol. XVII.)
His results have since been reworked by Adcock {Occ. Psych. 1948, Vol. 22)
and Emmett {Br. Jnl. Psych. Statist. Sec. Vol. 2), {Occ. Psych. Statist. Sec. Vol.
8) to show that an ability in spatial judgment could be inferred from the results
for younger children.
McLelland {Selection for Secondary Education, 1942, University of London
Press) obtained average correlations of the order of .6 between various possible
selection criteria and success in technical courses for boys and girls in junior
secondary schools in Scotland, and multiple correlations of the order of .8 when
criteria were combined. None of the criteria, however, included tests in practical
ability or similar material.
Bradford {British Journal of Educational Psychology, 1946. Vol. XVI) in two
thoughtful articles examines the relation between school performances of 105
pupils (13 plus) in a junior technical school, and their scores on a test battery
which included individual performance tests, and group tests of ‘g’, V, ‘k’.
Analysis of the various inter-correlations showed that there was a contrast
between the abilities required in dealing with the practical subjects and tests,
and those required to deal with the more academic school subjects (Physics,
Chemistry, Mathematics, French). The conclusion reached, that “success in
school studies is most likely to be found among pupils who, not differing widely
in general ability, achieve least success with practical tests of the performance
type”, emphasizes that in a school where different types of subject are taught,
success does not depend upon one general ability. Interesting features of the
analysis are low correlations (from minus .23 to plus .46, with a median at .20)


between a ‘g’ test and other tests—school subjects, performance tests, etc.; a
development of the idea that the antithetical abilities are ( a ) an ability to use
symbols—verbal, numerical or mathematical, and ( b ) an ability to control
imagery or sensory materials —“to deal with the actual”; and evidence that
intercorrelations between the various tests used and subject groupings (language,
science, drawing and workshop), are as high at the end of the course (for the
87 boys remaining) as at the end of the first year. The correlations between
workshop and drawing groups and the Kohs cube construction and spatial judg-
ment (K) tests range from .34 to .50. Workshop and science groups correlated
.50 and workshop and drawing .63.
Drew (Occ. Psych. Jan. 1947, Vol. XXI) used tests of general aptitude,
Spearman’s gvk battery of verbal, spatial and preceptual tests and Alexander’s
Performance Scale, in working with four groups of boys, one a senior elementary
school first year group of 353 boys averaging 11 years 9 months, another similar
group of second year boys averaging 12 years 11 months, a first year junior
technical school group of boys averaging 13 years 6 months, and a group of
88 boys averaging 15 years 8 months in the third year of the junior technical
school doing their diploma work. Analysis of his intercorrelated scores showed
to his satisfaction that an ability in practical performance (f) characterized some
of his tests. It was particularly important at the diploma stage, but evident in
his younger groups. On the other hand, spatial judgment (K) did not appear in
his result until about age 13. It was stronger at the diploma stage than earlier.
Practical ability (f) also appeared to influence the test scores more for the
first group than the second.
As considerable weight has been given to this study by those claiming that
practical ability can be distinguished at eleven plus it is important to note;
(1) That the boys forming the first two groups were not typical of the
usual examination group on whom selection procedures would be
practised.
(2) The factor analysis on which the emergence of the factor of practical
ability rests, has been gravely questioned by Slater (Occ. Psych. 1947.
Vol. XXI).
(3) The test in which it is claimed to show (f) most strongly, Alexander’s
Passalong test, is a relatively unreliable test.
(4) Re-Analyses by Vernon ( The Structure of Human Abilities, p. 110-111)
and Emmett (Brit. Jnl. Psych. Statist. Sect. Vol. 2) have not shown that
the practical ability claimed by Drew is necessary to explain the test
scores. On the contrary, spatial judgment does appear, in Vernon’s
opinion, in the youngest group.
Earle (Occ. Psych. Oct. 1947, Vol. XXI, No. 4), discussing the significance
of ability differences at 11 plus takes the stand that it is possible to classify or
guide children at 11 plus into particular fields of study; that the most important
element in the development of a particular ability in a particular child is that
“he finds himself to be and continuing to be as successful (in it) as his fellows”,
and that the best solution to problems of classification at eleven plus is to be
found in a “more careful study of the mental processes used by children in
school activities than in a statistical analysis' of miscellaneous batteries of tests.”
Dempster (Br. Jnl. Psych. 1948, Vol. XVIII, Part 3) in an experiment involv-
ing repeated re-testing at six-monthly intervals of boys aged 11 plus to 13|, with
four verbal, four spatial and a general ability test, concluded that an ability
in spatial judgment was just as important in his test results at age 11 plus as at
age 13 plus and could be measured just as well at age 11 plus. But when he
examined individual score profiles carefully, he concluded that in only a small
minority of individual cases did this help in selection.
Peel (Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych. 1949, Vol. XIX, Part 1) found evidence of a practical
ability, exemplified in performance on assembly and pattern checking tests,
equally strong at age 11 as at age 13 in groups of children in three successive
age groups (11, 12, 13) in an unreorganized senior school, there being 70-80
boys in each group.
Emmett (Op. cit.) also found ability in spatial judgment in a group of 11
and 12 year old boys, and re-analyzed earlier work by Mellone to show a
similar ability in 7 year old boys and girls.
Watts and Slater (The Allocation of Primary School Leavers to Courses of
Secondary Education, 1950, National Foundation for Educational Research)
administered a comprehensive set of tests, including verbal and non-verbal ability,
performance and spatial tests to the complete age group 10 years 6 months to
11 years 5 months in eight junior schools. An analysis of the results of the
585 children showed evidence of practical ability and spatial judgment. These
were each, however, only about one seventh of the importance of general ability
in determining the results, and other unexplained and inexplicable elements in
those results were just as important (e.g., between them they accounted for
16 per cent, of the variance; a general factor accounted for 55 per cent, an
unexplained other factor for 6 per cent., and other factors including error variance
for 24 per cent.).
Their conclusions are particularly cautious and amount simply to the belief
that their results justify further experiments, in which the test results would
be related to subsequent success in technical work, with “some grounds for
hoping” that it may be posisble to prognosticate success in occupations at
age 11 plus.
One warning they sound is so cogent that it is worth repeating: it is rarely
heard in England in the discussion on the selection problem (Ibid. p. 61) “It is
necessary to remind the reader, however, that even if a sharp division of children
at 11 plus into academic and practical groups proved to be possible, this would
not necessarily point to the desirability of arranging different curricula for them.
It might indicate no more than the need at this age for a difference of approach
and teaching method, since, as we have been able to confirm, the main differences
between children lie in the sphere of general mental ability.”


Pitts ( Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych., June, 1953, Vol. XXIII, Part 2) examined the rela-
tionship between the comprehensive entrance examination and subsequent success
in various aspects of art work in a Junior Art School (ages 14 to 16) and found
a multiple correlation of (average) approximately .6 between them.
Fitzpatrick ( Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych., June, 1953, Vol. XXIII, Part 3) devised group
performance tests to measure woodwork ability in 243 boys aged 11 plus in a
secondary modern school. Combining the results of these and other tests,
(g, v, and K), he arrived at a weighted multiple correlation of approximately
.5 with a criterion which combined instructors’ estimates of ability after 15
months with work-sample tests of sawing and workmanship.
Some attention has been given to studying the interests of children at 11 plus
to find out whether these provide information which can be used in association
with other data, to make a better allocation of children to appropriate schools.
Lambert {Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych., 1949, Vol. XIX, Part 2) prepared interest tests
giving equal opportunity to 11 year olds to choose between items drawn from
the technical side of their environment and those drawn from reading and study.
She used three such tests together with a number of practical tests on a group of
481 boys chosen from the top 30 per cent, of the 11 plus age group in general
ability. Careful assessments were made of the bias of interests, and these were
related to the test scores and later to performance in grammar schools (which
had a wide range of technical subjects in their curricula in the early years) and
in modern schools. A number of useful results appeared, but the following
conclusions appear amply justified (Ibid. p. 78-9) :
“Within the limits of the survey some evidence has been offered of the
existence of three groups, each group merging into the next:
(a) a group of children of grammar school ability with a sufficient bias of
verbal ability and academic interest;
( b ) a group of children of grammar and technical ability with an insufficient
bias of ability and interest;
(c) a group of children of technical school ability with a significant bias
of practical ability and technical interest.
“Out of those groups on the basis of the suggested criteria, ( b ) is the
largest, and is approximately 40 per cent, of the entire group. Between the
groups (a), and (c) there are wide differences both of bias and of interest
which suggest the need for the provision of different curricula, but for the
whole distribution a bilateral school in which alternative curricula differing
slightly in bias could be provided would appear to be more suitable than
separate grammar and technical schools.
“For a sample group, a significant change in the bias of interest was found
after one or two years in either a grammar or a modern school, the change
being away from the academic and towards the technical curriculum. If
these results are true for the whole population, they would support the
need to give a wide experience during the period 11 plus to 13 plus and
to postpone decision with regard to the final alternative course until a later
date.”
A very recent report by Fitzpatrick and Wiseman {Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych., June,
1954, Vol. XXIV, Part 2), on a different type of interest test suggests that it
could be used to forecast proficiency in woodwork at age 11 plus (although only
very little better than chance), and that a revised and improved form showed
significant differences in bias of interest between 600 children, aged 13 plus, in
grammar, central and modern schools in Cornwall. Further work on 11 plus
children is reported to be giving “promising results”.
Evidence of the relation of spatial judgment and practical ability to success
in technical school and work is found in many places. Some recent relevant
work is to be found in the following: Holliday {Occ. Psych., Jan., 1940, April,
1940, October, 1941, January, 1942), found that the abilities shown by 95 trade
apprentices and engineering apprentices in Engineering Mathematics and Engineer-
ing Drawing were not closely associated. Instructors’ ratings of these apprentices
on ability (not achievement), test results, and later examination successes showed
that Engineering Mathematics was particularly associated with success in an
intelligence test, and success in Drawing and more practical subjects with more
specialized tests in form relations, space perception and certain tests of mechanical
aptitude. These specialized tests showed that for the groups tested, the ability
known as spatial judgment was, along with general ability, sufficient to account
for the relations between the results obtained. Holliday’s follow-up of these
and other apprentices in the engineering firm in which he did his work suggests
that there is only limited value in statements made by these apprentices on
intake, of their interests and hobbies. (It is worth noting that, as in all guidance
work, he stresses the need for obtaining far more information about each
individual than is given by test results before effective selection can be made.)
Shuttleworth {Occ. Psych., Oct., 1942, Vol. XVI, No. 4), in an experiment
with 89 boys in a junior technical school in 1939 (age 13 plus) examined the
relationship between a number of tests of mechanical ability, spatial judgment,
and intelligence given after entry to the school and a composite mark on all the
subjects examined at the end of their first year (Arithmetic, English Essay,
Physics, Mechanics, Woodwork, Technical Drawing, Engineering Practice, Prac-
tical Mathematics).
He concluded that the boys’ first year success could have been better predicted
by a brief set of tests in space perception, form relations, reproduction of designs,
and tracing, than by the usual academic type of examination by which they were
originally selected, even though this included Woodwork and Drawing.
Macfarlane Smith {Occ. Psych., July, 1948, Vol. XXII, No. 3) showed the
existence of an ability to handle spatial relationships in a group of 100 Scottish
pupils, aged \l\ to 14£ in the first and second years of a Scottish secondary
school. Examining the relation between the scores on tests of the ability, and
school results in Drawing, Art, Practical Geometry, and Engineering Drawing, he
concluded that the test did measure a factor of importance in the successful
study of those subjects.


Earle ( Tests of Ability for Secondary School Courses, 1936, Univ. of London
Press) in a detailed study of test results, examination success, and general school
performance in a high school in Scotland, concluded (p. 33) that “there are bonds
of connection between groups of school subjects which represent abilities of a
more or less specialized character and in which there are marked differences
between individuals. The strength of these group factors is greater in the third
and subsequent years of a secondary course than it is in the first two years”.
He prepared special tests called “Science”, “Algebra” and “Geometry” which
he showed had obvious usefulness in selecting pupils who would show ability
in technical subjects sufficient to take them successfully through a three-year
course in those subjects.
Allen and Smith ( Selection of Skilled Apprentices for the Engineering Trades,
City of Birmingham Education Committee 1931-1939) used a number of spatial
and performance tests, along with a verbal group test of intelligence, and com-
pared these with the ratings given by instructors and teachers of apprentices
and senior boys at a central technical college and a junior day technical school.
The results of the seven tests of highest predictive value, compared with these
criteria, showed 80 per cent, agreement for the college apprentices, and 74 per
cent, agreement for the school senior boys. There were 60 third and fourth year
apprentices, the average age being 19 years 9 months and 48 senior boys of
approximately 16 years.
The latter group was followed up for one year in their industrial employ-
ment after leaving school. Their employers’ ratings of them as satisfactory and
unsatisfactory showed that the test results gave a better prediction of satis-
factory work than did the academic entrance examination which governed entry
to the technical school.
In a further study with the same test battery (which contains tests of spatial
judgment and mechanical ability) with a group of 157 boys admitted to a
junior technical school (at age 13 plus) in 1932 and 1933, and followed up
for some years, it was found that the results of the tests predicted the boys’
success in the engineering subjects at the end of a two years’ course better
than did the academic entrance examination. The test battery also indicated,
better than the academic examination, those who would do well in their
jobs after leaving school.
United States of America.
It is not customary in U.S.A. to provide differentiated courses based on apti-
tudes and/or interest, before the Ninth Grade (age 14 plus) (Third Year Junior
High School in a 6-3-3 system, or First Year in a High School in an 8-4 system).
Exploration of different pre-vocational fields is usually left until the second half
of that year or the beginning of the Tenth Grade. The high schools do, how-
ever, provide shop work and a considerable variety of what might be called
practical subjects from the earliest years. It is not to be expected, therefore,
that the nature of predictive or analytical studies will parallel that so pro-
minent in England at present. An attempt has been made, however, to choose
some of the most relevant material from a considerable quantity available.
1. Carter {Jnl. Genetic Psych., June 1928, Vol. XXXV. No. 2.) in a care-
ful analysis of the Minnesota Mechanical Ability Test, academic grades, an Otis
test of intelligence, and other scores (subject preferences, etc.) found no evi-
dence of a general factor of mechanical ability in Seventh and Eighth Grade
boys in a junior high school, although he did find, in the Seventh Grade group of
100 boys, higher correlations between performance in shop work and sub-tests
of the MMAT (.52 plus) than between shop work and academic grades (.42)
or shop work and Otis IQ. (.21), and an interest analysis gave correlations of .4
and above with the MMAT and of .64 with shop work.
2. Wittenborn {Ed. and Psych. Measurement, 1945, Vol. 5, No. 3) in a later
analysis of the data of which Carter’s work provided a part, did find, in Seventh
and Eighth Grade boys, six separately distinguishable abilities —scholastic ability,
spatial visualization, stereotyped movement, manual dexterity, perceptual speed
and steadiness. Scholastic ability was measured by two intelligence tests and the
correlations of these with the five tests which had the highest components of
spatial visualization ranged from .04 to .36, the average being .20. Three of
these were .05 and below, and 5 above .25. (We can find no U.S.A. studies other
than the last two which relate degrees of possession of spatial judgment or
mechanical ability, or a practical bent of mind, to performance of chi’dren of
ages 10 through 13 in practical activity.)
3. Kelley ( Crossroads in the Mind of Man, 1928, Stanford University Press)
found a spatial factor present in the abilities of both kindergarten and nine-year-
old pupils to handle memory for shapes, and turning shapes in imagination.
4. The Thurstones, in their studies of their tests of Primary Mental Abilities,
have shown that there is an ability in spatial judgment operating in. children as
early as 5 or 6 years.
5. Nemzek and De Heus {School and Society, 1939. Nov. Vol. 50) reported
that they found no usual predictive value in the correlations between tests of
mechanical aptitude and the achievement in industrial art courses of 150 boys
in Grade Eight in junior high schools in Michigan.
6. Segal {Ed. and Psych. Measurement, 1947, Vol. 7, No. 4), working at Ninth
and Eleventh Grade levels (Third and Fifth Year high schools), found correla-
tions in these selected groups of .68 between mechanical aptitude tests and success
in industrial arts courses (Eleyenth Grade—B7 cases) and of .50 between a two
dimensional spatial relationships test and success in Mathematics and Science
(Ninth Grade —57 cases).
7. Clark {Growing Points in Educational Research, 1949. The Differentiation
of Mental Abilities at Various Age Levels), in a study of the common and specific
factors of ability operating at five different age levels (from 6 to 16) in the
California Tests of Mental Maturity, which include a test of spatial relations,
found that as many factors were necessary to account for the variance at primary
and elementary schools as in the high school grade levels. It is not possible to
estimate from his data how important the factor of spatial judgment is at the
different levels.
8. Wyeth {Some Implications of the Queensland Proposal to Raise the School
Leaving Age, 1948, Unpublished D.Ed. dissertation, Univ. of California) reviewed
a number of studies in which attempts were made to gauge the relationship


between success at elementary schools and later studies. In general the correla-
tions reported are of the order of .6 between the scores on tests administered at
about age 11 or 12, and success one or two years later in similar junior secondary
school work.
9. Garrett and Schneck ( Psychological Tests, Methods and Results, 1933) and
Monroe ( Encyclopaedia of Educational Research, 1951) both indicate that the
median correlation to be expected between tests of inte ligence and school per-
formance in U.S.A. schools is about .45 at the most.
10. Stalnaker (Jnl. Exp. Ed. Sep. 1951. Vol. XX. No. 1) studied the inter-
correlations of certain test results in a Second Year class of 203 pupils in a
junior high school in West Virginia, the median age being 13 years 10 months,
and found lower correlations between a Paper Form Board Test and measures of
intelligence and scholastic achievement, than between these measures themselves,
indicating that it was measuring something different from these. (All the correla-
tions, however, were too low for effective individual guidance to be given).
Australia.
Comparatively little work has been done in Australia in similar fields.
1. Collman and Jorgensen (1935. The Prediction of Scholastic Success) ob-
tained correlations of the order of .55 to .70 between a combination of intelligence
test scores and entrance examinations, and school success. The former studied
success two and three years later, and the latter success from four to sixteen
months later. In both cases the intelligence tests correlated to the extent of
.5 or more, and were better as a single predictor than the entrance examinations.
2. Renwick (1942. Unpublished M. Ed. thesis, University of Melbourne),
tested three groups —70 pupils in pre-apprenticeship classes (average age 14
years) 85 pupils in Stage 1 of a trade course (average age 16 years 10 months)
100 pupils coming for testing to a state guidance bureau (all in sixteenth year)
and found evidence of both an ability in spatial judgment and mechanical manipu-
lation in all three groups.
3. In New South Wales, studies by the Research Office prior to 1947 showed
correlations of the order of .75 between IQ, and of .80 between a formal entrance
examination in English and Mathematics, and “high school success”.
4. A study of the scores on various tests taken at about 14 years 2 months and
their relation to prior and later school performance in Queensland metropolitan
high schools (Dept. Pub. Instr. Research and Guidance Branch. Bulletin No. 1,
1950), showed:
(a) correlations between general ability tests and previous school perform-
ance of from .41 to 62, and between school performance and special
aptitude tests of speed and accuracy, spatial judgment and number, of
from .20 to .31;
( b ) correlations of from .40 to .58 between general ability and subjects
taken at the prior scholarship examination;
(c) correlations of from .19 to .30 between general ability and the special
aptitude tests of speed accuracy, and spatial judgment;
( d) that a combination of the prior scholarship examination and a general
ability test gave the best prediction of success at the end of the first
year in an academic secondary school (though only .68);
(e) the spatial judgment test added little if anything to the prediction of
success in academic subjects;
(/) the best single predictor of success in First Year Shorthand (largely a
theoretical study) and of First Year Book-keeping, was the average
scholarship mark;
( g ) success in the industrial course was best predicted by a combination of
scholarship mark, mechanical comprehension, and spatial judgment.
There were low corre ations (av. .14) between academic and practical
subjects, and of .40 between academic subjects;
(fi) the highest correlation after six months at school between the special
aptitude test of spatial judgment and mechanical comprehension and
the practical subjects, was .23 and the lowest .03. The latter test gave
a correlation with Metalwork of .30 in a group of 101 students with no
previous Woodwork experience. After twelve months at school the cor-
relations increased so that a correlation of .51 between mechanical com-
prehension and an average mark on the practical subjects was found;
(i) a combination of mechanical comprehension and spatial judgment gave
a multiple correlation of .56 with success in the practical subjects of
Trade Drawing, Woodwork, and Metalwork. Scholarship marks and a
general ability test added nothing to this correlation.
5. In Bulletin No. 4, 1951, Selection for Secondary Education in Queensland,
the results of a study of the predictive value of various marks for success at the
Junior Certificate level are reported. This involved some 1,650 children in 28
large metropolitan State schools. Of this group, some 735 children took the
examination for the Junior Certificate two years later (16 plus). The aggre-
gate of marks in the Scholarship Examination (taken at 14) proved the best
single predictor of Junior Certificate success (correlation about .75 plus). The
general ability test correlated .50 with Junior marks.
6. In Bulletin No. 5 (1951), figures are reported showing correlations of from
.36 to .51 between various practical tests, and the practical subjects mentioned
above.
Sweden.
Elmgren ( School and Psychology, 1952. Stockholm) reporting results of a
very comprehensive study of intelligence, aptitude and achievement in Swedish
schools, reports a number of analyses of test results, etc. Among these,
relevant ones which appear justified by various analyses are;
(1) For classes 5, 7 and 8 (possible ages 11 plus, 13 plus, and 14 plus)
general intelligence is strongly represented in school work in theoretical
subjects—Geography, History, Language, Mathematics, while the practical
subjects (Handicrafts, Handwriting, Domestic Science, Drawing) show less
connection with it.


Over average
in theoretical
and practical
aptitude
Over average
in theoretical,
under in
practical
Under in
theoretical, over
in practical
Under in both
theoretical and
practical
Boys—
Per cent.
Per cent.
Per cent.
Per cent.
10-12
27-2
21-7
21-9
29-3
13-15
290
19-8
20-6
30-5
Girls—
10-12
28-4
22-7
21 0
27-8
13-15
29-8
18-7
20-8
30-4
Correlations between—
6th Class
8th Class
5th Class
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
N-120
102
101
80
?
?
1. Intelligence and—
Minnesota Assembly
•31
•17
•22
•13
•31
•11
Term marks—
In theoretical subjects ..
•49
•55
•40
•49
•62
•45
In practical subjects
•36
•44
•19
•21
•43
•14
Space Test
•22
•39
•18
—09
Minnesota Form Test
•42
•43
•32
•15
Cox’s Models
•51
•44
•43
•41
Practical Gp, Test
•48
•41
•27
•54
Technical Gp, Test
•43
•25
•31
•29
2. Theoretical and Practical
Subjects (total term marks)
•52
•34
•46
•41
•54
•18
3. Practical Test and Technical
Test
•42
•25
•30
•24
••
4. Minnesota Assembly and —
Theoretical subjects
•20
— 03
—13
—01
•11
— 02
Practical subjects ,.
•05
•18
•13 +
•01 +
•16
•14
Space Test
•34
•07
•18
•04
, .
Minnesota Form Test ..
•40
•32
•15
•32
, ,
, ,
Practical Test
•41
•26
—09
•11
Technical Test
•29
•16
•01
•34
t ,
Sloyd
••
••
•26
•16
5. Practical Subjects and—
Minnesota Assembly
•05
•18
•13
•01
•16
•14
Space
•28
•34
•28
•32
Minnesota Form
•28
•48
•19
•32
Cox’s Models
•19
•30
•06—
•21
Practical Test
•32
•03
•12
•26
Technical Test
•36
•16
•17
•35
(2) For some 400 boys and girls (approximate ages apparently 12-13,
and 14-15) in classes 6 and 8 of elementary schools, studied intensively with
a battery of tests and associated data (31 variables for Sixth Class and 40
for Eighth Class).
(i) General intelligence was shown to be a fundamental factor in both
theoretical and practical subjects in the school, and to be involved in
many practical tests; (ii) a strong factor emerged of ability in practical
subjects, much more important than general intelligence; (iii) more factors
are needed to explain the results in the practical aptitude tests for class 8
boys than for class 6 boys, although this is not so for girls. (There is, how-
ever, some loss of weaker pupils between classes 6 and 8, and this may
account for the differences.)
(3) The scores on the Minnesota Assembly Test (for some 4,000 boys
aged 10 to 15) showed symmetrical and approximately normal distributions
at each separate age level. This test he regards as measuring a mechanical-
technical propensity—a complex of specific aptitudes. He claims therefore
that the curve of development ( ie ., graph of average scores by age groups)
shows the maturing of an “aptitude-structure”. The figures he gives show
nothing resembling a sudden spurt of ability between any age levels; although
Elmgren claims that he considers it “as established that the type of prac-
tical aptitude here in question—and that probably also practical aptitude in
general—has an extremely complicated course of development, connected
with the whole course of puberty, and that the maximum rate of develop-
ment for boys within the period dealt with by this investigation (9 to 15)
occurs between the ages of 15 and 16.” (It would in our opinion be more
correct to say that his evidence indicates a less rapid growth after age
16. The extent to which this is purely a function of the test is not dis-
cussed, but is crucial. Nor can we accept his interpretation that the results
show “that growing children are gradually differentiated more and more
with respect of aptitude during the period mentioned. The puberty crisis
itself brings this development to a climax”.)
(4) He divided children into four groups with the following results on the
intelligence test and the Minnesota Test:
(5) A sample of the correlation coefficients between variables in his investi-
gations is given below:
For Class s—“ attainment subjects ” and “ extra subjects ” —total marks.
*7543—7


Summary and Conclusions.
A careful examination of all the foregoing material seems to us to point
irrevocably to one conclusion; viz., that it is impossible, with existing tests or
examination procedures to classify children into types at any of the ages men-
tioned with any certainty. There is evidence certainly that some special aptitudes
of value in successful work in the practical subjects in current secondary school
courses, and in technical drawing of certain kinds can be discerned by specially
designed tests at the ages of 11 plus and later. The strength of these aptitudes
in individual children, their durability under changed educational conditions, and
the degree of their importance in total school success are, however, matters
on which at present comparatively little is known. The evidence of their
existence is in our opinion strong enough to justify measures of them being
used along with all available other evidence in advising children at about age
13, about particular courses of study to be followed to reach certain vocational
objectives, but far too uncertain to justify any attempt to allocate children
definitely to particular courses at 11 plus or 12 plus, or to select children at
these ages for particular schools.
Even the evidence available on the prediction at ages 11 plus and later of
success in an academic course is not in our opinion sufficient to justify a rigid
programme of selection of a particular proportion of children for such a
course.
Performance in primary school work is not a sufficient criterion by which to
predict success in any of the variety of possible courses which secondary educa-
tion must offer if it is to be the final formal education for the majority of chil-
dren. Performance in school subjects associated with measures of general ability
special aptitudes and interest, with parents’ and children’s vocational aspirations,
and with teachers’ careful assessments of potentialities, provide material from
which it is possible to give guidance to children in the choice of particular areas
of study in secondary schools. Such guidance is not infallible, and justice
to children who are late in developing aptitudes, who have had no opportunity
to acquire information about some areas of life study in which they may
develop interest, and whose success in other areas may have been influenced by
particular features of school, teacher or instruction, can only be given by a
flexible organization in secondary education which provides opportunity for
variety of courses, for variety of presentation of the same course, and for easy
transfer from one course to another.
The Norwood report (Curriculum and Examinations in Secondary Schools.
1941, H.M.5.0.) has this to say: “The evidence placed before us and study
of the views of those who have already considered similar evidence convince us
that special interests and abilities do in fact often reveal themselves clearly by
the age of 10 plus or 11 plus, but this is not true of all children; in many
instances the cast of mind, not sufficiently manifested by 11 plus, gradually
reveals itself in the next two years or possibly later. It would be to the advan-
tage of children whose interests and abilities were clearly revealed by 11 plus
that they should at once have an appropriate curriculum; on the other hand
it would be wrong to force a particular kind of curriculum upon a child before
he had shown that it was suitable for him. Accordingly, any satisfactory plan
for differentiating pupils must, in our view, fulfil at least four essential require-
ments: firstly, it must allow for early discovery of special abilities, no less
than for late discovery, with a view to the provision of suitable curriculum and
suitable method of treatment; secondly, it must proceed on the assumption that
the discovery is dependent upon skilled observation over a period of time
which may vary considerably with different pupils and the diagnostic methods
employed; thirdly, it must leave room for rectifying of errors of judgment or
failure on the part of pupils to fulfil promise; fourthly, it must be carefully
thought out without being rigid or mechanical, and must allow within limits
for individual choice,”
Supplementary Note.
Almost all the more detailed studies in this field indicate that in the so-
called “practical abilities” as measured by current tests, girls perform differently
from boys. Usually their level of performance is lower, and the factor analyses
often indicate that “g” plays a larger part in it than in boys’ performance.
Whether this is an innate or an environmental difference, no one can say from
present evidence. Most of the material used to assess “mechanical pro-
ficiency” (or “practical bent”) has had a bias towards masculine work —
although this does not apply to most of the material used to assess spatial
judgment. The educational implications seem to us to be that it is even more
risky on such evidence to attempt selection or allocation of girls for so-called
practical or technical courses at ages 11 to 13, than it is for boys.
On the other hand, there does appear to be adequate evidence of a greater
development of a linguistic factor, and a lesser development of a number or
mathematical factor in groups of girls than in groups of boys at the end of
primary schooling. It would, however, in our opinion, be as unwise to use
these differences to justify different schools for girls, as it is, on the basis
of existing evidence on these abilities to justify separate linguistic and mathe-
matical schools for each sex.
The Development of Abilities and Their Differentiation.
The proper organization of secondary education will depend upon its ability
to provide for the different ages, abilities and aptitudes of the children attend-
ing secondary schools. It is important therefore to know whether, after the
age of 11 or 12, there is a differentiation of ability, aptitude and interest which
is sufficient to justify differentiated courses, apart from any such justification
that comes from social needs.


We may take it for granted that success in the primary school subjects upon
which current secondary courses build —linguistic and number skills in particular
—depends almost wholly on the level of general ability the child possesses.
Nevertheless, even at later primary school levels there is evidence that some
children have pronounced biases towards either linguistic or number work.
(The difference in these biases in the secondary stages is in our opinion as pro-
nounced as those between academic and practical, and provides as justifiable
grounds for guidance into particular courses as do the latter biases.)
We need answers to the following questions:
(1) After the age of 11 plus does the performance of children in school
subjects depend less on general ability and more on special abilities?
(2) To what extent is this due to the present nature of secondary school
work, or to other environmental circumstances, and to what extent is
it innate?
A considerable amount of work has been done in this field of study. Some
evidence has already been presented to indicate that abilities in spatial judg-
ment are present at ages from kindergarten on, and are partly measurable at 11
plus, and that practical ability (mechanical manipulation, etc.) is evident at
about age 13 plus.
Burt (Br. Jnl. Ed. Psych. June 1954, Vol. XXIV. Part 2) has presented a
convincing summary of the major studies in this field of differentiation of general
ability, together with some additional evidence obtained by testing the same
group of 326 boys at ages 9-10, and 13-14, with nine tests which gave adequate
range of response to allow the variability of scores at each age level to be
approximately the same. These tests cover general ability, verbal material,
spatial judgment and manual ability. His results appear to show quite definitely
that special abilities play a much larger part in determining the results at age
13-14 than at age 9-10 —although the factor of general ability does not decrease
greatly in absolute importance.
There are sufficient other studies, however, giving contrary evidence, to make
it foolish to base any form of secondary education on the assumption that these
special abilities develop independently of the type of environment, particularly
school environment. There is ample evidence that they play a considerable
part in the practical work in subjects such as woodwork and metalwork, and are
related to practical vocational skills, but quite inadequate evidence to show
that their growth is not influenced by the opportunities available for their develop-
ment and by the social and other incentives to use them successfully. There is
if anything evidence from studies made in both U.K. and U.S. Armed Services
during the 1939-45 war, that differentiation depends upon length and nature of
education and training.
There are no Australian studies from which data can be drawn for this ques-
tion. We have examined such information as is available in our own and
other records on general testing programmes, and find evidence of:
(a) The existence of a spatial factor at age 10 and later;
( b ) no rise in the importance of this factor in the results of comparable test
batteries given at ages 10.6 and 13.6 to small numbers of Queensland
children, although a verbal factor found at 10.6 increased three-fold in
importance in the 13.6 results;
(c) the continued importance of the general factor in an analysis of the
results of National Service Trainees on a varied test battery; it
accounts for some 60 per cent, of the variance;,
( d ) a spatial-practical-manual factor about half as important as v-ed factor
in some 477 boys between 12.9 and 14 in Queensland primary schools.
We can find no records of genuinely comprehensive analyses of the attitudes
of primary school children to, and their skills in, a wide variety of the types of
material which, in a more advanced form or in more complex arrangements, are
presented in the comprehensive test batteries given to older children in studies
of this general issue. We are inclined to the view that a carefully devised study
might well reveal as diversified abilities at lower age levels as at higher ones.
The difference is that, at the upper levels, the materials in which these abilities
are apparent are related closely those in which success or failure is gained
in school work or in employment.
We accept the position that both teachers and parents know that children,
early in secondary education, do show abilities and interest in some fields and
not in others, and that these, if fostered, play an increasingly important part
in success in these fields. If they develop, and persist in the presence of oppor-
tunities and incentives to development in other either related or unrelated fields, it
is a commonsense approach to foster them if they promote the child’s per-
sonal adjustment to life (which implies that they are socially useful). Ob-
viously the crux of the matter is to provide a child with sufficient opportunities
to explore possible fields of interest, of use to him, which his former experi-
ences may have left uncharted and unknown. In our opinion it would be an
injustice to any child to assume that abilities and interests, ascertained, how-
ever accurately at 11 plus or later, should be used to guide or direct him into
a course or a field of studies which would deprive him of the opportunity to
develop others which might be equally as strong, or more likely to lead to his
successful performance as student or citizen.
While there is much evidence that innate factors play an important part
in determining the nature and extent of many of those variations between in-
dividuals which are important in school or in working life, it is probably only
in extreme cases —either in a high or a low direction—that the innate factors
are crucial. The mathematical or musical genius must be regarded as born
rather than made, though even such a person requires a favourable environment
to bring out his capacities. For the middle ranges of talent in which the vast


majority must fall, the level of attainment must be regarded as produced to
a large extent by social pressures and by opportunity. It is well worth while
for the individual to “know his bent” because the pursuit of it is likely to
bring him more satisfaction.
Such considerations, plus the fact that late maturation in any direction seems
possible, mean that the arousal of interest and the provision of opportunity for
exploration are much more important in the early stages of secondary schooling
than any attempt to classify children and segregate them into types.
Again we reiterate our view that it should be the function of the school—
and we believe particularly the secondary school—to ensure that before the child
leaves formal compulsory schooling, he should have competence in the essen-
tial skills of social intercourse, and an adequate introduction to the possibilities
of the major fields of employment and citizenship, so that he can properly
select for his post-school life those areas in which his abilities and interests have
shown him that he can perform successfully relative to his fellows.


APPENDIX B
Evidence Presented by the Lecturing Staff of Sydney Teachers’
College
Section 1
THE PURPOSES OF SECONDARY EDUCATION IN NEW SOUTH
WALES
A. General Considerations.
The effectiveness of a school system depends on a number of factors, some
of which are treated in this Report: the quality of the teachers, the pattern and
quality of administration, the range and variety of schools and courses which
are available, the type of evaluating system which develops, and the relationships
between the schools and the community. But basic to all sound educational
development is a clear understanding of the goals towards which all efforts
are being directed, linked with an awareness of the nature and needs of the
pupils for whom school systems exist. This first section sets down some ideas
concerning the functions of the secondary schools of this State.
The central problem of secondary education is the delicate task of reconciling
and unifying into a single coherent philosophy two aspects of each pupil’s
development. Each child lives both as an individual and as a member of a
social group, and while the democratic ethos does not demand the renunciation of
one’s integrity as an individual, it requires of its members an understanding
acceptance of the idea that they are members of the group and that their
highest fulfilment as individuals is tightly bound up with their willing acceptance
of their social responsibilities.
We take the view that while the education of secondary school pupils must
be carried out with due regard to the social setting of which they are a part
and in which they will live as fully responsib’e adults, it is primarily as individuals
important in themselves that they are educated; they will be better equipped
to make a contribution to the welfare of their social group if all their powers
have been developed to the limit of their capacity.
At the same time, we realize that the ability to contribute to the welfare
of the group does not guarantee that co-operative effort and interest will in fact
emerge. In New South Wales, education takes place in a society which is,
in large part, democratic. Thus it is as members of a democratic community
that secondary school pupils come to school. It is for their present life in
such a society, as well as for their life as fully responsible adults, that they are
being educated. Democracy is a growing and developing ideal in our country
and, while adolescents should be helpful to live in society as it is, they should
develop an understanding of its underlying principles, ideals and difficulties,
which will make them eager and able to assist in the development of better
community living.
The function of the educational process then is to encourage the fulfilment of
each individual’s aspirations to the highest possible degree, and thus to develop
in each, according to his capacity, the power to think, work and act indepen-
dently; at the same time it is essential to ensure that this individual growth is
compatible with the completest possible fulfilment of the aspirations of all.
Education is as broad as life itself, but the school alone cannot achieve the
whole education of adolescents. The work of the school should supplement, but
not supplant, the influences of such educational forces as the home, the church,
the social and athletic club, the press and radio, and the whole life of the
community. The school must be aware of the existence and nature of these
numerous outside influences, and it must be selective, not all-embracing, in its
own functions.
B. Specific Functions.
In the light of the foregoing general considerations, the following more
specific aims, which carry implications for organization and method, have been
formulated.
I. Each pupil’s potentialities for intellectual, physical, emotional, social, and
spiritual growth should be given the fullest opportunities for develop-
ment. This calls for (a) adequate guidance services to help each
pupil to identify and understand his powers and needs, and ( b ) a
variety of curricula and patterns of school organization to cater for
all levels of intellectual power and to satisfy a wide range of abilities
and interests. The basic criterion for the organization, staffing, and
equipping of schools must therefore be the assurance that each child
can obtain that form of education which is of most value to him for
the development of his abilities and the satisfaction of his interests.
11. No matter what task is in hand at any given time—the development of
attitudes, ideals, knowledge, skills, ways of thinking or producing, and
so on through the whole range of school activities—pupils should be
given competent guidance in developing the ability to work with others
in a co-operative manner. In this, the secondary school should be
continuing a process which is accepted as standard procedure in any
good kindergarten and which should continue through every stage of
a child’s schooling.
111. On all possible occasions the life and work of the school should link up
smoothly with the life of the larger community of which the school is
a part. The school, with its systematic and specialized knowledge of
the history and structure of modern society, is able to supplement and


render more meaningful the informal teaching about society which
children receive in their homes, from the radio, press, and elsewhere,
and can help them to interpret their experiences outside the school.
IV. Since the democratic attitude implies a sympathy with and an understand-
ing of people of other communities, it must be a constant concern of
the secondary school to lead pupils to a knowledge, not only of our
own society, but also of societies other than our own. A knowledge
of people of other countries and an awareness of their problems, and of
the deeper tensions operating in the modern world of which we form
an integral part, is of vital importance. In particular, the language,
economic problems, ideologies, aspirations and fears of the people of
Asia and South-East Asia are major concerns to the Australian com-
munity.
V. We have already pointed out that the pattern of organization and range
of courses offered within a school should derive from an understand-
ing of the needs of the pupils for their personal and social develop-
ment. It follows that while educators must be constantly aware of
the demands made upon the school by outside academic, professional,
industrial, and other groups, and must give these demands sincere con-
sideration, they will yield to them only so far as the needs of the
pupils make this desirable and the selective nature of the school per-
mits.
VI. The methods of teaching employed will, as far as is compatible with a
given pupil’s capacity, give every opportunity for developing the power
to think clearly and critically, in order that adolescents might become
increasingly effective in the many choices they will have to make, if
they are to exercise both the freedom and responsibility involved in
living in a democracy, and if the culture in which we live is to be
preserved and improved.
VII. We have already stressed (111. and IV. above) the importance of giving
secondary pupils the opportunity to learn about the development, struc-
ture, and problems of our own and of other societies; a clear curricular
implication is that every secondary pupil must be given the opportunity
to pursue studies in the social sciences and in general science. We have
also stated (11. above) one methodological implication of our concept
of the social function of the school: the idea of group attacks on prob-
lems of common interest. We want to state clearly, however, that the
notion of immediate social relevance is not the only criterion for the
inclusion of studies and the choice of method. We would push to its
logical conclusion the idea of providing for individual differences of
capacity and interest by insisting that just as provision must be made
for the boy who finds his satisfaction in doing a craftsman’s job in
woodwork, or for the girl who finds hers in a course in homemaking,
so the fullest provision must be made for the adolescent who finds his
satisfaction in an advanced study of literature, foreign languages,
physics, or mathematics; and such studies being undertaken, they must
be pursued to the highest levels of scholarship of which the student is
capable. We see no incompatibility between high standards of scholar-
ship and a social philosophy of education. Intellectual mediocrity and
a suspicion of learning are the very negation of democracy.
C. Problems.
In the process of thinking about the purpose of secondary education, it is
obvious that many statements made must be value-judgments. Nevertheless, even
in attempting to state a philosophy of secondary education, we have become
aware that on some subjects there does not yet exist sufficient knowledge of all
the facts to enable us to make assertions with complete confidence. In some cases,
this happens because there are problems on which insufficient research has been
done; in others, research has been done but the findings are scattered and
may at present be located only in research theses in University Departments of
Education, Psychology, and Anthropology, or in reports prepared by the research
sections of State Departments of Education, and elsewhere. We therefore
suggest, at relevant points in the Report, problems which might form subjects
for pieces of original research, or for a number of synthesizing studies to bring
together material now scattered and not easily available.
(1) We have accepted the notion of the social responsibility of the schools.
Precisely what is the structure of society in New South Wales, and
v/hat problems will young people face when they take their full place in
it? What identifiable groups exist, and what is the nature of the rela-
tions between the groups and/or tensions within the groups? Which
elements of our culture are static and which are changing? What are
the important factors which are causing changes?
(2) If we know the answers to the questions in 1, can we state clearly the
knowledge and attitudes which will contribute most to happy and
socially useful living in our community? Are there any factors peculiar
to New South Wales society which warrant the formulation of educa-
tional aims different from those which are valid for other democratic
societies?
(3) We agree with the principle that the school should supplement, but not
supplant, the functions of other agencies. What arc the educational
contributions actually being made by these other agencies in New South
Wales? To what extent are the beliefs and attitudes of adolescents
being influenced by agencies other than the school? Are there
different answers from different parts of the State? By what methods
might other agencies be stimulated into further contributions?
(4) Having answered the foregoing questions, is it reasonable to assume
that the function of secondary schools would be the same in all parts
of the State; in any given place, to what extent would local problems
call for a statement of functions specific to that place? What func-
tions are common to all schools?


(5) In V. above we drew attention to possible demands by interested
groups, and we are satisfied that such demands are being made. But
there is need for careful investigation into the exact nature of the pres-
sures being brought to bear on secondary schools by outside agencies—
Universities, industry, the commercial world, and so on. To what
extent are their demands valid?
Section 11
THE NATURE OF THE SECONDARY SCHOOL PUPIL
While clear aims for secondary education are fundamental to its true develop-
ment, the nature of the pupils who are to receive this education must be well
understood if the aims are to be realized in full. During recent years the
study of the physical, intellectual, social, moral and spiritual characteristics of
children of school age has received close attention from specialists in these
aspects of growth and development, so that there is now a considerable body of
well attested information concerning these matters. We propose to refer but
briefly to the principal findings of these studies, in so far as they have relevance
to a discussion of needed reforms in secondary education in New South Wales.
First to be noted is that the young person of school age cannot be described
in general terms which apply to the whole period of years 12+ to 18. The
characteristics change with the age of pupils and these changes carry implications
for a pupil’s various activities during school life —work, methods of teaching and
learning, social and other activities —as well as for his potential growth as a
human being. As a human, he has the distinctive aspects of great intellectual
development, growth of physical skills, moral and social development and
spiritual aspiration and growth.
Physical Characteristics.
The unevenness of growth during this period often leads to physical awkward-
ness and to self consciousness. Glandular changes sometimes bring a degree of
imbalance which may be reflected in emotional instability and conduct problems.
The principal implications of their physical characteristics for the education
of school children would seem to be relevant for health and physical education;
with emphasis on food (food values, diet, supervision of school tuck shops), on
all round staff co-operation in matter affecting health (cleanliness, recognition of
postural defects, limitation of homework, etc.), on regular medical and dental
inspections, on the need for fitting the physical needs of pupils, as well as
gymnasia and playing fields, and on the desirability of educating parents to an
understanding of these characteristics and their implications.
Intellectual Characteristics.
The pupil of secondary school age is gradually approximating his maximum
intellectual power; those of lower academic endowment may reach their maximum
early in the teens, those of higher academic endowment continue to develop
during this stage. But all increase in intellectual power is at a gradually decreas-
ing rate (up to certain age). With the approach to the stage of maximum mental
power go a growing span of attention and power of concentration: but generally
a pupil’s experience is inadequate to meet the demands of his mental power.
A feeling of inadequacy can grow on pupils who, approaching their maximum
mental power, are faced with increasingly abstract or complex academic work;
and this often results either in a greater working effort on the part of a pupil,
perhaps at the cost of health or other interests, or in declining interest and
motivation, bad conduct, neglect of work, and perhaps in a desire to leave school.
During this period a pupil’s intellectual needs develop from those characteristic
of his earlier teens (relating to his understanding of life and its purpose, of sex
in a simple way, of success in present activities) to those characteristic of the
later years (interest in matters beyond his environment, study for its own sake,
interest in world movements, an awakening idealism).
The implications for secondary education of such intellectual characteristics are
clear and direct. Pupils of limited mental power will stay with studies or stages
of a subject which remain at the concrete level, while those more highly endowed
will range up to more complex subject matter, and will be ready to think in terms
of concepts and generalizations. And so variety of curricula must be provided
for them.
The combined teaching experience of the members of staff of this College
represents a rich and varied range of first-hand observations in many types of
schools. Many lecturers have taught in country secondary schools which are
multi-lateral in type; some have taught in private schools which cater for a
wide range of abilities and interests. This experience, combined with the
philosophy of education outlined in the first section of this Report, leads a
majority of staff to state the hypothesis that a considerable growth of multi-
lateral secondary schools is desirable in the city as well as in the country.
The observations of members of staff who have taught in non-selective country
secondary schools indicate that pupils in these schools develop a healthy spirit
of co-operation, a readiness and ability to participate with ease in the whole
social life of the school, and an acceptance of pupils of all ability levels into
all aspects of the life of the school; all these things we regard as highly desirable.
However, we realize that these developments may be due in part to a number
of factors outside the multi-lateral organization of the school. The fact that all
secondary pupils of a given area attend the same school, thus eliminating any
status-distinctions between different types of schools would undoubtedly be one
important factor; the home and community environment in which country
children live would also be powerful factors in their social development; it may
also be that staffs of country schools encourage and assist pupils to participate
in extra-curricular activities which develop a healthy social attitude, to a greater
extent than do their colleagues in the selective city secondary schools.


Realizing that there are many factors involved, we would recommend that
carefully planned and controlled experimental work should be carried out to
test the hypothesis that the multi-lateral secondary school is the type most likely
to fulfil all the functions of secondary education which we have outlined. We
therefore recommend that, in one or more areas where at present entrance to
secondary schools is on a selective basis, secondary schools be set up, each of
which would enrol all the pupils of secondary ige of the area concerned. Within
these experimental schools all forms of secondary education should be available,
with the curriculum organized along the lines suggested in the next section of this
Report. In the course of the experimental period, which should extend over at
least five or six years, constant evaluation would need to be made of the
development of pupils within the experimental schools and careful comparisons
would need to be made between their development and that of matched pupils
in segregated secondary schools and in country multi-lateral secondary schools.
Many aspects of development would need to be studied, and an attempt made
to answer a number of questions, such as:
(a) Is there any significant difference between the intellectual growth of
matched pupils in the three types of .school?
( b ) What can be said about the personality development of pupils within
the experimental schools, compared with pupils in the other types?
(c) What is the attitude of parents, and the community generally, towards
the experimental schools?
( d ) What is the optimum number of students in such a school?
All this would involve long-term, careful observations by skilled workers,
using—and perhaps developing—a wide range of personality inventories, rating
scales, standardized achievement tests; there would have to be surveys of com-
munity opinion, and of the judgments of teachers in the experimental schools.
Such an experiment, carefully carried through, could become as significant
for Australian .education as the Eight-Year Study was for the United States.
Types of schools apart, variety of curricula imply variously trained teachers
and the use of a variety of teaching methods. Provision for success in learning,
guidance in choice of studies and in meeting difficulties, are procedures as essential
as those relating to the teaching of the school subjects. Guidance may be general,
as from a teacher, or specialized, as from trained psychologists and counsellors,
in cases of special need.
Where a child has a mental (or physical) defect the school should help him to
accept the limitation he must live with and to make the most of the powers he
has, absorbing himself in developing and satisfying activities.
Social Characteristics.
Pupils differ in their social maturity at different ages, and there is a distinct
difference between the social maturity of girls and boys in the early teens —girls
being the more mature by one or two years at the age of 14 or 15 years. The
younger pupils seek approval and acceptance by the group and will identify them-
selves with a group (class) showing a wide range in physical, intellectual and
other characteristics. Older pupils are more discriminating in their social loyalties,
resulting in social cliques within a class and in groups interested in special
activities —sport, music, religion, politics, etc. A few remain aloof, absorbed
in special interests and activities, among which may be deep concentration in
some intellectual pursuit.
In school, opportunity needs to be provided for the pupils’ realization of these
general characteristics at the appropriate ages. It is here that wise guidance by
a competent form teacher is of especial significance—guidance towards social
maturity of those who are awkward or shy or aggressive, and, for all, towards
good pupil-teacher relationships based on increasing responsibility being granted
to the pupils as they grow older. However, it is increasingly the practice to
make provision in the curriculum or through extra-curricular activities, for social
development. Every subject can contribute its share to the development of thought,
attitudes and ideas which are in themselves important factors in the development
of social awareness. The curriculum should provide for a great variety of status-
giving roles for pupils; the methods of teaching should include group activity
and discussion; and emphasis should be placed on preparing a pupil for
responsible acceptance of his place in society.
No doubt this social aspect of education provides the clearest argument in
favour of co-education in secondary schools; though doubtless other forms of
organization could be devised to meet this need, e.g., the location of boys’ and
a girls’ secondary schools sufficiently close together to enable desired social
activities to be shared.
Moral characteristics are so much a matter of environment and training that
they can hardly be described in terms of typical characteristics. There are
moral implications in the facts of intellectual and physical development in the
adolescent stage. The features of these developments bring greater possibilities
or problems to different children. Teachers need to understand this, to enable
children to mature soundly and safely.
Progress in moral development is more likely to be made if the school as
a whole plans to work towards objectives than if only incidental development
is involved. Subject matter, methods of teaching, school life situations, and
social opportunities may all contribute to this development. The objectives to
be kept in mind include the development of sound values, of moral courage, of
the habits of basing decisions on sound information, of accepting responsibility
and of distinguishing between one’s rights and duties.
Somewhere within the secondary school course it would seem desirable to
include a survey of the history and doctrines of the major religions of the world.


Section in
THE CURRICULUM AND SCHOOL ORGANIZATION
The factors reported in the previous sections of this Report find expression
and fulfilment mainly through the types of curricula which are provided for
secondary school pupils, but also to some extent through the types of schools
which are established.
A. Organization.
As already pointed out, a strong majority of staff favours an extension of
co-educational, multi-lateral schools at the secondary stage, for reasons of
equality of opportunity, and of social development, and because such schools,
drawing pupils from a limited geographical area, can expect to receive strong
local support from their communities. Furthermore, the staff favour a school
so limited in numbers (700 to 750 pupils) that it remains a coherent and
manageable unit, though large enough to offer a full range of alternative courses.
The school building would have the following rooms and facilities besides class-
rooms: gymnasium, library, auditorium, cafeteria, laboratories, craft rooms,
workshops, music room, art studio; in addition there would be adequate
playing fields and grounds for special purposes ( e.g., agriculture or horticulture)
appropriate to the kind of work offered in the curriculum.
However, a number of us who would not favour that type of school alone
feel that variety, rather than uniformity, should be characteristic of our demo-
cratic institutions.
We all favour the raising of the school age to provide a minimum of four
years of education beyond the primary school stage, and generally this would
mean to 16 years: and a strong majority favours the extension of secondary educa-
tion for a further two years in the same school for those pupils who wish
to stay on at school, and for those who seek admission to a tertiary institution.
At the end of the compulsory four-year period pupils would take a general
Leaving Certificate examination, a pass in which would signify satisfactory com-
pletion of a course of general secondary education. The examination at the end
of the six-year period of secondary education would be linked with matriculation,
and generally with the requirements of the next stage of education. Some
members of staff hold the view that the organization of the higher secondary
stage could well be the subject of some experimentation, especially since there
are likely to be schools in some country areas where there would be insufficient
pupils enrolled in the last two years of the course. Those pupils who complete
satisfactorily one full year of study beyond the general Leaving Certificate
stage should have their certificates endorsed accordingly.
The experimentation referred to in the previous paragraph would be con-
cerned with the problem of establishing some form of junior college, which,
for many pupils, could serve as a transition stage between secondary school and
tertiary institution.
B. Curriculum.
We propose a reorganization of the curriculum so that, starting from a first
year of studies common to all pupils —a kind of orientation year to
secondary studies —the schools would offer in later years increasing
opportunity for pupils to elect subjects suited to their needs and interests; with
the increase in time allowed for elective subjects there would be a corre-
sponding progressive reduction in the number of subjects prescribed for all
pupils. The electives, as they are generally called, would fall into the following
groups—(i) Academic, (ii) Agriculture, (iii) Commercial, (iv) Fine Arts, (v)
Home Science, (vi) Technical.
Table I. shows the general structure of the proposed courses, while Table 11.
gives a more detailed statement of the way in which the courses might be
worked out in practice.
C. Notes on the Orientation Year.
The notes in this and the next section refer to the subjects listed
in Tables I and 11.
I. English ( inc. Library ).
The English Course should: —
(1) Develop the standard of proficiency reached in the use of functional,
utilitarian English {i.e., for communication and general intercourse),
through
(i) training in speech,
(ii) training in spoken English,
(iii) training in listening,
(iv) training in the writing of English for communicative and crea-
tive purposes (attention being paid to Usage and Grammar for
their practical importance),
(v) the use of books.
(2) Promote and guide the study and appreciation of literature.
11. Language.
A special course to introduce children to the study of language, French, Ger-
man or another, preferably European. The course would be mainly oral with
enough written work to fix necessary language forms. The language work would
be integrated with study of the foreign people. This course should act as a
guide in determining language possibilities of pupils in second year.
111. Mathematics.
1. Arithmetic: —Complete the instruction started in the primary school, in the
fundamental skills of Arithmetic with integers, vulgar fractions, decimal frac-
tions, percentage fractions and mixed numbers. The central purpose of the
orientation year should be to solve problems, as closely related to the pupil’s
life as possible, which use these fundamental skills of Arithmetic.


40
Compulsory Course
30
Total Periods
Compulsory Elective
First Year
40 —
Second Year
5 + 5 30 10
(two electives)
Compulsory Course +
French Home Science
Latin Technical
Agriculture Art
Commercial Music
(A) Three Languages
25
Third and Fourth Years
5 + 5 + 5
25 IS
25 IS
Compulsory Course +
(B) Two Languages
25
French Latin German
Greek Other
5 + 5
5
Compulsory Course 4-
French German
Latin Greek
Other
+ one elective
(C) One Language
25
5
5 + 5
25 15
Compulsory Course +
French
or
Latin
or
other
Lang.
\
Two electives
or
10
Agriculture or
Commercial or
Home Science or
Technical
{U; no Languages
25
5 + 5
+ 5
25 15
Three electives |
5
or
10
Compulsory Co
Agriculture or
Commercial or
Home Science or
Technical
+ one elective
\
or
15
Agriculture or
Commercial or
Home Science or
Technical
Eicctives
History Physical Science
Geography Descriptive Geometry and Drawing
Mathematics Art
Biology Music
2. Algebra:—Generalized Arithmetic, simple problems and formulae.
3. Informal Geometry—of the plane and space.
IV. Social Science.
(a) Social Studies.
The purpose of this course is to study human communities in various parts
of the world: their historical setting, the nature of their environment, the rela-
tionships between their environment and occupations, their social orgaftization
and degree of technological development.
Considerable emphasis will be placed on study of the pupils’ local com-
munity aiming at interesting them to participate in community life.
V. General Science.
The course would aim at making pupils familiar with the work of Science
in everyday life. Suitable central themes should enable the teacher to treat
related aspects of Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Geology, Astronomy or other
Science necessary to the understanding of the subject. Separate studies of
these strands would be avoided, the aim being to integrate them as far as
possible.
Practical work and activities inside and outside the classroom would help
to develop pupil participation in the work and their appreciation of the part
played by Science in their own community and the world in general.
Table I
PLAN OF PROPOSED CURRICULUM TO LEAVING CERTIFICATE


FIRST YEAR
SECOND YEAR
THIRD YEAR
FOURTH YEAR
FIFTH YEAR
SIXTH YEAR
No. Subject
Per
Subject
Per
Subject
Per
Subject
Per
Subject
Per
Subject
Per
1 ENGLISH
Incl. Library
2 ELEMENTARY
LANGUAGE
3 GENERAL
MATHEMATICS
4 SOCIAL SCIENCES;
(a) Social Studies
5 GENERAL SCIENCE
6 PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
7 ART
8 MUSIC
9 HOME SCIENCE T
10 MANUAL ARTS J
11 GUIDANCE
12 CLUB ACTIVITIES
13 RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
6
3
5
5
5
5
2
2
4
1
1
1
ENGLISH
incl. Library
GENERAL
MATHEMATICS
SOCIAL SCIENCES:
(b) Geography
GENERAL SCIENCE
PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
ART ]
or >
MUSIC J
ENGLISH LITERATURE
HOME SCIENCE 3
MANUAL ARTS J
GUIDANCE \
CLUB ACTIVITIES /
RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
6
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
1
1
ENGLISH
incl. Literature
and Library
GENERAL
MATHEMATICS
SOCIAL SCIENCES:
(c) History
GENERAL SCIENCE
PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
ART 'I
or
MUSIC
or
ENGLISH LITERATURE V
or
HOME SCIENCE
or
MANUAL ARTS J
GUIDANCE \
CLUB ACTIVITIES /
RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
6
4
4
4
3
2
1
1
ENGLISH
incl. Literature and
Library
GENERAL
MATHEMATICS
SOCIAL SCIENCES:
(d) Social Education :
Economics, Law
& Govt.
El. Sociology
El. Soc. Psych.
GENERAL SCIENCE
PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
ART ]
or
MUSIC
or
ENGLISH LITERATURE
or
HOME SCIENCE
or
MANUAL ARTS
GUIDANCE \
CLUB ACTIVITIES /
RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
6
4
4
4
3
2
1
1
ENGLISH
PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
GUIDANCE \
CLUB ACTIVITIES /
RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
5
or 6
3
i
1
ENGLISH
PHYSICAL & HEALTH
EDUCATION
GUIDANCE \
CLUB ACTIVITIES /
RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION
5
or 6
3
1
TOTAL
40
TOTAL
30
TOTAL
25
TOTAL
25
Plus
2 Electives
10
Plus (A) or (B)
(C) or (D)
or
15
Plus (A) or (B) or
(C) or (D)
15
Plus
Plus
5 Subjects
(A) THREE
FRENCH
from as full a range as can be provided and having regard to
university matriculation requirements. Some grouping of
subjects to guide selection may be desirable.
FRENCH
LATIN
AGRICULTURE
COMMERCIAL
HOME SCIENCE
TECHNICAL
ART
MUSIC
LANGUAGES
GERMAN
LATIN
GREEK
OTHER
5 + 5 + 5)
(B) TWO
LANGUAGES
FRENCH
GERMAN
1 ATIM
+
One Elective
GREEK
OTHER
(5 + 5)
Two Electives
(C) ONE
FRENCH
(5 + 5)
Electives
LANGUAGE
GERMAN
or
AGRICULTURE or
inira ana rounn tear*
1 IIM
GREEK
OTHER
+
HOME SCIENCE or
COMMERCIAL or
TECHNICAL
History Art
Mathematics Geography
Physical Science Biology
Descriptive Geometry Music
and Drawing
(5)
- (D) NO LANGUAGE
(10)
to) 3 ELECTIVES
(5 + 5 + 53
(b)
AGRICULTURE
COMMERCIAL
HOME SCIENCE
TECHNICAL
or
or
or
+ One Elective
(5)
(c)
AGRICULTURE or
COMMERCIAL or
HOME SCIENCE or
TECHNICAL
(15)
(10)
Table II—PROPOSED CURRICULUM FOR SECONDARY COURSE OF SIX YEARS
(Plan based on assumption of School Week of 40 Periods of 40 Minutes each)


VI. Physical and Health Education.
This course should provide for all pupils a varied programme of activities
suited to their sex and physical ability. There should be active participation under
suitable conditions in (a) gymnastics, ( b ) dancing, (c) major games, (d)
swimming, ( e ) camping or other extra-curricular activity.
Health teaching should include such subjects as:
(a) Need for adequate nutrition and rest,
( b ) value and need of physical exercise and recreation,
(c) suitable clothing,
(d) personal hygiene,
(e) good posture.
VII. Art.
At this initial secondary stage the child should be given the opportunity to
explore, experiment, find his own creative power and be able to say, “I did
that”. He should have approach to all manner of mechanisms, tools, and
materials. The teacher should primarily be a guide to the child in his develop-
ment and a close observer of his needs. Art teaching should provide for
activity and experience.
VIII. Music.
The general course of music should be designed to encourage active participa-
tion in choral and instrumental work with an emphasis on sharing performance
with the rest of the school in intra-mural concerts, on formal occasions or in
seasonal festivals. Intelligent listening to broadcast and recorded music could
be fostered through guided “listening” activities, participation in music projects,
class lecturettes, etc. Growth of music and contribution of suitable composers
could relate to the attendance at school concerts organized by the A.B.C. and
other groups.
IX. Home Science.
The purpose of this Home Science Course is to: —
(1) Meet the needs of the pupil as a family member.
(2) Give an indication of the contribution of the future study of Home
Science as a preparation for homemaking.
This will necessitate some elementary knowledge and understanding of the
scientific, economic, artistic and psychological principles of homemaking as well
as some basic training in homemaking skills.
Areas of study will include:—
(1) Meal planning involving studies in nutrition, foods and their pre-
paration.
(2) Home management, including housecraft, home decoration, economics
of household and needlework, and family living. Integration of the
various areas is essential.
X. Manual Arts.
In the Orientation Year, opportunities should be provided for pupils to
undertake exploratory work in as wide a range as possible of the old-established
crafts, and to learn something of their history. The approach to the teaching
of the various sections of the subject should be one that encourages creative
activity, independent thought and the exercise of initiative without neglecting
the acquisition of desirable techniques. The courses should be so organized that
it is possible for all pupils—boys and girls alike —to gain experience in at least
two sections of the subject. For girls, it is recommended that one of these should
be Needlecraft. Sections of the subject for inclusion at this stage might be;
Bookcrafts; Printing; Basketry; Weaving; Needlecraft; Leathercraft; Pottery;
Woodwork; Metal work; and Puppetry.
XI. Guidance.
The work covered in this field represents something new and is intended to
supplement, not supplant, the present guidance system in operation in the
schools. It would aim at giving help in study methods particularly at the out-
set of the secondary course and at giving each pupil a complete view of the
secondary school life and structure. Guidance would be needed in the selection
of courses, particularly at the beginning of each year. Pupils would be made
aware of the requirements for university entrance and those for other tertiary
institutions. It would assist the teacher to get to know his pupils and to dis-
cover those who need assistance of a more specialized nature.
XII. Club Activities.
This period will be devoted to activities involving the class as a community.
It would draw largely on the pupils’ suggestions and initiative and could link
with project work. There would be emphasis on school citizenship and civic
responsibilities; there would be practice in self government. Visits in and
out of school would provide wide and varied experiences and relate curricular
and extra-curricular activities.
XIII. Religious Education.
No fundamental change from the existing system is envisaged. It is desirable
that the religious education in schools be given by the ministers of religion.
It is recommended that efforts be made to improve this work by:—
(1) Provision being made by the various churches for special training of
their ministers.
(2) Better organization and facilities in the school.


D. Notes on Other Years.
Specialization in academic electives (except languages) is not desirable in
Second Year. A plan for education for better social living must of necessity
provide opportunities for gaining experiences in a wider field of subjects. A
little depth may be sacrificed for breadth at this point. The depth will soon
be made up in the four years following. Mathematics, for example, would have
9 periods for each of these four years and if more specialization were desired
periods could be increased in Fifth and Sixth Years by having as electives both
Mathematics I and 11.
Languages must be possible as electives in Second Year because
(a) they are not included in the compulsory courses, and
( b ) it is necessary to find those who are adapted to study them in the third
and successive years.
Pupils in Second Year continue with the compulsory courses for 30 periods
per week. This provides 10 periods for electives so that a pupil may attempt
two of them. Reference to the list of electives will show that these may have
a slight vocational bias while the ordinary academic electives, except languages,
are all held over until Third Year.
All pupils coming into Third Year may change their electives completely if
they wish in the light of their experience in Second Year. This can be done, too,
without dropping behind other pupils in any way. This means that Second Year
is still providing “orientation” and pupils are not committed to the courses
finally until they enter Third Year. Specialization, therefore, does not really
begin until Third Year (average age 14+).
In Third and Fourth Years the compulsory course is reduced to 25 periods,
leaving 15 periods for three electives, providing for varying degrees of specializa-
tion. Every pupil may confine his electives to the ordinary academic subjects
or he may choose from the special electives which have some vocational bias.
Should he choose the latter it is hoped that with 15 periods per week for two
years he could achieve a useful standard of proficiency when reaching the
Leaving Certificate, enabling him to gain satisfactory employment in his chosen
field without further study from specialist colleges.
For convenience courses have been divided into: —
(1) Three languages. (3) One language.
(2) Two languages. (4) No language.
Reference to the Tables I and II will show how these are organized.
The choices given here should provide for pupils of very varying abilities and
tastes. It should also be possible for any pupil to enter Fifth and Sixth Years
if he wishes.
Every effort has been made to provide for the very bright pupils, those of
average ability and those not so bright from the academic point of view but who
may find suitable avenues for progression in the more practical courses. At the
same time it is hoped that all will receive a general education that will enable
them to live their lives with purpose and satisfaction to themselves and to the
society of which they form an integral part.
E. Methods of Teaching.
The manner and spirit in which a proposed course of study is taught is as
vital to success as is the new content itself. In view of this we have thought fit
to present in the preceding “Notes” some suggestions on method which should
in themselves reflect what we have already stated regarding our aims and the
nature and needs of the pupils.
Our opinion is that great profit for pupils will result from replacing the more
formal type of lesson, in which they are mainly passively receptive, by a variety
of lesson procedures in which they are active participants. Such variety can be
achieved by the use of discussion; by the carrying out of experiments and
giving practice in recording (in his own words or by drawing diagrams) the
information resulting therefrom; by lecturettes and debates; by the use of projects,
and especially in presenting the end results of a project; and by the organization
of some parts of the course in units. Out-of-doors work, necessary in Biological
and General Science, but equally desirable in Mathematics and Geography, should
be undertaken as a matter of course in the school grounds or near neighbour-
hood; and an extension of it, by means of excursions, should be encouraged in
connection with History, Social Studies and other relevant subjects. Such
excursions may become the occasion for the co-ordination of parts of the
programme of work in different subjects, though this co-ordination will best be
done by the form teacher or other teacher who has the responsibility for teaching
several subjects, especially in the earlier years. The occasion for co-ordination
and the use of a variety of methods will almost certainly arise in attempting to
solve some problems.
Section IV.
EXAMINATIONS.
The re-organization of secondary education recommended in the Report would
mean that for most secondary pupils the final examination would occur at the
end of the fourth year. We feel, that at that point, an examination of a type
different from the present Leaving Certificate is required; further, it is the
opinion of this Staff that such an examination should be mainly of the internal
type; it would not be acceptable for university matriculation and therefore would
not be dominated by university requirements.


The Function of Examinations.
The present Leaving Certificate attempts to serve too many purposes, and
therefore carries out none really effectively. It is used —
(a) as a major factor determining the award of scholarships of various kinds;
(b) to qualify students for matriculation;
(c) to select students for different vocations;
( d ) to indicate the extent to which a student has profited from secondary
education.
While there is some support for the view that the Leaving Certificate could
fulfil all four functions satisfactorily, it is agreed by all that the prime function
of a major secondary examination should be to assess the general academic
quality of a student resulting from secondary education. This statement refers
to the examination at the end of the general four-year course advocated else-
where in this evidence, or to any other universal examination which may be
held. Presumably any further and later examination, such as that recommended
at the end of a sixth year of secondary education, will be influenced by matricu-
lation and other external requirements.
Kinds of Examinations Desirable.
Ideally a system of internal tests allows greater freedom for teachers to vary
their teaching procedures, to cater more adequately for student interests, and to
adapt their courses to local needs and conditions. It also makes possible a
progressive and reliable evaluation of student performance. To establish such a
system would then be the ultimate aim, but it would have to be developed care-
fully, and teachers would need to make their assessments with considerable skill,
and in order—
(a) that their assessments would carry weight with the community generally
and with employers and parents in particular, and
(b) that their system of assessments conformed to sound principles of
measurement.
We consider the procedure recommended in the Fyfe Report worthy of investi-
gation and trial for general leaving certificate purposes, f 1) This is a combina-
tion of internal examinations and a process of standardization based on a uniform
external test to which all candidates are submitted. The proposed external test,
which need not be very long, contains numerous short-answer type questions on
the “minimum essentials” of a secondary course, and deals with facts, principles,
skills, and reasoning processes which would be included in any sensible pro-
gramme. The average mark and the spread of marks of an individual school’s
candidates in this uniform test are then used to scale the school’s own assessment
of its students; the school’s order of merit is retained.
This method would not necessarily obviate cramming and coaching in the
“minimum essentials”; but as the fate of any student is not so definitely dependent
on a single external examination, there should be greater flexibility in teaching,
greater freedom from strain, and more reliable assessments.
Students who have completed four years of secondary school should be eligible
for a school certificate based on internal assessments. To achieve some uni-
formity in the issue of such certificates we recommend that an accrediting com-
mittee be appointed. This committee might be made up of representatives from
the secondary inspectorial staff and from private and Departmental secondary
schools. Such a committee might also assist in co-ordinating assessments at the
general Leaving Certificate level.
Number of Subjects in Final Examination.
We believe that the existing limitation to six subjects of the Leaving Certificate
leads to an undesirable restriction in the Fourth and Fifth Year courses followed
at present in the secondary schools. If the primary purpose of secondary educa-
tion is to fit the child to live in his environment, and to develop his qualities and
capacities, and only in the second place to serve as a basis for later specialization
directed towards his chosen vocation, then, within limits, the wider the course
followed in the secondary school the better.
This staff advocates elsewhere a general four-year course, followed by two
years of greater specialization leading to tertiary education or a special career.
However, as long as the present Leaving Certificate is retained, undue specializa-
tion may be avoided by increasing the permissible subject load to seven; by
re-arranging the grouping of subjects; or by making it possible for a student to
pass in different subjects at successive years, and to be credited with all such
passes. More than one of these plans might be followed.
Controlling Board for Secondary Education and Examinations.
An examination is a link between one stage of life and another, and the
course of study for an examination is, among other things, a preparation for the
next stage of living. It follows that the body which is ultimately responsible for
courses and for final examinations should be representative of both the stage
where the preparation takes place, and the stage for which the preparation is
made.
The courses of study in secondary schools lead to further stages of living—
commerce, industry, the university and other tertiary educational bodies, and
living generally. The present Board of Secondary School Studies has representa-
tives of the Education Department, the University, and secondary schools public
and otherwise. To give voice to other interests there should be representa-
tives of commerce, of industry, and of the home. The original recommendation
by the Committee established for the purpose of setting up a Board in 1933
was that the Minister should nominate such representatives. It is our considered
opinion that this should be done; further, that the present University represen-
tation of five members is excessive.
Such a re-constituted Board might well be concerned with all phases of
secondary education.
(!) Scottish Education Department, Secondary Education. His Majesty’s Stationery Office (1947),
Chapter VIII; in particular, pp. 47-49.


We are strongly of the opinion that examiners appointed by the Board to
conduct the external test at the general Leaving Certificate level should be
officers who are in close touch with the work of the secondary schools.
Nature of Examinations.
The following recommendations, both for internal and external examinations,
are made: —
(а) There should be an attempt to test understanding of principles and
ability to apply knowledge rather than to test knowledge of isolated
facts. This should tend to broaden the curriculum.
(б) Practical and oral examinations should be held in all subjects or
sections of subjects where this is practicable.
(c) No examination paper should exceed two hours in length.
{d) More use, than at present, should be made of the short-answer form
of question, in order to cover a wide sampling of the course being tested,
and to reduce the time both of answering the paper and of marking it.
We are of the opinion that English Expression should be the only compulsory
subject at the Leaving Certificate level.
Section V.
THE STAFFING OF SECONDARY SCHOOLS.
This section of the memorandum commences with a statement of general
principles, and then proceeds to enlarge on some of the general points where
it appears necessary to indicate some of the practical implications of those
principles.
A. General Principles.
We have already stated what we consider to be sound aims for secondary
schools (Part I). In this section of the memorandum, we start from the assump-
tion that secondary schools should do more than impart knowledge in a variety
of subject fields. We do not for one moment ignore the importance of the
intellectual development of secondary school pupils, but we stress the necessity
for the schools to develop a moral tone and an atmosphere which will stimulate
the healthiest total development of pupils. To achieve this, each school must
be given an opportunity to develop its own personality: it is essential for the
staff of a school to work as a group for a sufficiently long period to be able
to develop and implement a coherent philosophy of education, so that the
school operates as a school, and not as a loosely knit federation of subject
departments.
Teachers need to be aware of their responsibilities to play their part in the
total pattern of the life of a school, both within and without the classroom, to
foster the fullest development of harmonious moral and social attitudes in their
pupils. One obvious implication here is that pupils need to have fairly close
and constant contact with at least one member of the school staff, so that they
will come to see that secondary education implies more than the sum total of a
number of lessons in various subjects from a number of specialist teachers.
We would expect to find the following qualities and skills in a secondary
teacher at the point of his entry to the teaching profession; —
(u) We would place emphasis on the quality of the teacher as a person; he
should be self-reliant, well-adjusted, socially mature, and prepared to
consider new ideas. Modern concepts of teaching present a challenge
to the qualities of the teacher as a person.
(6) He should have undergone a sound general education at the tertiary
level.
(c) He should have a sound knowledge of the subjects he is to teach.
( d ) He should have developed his professional skill to the point where he
is ready to commence practising his profession in a competent fashion.
(e) He should have the desire to continue his own education, to grow in
professional competence, and to make a real contribution to the develop-
ment of a sound philosophy of education in his school.
(/) He should know —and preferably have experienced—something of life
outside the school, and should be able to appreciate the relevance of
the school’s work for the total life of the community.
All teachers —whether in public or private schools —should have undergone
a course of professional training, the minimum requirements of which would be
approved by the Minister for Education.
The personality and attitude of the teacher should be major factors in deter-
mining professional quality at various points; entry to training, entry to the
profession, and at various points of promotion.
Every secondary teacher should have a university degree or equivalent qualifi-
cation.
Since we want the best types of people to enter the profession, all possible
measures must be taken to raise the status of the profession, and the working
conditions of teachers, to the point where teaching can compete with the other
professions in attracting the best recruits.
As one of the best means of raising the status of the profession, we would
recommend that the colleges giving secondary training should become affiliated
degree-granting colleges of a university, or units in a university college of
education, and that within a reasonable time all teachers’ colleges should become
so affiliated.
There is a heavy responsibility on the administrators of the educational system
to take every opportunity to encourage the continuing professional growth of
teachers.


B. Recruitment
The minimum standard for entry to training as a secondary teacher should
be university matriculation or an equivalent qualification with, in general, passes
in the subjects which are to be the subjects for specialization in the secondary
teaching field. In the case of other students, a condition of the award of a
full teachers’ college scholarship and Teachers’ Certificate should be that they
qualify for matriculation by private study at their own expense.
The profession will have to be made sufficiently attractive to bring into the
field people of the right quality and in sufficient numbers to staff secondary
schools adequately. Adequate salary is only one aspect of this problem. Teachers
need to be given working conditions which will not only compare favourably
with those enjoyed by other professional workers, but which will enhance the
prestige of the profession. Some of the more important amenities to be
provided, and which should be regarded as routine provisions, might be noted:
adequate staff room facilities, clerical staff, laboratory and workshop assistants,
ample supplies of equipment, reasonable teaching loads and class loads.
Special attention is drawn to the need for satisfactory provisions for leave.
Long service leave, as provided for in the present Public Service Board Regula-
tions, should be available as soon as the requisite number of years of service
have been completed. Time spent on a genuine enquiry into some educational
problem should be granted as special leave on full pay, additional to any
period of long service leave which may be due.
While we do not enter into any discussion of the details of teachers’ salaries,
we would stress that the salaries of heads of schools and of administrators should
be such as to compare favourably with the salaries of people holding posts of
comparable importance and responsibility in the fields of industry and com-
merce. This is necessary if the teaching service is to be assured of getting
its fair share of the most able section of the community.
We expressed the view above that teachers should be able to bring to their
professional work some experience of life outside the school. Many teachers
are limited in experience because they pass directly from school to professional
training, and it will always be difficult to provide them with this sort of
experience before they go back to the schools as teachers. However, much
can be done by encouraging them to gain experience in the evenings, at week-
ends, and during vacations, working with youth clubs, various voluntary organiza-
tions, and even taking part-time posts in various occupations during their long
vacation. A lengthening of the course of professional preparation might even
permit of the sort of arrangement, which is found in some American colleges,
which permits students to leave college for a part of the year and take up
some occupation.
While the majority of intending teachers, as pointed out in the preceding
paragraph, will go straight from school to professional preparation, the profession
stands to gain a great deal if it can attract people who have had experience
of the world at work. The present practice of recruiting such people for the
two-year September session primary course conducted at Sydney Teachers’ Col-
lege should be extended on a large scale, with a vigorous and widely-ranging
recruiting campaign;, adequate facilities need to be provided for assisting those
who wish to take the matriculation examination. Such recruiting campaigns
will have enhanced prospects of success if the profession itself is attractive.
In this connection, no obstacle should be placed in the way of any teacher
who wishes to obtain vacation employment. Such a period of employment
would help teachers see the connections between school and community. This
would be particularly valuable, for example, for teachers of science or manual
arts, who could keep abreast of modern industrial developments.
We are of the opinion that the existing system of teachers’ college scholar-
ships which carry with them bond liability is not sound in principle. The
system of scholarship-cum-bond should be discontinued, and preparation for
teaching placed on the same footing as preparation for the other professions. It
may be that many potential teachers, who now leave school before completing
the full secondary course, would stay on to complete the full course if some
financial assistance were available to help their parents keep them at school,
and if a substantial system of income-tax rebates were introduced to cover the
real hidden costs of keeping a growing adolescent at school between the ages
of 16 and 18. We would want such a scheme to apply to all secondary pupils
in the senior school, and not only to those who undertook to enter the teaching
profession.
C. Professional Preparation.
Although this is not a report on teacher education, we thought it advisable to
indicate briefly a few of the implications, for teacher preparation, of the general
principles which we have stated.
The pattern of organization which we should like to see developing follows
from the idea we have expressed, namely, that all secondary teachers should hold
a university degree or equivalent qualification. We feel that this is needed, not
only as a guarantee of a high level of preparation, but as a major factor in
raising the prestige of the profession. Eventually those teachers’ colleges giving
preparation for secondary teaching should become degree-granting colleges,
affiliated to the universities or units in a College of Education of the universities
as is found in other countries. As a first step towards that goal, certain courses
within teachers’ colleges should carry credit towards a university degree. There
already exist precedents for such a move. Already some members of the staffs
of Sydney and Armidale Teachers’ Colleges are regarded by the Universities of
Sydney and New England as being competent to teach at the University level,
and are part-time lecturers or teaching fellows on the University staff. Further,
almost all the work for the Diploma in Education of the universities is carried
on by the staffs of the teachers’ colleges.
We feel that three patterns of preparation are needed to provide the teachers
needed to staff our schools in accordance with the ideas being worked out in this


memorandum. Two of these patterns would give the sort of preparation needed
for the teacher who is to be a specialist teacher in a narrow range of subjects,
the third would prepare for general teaching in the orientation year.
We regard the present non-degree courses for secondary teachers as a neces-
sary expedient, but not as a satisfactory permanent arrangement. Until the
practice can be firmly established of requiring ail secondary teachers to be
university graduates or people of equivalent standing, the non-degree course will
have to continue, but should be extended immediately to a minimum of three
years of professional training.
The professional courses for such a three-year course should deal with (a)
child growth and behaviour; ( b ) principles and practice of teaching, this covering
both general method and short special method courses; (c) content of teaching
subjects. The general strand would cover (a) English language and literature
and speech training; ( b ) Health and Physical Education; (c) Music, Art or Craft;
( d ) one of the group History, Geography, Economics, Anthropology, Sociology;
(e) Biological or Physical Science.
We have referred to three patterns of training. Briefly, they would be these:
(i a ) The present “end-on” plan, with the student spending three (or in some
cases four) years working for a pass degree; this period is followed by
one year of professional training, leading to a Diploma in Education.
During the Undergraduate years some work is done at a teachers’
college, and some opportunities are provided for intending teachers to
get to know something of what goes on in schools, but almost the whole
of the student’s time and energies are devoted to obtaining his degree.
( b ) The same pattern, except that the student takes an honours degree
before commencing the Diploma year.
(c) In this pattern, there would be a four-year Bachelor of Education
degree, during the last two years of which professional training would
be included. The degree requirements would cover courses from the
fields of Education, Psychology, Anthropology, Philosophy as general
professional background, together with subjects which would be of use
for people who were to be the class teacher in the orientation year.
Courses would be taken in the departments of English, History, Geo-
graphy, Mathematics and, perhaps, Economics.
We feel that these three patterns are desirable for the following reasons. In
the type of secondary school which we describe in Section 111 of this Report,
there will be three different tasks to be done.
If the orientation year described in Section HI is to fulfil its real purpose there
must be available teachers capable of ( a ) teaching a fairly wide range of
subjects, of the uniform curriculum for the first year of secondary school, and
( b ) giving pupils at that level the guidance which is so important at that stage
when the transition from primary to secondary schooling is taking place, and
when a beginning will have to be made to decide the stream within which a
pupil is likely to gain satisfaction. We feel that pattern (c) would prepare
teachers to do this.
On the other hand, the extension of secondary schooling to cover six years
will present a challenge to the teaching profession to lead pupils to attain stand-
ards of high scholarship in the final two years of the course generally, but
during the final year in particular. If the standard of work done at that
level is to approach that done in the English sixth forms or in the upper classes
of the Freeh lycees, it would be an advantage to have as many honours gradu-
ates as possible in our schools. For them, pattern ( b ) would be the best course.
So long as a bond system operates, we believe that the maximum period to be
served under bond should be three years. Such a reduction of the period for
honours students —at present five years—would encourage more students to take
honours degrees.
Pattern (o) would be that followed by those secondary teachers —probably the
large majority, who would be the specialist teachers throughout the first four
years, and even in some cases throughout the full six-year range.
This account undoubtedly over-simplifies what would happen; we should not
expect to find such clear-cut divisions between the three groups, nor would we
want them to be present. But the three different patterns would be needed, and
should be recognized in any discussion and planning for the reorganization of
teacher training. Each should be of equal value in determining status and pro-
motion prospects.
D. In-service Teacher Development.
Problems of the in-service development of teachers are matters of paramount
importance. Secondary teachers need to consider themselves as professional
workers, sharing in the organization of the educational process within the school
and keeping constantly in mind a clear idea of the wide ranging function of
the school.
The Staff Meeting should be a powerful instrument both in defining clearly the
function and nature of the school’s task, and in constantly seeking better ways of
fulfilling those functions. The fact that, for most of his course, each child is
taught by a number of specialist teachers makes it necessary that there should
be some place at which all the people who have contact with a child have the
opportunity to confer together and to develop some consistency in their treat-
ment of children and in the demands that may reasonably be made on them.
Staff meetings can perform the useful function of helping specialist teachers
understand the place of their own subject in the total programme and of appreciat-
ing the contributions that can be made by other departments. The Staff Meeting
provides an opportunity for the principal to tap the resources of the Staff and
to make use of the best advice they have to offer.
Every possible encouragement should be given to teachers to extend the range
of their own professional experience by attending vacation refresher courses,
joining their professional associations, and so on. Opportunities should be pro-
vided for attendance at full-time refresher courses during school terms, and on
full pay.


Careful guidance should be given to young teachers. This might be done by
the appointment of liaison officers who would supplement the work done by
inspectors, heads and subject masters. Working on a regional basis they would
be attached to the staff of a teachers’ college and could visit probationary teachers
—not to inspect and evaluate their work —but to ascertain their difficulties, spend
time with them and, if necessary, refer their difficulties back to the college for
suggestions. In this way not only would all possible agencies be engaged in help-
ing the young teacher, but the teachers’ colleges would be materially helped in
modifying and improving their courses in the light of the reports from their
liaison officers.
In-service courses should be available to give guidance in administration to
teachers who are ready to assume promotion positions.
E. Administrative Problems.
We have already stressed the importance of each school being given every
opportunity to develop a coherent philosophy of education and to enjoy sufficient
stability of staff to be able to do this. We therefore recommend that promotion
positions should be advertised, and that the Headmaster of the school in which
the vacancy occurs should have an opportunity of playing a major part in the
selection process. In this way the head would be able to build up a staff which,
over, the years, would be able to develop sufficient understanding among its
members to enable them to function as a closely knit team. This would reduce
considerably the mobility of teachers, and would enable members of staff to sink
their roots in a community.
We have referred to the desirability of having some secondary teachers who,
while not having high academic qualifications in any one subject, would be
capable of acting as class teachers over a fairly wide range of subjects in the
orientation year,, and would be capable of giving sound guidance, not only at
that stage, but generally throughout the school. For such teachers there should
be a line of promotion open to them; the first promotion position could carry a
title such as Master/Mistress of the Junior School, with particular responsibility
for the organization of the orientation year and of the guidance that is involved.
Such a position would rank equal in status to that of Subject Master/Mistress.
We have drawn attention to the need for some members of secondary staff to
have honours degrees. There must be adequate incentives for intending teachers
to take honours degrees, since such degrees normally require a year’s study beyond
that required for the pass degree, and with a consequent delaying of the point
at which the young teacher begins to earn a salary. We recommend that the
incremental scale for secondary assistants be so adjusted that the total amount of
salary earned by the honours graduate by the time he reaches the top of the
incremental scale should equal that earned by the teacher with the pass degree.
*7645—8^


APPENDIX C
Evidence Presented by Arthur Denning, Director of the New
South Wales Department of Technical Education
Introductory Statement.
1. Views Gathered from Many Sources Helped Drafting of the Statement.
The majority of the views expressed are strongly supported by officers of this
Department, as well as by representative industrial and commercial men. Some
are the personal views of the Director. Many of the opinions expressed are
necessarily based on personal observations and experience and not on research
evidence, for it is not always readily available.
The various comments and suggestions offered were intended to be constructive,
so that a secondary education system would be planned which would give due
regard to the importance and functions of technical education and, at the same
time, be capable of integration with the course structure we have developed.
2. Technical Education —The Largest “Consumer” of Secondary School
Products in this State.
The Department of Technical Education has a very significant role to play
in the Secondary School Enquiry, for it is by far the largest single “consumer”
of the secondary school products in the State.
In round figures, the intake of new students to technical college courses each
year is approximately 15,000, of which at present approximately 8,000 are
apprentices and 2,000 are training in certificate type courses for the technician
field, whereas new students beginning university and teachers’ college courses in
this State total in the vicinity of 5,000 annually. The Department then, particu-
larly with regard to the 10,000 apprentices and future technicians, is vitally
concerned with the preparation they have received in the secondary system. They
require a desirable minimum of secondary education—3 years for trades; 3-4
years, with at least Intermediate Certificate standard of entrance, for technicians.
The structure of the courses, contents of syllabus (especially commencing points)
depend in the first instance on what has been covered in the secondary school
syllabus.
Not only do we recruit from the State school system, but also from private
secondary schools. Thus, approximately 20 per cent, of Jhe enrolments in
technical colleges come from non-State secondary schools. We must therefore
consider the structure of their secondary course, too, in planning our syllabuses
and curricula.
3. Overseas Technical Education Developments—Concern in U.S.A.
Vast expansion programmes in the training of craftsmen, technicians and
technologists have been undertaken in the post-war period in various overseas
countries. In Russia, for example, 1,500,000 technicians are in training at present
according to reliable reports.
The Sub-Committee on Automation and Technological Change—the United
States Congress Joint Committee on the Economic Report states:
“The most disturbing thing which came to the sub-committee’s attention during
the hearings was the near-unanimous conclusion of the witnesses that the Nation
is faced with a threatened shortage of scientists, technicians, and skilled
labour . . .
“We can certainly not dismiss lightly the generally accepted evidence that
professional engineers are currently being graduated at a rate nearly twice as fast
in Russia as in this country, and that technicians are currently being turned out
at 30 or 40 times our rate. This evidence is not to be taken as necessarily indi-
cating that our science and capacity for technological advancement have been
surpassed elsewhere. It must, however, be taken as a plain warning that others
can catch up with us and, indeed, at current rates, are doing so. The president
of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Dr. Vannevar Bush, summed up the
problem for the sub-committee:
‘We already have a shortage in this country of skilled men of various
sorts. We also have a shortage of engineers and scientists. And not enough
men are entering these fields. It has been brought out in these hearings that
Russia is in some ways doing a better job in this regard than we are; they
are certainly training more scientists and engineers.’
* * * * * * *
“But the larger and longer run problem is that the Nation recognise the need
for keeping up and advancing its resources in the form of trained experts in every
field. The training problem exists at all levels.
“Under our traditional system of education, the first responsibility for this must
fall upon the local communities and the individuals and business directly in-
terested in specific kinds of skills and expertness. Many companies are already
demonstrating their awareness of this problem by providing in-training technical
courses and by endowing and supporting company fellowships and advanced
education.
“There are important reasons why this need for increased attention to the
training of experts should be underscored and recognised as a real problem.
The fact is that much of the knowledge and personnel upon which we are
drawing so heavily today comes as a by-product of the military background of
the past decade. Under the necessity of war and defence expenditures, the


Federal Government has contributed immeasurably to the building up of a com-
fortable present supply of trained personnel. This is all well and good, but none
of us want a situation to arise in which we must depend upon war or defence
expenditures as the means to securing such beneficient by-products . . .
. . It is a question of finding and accepting a peace-time programme to take
the place of in-service training of technicians, the war-accelerated and militarily
sponsored college programmes, and the later support and encouragement of
education afforded by the so-called GI bill of rights.”
4. Recruitment of More Women from which to Draw our Future Tech-
nician Staff.
Whilst it is well recognized that the recruitment pool is not unlimited, one
way of increasing the number of recruits, particularly into the technician field,
is to draw on the relatively untapped numbers of women. In the past insufficient
have offered, largely because of the fact that the secondary course they have
followed has not been oriented sufficiently towards the technical field. Training
in physics and chemistry, for example, has not been possible for many girls
who might be attracted towards the scientific or technical areas of employment.
A similar position has applied in England, as the 1956 British White Paper
points out:
“Apart from teaching, the most popular courses with girls cover such
subjects as nursing, commercial and secretarial work, commercial and indus-
trial design, art, the needle trades, catering, cookery and domestic subjects.
Fair numbers are taking courses in scientific subjects, but there
is no doubt many more could fake up science and would find open-
ings for most successful careers. The problem is how to increase the numbei
of girls asking for science courses, and the weakness here is in the secondary
schools, where there is a shortage of teachers of mathematics and science
more pronounced than in boys’ schools. The best point to attack this
problem must be in the girls’ schools, where the Head could influence more
girls, who have decided to take up teaching, to choose science or mathe-
matics as their special subject. Only small numbers of girls at present
decide to study science or mathematics at the universities or training colleges.
It is in the national interest that more should be encouraged to do so”.
5. A Proper Balance Needed between Craftsman, Technician and Tech-
nologist.
The British White Paper sounds the same note of urgency. It defines the
technologist, technician and craftsman as follows:
“A technologist has the qualifications and experience required for mem-
bership of a professional institution. Most university graduates in engineering
and other applied sciences, . . . become technologists.
“A technologist has studied the fundamental principles of his chosen tech-
nology and should be able to use his knowledge and experience to initiate
practical developments. He is expected to accept a high degree of responsi-
bility and in many cases to push forward the boundaries of knowledge in
his own particular field.
“A technician is qualified by specialist technical education and practical
training to work under the general direction of a technologist. Consequently,
he will require a good knowledge of mathematics and science related to his
own speciality. Examples of technicians in the factory are assistant designers
and junior ranks of management on the shop floor.
“Craftsmen represent the skilled labour of manufacturing industry and
account for more than one-third of its manpower. With the growing com-
plexity of machines and the introduction of new materials, it becomes all
the more necessary for them to appreciate not only the how but also the
why of the work they do.”
If Australia, and New South Wales in particular, is to hold its own, there is
urgent need to develop a balanced labour force of craftsmen, technicians and
technologists in correct proportion. Industry is becoming more and more con-
scious of this fact, particularly in its long-range planning. Thus, one large Aus-
tralian concern has established that it must increase its labour force progressively
in the forseeable future in the ratio of one new technologist to six new tech-
nicians and seven new craftsmen. Whilst this is not necessarily a standard
pattern in industry, since there will be variations in the proportions in many
different fields, it does highlight the point that in order to keep up the supply
of trained technical staff, the Departments of Technical Education and of Educa-
tion must give due regard to this factor in any planning they are required to do.
Considerable publicity over recent years has been given to shortages at the
technologist level, but insufficient emphasis has been given to the equally serious
shortages at the technician and skilled craftsman levels. Technical education has
the major responsibility in terras of training in the craftsman and technician
fields, and some responsibility along with the universities with regard to tech-
nologists.
Australia is particularly short in the field of technicians at the present time.
The position will be seriously aggravated as the move towards automation pro-
gresses. We are developing a pattern of technician level courses to meet the new
situation as rapidly as possib’e but more of the right type of students need to he
attracted into this field from other areas. In other words, in the national interest
this Department should not only be taking more students per annum who have
graduated from the secondary school system than other tertiary training institu-
tions, but it should be enrolling more again if the needs of industry, particularly
for technicians and craftsmen, are to be effectively satisfied.
6. Australia’s Urgent Need for Trained Technical Staff.
The need for greatly increased numbers of trained technical staff is already
recognized on all sides in Australian industry to-day. It is significant that we
are attempting to recruit skilled men by specially selecting our immigrants. Many
of our big national constructional projects have had to be let to foreign con-
tractors because, among other things, our own resources of trained manpower
were insufficient. We cannot continue to do this.
*7543


For economic survival as a nation we must balance our overseas trade. This
means increased and better quality production at competitive prices and, in turn,
increased numbers and quality of trained personnel to produce the goods.
The new demands created already by TV, the growth of automation, the
developments which will follow the introduction of atomic power and the by-
products of that industry, the effects of increased power from hydro-electric
schemes, increases in rural mechanization —all point to generally increased tech-
nical staffs to undertake the related designing, operating, servicing and supervising
work which will accompany them. In particular, large increases in the numbers
of craftsmen and technicians must follow these developments. We in technical
education know that industry and commerce have been starved for the numbers
and quality of recruits required to satisfy their demands in recent years. This
imbalance must be corrected.
Secondary education has an equal responsibility with us in spreading informa-
tion about industry’s needs. It must help us awaken fresh and positive attitudes
towards things technical amongst our young people and their parents, for the
next decade can be very crucial if our standard of living and security are to be
preserved.
These introductory remarks are intended to assist in providing a perspective
against which the general statement which follows may be read. They emphasize
that technical education has reached an important point in its development—a
point where a new orientation throughout the community generally must be
encouraged as an urgent priority in order to ensure that, on the one hand, the
nation’s future manpower needs will be met, and on the other, each citizen will
have the opportunity of living a full life.


CONTENTS
1. Introduction.
1.1 Terms of Reference.
1.2 The N.S.W. Secondary Education Product and Technical Education.
2. Features of Some Overseas Systems as They Relate to Technical Educa-
tion.
2.1 Some Features of the U.S.A. Educational System.
2.1.1 General Features.
2.1.2 Probable Reasons for the Developments Mentioned.
2.1.3 Advantages.
2.1.4 Some Disadvantages.
2.2 Features of the Present English Educational System.
2.2.1 The Present Unilateral Schools.
2.2.2 The Secondary Technical School.
2.2.3 The Newer Multi-Lateral Schools.
2.2.4 The General Certificate of Education, U.K.
?. Features of Secondary Education in N.S.W. as Related to Technical
Education.
4. Suggested Amendments to Secondary Education.
4.1 Suggested “Principles” to be observed in any Review.
4.1.1 The Need.
4.1.2 Some Guiding “Principles ’.
4.2 Suggested Aims for Inclusion in the Major Objectives.
4.3 Suggested Amendments to the Structure.
4.3.1 Improving Communications between Schools, Business and
Industry.
4.3.2 Variations to the School Organization.
4.3.3 Conversion of “Subjects” Approach into a Patterned or Global
Education.
4.4 Summary of More Specific Suggestions.
4.5 Pre-Vocational Training as a Technical Education Responsibility.


1. Introduction
1.1 The Terms of Reference.
The terms of reference of the Secondary Education Inquiry which has been
meeting over the past two years are as follows:
(a) “To survey and to report upon the provision of full-time day education
for adolescents in New South Wales.”
( b ) “In particular, to examine the objectives, organization and content of
the courses provided for adolescent pupils in the public schools of the
State, regard being had to the requirements of a good general education
and the desirability of providing a variety of curriculum adequate to
meet the varying aptitudes and abilities of the pupils concerned.”
In some respects the Departments of Technical Education and of Education
are both concerned with (u). My Department is involved already in the full-time
training of apprentices. It is possible that the trend will be towards more and
more full-time training courses, although the greater majority of students in
the immediate future will undoubtedly continue to attend part-time courses.
1.2 The N.S.W. Secondary Education Product and Technical Education.
(a) The Division of Responsibilities between the Education Department and the
Department of Technical Education.
The theme presented in this statement relates to the need for proper recogni-
tion of the function of the secondary school system in providing wide oppor-
tunities for obtaining a broad general education which includes in the first three
years at least the subjects English, Arithmetic, Social Studies, General Science
and preferably some handicrafts. The latter is considered necessary to assist in
developing creative skills and should be selected from subjects such as Woodwork,
Metalwork, Cooking, Needlework, Art. The handicrafts should be given as part
of a general education and should in no way be regarded as a preparation for
a vocation.
The pre-vocational and vocational aspects are the concern of the Department
of Technical Education. By pre-vocational training is meant pre-employment
vocational instruction which is aimed at ensuring the learning of the basic skills
and knowledge required to be employed productively in a particular vocation, or
group of vocations.
The secondary education system is being examined and suggestions are being
offered here then, from the point of view of the vocational/technical training
organization in this State.
(/>) Industry, Commerce and Technical Education.
Because of its concern with preparation for specific vocations, the Department
of Technical Education maintains a close liaison with industry and commerce,
and is in a position to speak with some confidence not only on what is expected
of the secondary education system in the way of general preparation for its
courses, but also on matters affecting the future employment of secondary school
students.
Whilst vocational/technical training institutions must use their utmost endeavour
to devise courses which will satisfy business and industrial needs on the one hand
and those of individuals on the other, their success to some extent will depend on
a proper appreciation of these needs by those responsible for the development
of the secondary school system. The aims, the principles governing its develop-
ment and the general structure of the secondary school system—even the
syllabuses —are therefore of vital interest to educators from the vocational/tech-
nical section of the tertiary education field-representing in any one year over
70,000 enrolled students in courses conducted by the Department of Technicai
Education alone.
Again, enrolment trends, and policy with regard to selection for special
secondary courses, are of major concern for this Department in its future
planning in this rapidly changing technical and technological age. The Depart-
ment’s function is to be sensitive continually to the needs for the development
of new courses, or the review of old ones. First-hand industrial surveys made
within industry itself, together with expert advice from representative advisory
committees from business and industry can contribute towards this planning, but
the secondary education system must have a significant influence also, both directly
and indirectly. It will not only affect the quality of the recruits entering industry
and technical courses through (he preparation they receive in secondary schools,
but also the quantity, by way of careers orientation, the development of attitudes,
and the other factors I list below.
What of the individuals who come to technical education and to industry?
What preparation should they bring?
(c) Preparation for Future Technical Training.
In general, the Department is vitally concerned with the following types of
information about individual students, and again with groups of students, coming
from the secondary school system. We consider it desirable that they should
have:—
(i) An adequate general education level, which will permit the undertaking
of advanced technical study, e.g., at the professional, technician or
the skilled craft level.
(ii) A minimum standard and adequate groupings of subjects as pre-
requisites for the many and varied courses offered.


(iii) An orientation through suitable elective subjects which will offer the
opportunity for creative experiences, the development of satisfactory
attitudes towards the world of work, and encourage increased under-
standing of the commercial, industrial and home life of the community.
(iv) Positive attitudes and values towards study, towards attending classes,
towards citizenship responsibilities, towards future employers, towards
a job well done, and towards the community generally.
(v) A reasonable level of social!emotional maturity —e.g., acceptance of
responsibility, confidence in group situations, etc.
(vi) A healthy and reasonably wide range of interests —both vocational and
otherwise.
(vii) A sound degree of confidence in the choice of a career, or the pre-
liminary steps taken towards a general career idea —based on the accept-
ance of personal responsibility for the choice made in the light of the
fullest information available about themselves, jobs and training required.
As these factors vary among individuals and groups, so the structure of this
Department’s courses and syllabuses must vary.
It is on these and many other grounds that the Department feels justified
in offering information, views and suggestions to this Committee of Inquiry,
quite apart from the fact that we, as a sister Department of the Education Depart-
ment, want to make a contribution in view of our knowledge of the requirements
of vocational education and our appreciation of the training needs of industry
and commerce.
2. Features of Some Overseas Systems as They Relate to
Technical Education.
Before proceeding to make specific suggestions for presentation, I wish to refer
to some of the outstanding features of two overseas educational systems, those
of the U.S.A. and England, both of which have a clear relationship to ours,
and both of which may have features worth considering and ideas worth adopting.
Those features selected and mentioned here will telate only to technical educa-
tion, since I have no doubt the systems have already been examined in other
respects by this Committee.
2.1 Some Features of the U.S. Educational System.
2.1.1 General Features.
The oustanding features of the American educational structure are its great
diversity and its magnitude—a total of 23,000,000 elementary, secondary and
tertiary level students, and thousands of separate, and decentralized, school sys-
tems. Decentralization means that local responsibility for education is encouraged,
so that the “ local-needs”, of the “grass-roots” approach is very noticeable. Strong
parent-teacher associations (with emphasis on all teachers participating and not
merely the headmaster or headmistress), Business, Industry and Education Days,
Career Days, elected local Boards of Education and so on are evidence of this.
Some disadvantages naturally How too from such decentralization —for example,
the harmful influences of local prejudices, do occur. This Department has a
strong belief in satisfying local needs too, and so it has developed close ties
with business, industry and community in technical education, through our
advisory committee system and our day to day services to, and contact with,
industry generally. Such regular interchanges of ideas have been invaluable in
planning for the future.
Perhaps the secondary system here could also develop closer ties with the
community, not only through such excellent avenues as at present exist through
Education Week and so on, but also through, for example, an advisory committee
system, widely representative of the many groups outside the Department who are
interested in education, to help with course developments, syllabuses and similar
activities.
The Americans, too, seem to have a higher level of educational aspiration
than we tend to have. This is reflected in their growing Junior College system
(covering the 13th and 14th years of schooling); the raising of the minimum
school leaving age; the growing importance of full-time co-operative vocational
training schemes (linked in some States with the moves towards the separation
of general and vocational education under separate Boards); as well as the
appearance of many ful -time pre-vocational and terminal courses for what I
call technician level training within the College/University and Vocational
Institute structure. Opportunities should be created here for more and more of
our secondary pupils to cross over to a pattern of pre-vocational courses (includ-
ing a core curriculum in general education, as well as pre-vocational subjects),
which my Department is investigating now as a long range development.
With the age of “automation” already becoming firmly entrenched in some
countries, we shall want better skilled craftsmen and certainly a tremendous in-
crease in the number of technicians and others trained at sub-professional level.
With the advent of such an age the economic urgency for early school leaving,
and the need for untrained juniors, should decline. These factors should combine,
therefore, to make a strong case for raising the minimum school leaving age
to 16 years and for ensuring pre-vocational and vocational training alternatives
within the Department of Technical Education up to this age on a required basis,
and beyond on a voluntary basis. There is much merit in the trend in Germany’,
in some American States, and in England towards requiring further education, at
least on a part-time basis, to the age of 18 years. I strongly support my col-
league, the Director-General, who has publicly recently urged further full-time
and part-time education beyond 15 years.
Any transfer to pre-vocational training should not be earlier than 15 years,
or the end of 3 years of secondary schooling. At the point of such transfer there
is a case for some selection by the Department of Technical Education the
first “selection” I be ieve the primary or secondary pupil should have encountered


From this remark you will gather I do not favour selection at the age and for the
purpose it is applied in our system at present, with the subsequent “streaming”
of students into schools with different curricula.
A feature of American education has been the strong group of Industrial
Arts (i.e., Manual Arts) elective subjects available in Senior High Schools. These
are given by specially trained teachers, often with co-operative industrial experi-
ence as part of their Bachelor of Education, Vocational Education, Degree. These
are regarded as a part of the general educational system and are not intended as
pre-vocational in nature but are offered as opportunities for voluntary “ex-
posure”—as the Americans would say—to any student as an exploratory, general
educational experience. These electives are available to all students, not to a
selected group, or to those remaining after a selection programme has operated
as here in New South Wales. As a result, there is far less of a stigma on such
subjects (e.g., Manual Arts, Domestic Science, etc.) for either boys or girls than
we find here, since selection, or non-selection, is done by the individual and
not for him. No arbitrary choice is made and imposed by school administrators,
however expert and good intentioned the latter may be. There seems to me to
be room in our secondary school system for such a range of electives, which the
boy or girl .having undertaken a solid core of required subjects, ((i) English;
(ii) a much less heavily loaded Mathematics than at present; (hi) a suitable com-
bination of Chemistry, Physics and the Biological Sciences; (iv) and a suitable com-
bination of History, Geography and perhaps Civics), may add, as he or she
wishes. The choice of emphasis would normally only be made after proper con-
su tation between the individual and a full-time specially trained school coun-
sellor, who should be readily available to students to help with individual educa-
tional and other problems if they so desire.
As I have said above, I favour increasing the opportunities for full-time pre-
vocational training for our adolescents, not as a replacement for part-time train-
ing—our major commitment in technical education —but as a supplementary
method of meeting the country’s needs for trained technical staff in se'ected
fields. A strong feature of the American approach in this regard is use of train-
ing co-ordinators who are responsible for both teaching in the vocational training
institutions and supervising and observing practical “on-the-job” experience which
is often arranged as a part of the full-time course. In our system with the clear
division of responsibility in training the adolescent between our two Depart-
ments, such co-ordinators —specially selected technical teachers —would have
important functions in helping the pre-vocational student bridge the gap between
school and the world of work. I therefore favour arrangements for limited
numbers of adolescents to transfer from the secondary system where they are
desirous of pre-vocational training. This transfer need not preclude in any way
further qualification for matriculation purposes during the course, nor should it
occur before 15 years of age (or completion of 3 years of secondary schooling
whichever is the sooner), and then only after investigation of suitability for such
transfer by arrangement between the Departments. -
I feel that the highly undesirable and unfortunate —and clearly undeserved—
stigma associated with Domestic Science and Junior Technical courses at pre-
sent to be found among teachers in the schools and the community in this State,
in Austra’ia—and in England, too, for that matter —will be partially removed
at least by encouraging the participation of all secondary students through
numerous electives to partake of some such subjects voluntarily and by encourage-
ment —all as a part of his, or her, recognized general educational “diet”, as it
were. The dignity of the wide diversity and levels of vocation could be dealt
with. All students could be acquainted with our apprenticeship system and our
community and manpower structure, and the place of the many vocations in the
economy could be handled through selected general and practical orientation
courses in, say, General Handicrafts, Women’s Handicrafts, General Printing
and Journalism, Homemaking, and so on. These subjects would need to be re-
garded, and presented, as part of a sound general education.
The question of educational selection inevitably arises also when the existing
community attitudes concerning such subjects are mentioned. Selection does not
apply in the U.S.A. in the same way as here, except in those universities and
colleges which can afford to select by objective and standardized procedures after
high school graduation. At the age this occurs, and for the reasons stated, I
would say they are quite justified in doing so. Below this level American schooo's
are featured by co-educational groupings by age, but little else. The unfortunate
teacher then has to develop and to make allowances for a wide range of
talents. I know how important it is to effective teaching, and for the purpose of
maintaining the right level of pressure on individual students, to have some
grouping. The “brights” must be given an enriched educational opportunity, the
“dulls” must be kept working at the level appropriate to their potential and this
means a considerably reduced syllabus, whilst the average majority must have
their share of attention too. Too wide a range of students in one class makes it
difficult to do a proper and efficient job with all, and so groupings for teaching
purposes become desirable and economical. I think, however, such necessary
grouping should be within the one school, and where possible within the one
grade, though there may be a case for a more flexible approach with some
children. Again, I believe such groupings should relate ONLY to the core cur-
riculum and not to the electives where individual talents might be allowed to be
recognized and developed in various groups which represent community samples.
The urge to go “to College” (28 per cent, of each age group does in fact do so
at present) is a further feature of the U.S.A. secondary system. The social
pressures are very strong indeed to do so, and I recognize it has some undesirable
results, but I consider further education of all kinds a sound investment whether
it be for the community, to overcome the shortages of skilled manpower, or for
recreational purposes. On the other hand it means that with a wide variety of
terminal courses in the colleges, universities, technical institutes, or in their
associated Junior Colleges, as in California, for example, the serious manpower
shortages at the technician level are to some extent being met. At least the
structure is there to deal with, the shortages. I must stress that it is in this area
that I foresee a very necessary and a most significant development in this country
and this State, in the next decade. The need is there already. Our universities
are not geared to provide sub-professional and technician level training nor


should they be. Their function is to satisfy professional needs effectively. We
know too, there is a significantly high wastage rate at universities because some
aspirants for professional training set their sights too high. Perhaps their special
aptitudes or their luke-warm interest in careers for which the universities exist
should have encouraged them to consider technician type training. But I am
afraid lack of knowledge about possibilities, or adverse general attitudes towards
any technical” career, have had their effect. Such factors could have been
corrected in the secondary school. I think the secondary system can do much to
orient students towards this field of training which has now so much to offer,
and will have more in the future.
I favour more general education (in the sense I speak of general education)
for more people for the increased leisure opportunities bcoming increasingly
available, and have drawn attention to it by stating my belief that the minimum
leaving age should be progressively advanced to 16 years, whilst more elective
opportunities and opportunities for senior secondary students to transfer to De-
partment of Technical Education courses should be created.
2.1.2. Probable Reasons for the American Educational Developments Men-
tioned.
Attention should be drawn to the following reasons which have influenced
the American educational developments mentioned:—
(i) Firstly, there is a strong belief in America, in Education as such. Be-
cause of this belief, fostered through locally inspired acceptance of
responsibility for it, there has been shown willingness and ability to
pay for it. Can we too develop these attitudes in our community? I
am convinced we can by going after public interest, encouraging feel-
ings of belonging to the educational movement and so on.
(ii) "Equality of opportunity” pervades all education in America, and here
too. But there is a difference. The American tends to say “it is up
to the individual if we provide the means”, and the means provided
permit a considerable measure of individual choice. Perhaps our selec-
tive approach to particular sorts of schooling at an early age some-
what contradicts any genuine acceptance of the principle of “equality
of opportunity”. Again, the American is prepared to fit the system to
the individual —in many ways ludicrously I know —in so many more,
however, to the considerable benefit of that individual. Is it true that
we are inclined here to have a cut and dried, structured, system and the
individual is required to conform to it and not it to him?
(iii) The readiness of expression of popular feelings and needs in frequent
and continuing revisions of educational policy permitted by decentraliza-
tion have been emphasized earlier. Do we not need more and more of
this questioning of the accepted, and the traditional?
(iv) The demands upon education from America’s headlong industrial de-
velopment in the past 50 years, and the need to assimilate a huge
migrant population in the same period, has led to a breakaway from
the traditional British and Continental secondary school systems, rela-
tively unrelated as they were to urgent community needs and depending
on a traditional grouping of subjects and a belief in the now out-
moded “formal discipline” (Latin is a good subject for disciplining the
mind) principle as the basis of a good general education. Are we being
posed the same problems which America has been facing for 50 years
and is still trying to face? I think we are. Do we not then need
to take advantage of their experience?
(v) Universities, for historical reasons, and because the many thousands of
education svstems do not “pyramid” to the university as they tend to
do here and in England, have probably had less downward influence in
America on the secondary systems. It is the practice rather than the
exception for all universities and colleges to enrol students prepared
by hundreds of differing (sometimes widely differing) systems, not only
in their own. but in other States or countries. They are not operating in
a relatively “closed” system as we are perhaps doing here. In some
ways the American situation with less pressure being exerted from
above, appears to have advantages to offer, even though American
universities and other degree granting institutions enrol probably three
or more times the proportion of the relevant age group than we do.
I feel that my Department and other interested tertiary training in-
stitutions who wish to, and are required to, accept the secondary school
product should have at least as much influence on the secondary
structure in general terms, as well as the syllabuses, as do universities
in this country. I should like to go further and devise a system where
lay members could also have a substantial say as well as educationists.
2.1.3. Advantages.
Some of the advantages of the American system are summarised; —
(i) The wide range of electives which allow opportunities for highly
desirable industrial and commercial orientation as a part of the general
educational stream. As a result, more and more interests and talents
are given an opportunity to flower.
(ii) The systematic attempt to avoid even the appearance of direction. There
is guidance and individual choice, rather than imposed selection. Some
of the injustices due to inevitable selection errors are as a result avoided.
The individual has the opportunity at least to grow then towards the
acceptance of personal responsibility.
(iii) In many ways, because of its closeness to, and even identification with,
community needs (e.g., Driver Instruction classes, etc.), the secondary
system, where equal opportunities exist for all, tends to have a unifying
effect on the social structure.
(iv) The system develops the individual’s social skills in many ways, and
seems to strike a more even balance between academic and other
values.
(v) It takes more students further along the educational road.


2.1.4. Some of the Disadvantages in the American System.
Some of the major disadvantages as I see them:—
(i) The American High School system appears to be less academically
efficient than here, there being a lack of depth in treatment of some
core subjects by our standards. More go further educationally, it is
true, but the minority suitable for higher studies tend to be less
adequately prepared for those studies than ours. (The American asserts
with some degree of truth that this elite group should be able to look
after such deficiencies themselves). The institutions of higher learning,
therefore, must cater for some of this deficiency and, hence, the
emphasis in universities on general education courses, even in the tech-
nologist and scientific fields and the invariable four-year Bachelor’s
Degree course compared with our three-year Degree in say, Arts or
Science.
(ii) The system tends to cater for the average and may hold back the
bright, and often makes no real provision for the dull.
(iii) The schools in the system must be large to function properly. For
example, to enlarge the range of electives offered, a minimum popula-
tion of 1,000 to 1,500 is necessary for economical staffing of all sub-
jects offered. Schools of 2,000 and more students are sometimes found
in America. To cater for the wildest possible range, however, such very
large schools tend to present administrative difficulties which have some
disadvantages, though on the other hand they are able to provide
amenities not available in the smaller unit.
2.2. Features of the Present English Educational System.
In discussing the present English educational system I am again only high-
lighting the features I feel are important to the particular emphasis I want to
give—that is, the features as they affect the technical education structure in
England, and their relevance for vocational/technical training here.
2.2.1. The Present Unilateral Schools —Three Types.
Selection for the three types of school —grammar, secondary modern and
secondary technical —creates many social problems, particularly in the stratified
English social system. It is commonly considered a social disgrace to fail to
gain entrance to a grammar school. Consequently, there is likely to be
undesirable pressure exerted on the primary pupil and a tendency to force him
to concentrate on those subjects which will be of most advantage in gaining
entrance to the coveted grammar schools. There is a danger for subjects less
essential for this purpose, but perhaps equally important in themselves, not
to be given the attention they deserve. Teachers, too, often coach children in
how to do the standardized intelligence and attainment tests used in “screening”
for the three types of schools. Can that undesirable development occur here,
where selection is so important? I am afraid it is likely, though I feel bound
to say I know of no instances I can quote.
The grammar schools are intended primarily for students destined for an
academic type of education and, as seems to be a view widely current with
regard to the curriculum of New South Wales high schools, the curriculum
there, too, according to many educationists, is to a great extent conditioned by
academic and university requirements. Yet only about 15 per cent, of the 30
per cent, of all secondary pupils entering grammar schools go on to a university
(i.e., approximately 4 per cent.). If the contention is true that university require-
ments appear to exert considerable influence on the grammar school curriculum,
is it not fair to say it appears to be disproportionate? Perhaps the same applies
here.
2.2.2. The Secondary Technical School.
The secondary technical school in England appears to me to have failed to
achieve the status and responsibilities planned for it following the 1944 Act.
The function of the secondary technical school in contrast to the technical
colleges is claimed to be to prepare students for entry to an industry, whereas
the latter is necessarily concerned with preparing students for a specialized craft
In it. The syllabus in the secondary technical school usually covers a wide area
relating to a particular industry, for example, the building industry.
Unfortunately, the common misconceptions, even by teachers, of the aim of
the 1944 Act have meant that instead of selected students entering them, the
secondary technical schools have tended sometimes to be a “dumping ground”
for misfits.
As a result, the present status of the secondary technical school in England
appears then to be unsatisfactory. Selection at 11 plus for secondary modern, or
grammar, schools means that when selection for secondary technical schools
occurs at 13 plus some of the “cast-offs” from the grammar school tend to
“revert” to the technical stream, while many of the better students suitable for
secondary technical schools tend to be kept back in the secondary modern stream.
It seems to me, therefore, that the original aim in the establishment of secondary
technical schools is not being achieved as effectvely as was hoped. In the same
way our junior technical and domestic science schools, whose students are
recruited rather by non-selection than any other way, assume the same function—
at least in the eyes of the disgruntled parents, and of many teachers and pupils,
despite the many attempts to arrange it otherwise.
2.2.3. The Newer Multi-Lateral Schools.
Some educationists consider the multi-lateral school the answer to the tendency
towards “educational snobbery”, which has been remarked on with regard to the
present unilateral system. Important points from recent discussions about such
schools, which have been reported to me, and which are relevant to the sugges-
tions I shall make later, include the following;—
( a ) Classification of pupils into three types and their segregation in separate
schools appears to be a bad feature of the present general education
system, and the multi-lateral schools now being developed appear to be
a step in the right direction.


(t) In general, the large numbers in multi-lateral schools are broken down
into “houses” (e.g., there would be 10 houses in a 1,500 pupil school).
Each house is planned to contain a cross-section of the school’s popula-
tion, and house assemblies are held and pupils may be taught in house
units, to permit growth in a relatively “normal” community sample.
(c) A transfer from one course to another is more simple than under the
orthodox system—i.e., it is easier to rectify mistakes in selection by either
administrators or pupils.
(d) To form homogeneous classes for teaching purposes a very large school
is necessary with consequent over-loading of organization and undesir-
able centralization.
I favour the multi-lateral approach as a general principle.
2.2.4. The General Certificate of Education, U.K.
Since I wish to take up the matter of the award of a standard qualification at
the conclusion of a required portion of the secondary course, I propose to refer
to the features of the English General Certificate of Education, introduced in 1950
in the English system.
One of the characteristics of this examination is the fact that it is awarded on
a subject basis. A student passing in one subject only is granted his General
Certificate of Education.
According to some university authorities, despite its very short trial this has
had a detrimental effect, both in England and Scotland, on the standard of
examination passes particularly since students may accumulate G.C.E. passes
over a number of examinations. This, they claim, tends to depreciate the value
of the certificate. Perhaps this criticism only applies with respect to the university
entrant group and the critics omit to say this and perhaps it is fair to ask how
such a criticism can be tested so soon after the commencement of the G.C.E.
approach. We must remember, too, that about 2\ per cent.-3 per cent, of the
original British secondary school enrolments have been securing Bachelors’
degrees.
On the other hand, it may have some advantages over the system where a
certificate is awarded only after a minimum number, and grouping, of subjects
at one examination, has been achieved. Under the latter system many students
not securing a certificate may have no clearly recognized evidence of any satis-
factory educational standard attained, and have little or no encouragement to
add to their examination performance. It is an “all or none” approach in many
ways.
I feel there is virtue in a “subjects” approach to examination qualifications.
The American system of awarding “grades” and issuing cumulative “transcripts”
of gradings when requested—and these are official documents—is in many ways
to be preferred to the system whereby no qualification is obtained until all
minimum requirements are achieved. I favour the award of a basic certificate
which can be replaced by a further one as other subjects are added. Safeguards
may be needed, of course, but I see advantages in the adoption of the scheme.
3. Features of Secondary Education in N.S.W.
The following general comments, concerning the features of secondary educa-
tion in New South Wales, which affect technical education are offered in
summary form. They again emphasize those aspects of interest to us in the
Department of Technical Education:
(i) The attitudes of early “leavers” towards further education at technical
colleges in many ways are unhealthy. Technical teachers report this to
me and my officers time and again. It seems legitimate to ask why this
is so. And to go on and ask, should it be so?
(ii) Selection by intelligence and attainments test for education in relatively
single purpose secondary schools influences pupils towards, or often
unfortunately for us with the better qualified lad, away from technical
college courses at which I think is too early an age (11 years plus).
In this Department’s view, selection should not occur until about 15
years, and then perhaps (and this not necessarily) only for admission
purposes to, say, one of our courses, or for further general education,
or again for a university preparatory course. In general, the principle
of selection as much as possible by the individual is the one I favour.
(iii) At present there is a tendency for the majority of our secondary school
students to leave shortly after 15 years, whereas normal apprenticeship
begins after 16 years. I cannot emphasize too strongly that apprentices
are the backbone of our economy, and should therefore include in
their ranks, in the main, lads with average potential as well as a leaven-
ing of those with above average capacity. Responsible officers in tech-
nical education and employers in industry are of the openion that such a
distribution from those offering has not been achieved. Industry and,
therefore, this Department have been getting the “rejects” far too
often of recent years. The present selection system has in some ways
helped to encourage this attitude. This is wrong and could prove a
disaster to our economy.
The “dead year” between and years is one which has
been a matter of grave concern to us, for many, suitable for appren-
ticeship or technician training, are attracted by high commencing wages
to unskilled jobs with no future. I favour the elimination of this “dead”
year and the further development of full-time pre-vocational courses
by the Department of Technical Education as mentioned above. Such
training would provide continuity of study orientation, this time in a
“technical” atmosphere for some of the talent at present being “lost”
to the technical callings. To cater for financial needs, a system of
scholarships such as the Commonwealth Scholarships might be con-
sidered.


(iv) Whilst our late leavers are academically more mature, they are socially
more immature than their counter-part in the U.S.A., for example—
and I do not mean the latter are merely precocious. I think this can
be attributed to different emphases in teaching methods and different
views on what constitutes general education. Our approach may need
review. By all means let us develop social maturity earlier.
(v) A disproportionate emphasis on university preparation seems to influence
the secondary school syllabuses. Could there not be more orientation
towards the needs of, preparation for, or orientation towards, other
tertiary training courses? The proportionate numbers seem to warrant
it. I do not advocate more vocational subjects in the secondary school
at the expense of general subjects. But I would prefer to see a change
in balance (in the main only by addition made possible by the desirable
year of further secondary education to 16 years I have advocated
elsewhere in this statement) through a review of the overall curriculum
and of the syllabuses in some subjects.
(vi) At present the vocational/technical groupings of subjects in the secondary
schools have a poorer relative status than the academic group in the
minds of, at least some, if not many teachers, parents and pupils. This
tends also to detract from similar types of courses in technical colleges.
The stigma of “relegation” to a junior technical or domestic science
school, for example, causes serious heart burnings and dissatisfaction
with our system.
(vii) At present quite a number of students enrol from secondary schools
with weaknesses (in varying degrees, of course) in the basic skills (study
methods, note making, reading and arithmetic), sufficient to handicap
them in handling the level of the course they wish to undertake. This
factor could be one of the contributing causes to the significantly high
wastage found in some of our courses. Some further strengthening of
diagnosed deficiencies in these skills can be adequately handled in the
secondary system, if additional time were available perhaps, without
the need for as much emphasis on segregation into “opportunity” classes
as now exists. I also recognize that some remedial work will still be
necessary in our Department, both in ordinary classes and by special
arrangement —in fact, we have established an Educational Clinic for
work in this connection.
(viii) There is frequent confusion of the pre-vocational with the orientation
functions of the many subjects at present appearing in the secondary
school curriculum. Woodwork, Metalwork and Technical Drawing
syllabuses should be recognized as part of a general education and have
the primary aim of providing an opportunity for creative experience
for better understanding of the industrial world and so on, even when
taken to Leaving Certificate standard.
(ix) Selection, which indirectly limits the “pool” from which apprentices,
future technicians and future technical teachers are to be drawn, has
important disadvantages from our point of view. Boys from full high
schools rarely consider skilled craft or technician careers yet many are
highly suitable and would be well satisfied in such vocations. And let
me emphasize again the economy needs a good sprinkling of young
people with high level potential entering these fields. Every craft, for
example, needs its leavening of the highly intelligent now guided away
at 11 years or so, if industry is to have the benefit of some of its
executives “graduating the hard way”—through the ranks. There is
value in a proportion of our top professional men graduating by way
of trades courses, matriculation and then professional training.
4. Suggested Amendments to Secondary Education.
4.1 Suggested “Principles” to be Observed in Any Review.
4.1.1 The Need.
The programme outlined very briefly below would educate the whole person
in an adequate fashion, recognizing his needs as a dynamic and growing entity,
but yet offering many opportunities for group adventures too. Only the general
features have been mentioned, with no attempt to detail and structure a pro-
gramme, which would depend on many other factors not considered here.
First, however, certain guiding “principles” or ideas are enunciated, which
are intended neither as exhaustive in coverage, nor mutually exclusive, but
which will provide a justification for the proposals offered. I recognize that
they may well be in need of further modification or clarification. Much of the
material here results from discussions I have had with my staff and industrialists.
I have kept in mind, in developing my suggestions, the need to recognize the
proper relationship of the secondary school to the community, to commerce, to
industry, and to the tertiary training institutions —and particularly to the technical
colleges of this State. I have tried to correct the lack of balance due to pressures
downwards on the system from the university—but it is not intended that there
should be instead a disproportionate emphasis on a technical/vocational orienta-
tion to correct the past trend.
4.1.2 Some Guiding “ Principles ”.
(i) The broad aims of secondary education should be clearly enunciated,
and be so phrased that the extent to which these aims are achieved in
the future can be, and will be, regularly assessed. A clear distinction
is drawn here between assessment of individual students by examinations,
etc., and what is intended —viz., assessment of the success of the curricu-
lum itself. Such assessment is rarely done in a regular fashion, yet
it is quite clear that some evaluation is urgently needed if we are to
progress. This Enquiry has my strong support for this very reason.
Perhaps the Committee should meet regularly, though if it became
more permanent it might perhaps be constituted on a wider community
basis than at present.


(ii) These aims should weight the educational process to meet the needs
of individual students in a realistic way, and in reasonably direct propor-
tion to the subsequent place they will lake in the community. (Where
training at a tertiary level is a possible outcome, the relative require-
ments for success in the various types of training institutions should
be given proportionate consideration.)
(iii) The priority of certain subjects over others should be reconsidered,
and thought given to the need for the acceptance of all subjects with
sufficient central “core” as equal in value. Thus the traditional im-
portance of some subjects (e.g., Mathematics and foreign languages)
should be carefully reviewed, and similar weight and time be perhaps
given to others. For example, Biology should rank as high in importance
as, say, Chemistry—and be as available to as many students—including
boys. The syllabus content, too, in many ways needs review, remember-
ing the priorities in aims. Mathematics again is in this category. I am
concerned at the depth of treatment aimed at for all students even in
the earlier years of Mathematics I and Mathematics 11, let alone what
our Fifth Year boys are expected to know.
(iv) The secondary education structure must recognize that, in the educative
process, the individual must learn to function more and more as his
education progresses, as an active and independent participant in the
world outside. (Therefore there should be a gradually developing
“bridge” between the facts and techniques, and skill and knowledge
being acquired at school, and what is required for reasonable adjustment
in the community —i.e., between what might be called the “school-
oriented-and-treated” and the “communiiy-oriented-and-treated” experi-
ences in life. The very many facets of getting along on one's own
in a community should receive adequate treatment and consideration.)
(v) Besides mastery of the basic techniques of communication to a reason-
ably advanced level, the individual must be given every opportunity to
multiply his acquaintance with, appreciation of, and basic understanding
of, a wide range of electives. (Such opportunities for orientation should
be encouraged by giving the subjects concerned adequate recognition.
Staffing difficulties might be overcome by using perhaps part-time staff
where sufficient full-time staff is not available, or where numbers do
not warrant a full-time appointment since the subjects must be presented
by appropriate experienced specialists and not by “general practi-
tioners”) .
(vi) Active individual participation is a basic pre-requisite to any programme
with a view to the development of a self-reliant individual capable of
self-evaluation and self-help. (Mass instruction may tend to stultify
this, so that methods must be explored which will permit the autonomous
growth of the individual. Free and guided group discussions, as well as
project work, for example, are possibilities not exploited as often, or
as early, in the secondary school classroom, as they might be, though
I am g ad to say they are featured strongly in the kindergarten and to
an appreciable extent in the primary classrooms in this State. I should
imagine the major emphasis on such methods should be in the secondary
system).
(vii) Selection, in the sense known in the English and N.S.W. systems, should
he relegated to that point in a student’s secondary education when he
has gained sufficient basic knowledges and skills, and is ready to make
an informed choice of the vocationally oriented educational programme
he should follow. (This should occur only after adequate investigation
of his own strengths and weaknesses as well as the various broad
vocational fields, both in fact as well as vicariously. At this point, should
pre-vocational preparation become his choice, transfer to a technical
college should be made, as there are adequate opportunities there for
continuation of general education.)
(viii) The curriculum and syllabus should be pitched at the level of the student
of average capacity and interests with appropriate arrangements being
made for the very bright and very dull, who might be grouped in homo-
geneous, graded classes at a proper level of endeavour in the “core”
subjects within the normal classroom stream. (Where diagnosis reveals
the need for remedial educational treatment outside this environment,
segregation should be only for the subject concerned. In general, for the
elective subjects, there will be little to be gained from homogeneous
grouping.)
4.2 Suggested Aims for Inclusion in the Major Objectives
I be’ieve there is a need to state clearly the general objectives of the secondary
education system. I think the aims should include, inter alia, the following:—
(i) to educate young people to recognize the worthiness of all useful occupa-
tions, whatever their academic demands;
(ii) to educate young people to regard their present studies and future
occupations as an opportunity to serve the community;
(iii) to develop both social as well as academic maturity in our young
people by increasing opportunities for social and group interaction;
(iv) To educate young people to adjust more effectively to the rapidly deve’op-
ing technological society we live in; and
(v) to permit young people to approach their studies in a critical and
evaluative atmosphere through the examination of, and group discus-
sions about, differing points of view.
In addition I refer you to the major objectives Dr. Radford of the Australian
Council of Educational Research enumerated recently at a paper he read at the
A.N.Z.A.A.S. Conference in Melbourne. He classified them under the following
broad headings:—
“(i) Health, Safety and Physical Development.
(ii) Social and Educational Development.


(iii) Ethical Behaviour, Personal Standards and Moral Values.
(iv) Social Relations.
(v) The Social World.
(vi) Aesthetic Development.
(vii) Communication.
(viii) Quantitative Relationship”;
and in enlarging on (iv) Social Relations, he stated
“The pupil can contribute to group discussions, he can ask thoughtful
questions; he can supply ideas; he can introduce himself and others
naturally and courteously; he can make strangers feel at ease. He makes
suggestions to bring about harmony and compromise. He uses the neces-
sary social skill in games and at parties. He can carry out his responsi-
bilities in a democratic group. He can help plan social events. He dif-
ferentiates between persons and their behaviour, accepting a diversity o r
behaviour. He is able to enjoy a party at which both sexes are present. He
is somewhat able to encounter and cope with ridicule, to discuss human be-
haviour objectively and impersonal y and to discuss ethics and current
events intelligently.”
4.3 Suggested Amendments to the Structure.
In offering some general suggestions concerning the secondary education
structure I think the following should have priority:
4.3.1 Improving Communications between Schools, Business and Industry.
( a ) Improvement of communications between our secondary schools and
business and industry is highly desirable. This implies greater oppor-
tunities for contact for all teachers and pupils with the activities of the
commercial and industrial world, for the bu k of boys and girls leaving
secondary schools go directly into employment. There is a danger that
our teachers, involved as they are under present circumstances in a
school —university—teachers’ college—school cycle, will unconsciously
emphasize academic things and perhaps tend “to reproduce their own
kind.” At this point I want it clearly understood that I am in no way
disparaging our secondary teachers. Now this emphasis may be quite
desirable for some students but certainly not the majority. How can a
simi ar emphasis in other directions, for example in an orientation
towards the technical/vocational fields, be ensured? Perhaps the
Americans have some suggestions for us. There, the need for teachers
with a proper appreciation of the relationship between the secondary
school and the community, particularly the industrial and commercial
community, has been fully recognized over recent years. Thus we see
such relations strengthened through:—
(i) The strong Parent-Teacher Association movement embracing not only
parents but all teachers. (N.B. This is rather different from N.S.W.
practices in the Parents and Citizens’ movement where only headmasters
and headmistresses are regularly persona grata at P. and C. Meetings.)
(ii) The typical Business, Industry and Education Days (8.1. E. Days), during
which teachers of all schools in a system are invited by representatives
of business and industries to inspect their factories and banks, etc., and
discuss problems of recruitment, personnel relations, etc., are strong
public relation influences in American education.
(iii) The regular Career Days, during which representatives of various voca-
tions are invited to address senior students on the requirements, advan-
tages and disadvantages of various vocations, are perhaps worth emula-
tion. The possibility of these becoming “recruiting drives” can readily
be circumvented.
(iv) Locally elected Education Boards are the accepted pattern everywhere
through the country.
4.3.2 Variations to the School Organization.
From my observations of overseas systems and my observations of the working
of our own, there is a case for varying the existing school organization. I favor
the establishment of some multi-lateral schools as the basic secondary schoo ! unit.
These would be designed for a variety of purposes to replace the present system
of unilateral, single purpose schools, which tend to stratify our boys and girls
into separate communities relatively unrelated to the social situation to which
they must learn to adjust. The general purpose, or comprehensive, school has
a clear advantage I think in providing a broad cross section of the normal social
structure, which will allow growth in an atmosphere more typical of their every-
day environment.
The social educative experiences of the gifted, the less gifted, the average, and
below average intelligence groups are rather limited by the present system of single
leve’ schools and pre-selected curricula, and to some extent prevent balance in
their growth. Such a limitation should be avoided, at least as much as possible.
I am not making a plea here for extremely large central schools (2,000 students
plus) but for multi-latera/ schools of the 1,000 to 1,500 size in place of the
present segregated schools. I strongly favour co-educational schools also for the
same reason.
The principles of giving full consideration to individual differences in interest,
aptitude, intelligence and future plans, would not be abrogated by such compre-
hensive and co-educational schools. In fact, if they are sufficiently large
and properly staffed, there is ample opportunity for a degree of selection
into homogeneous groups for instruction in the basic or core subjects, while for
the wide range of electives no selection would be required or desirable. I quite
recognize that the provision of many electives, selection for teaching purposes
of the limited type mentioned, and co-educational facilities are not practicable in
a school population of 300-800 and that is why I am advocating some


experimenting with the 1,000-1,500 size as having many advantages. Again, the
provision of proper amenities such as cafeterias, theatrettes and so on is very
difficult in the smaller school to which we are accustomed.
All secondary schools should be called "high schools’’ in order to avoid
continuing the present undesirable hierarchy of schools.
4.3.3 Conversion of Subjects Approach into a Patterned or Global Education.
The “subjects system” under which pupils do a collection of subjects with little
apparent effort towards integration should be constructively examined. The
difficulties of the “teenager” in integrating all the different subjects, taken in
different rooms under different teachers and often in different groups, can be
very real. It is essential, of course, to use staff members who are “experts” in
various subjects, particularly in the higher stages of secondary education, but it
is equally essential that there be a co-ordinating influence if education is to be
“for a fuller life”. Group and individual project work, “field” activities and
other co-ordinating media need development at the secondary school level.
4.4 Summary of More Specific Suggestions.
The followng summary of more specific suggestions is made in the light
of my earlier remarks, or indeed may only have been implied by them but I
offer them as my considered opinion of what should be features in our system: —
(1) Further education beyond school, and beyond the minimum school
leaving age, whatever may be determined, either on a full-time or
part-time basis should be encouraged at first, and in certain categories
later become compulsory.
(2) All secondary schools should be called high schools and be co-educational
and multi-purpose in character.
All should be sufficiently large to allow co-education, a core curricu-
lum of basic subjects, numerous electives, and an opportunity for some
degree of selection into homogeneous teaching groups, but only for the
core subjects.
Each secondary school should cater for approximately 1,000 to 1,500
students to permit multi-purpose activities in terms of curriculum, and
yet not become unwieldy in terms of organization and administration.
(3) Successful completion of four years of secondary education should be
a minimum for all, or 16 years, whichever is the first reached. Whilst
administrative, accommodation and staffing difficulties will affect imple-
mentation now of such a policy, a determined effort must be made to
implement the plan as early as possible.
(4) At the end of the fourth year there should be a “ subject ” examination,
public in character, and perhaps optional—i.e., open in any one year
to adults, private study students, etc. (i.e. not just students who have
attended “such and such” schools), so long as candidates were over a
certain minimum age, 16 years, or had completed 4 years of secondary
school.
(5) All students, passing in at least one subject, would receive a Certificate
(say a High School Leaving Certificate, which would state the subjects
attempted at the examination, those passed, and the grade achieved (A,
B, C or F) in each. Subjects could be added in succeeding years, either
by full-time or part-time study, and the Certificate replaced, so long as
it indicated the year in which each subject was passed.
(6) At the same time it would be possible to institute some system whereby
students who secured a minimum number of points, or “ credits ” (allow-
ing for subject groupings and weightings), in either one, or perhaps
two, successive examination periods could "graduate ”, or receive a
H.S.LC. at a standard, which would be an academic step towards
selection for further specialist education in a general education, a
university preparatory course, or a technical college.
(7) After completion of the four-year basic secondary course a University
Preparatory Course of say two years full-time duration normally would
be possible at the high schools in a general education course, with a
proper balance of both core subjects and other general subjects, together
with electives. Alternatively perhaps it could be carried out in a pre-
vocalional technical college course. Arrangements for part-time com-
pletion of such qualifications, spread over an appropriate period, would
be available as it is now in the technical colleges.
(8) The "core" curriculum of subjects should be developed at an appro-
priate level for the average students, with no suggestion of any reduction
in time spent on them, but rather with the opportunity to go further
with them in an additional required year, which could, however, be
oriented more generally than at present (e.g., the present Mathematics
syllabus is inappropriate and should be developed for the average
student).
(9) The present group of electives should be broadened and should be
readily available from as early as possible in secondary schooling for
as many students to sample as possible.
(10) Such electives should he clearly recognized as general education, and
not pre-vocational in character in the secondary school system as such.
(ID Selection of the type employed now at 11 plus (or even earlier in
the primary school) would not occur before 15 years, as a minimum,
though full-time counselling facilities would be available readily on a
voluntary basis.
(12) Students of a minimum age of 15 years and of their own choice should
be permitted to apply at the end of three or four years of secondary
schooling, as appropriate, for selected admission to the Department of
Technical Education’s pre-vocational courses, designed for ultimate entry
to the skilled craft or technician type field. The technical college course


structure in such an event could be varied and developed for such pur-
poses, although a pattern exists in several fields already—Women’s
Handicrafts, Art, Sheep and Wool, Pre-Apprenticeship and Day Secre-
tarial. This pattern could be broadened in approach quite readily to
permit, among other things, of progression towards matriculation, for
example. These could be appropriately constructed to include core
curriculum as well as general education electives, whilst giving weighted
instruction in the selected pre-vocational direction.
4.5. Pre-Vocational Training as a Technical Education Responsibility.
In addition to the original point I made that there should be a clear division
of responsibilities between the Department of Education for those electives sub-
jects, particularly of the Manual Arts type, which are intended for general educa-
tion and orientation purposes, and the Department of Technical Education for
all full-time pre-vocational and part-time vocational training I would like to
add the following arguments for consideration. I have said that the boy, or girl,
should transfer from the secondary system, either at the end of the third
or fourth year of such schooling, but not before 15 years of age, once he or
she wishes to embark on a pre-employment vocational training course.
Such a transfer I believe to be in the best interests of the student for the
following reasons, which for the sake of simplicity in development are the ones
which would be used with relation to the pre-apprenticeship training scheme
with which most are familiar.
(1) Firstly, pre-vocational training (in this case pre-apprenticeship training)
is likely to be most effective in a craft or technical atmosphere. This
arises from the specificity of the vocational section of the course. Some
might object to this specialization beginning too early; I consider it
quite appropriate at about 15 years in a full-time course, which also
includes a “core” of general education, and also so long as the degree
of specialization is such that it permits flexibility in later choosing the
particular avenue of calling. I see then the need, as we have at present
for more emphasis on the type of pre-apprenticeship course typified by
the Printing course, which emphasizes general printing, not just com-
posing or letterpress machining, for example.
Boys are not trained in Woodwork but in general building (i.e., wood-
work applied), not in Metalwork but in general engineering. This
is not only valuable as pre-vocational training but also serves as a
motivating factor, particularly where the teachers are industrially ex-
perienced men, and where there is access to a wide range of modern
technical equipment. Only the technical colleges can adequately provide
both the level of craft training and this atmosphere, and at the same
time be geared to handle the core of general education to which I
referred.
(2) Secondly, the Department of Technical Education is the sole training
authority in this State for apprenticeship training. The pre-apprentice-
ship courses are designed to merge gradually into the normal trade
course by giving exemption from Stage I in each case. In a few instances
to date (e.g. Building Industry) the apprenticeship period is shortened
by a year for successful pre-apprenticeship recruits.
(3) Planned industrial contacts on an extensive scale for experience and
observation, and of a more specialized nature, can be featured and be
arranged as an integral part of a pre-apprenticeship course through
technical college co-ordinating staff, with their day to day industrial
contacts.
(4) Avoidance of divided control. At present pre-apprenticeship is a
co-operative venture between this Department and the Department of
Education. Co-operation has been good, but such divided control is
unsatisfactory, particularly in cases where no “academic home” is
available, where students are “shuttled” from college to school and
back again.
The opinion has been expressed also that “school spirit” or “tone”
is at its best as a motivating force when students are quartered and come
to “belong” to the tertiary level institution, rather than the secondary
school.
(5) General educaton is an important element in the present pre-apprentice-
ship scheme. Its value is fully endorsed by this Department.
(6) Finally, equal opportunities could exist in Department of Technical
Education courses, as in Education Department courses, for suitable
preparation for the suggested public H.S.L.C. examination, for which
vocational/technical subjects, as approved by the Department of Tech-
nical Education, should be equally acceptable in securing (a) points
towards the “subject” certificate or ( b ) accreditation as a “graduate”
fit for progression to higher studies —either in technical education or in
university courses.
The point of transfer would be guided by the following criteria:—
( a ) Minimum age of 15 years, or completion of the third secondary school
year, whichever was the sooner, and
(b) Acceptability by the Department of Technical Education in terms of
potential aptitude and academic achievements (e.g., graduation to this
Department’s certificate type course, designed for technicians and semi-
professional occupations, would require minimum points and group-
ings) .


APPENDIX D
SOURCES OF EVIDENCE
1. List of Associations and Individuals who presented Oral Evidence
Arnott, Rev, Dr. F. R.
Australasian Trained Nurses’ Association.
Australian Council for Educational Research.
Australian Institute of Industrial Psychology.
Australian Life Saving Association,
Australian Physical Education Association (New South Wales Branch),
Baker, Rev. H. W.
Barcan, Mr. A.
Barratt, Mr. P. E. H.
Bassett, Dr. G. W.
Baxter, Professor J. P,
Belmore South Public School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Bennett, Mr. A.
Board of Secondary School Studies.
Boyd, Mr. E. H.
British and Foreign Bible Society in Australia.
British Astronomical Association (New South Wales Branch).
Brown, Mr. L. M.
Brown, Dr. M. S.
Bussell, Mr. A. C.
Country Women’s Association of New South Wales.
Darby, Mr. E. D., M.L.A.
Department of Public Health, New South Wales.
Department of Technical Education, New South Wales.
Doughton, Mr. H.
Duncan, Mr. G.
Eason, Mr. W. J.
Eastwood Central School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
English Teachers’ Group.
Father and Son Welfare Movement, Sydney.
Gilchrist, Mr. A.
Gilmore, Mr. W. J.
Girls’ Mistresses’ Association.
Gollan, Mr. W. E.
Harris, Mr. H. L.
Harvison, Mr. F. W.
Hauser, Mr. R. J.
Headmasters’ Association.
Headmasters’ Conference of Australia (New South Wales Section).
Headmistresses’ Association.
Hearnshaw, Mr. E., M.L.A.
History Teachers’ Association.
Hobden, Mr. M. G.
Hodge, Mr. R. F.
Holt, Mr. O. L. S.
Home Economics Teachers’ Association.
Hughes, Mr. Davis.
Institute for Semantography.
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia.
Institute of Inspectors of Schools.
Institute of Physics.
Johnston, Mr. W. A.
Jones, Mr. P. B.
Kelk, Miss V. P.
Kelly, Mr. M. N.
Kemp, Dr. L. C. D.
Lindsay, Mrs. C. M.
Long, Mr. D. M.
Mackie, Miss M.
Manual Arts Teachers’ Association.
Marquet, Mr. P. A,
Marriage Guidance Council of New South Wales.
Mathematical Association (New South Wales Branch).
McCallum, Senator J. A.
McCaw, Mr. K. M., M.L.A.
McMillan, Professor J. R. A.
Mellor, Dr. D. P.
Men Teachers’ Association.
Metcalfe, Mr. J. W.
Murch, Mr. A. J.


National Fitness Council. (Associated Youth Committee.)
Nay, Dr. N.
Newcastle and Districts Association of Science Teachers.
Newcastle Businessmen’s Club.
Newcastle Chamber of Commerce.
Newcastle-Coalfields Mathematics Teachers’ Association.
Newcastle Girls’ High School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Newcastle Headmasters’ Association.
Newcastle Manual Arts Teachers’ Association.
New Education Fellowship.
New South Wales Council for Christian Education in Schools.
New South Wales Council of Churches.
New South Wales Federation of Infants’ and Nursery School Club?.
New South Wales Federation of Parents and Citizens’ Associations.
New South Wales Public Schools Amateur Athletic Association.
New South Wales Teachers’ Federation.
New South Wales Temperance Alliance.
Northumberland Council of Progress Associations.
Orme, Mr. J. A.
Parkyn, Mr. G. W.
Parramatta District Council of Parents and Citizens’ Associations.
Physical Education Branch, New South Wales Department of Educaiion
Picton Central School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Professorial Board, New South Wales University of Technology.
Recreation and Leadership Movement.
Roderick, Dr. C.
Room, Professor T. G.
Rowe, Mr. H.
Royal Australian Historical Society.
Secondary Teachers’ Association.
Secondary Teachers’ Association (Armidale Branch).
Secondary Teachers’ Association (Tamworth Branch).
Sneddon, Miss H. M.
Society of Australian Teachers of Dancing.
Staines, Dr. J. W.
Standing Committee of Convocation, University of Sydney.
Stevenson, Miss J.
Sutherland Intermediate High School Staff.
Sutherland, Mr. J, A.
Sydney Esperanto Society.
Tapp, Mr. E. J.
Taylor, Mr. Bryson.
Teachers’ Guild of New South Wales.
Teaching Staff of the University of New England,
ten Seldam, Dr, R. E. J.
Trent Mind and Memory Development.
Union of Australian Women.
United Associations of Women.
Walters, Mr. O. W.
Ward, Professor J. M.
Willis, Mr. A. C.
Women Assistants’ Association.
Yelland, Mr. H. L.
2. List of Associations and Individuals who presented Written Evidence
All Saints’ Parochial Council, Tumut.
Association of Teachers of Agricultural Science.
Australian Broadcasting Commission, Sydney.
Berrima District Farm Advancement League.
Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited.
Browne, Professor G. S.
Burnett, Mr, D. C.
Bursary Endowment Board.
Campbell, Mr. G. A.
Campbelltown Public School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Canterbury Boys’ High School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Carr, Mr. D. A.
Catholic Education Office,
Chamber of Manufactures of New South Wales, Sydney.
Child Welfare Department, New South Wales.
Commonwealth Public Service Board.
Congregational Union of New South Wales (Young People’s Department'
Cooper, Mr. R,
Craddock, Mr. N. P.
Craigie, Miss L. E.
Crew, Mr. J. G.
Crick, Mrs. I.
Crisp, Professor L. F.
Cromarty, Mr. H. M.
Curtis, Miss P. A.


Dacomb College, Melbourne.
Davey, Mr. J.
Dennis, Mr. C. J.
Department of Labour and Industry and Social Welfare (Youth Welfare
Section).
Devonshire Press.
Doran, Mr. H. N.
Dudley, Mr. O.
English Association (Sydney Branch).
Fisher, Mr. G. A.
Gallie, Mr, F.
Gannon, Mr. A. C.
Gardiner, Mr. T. K.
Garside, Mr. L. C.
Geographical Society of New South Wales.
Geography Syllabus Committee.
Geography Teachers’ Association of New South Wales.
Gilchrist, Mr. A. D.
Goodman, Mr. R. D.
Granville Secondary Technical School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Greenwich Public School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Griffith High School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Griffiths, Mr. O.
Hall, Mr, J.
Hamilton, Miss A.
Henderson, Mr. A. G.
Hill, Mrs. F.
Hyde, Mr. V. W.
Institute of Automotive Mechanical* Engineers.
Kalmar, Mrs. E.
Kindergarten Union of New South Wales.
King, Mr. H.
Krippner, Mr. R. W.
Lane, Mrs. H. M.
Lecturers in Social Studies, Teachers’ College, Armidale.
Local Government Association of New South Wales.
Lundy, Rev. H. C.
Macoustra, Mr. W.
Makin, Mr. E. S.
MaCarthy, Mr. F. D.
McClintock, Mrs. E.
Methodist Church of Australasia.
Modern History Syllabus Committee.
Murray, Miss E.
Murray, Professor P. D. F.
National Union of Australian University Students.
New South Wales Board of Jewish Education.
New South Wales Cookery Teachers’ Association.
New South Wales Hockey Association.
New South Wales Institution for the Deaf and Dumb and the Blind.
Norton, Mr. P. J.
O’Farrell, Mr. A. F.
Parramatta High School Parents and Citizens’ Association.
Payne, Mr. T. W.
Phillips, Mrs. R. K.
Postmaster General’s Department.
Richardson, Mr. L. A.
Royal Australian Chemical Institute.
Royal Australian Institute of Architects.
Ryan, Mrs. E.
Ryan, Mr. T. J.
School Counsellor Body of New South Wales Departmental Schools.
Secondary Teachers’ Association, Armidale.
Spate, Professor O. H. K.
Speech Association, New South Wales.
Stimson, Mrs. C. D. J.
Stock, Mr. A.
Story, Mr. G. D.
Sydney Teachers’ College Lecturing Staff.
Taree High School Staff.
Teachers’ College Lecturers in Geography.
Torode, Mr. M. G.
Towsey, Mr. A.
Tweed District Men’s Hockey Association.
University of Queensland.
Viney, Mr. E. A,
Walker, Mrs. C.
Welsh, Mr. A. C.
Welsh, Mr. E. T.
