

Literary and Philosophical Intelligence.
pension, with a clear width of eight feet.
It is in other respects the same as the
Berai torrent bridge. A six-pounder
passes over with ease, six horsemen also
passed over together, and at a round pace,
with perfect safety.
We have no doubt but that these bridges
will eventually become general. During
the rains there will be three of them on
the great military north-west road, to Be-
nares, and we feel satisfied their utility
will be finally established at the conclusion
of the season.— [Cat. John Bull,
CURE FOR SNAKE BITES.
(From a letter addressed to the editor of the
Calcutta John Bull.)
Few professional men who have seen a
case of this description can hesitate in
deciding that all the symptoms arise from
the action of a direct powerful sedative,
and that all who die from the bite of poi-
sonous serpents die from want of excite-
ment. The strongest diffusible stimulants
have accordingly proved the most effectual
antidotes, and it is probable that they all
act in virtue of that stimulant quality
alone. Ammonia, for instance, harts-
horn, eau-de-luce, or whatever be its form
or name, has proved eminently successful,
and solely as a stimulant, not (according
to the old idea) as a corrector of poisonous
acidity.
But this valuable medicine has disad-
vantages which long ago made me desirous
of fixing on a substitute; it varies exceed-
ingly in strength, according to age, pre-
paration, &c. ; it is not always at hand;
and lastly, I believe its use to have been
attended with fatal consequences in one
case which came to my knowledge a year
ago, and which finally determined me td
try the strongest narcotics, should I have
an opportunity. Of these the most con-
venient are laudanum, and ardent spirits ;
brandy I have constantly used; and they
have answered my warmest expectations.
Without a single auxiliary besides exter-
nal heat, they have cured at least nine
cases within the last six months. As my
patients were nearly all sepoys of the Go-
ruckpore light infantry, on duty with the
different guards, and the poor fellows
were generally bitten at night, some mi-
nutes necessarily elapsed before I could see
them, so that I have had opportunities of
watching the effects of the remedies in all
stages of the symptoms, even to spasms of
the back, total insensibility, and cessation
of every pulse but that of the heart; and
in every instance I have to attribute the
cure to these two remedies given internally,
and rubbed on the throat and chest. Only
one man died, and he was pulseless, and
of course incapable of swallowing before
I saw him; ammonia, aether, &c., were
applied, but in vain ; so rapidly had the
venom been diffused through his frame.
The natives hardly ever use the simple,
but effectual precaution of tying the limb
with a cord above the wound ; and by this
and the delay caused by their attempts to
exercise the evil spirit, many deaths are
occasioned; several of the townspeople
have this year died of snake-bites.
From causes already mentioned, I have
only once ascertained the species of snake;
it was a large cobra de capello, which bit
a man twice in each foot, and then fixed
on his side, in open daylight, and the man
running away. This snake is more fre-
quently the aggressor than any other; and
although we have here a plentiful variety,
this appears to give more trouble than all
the rest. The essential differences in the
symptoms following the bites of different
snakes are not satisfactorily ascertained,
and it is very probable that such elucida-
tion will lead to much diversity of treat-
ment.
It is obvious that the doses given must
depend on the age, sex, and apparent
constitution of the patient, and on the de-
gree in which the venom has acted. None
of my patients had less than 100 drops of
, laudanum and two glasses of brandy,
given in two or three doses, with a little
peppermint,sugar, and water—warm when
it could be had—and many of them had
double that quantity; how much more I
will not venture to say, as in urgent cases
the quantities were not very precisely ascer-
tained. Except one man, who had headache
and blood-shot eyes for a few hours, every
one of the patients was at his duty next
day, a circumstance which powerfully
corroborates the idea of a direct sedative
action, and consequent expenditure of the
vital principle; for what sepoy could other-
wise bear unharmed that quantity of sti-
mulus ?
Following up the same principles, it is
proper to keep the patient walking about,
if he can move his limbs; and the liga-
ture should not be removed till the medi-
cine has unequivocally shewn its action by
the returning pulse and heat, which, in
my experience, has always happened in
less than an hour. I have used no appli-
cations to the wounds, as they are apt to
degenerate into troublesome ulcers when
irritated by caustics, &c.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Discoveries. —Mr. Oxley, Surveyor-Ge-
neral, in surveying part of the coast to
the northward, has succeeded in discover-
ing a river in Moreton Bay, lat. 28. (which
he has named the Brisbane), superior to
any yet known in New Holland. He as-
cended it for 50 miles, and saw its course
from an eminence for SO or 40 farther,
being compelled to return from further
examination from want of provisions. It
is three miles broad at the entrance, and
has usually from three to nine fathoms


water up to where he left off the survey ;
but about twenty miles from the sea it is
crossed by a ledge of rocks, over which
there are only twelve feet at high water.
At the distance to which he penetrated
the tide rose four feet and a half, and ran
upwards of four miles per hour. The
country all around was an undulating
level, abounding in very superior timber ;
the soil rich, and well covered with grass,
but rather stony. The river came from
the S.W. in the direction of the Mac-
quarie marshes, of which it may pro-
bably prove the outlet, being, at the ter •
mination of Mr. Oxley’s survey, about
three hundred and fifty miles in a direct
line from where he lost the Macquarie
river among reeds in his former trip into
the interior. The country around was
not subject to flood, no marks of it having
been seen higher than seven feet above the
then level of the river, which was consider-
ably within the banks. It contained abun-
dance of fish, and several parrots were
shot in the vicinity, of the same species
as have hitherto been found near the banks
of the Macquarie. A river of tolerable
magnitude, called the Tweed, was also dis-
covered behind Mount Warning, a little
to the southward of the last, with a fine
bar harbour of fourteen feet, and the
country seemingly good around. A
smaller one, called the Byone, was also
found in Port Curteis.
Mr, Archibald Bell, junior, of Rich-
mond Hill, has also discovered a new
route over the Blue Mountains, to Ba-
thurst, by way of Richmond, which passes
through a fertile, w'ell-watered, brushy
country; and besides considerably reduc-
ing the distance, the road will be compa-
ratively level, and free from nearly all the
obstacles which render the bleak and bar-
ren one now used so uninviting to the
traveller, and ill adapted for the passage
of carriages and cattle. The veteran corps,
lately disbanded, is to be settled along this
line.
Improvements. A stage coach with
fouT horses has recently commenced run-
ning daily between Sydney and Parra-
matta, leaving Sydney in the morning
and returning in the evening; while a
handsome two horsed spring caravan, fit-
ted up for passengers, leaves Paramatta
in the morning and returns in the even-
ing. These conveyances were paying so
well, that a second caravan was preparing
to run between Sydney and Paramatta
daily; a third between Paramatta and
Liverpool, and a stage-coach between Pa-
ramatta and Windsor; so that now travel-
lers may proceed by daily stages to all the
well-settled parts of the colony. The five
hives of bees taken out by Capt. Wallace,
of the Isabella, were thriving well, and
had thrown off many swarms, the greater
part of which had escaped into the woods,
where they will multiply fast, from the
climate and country being so favourable
to their propagation; so that wild honey
and w'ax may hereafter become objects ot
interest to the colonist for domestic pur-
poses and exportation, besides what will
be produced from the bees in their tame
state.
Mr. Hannibal M‘Arthur, some lime
ago, imported six young olive trees from
England, from five of which eighty-three
young plants have been raised by means of
layers, while the parent stems have added
a full third to their growth. The soil is
a very sandy light loam, of which Mr.
M‘Arthur was clearing several acres with
the view of planting an olive-grove, from
this soil appearing so congenial to them.
Should the production of the olive pro-
gressively increase at this rate, Mr. M‘Ar-
thur will be able in a few years to dis-
seminate this valuable tree over the whole
colony, where all attempts at propagating
it have hitherto failed.
A tread-mill for grinding flour has
lately been erected in Sydney by Govern-
ment, which answers so well as an object
of terror to criminals, and as a means of
making their punishment a source of pro-
fitable labour, that others were about to
be established on a more extensive scale.
A quantity of New Zealand flax had also
been imported, which the female convicts
in the factory were taught to dress in the
New Zealand manner by two natives of
that country, after which it is spun and
manufactured by the female convicts into
various descriptions of cloth. Should this
manufacture be properly encouraged and
conducted, it may not only prove a profit-
able way of employing the female con-
victs, whose bad characters unfit them for
family servants, but by encouraging the
New Zealanders to raise a commodity
which they can barter for useful European
articles, may, in the end, allure them
from acts of murder and cannibalism to
that of raising an article by which all
their various wants may be supplied. To-
bacco has this year been so extensively
cultivated, that the colonists will be inde-
pendent of all foreign supply, a duty of
4s, per lb. having been laid upon import-
ed tobacco, to encourage that of colonial
growth. This measure has put a com-
plete stop to the cultivation of tobacco in
Otaheite, where it had lately been pro-
duced of very superior quality. Had the
duty not exceeded four pence per pound
upon the Otaheitan it would have afford-
ed a sufficient protection to the New South
Wales grower, without annihilating its
cultivation in Otaheite, which may be
considered a dependence of New South
Wales, and on that account ought to be
entitled to some consideration.
The country is rapidly clearing by
means of the clearing gangs, the former
