

REPORT
OS’ THE
MOUNT TRENCHARD ESTATE.


PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SON,
LONDON GAZETTE OFFICE, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
AND
ORCHARD STREET, WESTMINSTER.


TO THE TENANTRY or the MOUNT TRENCHAED
ESTATE.
Mr Friends,
The accompanying excellent Report, made by Mr.
Stephen de Yere, appears to me to contain so much
information, useful now and in future years, that I have
directed it to be printed for distribution among you. The
Report not only points out the best crops, stock, and best
managed farms, but in distributing our prizes it gives much
sound and practical advice, the effect of which I hope may
be shown in further advances, if we are permitted to proceed
to another inspection and obtain another report in 1853.
You will remember that our Farming Society on this
estate has originated with yourselves, though carried on in
conjunction with me and those whom I have intrusted with
loci duties. It is by this friendly co-operation between
landlord and tenant that the successful prosecution of in-
dustry and of improvement can best be attained for your
benefit as well as to mine. What is already done is evidence
of the increasing industry and knowledge of the tenants;
I trust it wall contribute in an equal degree to their moral
and social improvement, and to that of their families. By
skilful and persevering management, your farms and home-
steads will become more creditable and profitable, and you
will be enabled to bring up your children in habits of
industry and intelligence that will make them good tenants
hereafter. You can now usefully visit each other’s farm,
you can thus profit, each by his neighbour’s experience ; the
Model Farm of Mount Trenchard and the Agricultural
School, with its Resident Pupils and an Industrial class, —the
instruction and example which you will derive from Mr.
Patrick Connor, the Agricultural Teacher, and the advice
which will be freely given you by Mr. Thornburgh, my
Resident Agent, and by my Scotch Land Steward, —will also


contribute to your progress and accelerate it. The special
notice by Mr. Stephen de Yere of the extreme industry of
John Kennedy, of Ballyhahill, shall be borne in mind by me.
Well acquainted as I am with every one amongst
you, having known the fathers and grandfathers of many
tenants now on the estate, I can, with earnestness and
truth, wish you and your families success and happiness.
Believe me,
Tour sincere friend,


[NOT PUBLISHED.]
REPORT,
AFTER AN INSPECTION OF THE
MOUNT TRENOHARD ESTATE,
lOR THE PURPOSE OP AWARDING
AGRICULTURAL PRIZES.
STEPHEN E. DB YEEE.
NOVEMBER, 1852.


REPORT.
I have adjudged the Mount Trenchard property
prizes as follows:
Green Crops.
Ist Class. 2nd Gass. 3rd Class.
1. Phil. Kelly. 1. Tim Madigan. 1. Daniel Sheahan.
2. Michael Cregan. 2. Denis Mangan. 2- McGreal and Cnlhaue.
3. Patt O’Brien. 3. Michael Guiney. 3, Thomas Bourke.
Neatest kept and most suitable House and Offices.
1. Michael Guiney. 2. James Nolan.
General Improvements and Manure.
1. Patt O’Brien. 2. David Cussen. 3. Patt McMahon, Mount David.
Best Dairy Cow.
1. Tim. Madigan.
2. Patt O’Brien.
Best Heifer.
1. Jerry Hartney.
2. James Nolan.
Besides those to whom I have adjudged prizes, I
think it right to mention with special commendation
the following persons, to whom our funds would not
enable me to award money prizes, viz.:—
In the Department of Green Crops.
Patt McMahon, Mount David.


David Cussen, whose turnip crop, though uneven
and damaged, is very creditable, considering its large
extent in proportion to his holding, the short time he
has been in possession of a much neglected farm, and
the fact of its being the first crop upon land drained by
himself. Also Patt Connell, of Clashganiflj whose crop
was good, but who did not evince sufficient -carefulness
in singling the plants.
In the Department of House and Offices.
Michael Cregan, of Shanid, whose entire homestead is
in most creditable condition; indeed, I had the greatest
difficulty in awarding the 2nd prize between him and
James Nolan. I also commend the cleanliness and
excellence of Denis Maugan’s house; but I think that
his offices are not in keeping with his house and the
nature of his holding. I also commend T. Burns much
for his clean and orderly little farm-house.
In the Department of General Improvements.
John Kennedy, of Ballyhahill, to whom for his extreme
industry I should have much wished to have been enabled
to award an additional prize. Michael Guiney, whose
farm, not only by the excellence of the crops, but by its
systematic arrangement and excellent drainage, evinces
not only industry but skill in its occupier. John
Hastings, of Mount David, who has drained a large
quantity of land (not yet, however, brought into culti-
vation), and who has made some excellent fences.
McGreal and Culhane, who have reclaimed and drained a
considerable extent of unprofitable bog. Daniel Shea-
han, of Gourbane, for drainage and clover. Thomas
Burns, for great improvements under circumstances of


extreme difficulty, having got up and added to his
little farm portions of cottiered and exhausted land.
And Denis Mangan ; whose improvements are, however,
of an earlier date, hut the state of whose farm shows
the care of a prudent and skillful agriculturist.
In the Department of Stock.
I specially commend an Ayrshire cow of Thomas
Bourke’s of Rathhroder, and a white heifer of David
Cusscn’s, which, if not allowed to breed at too early an
age, and if brought forward in good condition, would
perhaps have been the best animal in her class.
On the whole I have been exceedingly gratified by
what I have seen in each department, and in the several
classes.
I have had considerable difficulty in awarding the
prizes between several of the competitors. The green
• crops of the estate generally, though the result of the
exertions of persons as yet little experienced in that
species of agriculture, would he creditable to men of
large experience and capital. They exhibit care, in-
dustry, skill, and the judicious application of manure, and
if employed as well as they have been grown, will leave a
permanent effect in the enrichment of the farms, and in
the increase of the tenants’ capital. The landholders
appear to have at last become sensible of the impolicy
of that reckless gambling which in former years has led
them to risk their all upon a crop so perishable and
uncertain as the potato. With regard to farm offices,
the tenants are beginning to perceive the necessary
connexion between such and the growth of green crops,
and to know that the housing of their cattle will not


only secure the largest immediate profit on turnips and
mangles, hut will ensure the progressive improvement,
and increase of stock, the successive continuance of those
valuable crops by means of sufficient manure of good
quality, and the superior quantity and quality of grain.
The improvement of dwelling-houses in many instances
is peculiarly gratifying, especially in their cleanliness
and order, though in this respect much still remains to
be done. Cleanliness is next to godliness. The first
element of improvement is self-respect, and we must
feel ourselves raised above the position of brutes before
we can feel the first impulse of that energy which will
make us even wish to improve our physical, our moral,
and our social condition. Dirt and wastefulness always
go together; cleanlinesss and order are the parents of
true economy. They also greatly promote education;
because the teaching of the schools is of little value
without study at home; and at a clean and well
ordered fireside, amidst a sober household, the young
of the family will always find a place and a time
suitable for study, or for those literary recreations
which are at once the reward of education and a help to
its progress.
I have noted much improvement in the manufacture
and preservation of manure. The farmers are beginning
to perceive that much may be done even during the
summer months; that a manure-heap, when once
begun, rapidly accumulates; and that in order not to
waste our wealth, we must first learn not to waste our
waste. Still, I have observed a lamentable want of
knowledge, or of care, in the construction of manure-
heaps. I only met with one instance, that of Michael


Cregan, of Shanid, in which the liquid drainings, that
most valuable portion of the whole, were not allowed to
waste, and he a source of filth and not of profit. I
have strongly advised the farmers to reconstruct en-
tirely the places in which they propose to make their
manure-heaps; and to do so systematically, and with
the assistance of able advice. I would impress upon
them that by such means the winter rains may he
made as subservient to th,e interests of the soil, as spring
showers to those of the growing crop.
The show of stock was far superior to what I had
expected. In the class of dairy cows there were 13
competitors; in that of heifers, 7; beside other stock
not entered for competition. Though not generally
pure bred, they were such as to do credit to the taste
and judgment of the exhibitors, and were of a profit-
able description. Their condition, too, was highly
satisfactory; the more so, as they exhibited fair
samples of the general state of the stock, not having
been prepared for competition by extraordinary care
and feeding. I was particularly well pleased with the
improvements shown in this department by the holders
of small and poor farms, and I should have much
wished that it had been possible to give prizes for stock
separately to the three classes of occupiers, as was
done in the case of green crops.
The most pleasing part of my duty still remains—to
report upon the permanent improvements, and generally,
upon the agricultural condition of the estate. I find
by a paper communicated to me by Mr. Thornburgh,
that within the year, 75 acres have been drained, 31 acres
limed, 600 perches of new fences of the best description


made, and nearly 1000 perches of old and useless fences
levelled. It must be recollected that in this list are
not included improvements which have been effected to
a very large amount upon the farms of persons not
competitors in the association of this year, hut who,
there is every reason to hope, will become competitors
on future- occasions. For instance, the farms of Bally-
nacraggy, Knockoura, and Crohane, upon which im-
provements to a very large extent have been effected by
the enterprise of John O’Brien, Michael Cregan, jun.,
and Martin Sheahan, do not appear in the list.
The drainage has been executed with stone, in the
most perfect and permanent manner. Its effects are
already visible. The soil, relieved from the poison of
stagnant waters, and having its subsoil ventilated by
atmospheric air, yields beneficial crops to the grower,
and food for the support of man, instead of wasting its
luxuriance in the growth of pernicious weeds. Deep
ploughing or subsoiling, and the consequent renovation
of exhausted soils by turning up a subsoil which, in its
undrained state, would have operated as a poison on the
surface, is now rendered possible. Thus, a new and
powerful manure is drawn from the bowels of the
earth, and acts chemically upon the surface. Greater
depth is gained, and a new and fertile soil obtained by
combining the old surface with the new soil. The
important effect which this process must have upon
vegetable production will be at once understood by any
one who has observed how far the roots of wheat and
of many grasses will penetrate in a soil of sufficient
depth. Even in lands where the subsoil is not of such
a nature as would render it advisable that it should be


immediately incorporated with the upper soil, much
good is accomplished by the opening of the under strata,
which, by the admission of atmospheric air, and the
percolation, not retention of water, gradually change
their nature and become fertile. During my inspection
I have been much struck by the manifest improvement
of the drained lands. The stubbles look bright and
clean. Grass land is losing its rusty, forbidding aspect;
and the blue, coarse, reedy grasses are replaced by a
softer and richer growth.
The farmers seem to be gradually becoming aware of
the false economy of endeavouring to force a jaded soil
into the production of successive corn crops without
manure or renovation. Such a course is penny wise and
pound foolish. It may promise an immediate profit, but
it must necessarily end in the exhaustion of the soil and
the ruin of the farmer. I must admit that upon this
head much still remains to be learned, but the value of
the system of green cropping carried on this year will,
I trust, teach this great lesson with greater weight,
and more permanent effect, than any advice however
good.
I could have wished that the cultivation of clovers
(the importance of which as forming portion of a
rotation especially required for soils such as I have
visited, cannot be overestimated) had been practised
to a larger extent; but I think that next year will
exhibit a great improvement in this respect.
The levelling of old, and the building of new fences
has been judiciously done. They have been well con-
structed and in a proper direction. Labour, as well
as space, has been economised.


It has not been necessary to withhold any prize for
want of merit. The difficulty has rather arisen from
the closeness of competition in many cases. I should
have experienced but little difficulty if I had been
obliged to institute a comparison between the farmers
on Lord Monteagle’s estate and those of the country
generally.
In speaking to the tenants, I have tried to encourage
them to persevere in what they have so well begun.
I have endeavoured to impress upon them that a
work commenced is not a work completed;—that they
ought not to be discouraged by difficulties, or even by
want of success; —that nothing can be permanent
which is not progressive; and that steady and hopeful
industry will, under God's providence, meet with its
reward.
I now close this report, in which I have applied
myself principally to the examination of minute details,
considering separately the different branches of industry
and progress. Taking a larger view, I feel gratified
with the judicious and well-balanced management of
each farm. Rising still higher,—standing, as it were,
on the hill-top, and surveying the general estate, I
rejoice in its condition and prospects, I appreciate the
skill, the industry, and the respectability of its farmers.
STEPHEN E. DE YERE.
Mount Trenchard,
Nov. 13, 1852.


