

REPORT
on
1) CO-OPERATIVE ACTIVITIES, SORTHERE DIVISION
2) CHRISTIAN CO-OPERATIVE MOVEMENT, NORTH-EAST COAST
DIOCESE OF NEW GUINEA.
Summary of Recommendations
together with AREA MAPS.
Prepared by:
Rev. W. A. Glint.
Priest Warden of Christian Co-ops.
Diocese of New Guinea




REPORT CO-OPERATIV E ACTIVITIES, NORTHERN DIVISION,
TOGETHER WITH APPENDED NOTES BY REV. A. CLIHT.
CONA C O-OPERATIVE SOCIETY LIMITED.
Gona Co-op Plantation is growing and using by co-op distribution
the following 5 all” native "foods and fruit - taro, sweet potatoes,
corn, peanuts. Most of the corn and peanuts is kept for seed to in-
crease production and thus enable distribution®
Face fields are very extensive (approx. 10 acres). Gona Co-op
has 2 seasons of rice in store - twenty 25 flour drums and almost as
many bags. Much rice was lost by rats and the need of drums. Rice
huller now at leaga and Gona is waiting its turn to hull the much
needed rice.
Various kinds of beans are grown and distributed. Coffee has
been put in as a cash crop (this year) more to be sown. Tobacco is
to be put in as a Cash trial crop - native leaf and new seed. Tapa
tree also grown in Co-op Plantation.
Gona is _a_ Registered Society under the Ordinance.
Membership ... 131 Capital ... £3^2.
The people of all the villages work 2 days a week in the Co-op
plantation except on special occasions. They all liave -their own
private gardens and grow the usual native foods, taro etc. These
gardens are particularly good in this district. Special days are
put aside for private gardens.
Gona Co-op Villagesg-
Gona Jenati Bxugata
Faga Rapapo Igorabari
Kurou Vivisoini Maneneta Katuna
Jinji Warisota Beuru
GiUim CO-OmiATIVB SOCIETY LIMITED
Garara Co-ojp Plantation is growing and using by co-op distri-
bution, all native foods and fruit, taro etc., corn, peanuts, various
kinds of beans. Corn and beans ... increase of production as at
Gona.
Rice. Two seasons in store - much of their rice has been destroy
ed waiting for hullers as at Gona. Approx. 6 acres. 20 odd of drums
full and many bags. .Waiting for their turn to use huller. Distribu-
tion of all products the Co-op way.
Coffee, has been planted as a cash crop (about 3 yrs. old)
more to be planted.


Garara Co-op has only the one village - Garara.
Garara is a Registered Society under the Ordinance.
The people of Garara village work two days a week in the Co-op
plantation. They all have their own private gardens and grow the
usual native foods , taro etc. They have special days for their own
gardens.
Membership ... 75* Capital ... £379 •
IMGiI 00-OPBRATIVE SOCIETY LIMITED.
leaga Co-op has 2 Plantations plus a rice field at the hack of
Basabua Vill. No. 1 Plantation is growing all native foods (mostly
sweet potatoes) and fruit 3 corn and peanuts. There are a few cotton
trees. Coffee is planted as a cash crop and is about 2 yrs. old.
No. 2 Plantation is growing taro, potatoes, corn, a little rice
(about 2 acres) peanuts s and a little native tobacco (as a trial).
Rice fields at the back of Basabua Vill. are very extensive about
15 acres ? and more land has been cleared for rice. They have two
seasons of rice stored. 20 odd drums are full and as many bags. Much
rice has been lost through rats and lack of drums. Rice hulling is
now in progress at the village depot.
All told leaga Co-op has 128 rubber trees (new - not tapped).
No. 1 has 32 0000 a trees.
No. 2 has
Native fruits are grown extensively on all plantations.
leaga Co-op works 3 days a week in 00-op plantations„ All
people Y/ork in their own gardens. Private gardens arevery good in
all co-op centres.
leaga Co-op is a registered Society under the Ordinance.
Membership ... 193 Capital ... £440
leaga Co-op Villages.
Beporo Surilai Kanaunje
Gombe Banumo Haora Harova
Basabua Tarebasusu Omba


Buna
JSTo• 1 Plantation near Sanananda Vill, and is growing all native .
foods ? taro., sweet potatoes etc* ... corn, peanuts, and native fruit,
Rice is the main crop at present. Vast areas are sown. Much has
been lost for want of a huller. What is left is stored in drums and
bags, 15 drums and a number of bags,
No, 2 Plantation is near Boreo Vill, and is grown as above, but
not the area, Rice, about 12 drums and the same number of bags in store,
Nol and 10, 2 have lost rice over 2 seasons - rats and lack of
drums. Both plantations are now waiting their turn to use the huller.
Buna Co-op is_ preparing land inland to try coffee (3rd Planta-
tion) and tobacco as a cash crop.
Buna Co-op is a Registered Society under the Ordinance.
Buna Co-op Villagesg-
No. 1 Geruv/a, Siwori, Sanananda, Ango, Benobada, Wanda,
Honamburi.
No, 2 Boreo, Korigo, Sinemi, Vivesoino, Gendada, Warisota 1,
Warisota 2, Ondagepatari,
Buna is in membership like Gona and leaga, also capital. Their
book is away at present.
BAKIMEARI CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY,
Bakeimibari^Co-op Plantation is growing and using by Co-op method
of distribuTion~ all native foods, taro, etc. and fruits, corn and a little
peanuts. Rice, about 2 acres under. 6 flour drums full and several
bags waiting for rice huller.
Copra, for the last 2 yrs. has been produced and sold. The people
are about to build a better copra shed.
Coffee is to be tried, and ground has now been prepared, as a
cash crop.
Native tobacco leaf is planted as a test.
Bakumbari Co-op is ready and waiting for Registration,
Bakumbari Co-op Villagess-
Bakumbari
Kumbata Kurereda
Pufuda


Membership ... 81 Capital •*« £B3
Work days in Co-op twice a week. All people work their own gardens
■ _C O-Omy&TIJE SOCIETY.
Huhuru Co-op Plantation is growing all native foods and rice 9 a
little* ~^^o^rn^^dL^G&nu±s 9 '' They are now planting more native fruit.
In their shed they have rice in drums and bags waiting for the huller.
4 months ago they had 7 drums of rice and some bags. Coffee is to be
tried as a cash crop., and new Coffee to be put in. They already have
a coffee plantation* unused and unkept* over grown with scrub. It
may be of value? It may prove worth while.
Native tobacco loaf to be planted as a test.
Huhuru Co-op is ready and waiting for Registration.
Membership ... 125 Capital ... £l7l
Huhuru Co-op Villagesz-
Huhuru Senani
Peferi Horau
Siugu Jagarabambo
Work days - 2 days a week in Co-op. All people work their own
gardens.
miBURiiTA CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY.
Hamburata Co-op Plantation is grovdng all native food and rice *
about 3 acres of rice sowns a little corn and peanuts. They are
about to plant more native fruit crop. They have about 6 drums of
rice to be hulled. Much of their rioe has been lost - cause as stated.
Coffee is to bo planted. At first people were not keen through their
previous experience in coffee growing. They have a neglected coffee
plantation. It may prove of some value. They understood things when
it was explained the need of a cash crop for Co-op development and the
advantage of the Govt, scheme at Higaturu as a buying agency. This
should be a good coffee centre with Huhuru. Prom this centre all the
way to Sagari is neglected coffee plantations. We hope to develop
Coffee as a Co-op cash crop.
Native tobacco leaf will be tried in this Co-op.
All the people of the Co-op work 2 days a week in co-op and all
have their days in their own gardens.


Hamburata Co-op Villages*-
Homburata Haugata Johata Kukumbata
Sehora Eiho
SOPUTA_ 00-OPERATIVE SOCIETY.
Soputa Co-op Plantation is growing native food and fruit, rice 5 corn
and peanuts and a little tobacco (native).
Coffee 4 s produced as a cash crop and some has been sold already
through the Government Coffee Proj. Higatutu. More coffee is to be
planted. Soputa is in a good coffee area., and transport is available.
Soputa Co-op is. ready and waiting for Registration,
Membership ... 95 Capital ..» £BO.
Soputa Co-op Villages -
Soputa Hihonda
Buhemc Pendereta
KDMUSI RIVERCQ-QPERATIVE SOCIETY.
Kumusi River Co-op includes the SJLai, Korisata District and the
Kumusi River villages of Deuna and Ganana as well as some villages
between the Kumusi and Opi Rivers.
Co-op Plantations,as Siai ? Korisata 5 Deuna? Ganana 9 Hurata, and
Sagere (6 plantations).
(a) Siai Plantation is very extensive in native food and rice,
*(about 3 aoresj as well as oorn 9 peanuts and native fruit,
3 drums and 12 copra bags full of rice waiting for huller.
A small rubber plantation (not been tapped).
A new clearing,is being made for Coffee ? as a cash crop.
Native tobacco leaf.
(b) Kori sat a Plantation has native food as above - rice ? corn ? pea-
nuts. Rice about 2 acres and a quantity in store waiting for
rice huller.
There are 3 Cocoa Plantations worked by Co-op in this area. One
has just been cleared. They are working on the other 2 now.
This cocoa was planted not long before the war as far as I
could gather. A private Trader has been buying the cocoa pods
from the people at 2 for a l/-.
(°) Deurda_ Plantation (on the Kumusi River) has native food corn*
peanuts and rice. The rice is about 3 acres. Native tobacco
also.


(d) Ganana Plantation (on the Kumusi) has native food, corn,pea-
nut s, native tobacco, and rice (about 3 acres)*
The people of this Co-op all work their own native gardens as
well* This district has possibilities* The Co-op is one of the new
onoes•
Kumusi River Co-op is ready and waiting for Registration.
Membership • 357 Capital ••• £258.
P.S. Hurata Plantation is a new plantation and has at present native
food, corn and rice (about 1 acre).
Sagere Plantation, a new plantation, and has native food, corn
peanuts, and rioe (about 1 acre)*
Kumusi River Co-op Villagess-
Siai Deunia Korisata Kaiari
Baduru Kukuru Usoindari Aruruta
Oitatande Ganana Borugasusu Onobasusu
Hurata Ivlda Paparate Herota
Basanada Batari Tohenbari Siporosusu
Orosusu Rirou Honada Ititi
Sagere Papaki Aurita Osaku
Amburata Kikinoda Koninida Kakisusu
Korota Poho Utukiari Potomo
MAMBARE CO-QPERATIVE_ SOCIETY.
Mambaro Co-op District includes Plantations over a wide area and
will be a number of separate units working together*
Dewade 2 plantations, Mambututu, mjh 8 well organised planta-
tions" on the Gira River 9 and 4 on the Mambare River,and 2 on the Eya
River § 16 pi antations.
Dewade Plantation has 2 acres of rice soY/n. Native foods-
n-tive fruits to be planted* A little corn - more seed needed. Tor
baoco is to be tried here* Cash production at present is in shells.
All people Y/ork their own gardens.
Mambututu Plantation has a.ll native foods, a good crop of taro
and sweet potatoes, sugar cane, corn - more seed needed. Rice, about
3 acres. 10 bags of rioe in store - a lot lost through rats and no
drums. Need for rioe huller here. Further inland coffee will be tried
and people are preparing. Copra is also a possibility here and shell.
Gira River Plantation at Usi, Übutu, Wade, Onombatutu, Aiasi,
Tadre, Tubi, Batari, Demo - all grovang native food, taro etc. and
various quantities of rioe from 2 acres up to 4 or 5 acres. A lot
of rioe has been v/asted for want of drums - plenty of rioe in bags,


but what of rats? ITativ e food is planted in big areas.
All people work their own gardens and grow the usual native crop.
For cash crop in this upper Gira area 9 coffee will be tried. Gold
mining is in operation now. Timber is worth while going into.
Mambare River Plantation*.has all native foods and.fruity corn*
peanuts and rice. Areas of rice vary from 1 to 3 acres. Coffee will
also 'be tried here as a cash crop - tobacco also. Plantations at
Taudariy Kur©reda ? Ginemai and ?.
Eya River Plantations 5 growing native foods and rice as above.
Coffee will be tried in this area.
Mambututuy at the mouth of the 3 rivers ? is the natural port
for all these Co-ops. and is thus the Headquarters. Fr. Gill at
Dewade is their immediate advisor.
Mambare Co-ops.ready and waiting for Registrations Pewade ?
Mambatutuy Upper Gira,
All these Co-ops work 2 days a ?;eek in Co-op. 9 and certain days
their own gardens.
The influence of the above Co-ops. have extended into the
Mandated Territory on the coast 5 and inland on to the Waria River.
I have not their books 'with me and thus have no record of
membership ? capital 3 or list of all their villages.
AMBASI CO-OPERATIVE SPCIETY.
Ambasi Co-op Plantation Kainde ? Iwaia* Koena
1 & 2. All of them have rice from 1 to 3 acres ? native foods etc. All
these Co-op Plantations are new 5 and will develop on the accepted
co-op lines. Co-op sharing., and everyone working 2 days in the co-
op as w T ell as keeping their own gardens going.
Coffee will be tried inland at Koena 1 & 2 as ; a cash crop.
Iwaia is going in for shell as a cash sale. Tobacco is to be
tried.
Ambasi Co-op is now ready to be Registered.
Membership ... 251 Capital .., £ll6
Ambasi Co-op Villages t
Koena Aive f Tatai
Siabe Ambasi Begabari
Viru Iwaie Jitame
Kainde Dewatutu


POITGAITI 00-OPEBATIVB SOCIETY,.
Pongani Co—op joined with Gona at the first Co-op meetings and
is thus■one of the first.
There are two Plantations and they are extensive. Native food
corn//peanutsV'potatoes’ etc’. grown ? also native tobacco. Rice - vast
areas have ibeen sown. 20 odd drums are in the store waiting to he
hulled. Much has been lost to the rats for lack of drums. Copra
is produced and is a going concern.
Other possible flash products will be encouraged here. A trial
will be made in the area with coffee. All people work their own gar-
dens as well as two days a week in the co-op.
Pongani is to be registered.
Membership ... 1 ? 003* Capital ..£1320*
Pongani Co-op Villages?
Seboda Gunimba Sarapa Pareki
Pongani Puin Niniure Gora
Jegarakambo Songade Sire Nembade
Jeburugayari Wayei Atangiro Orabeji
Kevi Ondoro Bua Kanane
Oreya Yoivi Kwaowoki Mapuya
Gobe Ako
P.S. Ako has a new plantation with the idea of being a separate
uniT. T wilT be there in the next 2 or 3 days and may be
able to add to this.
ERORO CO-OPSRATIVS SOCIETY.
Eroro Co-op Society takes in all the villages of the district
and iT well organis ed 7 There are at least 8 plantations. They are
growing all native foods ? fruit 3 rice 3 corn and peanuts. They have
last season*s rice in store waiting for the Rice Huller. A lot of
rice has been lost through rats and lack of drums.
Eroro is a big populated area and it has a large membership.
Eroro Co-op is ready for Registration.
Copra is its cash production and has been producing copra a
co-op for the last 2 yrs.
Fr. Ray Nichols of A.M. Eroro is the immediate advisor for
Eroro and Pongani Co-ops,


ISIVITA CQ-QPKRATIVB SOCIETY.
IsivltjC o^2 p ijpL formation-was one of the early Co-ops,, but up to
the la's t feaTmonths hashing was .done , During the last 8 months Isi vita
has given a^lead and thtys we have a number of keen co-ops growing in a
good garden area,
Isivita Co-op is groY/ing a big area of native foods and fruit as
well as corn and peanuts and Rice, They have about 2 aoreas of rice
soym - 6 drums in store v;aiting to be hulled.
All thest willageshave big areas of rubber. It has been leased to
private traders and many of the trees have been thus destroyed through
bad tapping and carelessness. In this area Coffee is to be planted as
a Co-op cash crop. It is near to Higaturu and should be a success,
Isivita Co-op is ready for Registration.
Membership ~, 780, Capital ~, £337*
Isivita Co-op Villages 2
Hamumuta Kombeturu Soroputa Hewapa
Pija Bosiseta Pusanambo Asapa
Popondota Taremoturu Awara Sasembata
Egaturu Sigoreturu Peretembari Nomota
Tarabore Oingata Ihoreta Singi
Koropata Sawariture Inota Egapoekarita
Isivita Kendata Kandata Gosara
Huoruturu Timbeki lauta Sawarihambo
Barewoturu Hojani Hurita Barobine
Waseta Mumuni Tara Huvivi
Sorage Titiro
Since this report Y/as made many more have joined in as Co-op workers
in nev/ plantations,
Peretembari Plantation, native food, corn, rice etc, as above,
A big plantation (2 acres of rice). This centre takes in 4 vill.
and in Police book, population given 458 able to w T ork - male and female,
Gosara Plantation - much the same as above. Takes in 4 vill,
given population figures 276,
Mumui 9 much as above,
Sasembata & BareYfoturu , in a very big population centre and now
have IT very good plantations. Villages not recorded in Co-op book Yvdio
now have plantations in this .area.


Ha genbarib° New Plantation
H
Torogota ,f 11
"
All are growing from 1 to 3 acres of rice* Good plantations of all
native food and fruit. All Imve rubber trees. Coffee will be the
Co-op cash crop in this district. 18 plantations operating -
there are others.
_S_ANGARA DISTRICT.
In this area many co-op attempts are being made. The following
are the best organised and are ready for Registration.
Bqnge Co-operative Society is well organised. They have all
native'foods and fruit, corn, beans, rice (about 3 acres). They have
Z Co-op work days each week. Coffee is sown as a cash crop and native
tobacco for trial.
Bonge Co-op has 150 workers covering 7 villages.
Bahivaturu Hivgatutu Huivivi
Atintiuturu Toputuru
Bonge 0 j ahambo
Oaurapa C o—o perative Society - well organised. All native foods and
fruit. Coffee is also grown as a cash crop.
Omurapa co-op has 57 workers, covering 3 villages.
Kewana Co-operative Society, well organised. All native food and
is their cash crop.
There are various attempts at co-op gardens in this Sangara-
Isivita District, extending as far as Kokoda, where I believe there are
at least two well organised plantations. They are growing native food
and rice. All these people folio?; the co-op rule of working ih their
own gardens as well as the co-op, which is twice a week. This is
another first class garden district.
There are many more in this district yet to be visited.
►
ASINGI DISTRICT.
Asingi District is inland from Gona about half way to Sangara.
Here are several well run Co-op Plantations.


Ongoho Co-op Plantations ? grows all native foods and rice (about
2 acres sown); it covers 4 villageso A good garden district. Coffee
will he a cash crop. In this area as in others coffee has been grown
before. Their old coffee plantation is over grown with scrub. It was
not easy to talk the people into coffee again. Only because other co-ops
are trying coffee they agreed to do the same,
Co-op Plantation. Native food and rice etc. as above. Coffee
as above. Both these co-ops take in 4 villages.
Bi vinukoiari Co-op Plantation has a good plantation of native food*
rice ("about acre) native tobacco s a rubber plantation (not tapped) .
Coffee will be the cash crop. Only a few coconut trees. Co-op people
agreed to make the growing.of more coconut trees their first job. This
centre includes 5 villages. All work their gwn gardens.
There are native Co-ops growing native foods and some have rice 9
corn etc. at Bmo (near Pongani). Has native food ? corn and rice 9 and a
little copra as cash trade.
At Sefoa (near Tufi) native gardens are just beginning and they are
trying rice. Fr. Newman of A.M. Sefoa is their immediate advisor and also
at Naniu.
At Wanigela 9 two Co-op Plantations are just beginning. Fr. Lidbetter
of A.M. Wanigela is their immediate advisor.
At_ Menapi 9 Co-op just about to begin. Fr. Cruttwell of A.M. Menapi
is their advisor.
At Wedau (Bogura) Co-op just beginning clearing for Plantation -
native foods and rice.
At Wamira (near Bogura) Co-op just beginning. Fr. J. Bodger is
the advisor of Wedau and Wamira.
At Taupota Co-op garden is in operation. Native.food and rice.
Fr. Andrew of A.M. Taupota is their immediate advisor.




REPORT-CHRISTIAN CO-OPERATIVE MOVEMENT
(North-East Coast of Papua, Northern Pistrict)
l'ii© report deals with the area of the Anglican Mission, i.e., Papua
from Taupota to the Mandated border and inland as far as Kokoda.
The history of the Papuan-New Guinea Co-operatives amongst the Papuan
people started with the co-operative teaching given by Fr. James Benson,
Mission Priest of Gona, before the war.
During the war the Gona lads, many of whom served in the P. 1.8. and
the Labour Line, spread the idea of Native Co-operatives throughout the
Territory. Immediately after the war the Gona people, under the
leadership of Fr* Benson, set to work and established Native Co-operative
Plantations with the idea of building new Co-op. Villages as the centre of
activity. This idea soon spread far beyond Gona and today we have
before us the great opportunity of Co-operative work throughout the
North-East area.
In 1948 at the invitation of the Bishop of New Guinea and Fr. James
Benson, I went to Gona as Mission Priest and Co-op. Adviser.. At the e
Synod Leld at Dogura in July 1949? the Bishop of New Guinea officially
appointed me as Priest Warden of Christian Co-operatives. At the same
time he licensed four Papuan Co-operative Evangelists.
Luring most of 194$ 1 held special Co-op. Classes, dealing with
Co-ops in other lands (especially Native Co-ops), Co-op. history, etc.,
together with lessons in English. 4 1949 a period of rapid develop-
ment throughout this Northern Area, four Gona Co-operatives having been
Registered, one being the first in the Territory.
From the outset every encouragement was given to Fr. Benson by The
Administrator of the Territory,.Colonel.J. K. Murray, who took a personal
interest in the Gona experiment. Mr. J. H. Jones, who was Director of
District Services and Native Affairs at that time was most helpful. He
was responsible for the practical interest taken by the Government in the
encouragement of Native Co-ops. throughout the Territory. He set up a
Co-op Section of District Services to help and advise the New Co-ops. and
appointed Mr. J. Miller as Acting Registrar of Co-operatives. Mr. J. Miller
has personal knowledge of the v/ork of Fr. Benson and the Gona people. He
has been most helpful in every v/ay.
With the help thus given by these Government Officers, the policy of
the Missions and Government working together as co-partners in the interests
of the natives has been a very happy partnership.
I will now add information gathered during 1948 and 1949? which is
taken from my note book used during my Walkabouts f , and deal with some
matters which I feel should be fully investigated..


IS I VITA RUDDER,
The Co-operatives of Isivita and Sangara need immediate help and
advico about their rubber plantations. There are many villages and a
large population in the area of the Isivita Mission District* Each
village has its own Village Rubber Plantation, and it is the desire of
the people that their Rubber be worked as part of their Co-operative
effort. Apparently at some time in the past* the Rubber in this area
was leased to a private trader. I have tried three times (once in
1948 and twice in 1949) to find out the terms of the lease, but with no
satisfaction. While in Port Moresby Hospital I asked the acting
Registrar of Co-ops. to take the matter up and he has information about
the lease. The question still needs clearing up, in the interests of
the natives who desire to work the Rubber as part of their Co-operative
enterprise.
The questions I would like answered are g-
(l) For what period were the Plantations leased ? (2) What was the
price received on the market during that period ? (3) What was the
pri«e paid to the natives concerned ? (4} What was the method of
payment ? (5) Did the natives receive their full payment ?
In July 1949 while I Y/as relieving Pr. Sydney Smith, Mission
Priest of Isivita, yye had a visit from tv/o Government Officers, a
Mr. Wood, Agricultural Economic Expert of Canberra, and a Mr. Mills,
Agricultural Economist of Port Moresby, I asked about the Rubber.
We found that many trees in the various Plantations we passed through
had been destroyed for all time by carelessness or employment of
inexperienced tappers by the private trader.
In a contract or agreement made between . v;hite men there would
be provision for compensation. This brings us to the question, -
What were the terms of agreement in the lease ? I claim that the
village people of Isivita should be compensated for each tree
destroyed by bad tapping.
I recommend that the Rubber trees of these villages be brought
under control of the Co-operative Societies in the areas this is the
wish of the people.
I also recommend that the Government should give practical help
in Rubber production in the area, as is done in the case of Coffee
production at Higaturu.
. ; Five points I wish to stress t-
-1. That t erms of leases with the natives should be checked - the
period of leaser market price of Rubber during the v;hole
money received by the natives and method of payment &o.
2. That the matter of Compensation for damaged trees should be
investigated.
3* That Co-operative Sooities should take over the Rubber
production of the area.
4* • The Government should give practical help as mentioned above.
5. I recommend that Fr. Dennis Taylor, acting Priest Warden of
Co-ops, and fr. Sydney Smith of Isivita take this matter up
with the Registrar of Co-op. Societies and the District Officer.


RICE .
Rice has been grown extensively in the Northern Area since 1947*
Parts of the area may prove to he good rioe growing country. This is
of course 9 a matter for the Agricultural Advisers• The fact is that
rice is grown in this area hy the Co-operative Societies and four or
more crops of rice have been wasted for lack of Rice Hullers. As far
back as 1947 Rice Hullers were ordered by Gona Co-operatives. In July
1949 we received word that. Hand Hollers had arrived in the Territory, but
noone knew where they were. Over two months passed before three hand
hullers arrived (without handles). Buna-Gona, the main rice area,
received only one. There is an engine-driven machine at the Agriculture
Department ? Popendetta, but up to February when I had to leave the
Territory s on sick leave, there was no engine to drive it. Port Moresby
•ffioe people direct that the rioe be sent to Popendetta by the Native
Co-operatives. Anyone who knows the district would.know that this is
impracticable even if the machine did have an engine* The place for
the machine is where the rice is produced, because the Co-sp* Rioe is
for the people 1 s use. What is left over may be sold, but if the rice
is properly distributed the f, Co-op. Way ,! , there would be little for sale.
The purpose of rice-growing by the Co-operatives is to improve the diet
of the people.
This area is not a good food areaj, for three to four months in
each year food is scarce, and yet the Port Moresby Office staff direct
that the rioe be sold to the Government. I have a copy of a letter
containing this suggestion - such a policy is not in the interests of the
people or the Co-operative Societies. I have no fear of this direction
besoming.a policy, for the Government Officers on the spot know the factsJ
If rice is to continue as a crop in this area, something practical must
bo done. Can we get workable Rioe Hullers ?
Drums for Rice*
The flour drums supplied to the Native Co-operatives to store their
unhulled rice were supplied by the Mission from its own dump. The
Government Authorities promised drums but none were sent until late in
19485 when three dozen oil drums were received from the Government dump.
Drums are still needed to store unhulled rice.
From.the above some idea may be formed of the huge wastage in rice
production. Rats destroy most of it.
In 1949 a visiting Government Officer from the N.S.W. Co-operative
Registry Office said that the Buna-Gona Rice was cultivated far more
extensively than the Mekio Rice grown at the Government Agriculture
Rice-growing centre.
Co-operative production of Rice appears to be the answer to the
native food problem, but advice is needed urgently.


COCOA.
While on g, ’walkabout? of the Kumusi River Co-operative
Societies, I found three Cocoa Plantations. These were planted
some years before the war, by a progressive Government Officer who
was at loma. When I saw them” in 1949 they were hearing fruit.
Before the Co-ops* were organised, a-private trader was buying cocoa
pods from the village people at two for'l/-, and using the seed from
the p*ds for Ms own Plantation. The people have taken the three
Village Cocoa Plantations into their Co-operative. These people need
agricultural help and advice - especially in relation to Cocoa, which
has a future in this area.
COFFEE.
In the Sangara-Higaturn area the Government has successfully
established the Bangora Native Government Coffee Project. In this
way the natives are taught the whole, process of Coffee production.
The Co-operative Societies in the.area have been encouraged to
co-operate' with the Government in this progressive enterprise in
planting Coffee as a Co-operative cash crop.
Few Coffee seed has been planted by the leaga and Gona Co-ops.
Soputa and Garara Co-pps already have established Coffee Plantations.
In the Asingi and Hamburata area, and on the road to Siai from
Gona, there are to bo found Coffee Plantations overgrown with jungle.
It may be possible to save some of the Coffee in the interests of the
natives and their Co-ops. Other native coffee plantations such as
at Bangara were re-established after the war and thus saved from the
jungle.
.1 cannot understand why we have forgotten native projects in
Cocoa, Coffee and Rubber.
com.
At Eroro-Pongani Co-operatives, Copra is produced as a cash
crop. Bakumbari is the only copra-producing Co—operative in the
Gona group. Ambasi Co-op. has made a start and should be encouraged.
I have advised all coastal co-operatives to plant more trees and
develop copra co-ops. all along the coast. This should be
followed* up. The only way to dispose of the Copra is to sell through
a private trader or planter. By comparison with the price received
by the Native Copra Co-operatives on the Port Moresby coast, the price
received does not appear to be just. Shipping is a vital problem in
co-operative trade. Copra bags are bought from the private
trading firms. The Co-operatives would benefit if they could buy in
bulk lots through the Government Agency.


TBOgU .
There is the opportunity by the Mamharo Co-operative .Society to
ievelop timber production in the upper Gira River District, I under-
stand this is still native land, and it is the expressed desire of the
people that this timber should.be worked by their own Co-operative,
Advice and guidance are needed.
The Mission will have an European Priest stationed on the Gira
River by September next. He is experienced both as an Australian farmer
and as a Missionary, He will prove most helpful in the future
development of the Co-operatives in the District.
GOLD MIEENG,
Is one of the features of Co-operative work by the Mamba
District Co-operative, I have visited this field of activity and it
seems to me to have real possibilities. Advice and help are needed
in this matter without delay; the native interests must be protected.
Gold is a cash product of the Co-operative and in this matter Fr, Gill
is their immediate adviser. The Co-op officer has been informed? and
by now he possibly has things in order.
TOBACCO.
Is a product that has, X believe, possibilities both in the
Territory and for outside trade. I am expecting samples of the leaves
and cigars any time now, and hope to interest people in the Commonwealth,
TAPA BARK.
I have had samples of this bark sent to Sydney for testing purposes,
and I intend to continue with the enquiries. The Government began
investigations regarding the cultivation and production of this bark in
1948, but we have heard nothing of the outcome. This is a truly worth-
while venture,
KOTAI GRASS.
The possibilities of Kunai Grass as a paper product were recently
mentioned in Parliament as a project for private enterprise. The
country from Eroro to Soputa and the back of Gona has an abundance of
this grass. As this area is the centre of Co-operative activity and
enterprise, I suggest that with the necessary supervision from the
Government, the native co-operatives would be capable of utilising the
Kunai Grass to its full extent, .1 recommend that this matter be
presented to the right authorities,
CQ-OPERA_TIVE THAIHIHG.
The Mission has made a special effort in this direction.
(a) At Gona Mission Station, the pioneer centre of Co-operative activity
Fr, Benson has taught Co-operative Principles for a number of years.
In 1948 X was able to devote most of the year to full-time Co-operative
teaching as well as book-keeping and English. We hope that this special


training will begirt again in.t&e near future under a trained
commercial teacher,
(b) Dogura Mission Station is the centre of agricultural training,
Fhl John Badger.,who has had GO years experience,in tropical agri-
bulture'j :isr :the instructor. Duringl94B-50, Fr* Bodger had up to
,C-.R.'T.S. trainees 5 from 50 -60 of these trainees were from
■the Northern Co-operative Societies. They were specially chosen
for Agricultural training and will return to their people as Co-op
Farm Leaders, and some will receive'the Bishop’s Licence as
Gd-operative Evangel!sts-c At Dogura the training includes agri-
‘■ou:lture 3 . engineering, carpentry and book-keeping, with special
dsnglish : -cl asses,; and. Co-operative Leadership classes.
(c) At the Martyr * s Memorial School, Bangara (the first Secondary
High School in the North) special book-keeping and Co-op. classes
are . held* ...
(d) .For a period in 1948 Eroro Mission had a regular book-keeping
class. This class, together with a Co-op class will begin.again in
the near future with the help of the new Mission Priest, Fr. Nichols,
who is an experienced business man and missionary.
(e) The Mission hopes to spread this work of Co-operative and
business training to all main centres of Co-operative activity.
(f) The Gena Co-ops. hope to arrange to send six of our Co-op.
leaders to the Roman Catholic Mission of the Sacred Heart at Rabaul,
for special training in tobacco growing and also at the same
time to study animal husbandry. This matter is in the hands of Fr.
Benson of Gona, who has written to his old friends of the Sacred Heart
Mission. Fr* David Hand (Assistant Bishop of New Guinea) will oare
for their spiritual welfare©"
(g) Later on when the Government Station is ready, we intend to
send a few trainees to the Government Coooa Plantation near Rabaul.
I have discussed this matter with the Director of Agriculture, and
he is keen to arrange for the training as soon as the Plantation is
ready to receive them,
CO-OPERATIVE TRADE.
The Gona Co-operative Societies at a Meeting held on November
17th s -1946, drew up a list of goods and farm tools for their first
Co-op, order to be sent to the C.W.S. of N.S.W. (Co-operative Whole-
sale Society), £320 was sent, £3.00 for tools, etc, and £2O for
shares in the C.W*S. for the purpose of affiliation. At the ond
of 1948 about £IOO worth of goods arrived at Gona, as first part of
the order. Great difficulty Y/as experienced by the C.W.S. in
getting shipping space from Sydney, There was also difficulty at;
Samarai, where the goods must be transhipped for the North-East
Coast, The shipping is in the hands of private trading firms s
the local private trading firms expressed alarm at Native Co-ops,


ordering goods from the South, It was only because the goods were
farm tools and not consumer trade lines, that space was allotted for
the Co-op, goods on the coastal boats.
Fr, Thompson, the Anglican Priest at Samarai, arranged the
Customs clearance and shipping of the goods.
The matter of shipping is vital to the development of inter-
Co-pp trade in Papua-New Guinea. This matter should be fully
investigated and the Co-ops. should have complete freedom in ordering
goods and allotted shipping space. The Co-op Movement only asks for
the same rights as private enterprise. We ask for no privileges -
but ? in the field of business and trade to be treated as equals on
the same footing.
Bulk buying and selling will only be possible if 2-
(1) The private traders reverse their decision not to sell consumer
goods to Co-ops. There is no sign that they intend to do so.
(2) The Government shipping line, as proposed by the previous
Federal Government, comes into existence.
(3) The Co-Operatives obtain their own boats.
It must be realised that the whole future of Native Co-ops,
and their freedom.from private traders depends on obtaining satis-
factory transport.
Machinery on order.
A Rotary Hoe is on order for the Gona Co-operatives, and if
Rice is to be a crop in this area, a worthwhile Rice Huller is needed.
Ani mal_ Transport,
In this area of flat swamp country, with Native gardens some-
times miles away from the villages, some kind of animal transport is
desirable. In the hill country it would also have a place.
I suggest that the Acting Priest-Warden take these matters up
with the Agricultural and Co-operative Officers of the ]Jorth,
DISTRICT CO-OPERATIVE ORGANISATION,
A meeting of the Gona District Co-operatives held in December
1949, decided to form a District Group of Societies to be known as
the Northern District Co-operative Association* The four
Registered Societies, 6ona, leaga, Bnna, Garara, yjere represented
with Bukumbari, Boreo, Ambasi, Huhuru, Hamburata, and Kumusi River
Co-operatives.
The centre of this organisation is to be GONA, where the Natives
would be under supervision and training, as Gona is still the centre,
of Co-operative Educational activity. Also at Gona the Co-ops. have
already built their Co-operative Store shed, and future trading post.
The Association be the ?/holesale, bulk—buying, general agent,


and later the retail organisation of the Northern Co-operatives.
Even now the buying of Copra bags and tools oould bo arranged by
this agency* Also there is an urgent need to make some satis-
factory banking and financial arrangements by which they can enter,
the field of business, e.g., in making deposits and paying accounts.
4s a Mission Teacher is to be placed at Gona who has had commercial
experience 5 this opens up a great opportunity in training Natives to
manage their own affairs. A satisfactory method of banking is
holding back the interests and activity of the Co—operatives.
pe rat i ve s.
The Gona Co-operatives have grown naturally out of the teachings
of the Christian Faith, and their form of organisation has grown from
the standards and principles of Rochdale Co-operatives, ,as taught at
the Gona Co-op. classes. They are Christian Co-operatives with a
Christian purpose - to win Papuans for Christ and to accept Him as
the Lord of all life.
They are Community Co-operatives, with the village and the
Co-op. Plantation as the centre of their activities. Plans for Co-op
Villages are now taking shape, and in this the Papuans themselves have
included the Church in a central position with the Mission School.
They have shown great interest in the welfare of their children and
include educational and religious training as part of their Co-op
work. Our Co-operative Evangelists and Farm Leaders go out as
Chris Evangelists and Leaders of their people, teaching the
»Co-op Way 1 as God ! s Way of life for His people. This type of
Christian organisation has developed throughout the whole Northern
area. Gona has set the pattern.
Each Co-operative has i
(1) Chairman 9 who is the accepted Co-operative Leader.
(2) Job Master 9 who is in charge of labour for the various Co-op.
jobs, which include plantation work, village work, and at times
Mission and Government jobs.
(3) Farm Leaders are those who have had some,agricultural training.
He keeps a book and records all seeds planted, harvest, etc. He
plans and supervises sowing, harvesting,
(4) Time Keeper and Tool Keeper. Each.Gona Co-op. has a clock,
and the Time Keeper rings the Angelus bell, Dinner bell, Knock-off
bell, etc., as well as cares for keeps them sharp and in order,
(5) Secretary, keeps a Roll book with great care. All Co-op workers,
men, women and children, are included.
(6) The Committee, includes women as well as men. This election of
women to the Committee and point of leadership is a big step forward
in Papuan life.
(7) The Gona-Buna Co-ops. have a District Committee and have elected
a District Chairman, two Vice-Chairmen, and a District Secretary. A
full District Committee meeting would also include two members from
each Co-op. group.


The Chairman and Members of the Committee are elected by the
people, and where possible they must be Christians, or ore preparing ,
themselves for the Christian way of life and membership in the Church.
This does not mean that the heathen is exeludci. He is seeking
membership and.is welcomed, and joins as an equal with full membership
and privileges. By the efforts of the Co-op. Evangelists he is
taught that‘Co-operation is God’s way - ’’God’s Love in actio*”. The
Papuan understands the meaning of Love.
It is a fact that many of the Co-ops in the Northern area are
not fully Christian as yet, but all are linked in the common bond and
fellowship of Christian Co-operative organisation. The Angelus is
said midday on all Co-op Plantations, and the following prayer is said
at all Co-op. meetings, together with the Lord’s Prayer in the
language of the people.
”0 Lord, make haste, teach the world’s Christians the
Co-operative way. Set fhy people in every land the
task of creating Co-operatives in whioh Thy Redeeming
Love shall find full and free expression. Through
Jesus Christ our Lord.”
An Annual Harvest Festival is held. It is the great day of
Co-py Thanksgiving followed in Papuan fashion by the meeting, then
games, and dancing and feasting.
.In April, 1949 j 'the Bishop of. New Guinea visited the Gona
Co-op Plantation, where he Blessed the Plan-. on , the seed sown,
the crops, the store shed (full of rice), tool shed and Community
eating house. . This was followed by a great meeting of all Co-ops
in the District. The service and meeting and Blessing of Land,
seed sown and buildings, is a regular feature of all our Northern
Co-ops. The Mission Priest is always notified by the people Y/hen
the seed is sow# or crop ready for harvest.
It is interesting to note that in the election of their Co-op
Leaders, in the Gona District they have elected their own tribal
Chieftains, or from Chieftain families, all of whom are Christians.
Contrary to common opinion, I have found that the Gona tribes have
a Chieftain system.
Before the election of the Northern District Co-operative
Committee the Co-op Chairmen (who are the Chiefs of the Tribes) had
a meeting and said, ”We are old men, and we must elect our younger
men on the District Committee. They have been to school and \3g
have not.” From these young men the message of Christian Co-ops
is taken to all the people of the North. They have pledged them-
selves to the task of Evangelising the,great mass of people, who
are eager to knov/ the Christian Gospel.
The Co-operative division of Labour as stated above fits in
naturally to the Papuan way of life, for the 00— operative set—up
is in common with their village and tribal customs. The Native


Co-op is the Instrument by which the Papuan can obtain the benefits
of civilisation without the destruction of his village life caused
by indentured labour and white settlement.
* * s
The Co-operative Movement in Papua opens up a way in which the
natives can learn to do things themselves * without losing their
native’ culture and background. Co-operation alone can build up an
independent sative economy * free from exploitation. Co-operation
is a practical way in which the Government policy of development
of village councils can function. Co-operation can* and does
teach, the native to use his land. Only by using his land can he
hold it. Land is as important to the Papuan as is his village life*
To help this development we must be prepared to give him
education and training* especially in Agriculture and Co-operative
organisation and trade. t We must teach him the Rochdale Principles
of Co-operation*
The Government Registrar of Co-operative Societies* Mr. John
Miller* is doing his utmost -with the limited manpower and resources
at his disposal. The Director of Agriculture and his officers are
doing all they can* as also is the Department of Education.
The Anglican Mission is doing all it can* and has plans for
further development.
The Bishop of New Guinea has appointed Fr. Dennis Taylor*
Mission Priest of Dogura* as acting Priest Warden of Christian
Co-operatives during the period I am away on sick leave.
The Anglican Mission first brought the Christian religion to
the natives by preaching the Gospel. With this came the practical
application of Christianity in the fom of education and medical
services.
Nov/ the Church is opening a new field in Mission work* the
application of Christian principles to everyday life* through the
medium of Native Co-operatives.
W. A. Clint.
Priest Warden of Christian Co-operatives
Diocese of New Guinea.
June 1950*


SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. IS IVITA RUBBER,
(a) That terms of lease with the Natives should he checked -
the period of leaso, market price during the whole of this period*
money received hy the Natives, and method of payment,
(h) That the matter of compensation for damaged trees should he
investigated.
Was this inclmded in the lease , if not* why not ?
(Refer to remarks cn page 2 of Report)
(c) That the Native Co-ops* should take over the village rubber
plantations of the area 9 especially as this is the wish of the
people.
(d) The Government should give practical help - such as is
done with Coffee.
(e) That the Acting Priest-Warden* Pr. Dennis Taylor and Fr.
Sydney Smith* Mission Priest of Isivita, take the matter up with
the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, the Agricultural Officer
of Popendetta, and the District Officer. (Refer to page 2* Report)
(f) That recommendations he forwarded to the right Authorities
for Government supervision* and that the rubber plantations he
worked by the Co-operative Societies. (Refer to page 2.)
2. RICE.
(a) That the Acting Warden of Co-ops, the local Co-op Officer*
with the Agricultural Officer* take up the matter of Rice growing
and its possibilities* especially in the Gona-Buna area. Pongani
in the Oro Bay District, Siai* Deunia and Ganana Plantations on
the Kumusi River* as well as the Co-op. Plantations on the Mamhare
and Gira Rivers should he included.
(h) That a rice huller he sent to the Gona Co-ops,* as soon as
possible - one that will really work and do the job. The
Agricultural Officer will he able to advise the type of Machine
needed. (Refer to page 3? Report).
3. COFFEE.
That the forgotten Coffee Plantations in the Asingi-Hamhurata
area he inspected* and if proved worthwhile* he included in the
Native Co-ops, with Government help. (Refer- to p. 4? Report)
4. COPRA.
That the Coastal Co-ops he encouraged to plant coco amt
plantations for copra production, as suggested on page 4? Report.
5. TIMBER.
That timber possibilities on the upper Gira River he inspected
and that this project he included as a Co-operative venture* as
is the wish of the Natives. (Refer to page 5 5 Report).


6, GOLD,
That the product of the Mambare District Co-operative be immediately
protected and the necessary advice given. Also the possible
development of Co-operative Gold Mining in the Isivita area (page 5«)
7, TOBACCO,
(a) That possibilities be explored, especially in the Kumusi
River Co-op, area, and the Mambare District Co-op. area, and else-
Y/here.
(b) That the Acting Priest Warden follov/s up arrangements with
Fr. James Benson ro sending lads to Rabaul for training at Sacred
Heart Mission, (Refer to page 5* Report),
8. TAPA BARK, ... be followed up (Refer to page 5? Report).
9. ANIMAL HUS BANDRY.
Please note remarks on page page 6, para, (f). I r ecomaend that
the Acting Priest Warden take this matter up with the Agricultural
Officer and the Co-op Officers of the North. This is a great
need for the Gona Co-ops,
10. KDNAI GRASS 1
Co-operative possibilities as against private enterprise (Refer
to page 5? Report)
1!. CO-OPERATIVE TRADING ,
Re bulk buying for Co-op Plantations and consumer goods for Co-op,
Stores and Shippings this matter be taken up Y/ith the local Co-op
Officer, and the Registrar of Co-op. Societies. (Refer pages 6,7)
12. COCOA.
(a-) That the forgotten Cocoa Plantations mentioned be inspected
and direction given.
(b) That six of the most suitable lads be sent to the Government
Station near Rabaul for training in Cocoa Plantation work and
production, for a six to twelve months period, when the Government
Station is ready to receive them for training, (Refer p. 6, para (g)
13. It must be kept in mind that the purpose of the Community Co-ops,
of the Northern Area is to produce more adequate food f#r the
people. Co-op Farming can do.this with the necessary training
by an experienced agriculturist. In this Y/ork the Native
Co-ops look to the Government and the Mission.
14. That the Acting Priest Warden of Co-ops keep in touch with Mr..
John Miller, Registrar of Co-op. re Co-op training
methods and schemes.


15« That those who work in the interests of the Natives should
always remember $
(a) That the infant Co-operatives of Papua—Ney/ Guinea began
with the village people, working together on their land, and
that the land question is important to Native welfare - for if
a people love their land and land rights, they love their
heritage.
(b) That the Spirit of the U.N. Charter can only be fulfilled
if the Natives own snd keep their land, and that the farming
methods ef the Co-operative Movement are the best means of
developing the land.
(o) That, given honest informed leadership and technical
training, the Co-operative Movement is capable of developing all
the natural resources of the Territory, and providing Australia
with all the Copra, Coffee, Cocoa, Paper, Tea, Cotton, Tobacco,
and Rubber that she needs. These people are capable of being
trained for the job,
(d) That the ideals and principles mf E.oohdale Co-operation
should be taught in all schools and Co-operative Training centres,
16, That it is in the best interests of Native welfare to remember
always that within the Anglican Diocese on the North-East Coast,
and in the Northern District of Papua, the Co—operatives are of
Christian inspiration.




BUCKUMBARI Co-op. Society has two Plantations-one up
the River from Buokumbari, and one on the coast at
Kukereda.
Buckumbari is a Copra-proending Co-op, as well as
Plantation Crops.
Buckumbari is 2½ hours walk to Gona Mssion Station.




WALKING TIMES.
SIAI to KATIMA (Baturu) = ½ hour
SIAI to OITATANDI = 1¼ hours, (Rest House)
SIAI to HURATA = 2¼ hours. (Co-op.)
HURATA to DIVINUKOIARI = 2¼ hours (Rest House and
Co-op.)




WALKING TIMES.
SIAI ta DIROU 25 mins HURATA to OIMTATANDI 1¼ hours
SIAI to PAPAKI 1 hour HURATA to DIVINUKOIARI 2½ hrs.
SIAI to KIKINONDA 1 hr 10 min. PETIHIARI to IOMA 6 hrs.
SIAI to PONO 1½ hrs.
SIAI to BEURU 1¾ hrs. Co-op-Co-op Plantations, This
SLAT to SHEMAKHA 2 hrs. area has 3 Cocoa Plantations hearing
SIAI to KORISATA 2 hrs. 50 min. cocoa pods.








WALKING TIMES.
AMBASI to TAI-IA 55 minutes
TAI-IA to AIVE = 15 "
AIVE to KEKEI = 45 "
KEKEI to IWAIA = 1¼ hours
IWAIA to IAUGA = 2 "
(IWAIA is the last village and Station in the AMBASI-GONA DISTRICT.
IAUGA is in the Mission District of the MAMBARE, and on the way to
DEWADE-Head Mission Station (Priest, Fr. Romney Gill.
AMBASI has three Co-op. Plantations on the Coast, and two inland at WAITUTU.




There are many Co-operative Plantations up the Mambare
and Gira Rivers.
USI Village Co-op. on the Gira River has a Plantation
and also a Gold Mine.












All villages shown, and many others not included
have Rubber Plantations.


