

U Icp-fVdt.T
FOR THE INFORMATION OF GENTLEMEN OF THE MEDICAL
AND OTHER SCIENTIFIC PROFESSIONS.
REPORT
J)F(.
UPON
Certain Peculiar Habits and Customs
OP THE
ABORIGINES OE WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
To accompany the Collection of Weapons, Implements, etc.,
sent to the Exhibition at Sydney, H.S.W., 1879.
P E E T II;
BY AUTHORITY: RICHARD PBTHER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




OJD r J/ ~ —f & \ T "
/i.A fS
RepoH by Dr. Milne Robertson upon certain
peculiar Habits and Customs of the
Aborigines of Western Australia.
For the Information of Gentlemen of the Medical and
other Scientific Professions.
Fremantle, Western Australia,
August Bth, 1879.
At the instance of the Government of Western Australia,
I visited the Native Penal Establishment at the Island of
Rottnest, in order to investigate certain peculiar habits and
customs, said to exist among the aborigines.
There were about sixty native prisoners on the Island,
and among them good representatives of the different families
—I say families, as I understand tribes do not exist in the
Colony.
I examined several types of families, with the following
result:—
1. The families located on the Greenough River
practise circumcision; it is performed at the age of puberty.
The prepuce is drawn forward over the glans penis, and the
operator with a sharp serrated flint stone cuts completely
round the penis, at the point where the prepuce becomes
continuous with the integument of the organ. The pre-
puce is then forcibly pulled forward and completely torn
off; the raw surface is left to heal of itself. The prepuce,
lam told, is eaten by the mother. At or about the same
period one of the incision teeth, generally on the right
side, is taken out; two pieces of grass are inserted on each
side of the tooth and kept in for some days, during which
time the patient is not allowed to speak. The tooth gradually
gets loose and is then knocked out by a weapon called a
douack. The douack is not unlike a ruler in appearance, is
made of very hard wood, is two feet in length, and has a
piece of hardened blackboy gum at the end—a stone is often
enclosed in the gum.
2. The families on the DeGrey River have an extra-
ordinary custom. At the age of puberty the urethra in the
male is slit completely open, the slit extending from the


meatus urinarius to the middle of the penis. This is per-
formed on the under surface of the organ. The lad is thrown
down and one of the seniors of the family performs the
operation. The weapon used is a sharp stone. The corpus
spongiosum is cut through, and a broad-edged stone is
inserted into the wound and rubbed up and down in order to
lay the flaps wide apart; this stone is again inserted when
the wound is half healed, and thus prevents the parts con-
tracting. In the cases I saw, the corpora cavernosa could be
spread flat out, and the exposed surface of the urethra was
hard and non-sensitive. The prepuce formed a large flap on
the dorsal surface. This mutilation is not unlike the mal-
formation known as Hypospadias.
3. Among the Natives inhabiting the country on the
North side of the Murchison, between Mounts Aubrey and
Murchison, the same custom exists, but the urethra is cut
to a greater extent, extending from the meatus to the
scrotum. The operation is performed by the same imple-
ments, and in a like manner as in the case of the DeGrey
Natives. Water cannot be well passed standing, unless the
legs are placed widely apart, for it would run down the
thighs ; it is therefore usually passed in a squatting posture.
Since writing the above I have again visited Eottnest
Island, and was able to examine several other men from the
DeGrey and Murchison District; this examination enables me
to confirm my previous observations. One of the men was
induced to expose himself to a photographer, and the result
is seen in the accompanying photo. I need hardly add that
the man exhibited considerable terror upon the presentation
of the camera, and the expression of his face showed a capital
illustration of fear. So far as I can learn, these are the
only mutilations the natives practise upon their person, and
it seems to be confined to the natives inhabiting the Districts
mentioned, viz., the Greenough, DeGrey, and the Murchison,
but it very likely extends further North. In each case it
takes place at the age of puberty; no females are present,
but the men collect in large numbers, five or six of them
hold the patients while the operation is performed, and the
rest form a circle round, and by howling and shouting and
waving a piece of flat wood attached to a string made of


opossum hair, termed a “Mer-o-Miro,” which produces a hum-
ming sound, help to distract the attention of the sufferer.
The stones with which the operation is performed, as also the
“ Mer-o-Miro,” is preserved after each operation with much
secrecy. It is exceedingly difficult to get the natives to speak
about this operation, and the origin of the custom is unknown.
It is supposed by many that this rite is practised with a view
of preventing the increase of population; but this Ido not
believe. These natives are very fond of children, and
and there is abundance of food in their district, there can be no
reason why they should desire to prevent the increase of
population; besides, it is very doubtful whether the mere
cutting open of the urethra would be a preventative to any
extent. In the development of the penis the under or
posterior surface is at first simply grooved, by degrees the two
sides of the groove unite and form a complete tube, embraced
by the corpus spongiosum, the penial urethra is the result;
but in some cases no union occurs, the urethra opens on the
under surface of the penis, constituting the malformation
known as Hypospadias. This malformation in its minor
degree (and the case of the DeGrey natives is very similar) is
of no consequence whatever. The erectile tissue of the
penis is situated in the upper part of the organ—in the
corpora cavernosa—erection can take place, and the semen,
or at least part of it, will be lodged fairly within the vagina.
But Hypospadias in its higher grades is a very serious
infirmity; the corpus spongiosum is undeveloped, or
is represented by a firm band which binds the penis
down to the scrotum, so that in erection the organ
becomes curved downwards, and sexual intercourse con-
sequently impossible. The natives on the north side of the
Murchison appear to cut the urethra open down to the
scrotum; but this is performed at the age of puberty,
when the parts are fully developed; erection of the organ
will continue to take place, and sexual intercourse therefore
be quite practicable; even in this case I see no reason why
the semen or part of it should not be lodged in the vagina.
Very little semen is required to cause impregnation, and in
these cases the sides of the penis must be pressed together
to a certain extent during copulation; and this, together with
the capillary attraction in the groove of the urethra, would


be sufficient to convey part of the semen onward to the
vagina. It is also to be noted that in some birds and
reptiles a mere groove takes the place of the urethra, and
in some animals the penial urethra, though complete, is open
behind. For my own part lam inclined to think that these
operations were first performed to give relief in cases of
inflamation of the urethra, and that this rude surgery
gradually became custom. I have been informed by those
who have mixed mnch with the natives that the females
also undergo an operation, but what it is is quite
unknown. It appears that at certain seasons the sexes
separate, the men wandering by themselves in large num-
bers; it is not unlikely that these operations then take
place.
It may be noteworthy to mention that tattooing is
universal thronghout all the natives of Western Australia—
male and female alike. I examined a number of men at
Rottnest, and found that tattooing is generally limited to
the front of the body, extending from the clavicle down to
the umbilicus, below which it never reaches. Among the
natives of the Murchison district the shoulders are tattooed
as well. This also takes place at puberty, and is as follows :
The skin immediately above the umbilicus is raised in a
ridge extending across the body; this ridge is cut from one
end to the other with a sharp-edged stone, or of late years
with glass; an inch above this ridge another is raised and cut
in the same way, and so on until the clavicle, or just below it,
is reached. The same process takes place when the shoulder
is tattooed, the ridges running parallel with the muscular
fibres of the deltoid. Wood charcoal, powdered up, is then
well rubbed into the open cuts, the flesh is left to heal, and
the tattooing is finished. The more marked the tattooing,
the more attractive the native.
It is also the custom for all male natives throughout the
Colony, except perhaps those closely united with civilisation, to
have the septum nasi pierced at puberty. The instrument used
is a kangaroo bone with a sharp point. A charred piece of
wood is afterwards inserted, and frequently turned round, and
is left in until the wound is healed and the foramen permanent.
The females never have the septum of the nose pierced.


Albany
10
5
8
2 114
5
04
2
64
5
34
2
74
York
13
6
6f
3 04
5
04
2
54
6
34
2
74
Champion Bay ...
12
5
64
2 94
5
04
2
6
5
34
2
74
Murchison
13
5
9
3 0
5
24
2
64
5
54
2
8
Nicol Bay
3
5
94
3 14
5
4
2 11
5
74
2
74
The results of the examination of 53 natives are given in
the following Table :
Table of stature and girth round the chest of natives in Bottnest
Prison, from measurements taken 4th August, 1879 :
1 -M,, Greatest Greatest Least Least Average
Locality. JNO. height. girth, height. girth. height. girth.
ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in.
Gascoigne ”. ... 2 5 2 10i 55| 28f 5 6 294
Half-breeds 2 5 9i 3 If 5 8 3 0i 5 8| 3 OJ
From this it appears that the greatest height in 58
natives was sft. 9|in., the least sft. O Hn.; the greatest girth
round the chest 3ft.; and the general average of height
sft. s|in., and of girth 2ft. 91 in., omitting half-breeds. The
Murchison natives were mixed; had proper separation been
possible, the returns from the upper valley of the river
would probably have shown higher figures.
From a list, furnished by J. F. Stone, Esq., Comptroller
of the Convict Prison, Fremantle, of the height of the last
fifty prisoners admitted into that establishment, the following
comparison may be made:—
Convicts, Fremantle, greatest height sft. ll|in., least sft. Oin., average sft. sJin.
Do., Rottnest, ~ 6ft. 9iin., „ sft. o|in., „ sft. sjin.
or if, to make the numbers even, the three natives of the
North-West, whose height is much above the average, be
deducted—
Convicts, Fremantle, greatest height 6ft. ll|in., least sft. Oin., average sft. s|in.
Eottnest, ~ sft. 9in,, „ sft. OJin., „ sft. sin.
Fifty prisoners at the Convict Establishment, Fremantle,
were also measured round the chest, with the following
result:—
Greatest girth. ... ... ... ... 39 inches
Least girth ... ... ... ... 30 inches
Average measurement ... ... . ... 2ft. Ilf inches.
It will be seen the natives
results:—
Greatest girth.
Native ... 3ft.
European 3ft. 3in.
compare unfavorably with these
Least girth.
2ft. s fin.
2ft. 6in.
Average.
2ft. 9fin,
2ft. Ilf in.


10/l 0/
flAAio C.
I Two native skulls obtained at Rottnest, being examined
* ■''*f and measured according to Professor Huxley’s method,
brought the following result:—
No. 1. No. 2.
Axis ... ... ... 7| inches ... 7| inches
Transverse Axis ... 5£ inches ... 5f inches
Height ... ... 5f inches ... 6 inches
Projection of upper jaw... flinches ... If inches
Cranio-Facial angle ... 94° ... 97°
Cephalic index... ... 68-85 ... 74-32
Contents ... ... 80 cubic inches, 95 cubic inches,
ratio 19-22 ratio 20
Thickness of Skull:
Parietal Bone ... in.
Frontal Bone ... in. to in.
Professor Huxley, in his work on the comparative
anatomy of the vertebrata, states that the forearm and hand,
the foot, and the leg of the Australian Native are often larger
in proportion than the European. With the view of ascertain-
ing the extent of this discrepancy in the natives of Western
discrepancy in the natives of Western
Australia, I carefully measured fifty natives, together with
fifty Europeans, with the following result
Table showing the results of a comparative measurement of fifty Europeans
with fifty Australians.
Forearm and
Hand.
Foot.
European. Native.
European. Native.
European. Native.
Smallest compara- 7
tive measurement)
Largest compara-)
tive measurement)
Mean of aggregate 1
measurements )
17-52
18-28
19-02
10-08
Prom these measurements it will be seen that the fore-
arm and hand, and the leg, of the Western Australian native,
are considerably longer than the European, but that the foot
is smaller.
A. MILNE ROBERTSON,
Surgeon, Convict Establishment, Western Australia,
By Authority : Richahd Peihbk, Government Printer. Perth.
