

No. V of 1952
GOLD
COAST
REPORT
OF THE
COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY
INTO THE
HEALTH NEEDS
OF THE
GOLD COAST
Ordered by His Excellency the Governor to be printed
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING DEPARTMENT
ACCRA, GOLD COAST
1952
PRICE—FIVE SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE


REPORT
OF THE
COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY
INTO THE
HEALTH NEEDS
OF THE
GOLD COAST
Ordered by His Excellency the Governor to be printed
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING DEPARTMENT
ACCRA, GOLD COAST
1952


CONTENTS
Page
Chapter I—-Introductory ... ... ... 1
Chapter II —Existing Arrangements for Medical and Health Services 5
Chapter lll—The Medical Department and the Ministry of Health ... ... ... 10
Chapter IV—The New Local Authorities and Health Services ... ... ... 13
Chapter V—General Observations on planning a Medical Service ... ... ... ... ... 16
Chapter Vl—Proposals for Improving the Medical Service ... ... ... 17
Chapter Vll—Further Proposals 24
Chapter Vlll—Medical Practitioners Dentists ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Chapter IX—Recruitment and Training of Nurses, Health Visitors and Midwives ... 33
Chapter X—Other Medical Auxiliaries 39
Chapter Xl—Water Supplies ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Chapter Xll—Voluntary Agencies and Mining Companies 45
Chapter Xlll—Hospital Charges and Private Practice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Chapter XlV—Notes on Community-wide diseases and Nutrition ... ... ... 50
Chapter XV —Finance 54
Chapter XVl—Conclusions and Summary of Recommendations 55
Appendix A —Commission of Enquiry 59
Appendix B —ltinerary 60
Appendix C —References to publications ... ... ... ... 61
Appendix D —List of Hospitals 63
Appendix E—List of Proposed Health Centres ... ... ... ... ... ... 64
IA


TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CHARLES NOBLE ARDEN-CLARKE, G.C.M.G.,
GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE GOLD COAST
Your Excellency,
INTRODUCTORY
1. By a Commission dated the 9th day of February, 1952 the text of which is reproduced in Appendix A
to this Report Your Excellency appointed us to hold a commission of enquiry with the following terms of
reference ;
(i) to review the measures taken and projected in the Gold Coast, either by Government or by private
enterprise—
(a) for the development of preventive and social medicine, including health education,
(b) for the development of curative medicine, including provision of hospitals, health centres
and dressing stations and the training of personnel,
(r) for medical research ;
(ii) to examine the adequacy of the administrative structure and organisation of the Medical Depart-
ment in relation to such development; ■ and
(hi) to make recommendations.”
The Chairman and the two medical members of the Commission left London by air on the 10th February and
on the 12th, together with Mr. K. G. Konuah the fourth member of the Commission, duly took the oath
prescribed by S. sof the Commissions of Inquiry Ordinance. We now have the honour to submit our Report.
2. On the 18th February we had the advantage of a conference with the Hon. Mr. K. A. Gbedemah,
then Minister of Health and Labour, and he handed us a letter which runs as follows :
“ Sir,
Your appointment as Chairman of the Commission of Enquiry into the Health Needs of the
Gold Coast and the terms of reference of the Enquiry are set out in His Excellency the Governor’s
Commission which has been delivered to you and which has been published in a Government Gazette
Extraordinary.
When this matter first came under consideration it was felt that it might be desirable to state
in the terms of reference that any recommendations which might be made should take full cognisance
of the financial resources of the country, but on re-consideration of the point it was decided that it
would be preferable to deal with this in a separate letter.
This letter therefore invites attention briefly to the financial resources of the country and
its future prospects. From the Development Plan, copies of which will be provided by your Secretary,
you will see the heavy demands that are to be made on the accumulated surpluses and future revenues
which are to be devoted to Development, with particular emphasis on communications.
It is not intended that the limitations as set out in this letter should preclude the Commission
from making recommendations which are not immediately within the financial capacity of the
country or which might lead to a larger share of the present allocations being given to development
of health services, but it will be appreciated that any recommendations in the latter category which
may be adopted by the Standing Development Committee of the Executive Council for immediate
implementation would have to be at the expense of other items already accepted by the Legislature in
the Development Plan.
The estimated revenue of the Gold Coast from ordinary sources in 1952-53 is £33]- millions.
There has been a very rapid increase in revenue since the second world war, but it is not considered
that the rate of increase will be maintained. No further substantial increases in the rates of taxation
are likely to be practicable for some years and the amount of revenue accruing in future years will
therefore depend upon the value of exports and imports from duty on which the major part of the
Colony’s revenue is derived. If there is an increase in prices it is likely to be accompanied by a
proportionate inflation, so that any increase in revenue will not necessarily be able to provide for
increased services. Of the amount of £33J millions estimated to be collected in revenue in 1952-53


£ll millions will be paid into the various Development Funds to finance capital expenditure, leaving
£221 millions available to meet recurrent expenditure. Recurrent expenditure will, of course,
inevitably increase as the approved Development Plan is put into effect, so that the Government is
already committed by the Plan to a substantial increase in recurrent expenditure.
The Development Plan provides for expenditure of £75 millions on capital works ; it is hoped
that a considerable part of the programme of work in the Plan will have been completed by March,
195 G. It is not considered that the Government should commit itself to spend more than £75 millions
during the five-year period and such subsequent period as is necessary to complete certain major
works, e.g. Kumasi Hospital, Railway extensions, trunk road improvements, etc. Where it is decided
to afford priority to some item not in the Plan an item of corresponding size will therefore have to
be deferred. It is difficult to foresee what sums will be available for capital expenditure after 1956,
but it is likely that the country’s economy will still be largely dependent on the annual cocoa crop.
At the present rates of duty a crop of 260,000 tons sold at a world price of £213 per ton will provide
£7,280,000 for development from the export duty on cocoa. With the increase in recurrent
expenditure, it cannot be expected that more than another £1 million will be available for development
out of the ordinary revenue.
The sum provided in the draft ordinary estimates, 1952-53, for Medical is nearly £l-| millions
while in the Development Plan nearly £s| millions are earmarked for capital expenditure on medical
works. In the light of the preceding paragraphs it is clear that any proposals which involve any
substantial increases in these sums will require special justification.
You may wish to discuss further details of these financial aspects when you have had time to go
into the matter, and the Minister of Finance will, I know, be glad to give you further information and
explanation.
I have the honour to be.
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
K. A. GBEDEMAH."
3. Under the terms of the Commission it was left to the discretion of the Chairman whether the enquiry
should be held in public or in private or partly in public and partly in private. After consultation with the
other members of the Commission he decided to adopt both procedures, and as a result while sessions open
to the public were held in a number of places, the evidence, formal and informal, of the many witnesses who
appeared before us was heard in private. At a conference held at Accra on the 20th February the Press were
requested to let their readers know that the Commission would be glad to consider any constructive suggestions.
As a result of the publicity given in response to this request a large volume of letters and memoranda was
received and in many cases the writers were invited to confer with the Commission.
4. We decided at the outset to spend much of our time in seeing different parts of the Gold Coast and
as will be found from the statement of our itinerary in Appendix B we have visited, sometimes together and
sometimes in separate parties, some 45 places from Accra in the south to Bawku and Nandom in the north
and from Takoradi in the west to Keta in the east. We realise that the places visited represent no more
than a small, though we hope a fairly representative, sample of the country as a whole.
We do not propose to lengthen our Report by naming every person with whom we had discussions,
formal or informal, but it may be useful to indicate generally the sources from which we gathered our informa-
tion. In addition to His Excellency the Governor and the Minister of Health and Labour (Mr. Gbedemah)
we had the advantage of discussions with—
His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government (Mr. R. H. Saloway, c.m.g., c.i.e., 0.b.e.) ;
The Minister of Finance (Mr. R. P..Armitage, c.m.g,, m.b.e.) ;
Several members of the Legislative Assembly ;
The Chief Commissioners of the three Regions ;
The District Commissioners or Acting District Commissioners of the districts which we visited ;
The Director of Medical Services, and all the Senior Medical and Nursing Staff of the Medical
Department, the Senior Medical and Nursing Officers of the hospitals in Accra, Kumasi, Tamale,
Sekondi-Takoradi and Cape Coast and the Senior Medical and Nursing Staff of the district
hospitals that we visited ;


Representatives of the following Ministries and Departments—
Health and Labour ;
Local Government;
Education and Social Welfare ;
Agriculture and Natural Resources ;
Justice ;
Communications and Works.
Representatives and chief officers of the four municipal towns ;
The Principal of the University College of the Gold Coast;
The Headmaster of Achimota Secondary School;
Nana Sir Agyeman Prempeh 11, k.b.e., the Asantehene ; and a number of other Chiefs and Elders ;
Representatives of the principal Missionary Societies, the Red Cross, and the Society of Friends of
Lepers ;
The Chamber of Mines ;
Representatives of—
The Gold Coast Medical Practitioners Association ;
The Pharmaceutical Association ;
The Midwives Association.
5. Many of the representations made to us, whether orally or in writing, have dealt with the particular
problems of the area in which the writer or speaker was interested —requests for better medical facilities,
complaints of lack of roads and transport and so forth. Many of them disclosed a deplorable state of affairs.
We have carefully considered these and in formulating our proposals we have made suggestions which will,
we hope, in many cases go some, if not the whole, way to meet the suggestions made to us. To accept all of
these in whole would in present circumstances be quite impracticable.
6. Another and a large part of the representations related to the status, grading, pay and conditions of
service of persons employed in the Government medical and health services. As is well known, the Lidbury
Commission dealt exhaustively with these matters in their report covering the whole of the Government
services. That report was the subject of a Paper giving the views of the Government which was debated in
the Legislative Assembly. It was later the subject of an elaborate enquiry by a Select Committee of the
Legislative Assembly and of a further debate, after which the final decisions of the Government were
announced. It is clear that if we had undertaken a fresh investigation into the position of the officers of a
single department, the matter would once more have been reopened for every department of the Government.
In these circumstances we have thought it right not to attempt to deal with questions of status, pay and
conditions of service, except in a few cases where we consider that to secure a more efficient medical
administration the balance between different ranks of the service requires adjustment.
7. We have been in the Gold Coast for nearly four months and in that time much has happened. The
new local authorities are in process of being set up, new hospitals are being built, new dispensaries are springing
up all over the country. In trying to arrive at solid facts and figures—not an. easy task—we realised that it
was obviously impossible to secure complete information up to the day on which the Report is signed. We
have accordingly treated the 31st March, 1952, as the date from which the Report “ speaks ” though in a few
cases we have specifically mentioned later events. Thus when we use the present tense we refer to the state
of affairs on that date.
8. We have thought it convenient to retain throughout the familiar titles of Chief Commissioner,
District Commissioner, Director of Medical Services, Deputy Director of Medical Services, and Assistant
Director of Medical Services, notwithstanding that in May last the Government decided to alter the first two
of these titles and we ourselves recommend alterations of the last three. For the sake of brevity we omit
the words “ of Medical Services ” in referring to the Director, the Deputy Director and Assistant Directors.
9. Appendix C contains a list of reports and other publications to which we have been referred in the
course of our enquiry.


Zone
Mean Rainfall
Mean Mx. Temp.
Mean Relative Humidity
(«)
29 ins.
86°F
82%
(b)
82 ins.
83°F
86%
(c)
58 ins.
86°F
84%
id) '
43 ins.
92°F
61%
Region
Population
Density
(a) The Colony
...
. 2,222,810
84-2
(. b ) Ashanti
...
818,944
33-6
(c) Northern Territories ...
...
1,076,696
26-2
Under 1 year
1-16
16-45
45+
Total
Males
45
182
204
71
502
Females ...
47
165
216
70
498
92
347
420
111
1,000
Numbers Educated and Percentage of Population
Standard III-VI
Standard VII and over
(a) Colony
77,624 (3-5%)
52,099 (2-3%)
(. b ) Ashanti
20,057 (2-5%)
11,628 (1-4%)
(c) Northern Territories
1,254 (0-12%)
990 (0-09%)
Gold Coast
98,935 (2-4%)
64,717 (1-6%)
Post Secondary
Secondary
Primary
269
7,669
291,519
10. For administrative purposes the Gold Coast is divided into three regions : —■
(1) The Gold Coast Colony with the sourthern portion of Togoland administered with it. We
refer to this throughout the Report as " The Colony ”. Its headquarters are at Cape Coast.
(2) Ashanti, with headquarters at Kumasi, and
(3) The Northern Territories with the northern portion of Togoland administered with them.
Headquarters are at Tamale.
Within each region are a number of administrative districts (19 in all) and these are usually, though not always,
coterminous with the medical districts which form the basis of the medical administration.
11. A Births and Deaths Registration system is in operation over a part only of the Gold Coast. There
are 30 registration areas in the Colony, 7in Ashanti and 4in the Northern Territories. They are mainly
centred on the larger towns, and in all comprise about 10 per cent of the total population. In 1950 for the
registration areas the death rate was 20-0, the birth rate 29-3 and the infant mortality rate 122. In 1951,
the chief causes of death in these areas, in order of frequency, were (i) malaria, (ii) pneumonia, (iii) tuberculosis,
and (iv) the dysenteries, diarrhoea and enteritis.
12. The Gold Coast covers an area of 91,843 square miles (an area about equal to that of England,
Scotland and Wales). Its coastline measures about 334 miles, and from its northern frontier to the sea the
distance is some 440 miles. There are four main climatic zones :
{a) Coastal Belt—warm and relatively dry.
(h) South West Comer—warm and wet.
(c) Fomst Belt—warm and moist.
(i d) North—hot and dry (the rain being mostly seasonal).
13. At the 1948 census the population was 4,118,450 with a density of 44-8 to the square mile (England
and Wales have 685 to the square mile). Since 1931. when the previous census was taken, the population has
increased from 3,163,568 to 4,118,450, an average annual increase of 1• 77 per cent. The estimated population
in 1952 is 4,415,000. The census population was divided as follows :
In the Gold Coast there are 1,022 males to 1,000 females. (In England and Wales there are 1,087
females to 1,000 males). Only in the Northern Territories do the females outnumber the males. The propor-
tion is 1,000 to 990. This may be due to male labourers finding work in the South.
The age and sex distribution of the population is as follows ;
14. Eleven towns (Accra. Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi, Cape Coast, Koforidua, Tamale, Obuasi, Winneba,
Keta, Swedru, Aboso) have each a population of upwards of 10,000. Their combined population was 379,675
in 1948 or 9 per cent of the total population. The great mass of the people (91 per cent) live in rural areas.
(In England and Wales the comparable figu-e is 20 per cent).
The following figures relating to education are taken from the 1948 census ;
The numbers of pupils according to type of course were in December, 1949 as follows :


1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
School Certificate Estimated Passes (Grades I,
II and III).
574
707
823
977
977
1,033
1,033
1,057
1,057
School Certificate —Grade I—say 20 per cent of
above.
115
141
1C5
195
195
207
207
211
211
Four hundred pupils passed the Cambridge School Certificate in 1949, of whom 362 were boys and 38 girls.
The following table supplied by the Ministry of Education gives an estimate of the total output of boys
and girls in the Gold Coast who are likely to reach School Certificate standard in the years 1952-1960 :
The numbers of those estimated to secure a Grade I School Certificate are approximately equal to the numbers,
expected to take Sixth Form courses preparatory to entering universities.
15. The national income per capita is thought to be about £3O a year. The daily wage of the unskilled
labourer is 4s. 6d. in the large towns and 4s. elsewhere.
CHAPTER II
EXISTING ARRANGEMENTS FOR MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICES IN THE
GOLD COAST
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
16. In dealing with the Medical Department in this chapter we purposely disregard the fact that before
the date on which we reached the Gold Coast the department was grouped with another department under a
Minister of Health and Labour. We discuss in Chapter 111 the profound effects on the department of the
constitutional changes of which this grouping formed part.
17. Headquarters Staff. —The Director controls a department which the Lidbury Commission aptly
described as “ a large and heterogeneous organisation with a wide range of services He is assisted by a
Deputy Director and by an Assistant Director with' special knowledge of public health matters in the Gold
Coast. The Principal Matron is also stationed at headquarters ; she is in charge of all nurses in the country
and of subordinate women staff in hospitals.
18. There is a General Secretary, who holds the diploma of the Institute of Hospital Administrators
and is responsible to the Director for headquarters office organisation and management and for the supervision
of non-medical staff. He is assisted by an Administrative Assistant and supervises a staff of 39 clerks,
19. Financial matters are dealt with by a Senior Accountant, an Accountant, an Assistant Accountant
and 24 clerks. Payment of all salaries and accounts, but not of the wages of daily or casual labour, is made
by the Treasury, not by the accounts branch of the Medical Department ; we were given instances in which
this procedure was said to cause serious delays in payment, with consequent complaints and irritation.
20. Regional Staff. —At each of the regional headquarters at Cape Coast, Kumasi and Tamale there is an
Assistant Director who is available to advise the Chief Commissioner of the region. There is one regional
matron at Kumasi whose jurisdiction extends over Ashanti and the Northern Territories and one at Cape Coast
who supervises the Colony.
21. The population of the Colony is nearly three times that of Ashanti and rather more than twice
that of the Northern Territories. Its administrative centre at Cape Coast is eccentrically placed and makes
effective supervision over the medical establishments of the eastern half of the region almost impossible. We
understand that it will in the near future be divided for administrative purposes into three regions.
Hospitals
22. We found it difficult to get a precise statement of the number of hospital beds in the country.
This is largely due to the lack of definition of a hospital and to the fact that the number of beds in a hospital
is varied according to need. Moreover, extensions to existing hospitals are making rapid progress and new
hospitals are being brought into use. The Table in Appendix D gives a list of hospitals in operation on the
31st December, 1951, in their geographical distribution and the number of beds in each. It is, we believe,
sufficiently accurate. The list comprises both Government hospitals and also those belonging to mining and
timber companies, missions and private medical practitioners.
23. Apart from those grouped in Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi, and Tamale the Government
hospitals are scattered over the country. They are situated for the most part at the headquarters of a medical
district and are usually known as district hospitals. The proportion of hospital beds to population (based on
the 1948 census) is roughly 1 to 1,500 ; the figure for the Colony is 1 to 1,200, for Ashanti 1 to 1,550 and for
the Northern Territories Ito 4,300. Each district hospital has a medical officer in charge who in most cases
carries out also the duties of a Medical Officer of Health and is responsible for health work and the supervision
of dispensaries and dressing stations in the district.
24. There are other beds in private maternity homes carried on by midwives and others again main-
tained by native authorities who employ midwives. It is difficult to determine the total number of beds in
these homes.
25. There is also a mental hospital in Accra, the only one in the country. It has one medical officer, an
African trained in England in modern methods of psychiatry and graded as a specialist. There are between
700 and 800 patients, 140 of whom are women. The matron and the occupational therapist are European,
the rest of the staff African. It is proposed to build a mental hospital in Kumasi at an early date.
3


Government
Native Authority
Colony ...
11
27
Ashanti
5
35
Northern Territories .,
6
40
22
102
Year
Population
In-patients
Out-patients
1946
3,962,692
(estimated)
38,128
475,571
1947
4,034,020
(estimated)
43,483
570,280
1948
... 4,118,450
(Census)
60,796
735,583
1949
4,192,582
(estimated)
59,042
777,949
1950
4,266,716
(estimated)
60,766
747,231
Dispensaries and Dressing Stations ■ ■
2C. A dispensary or dressing station—the terms appear to be used interchangeably—is a small building
in a town or village in which are provided dressings and drugs for the treatment of minor injuries and illnesses
and for dealing with certain common, easily recognised diseases in which routine treatment is simple. Govern-
ment dispensaries have an attendant in charge who is usually a pharmacist, a nurse-dispenser, or a male nurse,
and, in addition to treating out-patients daily at the dispensary, this attendant may make up stock mixtures
for the use of dressers in native authority dressing stations in the surrounding area. There arc 22 of these
Government dispensaries.
27. In addition there are at least 102 “ dispensaries ” which have been set up b\ 7 native authorities.
These authorities select a suitable candidate to train for the post of attendant and maintain him during his
training of 18 months in a district hospital. In some cases they employ a pharmacist or male nurse. They
bear the whole cost of running the dispensary. Both dispensary and dispenser are misleading terms in this
context and should be discouraged ; no dispensing is carried on at these " dispensaries ” apart from the distri-
bution of stock mixtures. The dressing station should be described as such and the attendant as a dresser
and we use these terms throughout the remainder of our Report.
28. Medical supervision of dressing stations is exercised by the medical officer in charge of a district
liospital. In some cases the medical officer holds a regular clinic and sees cases referred to him by the dresser,
but all too often shortage of staff, transport difficulties and the rapid increase in numbers of dressing stations
make it impossible for the officer to hold a clinic or even to maintain that degree of supervision which is so
essential for efficiency.
29. During the last four or five years a wave of enthusiasm, largely spontaneous but to some extent
fostered by wireless and film propaganda and by mass education teams working under the Social Welfare
department of the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, has led many native authorities to establish
new dressing stations. Most of the present 102 stations date from this period. A great deal of this work has
been done without reference to the Medical Department.
30. The distribution of Government dispensaries and native authority dressing stations is as follows : —•
31. The total number of cases treated during recent years in hospitals, dispensaries and dressing stations
is as follows :
Medical Field Units
32. In addition to the general hospital and dispensary services described above, there are other services
with special functions and of these the most important, in a country in which medical statistics are scanty and
incomplete and where preventable endemic diseases take a heavy toll of the population, are the medical field
units.
33. These units are directed by a specialist in epidemiology whose headquarters are at Kintampo in
Ashanti. He is assisted by two medical officers, one based on Kintampo and the other on Gambaga in the
Northern Territories ; a third medical officer has recently been appointed. An entomologist is also attached
to the organisation. The teams are divided into two groups, one of survey teams and the other of treatment
teams. The differentiation is not rigid and one type can readily be transformed into the other, if circumstances
so demand. In addition there are fixed units, eight in all, spread over Ashanti and the Northern Territories;
34. A survey team consists of a field assistant in charge of ten or fewer technicians. Both field assistant
and technicians have been specially trained by the field organisation for this work and some of the assistants
have had experience in a hospital laboratory. A treatment team usually consists of two specially trained
technicians, and a fixed team of one field assistant and one technician.
35. There are at present ten survey teams. They traverse selected areas, visiting every village, taking
a census of the inhabitants and collecting specimens of blood, urine, faeces, skin or other material needed for
the investigations in progress. Other clinical observations are also made. The treatment teams follow in
the wake of the survey teams, treating patients in accordance with the findings of the survey ; as a course of
treatment takes longer than making a diagnosis, the treatment teams often have to be reinforced or a fixed
unit is left in an area to carry on the work they have begun. The medical field units also play an important
part in reinforcing local medical services in the control of epidemics. ■ '


Laboratory Service
36. There is only one laboratory in the country in which detailed or extensive pathological,
bacteriological or biochemical investigations can be carried out; this is the Medical Research Institute at
Accra situated near Korle Bu Hospital and the Maternity Hospital. In every hospital, however, there is
equipment for conducting simple clinical pathological examinations and a laboratory assistant or a microsco-
pist trained to make routine observations within a limited field.
37. There are three medical officers who have had some training in clinical pathology and who have
been given the title of Acting Pathologist. The establishment allows five pathologists. All training of
laboratory assistants and of microscopists, except those employed in medical field units, must perforce be
done at the Medical Research Institute. In addition, this Institute is so heavily engaged in routine work
from hospitals and other sources that there is, at present, little justification for the title Research Institute.
Leprosy Service
38. There are no satisfactory statistics to show the incidence of leprosy throughout the Gold Coast
but we have had ample evidence that the disease is widespread. Such figures as are available are set out in
the passage dealing with this disease in paragraph 359.
39. There is one medical officer of specialist status who is responsible for the organisation of a treatment
service over the whole country. His headquarters are at Ankaful, near Elmina, where there is a leper colony
with 200 patients, of whom about 30 are women. Here also are available laboratory facilities and technical
staff for microscopic and other investigations. This leper colony has been in existence for only two years
and is rapidly developing. In the nearby prison is a special enclosure in which leprotic prisoners from all
parts of the country are segregated for treatment. There is another settlement at Ho in Togoland which also
has about 200 inmates. At both Ankaful and Ho the patients are encouraged to assist in supporting the
community by cultivating land or by other work ; at Ankaful every patient able to do so must contribute
three hours work a day. These activities are supervised by resident non-medical officers, at Ankaful employed
by Government and by the British Empire Leprosy Relief Association and at Ho by the latter organisation.
40. There are other settlements at Weija near Accra, at Kumasi and at Yendi and Kpandai in the
Northern Territories but these are not yet satisfactorily organised. At Kumasi there are about 40 lepers
housed in an old settlement which the medical officer of health visits twice a week and deals with 300 out-
patients. At Kpandai, there are over 200 patients in a Mission settlement. In all these leper colonies voluntary
organisations are giving valuable assistance in caring for patients and in helping with their rehabilitation
when the disease is “ burnt out ”or cured. We would especially mention in this connection the Society of
Friends of Lepers with headquarters at Accra.
41. Every effort is being made to get lepers to attend the out-patient departments of those district
hospitals in which special leper clinics are held. In many cases medical officers hold clinics in the villages
of districts where the disease is known to be prevalent.
Public Health Services
42. The responsibility for public health services is shared between the Government and the local
government bodies, that is the councils of the four municipal towns —Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi and
Cape Coast —and elsewhere the native authorities, now about to be replaced by district, local and urban
councils.
43. Government administration. —Before 1946 a distinction was drawn between medical services and
health services. In the more important medical stations throughout the country there was a medical officer
whose duties were mainly centred on the district hospital and outlying dispensaries and a medical officer of
health who directed and supervised the work of sanitary inspectors and other sanitary staff employed by the
Government in the district. In less important stations, however, one medical officer carried out both sets of
duties. There were at headquarters in Accra two Deputy Directors each responsible for the work of his own
group of medical officers to the Director who at that time held the title of Director of Medical and Sanitary
Services. Before the outbreak of the 1939-45 war there was a senior health officer for the mining districts
whose duties involved supervision of the statutory Mining Health Areas. Up to 1946 there was no Assistant
Director stationed at the administrative headquarters of a region, except one in Kumasi with duties extending
over Ashanti and the Northern Territories.
44. Difficulties in filling the posts of medical officer of health led to re-organisation in 1946.
An Assistant Director who had held an appointment as medical officer of health was stationed at the
administrative headquarters of each region and, except in a few cases, district medical officers assumed the
duties of medical officer of health in addition to their other duties.
45. There are now eleven Medical Officers holding diplomas in public health in the employment of the
Government, but only five who hold posts as Medical Officers of Health. One of these is in Tamale and covers
the whole of the Northern Territories ; two are in Kumasi one of whom is seconded to the service of the town
council and is almost wholly employed in the town itself while the other is responsible for Ashanti. A fourth
is responsible for the town of Sekondi-Takoradi and for the port health work of Takoradi. The fifth is mainly
employed in the town of Accra, as a part-time officer of the town council, but also has duties over the much
wider administrative district of Accra. It is usual for the medical officer of health in a region to take over
the duties of the Assistant Director when the latter is bn leave.
46. At headquarters in Accra is an Assistant Director with special knowledge of public health matters
in the Gold Coast whose function it is to advise the Director. The chain of command in public health is from
the Director through the Regional Assistant Director to medical officers of health or other medical officers
in districts.
2A


47. In addition to medically qualified officers with public health duties there are 21 sanitary
superintendents and a number of sanitary officers of junior rank who are described in Chapter X. All but
one of the sanitary superintendents and the majonty of sanitary inspectors are Government servants.
48. The Government, through their medical officers and sanitary officers, exercise a general supervision
over sanitary operations of all kinds, and they have wide sanitary powers of regulation and control under such
Ordinances as the Towns Ordinance (Cap. 69) and those dealing with infectious diseases, quarantine and
mosquitoes. The Towns Ordinance operates in certain towns only and these include the four municipal
towns. In addition, the Government have assumed a direct responsibility for the provision of water supplies,
a service with which we deal in Chapter XI.
49. Local Government Administration. —Throughout the countryside the native authority sanitary
administration is of a simple kind. Under various names men employed by the authority are responsible for
the sanitary condition of villages. Some of these are being trained at the Kintampo school. For the most
part they have had no regular training at all. We encountered one whose previous experience was that of
registrar of the native authority’s court. Supervision of labourers removing night soil and refuse, collection
of “ conservancy fees ”, inspection of houses and yards and the issue of summonses for sanitary offences—
accumulations of water, rubbish, etc. —form the bulk of the work. This simple work can be, and sometimes
is, satisfactorily performed by men without elaborate training, but it appears that in many cases the work of
inspection and of collecting fees and fines is done mechanically. It is commonly said that the value of a
particular officer is apt to be judged by the amount of money which he brings into the native authority treasury.
50. The four municipal towns are under the administration of town councils and the sanitary functions
of these bodies are of a much wider description than those of the native authorities. They employ substantial
staffs, the principal officers being the Town Clerk, Treasurer, Medical Officer of Health, Town Engineer and
Chief Sanitary Inspector. It is in these towns that the overlapping powers of the Government and the local
authority are most marked. We understand that it is proposed shortly to lay before the Legislative Assembly
an Ordinance replacing the present four Ordinances governing the four towns and that this will decide, or
enable the Government to decide, what sanitary functions are in future to be entrusted to the councils.
51. The difficulties resulting from this overlapping of functions are best seen in Accra. Under the
Accra Town Council Ordinance of 1943 the council have very wide sanitary functions but in practice the
Government have undertaken important sanitary duties including the all-important supply of water, the
maintenance of the principal streets, and the sanitary services connected with Government property. It
seems that there has always been an ill-defined borderline between the responsibilities of the Government and
the council and we cannot avoid the conclusion that this has led to some of the sanitary short-comings from
which the town undeniably suffers.
52. It appears, for example, that while the Government accepts responsibility for some streets and the
council for the remainder, the exact extent of the responsibilities of each party has never been definitely
settled, the reason being one only too familiar in the Gold Coast—that the ownership of the site of the road
is uncertain and that this in some way determines the question of responsibility. Again, while the council
arc responsible for the maintenance of the great bulk of the streets, the drains alongside them are maintained
by the Public Works Department. The conservancy service, a very important and expensive one, is wholly
in the hands of the council, as is the refuse disposal service. We unde-stand that the present cost of the
conservancy service is approximately £31,000 p.a. towards which in 1951 the Government made a grant of
£5,000.
53. A perusal of the annual reports of the Medical Department and of the council’s medical officers of
health makes it clear that the sanitary condition of Accra has for many years been recognised as unsatisfactory.
In 1930 the Director, commenting on the increased building in the suburbs of the town, wrote “ It is becoming
apparent however that all is not well with building control in the town The growing disregard for the
Building Regulations makes for uneasiness, and can eventually only lead to the bequeathment to a future
generation of an insanitary legacy ”.
54. Much the same story is told in other fields of sanitary work, particularly perhaps in connection with
"‘conservancy” matters. “The worst features” writes the medical officer of health in 1951 “of the manage-
ment of night soil disposal and control of fly breeding are, however, to be observed on the outskirts of the town
at Mima, Lagos Town, Teshi and the area north of Guinea Lodge ”. After calling attention to the lack of
public latrines and dustbins, the report continues—“ money was voted during the current year to improve
conditions in Nima, but land disputes and the inefficient administrative set-up of the council held up progress ”.
Land disputes are also, we were informed, responsible for delay in obtaining the site for an additional market
which is now said to be required and sites for additional latrines badly needed in the centre of the town.
55. The lagoon at Korle Bu presents another formidable problem. An attempt was made to reclaim
this land in 1929 and work was carried on in stages up to 1931 when it was abandoned, presumably owing to
financial stringency. Since then nothing substantial has been done. Meanwhile, we are told that the lagoon
is fairly rapidly silting up and becoming increasingly a public health nuisance. Moreover, the drainage works
undertaken during the war by the Army for leading storm water into the lagoon have never been completed
and a r e also a potential area of mosquito breeding.
56. Another outstanding question is the possibility of providing a system of water-borne sewage for the
town as a whole. We understand that when the present enlargement of the water undertaking is completed
there should be a sufficient supply for this purpose. It would however be a very costly operation (a sum of £l|
million was mentioned to us as a rough guess) although an annual expenditure of something like £30,009
representing the cost of the present conservancy service might be set off against this capital charge.


57. We do not overlook the immense difficulties caused by the too rapid growth of the town’s population
over the last 20 years and we have seen with our own eyes some admirable working class houses which the
Government has recently built. It is no doubt the case that under present conditions the clearance of dilapi-
dated and overcrowded houses in the older parts of Accra would merely increase congestion in the newer.
None the less, if the town is to take its place as the capital of a modem community, great arrears of work must
be overtaken.
58. Kumasi, the capital of Ashanti, with an estimated population of some 80,000, is in some respects
more fortunate than Accra, chiefly because when the town was rapidly expanding, its original site and some of
its land, about one square mile in area, belonged to the Government, and when, in 1943, the Crown lands
comprising this site were vested in the Golden Stool, Kumasi remained sufficiently under public control to make
town planning a relatively simple matter. Largely as a consequence of this the new town is well laid out and
contains few of the congested areas so evident in Accra.
59. We have been struck by the important part which markets play in the economic and social life of the
country. We were told in Kumasi, for example, that no less than 84,000 persons have been counted to pass
through the older and bigger of the two town markets in the course of a day. The management of these
markets forms an important part of the activities of the local authorities and they are a valuable source of
revenue. We notice that the profits from market tolls in the case of the four municipal towns exceed the
revenues raised from rates. While we see no objection to the councils making on behalf of their rate-payers
a reasonable profit from their markets, we feel no doubt that the first charge on the tolls received should be the
maintenace of the markets in good sanitary condition and, where necessary, the provision of further accom-
modation to meet growing demands. From what we have seen in a number of cases we are not satisfied that
this conception of the council’s duties is generally accepted.
Weaknesses in the Medical Service
CO. Having given a brief sketch of the present medical service of the Gold Coast we think it right to
point out what, in our view, are the main weaknesses of the system. The service has not kept pace with the
country’s growing wealth and general development. Between the financial years 1928-29 and 1952-53,
Government expenditure on the medical service increased nearly five-fold. In the same period the total
Government expenditure increased more than six-fold and its revenue more than ten-fold. The percentage
of medical expenditure to total expenditure fell from 9 - 7 to 7-1 and to total revenue from 7-8 to 4-6.
But apart from growth of wealth and population there has been an immense shift from the remote country-
side and to some extent from neighbouring territories into the towns of the Gold Coast, a shift which shows
little or no sign of abating. This means that tens of thousands of Africans who before were effectively cut
off from medical services are now in a position to lengthen the queues for hospital treatment and strain the
resources of the service. In 1946 one person in every 104 of the population was admitted as an inpatient
and one in eight was treated as an out-patient. The corresponding figures in 1949 were one in 71 and one in
five. And again the striking success which has attended the use of modem treatment for yaws, sleeping
sickness (trypanosomiasis), leprosy and venereal diseases has no doubt led to a much higher proportion of
the population taking advantage of the medical services. Thus in a very real sense the success of the service
in commanding the confidence of the public has proved an embarrassment. It has created a demand which
the service is increasingly unable to meet.
61. A serious handicap under which the Medical Department has laboured in r ecent years is the fre-
quent changes in the offices of Director and Deputy Director. We find that since 1938 there have been seven
Directors and ten Deputy Directors and not infrequently substantial intervals between the departure of one
officer and the appointment of his successor. These constant changes must mean that a Director can seldom
carry through to completion any large-scale scheme which he has set on foot and must enter his office with
the knowledge that this will be the case. The system appears to us to offer a subtle temptation to officers
to leave things as they have found them. We have not attempted to calculate the frequency with which
other medical officers are moved from station to station, but we have been impressed on our tours with the
many occasions on which our enquiries as to some transaction in the recent past have elicited the reply
that the officer is a newcomer and has little or no knowledge of the earlier history of his medical district. This
constant shifting of officers within the Gold Coast is no doubt in part due to chronic shortage of staff and to the
necessity of having to make arrangements, some apparently at very short notice, for reliefs for those going
on leave. From the point of view of medical administration the situation would undoubtedly be eased if the
practice of taking a comparatively short annual leave, now made possible by air travel, became more general.
62. We have noticed the wide discrepancy between the number of posts in the medical establishment
and the number of officers actually serving at any given moment. This seems to be caused in
part by difficulties of recruitment—in particular recruitment of specialists—and in part by a failure to make
due allowance for absence on leave and for the normal time-lag in filling vacancies. We note that while 11
specialist posts remain unfilled there are, in addition to the normal number of officers on ordinary leave, eight
on study leave. The difficulty of recruiting specialists from outside no doubt enhances the importance of
granting study leave in order to fill the ranks of specialists from inside the service, but in that case it seems
reasonable to recruit more junior medical officers, paying them against the provision already made
in the Estimates for specialist posts still unfilled.
63. The Medical Department is inadequately housed in a building never intended, and quite unsuitable,
for an office to accommodate its present staff. Many of the junior staff are working under physical conditions
so cramped as to reduce very considerably their output. Partly for this reason and partly because there has,
it seems, been no thorough overhaul of the department for many years, the organisation is out-of-date and
over-burdened. One of the consequences of this is that the senior staff are largely engaged in work quite
inappropriate to officers of their rank. The work of the department is not fully documented and records
are not always up-to-date or are otherwise imperfect. The annual reports of the Medical Department are


a case in point. These important documents—the milestones marking the progress of a medical and health
service—should provide a general conspectus of the knowledge and- experience gathered in the year by the
whole medical staff of the country and should form a permanent record from which the country’s medical
History can be' built up. Making all allowances for the difficulties of the war and post-war situation,-
including the limitation placed during the war on the size of departmental reports, the fact remains that the
standards set up by some of the reports between 1920 and 1930 have not again been reached. . The lack of
readily available departmental records has made itself felt in our work. While we have received from the
officers of the department every assistance which it was in their power to give we are conscious that there
remain large gaps in our knowledge. We think it only fair to add, in justice to the Medical Department and
by way of an excuse for errors which will inevitably.come to light in our own report, that as the statutes of the
Gold Coast have not been revised for 16 years and as there is no general index to the 15 Annual
Volumes (running into some 6,000 pages) since the revision of 1936, it is a difficult and laborious business to
ascertain precisely what the existing law is.
64. Another feature which we have noticed is the apparent lack of liaison between the medical and other
departments. Projects having an obvious bearing on public health seem to be pushed forward without any
prior consultation with the department. In the case of rural water supplies, for example, a matter of first-rate
importance to a health service, we are not clear whether and to what extent the department through its local
Medical Officers and Assistant Directors has an opportunity of advising on schemes proposed by the Department
of Rural Water Development and the order of priority in which they should be undertaken. We have heard
different accounts of this matter in different regions. The one point that seems certain is that no direction
has been issued on the subject or clear understanding reached between the responsible departments. Again,
there has seemed to be complete uncertainty whether there is any effective machinery for consulting the'
Medical Department on the question of setting up a native authority “dispensary”. In one case it appeared
a medical officer had unsuccessfully protested against the establishment of several dispensaries on the ground
that no proper staff was available. In a minute on one of the files we found it stated in terms that the Medical
Department is not informed nor consulted when “ dispensaries ” are opened. On the other hand we have come
across cases where, by sensible co-operation between the Medical Officer and the District Commissioner, all
aspects of the matter have been considered before the work was begun.
It is of perhaps greater significance that the participation of the Medical Department in the prepara-
tion of plans for the great Volta dam project seems to have been of a very slight character.
65. As far as we have been able to ascertain, it has never been the practice of the Medical Department
to offer to its medical or other officers posted throughout the country a simple explanation, by means of a
handbook or otherwise, of the duties which they are expected to perform. We understand that such a hand-
book was in course of preparation about 20 years ago but that during the war its issue was indefinitely
postponed. Advice on individual matters, as they arise, has of course been given by way of circular and there
are the Government’s " General Orders ”. But there seems to be nothing to help a medical officer newly
come to the country and possibly newly qualified to discover from a bewildering mass of Ordinances,
Regulations, Orders, Gazette Notices and other documents, what exactly he is supposed to be doing and what
his relations are to officers of other departments, to the native authorities or to other local bodies. There
appears to be a similar lack of instructions to the Assistant Directors informing them even in the most
general way what is the range of their responsibilities and what matters they may and should dispose of finally
without reference to Accra.
66. Some of these defects are undoubtedly a direct result of the immense burden under which
administration in the Medical Department (and no doubt in others) has laboured in recent years owing to the
rapid succession of constitutional and other changes. The rate of change has been, and still is, so fast that
we ourselves have felt at times that we have been invited to draw a firm outline of a pattern seen in a
kaleidoscope. Some of what we are now writing will be out of date when we sign our Report, still more when
it is printed and published.
CHAPTER III
THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT AND THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH
67. Our Terms of Reference instruct us to examine, amongst other things, “ the adequacy of the
administrative structure and organisation of the Medical Department ” in relation to the development of
health services.
68. For upwards of 80 years there has been in the Colony a Medical Department working under a
Director and responsible for all Government medical establishments. The exact functions of this department
are not to be found in any of the Gold Coast Ordinances. Like other departments of Government it has
operated under the inherent powers of the Crown and subject only to the financial limitations imposed on it
by the terms of the annual vote of the Legislature.
69. Before the new constitution of 1951 the Director was answerable to the Colonial Secretary, as the
chief officer of the Governor, for the efficient organisation and administration of his department; and through
the Colonial Secretary he was the adviser to the Government on all matters of policy falling within the scope
of the department. While not empowered to initiate measures of major policy, he was responsible for
executing policy within the limits laid down, and was also; until 1951, a member of the Executive Council.
As such, he was able to play an important part in the formation of medical policy when proposals were brought
up—whether on his own initiative or not —for consideration by the Council.
70. The constitutional changes effected by the Gold Coast (Constitution) Order in Council, 1950,
which came into force in 1951, created a wholly new situation. The Medical Department was grouped with
two other departments (Labour and Co-operation) and placed under the charge of a Minister of Health and
Labour ; and a Permanent Secretary responsible for the organisation and administration of the Ministry was
appointed.


71. As a corollary of the new constitution an Ordinance (the Statutory Powers and Duties (Transfer
to Ministers) Ordinance, 1951) was passed and an order made under it. The effect of these was to amend a
number of earlier Ordinances relating to public health and medicine by substituting the “ Minister responsible
for Health ” for the Governor or the Governor in Council. Thus wherever the Director had previously acted
under these Ordinances on behalf of the Governor he is now acting on behalf of the Minister. There are two
exceptions to this transfer of responsibility. First, the order did not affect duties with which the Director
as such is specifically charged, e.g. his duties as chairman of the Nurses Board and Midwives Board. These
remain an individual responsibility. Secondly—and more important—the rules and instructions issued in
connection with the setting up of the Public Service Commission have imposed on all heads of departments,
including the Director, certain duties in relation to the appointment, promotion and dismissal of officers of
various grades which they are required to discharge without reference to their ministers. In this matter
their responsibility lies towards the Public Service Commission. Subject to these two exceptions, it seems
true to say that while the Director remains the principal medical adviser of the Government he is, so far as
the Medical Department is concerned, in the same position as that of other officers serving in a Ministry, that
is to say, every official act which he does is in constitutional theory the act of the Minister and one which the
Minister may be called on to defend whether amongst his colleagues in the Executive Council or in the Legisla-
tive Assembly or to the public at large. (We refer later in the chapter to the question of medical advice which
may be required by other Ministries, e.g. the Ministry of Education).
72. Our investigations have made it abundantly clear to us that the integration of the Medical
Department and the Ministry of Health, which' is a necessary consequence of the constitutional changes, has
not in fact as yet taken place. Whether and to what extent a similar situation obtains in other departments
and Ministries we do not know and it is not our business to enquire, but it is right to point out that constitu-
tional changes of this magnitude call for a long process of working out in terms of administrative reorganisation
and may simultaneously impose on departmental officers (as we are satisfied it has done in the case of the
Medical Department) an additional burden of day to day duties which in itself hampers the progress of the
reorganisation.
73. The general principles which should in our view govern the organisation of a Ministry charged
with health functions may be summed up as follows :
(i) Nearly every problem which confronts a Ministry of Health, whether it be the presentation
of new policy or the execution of a policy already determined, has a medical aspect and an administra-
tive and financial aspect. Thus the Minister is entitled to expect that every matter put forward for
his decision and every decision taken in his name has been considered from both these points of view.
(ii) This should be secured by having in each rank of the higher staff of the Ministry a doctor and
layman working in the closest collaboration, neither being superior or subordinate to the other. It
would be the duty of each to discuss with the other and, if possible, agree upon action wherever both
medical and administrative considerations are involved.
(iii) It is important—and in a country such as the Gold Coast where the shortage of qualified
medical practitioners is likely to be a source of embarrassment for many years to come, it is of the
utmost importance—that medical men should not be engaged on work which can be done not less well
by laymen.
(iv) In a Ministry of Health the problems on which a competent opinion can be formed by medical
men—and by medical men only—are of such fundamental importance that the chief medical adviser
to the Ministry should have full and direct access to the Minister. Only thus can it be ensured that
the medical adviser shall in no instance be placed in the position of carrying out a policy with which
he may from the professional point of view disagree without having had a full opportunity of urging
his views on the Minister in person. There are two methods of securing this end. The first is that
adopted in England where the Ministry of Health has a Chief Medical Officer who ranks in status with
the Permanent Secretary to the department and has direct access to the Minister. This system has
operated successfully since the establishment of a Ministry of Health upwards of 30 years ago. The
second is to follow a practice adopted in some of the Commonwealth countries and also in the English
municipal sphere and to have a medical man in charge of the department assisted by a staff of medical
and lay administrators.
74. In a country with a population of less than five million we might in other circumstances have been
disposed to advise the adoption of the second of these alternatives, namely a medical officer as permanent
head of the organisation. In the present circumstances of the Gold Coast we believe that this would be a
mistake. The wide differences in economic circumstances, occupation, habits and traditions between, the
inhabitants of the Colony* Ashanti and the Northern Territories, the scattered nature of the population, lack
of communications and the difficulties of transport all combine to make the problem of maintaining adequate
medical and health services one of peculiar complexity. Added to this is the fact that a new and compara-
tively inexperienced legislature is apt to impose heavy burdens on Ministers and their chief officials, as witness
the number of questions addressed to the Minister of Health on health matters in the last session and the fact
that the number of letters addressed to the Medical Department has increased from about 31,000 in 1948 to
about 47,000 in 1951. In view of these considerations we believe that if the proposals outlined in this Report
are to be carried out with vigour, it would be overtaxing the energies of any medical officer, however active
and devoted, if, in addition to his duties as chief medical adviser, he were burdened with the supervision of
the office, the responsibility for answers to questions in the Legislative Assembly, the constant attendance
on the Minister and all the other matters that fall to the lot of a permanent secretary. For these reasons we
recommend that the other method, that of having a medical adviser and an administrator of equal rank and
both with direct access to the Minister, should be adopted.


75. The two last preceding paragraphs have been written in terms of a Ministry charged with the
provision and supervision of health services. But the present Ministry of Health is, as we have already
mentioned, a grouping of the Medical Department and the Labour Department. The Department of Co-
operation has already, since the first allocation of departments was made, been assigned to another Ministry
and we understand that the original allocations are regarded as provisional and experimental and that further
changes may well take place. If so, we consider that the portfolios of Health and Labour should be separated.
The two have something, but not much, in common and we are convinced that a Minister solely concerned
with health and the officers of his Ministry will have plenty of occupation.
76. Turning now to the practical steps required to give effect to these principles, it is of the first
importance that the whole of the headquarters staff of the Ministry should work under one roof. (In saying
this we must not be taken as dissenting from the decision to house the Medical Stores Branch in Takoradi.
On a balance of considerations we have no doubt that this is right.) We understand that it is the intention
that when the proposed new Government buildings are ready the Ministry will be accommodated in quarters
sufficient to house the headquarters staff of the present Medical Department. Nothing short of this will
achieve the close collaboration which is required—a collaboration which we should hope would largely replace
formal letters and minutes by oral discussion.
77. To indicate the absorption of the Medical Department into the Ministry of Health we recommend
that the name “ Medical Department ” should be dropped. The department becomes in fact identical with
the Ministry. Further, we recommend that the title of Director of Medical Services should be replaced by
that of Chief Medical Officer, a title which will give a more accurate description of the post. Corresponding
alterations should be made in the titles of the lower ranks.
78. On the principles already indicated there should be a Permanent Secretary of the Ministry who is a
layman and a Chief Medical Officer of equal rank. Both of these would have direct access to the Minister. On
important matters of policy these two officers would normally consult and submit joint proposals ; or if a
disagreement between them was fundamental and admitted of no compromise, would each state his case to
the Minister, leaving the Minister to decide. There should be a complete understanding between them that
no matter of any substantial importance would be submitted to the Minister by one without the other being
informed by a copy of the minute or otherwise. Circulars, instructions and important letters would normally
be signed by the Permanent Secretary or Principal Assistant Secretary, except those addressed to the medical
or auxiliary medical staff of the Ministry dealing with technical matters. These would be signed by the Chief
Medical Officer or his Deputy or, in the case of those addressed to nursing staff, by the Principal Matron.
79. Below the Permanent Secretary would be a Principal Assistant Secretary and his relation to the
Deputy Chief Medical Officer would be substantially the same as that between their two superior officers. Thus,
if one was drafting a circular or instruction, he would not normally submit it to his superior without first
consulting his opposite number.
80. Below these ranks the administration of the Ministry would, as in the usual course, be split up
among a number of branches or sections or whatever it may be found convenient to call them. We have not a
sufficiently detailed knowledge of the work of the Medical Department and in particular of the amount of
work which each of the various subjects coming within the department’s jurisdiction entails to justify us in
attempting to suggest how many branches or sections there should be or how the subjects should be grouped.
Moreover, this will depend in part on the layout of the new local government service and the precise functions
of the Minister in relation to the new local authorities. There is, however, a matter affecting the location of
the higher medical staff on which we think it right to make some comment.
81. We understand that the presence of an Assistant Director in Cape Coast, Kumasi and Tamale forms
a definite part of the regional system of administration which it is the policy of the Government to maintain
and develop. Looked at purely from the point of the Medical Department the out-stationing of these high
ranking officers has, in our view, some obvious disadvantages. For one thing it disables them from taking
their share in important headquarters tasks—such as the collation and evaluation of reports and returns on
epidemiological matters, the preparation of the department’s annual reports, the drafting of instructions to
officers and work of a similar kind, some of which appears to us to have fallen into sad neglect through shortage
of staff. We consider that this shortage must be remedied by having at headquarters a second Assistant
Director.
82. Apart from the business of visiting the medical establishments in the region and keeping in touch
with the medical officers—work of the greatest importance, but which, as far as we can discover, does not and
need not occupy an Assistant Director for more than about one quarter of the year—the main part of his time
appears to be spent in correspondence with headquarters at Accra, chiefly on matters of staffing—promotions,
resignations, leave and so forth—work which could in fact be carried on more simply and expeditiously by oral
discussion, if the officers concerned were working under the same roof. It was impressed on us that for this
purpose the Assistant Directors were not provided with an adequate drafting and typing staff and con-
sequently had to spend time and energy on work quite unsuitable to senior medical officers. This difficulty
could no doubt be overcome, though the provision of these facilities for officers working in scattered offices is
notoriously expensive.
83. We are not satisfied that under present conditions the fullest use is made of these officers, but we
think that the new system of local government may be found to alter the position. The natural consequence
of the establishment of the new local authorities must, so far as we can see, be to bring the Government medical
service into much closer contact with the administration of local authorities than has hitherto been the case.
We understand that under the old system the approach to native authorities was the province of the District
Commissioners, the Chief Commissioners and the office of the Colonial Secretary. If, as we suggest later, the
Government medical officers must in effect act as medical advisers to the new councils (since the lack of doctors
puts out of the question for many years the possibility of a single council or even any reasonable combination
of councils having their own medical adviser) a great deal of new and additional work will be thrown on them
and on the Assistant Directors and it will be work which requires close contact with local people.


84. Again, if it is decided that the approval or disapproval of the annual estimates submitted by local
authorities will in the first instance be a matter for the Chief Commissioners, they will no doubt require the
assistance of all the leading departmental officers in their regions, including the Assistant Directors, in arriving
at their conclusions. To what extent this practice has obtained in the past in relation to the estimates of
native authorities we are not clear, but the greater scope permitted to the new local authorities will no doubt
involve a correspondingly heavier burden on the Chief Commissioner and his advisers.
85. In these circumstances we consider that the existing system should be maintained and that there
should be an Assistant Director at Kumasi and Tamale and, for the present, a Regional Matron at Kumasi
in charge of the nursing establishments of both regions. In view of the importance of securing in the Northern
Territories local recruits to the nursing and midwifery staff we think that the question of having a separate
regional matron at Tamale should be considered when the additional hospital accommodation for which the
Development Plan provides is completed. As regards the Colony if, as we understand, the decision has been
taken to break that up into three regions based on Cape Coast (but probably later on Sekondi-Takoradi),
Koforidua and Ho, we consider that there should be a senior medical officer at the headquarters of each. If
in any of the new regions the chief administrative officer is of a rank below that of Chief Commissioner, the
medical post should be held by an officer of a rank correspondingly lower than that of Assistant Director,
except in the case of the officer at Takoradi who should hold the rank of Assistant Director in view of his
responsibilities in connection with medical stores which we suggest in paragraph 181. We consider that one
regional matron stationed at Accra should suffice for the whole of the Colony.
86. The Director as medical adviser to other Ministries. —So long as the Director was a member of the
Executive Council, he advised the Government as a whole on medical and health matters. We have no
doubt that in substance this system should stand, though in form he will be acting as medical adviser to the
various Ministries whose functions call for medical advice. The alternative system which obtains in many
Government Departments in England of having a separate medical adviser to each would plainly be an extra-
vagance in a country of the size and population of the Gold Coast, and it is worth noting that in England the
importance of keeping the three departments chiefly concerned with medical matters —the Ministry of Health,
the Home Office and the Ministry of Education—in touch with each other has led to the regular practice of
appointing the same medical man to hold all three posts.
CHAPTER IV
THE NEW LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND HEALTH SERVICES
87. The constitutional changes of 1951 have been quickly followed by not less significant developments
in the sphere of local government. Outside the four principal towns (Accra, Kumasi, Cape Coast and Sekondi-
Takoradi) the whole system of native authorities operating under the various Native Authority Ordinances is
being replaced by a system of local authorities under the Local Government Ordinance, 1951 which, with
minor exceptions, repeals the existing law on the subject. The same Ordinance enables the Minister of Local
Government, with the approval of the Governor in Council, to set up by instrument district, urban and local
councils and to confer on these councils, either by way of powers or duties as he thinks fit, the functions listed
under 82 heads in section 58 of the Ordinance. We understand that the intention is that the areas of the
urban and local councils shall correspond broadly with those of the existing native authorities but that local
circumstances, including tribal affiliations, will be taken into account and may necessitate departures from the
policy on a considerable scale. A large number of these instruments have already been published and very
wide public health powers, including the power of building and maintaining hospitals, health centres, maternity
homes and “ dispensaries ” have been conferred on these bodies, but in every case subject to the limitation that
the powers are conferred “so far as exercisable previously by the native authority ”. We have been told that
these instruments are intended to be temporary and provisional, their object being to transfer to the new
councils no more than the work at present being undertaken by the native authorities. When the heavy task
of holding the elections and setting up the councils and their staffs is completed, new instruments will be
framed specifying in more detail the powers and duties of each council and in particular formulating the
limitations and conditions ” under which they will work. It will thus be possible to impose as much or as
little control by the Government as is thought desirable, the degree of control, if necessary, being varied
according to the type of council and the type of service in question. Apart from any conditions imposed under
this power, the Minister of Local Government can control the actions of councils in a number of ways. Thus
the council’s annual estimates of revenue and expenditure have to be approved by him, borrowings by the
council are subject to his consent and in the last resort he can perform on behalf of the council and at the
expense of the locality any function which the council have failed to discharge.
88. Each urban and local council will consist in part of members elected on an adult franchise and in
part of traditional members appointed by the traditional authorities. The instrument may in any particular
case provide for additional members known as special members and intended to represent special interests
in the locality, if the Governor in Council thinks fit. Elections are proceeding throughout the country and
will, we understand, be completed by the end of 1952.
89. As regards finance, the urban and local councils will take over the assets and liabilities of the native
authorities and will have an agreed share in the revenue of stool lands. In addition, they will be required to
levy a “ basic rate ” at such uniform rate per capita, as they think necessary and as is approved by the Minister.
Additional methods of raising money are open to them, if the Minister approves.
The four municipal towns have for long had and exercised local government functions on a much
greater scale than the native authorities. We have already referred to the proposed Ordinance which is to
replace the existing law relating to these towns. We have not seen its terms.
90. Thus the legal framework has been created and the stage is now set for a complete and modem
system of local government throughout the whole country. It remains to consider what part this new local
government organisation should play in the health services of the country and what should be the relation
between the councils and the various Ministries.
3


Region
District Councils
Local Councils
Urban Councils
Colony
14
53
3
Trans-Volta
4
29
1
Ashanti
10
79
5
Northern Territories
9
69
2
91. The principal health functions which may be applied by instrument under section 58 of
the Ordinance are set out in paragraphs (36) to (48) of the section as follows :
” (36) safeguard and promote public health including the prevention of and the dealing with any
outbreak or the prevalence of any disease ;
(37) build, equip and maintain, or grant sums of money towards the establishment, equipment or
maintenance of any hospital, health centre, maternity home, dispensary, as}dum for the aged, destitute
or infirm or for orphans or asylums and settlements for lepers ;
(38) exterminate and prevent the spread of tsetse fly, mosquitoes, rats, bugs and other vermin ;
(39) establish and operate ambulance services ;
(40) establish, instal, build, maintain and control drains, latrines, public lavatories and wash
places and any sewage systems ;
(41) establish, maintain and carry out sanitary services for the removal and destruction of and
otherwise dealing with nightsoil and all kinds of refuse ;
(42) provide, erect and maintain a public water supply, and impose water rates ;
(43) regulate or prohibit the sinking of wells and provide for the closing of wells ;
(44) prevent the pollution of the water in any river, stream, water-course, water hole or drain and
prevent the obstruction of any river, stream or water-course ;
(45) build, manage, license and control slaughter-houses ;
(46) regulate the slaughter of and provide for the inspection of animals intended for the food of
man ;
(47) regulate the preparation and sale of meat;
(48) establish, maintain and control cemeteries and burial grounds ; ”
92. We understand that the three types of council already mentioned will be distributed as follows ;
From enquiries made in the course of our tours it appears that the decision to confer or impose functions on
the major authorities (i.e. the district councils) rather than the minor authorities (i.e. the local and urban
councils) or vice versa will depend very largely on the customs and traditions of the locality. We were told,
for example, that in the Northern Territories the native authorities now exercising powers such as those of
establishing " dispensaries ” are the larger authorities which operate over areas corresponding roughly with
the proposed district, whereas in Ashanti the districts are in the main new creations with little or no history
or tradition behind them. That being so, it seems that there can be no universal practice applicable to the
whole country and we must leave to those much more closely acquainted with local conditions than ourselves
to decide how the new functions are to be allocated. A further and even more solid reason for not attempting
to do this ourselves is that health functions will form only a part, though a very important part, of the activities
of local authorities and if the design is to be a satisfactory one and a proper balance secured, all the functions—
health, education, highways, etc. —should be considered and assigned as a single operation. Hence in the
following paragraphs we speak of “ local authorities ” and we include in this term all three types of councils
without attempting to indicate to which type a particular function should be assigned. We include also such
combinations of councils as might be formed under section 43 of the Ordinance. On the other hand we exclude
from the term, and deal later with, the four municipal towns.
93. We state in Chapter VI that we regard medical field units, hospitals, health centres, and dressing
stations as the four main pillars of a medical and health service. Of these the medical field units are not
localised and must plainly remain a Government responsibility. So also in our view should hospitals and
health centres. We feel no doubt that the local authorities have not as yet the experience required for taking
charge of either of these organisations ; and even if this were otherwise, they could not, short of a transfer of
doctors and nurses from the Government service to that of the local authorities on such a scale as completely
to disrupt the former, provide the necessary skilled staff.
On the other hand we consider that all dressing stations should be in the hands of the local authorities
and that those dispensaries already established by the Government and not under our proposals merged in
health centres should be handed over to them as dressing stations. We think also that following the practice
of a few of the native authorities (of which the Akwapim Native Authority Maternity Home at Akropong is
a notable example), the local authorites should be empowered to carry on maternity homes, if they can make
the necessary arrangments.
94. We find difficulty in deciding whether functions conferred on local authorities under section 58
should be conferred by way of powers or duties. If they are merely powers and the local authority may
exercise them or not as it thinks fit, experience suggests than an authority which decides to do nothing may
ultimately compel the Government under pressure of public opinion to step in and do the work for them at
the expense of the rest of the inhabitants of the country. This is destructive of any real system of
local government. On the other hand to impose on every local authority in the Gold Coast an obligation to
undertake all the duties listed in paragraphs (36) to (48) of section 58 would be to lose all sense of reality.
We believe that in the difficult transitional circumstances of to-day when it still remains to be seen whether
the local authorities will have the necessary financial resources and administrative ability the best solution
of this problem is to adopt the formula “ the local authority may with the consent of the Minister and if the
Minister so requires shall ”, though whether the opening words of section 58 permit of this device may be a
matter for consideration. On that footing we see no objection to the functions contained in paragraphs (36)
to (48) with the exception of those relating to hospitals and health centres being conferred on these bodies.


We suggest that the power of consenting to a proposal or of directing action would lie with the
Minister responsible for the service—in the case of health functions the Minister of Health—but as the Minister
of Local Government has a general supervision over local authorities it might be well to provide either in
the terms of the instrument or as a matter of departmental arrangement that the two Ministers should consult.
In practice, of course, such consultations would at any rate in the first instance be conducted at a level much
lower than Ministerial.
95. We add one further comment on the allocation of functions as between different types of local
authority, because it has a peculiar bearing on matters of staffing and in the health service these are of major
importance. A two-tier system of local government, that is, where over a given area the functions are divided
between two types of authority, is necessarily more complicated and expensive than a one-tier system where a
single authority administers all the services. There may of course be —-and no doubt in the Gold Coast there
are —advantages which outweigh these objections. The system becomes still more complicated if the major
and minor authorities are both made responsible—in different capacities—for the same service, the major, for
example, supervising or co-ordinating the activities of the minor authorities or, as it is sometimes expressed,
the minor acting as “ agents ”of the major. Whatever is the exact formula adopted, this means in practice
that the major authority should have officers—of experience and capacity superior to those of the minor
authorities—to keep a check on the latter’s proceedings. In the sphere of health this would involve medical
officers, sanitary officers (perhaps of the Sanitary Superintendent grade) and probably others. An adequate
supply of these officers simply does not exist and cannot for many years be created even by the undesirable
expedient of denuding the Government service.
96. Again we understand that the Government have in mind to offer substantial grants towards the cost
of local government services, health and others. If so, they will no doubt wish to satisfy themselves by the
usual methods of advice and inspection that the local authorities understand their duties and are carrying
them out. We consider that any double system of inspection—one on behalf of the Government and one on
behalf of the district council —is unnecessary and is in any case a luxury which under present conditions the
Gold Coast cannot afford.
97. The Four Municipal Towns. —The town councils of the four towns would naturally be entrusted
with wider powers than those of the newly created local authorities. They should not in our view have the
management of the general hospitals, and health centres would not be appropriate in towns of their size. For
the rest we consider that in addition to the services which we have suggested for local authorities in general
they should be capable of handling the following services :
School Health Service.
Maternity and Child Welfare Clinics.
Health Visitor service (including the after-care of lepers and the tuberculous).
Here again lack of resources gives rise to the same difficulties. To require these towns forthwith to provide,
for example, a health visitor service when there are only 29 Health Visitors on the register and of these only
ten are at present working—all in government employment—is idle. On the other hand merely to empower
them to do so may delay almost indefinitely the setting up of a most important service in the town. We
think that the device which we have already suggested in connection with the local authorities should be
adopted here also and that the Government should be placed in a position both to restrain ill-judged action
and to stimulate a laggard council.
98. The distinction between Government and municipal functions in the town should be clearly and
firmly drawn. Under the present system each of the four towns has a medical officer of health who is an
officer in Government service seconded for the purpose on a part-time basis. He is also responsible to the
Government for an area going far beyond the municipal boundaries and is thus simultaneously acting on behalf
of the council and of the Government. We consider that for the present the system of seconding a Government
officer should continue, but that in the case of the three larger towns the officer should be regarded as being a
whole-time officer of the council and his duties limited to the area of the town. In view of the new and heavy
responsibilities which the councils will assume we regard the municipal work of the medical officer of health
as being substantially a whole-time job, but we see no objection to the officer at Takoradi continuing to be
responsible for the health work of the port and the officer at Accra for that of the air and sea ports.
99. If sanitary improvements are to be entrusted to the town councils on the scale which the situation
demands they must in our view have and exercise more extensively than at present the power of borrowing
money. In round figures the outstanding loans of the four towns are :
Accra £196,000
Kumasi £125,000
Sekondi-Takoradi ... ... £133,000
Cape Coast £12,000
We note that for the year 1952-53 the Accra council estimate their borrowings at no more than £2,000.
It is clearly impossible for a town, even with the help of generous Government grants, to finance the
kind of operations which are overdue in most, if not all, of these towns without the exercise of borrowing
powers, if the present rate-payers are not to bear an intolerable burden, a burden which in equity should be
spread over the present and future rate-payers throughout the period for which the expenditure will prove
beneficial. The usual precautions should of course be taken to see that the borrowings, whether of the town
councils or of other local authorities, do not outrun the financial capacity of the area and that a proper period
for repayment is fixed and provision made for regular instalments of principal and interest.
3A


CHAPTER V
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON PLANNING A MEDICAL SERVICE
100. “A disease-ridden, undernourished community cannot hope to achieve the same results as one
which is adequately fed and reasonably free from disease. This fact must be borne clearly in mind in assigning
a place to medical and health programmes in any general plan of colonial development and in allotting to it a
proper proportion of the resources available ”. These words form part of the opening paragraph of the section
on Medical Policy (A.C. (48) 4) in the report on the African Conference held in London in 1948. They represent
an obvious truth which cannot be too often emphasised.
101. Nevertheless, it must be recognised that the total resources available for the development of any
country are limited and this limitation applies not only to financial but also to physical resources and, what is
probably of more importance, to suitable man-power. Any plan for development must, therefore, take
cognizance of all these factors and must be so shaped that the maximum economic use is made of what is
available. Capital outlay on the development of health services, whether in the provision of hospitals or
health centres, sets up a continuing liability for which funds must be provided. These institutions, however,
are useless without trained staff to run them and more trained staff calls for a greater drain on available man-
power and more facilities for training. A development plan must, therefore, provide not only for capital
outlay and an increasing expenditure but also for the means of providing an increase in existing resources* of
manpower and materials.
102. The building of new hospitals, the enlargement of those already existing, the developments
demanded in school medical services, health visitor, midwifery and other services and the rapid increase in
the number of local authority dressing stations will all make heavy calls on the country’s available supply of
medical practitioners and medical auxiliaries to staff these services. They will also throw a heavy burden
on teaching facilities which are at present inadequate for the purpose.
103. It is quite rightly expected that candidates for training in medical auxiliary work should have
attained a reasonable standard of general education. But the total output of boys and girls who are likely
to reach School Certificate standard is not very great and according to the estimate given in the table at the end
of Chapter I will not reach its maximum until 1957-59. From this total should be subtracted the estimated
number of students who reach matriculation standard and will for the most part either aspire to a university
course or to employment in fields other than those available to medical auxiliaries. Moreover, in considering
the potential manpower for recruitment to the medical auxiliary services, allowance must be made for the
attractions of other forms of Government service, of commerce and of technology which will compete for the
limited supply of candidates. Again, factors of more importance in the selection of suitable candidates than
mere academic achievement are those of character and temperament, so that the number of those who have
reached the necessary educational standard may well be much in excess of the number who are suitable for
training.
104. There is a danger that projects which will distort and hinder an ordered plan of development may
be undertaken in response to the insistent demands of local and sectional interests. If real and lasting progress
is to be made in a country where so much is needed, the advance must be orderly and on a nation-wide basis.
The tendency to expect immediate and tangible returns for money spent may have to be resisted and the duty
of planning for posterity recognised.
105. With few exceptions, the representations made to us have pressed for more hospitals, more health
centres, more dressing stations and increased maternity services. Little thought appears to have been given
to the training of medical auxiliaries to staff these services or to the question of their maintenance in relation
to national or local financial resources. More hospitals mean more nurses, but already the training centres
are overtaxed because of lack of tutors and of material facilities. The training of dressers to take charge of
dressing stations throws a heavy burden on district medical officers and their often inadequate junior staff;
without more medical officers, there cannot be satisfactory supervision of dressing stations. The schools
training midwives cannot cope with the demands for increased midwifery services. It is imperative therefore
that attention should be given at once to the question of providing more candidates fitted for training as nurses,
midwives and dressers. This in turn demands examination of the problem of providing more tutors and more
medical officers.
10C. Before attempting to explore the possibilities of the recruitment of more staff to what, apart from
midwifery, is within the field of curative medicine it is necessary to determine to what extent the development
of a curative service will meet the health needs of the country ; it is necessary to get as accurate a picture
as possible of what may be termed the disease-pattern which prevails in the Gold Coast. The effect on the
health of the community of preventable diseases should be compared with that of diseases which—on present
knowledge —can be dealt with by curative measures only. If it can be determined that the greatest benefit
will accrue by concentrating more on one aspect of the problem than on the other, development should be
planned accordingly.
107. Statistical information which might give a reliable picture of the incidence of diseases in the
Gold Coast is very scanty. Vital statistics are available only for the limited number of registration areas.
The returns cover about ten per cent of the.population and the causes of deaths are not always shown. A
great deal of useful information on the incidence of certain diseases in selected areas has, however,
been collected by the medical field units in the course of their survey and treatment work, and it is difficult
’ to understand why more intensive efforts have not been made in the past to extend this invaluable organisa-
tion. A study of the results achieved by these units, of the figures given by district medical officers and medical
officers of health and of the reports of research workers has made it abundantly clear to us that the high death
rate, especially in children, and the undermining of the health of the population in many areas are mainly the
result of community-wide diseases which are preventable. For the most part these diseases are conveyed
by insects, snails or other intermediate hosts and occur in areas often remote, or difficult of access, from centres
of medical aid.


108. The problem of eradicating these endemic diseases demands a threefold approach ; first, the
treatment of all existing cases, with the double object of restoring health to the sufferers and of diminishing
the source of infection of the intermediate host; secondly, an attack on the intermediate host, both directly
and by eliminating conditions which favour its continued existence ; thirdly, education of the population
in matters of health and hygiene, particularly with reference to the hazards in their own area.
109. The apathy with which endemic disease is accepted in a primitive community is a hindrance to
any attempt at eradication. The benefits of cure or amelioration by treatment must first be demonstrated
to the local community in order to win the confidence and co-operation of the people, if efforts towards pre-
vention are to be successful. This can best be done by sending carefully trained and selected teams into the
villages rather than by attempting to coerce patients into attending hospitals or other treatment centres.
110. Any attack on the vector or intermediate host calls for a concerted effort which must include
specialists in fields other than that of medicine. The problems involve the entomologist, the civil and water
engineer and often the botanist as well as the medical officer. We have mentioned elsewhere the need for
closer co-operation between the Ministry of Health and those ministries and departments whose activities
in developing the country may effectively aid the promotion of a healthy community or may influence the
general health adversely. Two examples may be given of which we had evidence. In the Northern Territories
the impounding of water for the use of cattle is providing additional breeding grounds for snails and where
the people have access to this water for washing or drinking, contamination with schistosoma is almost certain
as long as there is infestation of the local population. Again, in the Northern Territories excellent work has
been done by the tsetse control organisation under the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources. River
valleys have been cleared and resettlement is being officially encouraged ; but we are told that some of these
same valleys are the haunts of simulium damnosum, with the consequence that the population may be brought
back only to suffer a higher percentage of blindness from onchocerciasis in the future. It appears that in
these developments the Medical Department has not been asked for advice.
CHAPTER VI
PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVING THE MEDICAL SERVICE
111. In this chapter we set out our principal- recommendations for improving the medical service of
the Gold Coast. The chapter deals only with the main structure of the service and our recommendations can
be summed up very shortly. In our opinion the immediate and most urgent medical needs of the Gold Coast
can be met by :
{a) expansion of the medical field units ;
{b) improvement of hospital facilities ;
(c) the setting up of health centres at nodal points in a network which embraces hospitals and
dressing stations ;
(i d) increase in number of dressing stations.
112. We claim no originality for these proposals. Hospitals have long been familiar in the larger
centres. Dressing stations and medical field units, though of more recent origin, are an established part of
the service. Health centres were recommended ten years ago by the Director at that time and form part of
the policy of the present Director. The Government have already built one and authorised two others.
113. There can be no sharp distinction between preventive and curative medicine ; organisations
may be set up which concentrate their activities more on one than the other, but the two can never be wholly
separated. More particularly is this the case in underdeveloped countries with a low educational standard
and a heavy incidence of endemic disease which the great mass of people tend to accept as part of the natural
burden of life. None the less in making our recommendations we have consciously aimed at shifting the
emphasis from the curative to the preventive side and it is for this reason that we place in the forefront the
medical field units. For the rest we would emphasise once again the importance of continuity of policy. The
proposals we make will have little effect, unless they are not only accepted in the first instance but are adhered
to and carried through as a long term operation.
{a) Expansion of the Medical Field Units
114. The enlargement of this organisation and a widening of its scope appears to us to offer the best
method of attacking endemic disease and the apathy with which it is accepted. The advantages of expanding
this service and extending its sphere of activity to embrace the Colony would lie not only in the clearing up
of a vast amount of endemic disease, but in the collection of statistical data on the incidence of disease,
without which a complete plan for a rational health organisation cannot be drawn up. The reduction of
disease, together with instruction of the people in hygiene and preventive methods of combatting disease,
should reduce appreciably the burden on hospital out-patient departments and special clinics.
115. We recommend, therefore, that steps be taken, as soon as possible, to expand the medical field
units. In addition to the specialist, there should be six medical officers; two of these should be responsible
for work in the Northern Territories, one for Ashanti, one for the western half of the Colony and one for the
eastern half. The sixth would be needed for relief duties but could also be profitably employed in special
investigations. There should also be two biologists, one of them an entomologist.
116. Senior laboratory technical staff to assist in the training of more microscopists and officers of the
rank of sanitary superintendent for supervisory purposes and for instructing junior staff in health matters
will also be needed. Recruits to the junior ranks of the enlarged service must be chosen with care ; they
should preferably, and in some districts must, be selected from local sources so that they know the language
and habits of the community and are thereby more likely to gain the confidence of the people and to be more
effective in health education.


Projected New Hospitals or Extensions of Existing Hospitals
Place
Additional
number of beds
(a) Colony
Remarks
Accra (Gold_Coast Hospital) ...
—
Addition of children’s ward.
Axim
... ...
12
Extension of existing hospital.
Dunkwa ...
—
Hospital to be rebuilt.
Hohoe
...
28
New hospital completed but not yet occupied.
Mpraeso ...
40
New hospital to be built by missionaries
with Government contribution.
Sekondi ...
28
Extension of existing hospital.
Tarkwa
.. ... —
Hospital to be extended or rebuilt. Decision
not yet taken.
Wiawso ...
...
52
New hospital. Not yet decided whether
the hospital should be at Wiawso or
Awaso.
Worawora
120
(b) Ashanti
New hospital to be built by missionaries
with Government contribution.
Berekum
...
24
New Maternity Hospital to be built by
missionaries with Government contribu-
tion.
Kumasi
270
New 500 bed hospital to replace existing
hospital.
Mampong
... ...
24
New Maternity Hospital to be built by
missionaries with Government contribu-
tion.
(c) Northern Territories
Bawku
... ...
47
New hospital.
Bolgatanga
66
New hospital completed but not yet occupied.
Jirapa
...
120
New hospital.
Nandom
—
New Maternity Hospital subsidiary to Jirapa.
Navrongo
...
18
New hospital.
Wa
48
Hospital to be rebuilt.
117. Suitable headquarters should be selected for the western and for the eastern sections of the Colony
at which the training of junior staff could be carried out. Kintampo and Gambaga already serve Ashanti
and the Northern Territories respectively, although it has been suggested to us that Kintampo is not entirely
suitable as a centre for training ; without a more intimate knowledge of Ashanti we are not in a position to
comment on this. The question of establishing a further training headquarters in the Northern Territories
should be considered. At each headquarters there should be a senior laboratory technician capable of
teaching laboratory technique to junior staff and of giving technical assistance in research ; there should also
be a sanitary superintendent capable of supervising work in the field and of teaching junior staff the
elements of personal hygiene and village sanitation, so that they in turn can give simple practical instruction
to the people. The numbers of microscopists and other field workers should be increased appropriately ; the
additional numbers required must be a matter for those with experience of the actual work to be undertaken.
Arrangements should be made for the provision and maintenance of an adequate number of suitable vehicles.
118. We regard the development of the medical field units as of first importance, but it is evident that
they alone cannot provide a complete medical service. It will always be necessary to provide for the treat-
ment of diseases due to unknown causes or to the follies and errors of man and this provision can only be
made on the basis of a network of static institutions spread over the country. As the great bulk of illness
can be dealt with by simple methods, these institutions need not all be fully equipped hospitals ; they can
therefore be provided at less cost.
(b) Hospitals
119. As already stated, a list of existing hospitals with the number of beds in each is set out in Appendix
D. In addition to these, the Development Plan, 1951 provides for a number of new hospitals or extensions
to existing hospitals. These are as follows, and we have stated in the second column the number of beds
which, as we understand from the Medical Department, will be added :
Extension or rebuilding of the hospital at Tarkwa is included in the above table and shown on the map
at the end of our Report, though it is not mentioned in the Development Plan. It appears that the cost of
providing this hospital was in fact included in the capital sum originally allocated in the Plan for new hospital
construction. We inspected the hospital and think that it should be enlarged by the addition of 70 beds.
We understand that in place of the proposed Government hospital at Damongo a hospital will be built
by the'Gonja Development Company.


120. Beyond these we do not recommend any further increase in the number of hospitals during the
next five years, although we recognise the number of hospital beds in proportion to population is still low.
When this projected programme is completed there will be some 3,900 hospital beds in the country or (on an
estimated population of four and three-quarter million) one bed to every 1,200 of the population.
It will be no easy matter to provide the trained staff for hospitals already built but not opened and
for those projected. In our opinion it would be unwise to build more until the training of nurses is better
organised to produce a steady and reliable annual output. If the number of nurses produced in the next
five years should, by good fortune, prove to be greater than can be foreseen at the moment, they will be needed
to meet the urgent demands for more midwives and health visitors or to replace those nurses of senior grade
who have been chosen for training as clinic superintendents in health centres.
121. Small hospitals are uneconomic both in staffing and administration. On the other hand, larger
hospitals can only provide a satisfactory service if they are easily accessible to a wide community. The lack
of roads and the poor state of many of those which do exist create serious difficulties in transporting patients
to hospital. The development of roads and railways has an important effect on local population densities
and so affects materially the choice of site and the size of new hospitals.
122. We recommend that at the end of five years the need for additional hospitals be given further
consideration. We hope that by that time the training of medical auxiliaries will be more effectively
organised and that it will be easier to forecast the general development of the country ; more rational planning
of medical services should then be possible.
123. Hospital Management Committees. —We understand that as a matter of administrative arrangement
all the Government hospitals have Boards of Visitors whose duty it is to visit and inspect the hospital not
less frequently than once a year and to make a report to the Medical Department. The members of the
boards are appointed annually by the Minister and their appointments are notified in the Gazette.
124. While visiting Kumasi we had some discussion with members of the board for the general hospital
and the child welfare clinic in that town. Complaint was made to us that their reports appeared to receive
scant attention at headquarters in Accra and it subsequently appeared that there was a delay of some four
months in commenting on their suggestions. It was urged on us that these boards were of little value, unless
their functions were something more then purely advisory.
125. We do not agree that an advisory board composed of local people with local knowledge may not
serve a useful purpose and we do not suggest any alteration of the system for the great bulk of Government
hospitals. But in the case of three major towns, Accra, Kumasi and Sekondi-Takoradi, we have decided to
recommend a change. We do so with the aim of relieving the Ministry of Health of much detailed accounting
and other work connected with these hospitals and also of stimulating local pride and interest in the hospitals
and providing a valuable form of public service. We regard the latter aim as by far the more important of
the two.
126. There is in our view no middle course between having a Visiting Committee with purely advisory
functions and a body which is given real responsiblities —in short a hospital management committee. Any-
thing more than the one and less than the other may lead to a dangerous division of responsibility between
the Ministry of Health and the committee.
127. The precise powers and duties of these committees would have to be worked out in detail, but w r e
suggest that the principles should be as follows :
(1) The committee, as now, would be appointed by the Minister. The term of office of the members
should be three years and they should be eligible for reappointment.
(2) In Accra the committee would be responsible for Korle Bu, the Ridge Hospital and the Princess
Marie Louise Hospital ; and similarly in Kumasi and Sekondi-Takoradi for all the hospitals in
either town.
(3) The Secretary to each committee should be a Government officer with the qualifications of a hospital
administrator. Under the general directions of the committee he would be responsible for the
day to day administration of the hospitals.
(4) The whole medical, nursing and other pensionable staff of the hospitals would remain Government
officers whose appointments, promotions, dismissals, etc., would be regulated as now by the Minister
of Health or under the machinery of the Public Service Commisssion as the case may require.
(5) The medical staff should form themselves into a medical committee. This committee would elect
its own chairman, who would have the right to attend meetings of the management committee
and convey to them the views of his colleagues on technical matters. The medical committee
would normally consult the matron or senior nursing sister on nursing matters.
(6) The committee of management would submit annual estimates for approval of the Minister and
subject to any directions that the Minister might give, would be authorised to incur expenditure
within the limits of the estimate.
(7) The Minister should prescribe the form in which the hospital accounts should be kept and
the accounts should be audited by an auditor, appointed by the Government.
(8) The committee should make an annual report to the Minister and this should include the report
of the medical committee.
If these recommendations are adopted and the experiment proves successful, similar arrangements
might be made elsewhere, but we think it essential that the hospital or group of hospitals should be large
enough to justify the appointment of a trained hospital administrator.


128. Hospital services and staffing. —We have not been able to visit every hospital in the country, but
in many of those we have visited we have noticed the paucity and often the absence of beds in single cubicles
or wards of two beds. Representations have been made to us by Africans, pointing out the disadvantages
of lying in a ward with other patients whose ideas of hygienic principles may leave much to be desired or the
nature of whose disease gives rise to feelings of apprehension or repugnance. We think these objections,are
valid, and, appreciating the difficulties of segregation in a small hospital, we recommend that in all hospitals,
by the building of extensions where necessary, there should be provided in single and two-bedded cubicles,
not less than six beds. These beds should be available for two purposes, (a) to provide isolation for cases
where isolation is necessary on medical grounds and ( b) to provide privacy for patients who are prepared to
pay a charge for the privilege. Separate accommodation should be provided for cases of tuberculosis
(paragraph 355).
129. In the majority of hospitals, patients must provide their own food unless they are paupers or,
what we are told amounts to the same thing, they have no relatives. It is generally recognised in modern
medicine that diet plays an essential part in the treatment of disease, but the habitual diets in many parts of
the Gold Coast are notoriously ill-balanced ; malnutrition is all too common, especially in children, and probably
contributes materially to morbidity. We recommend, therefore, that food should be provided for all patients
in hospital and that diets should be drawn up on a scientific basis, with due consideration, when possible, to-
the previous dietary habits of the patient. Apa r t from scientific considerations we make this recommendation
also on the grounds that the disturbance caused by the flooding of wards by relatives at meal times and the
doubtful standard of hygiene observed in serving meals cannot be in the best interests of the patients.
130. The problem of dealing expeditiously with large numbers of out-patients is acute in the larger
centres of population and steps should be taken to improve the present position by better organisation and by
the improvement of outpatient accommodation. This reorganisation is particularly important in the centres
providing specialist services. We assume that in Kumasi the problem was given due consideration when
the plans of the new hospital were drawn up. We understand that in Sekondi-Takoradi steps have been
taken to improve facilities, but in Accra, a new outpatient department is an urgent necessity at Korle Bu
and improvements at the Ridge Hospital are equally necessary. The question of establishing an additional
outpatient department in another part of Accra might be considered ; an analysis of the districts of the town
from which outpatients now come would aid the selection of an appropriate site. Some relief to the over-
crowded outpatient departments might be afforded if, as we suggest later (paragraph 327), special sessions
are set aside for patients who are willing and able to pay a fee to the hospital.
131. In all hospitals providing specialist services, modem diagnostic facilities should be available and
of these radiology is one of the most important. At Korle Bu there should be a new building provided for
the radiological department to give adequate space both for routine and special work and for the training of
radiographers. This will be the more necessary if, as we suggest later (paragraph 207), African students after
taking their medical course in the United Kingdom return to the Gold Coast for work in hospitals before
admission to the register.
132. The association of radiology and physiotherapy is something of an anachronism. The day has
long passed when a knowledge of electrical principles provided a claim to practise even in a limited field of
physiotherapy. We recommend that the department of radiology should be relieved of responsibility for
physiotherapy and that, in those centres where the volume of work merits it, a separate department
of physiotherapy be established in charge of a qualified physiotherapist under the supervision of a physician
or surgeon.
133. We heard many references to the need to employ almoners in hospitals, but were surprised to
find that the general impression still prevailed that an almoner was someone who assessed the capacity of a
patient to pay charges. The Report of the Committees on Medical Auxiliaries (Cmd. 8188) published in the
United Kingdom in 1951 defined an almoner as “ a social worker trained to assist the medical practitioner
in the investigation and treatment of disease by elucidating and adjusting social and economic factors which
contribute to disability and impede restoration to health ”. We do not think that, at the present stage of
development of the country, it would be beneficial to employ almoners in hospitals in the Gold Coast. We
recommend, however, that an almoner when she has had experience of social and economic conditions in the
Gold Coast, should assist in the training of health visitors.
134. Specialist services in diagnosis and treatment should be based on the four centres, Accra, Kumasi,
Sekondi-Takoradi and Tamale. We do not think it necessary to provide specialist services at Cape Coast
at present and suggest that three general duties medical officers should form the staff of the hospital, with
responsibilities for the supervision of health centres and dressing stations in the district.
135. We offer the following suggestions for staffing the specialist hospitals to deal with the variety and
volume of work they now undertake. Modifications in staffing will inevitably be necessary to meet changing
conditions. We have not included pathologists in these lists but have dealt with them separately in the next
chapter.
Accra
(G. C. Hospital, Ridge Hospital, Maternity Hospital and Princess Marie Louise Hospital).
One specialist physician and an assistant of the grade of medical officer.
One specialist surgeon and an assistant of the grade of medical officer.
One specialist in each of the following branches :
Obstetrics, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, radiology and anaesthesia.
Four medical officers for inpatient and outpatient work and for general duties.
Three medical officers for duties in the maternity unit and at the Princess Marie Louise Hospital-
One medical officer as house surgeon.
The services of two part-time medical officers may be necessary to assist in the outpatient
department or at special clinics.


Kumasi
One specialist physician and one specialist surgeon, each with an assistant as suggested for Accra.
One specialist in each of the following branches :
Obstetrics, ophthalmology, radiology.
Four medical officers for inpatient and outpatient work and for general duties; one officer should
supervise a group of health centres round Kumasi.
Two medical officers for duties in the maternity unit and at the children’s hospital.
One medical officer as house surgeon.
As in the case of Accra it may be necessary to employ one or more part-time medical officers for
work in clinics.
Sekondi-Takoradi
One specialist physician, one specialist surgeon, one senior medical officer and three medical
officers should provide adequate staff.
Tamale
One specialist surgeon, one ophthalmologist and three medical officers. One of the medical officers
should be responsible for the supervision of dressing stations round Tamale. It might be an advantage
to have the ophthalmologist based on Bolgatanga rather than Tamale.
136. Hostels for nurses. —We have heard much of the exorbitant rents which nurses in Government
hospitals often find themselves compelled to pay for accommodation and in some cases the long distances
which they have to travel. We appreciate the formidable difficulty in the way of attempting to provide
accommodation for the whole of the Government staff, but none the less in the case of unmarried female nurses,
we consider that, so far as practicable, hostel accommodation should be provided for those who desire it and
cannot live in their own homes, or with relatives. We understand that accommodation is in fact being provided
for this purpose in the new hospital at Kumasi.
137. Ambulances. —Some provision has already been made for hospital ambulances. We understand
that 15 are now in use and a further 22 on order. We recommend that every hospital should have
one > ambulance. At the larger hospital centres at least two ambulances will be needed. A driver and
attendant should be available for each vehicle and both should be trained in first-aid and stretcher bearing.
When not engaged on ambulance duties they could be employed in the wards or outpatient department.
From evidence we have heard it seems clear that the lives of many patients are jeopardised, if not indeed
lost, by rough journeys to hospital in lorries and the unskilled handling the patients receive from untrained
helpers. The provision of ambulances with trained attendants will do much to save life and ease the task
of the doctor in hospital.
It is essential, however, that there should be an efficient maintenance service to ensure that ambulances
are kept in sound order ; this will be no easy task.
138. Mental Hospitals. In addition to the specialist in psychiatry at the mental hospital in Accra
there should be a medical officer with a special aptitude for psychiatry. When the new mental hospital is
built in Kumasi, it should similarly have one specialist in psychiatry and one medical officer.
Health Centres
139. Our conception of a health centre in the Gold Coast is a building or group of buildings suitably
staffed and equipped to treat minor illnesses, to offer a limited maternity and child welfare service and to
instruct the local community in matters of health and hygiene. It will be operated by a team of workers
engaged in curative and preventive medicine and in educating the people in matters of personal and environ-
mental hygiene. The composition and size of this team cannot be rigidly laid down because it must, if it is to
work effectively, be capable of variation in accordance with the area and the density of population of the
district over which its activities range and with the proximity and accessibility of hospitals. In general, the
curative will receive less emphasis than the preventive aspect of medicine, and treatment should be looked on
as a means of gaining the confidence of the people and securing through this confidence their active
co-operation in preventive and educational measures. The success or failure of a health centre will depend on
the calibre of the staff employed. They must work as a team and, therefore, their selection should be based on
personality, integrity of character and a sense of responsibility at least as much as on technical qualifications.
140. Detailed plans for health centres may well differ considerably in different localities. In general,
however, there must be waiting accommodation for patients attending for treatment and waiting accom-
modation for those attending welfare and ante-natal clinics. The same space may be used for both purposes
if clinics are held at different times, but it is fundamentally important to ensure that sick and healthy should
not mingle indiscriminately. Separate accommodation may have to be made in some places. There should
also be not more than four beds, preferably in single or double cubicles, in which emergency cases may be
kept pending removal by ambulance to hospital. A consulting room, treatment room, small dispensary and
store and offices for the superintendent and sanitary inspector will also be needed together with accommodation
for maternity and child welfare work. Living quarters should be provided at least for the superintendent and
midwife. A site should be chosen on which expansion is possible.
141. If these health centres are to provide an efficient service they must be under the effective super-
vision of a medical officer and their recommended distribution is such that, with few exceptions, they can
reasonably be grouped round and act as the satellites of existing or projected hospitals.
4


The officer in charge of a health centre should be a man of not less than 30 years of age and of proved
capacity,as a nurse, who has had a special course of training to fit him for the work. This post might carry
dhe title of Clinic Superintendent. He would be responsible to a district medical officer for the administration
and for the organisation of the work of the centre. He would also carry out such forms of treatment as the
medical officer authorises him to do. An important duty of the clinic superintendent should be to supervise
the local authority dressing stations in his area. The special training for the post of clinic superintendent
should lay emphasis on the importance of preventive medicine and on the instruction in simple matters of
personal hygiene of patients attending for treatment.
142. The other members of the staff of a health centre should be at least one midwife, with or without
a nursing qualification, and a sanitary inspector. In those centres where the clinic superintendent supervises
several'dressing stations, there should be a nurse, preferably a woman, who would assist in treatment and
deputise for the superintendent in his absence. As soon as practicable a fully trained health visitor should
replace the midwife, although in some centres the volume of work may well justify retaining the midwife to
assist the health visitor. The midwife or health visitor should hold ante-natal and welfare clinics. The
sanitary inspector should be given supervisory duties over the sanitary organisations of local authorities and
should hold classes of instruction in environmental hygiene both for junior sanitary staff and for village com-"
munities. It should be the object of all the staff of a health centre to interest these communities in health
matters.
: 143. With the help of officers of the Ministry of Health and the Medical Department we have set out
in Appendix E and shown in the map at the end of this Report a tentative disposition of 43 new health centres
which, we think, will go far to meet immediate needs. The general principles which have guided us in the
selection of sites have been the density of population of the area, accessibility and means of communication,
distance from hospitals and certain geographical considerations which bear on the question of accessibility.
We do not presume to suggest that the positions selected are ideal in every case. It may well be that those
with a greater knowledge of local conditions and of the probable future course of development of roads or
railways may have other ideas and we should be content to leave the final selection of a site to them. Our
object in marking a position on the map is merely to indicate the locality in which we think a centre is needed.
Where the selected site for a health centre is in a town or village in which there is already a Government dispen-
sary or local authority dressing station, the health centre should replace it; in the case of a dressing station
consideration should be given to its transfer to another part of the area. In one instance—Nandom in the
Northern Territories —we suggest a health centre in place of the subsidiary hospital mentioned in the Develop-
ment Plan. In view of the proximity of Lawra and Jirapa we think that a health centre at Nandom, possibly
with some maternity beds, would suffice. In our view, the aim should be to complete these health centres
within the next five years. The major difficulty in achieving this aim will be the provision of suitably trained
staff. We deal with this problem later in Chapters IX and X.
144. Integration oj hospital and health centres. The health centre, in addition to ‘providing a medical
service in areas where none is now available, majr in certain places act as a filter to prevent the flooding
of out-patient departments of hospitals and to select suitable cases for transmission to hospital. If this and
the other functions of a health centre are to be carried out efficiently, the centre must be visited regularly and
frequently by a medical officer. He should hold a clinic once a week at the health centre in order to see cases
referred to him by the clinic superintendent. He should take the opportunity on these occasions of reviewing
and advising on the work of all members of the staff. The duty of the clinic superintendent of supervising the
activities of dressers in local authority dressing stations should not absolve the medical officer himself from
paying periodical visits to these stations.
145. It has been represented to us that mobile clinics or mobile “ dispensaries ” would be a valuable
adjunct,to the health services. But if mobile units of the type suggested are to serve a useful purpose, they
must be able to reach a predetermined place on a day and at a time previously advertised. Moreover, if they
are to carry out a prolonged course of treatment, the regularity of their visits is important. From a close
scrutiny of maps and from our own experience of roads and transport in the Gold Coast, we have no hesitation
in saying that the provision of mobile clinics or dispensaries would be a wasteful procedure, not only in money
and material, but in manpower. With the establishment of health centres and dressing stations on the scale
contemplated, we think these mobile units would be superfluous.
Dressing Stations
I4G. By virtue of section 170 of the Local Government Ordinance, 1951, native authority dressing
stations will pass to the new local authorities as these authorities come into being. These dressing stations,
of w-hich there are some 102, serve a useful purpose and should be continued. The dispensaries belonging to
the Government which have not been merged into health centres should be handed over to the appropriate
local authorities and become dressing stations. It should be made clear that in future the responsibility for
providing and maintaining dressing stations lies solely with these authorities. The number of dressing
stations -which might suitably be grouped round a health centre and act as feeders to it must of course depend
upon the density of the local population and other circumstances, such as communications; but six or seven
might be regarded as a normal group. All dressing stations should be supervised by the clinic superintendent
of the health centre serving the area. The district medical officer should also inspect them at intervals and
advise on the stock of medicines and dressings to be kept. It may happen—and we ourselves have seen one
or two examples—that the attendance of patients at a dressing station is not enough to justify its existence.
Where there is evidence of this, enquiry should be made to determine the cause. It may sometimes be
advisable to move the dressing station to another part of the area.


147. In the staffing of health centres and local authority dressing stations, provision must be made lor
the relief of members of the staff absent on leave. A well established ante-natal or welfare clinic should not
be allowed to lapse during the absence of a midwife and a plan must be devised in each district to meet this and
similar needs. Hospital staffing should be on a scale which will allow for reliefs to be provided both for health
centres and for dressing stations. Whenever convenient, health centres or dressing stations might be used
as a base for the static portion of a medical field unit.
Staffing of the Medical Districts
148. The setting up of health centres and the additional functions which will be assigned to the newly
constituted local authorities will add very substantially to the burdens of the staff at the headquarters of a
medical district. In addition to the supervision of health centres and of dressing stations the medical staff
will presumably have to act as medical advisers to the local authorities and to exercise a general supervision
over their public health activities. They will also, if our later recommendation (paragraph 169) is adopted, be
responsible for the school health service. Thus the medical officers in charge of the district hospitals, as
distinct from the large hospitals, will have a wide variety of duties outside the hospital. In our view it is
impossible for one medical officer in the majority of cases to carry out satisfactorily all these duties in
addition to his clinical responsibilities.
We recommend that the distribution of medical officers throughout the various districts should be as
follows ;
Colony ... ... ... ... 2 medical officers at Akuse, Axim, Dunkwa, Ho, Hohoe, Keta, Kibi,
Koforidua, Nsawam, Oda, Tarkwa and Winneba ;
1 at Saltpond.
Ashanti ... ... ... ... 2 medical officers at Sunyani;
1 medical officer at Bekwai;
1 medical officer at Juaso.
Northern Territories ... ... 4 medical officers to form the medical staff of the group of three
hospitals at Bawku, Bolgatanga and Navrongo ;
2 medical officers at Yendi;
1 medical officer each at Lawra, Wa and Salaga.
The medical officer proposed for Juaso will not be based on any Government hospital as the town and
a wide area round it are served by mining and mission hospitals at Konongo, Mampong, Mpraeso and Agogo.
None the less we think that a Government doctor to carry out the duties of a medical officer of health
in that part of Ashanti is essential.
149. Our proposals for the future establishment of medical staff, including recommendations made in
other chapters of this report, may be summarised as follows :
A —Medical officers
District 38
Medical Field Units ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Hospitals (including pathologists) ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Medical Officers of Health (towns) ' 5
Assistant Medical Officers of Health (School health work) ... ... 3
Regional in Colony (senior officers) ... ... ... ... 2
Medical Inspector of Mines (senior officer) 1
91
B—Specialists
Medicine ... ... ... 3 Epidemiology
Surgery ... ... ... 4 (a) Tuberculosis , .. ... 1
Obstetrics 2 (b) Field Units ... ... . 1
Ophthalmology ... ... 3 Malaria ... ... ... ... 1 -
Psychiatry 2 Leprosy ... 1
Pathology 2 Otolaryngology .. ... 1
Radiology ... ... ... 2 Anaesthesia .. ... 1
24
C—Assistant Directors of Medical Services
1. Regional ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
2. Headquarters , 2 5
D —Deputy Director of Medical Services ... ... ... ... ... ••• I
E—Director of Medical Services ... ... ... ... ... ••• 1
122
150. We have been impressed with the difficulties of maintaining continuity and efficiency of services
owing to the inability to find reliefs for all grades of medical officer during periods of leave and to the long
delays which often occur in filling a vacant post when the holder retires. We therefore recommend that the
figure of 122 should be increased to 150 to provide for these contingencies. It is recognised, of course, that a
relief of equal rank cannot always be provided for specialists, but the suggestion we have made in paragraph 135
above of having an assistant physician and an assistant surgeon in some hospitals might be adopted in other
specialties. We would also recommend that the leave periods of specialists and their assistants should be so
organised that a specialty is not denuded of expert officers.
4 A


CHAPTER VII
FURTHER PROPOSALS
151. In the previous chapter we have outlined the main framework of a Gold Coast Medical Service
as we conceive it. In the present chapter we deal with other important elements in the service, namely—
Pathological Services ;
Medical Research ;
School Health Service ; and
Health Education.
The chapter also deals with two matters which have been frequently brought to our notice —the medical
stores branch of the Medical Department and the question of registration and inspection of private nursing
homes.
Pathological Service
152. Well organised and readily available pathological facilities are an essential part of an efficient
medical or health service.. Pathological, including biochemical and bacteriological, investigations play an
important part both in preventive and curative medicine and are an indispensable element in most modern
research work. It is obviously not possible to have a pathologist in every small hospital, but laboratory
technicians can be trained to carry out the simpler procedures of clinical pathology in a laboratory which need
not be lavishly equipped. We have ourselves seen in a number of Government hospitals small laboratories
in which useful work within a narrow field appears to have been done, with carefully kept records, by techni-
cians who have had little training. It should be possible with further training to enlarge the scope of this
work.
153. In addition to the simple investigations for which facilities should be provided at even the smallest
hospital, it should be possible for every medical officer to have the advice and assistance of a pathologist when
necessary. It is not easy to offer such a service in the Gold Coast because of the wide distribution of small
hospitals and the difficulties of transport. Nevertheless, the present position would be greatly improved if
suitably equipped laboratories were provided at Kumasi, Tamale, and Sekondi-Takoradi. A pathologist
with adequate junior staff should be stationed at each of these places and it will be necessary to provide for
two pathologists in Kumasi when the new general and mental hospitals are built there ; one of these should be
of specialist status. These laboratories should be capable of dealing not only with investigations required by
hospitals but also with those in the field of public health ; with the anticipated growth in the responsibilities
of municipal and other local authorities, this latter field of work may well increase.
154. A new laboratory should be provided at Korle Bu hospital, fully equipped to meet the needs of the
hospital for routine investigations and to provide facilities for members of the clinical staff who may be engaged
in research problems involving laboratory work.
155. In Accra there should be a staff of three pathologists, one of whom should have the training and
experience to entitle him to be graded as a specialist. He should be responsible to the Director for the
organisation and efficiency of the pathological service, the headquarters of which would be the Medical Research
Institute. The other two pathologists would be responsible for the supervision of the new laboratory at Korle
Bu, for investigations required by other hospitals in Accra and for relief duties in other centres. The Medical
Research Institute would be the reference laboratory for the other centres and should be reorganised and
enlarged to offer facilities to visiting medical officers or biologists. It should also provide a library of reference
books and periodicals on medical and scientific subjects which would meet the needs not only of research
workers, but of medical officers generally, offering a lending service to officers outside Accra.
156. The training of laboratory technicians should be established on a firmer basis than at present by
concentrating the preliminary training on Accra and Kumasi when accommodation is available in the latter
place. This preliminary training should cover one year, during which elementary science and the basic methods
of laboratory technique should be taught. Those students who have made satisfactory progress and are able
to pass a test examination at the end of the year should be drafted for a further two years to hospital labora-
tories in one of the four centres where a pathologist is stationed and where there is senior technical staff.
Under no conditions should he be sent to take charge of a hospital laboratory until he has satisfactorily com-
pleted his two years of apprenticeship. The grade of microscopist should be abolished except in connection
with elementary work in the medical field units.
157. In order to ensure the satisfactory training of laboratory assistants more senior staff is necessary,
and we recommend that there should be two senior laboratory superintendents, eight laboratory superin-
tendents and (for service in medical field units, see paragraph 117) three senior laboratory assistants. We
think that the service would be strengthened if the proportion of First Division laboratory assistants to
Second Division was increased. At the Medical Research Institute there should also be an administrative
assistant, a librarian and the appropriate clerical staff.
Medical Research
158. The problems in medicine and social medicine or public health in the Gold Coast which call for
research are largely those common to West Africa as a whole. Organised medical research on any considerable
scale is expensive, and capable research workers are not so numerous as is generally supposed. It would
appear reasonable, therefore, that countries which have common problems should, in organising research,
share their resources in money, manpower and facilities. Much thought has been given to this matter in
recent years in West Africa and, as a result of discussions between representatives of Nigeria, the Gold Coast,
Sierra Leone and the Gambia, in association with representatives of tropical research interests in the United
Kingdom, it was decided to set up a body to be known as the West African Standing Advisory Committee for
Medical Research. In addition to four official members representing medicine and two members representing
higher education in the four territories, the Colonial Medical Research Committee and the Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine each appoint one member ; the Committee has a non-medical chairman.


159. At a meeting in May, 1951 of the Directors of Medical Services and of other persons in West Africa
concerned with medical research, it was recommended that a survey of medical research in West Africa
should be made to examine the facilities available and the possibility of co-ordinating research efforts. This
survey was carried out by the Director of the West African Institute for Trypanosomiasis Research and the
results were communicated to the West African Standing Advisory Committee for Medical Research at its
first meeting in April, 1952 in Ibadan. The Committee thus had an assessment both of the present position
and of the future possibilities of research in the four territories on which it could draw up plans for the future
in accordance with its proposed functions. We understand that these functions are (a) to advise on the order
of priority to be accorded to research problems, (6) to keep under review all research activities, (c) to advise on
the means of ensuring that the results of research are applied in practice, ( d ) to promote the maximum degree
of co-ordination of research work and co-operation between research workers and ( e ) to serve as a connecting
link between West Africa and other countries, particularly the United Kingdom.
160. We have not had the advantage of seeing the agreed minutes of the meeting held at Ibadan in
April, 1952, but we understand that the West African Standing Advisory Committee for Medical Research
concluded that the needs of medical research in West Africa could best be met by setting up a statutory body
which would have general responsibility for the organisation, co-ordination and conduct of research in West
Africa and which could hold and administer funds placed at its disposal. We agree with this conclusion and
recommend that full support should be given to the establishment of a West African Council for Medical
Research as a statutory body. The composition of the Council would presumably be similar to that of the
West African Standing Advisory Committee for Medical Research, reinforced by financial or administrative
representatives and by a secretary of recognised ability in medical research in tropical countries.
The creation of such a Council would provide the flexibility of administration and action which is so
essential in research projects, but which is inherently lacking in direct Government control. As a
semi-autonomous body with statutory functions and with direct connections with other research and
educational organisations it should be able to select and attract research workers of the highest calibre for
work in West Africa. It is hoped too, that it would be able to attract funds for research purposes from private
sources such as large industrial undertakings with interests in West Africa.
While we recommend that the Gold Coast Government should give its full support to the proposed
organisation for co-ordinating medical research in West Africa, we hope that every encouragement will be
given to individual medical officers engaged in all branches of work to undertake investigations within their
own field. There are many opportunities during routine work of making observations and keeping records
which may well make a valuable contribution to medical knowledge or at least provide a starting point for
more organised research.
161. The opening in 1921 of the Medical Research Institute in Accra was the outcome of the approval
given by the Secretary of State in 1920 to a project for the formation of a Medical Research Department in
the Gold Coast with a director in charge and a staff of six pathologists. The Institute has made valuable
contributions to our knowledge of tropical diseases and will always be associated with pioneer work on yellow
fever. It was here in 1927 that Dr. Mahaffy of the Rockefeller Foundation isolated the virus of yellow fever
and transmitted the disease to monkeys ; this is the original strain of virus responsible for the vaccine now so
widely used. It was here in 1928 that Dr. H. Noguchi and Dr. W. A. Young (Director of the Institute) during
their investigations on yellow fever, contracted the disease and met untimely deaths. Owing to shortage of
senior staff during and since the 1939-45 war, research output has dwindled. We would like to see an attempt
made to restore the former glory of the Institute.
162. We understand it has been proposed that the projected Council for Medical Research should take
over the administration of some of the research institutions in West Africa. We do not think the Medical
Research Institute in Accra should be included in this category. If our recommendations on the development
of pathological services are accepted, the Institute will become the reference laboratory and reference library
for the Gold Coast medical service ; it will also be relieved of much of the simpler routine work (paragraph 155).
These changes should enable it to offer greater facilities for research work and we have no doubt the Government
will recognise the value of attracting visiting research workers by making these facilities freely available and,
if need be, of improving them on the advice of the Council for Medical Research.
School Health Service
163. The medical inspection of school children in the Gold Coast was started soon after the end of the
First World War when several women medical officers were appointed ; they carried out a regular inspection
of children in infant and junior schools and of girls in senior schools of the towns of Accra, Sekondi, Koforidua
and Kumasi. The local medical officers of health were responsible for the senior boys schools. Retrench-
ment after 1932 much reduced the scope of the service and it was left largely to local medical officers of health
and to district medical officers to carry out such medical inspection of school children as their many other
duties allowed.
164. Teachers are given some training in the detection and treatment of minor maladies and in the
Northern Territories hold a stock of simple medicines. The children receive free treatment at a cost to the
state of about £5 per school per annum. In the Northern Territories, too, where schools are fewer than in
other parts of the country, the district medical officer makes an annual inspection of school children and a
medical record card is kept for each child.


Number examined boys 2,762 ; girls 880.
Malaria parasites present ...
Boys
32-2%
Girls
38.4% ,
Combined
33-7%
Diseases of the skin ;
(a) Scabies
12-2%
9-4%
H-5%
( b ) Tinea
. ..
2-6%
1-6%
2-3%
(c) Other conditions
23-2%
11*8%
20-5%
Defects in mouth and of teeth
33-4%
34-1%'
33-6%
Enlarged Tonsils
29-5%
37-3%
3D4%
Vision
(a) Fair (6/18 both eyes)
8-4%
d-9%
8-5%
( b ) Poor (6/24 one eye or worse)
D5%
3-8%
4-3%
Yaws ...
O'"
CO
2-0%
2-6%
165. The medical care of school children is a logical continuation of maternity and child welfare work.
Free treatment in Government institutions has always been given to children in Government schools. The
study and practice of healthy living should form part of the everyday life of all schools and every school
should be an object lesson in hygiene. The following extracts from the reports of the Medical Department
for the years 1946-50 are illuminating in this respect:—
1946. “ School Hygiene. There is no established school medical service. School children when
sick are referred to the district hospitals. District medical officers also carry out
periodical inspections of the schools in their districts when their many other duties
permit. This service will be developed as soon as adequate staff becomes available.”
1947. " School Hygiene. Sick school children continue to be referred to district hospitals, and
district medical officers carried out inspections of schools in their districts. Plans were
made for a School Medical Service to start in Accra in 1948.”
1948. “ School Hygiene —Accra. A school medical service of a limited kind was commenced
in Accra during May, 1948. There are 62 schools in Accra but owing to shortage of staff
only nine schools were visited and only children up to 12 years of age were inspected.
The visiting team consisted of one health visitor and two Second Division nurses.
There are approximately 20,000 school children in Accra and of these 2,820 were examined.
Minor ailments were treated by the school nurses and other cases were referred to the
Princess Marie Louise Clinic, where they were seen by the medical officer of health.
In addition lectures were given to the children on personal hygiene, diet and general
rules of health. Parents of younger children received advice.”
1949. “ School Hygiene. Eighteen schools are now visited by the ‘ School Team ’ . This team
consists of one health visitor and two nurses . . . . of the 3,571 school children inspected
494 were referred for treatment ....
This (table) shows six per cent of the children examined had enlarged spleens. Dental
decay was discovered in 188 children being five per cent of those examined.”
1950. " School Hygiene. The most widespread ailments discovered were: Conjunctivitis,
Scabies, Ringworm, Fevers, Dental Caries.
The school team’s report on the conditions of (24) school premises is as follows ;
Water... ... Only six have a pipe-borne water supply.
Playgrounds ... Sufficient but some extremely dirty.
Lavatories ... Twelve schools had no lavatories.
Ventilation ... On the whole good except for one school which was constructed
throughout with corrugated iron sheets. In the afternoon the
heat in this school is unbearable.”
166. In 1940, as it had been suggested there was some degree of malnutrition among school children,
a special survey in the Government schools of some of the larger towns was carried out by two medical officers.
A summary of some of their findings is shown below :
167. This survey and others made subsequently show that the school children of the Gold Coast suffer
from many preventable and remediable conditions. So far as prevention is concerned, instruction in hygiene
is a step in the right direction, but the teaching of hygiene in schools without even the rudiments of sanitation
is clearly of little value and the practice of hygienic habits is impossible. It is equally of little use teaching
school children hygiene or treating their preventable diseases, if after school they return to a village without
any sanitary amenities ; the lessons will be forgotten and re-infection or re-infestation will occur. A school
medical service can only succeed, therefore, where health education of the community and the practice of
healthy living are developed in the towns and villages.
168. This suggests that a school health service should first be developed in those areas where maternity
and child welfare services already exist and where sanitary conditions have reached a reasonable standard.
We recommend, therefore, that a school health service should first be organised in each of the towns Accra,
Kumasi, Cape Coast and Sekondi-Takoradi. The service should be an integral part of the local health service
administered by the Town Council and under the supervision of their medical officer of health. The school
children in Accra number nearly 20,000, in Kumasi 8,000, in Cape Coast 7,000 and in Sekondi-Takoradi 5,000,
An assistant medical officer of health should be appointed in Accra and Kumasi to carry out among other
duties that of school medical officer ; Cape Coast and Sekondi-Takoradi might share the services of another.
In each town a small staff of school nurses, preferably health visitors, would be needed to assist in the
examination of school children and for the treatment of those minor maladies which do not need attendance
at a hospital outpatient department.


169. Outside the four towns the service in each district, as and when it can be organised, should be
under the supervision of the district medical officer and it is partly for this purpose that we have already
recommended (paragraph 148) a considerable increase in the number of these officers.
The inspection and care of school children should form an important part of the normal duties of these
officers, though they will need the assistance of nurses or health visitors specially appointed for this work.
Child welfare clinics could at the outset be used also as school, clinics, although it would probably be found,
as the work increased, that separate school clinics were required. Special cases would, as heretofore, be
referred to hospital for treatment.
Health Education
170. The imparting of information by a teacher, the active assimilation of the information by those
being taught and the building up of knowledge in the latter by the joint efforts of both, are the usual processes
involved in education. Any attempts at education in health matters, especially in an under-developed
country with a largely illiterate population, must, if they are to be effective, take into account the ingrained
national, tribal and individual habits of the people. Health education must be directed towards adults as
as well as the younger sections of a community. It is relatively easy to develop healthy habits of living in
young people, especially if they are segregated in schools. It is less easy to influence the mode of life of adults
who have acquired habits probably handed down, in religious belief or tribal custom, through countless genera-
tions. Adults have a greater influence in family or community life than does that small section of the young
people who have benefitted by education and this is especially so where religious belief or tribal custom is
concerned. Much may be done by educating the youth of the country in the ways of healthy living, but
much of the effort will be wasted unless steps are taken to help young people to practise in their own commu-
nity what they have learned. The improvement of sanitation, water supplies and housing in towns and
villages must keep pace with health education of the young and old alike.
. 171. The education of school children in matters of health and hygiene can best be carried out by
school teachers who have been trained in the methods of education. Where a school nurse is available she
would supplement the teacher’s efforts as and when the opportunity offers. An essential part of the curriculum
in every teacher training college should be instruction in the elements of personal and environmental hygiene.
We would again emphasise, however, that the teaching of these subjects to school children in schools which
lack.even the rudiments of sanitation can be of little value (para. 167). The inculcation of cleanly habits
is impossible without the means of practising those habits.
172. We understand that about twenty years ago a close co-operation was established between the
Medical and Education Departments in a joint effort to spread enlightenment on health and hygiene. The
teaching of elementary hygiene was established and Red Cross Links were founded in schools; contributions
on health matters appeared in the Teachers’ Journal which was distributed every month to all parts of the
Gold Coast. Unfortunately this joint effort suffered a set-back during the war and the original impetus has
not yet been recovered.
173. Since the war the means of disseminating information have been greatly increased. The spread
of literacy, the greater number of both static and mobile cinemas, and the development of broadcasting
have made it easier to reach greater numbers of the population. The Public Relations Department have
taken full advantage of these developments and by means of films, talks by the “ Radio Doctor ”, articles
in the press and so forth have done much to stimulate interest in health matters. Simultaneously the Mass
Education teams have started work in villages, an important part of their programme being instruction in
general village hygiene, infant care and improved nutrition.
• I We believe, however, that these new methods of education, valuable though they are, can only be
supplementary to direct personal instruction. A printed article read, a film seen or a radio talk heard, tends
to fail unless reinforced by constant stimulation to action. This is especially the case with the adult section
of the community for whom the new teaching may mean a change of the habits of a life time.
174. In the villages and rural areas health education may be considered under three main heads :
(1) Village hygiene ;
(2) Domestic hygiene ;
(3) Personal hygiene.
Village hygiene includes the planning or layout of villages, house design, the provision of markets and the
supervision of shops selling foodstuffs, the installation of village latrines, conservancy methods, the disposal
of refuse and storm water and the provision of safe water supplies. The new local authorities will be
responsible for sanitary services but in some villages local health committees might do much to improve
village conditions by fostering local self-help. The advisers to local authorities and village communities
are the district medical officer, the sanitary inspector and, to some extent, also the clinic superintendent of
the local health centre.
175. Domestic hygiene includes the maintenance of a clean, tidy and well-ventilated home, the
provision and preparation of well-balanced meals, the storage of food, the care of the young, the disposal of
garbage, the provision of a house latrine, etc. The teachers of domestic hygiene will usually be health visitors
and mid wives who commonly have free entry into the people’s homes, school teachers who teach and train
children and instruct older girls in domestic science, and also clinic superintendents and nurses who, visiting
patients in their homes, have suitable opportunities for teaching hygiene. We have recommended (para-
graph 117) that there should be suitably trained staff associated with the treatment teams of the medical
field units so that patients cured of preventable disease ma} r be taught how to protect themselves against
reinfection.
176. Personal hygiene, which includes the formation of good habits and the establishment of a social
conscience, is best taught in the home and at school. The instructors are health visitors, midwives, nurses
«nd school teachers, and for the rising generation most important of all, the parents.


177. Village sanitation can in the last resort be enforced by law, but personal hygiene and, to a great
extent, domestic hygiene can only be taught and must be taught in a manner easily understood giving clear
and acceptable reasons for the advice offered. The best teachers are those that come of the people and live
and work among them ; they are particularly health visitors and midwives. A sick patient may well listen
to advice on hygiene given by the clinic superintendent or nurse attending him and a pregnant woman to that
offered by her midwife. The training courses for nurses, midwives, health visitors and clinic superintendents
should therefore include thorough instruction in personal and domestic hygiene as applicable to conditions in
the Gold Coast and those for clinic superintendents and sanitary inspectors should include the teaching of
village hygiene also.
During five years over 20,000 cases of schistosomiasis were treated, but the transmission of this disease
would stop within a few months of the cessation of pollution of water supplies by the local inhabitants. Again
ankylostomiasis is common ; over 30,000 cases were treated in five years, but this disease would begin to
die out, if the ground round compounds and villages was not polluted with human excrement.
Malnutrition in children, sometimes occurring in an extreme form as kwashiorkor, is largely due to
parents’ ignorance of the dietary requirements of childhood.
178. The Army and the Police Force provide good opportunities for health education and boarding
schools for the introduction of new articles of food. As an example of the last, milk is not at present generally
acceptable to the people of the Northern Territories but children might be taught to take it in school. Again
prisons can be examples of hygiene and, in hospital, doctors and nurses can frequently find suitable occasions
for teaching simple hygiene to patients.
Organised health weeks in towns and villages can do much to stimulate interest and enthusiasm.
Advantage can be taken of agricultural and other shows to stage appropriate health exhibitions. For such
exhibitions the School of Hygiene in Accra might provide suitable material.
179. Thus the extension of health education so as to reach the people in their homes will depend mostly
upon the training and provision of more midwives and health visitors and on the establishment in villages
of health centres and in towns of maternity and child welfare clinics. The health education work of the
Mass Education teams should be organised in close co-operation with the Ministry of Health whose experts
should advise on the subjects to be taught by the teams. In this way, simple lessons can be given and the
ground prepared for the more detailed teaching of health visitors, midwives and other officers of the Ministry
of Health.
Medical Stores Department
180. We have heard from many quarters complaints of delays experienced in obtaining drugs and
medical equipment through the stores branch of the Medical Department at Accra. It is not denied that in
recent years there have been difficulties in this branch. Most of the complaints were based on the ground
that the time taken in supplying goods for which indents had been sent in was so long and the intervals of
waiting so irregular and unpredictable that hospitals have been in imminent danger of running short of vital
necessities and in not a few cases have done so and found themselves compelled to pick up interim supplies
as and where they could. We have had the advantage of seeing a very full and informative report on the
subject of the medical stores branch made to the Minister of Health as recently as January of this year by a
small committee appointed for the purpose and including senior officers of the Gold Coast service.
181. When this Report was made, it had already been decided to transfer medical stores headquarters
from Accra to Takoradi. This important decision should do something to shorten the gap between the indent
and the date when supplies reach the hospital. The Report itself contains a number of recommendations,
many of them consequent upon this decision, of which the principal are :
(1) the setting up at Accra, Kumasi and Tamale of regional medical stores ;
(2) improvements in transport; and
(3) improvement in the quality and quantity of staff and abandonment of the idea that storekeepers
must necessarily be dispensers.
The Report contains a number of other suggestions on matters of detail to which we need not refer. We have
little doubt that if effect is given to these recommendations, a marked improvement in the service will result
and we would especially endorse the statement that except in the poisons section of the stores there is no
justification for the employment of dispensers in the position of storekeepers.
We think it is essential that a senior medical officer should be directly responsible to the Director
for supervision of the stores branch at Takoradi. In both the ordering and issue of stores, expert medical
knowledge will be necessary ; questions will inevitably arise on the priority of supply and the use of alter-
natives when some drugs or other materials are not available. We recommend, therefore, that the regional
medical officer stationed at Takoradi under the arrangements envisaged in paragraph 85 should be in charge
of the stores and should hold the rank of Assistant Director in view of these additional responsibilities.
182. When the new organisation is in working order and has finally proved itself, local authorities
should in our view be required (possibly as a condition of a Government grant) to secure supplies for their
dressing stations through the Medical Stores Department.
Registration of Nursing Homes
183. We understand that of the twenty-eight doctors practising privately in the Gold Coast some
nine receive patients and carry on small nursing homes. How many of the midwives in private practice do
the same is unknown, but the number is thought to be substantial. These nursing and maternity homes, if
carried on under satisfactory conditions, are in our view useful and to be encouraged in a country
where hospital and lying-in accommodation is scarce and conditions in the patient’s home are often deplorable.


As has been discovered in the United Kingdom, there are obvious possibilities of abuse. Premises may be
quite unfit and staffing arrangements inadequate, but the business goes on behind closed doors. Patients 1
ate usually unwilling to carry complaints to the authorities and in the absence of some record of the Romes’
coupled with a right to inspect them there can be no assurance that abuses will be brought to light. '.s’ >
184. We recommend therefore that legislation of a simple character providing for the registration and
inspection of these homes should be passed. The Minister of Health would be empowered to register a home
if certain conditions relating to staffing, to the adequacy and condition of the premises and to the keeping
of records are fulfilled. Medical officers of the Ministry or other qualified medical men, if authorised by the
Minister, would be empowered to inspect, the premises and examine records, and the Minister would have
power (subject possibly to an appeal to the Court) to suspend or cancel registration, if he found conditions
to be unsatisfactory. The carrying on of an unregistered home would be made illegal.
It must, of course, be recognised that at the outset a high standard of accommodation could not be
demanded. The home would have to be judged not by an ideal but by comparison with the average run Of
patients’ homes. The aim would be to raise the standard gradually and we believe that with sympathetic
administration this could be done without putting either doctors or midwives out of business. We suggest
for consideration that the Government might in suitable cases reimburse the midwife the whole or part of
the cost of bringing the premises up to the required standard. This might be either in addition or as an
alternative to the present system of subsidising midwives.
185. Nursing homes carried on by local authorities should be placed outside the scope of the Ordinance
as they will in any case be liable to Government inspection. But the Ordinance should apply to hospitals
or homes belonging to missionary societies or other charitable bodies.
CHAPTER VIII
MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS AND DENTISTS
THE MEDICAL REGISTER
18G. A number of Medical Practitioners and Dentists Ordinances starting in 1912 have been incor-
porated in a consolidating Ordinance of 1935 and this in turn has been amended by Ordinances of 1939, 1948
and. 1950. These Ordinances establish a register of medical practitioners—we deal with the subject of dentists
later—to which practitioners whose qualifications are recognised by the General Medical Council of the United
Kingdom have a right to be admitted. The Deputy Director is designated as Registrar and is charged with
the duty of keeping the register.
187. Section 15 of the Ordinance of 1912 makes it an offence for any unregistered person to practise
or profess to practise medicine or surgery. To this drastic provision against practising medicine, which has
no counterpart in the law of the United Kingdom there are the following exceptions :
(i) Section 14 of the Ordinance gives the Registrar discretion to issue a licence to any missionary
whose medical qualifications “ appear to the Registrar to be satisfactory” to practise medicine,surgery
and midwifery without personal fee or reward. Subject to the approval of the Governor, he may
attach conditions to the licence and may revoke a licence without explanation. Five licences issued
under this power are now in operation.
(ii) Under section 14A of the same Ordinance (a section added by the Ordinance of 1950) the
Director has power to license a person to be a medical practitioner for a " place or area ”, if satisfied
that the number of registered or licensed practitioners in the place or area is insufficient. Only persons
entitled by law to practise in any place outside the United Kingdom or who, though not so entitled,
hold a diploma granted outside the United Kingdom or have passed the examinations necessary to
obtain such a diploma, may be licensed under this power. The licence may be for a term of years
and may impose other conditions. Three licences granted under this power are now in operation.
(iii) Under Ordinance 37 of 1939 the Director may license unqualified persons to administer certain
forms of injections in accordance with the terms of the licence. We are informed that the persons
to whom “ injection licences ” are given are selected nurses, dispensers and dressers in Government
or Native Authority service and that the licence authorises the holder to give specified routine treatment
to patients suffering from certain diseases such as yaws.
(iv) The same Ordinance permits the practice by a native of the Gold Coast of any native system
of therapeutics excepting acts likely to be dangerous to human life and the administration or prescrip-
tion of poisons. It also permits “ the application of dressings ”by any unqualified person. ’ !. ,:
188. It appears that some 47 of the Native Authorities in the Colony have made rules under section 20
of the Native Authorities Ordinance, 1944, forbidding a herbalist to practise unless he has obtained a, licence
from the Native Authority. A licence granted under these rules does not of course affect the restrictions placed
by the Medical Ordinances on practice by unqualified persons. We have had the advantage of discussing
the question of licensing herbalists with the Standing Committee of the Joint Provincial Council of the Colbny
and others. Different opinions were expressed, some taking the view that licences were granted more .'or
less automatically, the general object of the rule being to secure licence fees for the Native Authority Treasury,
others that there is an established system of master and apprentice amongst herbalists, that licences were
only granted on the recommendations, of the master and that this provided a useful safeguard ,against
quackery,
; , It appears that the whole system has proceeded without any supervision from, indeed without the
knowledge of, the Medical Department. : : :
5


189,, Section 4-of the Ordinance of 1948 provides for the setting up of a Disciplinary Committee of
four members to investigate cases where a medical practitioner has been convicted of a felony or misdemea-
nour, or against whom there are allegations of professional misconduct. The Committee may, after due
enquiry, take action by'
(a) reprimanding the practitioner,
( b) suspending him from practice,
(c) removing his name from the Register.
An appeal lies to the Supreme Court on a question of law.
The setting up of this Committee relieved the Governor in Council of the responsibility which he
formerly had of removing the name of a practitioner from the Register. We recommend that this right and
proper step should now be followed by a similar provision relieving the Registrar and the Director of the
responsibility of granting or refusing licences which they have under sections 14 and 14A respectively, and that
these functions should be vested in a board to be known as the Medical and Dental Board of the Gold Coast.
To this Board should be transferred —
(a) the existing duty of the Registrar to maintain a register of medical practitioners, and
( b ) the functions of the Disciplinary Committee.
The number of medical and dental practitioners in the Gold Coast and the volume of business connected
with medical education are likely to remain too small to justify having a separate Disciplinary Committee,
such as exists in the United Kingdom under the Medical Act, 1950.
190. The medical register should be published in two parts, one known as the permanent register
and the other as the temporary register ; the latter should contain the names of medical practitioners to whom
licences issued under sections 14 and 14A are now in operation.
191. We suggest that the statutory body should consist of five members appointed by the Governor
in Council. One member should be in private medical practice in the Gold Coast and one should be a dental
practitioner. The Board should elect its own Chairman.
The duties of a Registrar would not be onerous in so small a community and might be undertaken by
an administrative officer of the Ministry of Health.
192. Despite the intention of section 15 of the Ordinance of 1912 to eliminate practice by persons
not duly qualified, the evidence we have had from a variety of sources clearly indicates that illegal medical
practice is widespread in the Gold Coast. No attempt is made—probably wisely—to define medical practice
in the Ordinance and there may be occasions on which doubt as to the exact meaning and scope of the term
makes it difficult to take action. But in the great bulk of cases where unauthorised persons make a practice
of giving injections or supplying medicines to persons whom they purport to examine it can scarcely be doubted
that medical practice is being carried on. We understand that in 1951 thirty persons were prosecuted and
twenty-eight convictions obtained. While we fully recognise the difficulty of securing evidence of these
practices owing to the unwillingness of persons with knowledge of the facts to come forward, we hope that
this policy of prosecuting, whenever there is a reasonable chance of success, will be vigorously maintained.
193. Practice by unauthorised persons will undoubtedly continue in greater or less degree so long
as there are enough gullible and superstitious people to make it profitable. There will always, in any commu-
nity, be a supply of irregular practitioners from among those in whom cupidity, associated, with a lack of
social conscience, is the main driving force.
, 194. A reduction of the mass of preventible endemic disease, by methods recommended elsewhere
in this Report, would do much to lessen the demand for this illicit and frequently harmful treatment, but it
is mainly by a prolonged and persistent effort to raise the educational standard throughout the country,
especially in matters of health and hygiene, that any real progress can be made in the eradication of irregular
practice.
195. We have been disturbed by the evidence we heard of the prevalence of illegal practices by
persons in official employment. Inadequate supervision of auxiliary medical staff employed by the Govern-
ment or native authorities and the ease with which it seems possible to get dangerous drugs are the most
important factors concerned. The increase in qualified medical staff which we recommend elsewhere should
ensure better supervision of auxiliaries, but better supervision must be combined with energetic action
■when irregularities are discovered .
We were told of the widespread belief in “ the injection ” as a cure for most, if not all diseases, and
it appeared that the injection of useless or of potentially dangerous substances was a prominent feature of
illegal practice.
Recruitment of Doctors
. 196. There are 152 medical practitioners registered or licensed to practise medicine in the Gold Coast.
Of these 89 are in the Government Service, 28 are private practitioners, 23 are employed by the mining com-
panies, six by missionary societies, three by a timber company and three are at Achimota School and Univer-
sity College. Of the total in Government employment a significant number—usually estimated at about
IG-—are absent from the Gold Coast at any given time ; and we understand that in the case of doctors employed
by the mining companies the proportion is considerably higher.
197. The distribution of practitioners over the whole country is very uneven and those employed by
the mining companies have the specific duty of providing medical care only for the employees of these com-
panies, though in practice this care is extended in most places to families of miners and in some cases to a
proportion of the surrounding population.


198. In the Northern Territories there is one Medical Officer to 120,000 of the populatiort ; in the
trusteeship territory of Togoland, the proportion is one to 96,000 ; in Ashanti one to 27,000 and in the Colony
one to 24,000. The higher proportions in Ashanti and in the Colony are due mainly to the presence of the
mines in these regions, and to the private practitioners concentrated in large towns. Of the 28 private
practitioners, 10 are in Accra and five in Kumasi.
199. There is little inducement to private practitioners to practise in the rural or semi-rural areas
because of the lack of social amenities and the poverty of the people. The population as a whole is, therefore,
dependent on the services provided by medical officers in Government employment. We have recommended
elsewhere in this report that the total number of medical officers in the Gold Coast Medical Service should be
increased over the next five years to 150 ; it is necessary to consider how these numbers can be provided and
maintained.
200. The policy of the Government, as set out in the Report of the Select Committee on the Lidbury
Report (1952), is to establish a Gold Coast Civil Service of which a Gold Coast Medical Service will presumably
be part. As stated in paragraph 22 of the Report “ The effect of this policy, when it is carried out, will be
that :
{a) in future, Africans will be appointed to a Gold Coast Civil Service ;
( b ) any expatriates whom the Government recruits through the Crown Agents or direct will also be in
the local service ;
(c) if this Government is unable to recruit into the local service as in (a) and ( b) above, the Secretary
of State may be requested to send Unified Colonial Service Officers to fill vacancies, provided it is
in the public interest that such vacancies should be filled ;
id)
(e) ”
201. The Government of the Gold Coast award scholarships each year to suitable students who wish
to proceed to a medical school in the United Kingdom and enter into a bond to join the Gold Coast medical
service for a period of five years on their return. The number of scholarships varies each year, depending in
the main on the number of suitable candidates and on the number for whom places can be provided in medical
schools. At present there are 37 of these students in the United Kingdom of whom nine are due to qualify
in 1952 and six in 1953 ; by 1957 all but seven should be qualified.
202. The established policy of the Government is now to recruit Africans whenever possible to posts in
the civil service including the medical service. It is evident that to provide a service of 150 medical officers,
including specialists, within five years extensive recruitment of non-African candidates will be necessary
since the return of African students qualified in the United Kingdom will do little more than replace the
normal loss due to retirement. But it is a matter for immediate consideration what steps should be taken
now to secure the necessary number of African recruits to the profession as a long-term policy. There is no
medical school in the Gold Coast so that, at any rate for the present, students must go abroad to be trained.
We discuss later in the chapter the question of the establishment of such a medical school. Meanwhile four
training grounds are possible, (a) the United Kingdom and the Dominions, (b) the United States, (c) Nigeria
and ( d ) European countries other than the United Kingdom.
203. The Gold Coast medical service has been built up on the ethics and principles underlying the
system of medicine taught and practised in English-speaking countries and to try to blend with this the systems
and practices of other countries may well lead to difficulties. The language problem in European countries
other than the United Kingdom would add materially to the students’ burden. _
204. We understand that the medical school at Ibadan would be able to accommodate about ten
students a year from the Gold Coast for pre-clinical work, but at present could offer no facilities for clinical
experience, although such facilities would probably be available in about four years. Meanwhile clinical
students must be sent to the United Kingdom for training in hospital. For the immediate future, therefore,
the possibility of training at Ibadan is not a complete solution of the problem, though we think that, when the
new hospital is established there and has been approved by the University of London for undergraduate train-
ing, the question of sending Gold Coast students to Ibadan should be given serious consideration. The
Committee on Higher Education which reported in 1946 (No. VII of 1946, paragraph 42) anticipated that,
when full clinical facilities were available in Ibadan, “ both Gold Coast Government and private students
will go to the medical school at Ibadan ”, but added “ It should be mentioned, however, that the Gold Coast
is looking forward to the day when it can have its own medical and dental schools attached to its own
University College ”.
205. The cost of maintaining a student in the United States and the difficulty of gaining entrance to
most medical schools in that country, together with the factors mentioned in the two foregoing paragraphs,
lead us to the conclusion that the Gold Coast Government should increase its annual number of scholarships
as and when suitable students are available and should ask the Colonial Office to negotiate with medical schools
in the United Kingdom for a greater allocation of places for Gold Coast students. We hope, however, that
in its desire for an accelerated recruitment of Africans, the Government will not be tempted to lower its
standard for the selection of candidates.
206. Medical practice in the Gold Coast presents so many differences from that in temperate climates
that recruits who have qualified in the United Kingdom should serve a period of one year under the instruction
and supervision of senior officers before being given a position of full responsibility. We recommend that the
first six months of this year should be spent at Korle Bu, Kumasi or Sekondi-Takoradi; the second six months
should be spent in one of the larger district hospitals where there is a senior officer in charge. The Medical
5*


Act,of 1050 of the United Kingdom provides, among other things, that, as from an appointed day, medical
students on passing their qualifying ,examination must gain, further experience by holding resident- posts , in
approved hospitals for a prescribed period before they become eligible for full registration as medical prac-
titioners., The appointed day will probably be Ist January, 1903, and the prescribed period will be one year.
Newly qualified practitioners will receive a salary during their prerregistration year,
. 207. In future, therefore, if eligibility for registration in the medical register of the Gold Coast is to be
thc;Same as that for registration in the United Kingdom, West African students who do not pass their final
examinations before Ist January, 1953, will have to serve one year in an approved hospital before they can be
registered. As there are at present no approved hospitals in the Gold Coast, the return of these students will
be delayed by one year. The approval of hospitals lies with Licensing Bodies in the United Kingdom and
the Medical Registration Council of Ireland. These bodies will approve only those hospitals which provide a
reasonable range and standard of service and can offer the necessary experience under adequate supervision.
If, as we hope, Korle Bu, Effia Nkwanta and the new hospital at Kumasi will before long qualify for approval,
West African students who have passed their final examinations in the United Kingdom will be able to spend
the statutory period in gaining experience in the surroundings in which their future practice lies. When this
is possible, our recommendations in the last preceding paragraph above should be modified appropriately.
, • ■ A Gold Coast Medical School
208. It has been represented to us that the Gold Coast should forthwith establish a medical school
in which to train its own medical practitioners. While we support the view that there arc advantages in
educating under-graduates in their own country and sending selected graduates for further training abroad,
we think there are weighty material factors to be considered before reaching a practical decision on the question
of establishing a medical school in the Gold Coast.
209. We have already suggested a figure of 150 medical officers at the end of five years and if we
attempted to look forward for another five years, we do not think that the number is likely to be greatly in
excess of 200. On this assumption—though our argument would be scarcely less valid even if this number
were doubled —an annual recruitment of eight practitioners would be necessary to replace retirements based
on an average length of service of 25 years ; to allow for other contingencies than normal retirement the annual
needs may be taken as ten.
210. We have read the very detailed report of the University of London Medical Delegation on a
proposed medical school for the Gold Coast and note that the estimated annual cost for the institution they
propose is £231,200. The estimates were made on the assumption that the annual intake of students would
be 40-50 and proposals for extensions to Korle Bu Hospital were based on this assumption. The wastage of
students in the final years of a medical course is not great, so that presumably the output of practitioners
may be taken at about the same figure. But an output of 40 practitioners a year would maintain a force of
1,000 medical officers, assuming an average length of service of 25 years—and in the case of Africans in their
own country 25 years may be an under-estimate.
• ■' 211. It would seem, therefore, that a school of this size would produce a surplus of medical practitioners
who could not hope to find employment in the Gold Coast and who might have difficulty in securing employ-
ment outside West Africa. We realise, of course, that it would be at least ten years from now before the
school would produce its first output of practitioners, even if the plans of the London Medical Delegation
were put in hand at once, but we do not believe that the progress of development in the Gold Coast will be
such by that time that the medical service and general practice could absorb the annual output of the school
for more than- the first two or three years.
212. If the intake to the medical school were 20 or less instead of 40-50 a year, the annual costs would
not be reduced in the same proportion. Teaching could be carried out with a smaller staff, but saving in
expenditure would be by the reduction of the less highly paid junior staff and it is doubtful if the total expen-
diture would be reduced by one quarter. Assuming an output of 40 practitioners a year at the estimated
annual expenditure for the medical school of £231,200, the cost of producing a medical practitioner would be
£5,780 ; if the output were 20 a year and the total annual expenditure of the school three quarters of £231,200,
or £173,400, the cost would be £8,670. These figures take no account of capital cost.
213. We are informed that a medical student in the United Kingdom requires about £7OO a year for
six years, this sum allowing for all expenses, including travel to and from the Gold Coast. It is, therefore,
cheaper to continue sending students for training in the United Kingdom provided that by this means an
adequate supply of practitioners can be produced for service in the Gold Coast ; we believe the supply could,
for the predictable future, be maintained in this way. We have seen that a sum of £1,200,000 has been set
aside in tlie Development Plan of 1951 as capital expenditure for the Medical Faculty of the University College.
The interest on this money at only 3 per cent per annum would maintain fifty medical students in the United
Kingdom.-
. - ' 214. ’We are fully aware of the intangible benefits which are conferred on a country by having a medical
school and ’teaching hospital and which cannot be assessed in any financial balance sheet. We believe, however,
that at the present time, and for many years to come, the establishment of a medical school in the Gold Coast
would be a luxury which the country can ill afford to contemplate in contrast to the overwhelming need for
the organisation of preventive and curative services, the development of which calls for concentration on the
recruitment and training of medical auxiliary staff rather than on an increase in medical practitioners.
215. We may add—not as an additional argument but as a matter of fact—that it would in our view
be extremely difficult to reach a right decision on a question posed but not answered by the University of
London Medical Delegation, namely, whether the additional buildings required for clinical teaching should
be erected at Korle Bu until the whole matter of the neighbouring lagoon and the drainage into it has been
explored and definite decisions taken.


Dentists and a Dental Service '
216. The practice of dentistry and the registration of dentists are regulated by the series of Medical
Practitioners and Dentists Ordinances to which reference has already been made. An amending Ordinance
of 1951. granted the Director of Medical Services the same powers of licensing dentists as he held for doctors
under the Ordinance of. 1950. The main Ordinances established a register of dentists and prohibited the
practice of dentistry to all except registered dentists. Dentists holding qualifications which would entitle
them to registration in the United Kingdom are entitled to have their names included in the register of the
Gold Coast so long as they reside in the country.
.. 217. There are six dental surgeons, four of whom are in Government Service and two in private
practice. Of the former group, two are stationed in Accra, one in Kumasi and one in Sekondi. One private
practitioner is in Accra and one in Kumasi. The Government have provided scholarships for the training
of selected African candidates in dentistry and there are at present six students training in the United Kingdom.
218. There are no statistics available on w'hich to base a reliable estimate of the incidence of dental
diseases, although one survey of a small group of school children showed that about 30 per cent had carious
teeth. It is impossible, therefore, to know the number of dentists required to meet the needs of the population.
The services of a dentist, howeveT, should be available in all hospitals which provide specialist services and,
from our own observations, it was evident that there was enough work in the hospitals in Accra to keep two
dentists busy. Until such time as needs can be more accurately gauged, we recommend that there should
be two dentists in Accra, two in Kumasi, two in Sekondi and one in Tamale. Two further dentists should be
appointed, one of whom should be relatively senior and have had some training in the methods of making
dental surveys ; the other should be available for general relief duties. The senior officer should organise
surveys in different parts of the country, with the help of officers stationed at the specialist hospitals, of the
state of the mouths and teeth of school children and of the general population. Nurses or health visitors
should be trained to assist in this work. The results of these surveys should form the basis on which an
estimate of the dental establishment may be made.
219. Dental fitness is an important factor in the health of the community and the care and preservation
of the teeth in school children and adolescents may prevent much ill-health in later years. We w r ere told
that there was little call for prosthetic work in dental practice in the Gold Coast. If this represents the picture
in all parts of the country, there should be no need for a large staff of dental mechanics and concentration on
conservative dentistry, especially in the younger age groups, would tend to maintain this position. Instruction
on the care of the teeth should form part of all health education programmes. An investigation into the
effects on the teeth and gums of the prevalent habit of chewing a stick or twig might produce interesting
results.
220. The provision of mobile dental clinics is an obvious suggestion for the treatment of patients in
outlying areas, but we do not recommend this until more is known of the needs for dental treatment. Clearly,
for the purpose of making the surveys we have recommended above, some form of transport with very simple
equipment will be needed. If these surveys show a high incidence of dental caries in schools or in large villages
away from the towns where dentists are stationed, mobile dental clinics may be necessary. The objections
we have raised to the use of mobile medical treatment vans do not apply with equal force to dental vans in
that very few of the latter would be needed, their visits would only be made at long intervals and the amount
and variety of equipment carried would generally be less.
CHAPTER IX
RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING OF NURSES, HEALTH VISITORS AND MIDWIVES
221. In this and the next following chapter we deal with the recruitment and training of the major
classes of medical auxiliaries. Our object is to state briefly the existing systems of recruitment in each class,
to consider whether these systems will prove adequate for the expanded service which we recommend, and,
if not, what steps should be taken to remedy any defects. There are of course many other smaller classes of
medical auxiliaries in the medical service. Any recommendations which we have thought it necessary to
make in regard to these will be found elsewhere in the Report.
Nurses
222. Good nursing is the very foundation of a hospital service and upon the adequacy of the nursing
training will depend the quality not only of the nursing staff of the Gold Coast hospitals but also of its
midwifery, its health visiting and the administration of its health centres. We believe that nothing will
contribute more to improving the country’s health services than a carefully thought out policy for recruiting
and training its nurses.
223. The first two nursing sisters were appointed to the Gold Coast in 1878 to look after the health of
the Government officials. The African nurses trained by these sisters and their successors were for some
time exclusively men and even now there are more males than females in the nursing service. The system
of training was that of apprenticeship for a period of three years. About ten years ago the Director recognised
that this apprenticeship system could not produce nurses of the calibre required to fill the highest posts in the
service and drew up plans for a School of Nursing with a defined syllabus of training. It was not till 1945,
however, that the school was opened. There followed the Nurses Ordinance, 1946, based on United Kingdom
legislation, and in June, 1950 the training at the Nurses Training College in Accra and the examination of
the Nurses Board of the Gold Coast were recognised as satisfying the requirements of the General Nursing
Council of England and Wales for full reciprocity. •


224. The nursing profession is now governed by the Ordinance of 1946 and the regulations made under
it. A short amending Ordinance was passed in 1948. The main Ordinance sets up a Nurses Board (of which
the Director is Chairman), a Nurses Register and a Registrar of Nurses.
The effect of the regulations is to create two main classes of nurses, ( a ) the Qualified Registered Nurse
(Q.R.N.) and ( b) the State Registered Nurse (S.R.N.). For both types of nurse the register contains a number
of “supplementary parts ” for male nurses, mental nurses, sick children’s nurses and so forth.
225. Qualified Registered Nurses. —The training of these consists of a three-year course at an approved
training school. The syllabus of this course is laid down in the regulations. Five hospitals are at present
approved for this purpose, namely, the Gold Coast Hospital, Accra, the General Hospital, Kumasi, the General
Hospital, Tamale, the Effia Nkwanta Hospital, Sekondi and the Cape Coast Hospital. In addition, it is
permissible for candidates who have served a form of apprenticeship in the hospitals of mining companies,
missions, the army and even in private “ hospitals ” to take the examinations of the Q.R.N. qualification.
Pupils for training in each of the five approved hospitals are selected by interview and an entrance
examination ; the minimum educational standard is the primary school leaving certificate. The first three
months of the course is a probationary period ; after that the pupil is gazetted and becomes a pupil nurse
employed by the Government. We understand that this system of gazetting at this stage leads to many
disciplinary difficulties and we recommend that gazetting should be postponed till the final examination is
passed. Up to this point the young men and women should be regarded as being in a state of pupillage. To
give them the rank and status of Government employees is a misrepresentation of the facts.
226. During the probationary period wastage among females is high since many pupils are found, or
find themselves, to be unsuitable for the work ; we have been told it may be 30 per cent to 50 per cent in some
hospitals. Although the course is nominally of three years, many pupils take longer before they are able to
pass the final examination. It is not unusual for a candidate to have three attempts at both preliminary
and final examination, thus increasing the training period to four years. It appears that many of the failures
are due to inability to deal with questions in written papers ; in view of this it is worth considering whether
the emphasis between theory and practice in the final examination should not be varied and the scope of the
practical tests extended.
227. In addition to pupils who have taken the training course and passed the Q.R.N. examination,
nurses are in some cases admitted to the register by virtue of receiving a “ certificate of competency” from
the Nurses Board without passing the Q.R.N. examination. We understand that the great bulk of these
are nurses who have proved themselves competent by rendering nursing services in the Gold Coast. A few
are nurses whose experience has been in other countries but who are not eligible for admission to the S.R.N.
register. Provision is made in the regulations for the issue of these certificates of competency, but the
regulations do not indicate whether any training, practical or theoretical, apart from service in some capacity
in a hospital, is required or by what criteria an application for a certificate is granted or refused. The system
was presumably intended to be a transitional one designed for the sake of nurses in employment before 1947
and we feel no doubt that it should as speedily as possible be brought to an end.
228. State Registered Nurses. —Entrance to the Nurses Training College has, up to now, been restricted
to females and is controlled by competitive examination and interview. During training all students live in
the College Hostel. Entrants are in two categories (a) those with elementary education up to Primary School
Leaving Certificate or with less than four years secondary education and ( b ) those who hold the Senior
Cambridge School Certificate. In the case of the first group training at the College extends over four years,
the first of which is a pre-nursing course in general educational subjects. For the second group the course
lasts three years, together with a four months preliminary nursing course, in which candidates of the first
group join after they successfully pass the test at the end of the pre-nursing course. On passing the final
state examination a nurse is required to train for 18 months at the Maternity Hospital in Accra and thus
becomes eligible to qualify as a midwife.
229. There is appreciable wastage during the year’s pre-nursing course amounting to about 30 per
cent in each of the past three years. Thereafter, wastage is less in any one year, but may amount to 20 per
cent or 25 per cent over the three years course. The entry to the preliminary nursing course was 33 in 1949,
43 in 1950 and 50 in 1951. The annual output of the college during the past three years cannot be taken as
more than a general indication of the future output because of the smaller numbers admitted during the
earlier years of development. The capacity of the college is 180. The proportion of those entering the college
three years previously who passed the qualifying examination was 72 per cent in 1949, 52 per cent in 1950
and 77 per cent in 1951.
230. But it is clear that in any event the output of the Nurses Training College cannot by itself maintain
the present numbers of nurses, much less provide for a rapidly expanding service. Consequently the
apprenticeship system of training for the Q.R.N. grade is still in existence, and it would be highly inadvisable
to abolish it until more candidates of the type and educational standard required for the college, and suitable
accommodation, are available. Many of the nurses trained by apprenticeship are doing excellent practical
work and only suffer from the disability that, from lack of opportunity, they have little general educational
background. An interesting experiment was begun last by selecting 12 male nurses (Q.R.N.) of promising
ability to train for 18 months at the college, after which time they would be eligible to sit the final S.R.N.
examination. Up to date three have withdrawn on the plea that the course is too difficult.


Nurses on the Register (1st March, 1952)
General Register (including Supplementary Total Not in
Non-Govt.
Govt.
part for Men).
Registered
Practice
Service
Servic
1. S.R.N. (Female)
121
49
17
55
2. S.R.N. (Male)
1
—
—•
1
3. Q.R.N. (Female)
242
34
32
176
4. Q.R.N. (Male)
585
5G
160
363
Supplementary Part for Sick Children’s
Nurses.
1. S.R.N
1
1
2. Q.R.N
40
23
1
16
Men
Women
1946 ...
...
11
8
1947 ...
11
11
1948 ...
22
39
1949 ...
22
76
1950 ...
56
145
1951 ...
51
87
Men
Women
1949
5
51
1950
9
56
1951
None
59
Men and Women
1949 ...
• • • , . .
72
1950 ...
... ...
43
1951 ...
... • . »
34
231. The following table gives the number of nurses on the Gold Coast Register in their different
categories. Of the total number of female nurses under the heading “ not in practice ” 03 are training in
midwifery.
232. We have asked a number of medical officers, matrons and nursing sisters whether on the whole
they regard men or women as better suited for the nursing work required in the Government hospitals in the
Gold Coast. There was no consensus of opinion on this point but we think that the main body of opinion,
though with important exceptions, favoured men. There is one factor which makes the female nurse sub-
stantially more expensive and creates no small administrative difficulties. This is the matter of maternity
leave. A married woman on becoming pregnant is entitled to a length of leave (including annual leave) on
average between five and seven months, fully paid. We have been given instances where more than 50 per
cent of the nursing staff, including pupil nurses, were absent from a hospital simultaneously for this reason.
The present policy of the Medical Department appears, nevertheless, to favour the recruitment of women.
It seems to us imperative, however, that if the nursing service is to be expanded to meet the needs of the next
ten years and if the efficiency of the service is to be maintained, steps should be taken to recruit more men as
soon as the necessary training facilities are available. Male nurses will certainly be needed as a source of
recruitment for clinic superintendents.
233. Estimates of future output. —It is not easy to make a reliable estimate of the future annual total
output of nurses. The figures for the last three or four years, on which we would normally base an estimate,
cover a period of transition and evolution. In the case of state registered nurses, however, if it is assumed
that (a) between 75 per cent and 80 per cent of entrants to the preliminary nursing course succeed in passing
the final examination and ( b ) the intake is not materially increased, calculations in the light of figures given
in paragraph 229 above indicate that an average annual output of about 34 might be expected.
234. The output of Qualified Registered Nurses is much more difficult to calculate. The intake of pupils
into Government hospitals in the past six years was as follows :
These figures represent pupils “ gazetted
235. Wastage in the past three years was :
If we accept the normal duration of training as three to four years, the intake in the years 1946, 1947
and 1948 should bear some relation to the output in 1949, 1950 and 1951. In actual fact the number of female
nurses admitted to the Register by virtue of having passed the Q.R.N. examination in each of these three
years was 0, 1 and 36. The corresponding figures for men were 35, 47 and 35. It is difficult to find in these
figures any relation between intake and output. We can only suppose that the output figures include candi-
dates from sources other than Government hospitals.
236. Appreciable numbers of names have been added to the Q.R.N. Register by virtue of a certificate
of competency not based on the Q.R.N. examination. The figures are :
For reasons already given the great bulk of these nurses do not represent additions to the nursing strength,
because most of them were before admission to the Register working as nurses and owe their admission to
competency in this work. Thus the 1951 admissions to the Q.R.N. Register amounted in all to 105, of which
71 were by way of Q.R.N. examination. If to this is added the estimated output of S.R. Nurses (34), a total
of 139 is reached, but in view of the wild fluctuations year by year in intake and output we regard this figure
as highly problematical.


237. The total number of nurses (Ist ,and 2nd Division) in Government service in general hospitals is
533, which gives a ratio of one nurse to 3 - 3 beds. The compulsory age for retirement is 55, but the actual
length of service we should put at an average of 15 years, having regard to the preponderance of women. On
this basis an output of 3G nurses a year will be needed to meet present requirements. We are not satisfied,
however, that the present total number of nurses is adequate for present requirements. Although the ratio
of nurses to beds over the whole country is about Ito 3 - 3, it is evident that hospitals in which nurses are
trained and which offer specialist services must be staffed more generously than this. We ourselves have seen
two district hospitals in which the ratio was Ito C and another in which it was Ito 8. We understand that
the policy of the Medical Department is to increase the ratio to Ito 2 • 5. If this is carried into effect the total
of 533 will be increased to about 700 and this will call for an annual output of about 47 to maintain
establishment.
238. We now turn to the increased demands which will be consequent upon (a) the additional
hospital accommodation already projected by the Government (paragraph 119) including new hospitals built
but not yet in operation and ( b ) our own proposals for the provision of isolation cubicles, health centres,
accommodation for tuberculous patients and the expansion of the midwifery and health visitor services.
239. We assume that the demands for additional nurses under [a) of the preceding paragraph will be
spread over five years, although the hospitals at Bolgatanga and Hohoe are already completed and each will
call for 30 more nurses during the next few months. The proposed hospitals and extensions to those already
existing set out in paragraph 119 will add about 810 beds to the present total. Our recommendations for
isolation cubicles in all hospitals (paragraph 128) we estimate to add about 200 beds and for tuberculous
patients approximately the same number ; but the staffing of the accommodation we envisage for tuberculosis
(paragraph 355) need only be on a scale about half of that for general ward beds, so that for purposes of
calculating extra staff we may take the number of beds as 100. There are thus about 1,100 more beds for
which staff will be needed in the next five years. On a ratio of one nurse to 3 - 3 beds, these will call for 336
nurses or an annual output during the five-year period of 67. To this total of 33G must be added 40 to provide
clinic superintendents and 40 for midwives or nurse-midwives for health centres, bringing the annual
requirement under these three headings up to about 85. With an annual output of 36 needed to maintain
the present establishment the nurse-training hospitals must provide a total annual output over the next five
years of about 120. On the basis of a ratio of one nurse to 2 - 5 beds this total annual output will have to be
about 175.
240. If the total nursing establishment calculated in the foregoing paragraphs is achieved in five years
the annual output of nurses needed thereafter to maintain it will be 65 on a ratio of one nurse to 3-3 beds
or 83 if the ratio is one to 2-5. It is certain, however, that provision for further developments must be made
at that time and the output of nurses adjusted accordingly. Our calculations have taken no account of the
demands for midwives or of the difficulties, of which we have heard, in securing trained nurses for the hospitals
of mining companies. If our recommendations on the registration of nursing homes, on a school health service
and on the provision of health visitors are carried into effect, there will be a still greater demand for trained
nurses which must be met by intelligent anticipation of needs and an appropriate adjustment of the intake
of pupil nurses based on a review of the position each year. It appears to us that for many years to come an
annual output of 150-175 nurses should be the aim.
241. This aim will not be satisfactorily achieved unless a full complement of sister tutors is provided
and care taken in the selection of ward sisters and other trained staff to ensure that those appointed are
capable of giving practical instruction to pupil nurses and of supervising their work. The African pupil
nurse needs close and constant supervision and guidance ; a sense of responsibility develops slowly with the
encouragement of sympathetic instructors. The ratio of pupil nurses to trained nurses in each of the five
training schools is one to 0-9 and to first division nurses is one to 0-15. The guidance and practical instruc-
tion which we consider necessary for pupil nurses cannot be given satisfactorily by those recently registered,
nor is it possible for one first division nurse to give adequate attention to six or seven pupil nurses. The
ratio of pupil nurses to beds varies in the five training hospitals between one to 2-3 and one to 2• 6 ; this we
regard as too high.
242. We recommend, therefore, that there should be a higher proportion of specially selected first
division nurses in training hospitals and that the number of pupil nurses in each of four of the five hospitals
be reduced by about one-third ; at Korle Bu the reduction should be one half, because of the facilities needed
for student nurses from the Nurses Training College. To compensate for the reduction in pupil nurses at
existing training schools, others must be established and suitably staffed. To ensure a reasonable range of
experience, a training hospital should have not less than 60 beds ; indeed we would have preferred to say
100 beds, had more hospitals of this size been available. When the new hospital at Kumasi begins to train
nurses, the position will need to be reviewed. We understand that there is to be a nurses training college
there which will train state registered nurses. We trust that the overcrowding with pupil and student
nurses which we have seen at Korle Bu will be avoided in Kumasi.
We think that one of the most serious difficulties may be the supply of sister'tutors and therefore
consideration might well be given to adopting a policy of sending young African women to the United Kingdom
for training as nurses. Apart from the cost of the journey, the expense would be comparatively trifling.
This policy should of course be adopted only if enough suitable candidates are available Without depriving
the Nurses Training College of recruits of the right calibre and educational standard.


243. Hostels for Pupil Nurses. —lt has been suggested to us that young women in training for the
O.R.N. Register should be accommodated in hostels. It is said that the provision of hostels would encourage
parents living at a distance from the training hospitals to send their daughters for training and that it would
diminish wastage during the training period. We believe that there is substance in both these arguments
and that apart from this, the provision of hostels would make for the health and comfort of the pupils and be
conducive to good discipline. It would not be necessary to provide accommodation for pupils (possibly about
30 per cent of the whole number) whose homes are within a reasonable distance of the hospital, but we think
that other pupils should be required to live in the hostel, unless those in charge of the training were assured
that satisfactory arrangements for boarding the pupil elsewhere had been made. It is of course of the first
importance that the management and supervision of the hostels should be in the hands of competent wardens.
244. Mental Nurses.—We are not satisfied with the standard of training of mental nurses. A revised
course of training has recently been introduced, but more tutors will be needed if the standard of existing
nurses is to be improved and if a trained staff is to be provided for the new mental hospital in Kumasi. Addi-
tional accommodation will also be needed for a training school. We recommend that four tutors for the
training of mental nurses should be recruited to establish a training school at the mental hospital in Accra.
An additional occupational therapist should also be appointed.
245. The importance of a nurse understanding the language of a mental patient and of being under-
stood by him should be borne in mind in recruiting pupils for training as mental nurses. The proportions
recruited from different regions should bear some relation to the proportion of patients from these regions.
We do not think that there would be any advantage in sending pupils to the United Kingdom for training
because of the widely different conditions in the Gold Coast. We believe that a team of tutors and occupa-
tional therapists under the guidance of a psychiatrist can, with the necessary enthusiasm and encouragement,
build up a satisfactory staff of African mental nurses.
Health Visitors
246. The Nurses Ordinance of 1946 makes no mention of health visitors but the regulations made
under it prescribe a supplementary part of the register for health visitors. Persons entitled to register in this
part are :
{a) persons registered or entitled to register as health visitors in the United Kingdom ;
[b) persons holding valid certificates of competency in health visiting issued by the Board on being
satisfied by a report of the Director as to character and competency.
247. The number of health visitors on the register is now 29, of whom ten are in Government Service.
All are women. There are 21 vacant posts on the establishment and no pupil health visitor is at present
being trained. It appears that this class of work has never been popular, partly for the reason that the work
is considered to be more exacting than that of a nurse and the prospects of advancement not so good, and
partly owing to lack of interest in preventive health work.
248. There is in fact a very wide field of work for health visitors in the Gold Coast. The birth rate is
high and the infant mortality rate, calculated to be 110 in the registration areas, is thought to be not lower
than 120-140 in the villages. Midwives and health visitors should prove to be two of the most effective
agents in providing improved standards of personal and domestic hygiene. They are, indeed, the foremost
“ health educators ” of the people. Again in child welfare work, the school health service and in dealing
with tuberculosis, health visitors can play a most important part in the health services of the country. In
the smaller towns and villages they should act as community or district nurses working in, and from, the
health centres and also as the supervisors of midwives.
249. The health visitor, before undertaking her special training, should have been registered as a
nurse (whether a S.R.N. or a Q.R.N.) and as a midwife. In calculating the required output of midwives
from training schools, we have provided for one midwife in five becoming a health visitor. Consequently
some 18 health visitors should be trained annually. But in the case of health visitors it seems to us that know-
ledge of the local language is essential and, as it is unlikely that young women with the necessary qualifications
could be found in the Northern Territories during the next few years, we think that for the present the provision
for training should be limited to an output of 12 health visitors every year for service in the Colony and
Ashanti. Part of the training could be given in the School of Hygiene, Accra —where extensions and additions
should be made to the graphic museum —part in child welfare clinics, in ante-natal clinics and in home
visiting, both in Accra and Kumasi. Suitable hostel accommodation should be provided for the pupil health
visitors and the course should extend over one year.
Midwives
250. The code governing the practice of midwifery is contained in the Midwives Ordinance (Cap. 64 of
1936 which incorporates earlier Ordinances) and in two amending Ordinances of 1944 and 1947. The general
effect of this legislation was to establish a Midwives Board (of which the Director is Chairman) and to set up a
roll containing the names of registered midwives. No woman who is not registered may claim to
be a qualified midwife and in certain scheduled towns of the Gold Coast (now 13 in all) no one but a doctor
or registered midwife may habitually attend women in childbirth. Outside these towns there is no restriction
on midwifery practice.
251. The Board has power to make rules for the training of midwives and to appoint a supervisory
authority over any midwives or class of midwives. The rules provide for a course of training at an approved
training school lasting three years, or in the case of a woman who is already a registered nurse, 18 months.
There are two of these in the Gold Coast ; one, the Midwifery Training School at Korle Bu, Accra, the other
in Kumasi. The Korle Bu School has accommodation for 72 pupils. The Kumasi School is new (though the
buildings are old and not very satisfactory) and only one of its pupils has as yet qualified. It will accom-
modate 40 pupils.
6


252. The number of registered midwives is at present 362. The majority, before training in midwifery
hold a qualification in general nursing and many continue to serve in hospitals as nurses or midwives. The
Government employs 176 and 93 of the remaining 186 are said to be in practice, either privately or in a few
cases in the employment of native authorities. In these cases the midwife frequently sets up a labour ward
and a small number of beds in her own home or in a house provided by the native authority. Provision is
usually made for ante-natal and post-natal care.
253. The Government have not instituted any general system of domiciliary midwifery, but in order to
encourage midwives to take up private practice in the villages they pay a subsidy of £5 a month together with
a bonus of 10s. a case up to a maximum of 30 cases a month. This financial inducement is not paid in Accra
1 and other large centres of population. The system of payment by native authorities varies in different areas.
In a few areas the Red Cross Society have established maternity clinics from which midwives employed by
them with Government assistance attend cases in the neighbourhood. The supervisory authorities appointed
by the Board are the medical officers of health and some degree of supervision over midwives is maintained
hy them or by health visiting staff, when available.
254. We were informed by persons representing the Gold Coast District Midwives Association that a
fee of £1 Is. per delivery is fixed by the Government for midwives in private practice and that this fee dates'
from 1932. They suggested that it should be raised. We understand that in fact there is no prescribed fee
and that the matter is one of custom. If so, there appears to be no reason why the Association should not
advise their members to bring the fee more into accord with the changed value of money. We were informed
that in addition to this fee it is usual for a midwife dealing with a case in her own home to charge a fee of
about 10s. for a six-day stay.
255. In 1951 a new rule was added to the Midwives Rules requiring every registered midwife to
undergo a residential course of instruction of not less than four weeks in an institution approved by the Board.
The rule provides for certain exceptions to this obligation. The Association complained to us of the hardship
inflicted by this rule partly on the ground that the only institution at present approved by the Board is at
Accra and partly that while the Government pay the cost of travel the midwife herself must pay for board and
lodging in the hostel and must make her own arrangements for providing a deputy in her absence.
256. While.we have no doubt that refresher courses for midwives at reasonable intervals are valuable,
we are not clear that the Board are entitled to make it an obligation imposed by rule and enforceable in the
■last resort by striking a midwife off the roll. However that may be, we think that, as soon as practicable,
the school at Kumasi should also be approved for this purpose and that the financial terms might be somewhat
more generous.
257. Recruitment and Training. —A question of much greater importance is that of the adequacy of the
present arrangements for recruiting and training midwives. There are 269 midwives working either in
Government or native authority employment or in private practice amongst an estimated population
(in 1952) of 4,414,978. The calculated birth rate is about 30 in the registration areas. Applying this rate
to the country as a whole, there would be 132,450 babies born in 1952.
On the assumption that in 1952 every midwife of the 269 working in the Gold Coast attends at 175
births (a very high figure but below the actual figure for Accra), then 47,000 women would receive skilled
attention and 85,000 would be without it.
258. The maternal mortality rate of 18-3 given in the Medical Department report for 1949 is very
high (the rate was 0 - 97 in ,1949 for England and Wales). The Gold Coast rate, however, is not quite a true
one as registration of births is confined to certain areas and it is in these areas that special hospital facilities
exist ; as a result a number of very ill patients are brought into registration areas for treatment and so swell
the mortality rate there. In the twenty-third annual report (for the year 1951) of the Maternity Hospital,
Accra, the specialist in charge writes :
“Itis a matter of gravest concern that most—if not all —of the deaths
which represent 74 per cent of the total, could have been prevented by adequate pre-natal care and
skilled attention at birth. All of these cases arrived at the hospital either after a trial of various native
treatments or following the mal-attentions of untrained midwives.”
259. If it be assumed that on average a midwife’s “ working life ” is 15 years and that she conducts
150 labours in a year, then about 1,105 midwives would be required in 1967 for an estimated population in
that year of 5,526,960. Some midwives should continue training to become health visitors, and we have
already suggested a proportion of one in five for this purpose. Thus another 276 midwives would be required,
bringing the figure up to 1,381. To produce this number in the next fifteen years an annual output of not
fewer than 90 would be necessary. The number of pupils now in training is 92 and the expected output this
year is 47.
Even if the higher rate of output could be attained in this period, it would still mean that during the
course of the fifteen years more than half a million women in childbirth would be without skilled assistance.
260. We recognise that the rough calculations made above are based largely on estimates. That is
inevitable, but we feel sure that we have not drawn an unnecessarily gloomy picture of the prospects.
261. Another crucial factor in the situation is this. We have heard from all sides of the difficulty of
persuading people in the Colony and Ashanti to take up work in the Northern Territories. Representatives
of the officers of the Medical Department in Tamale complained to us bitterly of the disadvantages of having
to work in this region—unknown languages, strange people, disagreeable food, expenses of journeys home
and so forth. We think it quite certain that in no foreseeable future will midwives from the Colony and
Ashanti take up private work in the Northern Territories. Even if they could be induced to do so, ignorance
. of the language and of local ways of life would effectively prevent real contact with their patients and would
halve their value as teachers of personal and domestic hygiene.


(a) Colony (Population 2-2m)...
Sanitary
Inspectors
84
Sanitary
Overseers
28
Mosquito
Headmen
178
Village
Overseers
297
( h) Ashanti (Population -8m) ...
12
44
7
3 =
66
(c) Northern Territories (Popu-
lation I - 2m.)
14
2
9
3 =
28
110
74
194
13
391
262. This is a difficulty which obviously goes beyond the realm ot midwifery. We believe that there
is only one real remedy and that is to induce young people in the Northern Territories to undergo training
and qualify themselves to staff their own services. But here again one is met with the difficulty that owing
to lack of schools and for other reasons the supply of girls who could profit by studying the existing midwifery
course and hope to pass the examinations would be quite unequal to providing the necessary number of
recruits, if other not less pressing needs (e.g. teachers, nurses, health visitors, etc.) are taken into account.
263. We have been unable to find an answer to these two problems—the sheer paucity of certified
midwives and the impossibility of recruiting them for the Northern Territories—except by establishing a
special class of women, who might perhaps be called “ village midwives ”. These would be available to serve
in areas outside the scheduled towns in which practice is already confined to the registered midwives and
any other towns that may from time to time be added to the schedule. We think that a course of training
of not less than a year would suffice and should consist in the main of practical demonstrations and lectures
and, under the supervision of a registered midwife, of the delivery of not less than thirty pregnant women.
264. We note that the Government in their offer of 1951 to voluntary agencies have made it a condition
of financial assistance that the agencies should provide midwifery training. We understand that plans are
already in preparation for training schools to be run by the missionary societies at Jirapa, Mampong
(Ashanti), Berekum and Mpraeso and no doubt others will follow. In some at least of these centres the
training offered by the society might well be the shorter and simpler course of one year. Indeed we much
doubt whether in some of these institutions the staff and facilities will exist for the full course.
265. If this system should prove successful, we contemplate that following the principle of the present
midwifery law, areas in which unqualified midwifery practice is now permitted would, as time went on, be
closed to the wholly untrained practitioner and midwifery practice limited in these areas to the registered
midwife and the village midwife.
266. An interesting experiment was made in the autumn of last year in the Castle of Anomabu by the
Department of Social Welfare under the guidance of the senior medical officer of the Cape Coast Hospital
and the senior health visitor. Some 50 unqualified midwives were invited to attend a ten-day course of a
very simple and practical kind, the object of the course being to eliminate some of the more dangerous features
of traditional practice, to emphasise the importance of hygiene in midwifery and to remove the suspicion
and fear which prevents the traditional midwives sending abnormal cases to the hospital. We think that
further experiments on these lines might usefully be carried out, though possibly with a rather longer course.
It is worth considering whether a woman who has completed this might not be given some simple equip-
ment which would be a visible reminder of the training she had received.
CHAPTER X
OTHER MEDICAL AUXILIARIES
SANITARY STAFF
267. The sanitary staff employed by the Government may conveniently be dealt with under five
headings:—
(i) Sanitary Superintendents.
(ii) Sanitary Inspectors.
(iii) Sanitary Overseers.
(iv) Mosquito Headmen.
(v) Village Overseers.
(i) Sanitary Superintendents. —There are 21 of these in the Gold Coast, all but one of whom are in
Government employment. Six are Africans. Three sanitary superintendents are acting as training officers
in charge of the School of Hygiene in Accra and training schools at Kintampo and Tamale respectively.
Four are working for the municipalities of Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi and Cape Coast.
(ii) Sanitary Inspectors.—There are 110 of these, all African. 28 are working in three of the four
municipal towns, (Accra (13) Sekondi-Takoradi (11) and Cape Coast (4)), in addition to those employed by
the Councils.
(\\\)Sanitary Overseers, of whom there are 74, form a class of officer junior to the sanitary inspector.
(iv) Mosquito Headmen.— The title owes its origin to the fact that they were originally in charge of
gangs of labourers carrying out work to limit the breeding of mosquitoes ; later their duties were extended
to include other sanitary work.
(v) Village Overseers were first appointed to supervise the planning of villages to a simple lay-out and
the building of houses ; their duties also included the supervision of elementary sanitary services in the
villages.
The distribution of these four last classes of officer is as follows :
6a


Region
For Government
Others
(a) Colony
66
122
(i b ) Ashanti ... ... ...
20
31
(c) Northern Territories
16
1
102
154 =
256
268. Training. —There are three training schools. In 1938 a School of Hygiene was established in
Accra to prepare pupils by means of a three-year course for the Royal Sanitary Institute (West
Africa) qualification and 61 now hold this qualification. The work of the school was interrupted during the
war but was subsequently resumed. A school at Kintampo provides a simpler course extending over two
years and its main object is to prepare pupils for small town and village work. A recently established school
in Tamale provides a three-year course for pupils intending to take up rural work in the Northern Territories
only.
We understand that the present intention is to form as quickly as practicable two grades of sanitary
inspector, i.e. senior and junior inspectors (see pp. 182 and 183 Vol. 1 of the Lidbury Commission Report).
In general junior inspectors are intended to replace the various classes of sanitary overseers, mosquito
headmen and village overseers. To this end separate courses are being held at Accra and Kintampo for
serving officers. Those admitted after an entrance examination to the Accra School will pursue a course of
study that may lead to the Royal Sanitary Institute (West Africa) examination and those admitted to the
Kintampo School will follow a simpler course qualifying them for the junior posts. When these courses are
finished, the School of Hygiene will revert entirely to a three-year course for new entrants who will be required
to hold the Cambridge School Certificate. At present there are only nine pupils taking this course. Similarly
the Kintampo School may at a later date be limited to new entrants.
269. Whatever shortcomings there may be in the towns of the Gold Coast in the matter of water supply,
conservancy arrangements and so forth, we found a widely accepted opinion that, so far as the work of sanitary
officers can secure improvements, very marked improvements have in fact been achieved in recent years and
that standards of sanitation both in the towns and in many of the villages have risen. There is still much
house-to-house inspection needed in the towns for the prevention and discovery of mosquito and fly breeding
and of accumulations of filth, and supervision of markets is no less important. Such inspection can be carried
out by inspectors who do not necessarily hold the certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute and we consider
that for many years there will be a place for such less highly qualified officers.
270. Future Recruitment. —When the serving officers now undergoing further training at Accra and
Kintampo finish their courses, there should be a reasonable number of sanitary inspectors in the Colony.
The figure would be about 290 Government officers, including those working in the municipal towns, together
with an unknown number in the employment of the local authorities. To bring Ashanti into line on a
population basis with the Colony nearly 50 more officers would be required and the Northern Territories
would need 140 more.
271. After the temporary arrangements for training serving officers are over, the annual output of the
three schools should be about 30, but this may be affected by the difficulty which is expected to arise in Tamale
in securing enough pupils. Once more it is unfortunate that in this area where an increase in the number
of sanitary staff is most needed to raise the level of village sanitation, the supply of boys who have reached
Standard VII is small. We should regard an output of 30 as a reasonable figure.
272. Whether and to what extent the members of the present staff of Government sanitary officers
should be invited to transfer to the service of the new local authorities is a difficult question. We understand
that at present many of them are very reluctant to do so, but the establishment of a regular local government
service may overcome the difficulty. We consider that in any event the Government should continue to
employ the sanitary superintendents as a corps of inspectors.
273. If effect is given to recommendations which we make elsewhere, the School of Hygiene in Accra
will be used for the training of clinic superintendents and health visitors, as well as sanitary inspectors.
A graphic museum has already been started at the School and we consider it should be enlarged and completed
as soon as possible. The museum should contain material and exhibits, including photographs, to demonstrate
all aspects of health work in the Gold Coast.
Pharmacists
274. The Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance, 1946 which superseded earlier Druggists Ordinances
established a Pharmacy and Poisons Board consisting of eight members appointed by the Governor, now
the Minister. The Director is chairman and Registrar. The principal duties of the Board are to keep a
register of pharmacists, to prescribe courses of training and examinations for admission to the register, to
issue certificates of competency and (subject to a right of appeal to the Supreme Court) to remove the name
of a pharmacist from the register.
275. In prescribing courses of instruction for pupils the Board are required to approve and supervise
“ private institutions ” for the training of pupil pharmacists. There are at present eleven of these institutions,
all of them being leading pharmaceutical stores, in which the pupils undergo a five years’ apprenticeship.
The other method of entry into the profession is a three-year course at the Government School of Pharmacy,
Accra. This institution is shortly to be merged in the new College of Technology now in course of erection
at Kumasi. In addition to the full-time course the School of Pharmacy has provided short evening courses
for pupils who seek to enter by way of apprenticeship. Of the pharmacists admitted to the register since
1946, 65 were trained at the School of Pharmacy and 54 at approved “ private institutions”, i.e. by way of
apprenticeship.
276. There are 256 names on the register. Of these 102 are working for the Government, others on
their own account and others again for mining companies and commercial firms. They are distributed as
follows :


Region
Dispensaries
Hospital
Field Units
Stores and
H.Q. Office
(a) Colony
5
52
—
9 = 66
( b ) Ashanti
3
16
1
— = 20
(c) Northern Territories
6
10
—
— = 16
14
78
1
9 = 102
The distribution of those working for the Government is as follows :
It appears that there are seven pharmacists working for mining companies and one or more pharmacists
practising their profession, as owners of or employees in drug stores, in 32 towns or villages of the Colony,
three of Ashanti and one of the Northern Territories.
277. Representatives of the Pharmaceutical Association with whom we conferred drew attention to
the increasing difficulty that pharmacists find in securing Government employment. It seems that the fact
is commonly overlooked that the training of a pharmacist is not a training for a Government post but for a
profession which the pupil, if he qualifies, is free to practise. We suggest that the Pharmacy and Poisons
Board should bring this to the notice of every student proposing to enter the training course, making it clear
that he must not expect automatically to enter Government service.
278. Under section 16 (3) of the Ordinance no person other than a registered pharmacist may—after
the expiration of five years from the commencement of the Ordinance, a period which has now expired—
•dispense for a doctor, dentist or veterinary surgeon. We were told that this provision is being largely
disregarded, but we have had no means of verifying this statement. The number of doctors in private practice
is, and for some years is likely to be, so small that the strict observance of this section would not substantially
assist the employment of pharmacists. We do not consider that the qualifications of a pharmacist
are necessary for, or particularly appropriate to, the work of a dresser in a dressing station or of a medical
storekeeper.
279. Enforcement of Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance. —The Ordinance contains drastic limitations
on the import and sale of poisons and various other drugs and its administration is mainly in the hands of the
Pharmacy and Poisons Board. While we recognise the difficulty of securing evidence of breaches in these
provisions, we are not satisfied that the powers have been used as effectively as they might have
been. Section 71 (2) of the Ordinance enables the Board to authorise medical practitioners and pharmacists
to enter premises, inspect records, examine poison books and so forth. We understand that in 1947 two
pharmacy inspectors were appointed and that subsequently provision was made (in the estimates of 1950-51)
for the appointment of a further six, but it seems that only the original two received instructions and those
only oral, and we have been unable to find in the Board’s minute book any trace of a formal appointment
of the six. We have found also in some of the Government hospitals that we have visited a lack of accurate
records of dangerous drugs and poisons used.
280. The Pharmacy and Poisons Board should not hesitate to add to the list in Schedule XIII of the
Ordinance any substance, the use of which in the opinion of the Board is being abused. We would especialh-
draw attention to the various preparations of arsenic and to antibiotics which are commonly said to be in
this category.
281. There does not appear to be in the Ordinance any provision prohibiting the possession by
unauthorised persons of poisons in Part lof the Poisons List or in Schedule XIII to the Ordinance. As it is
thought that certain drugs (among them being the sulphonamides and preparations of arsenic) arc smuggled
across the frontier, we recommend that the possession of these poisons should be restricted to authorised
sellers of poisons (other than those authorised to sell Part II poisons only) and to those who hold such substances
by virtue of a prescription given by a medical practitioner, dentist or veterinary surgeon.
282. We draw attention to two provisions in the Ordinance which may afford loopholes for the illegal
supply of drugs. In section 63 (1) (c) (ii) the term “ any employee of the Government in the course of his
duties as such ” seems to be too wide and we think that some provision should be made in section 63 (1) (c)
(iii) and (iv) for the nomination of a responsible officer who would sign an order for drugs.
Clinic Superintendents
283. In the section of this report dealing with health centres we have advocated the appointment of
an officer in charge with the title of Clinic Superintendent ; we have also suggested some of the qualities such
an officer should possess. It is not intended that a clinic superintendent should be considered as a substitute
for a medical officer or that their recruitment should be regarded as an expedient to make good a temporary
shortage of doctors. There is such a vast amount of work in the medical field which can be dealt with by
intelligent and reliable medical auxiliaries working under the direction of a medical officer that these auxiliaries
must have a permanent place in the medical service. In addition to the value of clinic superintendents in
charge of health centres, they could with advantage be employed in the routine treatment of simple or easily
recognised diseases in the outpatient departments of hospitals which are at present overloaded with such
cases ; medical officers might refer cases needing prolonged routine treatment to special sessions organised
for the purpose.
284. We understand that the Government in 1951 approved the creation of a grade of “ medical
assistant ” and we have read memoranda setting out proposals for the recruitment and training of officers of
this grade, which is, in effect, that of clinic superintendent. In view of the need to establish and staff health
centres as soon as possible and because we believe that maturity and qualities of character are of an importance
equal to or even exceeding those of academic or technical ability, we recommend that the field of recruitment
for clinic superintendents should not be limited by an insistance on the holding of the S.R.N. qualification.


There must be a number ot male nurses or nurse-dispensers of proved integrity who would, after not more
than a year’s instruction, merit the grade of clinic superintendent and we are of the opinion that suitable
candidates should at the outset be selected for training from this source. Selection for training would not
imply automatic appointment to the post; this should depend on performance during the course and success
in tests at the end of a year. The salaty scale of a clinic superintendent should be that of a ward sister.
285. If candidates are selected from nurses (whether S.R.N. or 0.R.N.) who are actively practising
their profession in hospital and who have already had several years’ experience as a nurse, there should be
little need for a great deal of clinical training in the proposed course, beyond that necessary to show a supervisor
or tutor that the candidate’s method of dealing with patients displays that humane outlook which, we are told,
is sometimes lacking. The principles and practice of elementary personal and environmental hygiene should
be given a prominent place in the course. Instruction in methods of keeping accurate records and accounts
and in the organisation of work in a health centre should also be included. The whole training should be
aimed mainly at developing a sense of responsibility and leadership rather than a high degree of technical
ability.
286. About 40 clinic superintendents will be needed within the next five years if effect is to be given
to our recommendations. It is improbable that further developments will increase that number beyond 80
within ten years. We would emphasise that the development of health centres must be governed by the rate
of production of well-trained auxiliaries of all types to staff them and by the recruitment of medical officers
in sufficient numbers to supervise their activities. Failure to appreciate this may well bring health centres
into disrepute.
287. A proposal has been made to set up a special training school for clinic superintendents ana we
endorse this proposal. We think it important that a uniform and carefully planned syllabus of instruction
should be drawn up and that teaching staff should be specially selected and appointed to the school for a
number of years ; appointments of short duration will inevitably lead to lack of continuity of method and a
lowering of standard. The special training school need not be large and the staff, other than the officer in
charge, need not be engaged as whole-time instructors. On the assumption that 40 clinic superintendents
will be produced in the next five years and that a service life of at least 20 years in that grade may be expected,
the school would only need to produce four or five a year to maintain the cadre, even if at some indefinite
future date the total numbers actually employed should rise to 80 or 100.
288. We have not sufficiently intimate knowledge of available facilities to offer an opinion on the exact
location of the school, but suggest that the School of Hygiene in Accra might provide instruction in the
preventive aspect of their work and that if, as we have elsewhere recommended, a new out-patient clinic is
established in Accra, training in simple methods of treatment might be given there. A handbook for the use
of clinic superintendents in the service would be valuable.
Local Authority Dressers
289. The recent rapid increase in the number of native authority dressing stations has created a demand
for the training of dressers which has outstripped the facilities available in many areas. At present the course
of training lasts 18 months and is given by the district medical officer and his junior staff, usually in the
hospital of the area in which the dressing station is situated. We think this should continue, but only when
facilities at the hospital are adequate and the medical and senior nursing staff have time to give individual
attention to the pupils. We have seen cases where satisfactory instruction w'as clearly impossible. The
worst case was one in which there were nine prospective dressers attached to a hospital with one medical
officer, one second division nurse, a dispenser and an average daily out-patient attendance of 40. In two
other places there were five pupils in one and six in the other ; the hospitals had 26 and 24 beds respectively
and in neither case would the out-patient attendances provide enough material for the practical instruction
of so many dressers, nor was the out-patient accommodation sufficient.
290. We recommend that a close scrutiny be made of facilities for the training of dressers. It is clear
to us that the first hospital we mention in the preceding paragraph should not train dressers at all. In general,
we advise that there should not be more than three dressers in training at any one time in a district hospital.
They should serve a probationary period of three months, at the end of which the medical officer should
decide whether they are suitable candidates or not and advise the native authority (in future the local authority)
accordingly. In the event of an adverse report the candidate should be withdrawn.
291. The course for dressers should include :
{a) The recognition and treatment of the more common local endemic diseases.
{b) The recognition of conditions which require treatment in hospital.
(c) Training in first-aid measures.
Here again a handbook —of the simplest kind—might usefully be prepared.
CHAPTER XI
WATER SUPPLIES
292. In the course of the conferences which we have held up and down the country we have heard no
dissent from the view that the provision of adequate supplies of wholesome water for human consumption is
one of the most urgent public health needs throughout the Gold Coast and in the Northern Territories possibly
the most urgent. This view accords with the passage in paragraph 98 of the Development Plan 1951 where
it is said “ the improvement of water supplies throughout the country is of fundamental importance for
development. Without the provision of clean water in the towns and villages a basic standard of health
cannot be attained.” Provision is made in the report for capital expenditure on water supplies of £3-1- million,
of which £ll million are allocated to urban and £2 million to rural water development.


Wells
Ponds
Tanks
Other works
Colony
74
5
11
3
Ashanti
73
11
—
1
Northern Territories
... 361
3
—
—
Totals
... 508
19
11
4
293. Apart from a number of minor though valuable water undertakings carried out by the native
authorities—chiefty the digging of wells—the supply of water has always been treated as a Government
obligation. The Waterworks Ordinance (Cap. 55 of 1937) provides for the setting up of water authorities in
different areas, but in practice, the Director of Public Works has always been constituted the water authority.
His department has provided piped supplies for the following towns with an aggregate population of (about)
332,400 :
Accra Kumasi
Winneba Cape Coast
Sekondi-Takoradi Koforidua
Tamale Pong-Tamale.
Further schemes for the town of Nsawam and the states of Manya Krobo and Yilo Krobo with an aggregate
population of 67,215 are nearing completion and the Development Plan provides, in addition, for supplies to the
following ten towns with an aggregate population (excluding Tamale, which already has a piped supply) of
(about) 71,000
, Dunkwa
Keta
Oda-Akim Swedru
Swedru-Apam
Tarkwa (including Abosso)
Tamale-Savelugu (including Kumbungu).
The inhabitants of these towns represent about 11 per cent of the population of the Gold Coast, but we under-
stand that the “ limits of supply ” of the undertakings extend in some cases well beyond the town boundary
and consequently that a piped supply is available to about 20,000 more.
294. As shown in Appendix 2 of the Development Plan, large sums are being spent now and in the near
future on extending and improving existing supplies, notably at Accra and Kumasi. We understand that in
Accra the growth of the town had necessitated the relaying of many of the distributing mains.
295; The town of Obuasi draws its water from supplies provided in part by the Ashanti Goldfields
Corporation and in part by the Obuasi Sanitary Board. Other mining companies also provide piped water to
villages around the mines.
290. The responsibility for water supply in rural areas lies with the Department of Rural Water
Development, an organisation established in 1944 with its headquarters now at Kumasi. In May of the
present year this department which had previously been grouped with others under the Ministry of Agricul-
ture and Natural Resources, was transferred to the Ministry of Communications and Works and as a con-
sequence the two operations of urban and rural supply are now the responsibility of a single Minister.
297. Up to 1950 the department had dug 889 village wells, of which 658 were in the Northern Terri-
tories, 104 in Ashanti and 127 in the Colony. During the year 1949-50 223 wells were completed. The
department has also constructed a number of reservoirs, boreholes, tanks and ponds and given advice and
assistance to native authorities on the construction of suitable water supplies.
The expenditure of the department in 1949-50 was just under £lOO,OOO. In the same year the cost of
work carried out by native authorities was in round figures £15,000 of which £5,100 was spent in the Colony,
£1,900 in Ashanti and £B,OOO in the Northern Territories.
298. In the year 1949-50 the native authorities completed the following “ waterworks ”
299. It is clear that while the larger towns are reasonably well supplied there is still much to be done
in supplying the rural parts of the country where some 90 per cent of the inhabitants live. We have heard no
suggestion from any quarter that the Department is not, within the limits of its staff, working with great
efficiency. As appears from paragraph 28 of its 1949-50 report it is hampered by shortage of labour, parti-
cularly in the Northern Territories. Once more the need of the Northern Territories for skilled workers—
in this case carpenters and masons—becomes apparent.
300. The present system of rural supply seems to us to have three defects, two of which are directly
attributable to shortage of skilled staff:—
(1) Enough attention is not and cannot be given to seeing that wells, dams, etc., already provided
are in fact operating satisfactorily. We came across a village riddled with guinea worm where wells
had been dry for many months and apparently no steps had been taken to remedy the position.
(2) We think that more advice should be available to local authorities and even to village com-
munities attempting to provide their own supplies. We understand that a good deal of village activity,
stimulated by mass education teams, is being devoted to water supplies of a primitive kind and that
skilled advice may or may not be available according as the rural water organisation can or cannot at
the moment spare staff for the purpose.
(3) As we have pointed out earlier, there seems to be no proper liaison between those responsible
for water supply and the Medical Department.


301. There are obviously many points on which considerations of public health may be important.
Thus open reservoirs, tanks and ponds require protection against pollution, particularly against infection,
with schistosoma. Such supplies cannot be considered safe and should only be installed where it is found,
impossible to provide water by some other method or system. Or again, the great prevalence of dracontiasis.
(guinea worm) in many parts of the country and a widespread but localised incidence of schistosomiasis,
make the provision of safe water to some villages a matter of much greater urgency than to others.
302. A further question is whether and in what way the new system of local government, introduced,
by the Ordinance of 1951, calls for an alteration of the present arrangements. The supply of water is of course
a primary necessity of public health and is a matter for which in the United Kingdom and many other coun-
tries, local authorities are commonly made responsible. Section 58 (42) of the Ordinance of 1951 includes
amongst the functions which may be conferred on local authorities the power (or duty) to “ provide, erect and
maintain a public water supply and impose water rates.” No doubt a similar provision will appear in the
proposed new municipal Ordinances. It would therefore be possible to abandon the present system and
throw’ the whole responsibility for providing water on the local authorities.
303. We think that this w'ould be a mistake. In a country of this size and population, which has-
hitherto had a single w’ater authority, namely the Government, it would in our view be a retrograde step to
split the organisation into fragments. We recommend as an alternative that as regards piped supplies the
system should be for a central organisation to continue to provide water supplies in bulk but that the aim
should be gradually, as and when new councils find their feet and show the necessary administrative and
financial capacity, to transfer to them the responsibility for water distribution. This is a familiar division of
functions, the bulk supplier selling the water to the distributing authority at a price per thousand gallons.
304. We also consider that the principle should be firmly established that a supply of wholesome water
is a commodity w'hich costs money and like other commodities should be paid for by the consumers. In the
case of urban supplies this idea has been accepted at any rate in principle and the Waterworks Ordinance
provides for the collection by the town councils of a water rate of 21 per cent of the rateable value of premises.
Elsewhere a similar rate is collected by the District Commissioners in urban areas supplied by the Public
Works Department. The proceeds of these rates are paid over to the Government. Charges for metered
supplies are paid by the consumer direct to the department. In the seven largest of the towns the total
amount of water distributed in 1950-51 w r as 1,681 million gallons ; the average cost per thousand gallons was
27 • 14d. and the average receipts 12 • 15d. Estimates for the year 1952-53 show a greater discrepancy between
cost (28-6 d.) and receipts (11-7 d.) We understand that it is proposed to increase the charges for metered
supplies. Thus it is true to say that water supplied to the towns is now being largely paid for by the whole of
the inhabitants of the Gold Coast, the majority of whom themselves have no proper supply at all.
305. As we have already said, we do not doubt that the taking over by local authorities of the task of
distribution will have to be a slow process and that the transfer should normally not be made until the distri-
bution system is in good condition and as far as can be foreseen adequate for the needs of the area. In the
case of Accra, for example, the formidable task of replacing mains now too small to carry the water needed
should be completed before the responsiblity is thrown on to the town council.
306. The foregoing paragraphs have been written in terms of the piped supplies provided in the larger
undertakings. There will of course continue to be a large number of small operations, e.g. the sinking of a
well, in which the distinction between supplying in bulk and distributing water is meaningless. We suggest,
that in these cases the Government should do the work and that the supply should then become the respon-
sibility of the local authority. In order to maintain the principle that water must be paid for, the Government
should charge the cost to the authority, though in the poorer areas a part (or the whole) of it might no doubt
be ultimately borne by the Government under a system of grants in aid. It would clearly be right in proper
cases to encourage local authorities or even villagers to attempt minor undertakings themselves, if only
because they might be able to tap local resources of labour, voluntary’ or paid, but we think it important that
these undertakings should be planned and supervised by technical officers of the Government. Otherwise
the results may be disappointing and sometimes dangerous.
307. We have considered whether, assuming that the supply of water in bulk remains a central
responsibility, the proper instrument for that purpose is a Government Department. Until the difficult
transitional stage is completed, the Government would probably wish to retain control. We believe that
subsequently the service of water supply—a typical “ public utility ” —might with advantage be handled by a
statutory board or corporation and that this as a matter of convenience might be centred on Kumasi. Any
such organisation would need to have a close liaison with the Government’s medical advisers for the reasons
w’e have already given ; and there would be questions of priorities as between different areas of the country,
a point which might be met by providing for a fully representative advisory committee to assist the board.
For the rest, the w'ork is purely technical and could be left to competent engineers and geologists. For that
reason we should suggest a small board composed mainly, if not wholly, of technical experts. The board
w’ould no doubt require, in the first instance, a substantial loan from the Government to provide working
capital, but if the principle is accepted that w'ater consumers should pay for water supplies, it should become
self-supporting. The question how the distributing authority would find money to meet the board’s charges
is one of general local government finance. It would be for the authority to decide whether the necessary
sum should be raised by a water rate or be paid out of the general rate or by any other of the methods which
the Minister of Local Government has power to approve. In places w’here a large proportion of the water
is drawn from public stand pipes, a charge per gallon to be collected by an attendant is a possibility.


CHAPTER XII
VOLUNTARY AGENCIES AND MINING COMPANIES
VOLUNTARY AGENCIES
308. In comparison with the immense contribution of the missionary societies to education, their work
in the medical field has been on a modest scale. None the less, valuable work, including the provision of over
100 hospital beds, 16 dispensaries, and 3 leper institutions, has been and is being done—in the main
independently of the Government. For the most part the work of the missions (some ten in all) consists of the
provision of dispensaries in which simple out-patient treatment is provided. In some there are a few maternity
beds. Other voluntary activities include the provision by the Red Cross Society of the services of health
visitors, of ambulances and of static and mobile clinics. We understand that while the policy of the Gold
Coast Government has been to give generous support to the mission schools, a somewhat different attitude
was until recently adopted towards the medical work of the missionary societies and that as a consequence
this work has for the most part proceeded without Government aid. In a few places—notably at Dormaa—
there has been co-operation between a mission and the native authority.
309. In May, 1951 the Government published a “ Statement of Principles regulating financial assistance
to voluntary agencies undertaking medical work ” which indicated a change of policy. This was followed
by a declaration in the Development Plan of the same year in the following terms “ It is hoped to obtain the
assistance of non-Govemment agencies, particularly the missionary organisations, in the expansion of health
services, especially in the field of maternity and child welfare work.” The statement offers financial aid in
the shape of capital grants and contributions toward recurrent expenditure on certain conditions, the principal
of which are that the hospital must be erected in accordance with approved plans and specifications, that it
must admit persons of any race or creed, that it must be administered by a committee consisting partly of
representatives of the mission and partly of Government representatives, that it must be conducted to the
satisfaction of the Government, no professional fees being chargeable and that proper accounts are to be kept
and audited. The requirement of a joint committee of management applies only where the Government’s
capital grant is not less than one half of the estimated cost or is £30,000 or more.
310. We are strongly in favour of a policy designed to elicit a fuller contribution from the missionary
societies and other voluntary agencies. Any policy which can relieve the Ministry of Health of a part of its
burden is plainly to be welcomed and more especially a policy under which skilled staff, medical and nursing,
may be made available without drawing on the country’s slender resources. Our only comment on
the Government Statement of May, 1951 —and it is one of some importance—is that the proposed arrangements
might with advantage be more flexible. We have heard, for example, that the setting up of the proposed
joint committee is proving unacceptable to organisations which adopt the principle of entrusting the
administration of their hospitals to a single officer and not to a committee. We see no reason why
this particular joint arrangement should be treated as a sine qua non, though where it is acceptable to the
voluntary agency concerned it may sometimes be a convenient practice. The fact is that if and so long as
the voluntary agency maintains a satisfactory hospital and the Government contributions, whether to capital
or recurrent expenditure, are less than what it would cost the Government to build and run the hospital
themselves, the bargain is a favourable one. If for any reason the agency ceases to maintain and conduct
the hospital on proper lines the situation changes, and if the Government have made a substantial capital
contribution, it is reasonable that the hospital and its equipment should pass to them, or at least that the
Government’s contribution or a part of it should be paid back. Those communities with which we discussed
the point recognised the fairness of such an arrangement and would, we believe, feel no difficulty in accepting
it.
311. Another but more elaborate system which has been adopted in some cases in the United Kingdom
when large sums of money are involved is to treat a capital grant as though it were a mortgage carrying no
interest and to provide that for each year during which the hospital is satisfactorily carried on, a proportionate
part of the sum (usually 1 /40th) is written off. But whatever the arrangements are, experience suggests
that if the maximum advantage is to be taken of these agencies whose objects are charitable and not profit-
making, it is worth while having, if necessary, a careful negotiation with each without attempting to force
the arrangements into a single mould.
312. If the recommendations with regard to the fees payable by in-patients and out-patients at
Government hospitals, health centres and local authority dressing stations are accepted, it would be necessary
to require any voluntary agency receiving grants from the Government to adopt the same procedure and make
available a proportion of their beds free of charge.
313. We note that in the Development Estimates of 1952-53 (p. 125) provision is made for mission
grants amounting to £140,000 and that it is intended that this sum should be expended by the end of the
present financial year.
Mining Companies
314. There is a considerable volume of legislation dealing with the obligations of mining companies
towards their employees but in connection with health and sanitary matters it appears that the operative
provisions are the Mining Health Areas Ordinance (cap. 127) and the Mining Health Areas Regulations made
under section 4 of the Ordinance.
315. Medical Attendance and Hospitals.— The last-mentioned section empowers the Governor in Council
to make regulations (inter alia) “ for the medication, attention and hospital treatment of such labourers in
any mining health area when sick or injured ”. The regulations give effect to this by requiring the manage-
ment. of every mine employing 500 or more persons to appoint a whole-time medical officer (Reg. 27) and
“ to provide hospital accommodation which, in the opinion of the Director, is suitable and adequate ” (Reg. 30).
7


A mine employing 200 persons or more must provide a dispensary and a dispenser. The regulations also
provide for the inspection by the Deputy Director of Health Services of plans of proposed hospitals and for
his stating any objections he may have to them. It will be observed that the responsibility for seeing that
the mining companies’ hospitals are “ suitable and adequate ” is placed on the Director and that there is
apparently no appeal from his decision.
316. Sanitary Matters. —The legislation provides for “ mining areas ” and " mining health areas ”.
The two are quite distinct and are created for quite different purposes. The mining area consists of the land
in the immediate vicinity of the mine including the actual overground works and installations of the mine.
Within this area the mining company are responsible for all sanitary arrangements including water supply,
a proper lay-out of houses, disposal of refuse and sewage, abatement of nuisances and so forth. The mining
health area usually covers a far larger extent of land, sometimes several square miles. The general effect of
the regulations is to give to the Deputy Director of Health Services even wider sanitary powers and duties
than the mining companies have in the mining areas. For this purpose a large number of building regulations
made under the Towns Ordinance are applied to these areas. The'bbject of establishing mining health areas
was, as we understand, to apply certain sanitary measures normally operating in established towns to the
large unorganised populations made up of miners and their dependants which were springing up round the
mines.
’ 317. It appears that mining companies wishing to house their labour frequently build estates in the
mining health areas and in practice supply services to these estates, notwithstanding that' they actually lie
within the sphere of Government responsibilitv.
\
• 318. One town which we visited, Obuasi, has for many years had under a special Ordinance a Sanitary
Board consisting in part of representatives of the mining company (Ashanti Goldfields Corporation) and in
part of local nominated or elected persons. The Board has been responsible for the sanitary conditions of
this considerable town (population 15,876) and has operated with great success. Although the area is
technically a mining health area, we understand that Government action has in effect been replaced by that
of the Board. Under the new Local Government Ordinance this Board is being replaced by an urban council
on which the mining company will retain some, though a much smaller, representation.
319. Other mining health areas will similarly find themselves under the jurisdiction of an urban or
local council on which, as we understand, the local mining company will be represented, and it is a question
whether the system of mining health areas should not be abandoned. For reasons which we mention in the
next paragraph the whole system appears to have fallen into decay and as soon as the new councils are firmly
established, we think that it might well be removed from the statute book. Otherwise there will remain a
duplication of sanitary powers with the usual consequences of delay and inaction. We recognise that the
abolition of the mining health areas would bring to an end arrangements for part-time work as medical officers
of health in these areas made between the Government and the medical officers of some of the
mining companies. We think that the new local or urban councils would be well advised to consider whether
thej' should not attempt to make some similar arrangements with these practitioners.
320. Between 1935 and the outbreak of war a senior health officer in Government service was specially
posted to supervise all the mining health areas and generally to keep in touch with the medical officers of the
companies. In 1939 he was called up for military service and it is, we think, unfortunate that he has never
been replaced. Whether this officer was formally empowered to exercise the statutory powers of the Deputy
Director of Health Serviccs—a post abolished in 1946 —we are not clear.
321. We now turn to the question of medical treatment and hospitals. We understand that in general
the mining companies accept into their hospitals the dependants of their employees and other members of
the local population, if room permits. So far as it goes this system provides a useful service but the companies
are of course under no obligation to make their accommodation adequate for the whole local population and
in fact it is not. Moreover there is the difficulty that the companies’ hospitals are normally within the ambit
■of the pit head works and the companies are not usually prepared to allow a lorry or ambulance to bring a
patient who is not one of their own employees to the doors of the hospital. We appreciate the reasons which
underlie the companies’ attitude* but we have heard a number- of complaints on this score.
322. The standard of accommodation in those of the companies’ hospitals which we visited varied
widely, but we saw none markedly below the average standard of Government hospitals. We were told that
in general the companies find great difficulty, in recruiting trained nurses and inspection of the hospitals in
some cases bore this out.
323. It is plain that a system under which two separate hospital authorities have the responsibility
for two different sections of a local population can be most economically worked by close co-operation between
them. It appears that negotiations between the Medical Department and the Chamber of Mines—including
the proposal for a joint 200 bed hospital at Tarkwa—were started early in. 1950 but came to nothing.
At the conference with representatives of the Chamber of Mines we gathered that they would prefer
to carry out their statutory duties independently of the Government, though they would be prepared to
consider a reciprocal system under which, where accommodation was available, they would accept non-miners
into their hospitals on payment by the Government of an agreed charge per capita and the Government would
do the same for miners received into Government hospitals. This should, we think, be the subject of further
negotiations. It has occurred to us also that the possibility might be explored of making arrangements
between the Government and a mining company under which the former would provide and staff a clinic with
perhaps 20-30 beds in close proximity to the mining area on the footing that the company would permit one
pf their medical officers to visit and take charge of the patients on a part-time basis. Other arrangements
of the kind may suggest themselves. For the rest it seems that matters must for the time being remain as
thqy stand. The companies have their obligations and it is the duty of the Government to see that they are
carried.out.,. But a partnership, desirable though it may be, cannot be forced on an unwilling party.


CHAPTER XIII
HOSPITAL CHARGES AND PRIVATE PRACTICE BY MEDICAL OFFICERS
324. Hospital Charges. —There is, so far as we have been able to ascertain, no Ordinance, Order or
Regulation stating clearly who are the beneficiaries of the Gold Coast medical service and on what terms. We
understand that Government officers have a right to free medical attention as one of the terms of their con-
tracts with the Government. In other cases the position has apparently to be deduced from the Hospital
Fees Ordinance of 1897 as amended by Ordinances of 1935 and 1950. These enable the Governor in Council
to make regulations “ fixing the scale of charges to be paid by patients or classes of patients obtaining medicines
or-surgical appliances at, or receiving attendance and treatment in, any hospital ” and specifying conditions
on which patients may obtain medicines and appliances at, or be received into, any hospital. The latest
regulations under this Ordinance are dated sth September, 1942. The schedules to these regulations lay down
scales of charges for “ accommodation and maintenance ” and for radiography, electro-therapy and massage
and operating theatre charges. Regulation 12 forbids charges of any kind being made to certain classes of
persons including Government officers (and, in some cases, the wife and children of a Government officer),
European nursing sisters in Government service, pupils at Government boarding schools and paupers. The
decision whether a person is to be regarded as a pauper or not is left to the medical officer in charge, subject
to the directions of the Director. Under the same regulation persons undergoing treatment for pulmonary
tuberculosis, venereal disease and yaws are also exempt from charges. It does not appear that any steps
have been taken to bring the exemption of persons suffering from these diseases to the notice of the public—
no doubt a difficult thing to do in a population largely illiterate. We found one medical officer quite unaware
of them. In the larger hospitals it is impracticable for the medical officers in person to decide on a patient’s
capacity to pay charges and we understand that the work is usually entrusted to a nurse. We believe that very
great differences between the practice of different hospitals in this matter would be found if a close investiga-
tion were made.
325. The popular view of the situation appears to be that it is little or no use attending a hospital unless
you are prepared to pay money in all directions. This is no doubt an exaggeration, but we cannot escapfe
the conclusion from statements that we have heard in all parts of the country that, apart from and in addition
to a complicated system of official charges, unofficial disbursements are necessary.
32G. We have given much thought to this matter and have come to the conclusion that this most
unsatisfactory state of affairs will not be ended except by adopting the simple and intelligible principle that
in-patient and out-patient treatment in hospitals is entirely; free of charge. We recognise that there are
substantial arguments to the contrary. The Government will lose revenue,; though the amount of money
actually collected in 1950-51 was only about £37,000 or less than 4 per cent of Government expenditure on the
medical, services. It is true that many people in the Colony and Ashanti, if not in the Northern Territories,
can afford to, and do without apparent reluctance, pay the recognised charges and that the fact of payment
may enhance in their eyes the value of the treatment received. It is true also that while the charges'must
have some deterrent effect, it is impossible to measure this. None the less we believe that on balance the
weight of argument is in favour of a free service. The Government have already thought it wise to offer free
treatment in the case of the diseases mentioned above, presumably on the ground that it is especially important
in the public interest that these diseases should be attended to. Much the same argument could be applied
to a number of other conditions.
327. Our recommendation that hospital charges should be abolished must be read in the light of our
previous recommendation that steps should be taken to provide “ pay-beds ” in hospitals, that is, accommoda-
tion in smaller wards where patients willing and able to pay could be accommodated. If suitable charges
were fixed for this accommodation, the loss of revenue for the other beds would at any rate be partly met.
We also suggest that in the larger hospitals, where queues for the out-patient departments are long, it would
be reasonable to provide special hours at which patients willing to pay a suitable sum could attend.
The principle of free treatment in hospitals should in our view be extended both to Government health
centres and local authority dressing stations. If our recommendations are adopted, every possible step should
be taken to bring the new situation to the notice of the public.
Private Practice by Medical Officers
328. We now turn to the vexed question whether whole-time medical officers in the employment of the
Government should be allowed to carry on private practice. For upwards of 30 years this matter has been
under discussion in the dispatches of successive Secretaries of State and reports of Commissions and statements
by West African Governments. In particular, both the history of the matter and the arguments for and
against abolishing or modifying the system have been exhaustively examined by Sir Sydney Phillipson, c.m.g.,
in a report made by him to the Nigerian Government in 1949. The Lidbury Report on the Civil Service
of the Gold Coast made in 1951 also deals with the matter at some length.
This subject plainly falls within our terms of reference and the statement issued by the Gold Coast:
Government on the Lidbury Report in 1951 declares in terms that “ the Government has decided to refer the
Lidbury Commission’s recommendations on private practice by Government Medical Officers for considera-
tion by the Commission to be appointed to investigate and report on the administration of Health Services
in the Gold Coast ”. On our arrival we were authoritatively informed that while thd Lidbury Report as a
whole was once more under Government consideration, a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly having
been appointed to consider it, this particular reference to our Commission still stood.
329. We begin by quoting with cordial agreement Sir Sydney Phillipson’s statement (paragraph 51
of his report) : —“ The plain fact is that a perfect solution, which would command the assent of all concerned
is not to be found. In other words, holes can be picked in any scheme put forward. Any proposals relating
to this subject are bound to elicit continual representations of the most varying and contradictory kinds
?a


330. It would not be profitable to attempt to set out in our own words all the facts, arguments and
conclusions (running into nearly 100 closely printed pages) in the Phillipson and Lidbury Reports. We must
assume that those who are concerned with this matter are familiar with, or at least have access to, these
documents. For present purposes it suffices to call to mind a few of the crucial events and their dates. Up
to 1934 private practice on the part of the Government medical officers appears to have been accepted as a
normal feature of medical service in West Africa. In that year, when it became necessary to frame regulations
for the newly created Unified Colonial Medical Service, the decision of the Secretary of State was stated in
regulation 7, which runs as follows :
"No officer shall be entitled as of right to practise on his own account. The conditions, if any,
under which officers may be permitted to engage in private or * consulting practice, and to receive fees
from members of the public, shall be determined by local regulations framed in accordance with the
circumstances of the various dependencies and approved by the Secretary of State ”.
The Regulation contained a saving for the rights acquired by officers prior to the Ist January, 1934.
331. In January, 1946 the then Secretary of State issued a dispatch calling in effect (to use the words
of Sir Sydney Phillipson) “ for the acceptance and effective application of the principle that private practice
should be abolished and requesting the Colonial Governments to give early consideration to the adoption of a
particular method of achieving this object ”. So far as we have been able to ascertain, in all letters of appoint-
ment issued to medical officers going to the Gold Coast since that date it is expressly stated that they are
precluded from engaging in private practice for remuneration. The West African Governors in Conference
thereupon invited the Commission on the Civil Services of British West Africa which was then sitting under
the Chairmanship of Sir Walter Harragin to recommend a scale of compensation to serving officers for tlie
withdrawal of the privilege. Owing to practical difficulties in giving effect to the recommendations of this
Commission Sir Sydney Phillipson was invited by the Nigerian Government to review and report on the whole
subject.
332. Sir Sydney’s report dealt with the matter exhaustively. As regards treatment in public
institutions he recommended that, subject to medical officers appointed before the Ist January, 1934 being
given an option to continue on their existing terms, “ no personal or private professional charge shall be made
by Government medical officers for services rendered within any Government (including Native Administra-
tion) hospital, dispensary or other medical institution provided at public expense ”. This recommendation applied
both to in-patients and out-patients. He further recommended that official fees for professional services in
public institutions should be prescribed and that these fees should be credited to an official Medical Fund
but with the exception that 50 per cent of the fees for “ certain non-routine operations ” and the whole
of the fees prescribed for consultations should be paid to the medical officer who rendered the service. As
regards private practice outside public institutions (extra-mural practice) Sir Sydney recommended its con-
tinuance for the time being, not as a right or privilege, but as a means of helping to meet a public need and
subject to certain conditions of which the most important was that the officer should not be allowed “ to open
a private consulting room or a private hospital or to set up openly in private practice by any similar
expedient ”.
333. These recommendations were accepted by the Nigerian Government in a Statement (Sessional
Paper No. 28 of 1949) laid before the Legislative Council but with one very important modification, namely,
that no part of the fees for the “ non-routine operations ” or for consultations should be paid to the medical
officers concerned. “ Apart from the fact ” the Statement continued (paragraph 4) “ that the first exception
might be regarded as introducing unequal treatment as between surgeons and physicians, there is obviously
a great deal to be said for establishing in the most definite way possible the principle that within the precincts
of institutions built and maintained at public expense there will be no private professional charges ”. The
conclusions of the Government contained in this statement were approved by the Legislative Council with
one further change, namely, the abandonment of the “ Medical Fund ”.
334. In the Gold Coast the position was reviewed in May, 1950 by the Executive Council in the light of
the Phillipson Report and of the decisions taken in Nigeria. Certain conclusions were reached but effect was not
given to them, and when the new legislature came into being under the Order in Council of 1950, it was decided
to await the view of the Lidbury Commission. The recommendations of this Commission are set out on
pages 126-128 of volume I of their report. They recommended that half fees should be paid to the medical
officer rendering a service in a Government hospital not merely (as Sir Sydney had recommended) in the
case of certain non-routine operations but for “ all surgical operations ”. They followed Sir Sydney in
recommending full consulting fees in Government institutions and also in permitting extra-mural practice,
but as regards the latter they again went further than Sir Sydney in recommending that medical officers
should be permitted to see patients in “ centres to which patients can be brought ”. These recommendations
having been considered, the Government have thought right, before coming to a decision, to invite us to
consider the matter again.
335. We deal first with the substantive questions whether {a) private practice in Government institu-
tions, ( b) private practice outside Government institutions (extra-mural practice) and (c) consulting practice
should continue to be allowed, leaving over for the moment the question of what, if any, compensation should
be awarded, if the present system is modified.
336. Private Practice in Government Institutions. —We accept all the arguments put forward by
Sir Sydney Phillipson and the Lidbury Commission in favour of abolishing the right to private practice in
Government institutions and recommend that the policy adopted by the Nigerian Government should be
adopted and the principle definitely established that there are to be no private professional charges for work
done within the precincts of institutions built and maintained at public expense.
We consider that a system of paying half fees for “ certain non-routine operations ” as suggested by
Sir Sydney or for “ all surgical operations ” as suggested by the Lidbury Commission, will merely prolong
indefinitely what is, by common consent, an unsatisfactory state of affairs.
* It is worth noting that in the Lidbury Report which quotes this passage in paragraph 442 the word “ or " between " private ”
and “ consulting ” has dropped out.


337. There is only one point on which we wish to elaborate the arguments put forward by Sit Sydney
Phillipson. Officers appointed between 1934 and 1946 unquestionably may be permitted (though they have
no right) to engage in private practice. That is stated in terms in the regulation of 1934 which we have quoted
above. But private practice must presumably mean the treatment of patients who are not entitled, or perhaps
do not choose, to receive treatment from the doctor in his capacity of a Government officer in charge of, or
employed in, a hospital. The question who is and who is not so entitled seems to us very obscure. We
understand the argument to be that since the Hospital Fees Regulations prescribe no charges for treatment
as distinct from charges for ‘‘ accommodation and maintenance ” and for certain services such as radiography,
the patient has no right to treatment and must make his own bargain with the doctor. Whether this is good
law or not may be uncertain. The Hospital Fees Ordinance (as distinct from the regulations made under it)
plainly contemplates the charging of official fees for treatment in hospital (paragraph 324). However that
may be, what is certain is that the whole situation is and must remain completely incomprehensible to an
African illiterate and he must inevitably class the fees charged by doctors with the illicit impositions which
frequently confront him when he enters the hospital door.
338. Extra-mural Practice. —We feel strongly with Sir Sydney Phillipson and with the Lidbury
Commission that the system of extra-mural practice, no less than that of private practice in hospitals, may
well create a direct conflict of interest and duty, and ought to be brought to an end at the earliest possible
date. It is generally admitted that private practice makes for friction amongst members of the medical staff
and renders the allocation of posts a most invidious duty. Moreover, if, as we understand to be the case,
the prospect of being posted to a lucrative station may affect the decision of a doctor joining the service on a
short contract, the task of the medical administrators is still more embarrassing and decisions may be taken
which result in grave injustice to officers who have joined the permanent service.
339. As regards the post-1946 officers, (who constitute nearly two-thirds of the present medical
establishment) we are clear that the present state of uncertainty should be brought to an end. Either the
officers should be told that they must observe the terms of their contracts or this particular obligation must
be formally waived. The matter closely affects the interests of a third party, namely the public, African
and European, and they have a right to know what the position is. We think that to waive the obligation
would be a retrograde step wholly out of accord with the policy of successive Secretaries of State and with
public, and to a considerable extent medical, opinion in the Gold Coast. What proportion of the post-1946
doctors have observed the terms of the contract and what proportion have not we have no means of knowing,
but we are aware that there are some doctors in both classes. We recommend accordingly that in the case
of the doctors who entered the service after the end of the war and in whose letter of appointment the term
■quoted above was included, the prohibition against private practice should be enforced.
340. We should have recommended the same course in the case of the officers who joined the service
before the war and have, under the 1934 Regulations, the privilege of private practice but for the difficulty
which deterred both the previous Commissions from recommending ah immediate and total cessation of such
practice, namely, the risk of depriving some members of the public of medical services which they might
otherwise secure. We recognise that our proposal with regard to the post-1946 medical officers may to
some extent reduce the scope of private medical service, but in that case we consider that the balance of
advantage clearly lies on the side of bringing private practice to an end. Moreover, so far as the public is
concerned, there are three relevant considerations :
[a) If our recommendation for creating, as soon as may be, more than one class of hospital
accommodation is accepted, it should go some way to meet the case of persons who wish to call in a
doctor because they are not prepared to accept accommodation in a general ward. To a certain extent
the same argument applies, if different hours for the attendance of outpatients are established. And
again a more complete ambulance service such as we recommend should lessen the need of domiciliary
visits.
(, b ) In the Northern Territories the question of private practice is not a live issue owing to the
poverty of the inhabitants. In the Colony and Ashanti there are 28 doctors in private practice
(including ten in Accra and five in Kumasi) and in a few areas a private service can be said to exist.
(c) The cessation of private practice by medical officers or even the knowledge that the system
is to be brought to an end within a definite time should increase the attractions of private practice for
doctors, particularly African doctors.
Weighing these conflicting considerations we have reached the conclusion that it would be a mistake to abolish
private extra-mural practice wholly and at once and that the officers who joined the service under the 1934
Regulations should be allowed to continue this practice for the remainder of their term of service.
341. Consulting Practice. —We look upon this practice in a different light, and we think that if a private
practitioner who is attending a patient decides at the patient’s request to seek a second opinion or professional
assistance from a member of the medical staff, the latter should be entitled, if his official duties permit, to
act and accept remuneration in a private capacity, provided that the service is rendered outside a Government
institution and without the use of Government equipment.
342. We understand that there are in Government employment very few officers who joined the Gold
Coast service before 1934. The two previous Commissions considered that officers in this group should be
permitted to elect whether to continue as at present or to surrender their rights and accept compensation.
We think that the Government must accept this position since an attempt to compel a surrender of the right
to private practice might expose them to the risk of legal proceedings. We are bound however to point out
the curious result which this might have, if in fact there is any appreciable number of medical officers who
would be entitled to claim this privilege and decided to do so. In an area served by a hospital of which the
medical officer is one who is claiming the privilege, the public, African and non-African, might find them-
selves compelled to pay for the doctor’s services ; in other areas treatment would be free, the medical .officers
being under an obligation not to accept fees.


Year ended 31s# March, 1950
Net Earnings from Private Practice
Year ended 31s# March, 1951
Net Earnings from Private Practice
£l,000-£2,000
... 7
£l,000-£2,000 ... 8
£500-£l,000
7
£500-£l,000 ... 12
£250-£500
12
■ £250-£500 ... 9
£100-£250
3
£100-£250 ... 8
Nil-£100
11
Nil-£100 3
Nil
30
Nil 29
70
69
343. It would be wrong to omit the warning that if these recommendations are adopted, medical service
under the Gold Coast Government may. present less attractions both to African and to non-African doctors
and thus affect recruitment. :
344. Compensation.— lt remains to consider what, if any, compensation should fairly be payable to
the medical officers concerned. Those who joined the service after January, 1946 and whose letter
of appointment contained an explicit condition forbidding private practice are not in our view entitled to any
compensation at all. As we understand it, the basis on which compensation might be claimed is that the
officer is being deprived of a right to undertake private practice. In the case of these officers such a right
never existed ;it was in terms ruled out in the document laying down the conditions of their service. On this
point we agree with Sir Sydney Phillipson. .
345. In the case of officers who joined before 1946 and under the 1934 Regulations, we think that some
compensation is due, but find it very difficult to arrive at a satisfactory basis on which to assess it. One of
the objects of the 1934 Regulations seems to have been to convert what was previously a “ right ” into a
“ privilege ” and it is arguable that this was intended, amongst other things, to avoid any claim for
compensation, if the privilege were withdrawn. However that may be, the privilege has in fact been allowed
to run for many years. Following the course adopted by Sir Sydney in Nigeria (see paragraph 37 of his report)
we have ascertained from the Income Tax Department of the Gold Coast the returns of private earnings made
by medical officers of the Government in the years ended 31st March, 1950 and 31st March, 1951. (Earnings
of named individuals were not, of course, disclosed to us.) The figures are as follows :
It will be seen that in the year 1950-51, 40 of the 69 doctors who sent in returns made net earnings amounting
to about £26,000 in all, if in each step of the scale the median figure is taken. In the previous year the total
earnings are slightly less. In neither case do the figures indicate how many of the medical officers in question
are “ pre-1934 ”or “ post-1946 ”. We agree with Sir Sydney Phillipson that while the figures have some
relevance no calculation can be founded on them.
346. It is, we think, quite impracticable to make an evaluation of the actual loss which any particular
doctor might sustain. It is obviously impossible to base a calculation on the prospect of future earnings in
private practice, since the stations to which an officer may be attached are unknown and we understand that
the fees at different stations vary within the widest limits. To base compensation on present and past earnings
would be quite unfair. The doctors who would suffer most heavily from the curtailment of private practice
are those who have as yet had no opportunity of engaging in it but may fairly expect to have such
an opportunity in the future. The figure adopted by the Lidbury Commission (a non-pensionable allowance
of £3OO per annum to officers while engaged on clinical duties) is more generous than that adopted by the
Nigerian Government (£200) but in view of the fact that our proposals go further than those of the Lidbury
Commission we have come to the conclusion that the higher figure (£300) is not unduly generous and we
recommend that this figure should be adopted.
CHAPTER XIV
NOTES ON COMMUNITY-WIDE DISEASES AND NUTRITION
347. We devote this chapter to notes on some of the community-wide diseases of the Gold Coast which
are responsible for a high death rate and much sickness. The statistical information available to us is very
incomplete and, as we have already explained, this is due in large part to the difficulty of securing the necessary
information elsewhere than in the registration areas. We add also a note on the subject of nutrition.
348. Malaria. —The incidence of malaria in the Gold Coast is high. During the five years 194 G-50
out of every 1,000 deaths from all causes over the whole of the registration areas, deaths from malaria range
from 85 in 1947 to 123 in 1950. Indeed malaria and diseases of the respiratory tract (excluding tuberculosis)
were the two chief causes of death. The death rate from malaria is highest amongst the young, particularly
those in the first year of life. During the same five years 379,174 cases of malaria were treated in hospital,
and of all other diseases yaws alone caused more patients to attend for treatment. In hospitals the number
of deaths due to malaria ranged in these years from 3 • 3 to 4 • 8 per cent of deaths from all causes.
349. Among 291 blood slides examined in Lawra in 1952 malaria parasites were found in 219. In
Kumasi of 600 children under the age of one year attending hospital for treatment 55 • 5 per cent were found
in 1938 to be carrying malaria parasites. Among admissions in 1951 to the Maternity Hospital, Accra, 20 per
cent of the patients were found to be parasite carriers and malaria was the chief cause of sickness among the
, staff. In a village in the Colony three miles from a Government dispensary it was found in 1950 that 31-7
per cent of the inhabitants had malaria parasites in their blood ; the percentage of carriers in those under one
year of age was 66*6 per cent and in those from one to five years 79-6 per cent.
350. Although it must be true that most adults have acquired, and maintain, immunity to malaria
in the sense that they do not suffer acute attacks of the disease, yet the figures for hospital attendances suggest
that the minority which do not enjoy such immunity is far from negligible. In infants, moreover, malaria
causes many deaths before immunity can be acquired and in children is responsible for much ill-health before
immunity is fully established.


Year
In-patients
Out-patients
1946 ...
. ..
892.
540
1947 ...
933
787
1948 ...
. .
;.. 1,033
1,713
1949 ...
• •
1,014
807
1950 ...
. •
767
10,17.7
1951 ...
• • •
746
14,068
351. A research officer is at present investigating " urban ” malaria in Accra. Whatever steps it
may be practicable to take in the near future to control malaria in the large towns —and this disease was the
cause of 11-4 per cent of the registered deaths in Takoradi in 1951—it is certain that many years must pass
before effective measures can be taken to prevent the transmission of malaria in the, villages. Consequently
it is important that quinine—and other anti-malarial drugs—should be made more freely available in the.
rural areas. The spreading network of health centres and dressing stations will help. Quinine is already
sold in post offices, the sale in 1951 amounting to 879,248 tablets, and efforts should be made to extend the
availability of anti-malarial drugs through village shops. As children are the greatest sufferers from malaria,
it is important that these drugs should be provided in a form and dosage suitable for them.
352. Tuberculosis. —In 1951 tuberculosis was the third highest cause of death in the registration areas.
In these areas deaths from tuberculosis during the five years 1946-50 ranged from 73 to 101 in every thousand
deaths from all causes. During the same five years 11,197 cases of pulmonary tuberculosis were admitted to
hospital and, among them, there were 1,241 deaths constituting 6-8 per cent of all deaths occurring in hospital.
In the three years 1948-50, pulmonary tuberculosis has led to the invaliding from Cxovernment service of 27
African officers out of a total of 146 invalided. It was the greatest single cause of invaliding.
353. In 283 post-mortem examinations carried out by the Government pathologist in the year 1951,
tuberculosis was found to be the most common cause of death (24 cases), pneumonia (22 cases) being the next
highest killing disease. He writes in his report: “ Tuberculosis is once again one of the most frequent causes
of death. It is interesting to note that the greater number of the cases of tuberculosis wese diagnosed in the
autopsies performed in the public mortuary, mostly in the vagrant population ”. There are no figures readily
available that might show whether the incidence of tuberculosis, pulmonary or other, is rising or falling. But
the number of deaths from pulmonary tuberculosis in every thousand deaths registered has fallen consistently
each year from 101 in 1946 to 73 in 1950.
354. In 1932 tuberculin tests were carried out in Saltpond on 1,000 healthy subjects whose ages varied
from four to 70 years and who represented practically all classes of the community. The results showed a
progressive increase in the number of positive reactions from 19 per cent in the 0-5 age group to 82 • 6 per cent
in those 51 years old and over. In 1943-44 Mantoux tests w r ere made on mine labourers (mostly immigrants
from the north) at Tarkwa and positive reactions were given in 97 per cent, whilst local school children (aged
7-15 years) gave about 60 per cent positive reactions.
355. We have studied the Report made by Professor F. R. G. Heaf after his visit to West Africa in the
summer of 1951 and we agree with him that the provision of simple isolation units in close association with
general hospitals is a necessary and urgent measure. These units should be in addition to, and separated
from, the isolation cubicles already recommended (paragraph 128) and their construction should not be
elaborate. The actual number of beds provided would depend on the estimated needs of the area.
356. To determine the true relationship of tuberculosis with mining requires, in our opinion, further
investigation. Mantoux testing of representative samples of the population in different parts of the country
would probably yield much useful information. We understand that a medical officer is now in the United
Kingdom for a special course on tuberculosis and he will no doubt give this matter his consideration on his
return later in the present year.
357. Yaws. —Records show that nearly 600,000 cases of yaws were treated in hospitals and dispensaries
in the five years ended in 1950. This represents one in about every 35 of the population in each year. In
surveys made in 1951, among 85,103 people examined in Ashanti 3,429 were found to have yaws —a percentage
of 4-02 per cent. In the Northern Territories 3,507 cases were discovered among 118,492 persons examined,
giving a percentage of 3. No separate survey figures are available for the Colony. The disease occurs mostly
among the people of the villages and countryside. The medical field units and dispensaries have made treat-
ment for yaws widety available, and, in our opinion, the dresser in every village dressing station should be
trained to treat the disease.
358. Sleeping Sickness (human trypanosomiasis).—The number of cases of sleeping sickness treated
in 1939 was 5,095. In 1950 the number was 1,763 and in 1952 it was 1,112.
. Surveys made during 1951 in Ashanti showed 91 cases among 85,290 persons examined (i.e. 0-10 per
cent) and in the Northern Territories 288 cases among 118,492 people or 0-24 per cent. A survey made in
Tumu in 1937 showed a percentage of 7-01 of people suffering from the disease ; by 1951 it had fallen to 0-07.
Corresponding percentages in Gambaga were 6 • 24 and 0-19.
Much work has been done during the past few years and the incidence of the disease has been greatly
reduced. The medical field units have carried out the surveys for human trypanosomiasis and its treatment,
whilst the control of the fly has been in the hands of the Tsetse Control Department under the Ministry of
Agriculture and Natural Resources.
359. Leprosy. —This disease occurs throughout the Gold Coast but is specially prevalent in Ashanti
Where in 1951 during trypanosomiasis surveys 2 • 2 per cent of the people examined in some areas were found to
be lepers.
Since 1950, many more cases have come under treatment with the opening up of the special centres
described in paragraphs 39-41.


Staple Foods
Calories
Protein
Fat
Carbohydrate
Vitamins
Northern Area
Millet
Groundnuts ’
1 1,400
r to
60 gms
(practically
30 gms
200 gms
to
A 1
B > low
Pulses J
1 2,000
all vegetable)
400 gms
c J
Forest Country
Plantain 1
Cocoyam
Maize J
1 3,000+
90 gms,
(20% to 30%
animal)
. 35 gms
600 gms
Satisfactory
Fisher Folk
Maize ]
Cassava
Fresh Fish j
[ 3,200
135 gms
(70% animal)
40 gms
500 gms
These figures give no indication of the actual incidence, because many lepers are out of reach of treat-
ment centres and we were told that in some parts of the country they are prevented by their families from
disclosing their disease. A leprologist was recently appointed to organize and give advice on the treatment
of leprosy. The new drug D.D.S. has been used with success and we consider its value in the treatment of the
disease should be fully tested before plans are made to provide in the Gold Coast more residential institutions
for lepers.
360. Onchocerciasis. —This disease is most prevalent in certain parts of the Northern Territories and in
Togoland.
In the 1948 Census 9,028 totally blind persons were found in the Northern Territories (i.e. about -84
per cent of the population) the cause in many cases undoubtedly being onchocerciasis. In 1948-49 it was
found that 170 out of 280 cases of blindness (i.e. 61 per cent) examined presented a recognisable clinical
picture, which was diagnosed as onchocerciasis. It has not yet been possible to map out accurately the
endemic areas or to ascertain exactly the incidence and prevalence of this disease.
An entomologist is now making an investigation into the habits of the vector fly (simulinm damnosum)
and the British Empire Society for the Blind are sending an entomologist and an ophthalmologist to work in
this field.
361. Ankylostomiasis. —This disease is widespread but does not commonly appear to cause much
obvious disability except in a few special areas (e.g. Axim). In the five years 1946-51, the cases treated in
hospitals and dispensaries numbered 32,513.
In a village in the Colony, 52 per cent of the people were found to be infested with hookworms and
among 255 leper patients, 52 or 20 per cent were found to harbour the parasite. In association with other
debilitating diseases such as malaria and schistosomiasis, ankylostomiasis must be responsible for a great
deal of general ill-health. The disease is largely due to defective domestic and village sanitation. Many
villages in the Colony and Ashanti have latrines but there is still much to be done both in increasing their
number and in securing that they are properly maintained and used. This is a matter to which the attention
of the new local authorities might be specially directed.
362. Schistosomiasis and Guinea Worm. —These diseases occur in many parts of the Gold Coast. In
the five years ending 1950, the number of cases of schistosomiasis treated in hospitals and dispensaries was
20,451.
In providing water supplies for villages and domestic animals it is most important to make sure the
supplies are properly protected against contamination (paragraph 301). Experience in other tropical countries
has shown how difficult it is to eradicate schistosomiasis once the disease is established.
363. Venereal Diseases. —Gonorrhoea appears to be about nine times as common as syphilis. In the
years 1946-50, the number of cases of gonorrhoea treated was 82,430 and of syphilis 9,348. It seems that
much illicit trade in the sulphonamides is carried on, particularly in the treatment of gonorrhoea, and that
resistant organisms may already exist. The Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance provides that only medical
practitioners may treat venereal diseases and that sulphonamides may only be supplied on a doctor’s pre-
scription. We have recommended (paragraph 281) that the law should be strengthened by making the
possession of certain drugs by unauthorised persons an offence.
Nutrition
364. The country can be divided into three main geographical zones : the coastal plain, the forest
country and the northern areas. The coastal plain is densely populated but, owing to light rainfall, is not
highly productive ; on the other hand, most tropical foodstuffs can be readily grown in the forest country..
The soil of much of the northern area is not very fertile except in the north-east.
365. Much of the food consumed in the Gold Coast is produced locally but some, including wheat,
practically all milk and most of the meat, is imported from overseas or neighbouring territories. The staple
foodstuffs of the inhabitants of the coastal plain are maize and cassava, whilst those of the forest people are
plaintain and cocoyam. In the North the main foods are the millets, guinea corn and yams ; groundnuts and
rice are also cultivated.
366. In general the diet of the people of the Gold Coast lacks protein. Although animals are reared
in the North, they are not commonly killed for food on the spot but are sold for export to the South. In the
coastal plain and the forest country this imported meat is too expensive for the majority" of the inhabitants,
whilst under the present somewhat primitive arrangements for fishing the supply of sea fish is not large. A
recent census of livestock showed a considerable increase in numbers since 1921—cattle having increased from
some 76,000 to 374,000 in 1951 and meat consumption is now estimated to be 10 lbs. per person in the year.
Fruit and vegetables are freely available in the coastal plain and forest country but vegetables are only grown
in the rainy season in the northern area. The fats most commonly consumed are palm oil, groundnut oil,
coconut oil and, in the North, shea-butter.
367. Dr. Purcell, at that time a medical officer in the Government service, carried out a nutrition,
survey in 1940. He considered typical diets to be :


Height
Weight
Northern Area
661" to 67*"
128 lbs. to 136 lbs,
Forest Country
63" to 65"
115 lbs.
Coastal (fisher folk)
66" to 67"
142 lbs.
Cases
1949
Deaths
Cases
1950
Deaths
Scurvy
77
—
49
1
Beriberi
205
2
148
5
Pellagra
181
1
187
—
Other nutritional conditions ...
3,795
53
5,780
97
' 368. There was a considerable increase in population between 1931 and 1948 ; the census of the former
year showed a population of 3,163,586 and that of the latter year 4,118,450 —the average annual increase
being 1 • 77 per cent.
The average height and weight of adult males—as given by Purcell —suggest that the people attain
fairly good physical standards :
Sickness rates are not available except for a few small special groups, such as mine workers, policemen and
prisoners, among whom the rates are low. During one month in 1952 in one mine 548 " man-days ” were lost
by sickness out of 42,000 possible “ man-days ”, that is one day in 77 or 4• 7 days a year ; in another mine one
day in 86 or 4- 2 days a year. In 1951 the sickness rate in the police force was two days per man for the year
and the annual rate for prisoners for the three years 1948 to 1950 was about five days. The age constitution
of the population as given in the 1948 Census (paragraph 13) shows that in every 1,000 of the people 141 are
aged 45 years or over ; these figures indicate that the expectation of life is not long.
369. The following extracts are taken from a summary appended to an article in the “ Transactions of
the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (1950 Vol. 44) ” entitled “ A Medical Survey in a Gold
Coast Village ”byM. J. Colboume, et al. “ There was a high child mortality in the village and few people
lived beyond 50 years. . . . The heights and weights of the people were less than those of English people. Blood
counts, and haemoglobin and haematocrit estimations, fell below the normal standards for England. Signs
suggesting protein and vitamin deficiency were noted in mothers and children. Enlargement of the liver,
which was present in 33-3 per cent of people, was thought to be due partly to malaria and partly to mal-
nutrition. The normal African is not healthy by European standards, but is undersized, anaemic and disease
ridden ”
We were interested to note that in an earlier passage of the same report the authors after describing
in more detail the conditions summarized above continue ‘‘This may appear a gloomy picture, but African
physiology has one trump card, for the people of Kwansakrom, like those of every other African village,' are
unashamedly and infectiously happy, in spite of their appalling load of physical handicaps Our.own casual
observations confirm this impression.
370. In the Report of the Medical Department for 1950 the Director wrote; ‘‘The fundamental
problem of nutrition in this country remains the deficiency of protein. The work of the Departments of
Animal Health, Fisheries and Agriculture to increase supplies of animal protein continues but is of necessity
slow. Beans, peas and groundnuts are eaten in all parts of the country but not in sufficient quantity and
efforts are being made through publicity to popularize an increased use of these foods and also to encourage
the use of a cereal staple in those parts of the country where only non-cereal staples are liked.
“In the last few years there has been a great increase in the use of bread. An investigation showed
that although bread is not being used to replace a staple food it is being used by many people in sufficient
quantity to make its use as a carrier for extra nutrients worthwhile.
“ The possibility of importing wheaten flour enriched with B vitamins, iron and calcium is being
considered.
" Towards the end of 1950 news was received of a new treatment for kwashiorkor. Skimmed milk
powder is used for this treatment and supplies have now been obtained for use in hospitals.”
Cases of frank deficiency disease are not common but signs of shortage of Vitamins A and C are said
to be found in the northern area and in all parts of the country there is evidence that the Vitamin B complex
may be lacking in the diet. The examination of 3,462 schoolchildren in Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi and Cape
Coast during 1939 and 1940 showed that dental caries was present in 33-6 per cent although it is an uncommon
condition among children of the northern area. Kwashiorkor occurs with some frequency ; it appears to be
due to protein shortage and occurs early in life. Survivors probably suffer permanent damage to the liver.
Rickets is a rare disease.
371. The reports of the Medical Department for the years 1949 and 1950 classified over 10,000 cases of
nutritional diseases as follows :
In the same two years 27 and 36 deaths are stated to have been “ due to starvation In the northern areas
there may occur from year to year a shortage of food following poor or ill-spaced rains and the great monetary
value of the cocoa crop has tended to reduce the incentive to grow foodstuffs in a large part of the most
productive areas of the country. An important factor affecting the state of nutrition of the people is the
prevalence of many parasitic diseases (e.g. malaria, schistosomiasis, ankylostomiasis). ■
There is some evidence of an increasing consumption of imported white flour —particularly as bread
and especially among the people of the Colony. Effect has not as yet been given to the proposal to enrich this
flour with Vitamin “ B ” and calcium which was made as a result of the Director’s suggestion in the 1950
report. - ,
There appears to, be need for greater production of foodstuffs—notably in the northern areas—and for
a greater consumption of protein.
8


372. It seems that up to the present no very effective action has been taken on this matter by the
Government. A Nutrition Committee was set up in 1937, but presumably owing to the war it came to nothing.
It was reconstituted in 1948 with a membership of eleven, including representatives of seven or eight depart-
ments. Apparently two meetings were held and certain surveys were suggested, but no action seems to
have been taken. We doubt whether in a matter of this kind a large inter-Dcpartmental committee is the
right body to initiate action. It is clear that the first need is for much more detailed and accurate information
as to the actual nutritional condition in different parts of the country. When that is obtained, the question
of remedial action will no doubt involve co-operation between many departments. At the present stage the
primary responsibility lies, we suggest, with the Minister of Health and we think that before deciding what
surveys he proposes to set on foot and how they are to be conducted, he would be well advised to consult the
proposed organisation for co-ordinating medical research in West Africa to which we have already referred
(paragraph 160).
CHAPTER XV
FINANCE
373. Bearing in mind the terms of Mr. Gbedemah’s letter set out in paragraph 2 of our Report, we
have not overlooked the question of the cost of our recommendations and in the present chapter we discuss
the main headings under which additional expenditure, capital and recurrent, would fall if effect were given
+n them.
374. To make a precise estimate is, we consider, impracticable. Apart from the question of
unpredictable variations in building and other costs, the extent to which the estimates of the Ministry of
Health would have to be increased over the next five or ten years on account of our proposals will depend on
many factors not within our knowledge. We do not know, for example, to what extent the Government
would find it necessary, if the health centre programme is undertaken, to provide accommodation for the
various members of the staff, nor the extent to which, if houses are provided, the rent which the occupant
would be required to pay would be a set-off against the capital cost of the building. The same is true of hostel
accommodation to be provided for nurses, though in the case of hostels for pupil nurses we assume that the
whole charge would be borne by the Government.
375. The major items of capital expenditure will, as we see them, include ;
Health Centres ;
Additional hospital beds for tuberculosis cases, isolation blocks and cubicles for privacy ;
Medical Field Units—vehicles, tents and equipment ;
Hostels for nurses and pupil nurses ;
New out-patient department to serve Accra ; improvements to existing out-patients department
in Korle Bu ;
Pathological Laboratory at Korle Bu ;
New radiology department at Korle Bu ;
Ambulances ;
School for Clinic Superintendents ;
Improvements at Tamale for specialist services.
Some of this expenditure is already contemplated in the Development Plan. Thus the Plan provides
for ;
£20,000 Medical Field Units and mass treatment ;
£lOO,OOO Isolation blocks, maternity and children’s wards ;
£30,000 Laboratories ;
£20,000 Sanitary Inspectors’ school at Kintampo ;
£60,000 Extension of Nurses’ Training College ;
£32,000 Pupil Nurses Hostel at Korle Bu ;
£50,000 Ambulances;
£30,000 X-Ray plant ;
£217,000 Housing and other offices ;
£20,000 Local authority dressers school.
376. To what extent our recommendations overlap or go beyond the more general proposals in the
Development Plan we are not in a position to say. That in some matters they involve considerable additional
expenditure is obvious. In one or two minor matters (e.g. a school for local authority dressers, which we do
not recommend) and in one very large item they fall short of what is contemplated in the Plan. If our advice
that no immediate steps should be taken to establish a medical faculty is accepted, a saving of an estimated
capital sum of £1,200,000 would result.
For these reasons we think that any attempt to arrive at exact figures might well prove
misleading, but so far as capital expenditure is concerned we believe that, if account is taken of the omission
of this very heavy expenditure on the medical faculty, our proposals would cost less than the expenditure
under the head of “ Health ” in the summary appended to the Plan.
377. We now turn to the recurrent expenditure. We have made it clear throughout our Report that
the future of the medical service in the Gold Coast depends in our view principally on an increase in the number
of the trained staff (including teaching staff) and it is under this heading that the main additional expenditure
has to be faced.


378. It is possible to give a very rough outline of the major items under this head and for this purpose
we have based ourselves on the scales recommended by the Lidbury Commission, using the median figure in
each scale. We have not taken into account any possible cost-of-living allowances.
Salaries of additional medical officers, dentists, nurses for hospitals, clinic
superintendents and nurse-midwives for health centres, health visitors,
etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (approximately) £165,000
Cost of diet in hospitals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (approximately) £115,000
Loss of revenue due to abolition of hospital charges ... ... ... (approximately) £30,000
Additional costs of medical field units (excluding salaries) ... ... £lO,OOO
Maintenance of additional hospital beds, health centres, etc. ... ... £120,000
This very rough estimate suggests that the additional recurrent expenditure may be of the order of
£440,000. The estimates for the service of the Medical Department for the year ending 31st March, 1953
are £1,480,060. The whole of this additional annual expenditure will not of course, be incurred immediately.
It will take several years to build up the augmented service which we recommend. It is to be remembered
also that if our recommendation with regard to the proposed medical faculty is accepted, there will be a very
substantial saving in recurrent expenditure (paragraphs 212, 213 and 214).
379. Mr. Gbedemah’s letter set out in paragraph 2 of the Report gives the estimated revenue for 1952-53
from ordinary sources as £33J million. It is not perhaps unduly optimistic to assume that in the period for
which our proposals are intended the ordinary revenue will not fall. On this assumption we suggest that the
additional expenditure involved in our recommendations is not excessive in a country where the benefits to be
derived from the conquest of disease are so outstanding. We have noted that up to the year 1948-49 expen-
diture on the Medical and Education Departments was about the same. Since that year educational expen-
diture has increased so rapidly that the 1952-53 estimates show the proposed expenditure on education to
exceed that on the medical and health services by no less than £U million.
380. Volta Development Scheme. —Our estimate of the medical needs of the Gold Coast takes no account
of the situation which would be created if it is finally decided to proceed with the Volta Development Scheme.
Beyond seeing Dr. Lewis Berner’s report on the entomological aspects of the matter and the report of Sir
William Halcrow and Partners on the Development Scheme as a whole we have not been furnished with any
information on the subject. We note that in paragraph 303 of his report Dr. Berner recommends the setting
up without delay of a medical service to deal with the diseases of the Volta River project. “ This health
service ” he continues “ should contain a division dealing exclusively with insect-borne diseases which, as is
readily apparent from this report, are major problems in the Gold Coast. My first recommendation, therefore,
would be to set up a health service headed by a specialist in tropical medicine. The staff should include a
malariolcgist and an entomologist experienced in working with insects of medical importance. An engineer,
trained in malaria control of impounded waters, is one of the very necessary persons for the staff of the health
service. Adequate laboratories, equipment, and assistants must be provided for this highly trained personnel
who can do much in the control and eradication of many of the tropical diseases
381. We endorse this view and we would only add that whether this staff is to be specially recruited
and employed by the proposed River Volta Authority or is to form part of the medical staff of the Government
it should in our view be treated throughout as a separate and self-contained unit.
CHAPTER XVI
CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY
382. Much of our report has, of necessity, been devoted to describing the weaknesses of the present
medical service in the Gold Coast, but we should be doing less than justice if we failed to make clear how
great a debt the country owes to this service and the men and women, past and present, African and non-
African, who have built it up. The very fact that we were met on every side with urgent demands for more
hospitals, more dispensaries, more ambulances, better sanitation and water supplies and so on is the best proof
that the people at large are realising, as never before, what has been and can be done to lessen the burden of
ill-health and to give the rising generation a prospect of happier and longer lives.
383. The government and local government of the country are now in the hands of elected represen-
tatives of the people and it remains for the people to decide what advances in the medical and health services
they wish to secure. Two conditions are essential for effective action. It has been wisely said that public
health is purchasable. We believe the programme of advance which we have suggested to be well within the
financial capacity of the country and we are sure that, if capably administered, it would pay handsome
dividends in health and happiness and not least in productive capacity. But, as we have shown in the previous
chapter, it would involve increased expenditure on the health services and the public must be prepared to
accept that situation.
384. A second and even more important consideration is this. While the Gold Coast will, we hope,
continue to look to the United Kingdom for much of its higher training, the staffing of the services will
necessarily fall more and more into African hands. This means that in rapidly increasing numbers recruits
must be found in the Gold Coast itself —and not least in the Northern Territories. All paper plans will be
futile, unless there is forthcoming a continuous stream of young African men and women ready to submit to a
long and laborious training and so fit themselves to take part in a public service upon which the future of their
country largely depends.
Summary of Recommendations
(1) The Medical Department should without delay be merged in the Ministry of Health and Labour.
The officers of the Medical Department and of the Ministry should be welded into a single staff and except
where the Director or Deputy Director or any other medical officer has duties specifically assigned to him by
Ordinance, Order or Regulation the whole of the medical staff should be responsible to, and under the direction
of, the Minister ; (paragraphs 71-73).
8a


(2) In view of the importance of the medical problems confronting a Ministry of Health the Director
as the Minister’s principal medical adviser should rank on an equality with the Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry and should have full and direct access to the Minister : (paragraph 74).
(3) The Labour Department should be removed from the Ministry of Health and placed under another
Minister: (paragraph 75).
(4) To secure the principle that every question having a medical and an administrative aspect should
be considered in both aspects the medical and lay administrators of the Ministry should work in the closest
co-operation, care being taken that medical men should not be engaged on work which can be done not less
well by laymen : (paragraph 73).
(5) The whole of the headquarters staff of the Ministry (with the exception of the medical stores branch)
should be housed in a single building. The term “ Medical Department ” should be dropped and the Director
should be known as the Chief Medical Officer, with corresponding alterations of title in the lower ranks of
medical officers : (paragraphs 76 and 77).
(6) The practice of stationing Assistant Directors at the headquarters of the regions should be main-
tained as an essential part of the regional system of administration, though in the past it has had disadvantages.
The Assistant Directors are likely to find important new duties in connection with the new Local Government
system. As the Colony is to be broken up into three regions, the rank of the medical officer at regional head-
quarters should correspond with that of the administrative officer except that the medical officer at Takoradi
should in any event rank as an Assistant Director in view of his responsibilities in connection with the medical
stores department. There should be an additional Assistant Director at Headquarters. There should be
one regional matron in Accra for the whole Colony and one at Kumasi for Ashanti and the Northern Terri-
tories, but the question of a separate matron for the latter should be considered when the projected additional
hospital accommodation is completed ; (paragraphs 81-85).
(7) The Director should act as medical adviser to all other Ministries needing medical advice ;
(paragraph 86).
(8) Outside the four municipal towns the local authorities (whether district, local or urban councils)
should be entrusted with the health functions specified in paragraphs (36) to (48) of section 58 of the Local
Government Ordinance 1951, except those relating to hospitals and health centres, but the powers of the
authorities should, until they have been proved to have the necessary financial resources and administrative
ability, be qualified by some such words as “ the local authority may, with the consent of the Minister,, and
shall if the Minister so requires ” : (paragraph 91).
(9) Power to consent to or require action in the field of medical and health services should be vested
in the Minister of Health but in consultation with the Minister of Local Government : (paragraph 94).
(10) Supervision of a local authority’s work by a superior local authority and also by a central depart-
ment should be avoided. It would involve a waste of skilled man-power the supply of which is in any case
short : (paragraphs 95 and 96).
(11) The councils of the four municipal towns should have the same health functions as other local
authorities, but with the addition of the school health service, maternity and child welfare clinics and a
health visitor service including the aftercare of lepers and the tuberculous. The power of the Minister to
control or stimulate action should be the same as for other local authorities : (paragraph 97).
(12) The distinction between Government and municipal functions should be clearly and firmly drawn.
The medical officer of health in each town should for the present continue to be an officer of the Government
seconded for the purpose, but should have no duties outside his municipal work, except the port health duties
in Takoradi and the seaport and airport duties in Accra : (paragraph 98).
(13) If the work of the councils is to be adequately done they must exercise their borrowing powers
more freely than at present ; (paragraph 99).
(14) The immediate and most urgent needs of the Gold Coast can be met by expanding the medical
held units, setting up health centres, improving hospital facilities and increasing the number of dressing
stations : (paragraphs 111).
(15) The medical field units should be staffed by a specialist and six medical officers with appropriate
technical staff. The junior staff should as far as possible be local so as to speak the local language. The
organisation should include two biologists, one of them an entomologist ; (paragraphs 114-117).
(16) We do not recommend any immediate increase in the number of hospitals beyond those for which
provision is made in the Development Plan. At the end of five years, when the training of medical auxiliaries
will be more effectively organised, the question of additional hospitals should receive further consideration ;
(paragraph 120).
(17) In every hospital not less than six beds should be provided in single or two-bedded cubicles so as
to enable patients whose isolation is necessary on medical grounds or who are willing and able to pay for
privacy to be accommodated elsewhere than in the general wards ; also additional beds for tuberculosis
patients : (paragraphs 128 and 355).
(18) Food should be provided for all patients in hospitals : (paragraph 129).
(19) The group of hospitals in each of the three major towns, Accra, Kumasi and Sekondi-Takoradi
should be placed in the charge of a hospital management committee. Various improvements to these hospitals
are recommended : (paragraphs 123-128).
(20) In addition to three health centres now built or in course of building there should be a building
programme of 43 further centres to be completed in the next five years. The object of the centre should be
to treat minor illnesses, to offer a limited maternity and child welfare service and to instruct the local com-
munity in matters of health and hygiene. The staff should normally consist of a clinic superintendent, a
midwife and a sanitary inspector. In centres forming the base of several dressing stations there should also
be a nurse. As soon as practicable, the midwife should be replaced by a fully trained health visitor ;
(paragraphs 139-143).


(21) A map appended to the Report shows a tentative layout of the proposed health centres. It is
not suggested that the positions selected are ideal in every case. The object is to indicate broadly the locality
in which a centre is needed : (paragraph 143).
(22) Mobile medical clinics are not recommended. The objections do not apply to dental clinics ;
(paragraphs 145 and 220). ' ' ’
(23) The new local authorities should be solely responsible for dressing stations and those belonging
to the Government should be handed over to them. They should be supervised by the clinic superintendent
of the health centre serving the area. Six or seven dressing stations grouped round a health centre and acting
as feeders to it might be regarded as a normal organisation : (paragraphs 146-147).
(24) The volume of work falling on the medical officers will be substantially increased and in certain
districts a staff of two medical officers is recommended : (paragraph 148).
(25) There should be a pathologist with a suitably equipped laboratory at Kumasi, Tamale, and
Sekondi-Takoradi; and a further one at Kumasi when the new general and mental hospitals are built there :
(paragraph 153).
(26) There should be a new laboratory at Korle Bu Hospital providing facilities for members of the
clinical staff engaged in research problems. There should be three pathologists at Accra, one of whom (of
specialist status) should be responsible for the organisation of the pathological service. The Medical Research
Institute at Korle Bu should be the headquarters of the service and should act as a reference laboratory for
other centres and include a reference library : (paragraphs 154 and 155).
(27) The training of laboratory technicians should be put on a more regular footing : (paragraph 156).
(28) The Government should give full support to the proposed body responsible for the organisation
and conduct of research in West Africa : (paragraph 160).
(29) Individual officers should also be encouraged to undertake investigations within their own field ;
(paragraph 160).
(30) A school health service should be developed first in the towns of Accra, Kumasi, Cape Coast and
Sekondi-Takoradi. Elsewhere, district medical officers should include the inspection and care of school
children in their normal duties : (paragraphs 168 and 169).
(31) The Ministries of Health and Education should co-operate closely in health education work :
(paragraph 179).
(32) The transfer of the medical stores headquarters from Accra to Takoradi and the reorganisation
of the branch suggested in the report made to the Minister of Health in January, 1952, should be put in hand
to meet the complaints of delay and difficulty in obtaining drugs and medical equipment : (paragraph 181).
(33) Legislation should be passed providing for a simple system of registering private nursing homes.
The system should include inspection of the home and the compliance with conditions as to the adequacy of
the premises and staff and the keeping of records : (paragraph 184).
(34) A Board to be known as the Medical and Dental Board of the Gold Coast should be established.
Its functions should be to maintain registers of Medical Practitioners and Dentists, to grant licences under
sections 14 and 14A of the Medical Practitioners and Dentists Ordinance, 1912, and to exercise the powers
now vested in the Disciplinary Committee. The Board should consist of five members of whom one should
,be a doctor in private practice and one a dentist. The members should be appointed by the Governor-m-
Council: (paragraph 189).
(35) The total number of medical officers in Government service should be increased during the next
five years to 150. The number of African medical students now in training in the United Kingdom (37)
will do little more than to replace retirements and it will be necessary to continue for some time to recruit
non-African doctors. Meanwhile the Government should increase the annual number of scholarships for
medical training in the United Kingdom : (paragraphs 199-205).
(36) The establishment of a medical school in the Gold Coast is not recommended at the present time.
The number of medical officers and private doctors in the Gold Coast is not likely to exceed 200 within any
period for which it is reasonable to plan and an annual recruitment of about ten would suffice. A medical
school designed for such a small output would be very expensive and the cost of maintaining students in the
United Kingdom would be substantially less : (paragraph 214).
(37) Both types of nursing training—i.e. for the S.R.N. and the Q.R.N. qualifications—should continue
for the present; (paragraph 230).
■ , (38) Admission to the Q.R.N. register otherwise than by the normal Q.R.N. training course and
examination should bq brought to an end as soon as possible ; (paragraph 227).
(39) A ratio of one nurse to 2-5 beds should be the aim. ,On .this ratio, in order to provide for the
staffing of the new and enlarged hospitals and health centres, an output of about 175 trained nurses a year
over the next five years would be necessary. After that period and taking into account other probable demands
for nursing services (e.g. school health service), an output of 150-175 would probably be necessary:
(paragraphs 237-240).
(40) The number of pupil nurses in Korle Bu should be reduced by one half; and in the four other
training hospitals by one-third. Other training hospitals must be established, but no such hospital should
have less than 60 beds : (paragraph 242).
(41) Pupil nurses should not be “ gazetted ” until they have been admitted to the register : (paragraph
225),
(42) Hostels for pupil nurses who cannot live at home should be established: (paragraph 243),
(43) Consideration should be given to the question of sending suitable candidates to the United
Kingdom for training as nurses : (paragraph 242).


(44) A small training school with four tutors and two occupational therapists should be established at
the Mental Hospital, Accra to train mental nurses. The importance of a mental nurse understanding the
language of the patients is emphasised ; (paragraph 244).
(45) There is a wide field of work for health visitors in the Gold Coast. A proportion of one health
visitor to every four midwives should be aimed at. Knowledge of the local language is essential. Until
candidates with the necessary qualifications can be secured in the Northern Territores, provision should be
limited to a yearly output of 12 health visitors to serve the Colony and Ashanti: (paragraphs 248-249).
(46) As a temporary measure, a special class of “ village midwives ” should be instituted. Practical
training of not less than one year with attendance at 30 confinements should be given. These village mid-
wives would be entitled to practice only outside the scheduled areas in which practice is limited to the certified
midwife : (paragraph 263).
(47) The Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance 1946 should be more vigorously administered and additions
to the list of poisons in Schedule XIII should be considered. Amendments of the Ordinance are suggested :
(paragraphs 280-282).
(48) Clinic Superintendents in charge of health centres should above all be men of character
and integrity. Candidates should be selected from nurses (whether S.R.N. or 0.R.N.) who have served
several years in hospital. A course of one year including the principles and practice of elementary personal
and environmental hygiene and instruction in keeping records and accounts should suffice : (paragraph 285).
(49) The proposal to set up a special training school for clinic superintendents is endorsed. An output
of some four to five a year would be sufficient. Some of the training could be given at the School of Hygiene
in Accra : (paragraph 287).
(50) The present method of training dressers should continue but only where the hospital facilities are
adequate and the staff can give individual attention to the pupils. A district hospital should not normally
deal with more than three pupils ; (paragraph 290).
(51) The principle that the supply of wholesome water should be paid for by the consumers should be
recognised. The Government should continue to be responsible for the supply of water in bulk and should
charge the municipalities and local authorities the cost price ; the distribution of water should be a function
of the municipal councils and, as and when they prove their capacity, of the local authorities ; (paragraphs 303
305).
(52) When the new arrangements are in full working order, the duty of supplying water in bulk should
be transferred from the Government to a statutory board to be established for the purpose : (paragraph 307).
(53) The recent policy of the Government to assist financially the medical work of missions and other
voluntary bodies is to be welcomed. In the case of capital grants conditions should be imposed to secure
that if the work ceases, public money is not lost, and wherever grant-aid of any kind is given, the voluntary
body must satisfy the Government that the work is proceeding satisfactorily. Subject to this, the conditions
of the grant should be adapted to the circumstances of each case ; (paragraph 310).
(54) The system, abandoned owing to war conditions, of having a senior medical officer specially
concerned with the mining areas and in close touch with the mining companies and their medical advisers
should be restored : (paragraph 320).
(55) It should be considered whether under the new system of local government the retention of the
mining health areas is necessary or desirable : (paragraph 319).
(56) Negotiations for reciprocity between the Government and the mining companies in the matter
of treating mining and non-mining patients should be continued ; and the possibility of inviting medical men
employed by the companies to undertake, on a part-time basis, the care of patients in Government centres
adjoining the mining areas should be considered ; (paragraph 323).
(57) The abolition of all charges in hospitals, health centres and dressing stations is recommended ;
(paragraphs 326).
(58) The abolition of the privilege of medical officers to private practice in Government institutions
and enforcement of the prohibition against private practice of all kinds in the case of officers who joined the
service after January, 1946 are recommended : (paragraphs 336 and 339).
(59) Extra-mural practice should continue to be allowed for officers who joined the service under the
1934 Regulations : (paragraph 340).
(60) A non-pensionable allowance of £3OO per annum for loss of private practice in hospitals should
be paid to officers while engaged on clinical duties other than those who joined the service after January, 1946
and were debarred from private practice by the terms of their service : (paragraph 346).
(61) Medical officers who entered the Gold Coast service before 1934 should be given the option of
continuing as at present or surrendering their rights and accepting compensations (paragraph 341).
In conclusion we would add that our Secretary Mr. P. S. G. Smith has been indefatigable. His wide knowledge
of local conditions based on experience both as District Commissioner and at headquarters in Accra has proved
invaluable and he handled with great success the complicated arrangements invblved in our long tours. We
are much indebted also to the shorthand writers and typists who served us. Without their skill our work
would have been much more laborious and could not have been completed in the time.
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servants,
E. JOHN MAUDE
G. A. CLARK
K. G. KONUAH
A. E. LORENZEN
Chairman
P. S. G. SMITH
Secretary.
17th July, 1952.


APPENDIX “ A ”
GOLD COAST GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
Published by authority
No. 18 MONDAY, 11th FEBRUARY 1952
THE COMMISSIONS OF ENQUIRY ORDINANCE
(CAP. 209^
Commission No. 1 of 1952.
COMMISSION
ISSUED UNDER SECTION 2 OF THE COMMISSIONS OF ENQUIRY ORDINANCE
By His Excellency Sir CHARLES NOBLE ARDEN-CLARKE, Knight Grand Cross of the Most
Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the
Gold Coast Colony, etc., etc., etc.
(L.S.)
C. N. ARDEN-CLARKE
Governor.
WHEREAS I have deemed it advisable to issue this Commission authorising the Commissioners hereby
appointed to enquire into and report upon the matters set out in the terms of reference herein contained
being matters in which an enquiry would, in my opinion, be for the public welfare :
Now therefore, I, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by the Commissions of Enquiry
Ordinance, do hereby appoint the following to be Commissioners with all due authority in accordance with
the provisions of the said Ordinance, for the purposes of such enquiry :
Sir John Maude, k.c.b., k.b.e., Chairman
Dr. Albert Ernest Lorenzen "1
Dr. George Albert Clark > Members.
Kofi George Konuah, Esquire J
And I do hereby direct that the following shall be the terms of reference for the Commissioners ;
(i) to review the measures taken and projected in the Gold Coast, either by Government or by
private enterprise—
(а) for the development of preventive and social medicine, including health education,
(б) for the development of curative medicine, including provision of hospitals, health centres
and dressing stations and the training of personnel,
(c) for medical research ;
(ii) to examine the adequacy of the administrative structure and organisation of the Medical
Department in relation to such development ; and
(iii) to make recommendations.
And I do further direct that the enquiry shall be held in Accra, and at such other place or places and
at such convenient dates and times as the Chairman may from time to time appoint, and that the enquiry
may be held in public or in private or partly in public and partly in private, at the discretion of the Chairman.
Given under my hand and the Public Seal of the Gold Coast at Government House, Accra, this 9th day of
February in the year of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and fifty-two.


APPENDIX “B”
ITINERARY
,11th February ... ... ••• ••• Chairman and overseas members arrived in Accra by air from the
United Kingdom.
12th February-3rd March ... ... In Accra.
4th March To Kibi and Suhum, returning to Accra.
sth March ... ••• ••• ••• In Accra.
6th March ... To Mampong, Larteh and Akropong, returning to Accra.
7th-llth March In Accra.
12th March ... To Peki and Amedzofe.
13th March To Hohoe, Kpandu and Golokwati, returing to Amedzofe.
14th March To Vane, Kpedze Awlime and Ho, returning to Amedzofe.
15th March ... ... ... To Accra.
16th-21st March In Accra.
22nd March To Kumasi (by air).
23rd-25th March In Kumasi.
*26th March To Sunyani,
*26th March To Mampong and Kintampo.
*27th March To Berekum, Teobabi and Dormaa-Ahenkro, returning to Sunyani.
*27th March In Kintampo.
*2Bth March To Bekwai and Obuasi.
*2Bth March To Nkoranza and Konongo.
*29th March In Obuasi.
*29th March To Agogo and return to Konongo.
30th March To Kumasi.
31st March To Accra.
lst-4th April ...' ... ... ... In Accra.
*sth April ... ..; To Kumasi (by air).■
*6th April In Kumasi.
*7th April To Tamale (by road).
*Bth April To Tamale (by air).
9th April In Tamale.
*loth April To Bolgatanga and Navrongo.
*loth April ... ... To Bolgatanga, Zuarungu and Navrongo, returning to Bolgatanga.
* 11th April ... ... ... ••• To Tumu, Han, Lawra and Nandom, returning to Lawra.
*llth April To Bawku, returning to Bolgatanga.
*l2th April To Jirapa and Wa.
* 12th April ...’ To Accra (by air).
*l3th April ... To Sunyani.
*l4th April .... ; ... To Kumasi.
*lsth April ... . ... To Accra.
16th-20th April In Accra.
21st April To Cape Coast.
22nd April To Sekondi-Takoradi.
23rd April ... ... ... ••• In Sekondi-Takoradi.
24th April To Tarkwa.
25th April To Cape Coast.
26th April To Accra.
27th-28th April In Accra.
*29th April To Ibadan. Nigeria (by air).
*3oth April-*lst May In Ibadan.
*2nd May To Accra (by air).
3rd-llth May In Accra.
* 12th May ... ... ••• To Koforidua, returning to Accra.
13th May In Accra.
* 14th May To Keta.
* 15th May To Accra.
16th-27th May In Accra.
28th May Chairman and overseas members returned by sea to the United
Kingdom.
♦On these dates, the Commission separated into two teams.


APPENDIX "C”
REFERENCES
Ashanti Native Authority Finance 1949-50 ... 1950, Illustrated Pamphlet.
Public Relations Department, Accra.
Atlas of the Gold Coast ... ... ... ... 1949. Gold Coast Survey Department, Accra.
Berner, Lewis .... ... ... ... ... 1950. Entomological Report on the Development of the
Volta River Basin.
Busia, Dr. K. A. ... ... ... ... ... 1950. Report on a Social Survey of Sekondi-Takoradi. . ,
Crown Agents, London.
Colboume, M. J. Edington, G. M. and Hughes, 1950. A Medical Survey, in a Gold Coast Village. ,
M. H. Trans, of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, Vol. 44, No. 3.
Colonial Office ... ... ... ... ... 1948. Papers and Minutes on the African Conference.
Colonial Reports 1949. Gold Coast. H.M.S.O.
Commission on the Civil Service of the Gold 1951. Report (2 Vols.).
Coast. Government Printer, Accra.
Committees on Medical Auxiliaries ... ... 1951. Reports, cmd. 8818. H.M.S.O.
Committee on the Training of Nurses for the 1945. Report, cmd, 6672. H.M.S.O.
Colonies. v '
Cumpston, J. H. L. ... ... ... ... 1950. Report on the Medical and Public Health Organisa-
tion of Ceylon. Government Printer, Ceylon.
Development Plan, 1951 ... ... ... 1951. Plan. Government Printer, Accra.
Eddey, L. G. ... ... ... ... ... 1947. An Example of Effective Disease Control in a
Tropical Mining Community.
British Guiana Medical Journal.
Eddey, L. G. ... ... ... ... ... 1947. Destruction of Adult Mosquitoes by Residual
D.D.T. Methods.
Trans, of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, Vol. 40 No. 5.
Eddey, L. G. ... ... ... 1944. Spray-Killing of Mosquitoes in Homes—a Con-
tribution to Malaria Control on the Gold Coast.
Trans, of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene Vol. 38 No. 3.
Gold Coast Census, 1948 ... ... 1950. Census. Government Printer, Accra.
Gorman, William, Q.c ... ... 1947. Award of the Arbitrator in the Matter of a Trade
Dispute between the Gold Coast Mines Employees
Union and the Gold Coast Chamber of Mines.
Government Printer, Accra.
Guide to Junior Posts in the Medical Department Pamphlet. Government Printer, Accra.
Hailey, Lord 1938. An African Survey. Oxford University Press.
Halcrow, Sir William and Partners ... ... 1951, Report on the Development of the Volta River
Basin.
Heaf, Professor ... ... ... 1951, Report on Tuberculosis.
Konievsky, 1 1946. Social Insurance in Palestine and its Reconstruction.
Kuczynski, R, R. ... ... ... 1948. A Demographic Survey of the British Colonial
Empire ; West Africa. Oxford University Press.
Local Government Finance, 1950 Report. Government Printer, Accra.
Morris, K. R. S ... ... ... The Ecology of Epidemic Sleeping Sickness.
Bulletin of Entomological Research, VoL 42,
Part 2.
Murray, A. J. arid Crocket, J. A. 1947. Report on Silicosis and Tuberculosis among Mine
Workers in the Gold Coast.
Government Printer, Accra.
9


National Association for the Prevention of 1949. Transactions of the Second Commonwealth and
Tuberculosis. Empire Health and Tuberculosis Conference,
London. Pendragon Press.
Phillipson, Sir Sydney ... ... ... ... 1949. Grants-in-Aid of the Medical and Health Services
provided by Voluntary Agencies in Nigeria.
Government Printer, Lagos.
Phillipson, Sir Sydney ... ... ... ... 1951. Regional Administration.
Government Printer, Accra.
Phillipson, Sir Sydney ... ... ... ... Report of a Commission on Private Practice in
Nigeria. Government Printer, Lagos.
Pridie, E. D. ... ... ... ... ... Notes on a Tour of the Gold Coast.
Reports of the Education, Medical, Mines and Annual Reports.
Rural Water Development Departments. Government Printer, Accra.
Repo r t of the Select Committee on Local 1951. Report.
Government (Colony) 1950. Government Printer, Accra.
Repo r t of the Select Committee on Local 1951. Report.
Government (Ashanti). Government Printer, Accra.
Report of a Committee of the Territorial Council 1951. Report.
of the Northern Territories on Local Govern- Government Printer, Accra,
ment in the Northern Territories.
Report of the Select Committee on the Lidbury 1952. Sessional Paper No. HI of 1952.
Report. Government Printer, Accra.
Report of the Commission of Enquiry into 1948. Report.
Disturbances in the Gold Coast. Colonial No. 231. H.M.S.O.
Report to His Excellency the Governor by the 1949. Report.
Committee on Constitutional Reform 1949. Colonial No. 248. H.M.S.O.
Report of the Committee on Higher Education 1946. Sessional Paper No. VII of 1946.
August-November, 1946. Government Printer, Accra.
Report on the Gold Coast Police, November, 1952. Report.
1951. Government Printer, Accra.
Revenue and Expenditure of Native Authorities 1949. Sessional Paper No. HI of 1949.
in the Colony, Ashanti and the Northern Government Printer, Accra.
Territories for the year ending 31st March,
1948.
Revised Conditions of Service for the Gold Coast 1947. Sessional Paper No. lof 1947.
Civil Services, 1946. Government Printer, Accra.
Statement by His Majesty’s Government on the 1948. Statement.
Report of the Commission of Enquiry into Colonial No. 232. H.M.S.O.
Disturbances in the Gold Coast 1948.
Statement of the Gold Coast Government on the 1951. Sessional Paper No. IV of 1951.
Report of the Commission on the Civil Service Government Printer, Accra,
of the Gold Coast 1950-51.
Supplement to the Report of the Select Com- 1950. Sessional Paper No. IV of 1950.
mittee of the Legislative Council on the Afri- Government Printer, Accra,
canisation of the Public Service.
University of London Medical Delegation ... - Interim Report on the Setting up of a Medical
School in the Gold Coast.
Winslow, C. E. A. ... ... ... ... 1951. The Cost of Sickness and the Price of Health.
W.H.O. Geneva.
World Health Organisation ... ... ... 1951. Malaria Conference in Equatorial Africa.
W.H.O. Technical Report Series No. 38.
World Health Organisation ... ... ... 1951. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee
on Nutrition.
W.H.O. Technical Report Series No. 44.
APENDIX “ C ” — contd.
REFERENCES— contd.


Government
Missions
Private Nursing Homes
Mining and Timber Companies
and Schools
Place
Beds
Place
Beds !
Place
Beds
Place
Beds
Colony
Accra :
Gold Coast Hospital, Korle
316
Accra ...
8
Aboso (Taquah & Aboso
59
Bu.
Mines Ltd.).
Ridge Hospital
35
18
Achimota (Univ. College
30
Maternity Hospital
102
22
and Secondary School).
P.M.L Children’s Hospital
16
18
Akwatia (Cons. African
41
—
25
Selection Trust Ltd.).
Total ...
469
91
Awaso (British Aluminium
Co., Ltd.).
Bibiani (Bibiani (1927)
10
45
Aknse
27
Kadjebi
30
Ltd.).
Axim ...
37
Larteh
4
Bogosu (Marlu Gold
56
Cape Coast ...
97
Suhum
16
Mines Ltd.).
Dunkwa
79
—
Kade (Holland Syndi-
12
Ho
38
Total
50
cate).
Hohoe
12
—
Nsuta (Afr. Manganese
.
Keta ...
63
Colonv Total
141
Co.. Ltd.).
Kibi
22
—
Prestea (Ariston Gold
68
Koforidua
54
Mines Ltd.).
Nsawam
26
Samreboi (Atr. Timber
30
Oda
46
& Plywood Ltd.).
Saltpond
19
Tarkwa (Amal. Banket
72
Sekondi (Effia-Nkwanta)
166
Areas Ltd.).
Takoradi
31
—
Tarkwa
54
Colony Total ...
437
Winneba
60
Worawora
18
'
Total ...
831
Colony Total ; ...
1,300
Ashanti
Kumasi :
North Wing Hospital
19
South Wing Hospital
220
South Wing Mat. Unit ...
42
Children’s Hospital
24
Agogo
100
Kumasi
6
Konongo (Konongo Gold
43
305
Mines Ltd.).
Obuasi (Ashanti Gold-
42
Bekwai
9
fields Corporation Ltd.)
Sunyani
25
Ashanti Total
85
Ashanti Total ...
339
Northern Territories
Tamale :
Central
92
West
8
100
Bawku
25
*I.awra
11
Navrongo
27
*Salaga
12
Wa
28
Yendi
36
139
Jirapa (Mater-
nity).
14
Northern Territories Total ...
239
Gold Coast Total
1,878
CLASSIFICATION OF BEDS
(a) General Hospitals :
(i) Government Hospitals
1,736
(ii) Mission Hospitals
118
(iii) Private Nursine Homes
147
(iv) Mines and Timber Companies, and Schools
522
2,523
(6) Maternity Hospitals :
(i) Government Hospitals
102
(ii) Mission Hospitals
14
116
( c ) Children's Hospitals :
(i) Government Hospitals
40
40
2,679
Total
1. The Mental Hospital in Accra with accommodation for 750 patients is omitted from the above table.
2. On the 31st December, 1951, there were no Medical Officers stationed at the hospitals marked
*
APPENDIX. “D ”
DISTRIBUTION OF HOSPITAL BEDS ON THE 31ST DECEMBER, 1951


A. The
Colony
B.
Ashanti
(a)
Togoland — Trans-volta Region
Dzodze
Kadjebi
Kete Krachi
Sogankope.
Attebubu
Bechem
Dormaa-Ahenkro
Fomena
Goaso
Juaso
P)
Eastern Region
Kintampo
Ada
Asamankese
Mampong
Nkawkaw
Odumasi
Ofuasi
Mampong
Nkawie
Ofinso
Sampa
Techiman.
Suhum.
C.
Northern Territories
Binaba
(c)
Western Region
Akropong
Agona Swedru
Agona Nkwanta
Asikuma
Diaso
Enchi
Foso
Nauli
Twifu Praso.
Bole
Chereponi
Daboya
Gambaga
Gushiago
Nadawli
Nandom
Sandema
Tumu
Yagaba.
APPENDIX “E "
PROPOSED HEALTH CENTRES
GPD.W2C4I 1,120,7-52


DISTRIBUTION OF HOSPITALS, PRIVATE HURSING HOMES AND HEALTH CENTRES
ON THE 31 ST DECEMBER, 1951,
WITH SITES FOR NEW HOSPITALS AND SUGGESTED SITES FOR NEW HEALTH CENTRES
