

1861.
QUEENSLAND.
Legislative Assembly
NATIVE POLICE FORCE.
REPORT
FROM THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
NATIVE POLICE FORCE
AND THE
CONDITION OF THE ABORIGINES GENERALLY:
TOGETHER WITH
The Proceedings of the Committee,
AND
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
ORDERED BY THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY TO BE PRINTED,
17 July, 1861.
BRISBANE:
FAIRFAX AND BELBRIDGE, PRINTERS, QUEEN-STREET.


EXTRACTS FROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS OF
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
Votes and Proceedings, No. 2. Wednesday, 1 May, 1861,
8, Native Police'Force : —Mr. Mackenzie moved, pursuant«to amended notice, That a
Select Committee he appointed, with power to send for persons and papers, and sit
during any adjournment of this House, to inquire into and report on the organiza-
tion and management of the Native Police Force; and further, to enquire into and
report how far it may be practicable to ameliorate the present condition of the
Aborigines of this Colony. Such Committee to consist of seven Members, to be
chosen by ballot, and the Mover,
Debate ensued.
Question put and passed.
Whereupon the House proceeded to the Ballot, and the Speaker declared the follow*
ing Members to be the Committee duly appointed, viz ;—Mr. Mackenzie, Mr.
Mr. Fitzsimmons, Mr. Gore, Mr. Moffatt, Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Royds, Mr. Watts, and
Mr. Ferrett.
Votes and Proceedings, No. 5. Tuesday, 7 May, 1861.
6, Question of Privilege :—Mr. Watts called the attention of the House to an Article in
the Moreton Bay Courier, of this day’s date, animadverting in terms disrespectful to
the House upon the Constitution of the Select Committee, appointed on the Ist
instant, to enquire into the Organization and Management of the Native Police
Force ; and moved, That the said Article is a Breach of the Privileges of this
House.
Debate ensued.
Jntcrruption.
Jf: * * * * #
9. Question of Privilege: —The Debate on Mr, Watts’ motion, interrupted by the Pro*
ceedings recorded in entries 7 and 8 resumed.
Motion, by leave, withdrawn.
Votes and Proceedings, No. 12. Tuesday, 21 May, 1861.
1. Native Police Force:—Mr. Mackenzie moved, without previous notice. That the
following Message be transmitted to the Legislative Council;—
“ Mr. President,
“ The Legislative Assembly having appointed a Select Committee on the Native
<e Police Force, and that Committee being desirous to examine the Honorable Alfred
“ William Compigne in reference thereto, beg to request that the Legislative Council
“ will give leave to its said Member to attend accordingly, on such day and days as
“ shall be arranged between him and the said Committee.”
Question put and passed.
Votes and Proceedings, No. 13. Wednesday, 26 May, 1861.
2. Native Police Force :
“ Mr. Speaker,
•< f Ir answer to the Message from the Legislative Assembly, dated the 21st May,
" 1861,


“ 1861, requesting leave for the Honorable Alfred William Compigne, a Member of
“ the Legislative Council, to attend and be examined before a Select Committee of
“the Legislative Assembly on the Native Police Force, the Council acquaints the
“ Assembly that leave has been granted to its said Member to attend and be
“ examined -by the said Committtee, if he think fit.
“M. C. O’CONNELL,
“ President.
“Legislative Council Chamber,
“Brisbane , 22 nd Mag, 1861.”
Votes and No. 15. Tuesday, 11 June, 1861.
3. Native Police Force:—Mr. Mackenzie moved, without previous notice, that the
following Message be transmitted to the Legislative Council:—
“Mr. President,
“ The Legislative Assembly having appointed a Select Committee on the Native
“ Police Force, and that Committee being desirous to examine the Honorable Maurice
“ Charles O’Connell in reference thereto, begs to request that the Legislative Council
“ will give leave to its said Member to attend accordingly, on such day and days as
“ shall be arranged between him and the said Committee.”
Question put and passed.
4. Refusal of Witness to attend Select Committee:—Mr. Mackenzie, as Chairman of the
Select Committee on the Native Police Force, referring to Standing Order No.
clxyiii. , reported the receipt, by the Clerk of the House, of the following letter
“ Degilbo, May 4th, 1861.
“ Sir,
“ In answer to your request, just received, that I will favor the Select Committee
“ of the Legislative Assembly on the Native Police question with my attendance
“ upon the 25th instant, for the purpose of being examined, I have the honor to say
“ that, anxious as I am for the results which their labours will doubtless produce,
“ I am yet most unwilling to travel over 200 miles to appear before the Committee,
“ whose constitution called forth so much suspicion in, and increasing disappoint-
“ ment outside of, the Assembly.
“ I have the honor to be,
“ Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
WM. HENRY WALSH.
f‘ Lewis A. Bernays, Esq.,
“ C. L. A., &c., &c., &c.”
Whereupon Mr. Watts moved, “ That” William Henry Walsh he ordered to attend
this House on this day month.
Debate ensued.
Mr. Lilley moved, That the question be amended by the omission of all the words
following the word “ That,” with a view to the insertion in their place of the words
“ the conduct of W. H. Walsh, a Justice of this Territory, in disobeying a summons
“ from a Committee of this Honorable House, is highly reprehensible, and merits
“ the severest condemnation of the House.
“ (2.) That this Resolution be communicated by Address to His Excellency.
Debate continued.
Question, —That the words proposed to be omitted stand part of the Question, —put
and negatived.
Question, —That the words proposed to be inserted in place of those omitted be so
inserted, —put and passed.
Whereupon, Question,-—That the conduct of W. H. Walsh, a Justice of this
Territory, in disobeying a summons from a Committee of this Honorable House, is
highly reprehensible and merits the severest condemnation of the House.
(2.) That this Resolution be communicated by Address to His Excellency— put and
passed.
Votes
extracts erom the votes and proceedings.


Votes and Proceedings, No. 16. Wednesday, 12 June, 1861.
2. Native Police Force:—The following Message, from the Legislative Council, received
and read; —
“ No. 4.
“Mr. Speaker,
“ In answer to the Message from the Legislative Assembly, dated the 11th
“instant, requesting leave for the Honorable Maurice Charles O’Connell, President
“ of the Legislative Council, to attend and be examined before a Select Committee of
“ the Legislative Assembly on the Native Police Force, the Council acquaints the
“Assembly that leave has been granted to its said Member, to attend and be
“ examined by the said Committee, if he think fit.
“ M. C. O’CONNELL,
“ President.
“Legislative Council Chamber,
“Brisbane, 12 th June, 1861.”
Votes and Proceedings, No. 23. Tuesday, 25 June, 1861.
5. Native Police Force :—Mr. Mackenzie moved, without previous notice, That the follow-
ing Message be transmitted to the Legislative Council: —
“,Mr. President,
“ The Legislative Assembly, having appointed a Select Committee to enquire
“into the Condition and Management of the Native Police, and that Commitee being
“ desirous to examine the Honorable Alfred Henry Brown, M.L.C.,in reference thereto,
“begs to request that the Legislative Council will give leave to its said Member to
“ attend accordingly, on such day and days, as shall be arranged between him and the
“ said Committee.”
Question put and passed.
Votes and Proceedings, No. 24. Wednesday, 26 June, 1861.
6. Messages from Legislative Council :
(1.) Native Police Force :
“No. 8.
“ Mr. Speaker,
“ In answer to the Message from the Legislative Assembly, dated the 25th
“June, 1861, requesting leave for the Honorable Alfred Henry Brown, a Member
“ of the Legislative Council, to attend and be examined before a Select Committee
“ of the Legislative Assembly on the Native Police Force, the Council acquaints the
“ Assembly that leave has been granted to its said Member to attend and be
“ examined by the said Committee, if he think fit.
“M. C. O’CONNELL,
“ President.
“ Legislative Council Chamber,
“ Brisbane, 26i fh June, 1861.”
Votes and Proceedings, No. 36. Wednesday, 17 Judy, 1861.
1. The House met, pursuant to adjournment. The Speaker, after reading prayers, took
the Chair.
Native Police Force:—Mr. Mackenzie, as Chairman, brought up the Report from, and laid
upon the table the evidence taken before the Select Committee, appointed on the Ist
May last, to enquire into and report on the organization and management of the
Native Police Force; and further, to enquire into and report how far it may be
practicable to ameliorate the present condition of the Aborigines of this Colony.
Ordered to, be printed.
extracts from the votes and proceedings.


1861.
Ikgblat&e
QUEENSLAND.
NATIVE POLICE PORCE.
REPORT.
The Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly, appointed by
ballot on the Ist May, 1861, with power to send for persons and
papers, and sit during any adjournment of the House, to enquire
into and report on the organisation and management of the Native
Police Porce ; and further to enquire into and report how far it
may be practicable to ameliorate the present condition of the
aborigines of this Colony, have agreed to the following Report:—
Your Committee, entering on their duties fully impressed with
the importance of the subjects under consideration, have examined
upwards of thirty witnesses, including the principal Officers of the
Native Police Corps, and have thus collected a mass of evidence of the
most comprehensive character.
To make this record more complete, your Committee have
availed themselves of portions of the evidence taken before a Select
Commitee held in Sydney in the year 1858, and in addition, the
Appendices attached to this Report contains much valuable infor-
mation.
Your Committee cannot but express their regret that more
than one witness, capable of affording important information regarding
the Native Police, should have refused to submit themselves to an
examination.
The questions brought under the notice of your Committee
have been:—
1. The


1. The present condition and organization of the Native Police
Force.
2. The charges of unnecessary cruelty brought against their
officers when dealing with the Natives, and protecting the
settlers against their aggressions.
3. The prospect of civilising, or in any way improving the
condition of the aboriginal population.
I. In acquiring information on the subject of the working of
the Native Police, your Committee, by selecting persons from all
classes, have endeavoured to avoid making the evidence merely the
expression of the views of any section of the community, favourable
or otherwise, to the abstract question of the employment of an abori-
ginal protective Force.
The whole weight of the evidence, with one or two exceptions,
tends to prove :
1. That any change in the organisation of this Force by the
substitution of white troopers for Native, would destroy
its efficiency.
2. That since its establishment and reconstruction under its
present Commandant, the destruction of property and loss
of life on either side has considerably diminished
3. That any attempt to disband the Force suddenly, would, as
on a previous occasion, lead to disastrous results.
It is clearly shown by the evidence of the Commandant and
some of the witnesses, that any want of discipline that has existed in
this Force, or any excesses that are attributable to the Troopers,
have arisen mainly from the inefficiency, the indiscretion, and the
intemperate habits of some, of the Officers, rather than from any
defect in the system itself.
It also appears evident that no advantage would accrue on the
score of economy, by am re-construction of this corps in the way that
has been proposed by some of the witnesses. Your Committee, there-
fore, have directed their attention to the necessity of improving the
internal organisation of the existing Native Police, and, in pursuing
this enquiry, the following points have presented themselves as worthy
of recommendation :
1. That it is of the highest importance to Secure the services
of efficient Officers ; the successful working of the Force
depending almost entirely on their energy, ability, and
sobriety.


sobriety. That Cadets should he appointed, who
should serve a certain period under the supervision of the
head of the Force before they are considered eligible to hold
commissions, and that appointments to the Corps should
be made solely on the recommendation of the Commandant
for the time being, who should be held responsible for the
efficiency of his Officers.
2. That no detachment of Native Police should be stationed
in the vicinity of any of the towns, as the facilities for
obtaining intoxicating liquors tend to demoralize the
Troopers, and have, in some cases, resulted in the most
serious outrages and breaches of the law.
8. That the Troopers should, in all cases, be recruited from
districts at a distance from those in which they are likely
to be employed.
4. Monthly returns of all proceedings, and the state of the
troops, should be forwarded by each Officer in command of
a detachment to the Commandant of the Force, who would
furnish a general abstract thereof to the Colonial Secretary,
or. the head of the Executive Department, under which
he may be placed.
5. A more simple and efficient system of keeping the accounts,
and furnishing the supplies of clothing, ammunition, &c.,
to the different divisions, appears to your Committee
highly necessary, and, unless in cases where it may be
urgently required, your Committee deprecate the practice
of removing efficient Officers from the districts they have
been accustomed to serve in.
11. The charges brought against the Officers of the Native Police
have been investigated as far as practicable.
Your Committee, although aware how difficult it may be in cases
where depredations are committed by the blacks to make them amen-
able to British Law, cannot countenance the indiscriminate slaughter
which appears on more than one occasion to have taken place.
Lieutenant "Wheeler appears to have acted with indiscretion
on his late visit to the Logan and Fassifern. Your Committee re-
commend that he should be reprimanded, and removed to another
district: were it not that in other respects he is a most valuable and
zealous Officer, they would feel it their duty to recommend his
dismissal.
With


With respect to the affray at Mr. Mortimer’s, it appears that
the detachment of Police stationed at Maryborough was most impro-
perly handed over by the Officer in charge, lieutenant Murray, to
Second Lieutenant Morrisset, a young officer newly appointed,
unacquainted with his duties, and also with the Troopers placed under
his control. It also appears by the evidence that the natives had
been committing depredations in that neighbourhood for some time
previous, and that the assistance of the Police had been demanded.
It is likewise shown by Mr. Morrisset’s report that they attacked the
Police in the first instance. After a careful consideration of the
evidence in this case, your Committee recommend that Lieutenant
Murray should be removed from the Force, both on this account, and
his general unfitness for his duties.
Lieutenant Bligh appears, as far as evidence in his case was
procurable, to have been justified in his attack on the natives in the
town of Maryborough. He is generally spoken of as a zealous and
efficient officer, and bears a high character from the Commandant.
Your Committee having been informed that the present Com-
mandant has resigned, or is about to resign, his appointment, feel
themselves relieved from the necessity of making any comments on
his management of the Force.
Touching the murder of Fanny Briggs by Troopers of the
Native Police, it does not appear to your Committee that this unfor-
tunate occurrence militates in any way against the Force. The
detachment was stationed too near the Town of Rockhampton, which
gave facilities for procuring liquor. The Troopers were on friendly
terms with this young woman, and, by the evidence of the Comman-
dant, Mr. Morrisset, it will be seen that she promised Toby, one of the
Troopers, a bottle of grog if he found the horses belonging to the
station. On the day after this note was written she was murdered.
Instances of rape and murder resulting from the influence of liquor,
have occurred when the aborigines committing such excesses have not
been members of the Police Force.
111. The evidence taken by your Committee shews beyond
doubt that all to Christianize or educate the aborigines of
Australia have hitherto proved abortive. Except in one or two
isolated cases, after being brought up and educated for a certain
period, the Natives of both sexes invariably return to their savage
habits. Credible witnesses shew that they are addicted to cannibalism ;
that they have no idea of a future state; and are sunk in the lowest
depths of barbarism. Missions have been established amongst them
at different periods with but partial success; and the same may be
said of the schools established in the different Colonies.
Nevertheless


Nevertheless, any improvement in the social condition of this
benighted race is an object so desirable of attainment, that your Com-
mittee feel justified in recommending to the notice of the Government
the plan sketched forth in the evidence of Mr. Zillman, whose great
experience entitles his opinion to favourable consideration.
This proposal embraces • the establishment of a Missionary
Cotton Company, who, receiving land and other assistance from the
Government, would endeavour to educate the children while employing
the parents in the necessary work - of the plantation. Such a proposal
appears to your Committee sufficiently feasible to justify a trial.
Should it succeed, the system may be operated upon to any extent.
In bringing their labours to a close, your Committee are
desirous to bring under the notice of your Honorable House the
assistance they have received from several of the witnesses, who, at
great personal inconvenience to themselves, have given so much
valuable information.
R. R. MACKENZIE,
Chairman.
Legislative Assembly Chambers,
Brisbane, 17 July, 1861.


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE,
FRIDAY, 3 MAY, 1861.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie, Mr. Moffatt,
Mr. Fitzsimmons, Mr. Blakeney.
Mr. Gore Mr. Royds,
Mr. Watts, Mr. Ferrett,
On the motion of Mr. Gore, seconded by Mr. Watts, the Hon. R. R. Mackenzie was
called to the Chair.
The Committee deliberated as to the evidence which would best satisfy the object of
their investigation, and the witnesses whose attendance it would bo most desirable to request.
It was finally Resolved to take the evidence of Mr. C. M. Fraser, then in attendance
on the Committee, and to summon Jacob Lowe, Esq., and Dr. Challinor, M.P., as witnesses
for the ensuing Wednesday at Eleven o’clock.
[Adjourned till Wednesday next at Eleven o’clock.]
WEDNESDAY, 8 MAY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie, Mr. Gore,
Mr. Watts, Mr. Fitzsimmons,
Mr. Moffatt, Mr. Blakeney,
Mr. Royds, Mr. Ferrett.
The Hon. R, R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Committee deliberated, and on the motion of Mr. Watts, seconded by Mr. Ferrett,
it was Resolved :—
“ That' measures should be talien for a thorough investigation into three separate
“charges brought against the Native Police in various parts of the Colony,
*• namely, at Fassifern and Maryborough, and in the neighbourhood of the
“Messrs. Mortimer’s station.”
Dr. Challinor, M.P., called in and examined.
A question arising during the examination of Dr. Challinor as to the propriety of
certain questions put by the Chairman, witness requested to withdraw, and Committee
deliberated as to the line of examination which it would be desirable to adopt.
Proposed by Mr. Gore, seconded by Mr Watts:—
“That it is desirable, in the opinion of the Committee, that the Chairman should
“ be allowed to take his own course as to the examination of witnesses without
“ interruption from Members of the Committee.
Question put.
Committee divided as follows
Ayes, 3. Noes, 4.
Mr. Watts | Mr. Royds
Mr. Gore j Mr. Blakeney
Mr. Fitzsimmons 1 Mr. Moffatt
j Mr. Ferrett
Examination


Examination of Dr. Ghallinor resumed, and subsequently adjourned till the follow-
ing day, in order to allow of the examination of Jacob Lowe, Esq., then in attendance on
the Committee.
Jacob Lowe, Esq., examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 9 MAY.
Members Present :—•
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Royds
Mr. Watts Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Gore Mr. Blakeney
Mr. Ferrett Mr. Moffatt.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Examination of Dr. Ghallinor concluded, and Lieut. Wheeler, J01.P., called in
and examined.
[Committee adjourned till Wednesday, the 15th instant, at Eleven o’clock a.m.]
WEDNESDAY, 15 MAY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Ferrett.
Mr. Watts Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Gore Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Blakeney Royds.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Captain Coley called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 16 MAY.
Members Present ;
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Royds
Mr. Watts Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Gore Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Moffatt.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie.in the Chair.
R. B. Sheridan, Esq., and Lieut. Wheeler, N.M.P., (further) examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at the rising of the House.]
FRIDAY, 17 MAY.
Members Present ;
Mr. Mackenzie I Mr, Royds
Mr. Watts I Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Gore | Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Blakeney.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair,
Air. Henry Babbit called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till Wednesday next at Eleven o’clock,]
WEDNESDAY,


WEDNESDAY, 22 MAY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Blakeney
Mr. Watts Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Gore Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Ferrett.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
The Hon. A. W. Compigne M.L. C. (by leave of the Legislative Council) and A, C.
Gregory , Esq.., examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at. Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 23 MAY.
Members Present:—
Mr. Mackenzie I Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Watts 1 Mr. Gore
Mr. Ferrett j Mr. Blakeney.
The. Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
A. 0. Gregory, Esq,, Surveyor-General, further examined, and Messrs. Sneyd and
J. Fraser called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned during recess.]
WEDNESDA Y, 12 JUNE.
Members Present
Mr, Mackenzie Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Watts Mr.’Royds
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Mr. J. Davis called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Half-past Ten o ! olook.]
THURSDAY, 13 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Watts Mr. Royds
Mr. Blakeney Mr, Moffatt
Mr. Gore Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon, R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Messrs. Rod 6 and Garden Collins called in and examined.
Mrs.. Jane Bray, who had been summoned to give evidence before the Committee
this day, we*s not in attendance.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at the rising of the House.]
FRIDAY


FRIDAY, 14 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Gore Mr. Royds
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Ferrett Mr. Watts.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Messrs. Farringdon and Daly called in and examined.
At the request of these -witnesses, that the expenses incurred by them in attending
the Committee should be allowed, they were directed to send a statement of such expenses
to the Committee, with a view to their being granted, if reasonable.
[Committee adjourned till Tuesday, the 18th instant, at Eleven o’clock.]
TUESDAY, 18 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Gore
Mr. Royda Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Watts.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
J. K. Wilson and J. L Zillman, Esqrs., called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock.]
WEDNESDAY, 19 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Gore Mr. Blakeney
Mr. Watts. Mr. Royds
Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon. R, R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
0. R. Haly, Esq., M.P., and the Hon. M. C. O' Connell (by leave of the Legislative
Council) called in and examined.
At the suggestion of the Chairman it was Resolved, —“That the evidence of the
Hon. M. C. O’Connell, given in Sydney on the Dawson Murders, in 1858, should be printed
as an appendix to his evidence taken on the present occasion,”
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow, at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 20 JUNE.
■ Members Present :
Mr. Watts Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Royds
Mr. Moffatt Mr. Gore.
The Hon. R, R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
John Hardie and John Mortimer , Esqrs., called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at the rising of the House.]
FRIDAY,


FRIDAY , 21 JUNE.
Members Present: —
Mr. Mackenzie I Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Watts | Mr. Boyds
Mr. Gore j Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Blakeney | Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon, B. K. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Leonard Edward Lester , Esq., called in and examined.
Mrs. Lester who had been summoned to give evidence before the Committee, was not
in attendance.
[Committee adjourned till Wednesday next, at Eleven o’clock.])
WEDNESDAY. 26 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Watts
Mr. Gore Mr. Boyds
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Ferrett.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Thos. Petrie and Pallet Gardew, Esqrs., called in and examined, and the Hon. A-
3. Brown, M.L.C., examined by permission of the Legislative Council.
Committee decided that the evidence of the Hon. A. H. Brown, given before a Select
Committee in Sydney on the Dawson Murders, in 1858, be re-published as an appendix to
the evidence given by that gentleman on the present occasion,
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 27 JUNE.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Ferrett
Mr. Watts Mr. Royds
Mr. Gore Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Lieut. Carr, N.M.P., called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at the rising of the House.}
FRIDAY, 28 JUNE.
Members Present:—
Mr. Mackenzie I Mr. Boyds
f Mr. Blakeney
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
C. F. D- Parkinson, Esq., called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till Thursday next, at Eleven o’clock.
THURSDAY, 4 JULY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie I Mr. Boyds
Mr. Blakeney j Mr. Watts
. The. Hon. B. Mackenzie in the Chair.
John M‘Donnell, Esq., Secretary of Native Police, called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till Saturday nest, at Eleven o’clock.]
SATURDAY,


SATURDAY, 6 JULY.
Members Present ;
Mr. Mackenzie Mr. Royds
Mr. Watts Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Gore.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
The Chairman read a letter received from Mr. R. F. Giles, who had been summoned
to give evidence before the Committee, stating that the "writer would be put to very great
mconvenience by attending the Committee at an earlier date than the 30th instant; and
further, that want of funds would, under any circumstances, have prevented his immediate
compliance with the summons, which reached him when 100 miles from home.”
The Chairman submitted to the Members of the Committee a letter from Mr. John
Mortimer, addressed to him, in reference to the writer’s views on the subject of the ameliora-
tion of the Blacks’ condition.
E. iV. V. Morrisett, Esq., Commandant of Native Police Force, called in and examined.
[Committee adjourned till Bth instant, at Half-past Eleven o’clock.
MONDAY, 8 JULY.
Members Present:—
Mr. Watts Mr. Mackenzie
Mr. Blakeney Mr, Royds
Mr. Gore Mr. Fitzsimmons.
In the absence of the Chairman, John Watts, Esq., took the Chair.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie entered the room in the course of the examination.
Lieut. John O' Connell Bligh, N.M.P., called in and examined.
Committee deliberated, and the Chairman was requested to prepare a Draft Report, to
be considered at the next meeting.
[Committee adjourned till Wednesday next at Eleven o’clock.]
WEDNESDAY, 10 JULY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie | Mr. Watts
Mr. Royds | Mr. Blakeney
Mr. Fitzsimmons,
The Hen. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
Chairman submitted Draft Report which was read a first time.
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 11 JULY.
Members Present
Mr. Mackenzie • Mr. ferrett
Mr, Watts Mr. Royds
Mr. Blakeney Mr. Gore
Mr. Fitzsimmons.
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
A letter addressed to the Chairman by Br. Challinor, M.P., was ordered to be printed
as a separate appendix.
The Chairman submitted to the members present two letters received from Mr.
Frederick Walker—one addressed to the Colonial Secretary, and the other to Dr. Challinor,
in reference to matters connected with the subject of the inquiry.
’ In the unavoidable absence of one of the members of the Committee,
[Committee adjourned till to-morrow at Eleven o’clock for further consideration and adop-
tion of Report.]
FRIDAY,


FRIDAY, 12 JULY.
Members Present :
Mr. Mackenzie ] Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Royds Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr. Gore | Mr. Ferrett
The Hon. R. R. Mackenzie in the Chair.
The Chairman having submitted Draft Report,
Committee deliberated. •
Motion made and Question —“That this report be read a second time and considered
paragraph by paragraph” —Agreed to.
The Preamble was agreed to.
Section I.—Paragraphs 1,8, 4,6, were verbally amended and agreed to.
Motion made (Mr. Moffatt), and Question —That paragraph 2, viz: “In
“classifying the evidence, it is remarkable, that the opinions of the persons examined, as to
“ the relative advantages or efficiency of a White or Native Police Force appear to be
“governed by the distance they may have been residing from the towns where the
“ concentration of population affords sufficient mutual protection,” be omitted —Agreed to.
Motion made (Mr. Moffatt), and Question —That in clause 1 of paragraph 5 the
words “To carry this out, your Committee recommend that those officers shown by the
“ Commandant and other witnesses to be intemperate, and in other respects unfit for the
“ duties imposed on them, should be at once removed from the Force,” be omitted.
Committee divided :
Ayes, 4.
Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Fitzsimmons
Mr, Ferrett
Mr. Royds
No, 1.
Mr. Gore
Motion made (Mr. Royds) and Question , —That clause 4 of same paragraph, viz:—“ That
“ a chain of posts should be established, extending from the Maranoa to the Kennedy, each
“ detachment to consist of four troopers and a white sergeant. These patrols to be
“ stationed at convenient distances from each other, to be constantly on the move, and under
“ the inspection of the officers attached to each division. And that the head quarters of
“ the Commandant should be fixed in a sufficiently central position, so as to enable him to
“ exercise a proper supervision and control over the whole Force,” be omitted.
Committee divided.
Ayes, 4.
Mr. Royds
Mr. Gore
Mr. Moffatt
Mr. Ferrett.
No, 1.
Mr. Fitzsimmons.
Motion made (Mr. Moffatt), and Question —That Clause 7 of same paragraph, viz.;
“ Your Committee would further observe that they think a wider range should be taken
“in the appointment of officers; many of them at present appearing to be individuals
“ appointed from interest, and because they had failed to succeed in any other profession,”
be omitted —Agreed to.
Motion made and Question —“ That paragraph 5, as amended, stand part of the
“ Report” —Agreed to.
Section ll.—Paragraphs 1,2, 3,4, 6, and 6 verbally amended and agreed to.
Motion made (Mr. G-ore) and Question —That the following new paragraph, to
follow paragraph 5, viz :—“ Your Committee having been informed that the present
“ Commandant has resigned, or is about to resign, his appointment, feel themselves relieved
“ from the necessity of making any comments on his management of the Force,” be added,
Agreed to.
Section lll.—Paragraphs 1,2, 3,4, agreed to.
Motion made (Mr. Gore), and Question —“ That the Report as amended be the
“ Report of this Committee” —Agreed to.
Chairman requested to report to the House.
[Committee adjourned.]


LIST OF WITNESSES.
Friday, 3 May, 1861.
0. E. Fraser, Esquire #
Wednesday, 8 May, 1861.
Dr. Chaltinor, M.P.
Jacob Lowe, Esquire , - .... 2
Thursday, 9 May, 1861.
Dr. Challinor, M.P., second examination
Lieutenant Frederick Wheeler, N.M.P.
* ... ... 16
Wednesday, 14 May, 1861.
Captain John Coley
Thursday, 16 May, 1861.
R. B. Sheridan, Esquire
Lieutenant Frederick Wheeler, N.M.P., second examination ... ... ... 2g
Friday, 17 May, 1861.
Mr. Henry Babbit
33
Wednesday, 22 May, 1861.
Honorable A. W. Compigne, M.L.C. g 5
A. C. Gregory, Esquire, Surveyor- General gg
Thursday, 23 May, 1861.
A. C. Gregory, Esquire, second examination ...
Mr. Samuel Sneyd
John Fraser, Esquire
Wednesday, 12 June, 1861.
Mr. John Davies ....
54
Thursday, 13 June , 1861.
Mr. Augustus Rode
Garden Collins, Esquire
Friday, 14 June, 1861.
Mr. Francis H, Farringdon gg
Mr. Owen Daly ...
6B
Tuesday, 18 June, 1861,
John Ker Wilson, Esquire
Mr. John L. Zillman ....
75
Wednesday, 19 June, 1861.
Charles Robert Haly, M.P
Honorable M. C. O’Connell, President of the Legislative Council ~, ' g 2
Thursday, 20 June, 1861.
John Hardie, Esquire
John Mortimer, Esquire
4 • 101
Friday, 21 June, 1861.
Leonard E. Lester, Esquire
4 108
Wednesday, 26 June, 1861.
Thomas Petrie, Esquire
Honorable A. H. Brown, M.L.C.
’ H 4
Pollet Cardew, Esquire...
4 ’ ... 127
Thursday, 27 June, 1861.
Lieutenant Carr, N.M.P
5 128
Friday, 28 June, 1861.
C. D. E. Parkinson, Esquire
' * « "• <M Iqo
Thursday, 4 July, 1861.
John McDonnell, Esquire, Secretary of Police Department
’ *’* •** • • • ••• •••
Saturday, 6 July, 1861.
E. N. Y. Morisset, Esquire, Commandant of Native Police ,
143
Monday, 8 July, 1861.
Lieut. J. O'Connell Bligh, N.M.P * .
f f *•' ** * •• • .. •


LIST OF APPENDICES,
{To evidence given by Dr. Challinor, M.P., on the Bth May, 1861.)
Letter to Attorney-General respecting Magisterial Enquiry at Eassifern ... 6
(To evidence given by Mr. Samuel Sneyd, on the 23rd May, 1861 J
Beale of Pay, Rations, and Clothing of the Old Mounted Police ... 50
(To evidence given by J. L. Zillman, Esquire, on the 18 th June, 1861 .)
Mission of the Moravian Church in the Wimmera District, May, 1861 ... 79
(To evidence'given by the Mon. M. C. O' Connell, on the \%th June, 1861 .)
Evidence given by Witness in Sydney before the Select Committee on the Dawson murders, in 1858,
with (Appendix A.) remarks on the Formation of a Corps of Mounted Police for the Frontier
Districts of .New South Wales, and (Appendix B. and C.) Schedule of estimated expenditure
required for such Corps.. ... .; 88
(To evidence yf ven by J. Mortimer, Esquire, on the 20th June, 1861 J
APPENDIX A. & B.
Correspondence between Messrs. Mortimer and the Colonial Secretary, in reference to alleged outrage
at Fassifern 107
(To evidence given by the Mon. A. M. Drown, M.L.C., on the 26th June, 1861 J
APPENDIX A.
Proposition for the Construction of a White Police Force 121
APPENDIX B.
Evidence given by Witness before Committee in Sydney on the Dawson murders, in 1858 122
{To evidence-given by E. N. Fi Morisset, Esquire, Commandant of Native Police Force, on the 6 th July
1861.)
APPENDIX A.
Instructions of Commandant to Officers and Camp Sergeants of Native Police 151
APPENDIX B. *
Officers Report, &c., in reference to an attack on the Blacks at Manumbar 152
LIST OF SEPARATE APPENDICES.
APPENDIX A.
Copy of a letter to the Secretary of the Board of General Education, Sydney, by W. A. Duncan,
Esquire, 22nd January, 1852 159
APPENDIX B.
Missionary success among the Aborigines—Report of meeting at Melbourne 160
APPENDIX C.
Considerations as to the means to be adopted for civilizing the Aborigines of Australia, bv Mr.
William Ridley, B.A. ... ... ... ... 168
APPENDIX D.
Letter from Dr. Challinor, M.P., to the Chairman of the Committee, containing suggestions with
regard to a Protective Force,.. ... ... 166


1861.
QUEENSLAND.
ILegtslattto
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
TAKEN BEFORE
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON
THE NATIVE POLICE FORCE,
AND THE
CONDITION OF THE ABORIGINES- GENERALLY.
FRIDAY , 3 rd MAY , 1861.
present:
.Mb. MACKENZIE, Mr. MOFFATT,
Mb, FITZSIMMONS, Mr. BLAKE NEY,
Mr. GORE, Mr. ROYDS,
Mb. WATTS, Mr. FERRBTT.
The Honorable B. EL MACKENZIE in the Chair.
C. M. FRAZER, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : Your name is Colin Frazer ? Colin Mackenzie Frazer.
2. You were in partnership with Mr. Parkinson, of Kenilworth ? Yes.
3. In the Burnett and Wide Bay district ? Yes; and on the “ Mary.”
4. You are aware that a collision took place between the Native Police and the blacks there ?
1 heard so.
6. Were you not present ? ■ No. '
6. I understood you were ? No, I was at Kenilworth at the time, about fifty miles away.
7. What distance is Kenilworth from Donald Mackenzie’s, Connandale ? About ten miles.
8. You were at Kenilworth at the time all this happened ? Yes.
9. You heard the blacks came out ? Well, I heard so ; a black boy came up from Jimbil,
and said that there had been a great noise over at Walleraine between the Native Police,
and the blacks—a great row—some had been shot.
10. Did you see any officer in command of the detachment of Native Police at that time ?
I saw him after I had heard of this affair.
11. Will you, tell us who it was ? It was Mr. Morrisett.
12. Does he command a detachment in that district ? No.
18. He was passing with horses—had he a detachment with him ? Not when he passed with
horses.; he only came then unarmed with three men.
14. Was that at the time the collision took place ? No. It was before that when I saw Mr.
Morrisett pass with horses, at Donald Mackenzie’s.
15. Nothing was going on then ? Nothing at all.
16. Did you see Mr. Murray, Lieutenant of the Native Police, up there at that time ?
No. I did not.
17. What detachment had Mr. Morrisett with him ? upon my word, I don’t
know. Mr Murray’s detachment had come over then, I believe,
18 You believe so? Yes.
19. Did Mr. Murray not come there himself? Not that I saw. •
20. What state had the blacks been in there for some time ? They had been very trouble-
some.
21. Since when? Ever since I had been there.
22. How long ago was that ? Two years ago—over two years ago.
28. Have you found them any worse lately—since the last six months ? I have—at least I
have not found them any worse, but the Bunya Bunya season coming on, they collect in
larger numbers, and are more troublesome then,
24. From


, 24. From your own knowledge, they are always more troublesome at that season ? Yes,
always.
' 25. You heard from the natives that some were killed, but are you aware of this from your
own knowledge ? Did you see any killed ? No. I neither saw, nor knew, from my own
knowledge, that any were killed; the first I heard of it was from the blacks.
26. Mr, Morrisett you say was in charge of the detachment ? Yes. He appeared to me to be
so.
27. Do you know what district he is stationed in ? No, Ido not.
28. Do you know what time he has been in the force ? Well, No—about eighteen months,
as far as I can tell; I would not be sure.
29. By Mr. Blakeney : You say that the blacks have been very troublesome ? Yes, they
have been—cutting and killing cattle.
30. Many ? It is hard to say how many, but it is the mischief they do the cattle.
31. Have you seen any speared ? Yes.
32. Several ? Yes. And slashed and cut with tomahawks.
33. Was there any hostile demonstration at any of the stations? Well, at the next station
they came up one night —the station below us—and said they would bail them up, but
they did not; they surrounded the place.
34. Can you give any information to the Committee with regard to any demonstrations or
habits of the blacks ? Well, I can’t give any information as to their habits or
demonstrations. ±
35. Do you know of any of the whites being killed, or of the blacks by the Native Police or
settlers ? Not up there, I have never known of a white man being killed up there at all.
36. Or of a black ? Not by Native Police.
37. No ; but have you known of any cases at all of whites being killed by blacks, or of blacks
being killed by whites ? No, not up there.
38. By Mr. G-ore : You have mentioned the Bunya Bunya season ? Yes.
39. Can you of your own knowledge give any information with respect to the habits of the
blacks at that season ? They collect together to feed on the Bunya Bunya, and to fight
among themselves, and when a large mob get together like that, if there are any cattle,
they generally go and rush them.
40. You don’t know anything of your own knowledge with respect to their cannibalism at
that time ? Not of my own knowledge, except what the blacks have told me.
41. What have they told you ? They have told me that very often if they can’t get cattle,
or don’t happen to have any other food, they will kill one of their tribe and eat him. They
generally kill a black gin; that is what they have told me.
42. Have you any reason to believe that is correct ? I think so. I think it is very likely.
43. Have you ever heard that they kill children ? Yes.
44. More frequently than grown up people ? I could not say that—whether more frequently
than grown up people or not.
45. Then, in fact, you have no doubt that the practice of cannibalism prevails ? I have not
the slightest doubt in my own mind.
46. Do you know how they select a particular individual ? Well, he is selected by a few ;
they pitch upon him, and on the first opportunity they get him off his guard, and knock
him on the head. They occasionally eat those killed in their fights, but not as a general
rule.
47. What is the number of the blacks that collect at the Bunya Bunya ? Well, I have seen
myself between 500 and 600 in one mob.
48. Do you think that if they came on a white man—or that if a white man came on them
unarmed ? I think that if a mob of blaks came on a white man unarmed, he would
stand a poor chance.
49. Do you think they would kill him ? They would be nearly sure to do so.
50. With a view to eating him? No; I don’t think they would eat him. They don’t
like whites.
WEDNESDAY , 8 th MAY, 1861.
sreomt:
Mr. MACKENZIE, Mr. ROYDS,
Mr. WATTS, Mr. MOFEATT,
Mr. GORE, Mr. FITZSIMMONS,
Mr. FERRET, Mr. BLAKENEY.
The R. MACKENZIE, in the Chair.
Dr. CHALLENGE, M. P., called in and examined
>l. By the Chairman ; You are the Coroner of the Police District of Ipswich? I am.
2. I find that on thePthird and fourth of January last you instituted a Magisterial Enquiry
'at Fassifern respecting the death of some blacks, —did you hold a Magisterial, and not a
Coroner’s Inquest then, or did you on any subsequent occasion ? I held a Magisterial
Enquiry on the third of January—an enquiry commencing on the third, and adjourned to
the fourth, and subsequently to pther dates, which I can’t remember j ust now, but the date
was put to each of the depositions.
3. There


3. There was an adjourned enquiry from time to time ? Yes.
4. But did you, at the time you held the first enquiry at Fassifern, see the bodies —will
you explain why you did not hold an inquest in the regular way, instead of making a
Magisterial Enquiry ? In the first place I knew it was illegal to hold an inquest on bodies
highly putrifled. I had received information as early as the Monday preceding Christmas
Day—the day before Christmas Day—that some blacks had been shot in the paddock of Mr.
Hardie, of Fassifern,
5. You received information that the blacks had been killed at Fassifern, and you held an
enquiry into the matter, will you state what passed under your immediate knowledge on
that occasion? I took the depositions of various witnesses on oath, and when the investiga-
tion was completed, as far as I thought necessary, I transmitted the depositions, and my
comments on the evidence, to the Attorney-General.
6. You have been for some years one of the Coroners of the Colony ? Yes.
7. How many years ? Twelve years last January.
8. Have you seen much of the Native Police during that period ? No.
9. Have any of their acts been brought under your notice at any former period ? Only
those that occurred on the Friday and Monday proceeding Christmas Day.
10. You have taken great interest, I believe, in the aborigines since your arrival in the
Colony 1 I have never taken any public part in the matter that I know of, with the
exception that I supported Mr. Ridley, a Missionary to the aborigines; but lam not
aware that I have ever or written on the subject.
11. As you have mentioned Mr. Ridley’s name, can you inform the Committee how far his
efforts to civilize the blacks have been successful ? I can’t say. I believe it is Mr. Ridley’s
opinion that they are open to the influence of the Gospel, and that he merely gave up his
efforts because he did not find sufficient pecuniary support.
12. He is not here now ? lam not aware that he is.
13. Now, with regard to what occurred at Fassifern —you received certain information, and
proceeded to act upon it ? I did.
14. Will you state what you saw—what came under your own observation ? I observed
three dead blackfellows,—one of the bodies was considerably burned; two of them I
recognised as being old men, because they were grey-headed,—one in particular had a grey
beard.
15. Did you know them at all—had you ever seen them ? I did not know them.
16. There were three, I think you stated ? There were three; and the bodies were so
highly decomposed, that when we came to examine them and to turn them over, they fell
to pieces; they were lying on their backs, and when we came to move the bodies for the
purpose of examining the under surface, the parts would not hold together.
17. Did you notice any particular wounds in the bodies of these blacks? The skulls of
two of them had been fractured, and there were what appeared to be bullet wounds on the
body.
18. Do you consider that the evidence brought before you was sufficiently conclusive to
warrant you in assuming that Lieutenant Wheeler was the cause of death in the case of
these blacks ? I do.
19. What was your reason for coming also to the assumption that some of the witnesses as
to the death of these blacks did not give their evidence correctly on oath ? I may be
allowed to state that that question enters into my conduct as Coroner, and I dispute the
right of the Committee to enquire into my conduct as Coroner. lam quite prepared to
defend it before a Committee empowered to do so; but I don’t think it falls within the
power of this Committee to make these enquiries; I therefore decline to answer the
question.
20. You have stated in your letter to the Attorney-General that “ the shooting of the said
blacks is now distinctly and unequivocally traced to Lieutenant Wheeler, and the detach-
ment of the Native Police under his command, on the 24th day of December last” —(vide
Appendix. Letter of Dr. Challinor -to the Honorable the Attorney-General, January
29th, 1861) —I now ask you, how have you come to that conclusion? From the
depositions—the sworn depositions.
21. The depositions now before me (referring to Report of Inquiry in the Ipswich Herald,
of 19th February, 1861) ? Those depositions are correct, I suppose; but I refer to the
original depositions.
22. I want to know how you came to the assumption that the whites on that occasion gave
false testimony—you speak (vide Appendix) of your “ information being derived
from two perfectly independent sources,” but that has nothing to do with the sworn
evidence ? I think I have stated that I came to the conclusion from the sworn depositions
which I forwarded to the Attorney-General; but, beyond that, I don’t think that this
Committee has any power to ask me any questions on this subject.
28. You have stated that it is your conviction that the evidence is strong against Lieutenant
Wheeler, and the Native Police troopers—there is nothing that I can see, in the enquiry,
with respect to any provocation given on the part of the blacks in their attack on the
station ; did you hear of any ? I did not hear of any.
24. Not of any provocation given in any way by the nativlPon that particular occasion ?
No. I did not' hear of the slightest provocation—l examined Mr. Hardie, Mr. Weniholt,
the storekeeper, and others.
25. Do you remember hearing of a ease that occurred some short time ago—two years ago
—when some men were murdered by blacks in a brutal manner in the Bay ? I remember
—I have a recollection of a party going in a boat with black fellows, and being subsequently
found murdered—if that is what you are alluding to.
26. That is what lam alluding to. Are you aware if the Government took steps to bring
the murderers to justice ? So far as my memory serves me, I believe that proceedings were
instituted.
27. Do you recollect if any remarks were made on the subject? I could not charge my
memory with any. 28. Do


28. Do you think that there was the same amount of notice taken of that case as of the
present matter of the three men at Fassifern ? I don’t know that I comprehend your
question.
29. I only wished to ask you if great notice was taken, and whether there was even any
interference of the Government., or of any one, on that occasion to bring the murderers to
justice ? I could not speak distinctly, for it happened some years ago, if I remember
rightly.
30. By Mr. Watts : Did you, in the enquiry at Fassifern, obtain any information which
will enable you to point out any one who would give evidence before this Committee to
criminate the Officers of Native Police, and the other men under his charge 1 Am lin
possession of such information ?
31. Yes, can you give us the names of any individuals who would be able to account for the
supposed murders at Fassifern ? I believe so.
32. Can you name them ? Mr. Farrington.
33. Can you give us his place of residence ? At Fassifern.
34. Would you mention any other names, Dr. Challinor, if you please ? There was a Mrs.
Jane Bray; she saw the whole of the Native Police at the blacks’ camps.
35. Were there any other parties ? I have some memoranda, at home, which might enable
me to give other names.
36. Mr. Turbayne? I don’t think that Mr. Turbayne can give any, information; I
can’t speak as to the extent of his knowledge, but I believe he |ps not present on the station
at the time the blacks were shot; he was there the following day, but not on that day.
37. Did you see the whole of the three blacks lying dead at Fassifern yourself? I saw
the three blacks; they were all highly decomposed, but one was considerably charred, and
consumed (by fire.)
38. From the appearance of the bodies were you led to believe that they were shot, or do
you think, from the wounds in the heads, or whatever appeared on the bodies, that they
could have died from other causes ? I believe that they could not have died from any other
cause than from injuries inflicted by bullets.
39. From gun-shot wounds ? From gun-shot wounds.
40. Was any one present with you at the time you viewed the bodies ? Mr. Balbi was
with me. I received information that his black knew where the bodies were, and I called
at Mr. Balbi’s for the black to act as a guide, and to request that Mr. Balbi would come
with me as interpreter between us, and that he might direct me to the spot.
41. Can you give any information to the Committee as to what brought the Native Police
that came on to the station at Fassifern ? Mr. Hardie stated in evidence that he had been
speaking to his neighbours—among others I am not certain whether he referred to Mr.
Lester, but to some of his neighbours, and that they recommended him to send for the
Native Police; and I think it appears in Mr. Hardie’s evidence that Mr. Wheeler had been
informed at Coochin that Mr. Hardie wanted to see him to disperse the blacks; I think
you will find it in Mr. Hardie’s evidence.
42. Do you know whether the blacks at any time had been committing any depredations in
that neighbourhood ? I put it to some of the witnesses, and all that I heard was that
some time ago the blacks had been killing bullocks up at Mr. Carden Collins’s station, a
long time ago. You will see that in Mrs. Bray’s evidence ; and also that just previously some
shepherd’s hut had been robbed of a fig of tobacco and a blanket—that I think is in Mrs.
Bray’s evidence; but I know I did not hear anything more, except that Mr. Hardie stated
that some eighteen months ago one of them had committed a rape on a girl. I also think
that Mr. Hardie said that they had been killing his bullocks right and left, or that they had
been chasing them. He also stated that the blacks’ dogs had been chasing the horses in
the paddocks I know that I did not hear anything more that I can remember.
43. Can you give us any information as to the present state or condition of the natives ? I
don’t know that I exactly comprehend that question.
44. I want to know whether you have any knowledge of their habits and pursuits—of course
I want to know your general opinion of the blacks, and what can be done to ameliorate their
present position ? I think that they ought to be entitled to hunt game on the runs on which
they have always done so. I think they should be allowed to procure food on the grounds on
which they have been accustomed to procure it ; to hunt and fish, unless the Government, in
lieu of that, gave them some compensation in the way of food. I say this, because I could
produce evidence of cases in which I know that quiet blacks have been molested when fishing,
and also when they have been camped on alienated land. In the latter instance their dogs
were shot, and blankets and opossum rugs collected and burnt; in the former, they were
fishing in the Bandamba Lagoon, and were chased away by- dogs and by a man or men on
horseback, with stock-whips. Ido not state this on my personal knowledge, but I have it
from persons who observed the circumstance ; I rode fifteen miles to ascertain the correctness
of the account in relation to the fishing from a person who saw the occurrence, and forwarded
that information to the Sydney Government.
45. By the Chairman : With reference to a former question I put as- to- whether you bad
taken a great interest in since your arrival in the Colony, you said you had
not ? I understood you to askilhether I had interested myself in the matter by speaking at
public meetings or writing on the subject. I have not done so, hut I have personally taken an
interest in the condition of the blacks.*
46. By Mr. Gore ; You stated, Dr. Challinor, in evidence, that it was highly irregular to hold
an inquest on bodies that were decomposed, may I ask your authority for that statement ?
I am prepared to produce my authority when it is requisite to do so.
47. Ypu decline to do so now ? Yes, I do, because Ido not think it is within the power of
* I spoke only from memory at the time. On reflection, I remember that I spoke at a public meeting,
held in Ipswich, for the purpose of establishing a Mission to the aborigines, and on other occasions I may
incidental!'’ have alluded to the wrongs inflicted upon the aborigines by white people.
the


the Committee to enquire into the matter. I am quite prepared to prove my opinion to be
correct.
48. Where have you resided —I think you said that you had been twelve years in the Colony
—in Ipswich ? Entirely in Ipswich.
49. Have you never been any distance from Ipswich ? I have been as far as Mr. Carden
Collins’s station.
50. Have you not been beyond fifty or sixty miles beyond Ipswich ? I think not beyond
sixty miles.
51. Have you been frequently in the habit of going that distance from Ipswich ? I have been
several times.
52. Do you know anything of the customs of the blacks ? I can’t say that I know their
customs from my personal knowledge. I think I have seen a corroboree, or something of that
kind, but of their personal habits I have no knowledge of my own.
53. Have you associated with them in any way ? I have been often with them, hut I have
never been brought into contact with them—not in the bush.
54. You are aware that the object of one branch of our enquiry is to ascertain what are the
habits and customs of the blacks, and whether there is anything to be done in ameliorating
their condition ? Yes.
55. To look to the whole of their habits and customs —of course, before we can do anything
to ameliorate their condition, we must know what it actually is—you are aware" that it is so ?
I think it would he desirable that the Committee should know what their habits are.
56. Do you consider yourself • competent to make any suggestions, from your knowledge of the
habits of the blacks ? - Only that they should be allowed to procure food in the way they have
been accustomed to do, or that the Government should find them some compensation.
57. Has it come to your knowledge that the blacks are prevented from hunting where they
are accustomed ? I have heard it.
58. You don’t know it from your own knowledge ? I know they have been hunted off one
station.
59. You are aware of this from your own knowledge ? Not from my personal knowledge.
I have stated that I made enquiries with regard to their being hunted off one station, and
went fifteen miles for that purpose.
60. And heard the story from a person who saw the occurrence ? Who said that he saw it.
I will give his name—the name, to the best of my recollection, was Carroll. I don’t know
what he is now, he was shepherding then on one of the Peak Mountain stations—at the
Molly Margorum station. The other name is Owen Daly.
61. And who is Owen Daly? He is a freeholder on the Bnndamba. He came to inform me
as a Magistrate; and to enquire what ought to be done.
62. By the Chaikman : How long since was it that Carroll gave you that information ? It
was about the time that Mr. John Hay was Secretary for Lands and Public Works.
63. By Mr. Goke ; Are you not aware that life is unsafe all along the coast to the north and
south of the Bay ? I believe there is required for the preservation of life there.
64. Do you mean white life ? White life,
65. You refer to the country generally to the north and south of the Bay ? I know it from
report only, not from my personal knowledge.
66. Your personal knowledge on the subject is very little ? Very little.
67. You are, in short, as far as personal knowledge goes, not a very trustworthy authority as
to the general condition of the blacks ? I have formed my opinions of their condition from
what I have heard.
68. Were not the Native Police, on the occasion mentioned to-day, engaged in executing
warrants ? Not on any of the parties shot, that I have heard of.
69. Do you know of your own knowledge that the Native Police were not engaged in pursuing
offenders of that tribe then about ? Not of my own knowledge.
70. Have you any reason to believe that they were not executing warrants ? I have no
personal knowledge—that is, as to their executing warrants at the time the aborigines were
shot-
-71. Are you not aware that" the blacks occasionally congregate in very large numbers ? I have
seen it so in Ipswich.
72. And have you not reason to believe that they congregate elsewhere in large numbers ? I
have heard so from other reports.
73. Have you no reason to believe that they had not congregated in large numbers at
Eassifern on the occasion referred to ? From what I heard stated, I believe they were there
in large numbers.
74. And have you not had reason to believe that these congregations of blacks frequently
commit outrages ? I can’t say from my own personal knowledge.
75. It is only supposed so ? 1 have heard it stated that in the far districts, when they have
congregated in large numbers, they have committed serious depredations.
76. Have you never heard it stated that they do so to the north and south of the Bay? I
consider those out-districts.
77. Were there not a rape and an atrocious murder committed within four or five miles of
Brisbane by a black —comparatively civilized ? I heard from the public reports that a German
woman had been murdered and robbed, but Jj, was not aware that a rape had been committed.
78. You said murdered and robbed ? That 1 knew from report.
79. Are you not aware that a warrant was out for that man, and that he was not taken ? I
believe so. I myself issued a warrant for a blackfellow, for killing a gin, on an inquest
I held.
80.. Were there not two comparatively civilized black boys executed for atrocious rapes, on
German women ? I believe I was one of the Committing Magistrates.
81. That is within your Own knowledge ? Yes.
82. Was there not a rape, or violent assault, committed by-blacks between here and Fortitude
Valley


Valley, within the last two or three years? I could not speak positively on the subject, but
that brings to my mind an attempt to commit rape, which comes within my own knowledge,
in the neighbourhood of Ipswich.
83. Then it is within your knowledge that the blacks do occasionally commit rape ? I believe
it to be so—such cases have occasionally come before me.
84. By the Chairman :Do you recollect some three or four years ago—say four—a black
being committed to take his trial for rape, by the name of Basket, and his being committed to
Sydney Gaol; do you also recollect that this man was sent back from Sydney with a ticket-
of-leave for Ipswich ? I can't say that I remember anything about that rape or the ticket-of-
leave, but I remember an aboriginal of the name of Basket being tried for breaking into a
Chinaman’s hut. I may say that with regard to larceny among the blacks, I have seen
several cases about Ipswich.
APPENDIX TO DR. CHALLINOR’S EVIDENCE.
January 29th, 1861.
She,
In transmitting you the proceedings of the Magisterial Enquiry respecting the
death of the three aboriginals, who were lying dead in the scrub, adjoining the head station,
Fassifern, on the 3rd and 4th days of January instant, it is my duty to state that the evidence
of Mrs. Hardie did not correspond with the information I received respecting the extent of
her knowledge in reference to the death of the said aboriginals. My information was derived
from two perfectly independent sources, and the information from these distinct sources was
substantially the same. Mr. Hardie’s statement about the blackfellow he saw dead, looking
as if he had been killed “by a heavy-metalled vvaddy,” the fighting of blackfellows with
each other, and the blacks’ dogs chasing the horses in the paddocks, are of a piece with the
denial of any blacks having been shot on Fassifern station. The story about the rape
committed on the daughter of one of the shepherds by two blackfellows eighteen months ago,
may or may not be true : but after the false statement he made respecting the shooting of the
aboriginals on the 24th of December last, I should hesitate to believe it on his testimony
alone. Moreover, when I questioned him on the 12th instant about the service of the first
summons I sent to James Bennett, he distinctly told me, as he had told Constable Carson on
the 10th instant, that he was not then in his employment, for he had discharged him. Yet,
from Bennett’s own statement, he had been unremittingly attending a flock of sheep, which
Mr. Hardie put under his care on the 26th or 27th of December last, till he was relieved on
the 25th instant, that he might appear before me on the following day. I shall be able to
produce additional evidence, if required ; but as the„shooting of the said blacks is now distinctly
and unequivocally traced to Lieutenant Wheeler and the detachment of the Native Police under
his command, on the 24th day of December last, it appeared to me that I might close the
present enquiry. As no committal can take place under this enquiry, but the evidence will
have to be re-taken before the persons implicated, I venture respectfully to request that this
important case may not be left to be conducted by non-professional men. The Nelson referred
to in Farrington’s evidence is not the Nelson against whom there is a warrant out for
murdering the German woman on her road to Brisbane from the Logan.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
HENRY CHALLINOR, J. P.
To the Honorable the Attorney-General,
Brisbane.
JACOB LOWE, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman ; You are a squatter of some years’ standing, I believe? Yes.
2. Of how many years ? I have been a squatter since 1846, I think.
o. As an outside squatter, have you had to go into outside country, among the blacks ?
Yes.
4. Forming stations ? Yes.
5. You were engaged in that pursuit before the establishment of the Native Police
Force ? Yes.
6. At that time were squatters left to protect themselves ? Before that time, I may say
they were.
7. Do you consider that the relations between the squatters and the natives—the abori-
gines—have been improved by the establishment of the Native Police, and by the old system
of leaving the squatters to protect themselves being done away with ? I do.
8. Do you consider that it has been a gi’eat improvement? Decidedly.
9. Were you in the same part of the country where your station now is, when the Native
Police first came up? Yes, on the Macintyro.
10. What was the state of matters between the squatters and the natives ? The state of
matters between the squatters and the blacks was as bad as could be previous to that time.
The settlors were all driven away by force from their stations, and when I came up, in 1846,
I was only taking up runs from which the settlers bad been driven by the natives, and which
had been abandoned
11 What


11. What is the state of that part of the country now? At the present day there are no
blacks to disturb the settlers in any shape whatever. There are none now.
12. In your experience has it been the case, or otherwise, that squatters are always willing
to live on amicable terms with the natives, if they will allow them ? I have never known
it, in one instance, otherwise. The squatter is too glad to live on friendly terms with the
natives.
13. You have, no doubt, heard, at different times, charges of gross cruelty towards the
natives brought against the squatters through the press, and letters addressed to the Govern-
ment? Yes.
14. From your knowledge of these matters, which must be considered extensive, do you
believe that these cases ever occur at all ? They have never occurred to my knowdedge.
15. Do you not, at any rate, think that the cases have been greatly exaggerated ? Yes,
they have been very much exaggerated.
16. You have never to your knowledge been engaged in, or known of any of your friends,
driving blacks into stock-yards, and massacreing them by the hundred, as has been stated ?
We have never heard of such a thing in our part of the country, and the blacks are wilder
there than anywhere else : there were more murders committed by the blacks there than
anywhere else.
17. Nothing has been done, then, except in protecting the runs and property of the set-
tlers ? We only went after the blacks when our property was driven away, or they attempted
to attack us in our huts. If the Committee will allow me, I can give an instance of our
provocation.
IS. Did the blacks ever attack you in your huts? Yes.
19. Will you state the circumstances ? I brought a draught of cattle from Gwydir to
Borrongo, on the Maeintyre. The cattle were herded for six months, and were then turned
out. About three weeks after we could not find them at the usual place, and, on going to
the camp, we got seventy-five carcases. We followed the blacks on that occasion, and
punished them for this slaughter of our property.
20. Were the cattle speared ? They were all destroyed—speared—the whole of them,
21. You saw the spear marks ? Oh yes ; the spears were in them mostly.
22. What amount of stock was injured independent of the seventy-five killed—at what did you
estimate your entire loss? We never ascertained that. Perhaps one-half or a fourth went
away as much damaged as those they slaughtered. Those mentioned were only those killed
on. the spot; very likely as many more ran away, and died in the scrub.
23. What parts of the bodies were taken away ? There was not one of them broken, ex-
cept two Hereford heifers, who had very rich coloured coats. They stuck the hearts of these
on two poles, facing each other, as gateway posts.
24. Then this cattle was destroyed by the blacks, not for the purpose of food, but just as a
wanton outrage on your property ? Yes. To drive us away out of the district—to frighten
us.
25. Have any instances come under your knowledge of flocks of sheep being driven away
by the blacks ? No j to the best of my recollection, there have been none.
26. Were depredations by the blacks a frequent occurrence on your station, or in your neigh-
bourhood ? They occurred almost every day till we got the Police to that very spot from the
Murray. Ours was the first point the Police came to when they were ordered from the Murray
27. Do you consider that soon after the arrival of the Police in that quarter matters as-
sumed a different aspect ? Yes. We immediately derived benefit from their presence.
28. Do you consider them a useful force ? I do.
29. Do you consider them at the present time in an efficient state ? Yes, I do.
30. Do you hear of many murders being committed, through the press ? Only in that
way.
31. I don’t mean of blacks by the whites, but of whites by the natives ? No.
32. Are these instances rai’e ? Very rare now.
33. Do you attribute this to the efficiency of the Native Police ? I do.
84. You think that it res a Its entirely from the fear the blacks have of being followed
and destroyed ? I can’t suppose anything else.
35. You have, of course, seen the Native Police frequently ; —have you ever been out with
them on any occasion ? No; I have never been out with them,
36. Prom your knowledge of the force, do you consider that.it insufficiently officered, gene
rally speaking ? lam afraid that it is there the error lies.
37. From your own knowledge of the Native Police, do you consider that the detachments
are under proper control of their officers when they come into collision with the wild tribes ?
I could not answer for that unless I knew the officers; I believe a great deal of the efficiency
of the force depends upon the way in which it is officered.
38. But no instance has come under your direct knowledge where, in the case of a collision
with the natives, the Police force has been found to be not under proper control of its
officers ? No.
39. Have any instances of wanton cruelty towards the aborigines by the Native Police
force ? No, not one,
40. Seeing that the condition of the aborigines is so much improved at this day from what
it u-<ed to be, do you think that that condition could be further improved ? The condition
of the blacks in general ?
41. In general ? Not much.
42. There is no attempt made now on the part of the settlers to drive the blacks from their
hunting grounds, or to prevent their getting as much game as they choose ? No, not when
they are quiet.
43. And hold them for hunting and fishing, and so forth ? Yes.
44. Could you offer any suggestions by which you think that the condition of the blacks
might be improved—that might be advantageous both to the blacks and the whites ? I
don’t think 1 could I have tried to induce them to conic in, but they will not come unless
they


they please; they are very ungrateful, generally speaking, and leave at a moment’s notice,
and go away on their own pursuits. I have talked to them about religion and one thing
and another, and those that I have had for fifteen years about, have as much notion of these
matters as they had the first day they came to me.
45. You have taken some trouble with them ? Yes, I have talked to them in the manner
described.
46. Do you consider it possible to inure them to labour in any way —do you find that they
continue as shepherds, stockmen, or bullock-drivers for any time ? I have two now shep-
herding for me, who have fattened wethers for me, which I have sold at 14s. a-head on the
station.
47. Do they stick steadily to that kind of work? No. You can’t depend on them.*
4b. There is no instance in which you can depend on them ? No. They will go off at the
very time you want to gather cattle, if there is a corroboree or any other gathering of the
blacks.
49. Do you think that any extensive efforts to utilize them in this way would be suc-
cessful at all ? I don’t think they would. I don’t think that any plan could be devised
which would afford better opportunities than the squatter's have of bringing them into a
state of civilization.
50. You are awar ■ that missions to try and civilize them were established in New South
Wales, and on the shores of More ton Bay ? Yes.
51. Are you aware whether these missions were successful ? I don’t know about the
Mure ton Bay Mission; but, as regards the one near Sydney, on the South Creek Road to
Windsor, at Blacktown, I have seen blacks educated there take to the bush.
52. Do you speak from your personal knowledge ? Yes. I have met with blacks
educated at the School—who have told me that they were educated at that school—and I have
found them hunting on the Bulgoa Mountains in a wild state.
53. Your opinion is, then, that no attempt to civilize them would be useful ? Yes. I have
known other case? where a gentleman tried to civilise blacks, and they have all gone back
to the bush.
54. Have you heard of such attempts being successful in other Colonies ? No.
55. By Mr. Watts; Before the establishment of the Native Police, had many whites
been killed in your neighbourhood ? A great many. I think, if a circuit of thirty-five
miles round were taken, there would be found to have been fifteen or sixteen killed within
the last eighteen years.
56. Do you remember a settler of the name of ‘ Marks ’on the Maclntyre ? Yes.
57. Do you remember the case of the blacks attacking his place, and killing his son ? Yes.
58 Can you give the Committee any information on the subject ? He was shepherding
at the time
59. Was he a boy ? A boy of about seven or eight years. His father kept him shepherd-
ing while he went to dinner, and when he came back, the boy was missing; a search was
made, and they could not find the boy : they then got some of the neighbours, and found
the boy cut up in pieces, and put into hollow parts of the trees —that happened about
eighteen miles from my place.
60. Do you remember, somewhere about the same period, the natives attacking his (Mr.
Marks’) teams, and taking all the provisions, stores, and everything they could get ? I
remember that about twelve months after, the blacks attacked a bullock-team of his, and
killed the bullock-driver, and speared some of the bullocks, I believe.
61. Did they not kill one of the bullocks ? I think so ;I am not positive I think I
was on the Macintyre at the time.
62. And took away all the stores off that dray ? lam not positive about that. Another
case is that of ‘ Miunemy ’; it was then in the possession of Charles Abercrombie, who was
an immigrant of a very quiet and unobtrusive disposition. The blacks came up, and got
him to cut the hair of one of them; they asked him to get a pair of scissors, and cut the
man’s hair; while he was in the act of doing that, another came up and sent a tomahawk
into his head, and killed him dead on the spot.
63. Don’t you think this a treacherous race, and one not to be trusted? Yes. I could
give a hundred instances of it.
64. Then you think they often commit murders and depredations without any provocation
on the part of the whites ? Itpcidcdly so. So far as any one can know, all provocations
come from them, and have come for years; as far as I know, neither I nor any one I
know has ever given them any provocation.
65. Do you think any amount of confidence will attach them to you? In some instances
I found that they seemed to be alive to it, and at other times it would go off again ; you
could never depend entirely upon the blacks ; you can never win their affections to you, so
as to trust them like any other individualf
66. Do you think that by keeping them in a state of dread that you may depend on them ?
My opinion is that the only reason for their being in a state of subordination is to be found
in their dread for a white man; it is not respect or love, but fear.
67. Do you know of any natives in your neighbourhood ever having received an education ?
Yes, I think I know of one, Billy Bird, christened by Mr. Threlkeld, and married to «
white woman by Mr. Glennie, up at Toowoomba.
68. What has been the result of that marriage on the black ? I should be very sorry to
trust him as far as I could throw him.
•* I have three boys, two of whom have been upwards of twelve years in my employ as slock-keepers,
and for the general purposes of stock-keeping. I find them to he very useful, but even these, at any
gathering of the hush blacks, must be allowed to attend such meetings, whatever work r may have on
hand.
f I have given a blackfcllow his breakfast for bringing up a horse in the morning—this was considered
a reclaimed black—at twelve o’clock of the same day I have come upon him hunting my cattle with
speers, for the purpose of slaughtering them, and that within three miles of the head station.
69. Docs


<39. Does his wife livc'with him ? Yes, she does.
70. Docs he seem to live happily with his wife, and his wife with him? Well, I am not
able to answer you that. I don’t know.
71. Have they any children ? Yes.
72. Do you remember Captain Dumarosque forming a station on the Maclntyre Brook ?
I.think that was before I came out here, but I have heard it stated.
73. You don’t remember a man of the name of Kemp residing on that station? No,
I don’t.
74. By Mr. Gore ; You have said that now, since the arrival of the Native Police, there
are no blacks to hunt, do you mean to say that there are no blacks at all, or that they do
no harm—-you don’t mean to say that the blacks have been destroyed by the Native Police ?
Decidedly not.
75. Are they much diminished in number ? They were at the time the Black Police came
among them; of course we went out, and met them, and killed a good number.
76. But there are still a great number of blacks ? There are.
77. Were they destroyed by you in defence of your property—shot in battle in short ? Yes.
78. Have you ever seen the Black Police engaged with the natives ? No.
79. Do you know how they follow the blacks through the scrub ? I only know from what
I hear ; I have never been with them.
80. Have you reason to believe that they follow the blacks through the bush efficiently ?
Yes. _
81. Can a white man follow them so ? I don’t think so; my informants are Mr. Marshall
and Mr. Pulford.
82. Have you ever had occasion, with other white men, to attack them in the bush ? No.
83. Did you ever attempt to do so ? No.
84. Could you do any good with them (white men) in a scrub ? Yery little.
85. You would be confined in the means of attacking them ? Yes. In the first place you
could not go with horses, or take any horses with you; you must, therefore, leave them.
83. You have mentioned that you could not depend on the blacks, because they are used
to go to borees and corroborees ? Yes. The blacks cannot be depended on, because they
want to go off at a certain time, without reference to your wants —they are not the same
as other servants.
87. Do you know what takes place at the borees ? I have not the slightest idea; I don’t
think any white man has. They have certain regulations among themselves as to how they
shall act, I believe; still there are a great many things that we know nothing about.
88. Don’t you believe that mischief is often concerted there ? Yes.
89. Have you reason to believe that unnatural offences are committed at the borees ? I
have never heard that before; I think that almost the reverse of that is the case—l think
they are very particular.
90. Would you propose, in any plan for improving the state of the blacks, to put a stop to
the borees ? Yes; if it could be done, I think it would be a very great improvement,
because it draws them to one spot, and there they devise mischief.
91. One of your principal objections—at least, one of the principal difficulties yau stated
as existing in turning the blacks to some purpose, was that they can’t really stick in one
place—don’t you think that, if these borees were put down, there would be a much greater
tendency among the blacks to remain on the stations ? I think, if they were put down
altogether, there would be no inducement for them to leave, on the grounds of attending
■these meetings.
92. Do you believe that the young blacks in many instances are compelled to attend
these borees ? Yes. The black boys are compelled to attend.
93. By the Chairman : You are aware that some years ago the Native Police were
disbanded, or a large portion of them were disbanded ? I heard so.
94. Do you know the cause ? I could not tell exactly. I can’t say I could tell the real
cause. I believe that the force did not give satisfaction.
95. Was it not immediately after the force was disbanded that the outrages took place
on the Upper Dawson and elsewhere? Well, my particular attention was not drawn to the
matter; I heard of the outrages, and of the disbandment of the police, but I could not
speak positively as to dates.
96. Would you consider it a wise measure to adopt at the present time to make any
reduction of the force—to disband it—turning lose among the natives trained troopers 1 I
think that it would be a very unwise act.
97. By Mr. Ferrett : You stated just now that the blacks used to spear and mutilate
cattle on your run; did you ever know of their killing cattle, and taking only the tongues
from them ? Yes, and the fat too.*
98. Do you suppose that they kill the cattle wantonly, or from want of food? From a
wanton disposition.
99. You alluded just now to the depredations committed at Mr. Marks’s station; do you
know whether, previously to their killing his son, he had been kind to the blacks ? Well,
it is supposed that he had been anything but kind to them, but I don’t know myself.
100. Do you know anything in particular with regard to the customs, manners, and usages
of the blacks in your part of the country ? Well, I should like you to specify your
meaning.
* I have heard from my neighbours of blacks coming to the’r but with the kidney fat of a slaughtered
bullock stuck on one of the spears, when they called to, the parties belonging to the station that they
would give them a share of what they had helped themselves to —that they were not like the whites
themselves—greedy.
101. Do


101. Do you know if they are cannibals or not ? No, Ido not
102. Do you know that they carry about their dead for a considerable time ? Yes. The
gins carry their own offspring occasionally for twelve mouths after they are dead.
103. Have you no idea for what purpose they carry their dead ? No.
101. Do you know that, for a certain time after death, the bodies are carried about, and
that the males of the tribe dip their fingers in portions of their bodies and suck them ?
I don't believe anything of the kind.
105. By Mr. Royds; Would it be an advantage to the blacks themselves if the squatters
were left to defend themselves, instead of having the Native Police to defend them ? Well,
1 don’t know; it would depend on what kind of whites would be after them.
106. I mean on outside stations, where the blacks are inimical to the whites, would more
blacks be destroyed by the whites, if they had to defend themselves, than there are killed
by the Native Police? There would be more bloodshed, if the whites were allowed to have
their own way in punishing the blacks.
107. Would it be possble to establish a force of white troopers with a few black trackers
equal or superior to the present Native Police Force ? I don’t think you could get white
men to answer the purpose at all. I don’t think the Force would be as efficient.
108. By Mr. Blakeney : In the commencement of your examination you seemed to take
exception to the way in which the Force was officered—does that objection still exist ? I
fear it does, to some extent.
109. Does it'to your own knowledge ? I don’t know anything of the officers of my own
knowledge.
110. Are there any Native Police in your district ? No. But I have seen officers whom
I have considered too young to be put at the head of troops—boys almost, fresh from
school. I don’t believe that any Company can do well under such officers as these. I saw
Mr. King at Callandoon sometime ago.
111. He is not in the Force now ? No, not now. I should say that he was too young and
inexperienced to be at the head of a portion of the Force. The officers ought to be
experienced men. If there were such, we should have no more talk about the Black Force
being inefficient or profitless.
112. When have you last seen any of the Native Police officers ? Well, I had at my place
not long ago Mr. Walker, from Maranoa.
113. He is not too young? No. If the officers were all like him, I should say that the
Force was well supplied with officers.
114. By Mr. Moeeatt: At the time you knew the Force, was it well officered ? Yes, it
was.
115. Do you know if there are any officers in the Force now that you knew then ? No, I
don’t believe there is one of them. They were all experienced men.
116. What description of men were they? You mean the officers —They Were men that
knew the dispositions of the blacks, their habits, and so forth, and to a certain extent could
speak their language ; they had been residents among them for years.
117. Do you consider the Native Police a severe service for men to be employed in ? Yes,
If a man does his duty it is a very severe service.
118. And does it tell on the condition of the men ? Yes, undoubtedly.
119. They are subject to exposure to all sorts of weather? Yes. When they are on an
expedition they must follow it out, or they would do more harm than good ; they must
follow it out so as to be of any benefit to the place they are looking after.
120. Men such as you have alluded to are not in the Force now ? That I don’t know; but I
think if it were as well officered as it used to be, there would be less complaint. Unless the
officers are experienced men, and such as know something of a bush life, we shall never
derive the benefit from the Native Police Force that we might.
121. Do you think the Force would be a valuable protection to life and property if it were
well officered ? Yes.
122. Supposing this Force were disbanded, and you went out to take up new country, would
you go with the same confidence ? Decidedly not.
123. It would cause you to have a larger outfit of men to protect yourself? Yes, because
I should have to be prepared to meet the blacks, if the Force were not there.
124. Do you think that any measure could be enacted to prevent blacks from roaming about
as they like ? I think if a law could be obtained to prevent blacks from assembling on the
borders, that it would tend greatly to prevent mischief.
125. Do you think they could be prevented by any law ? Thus far, —the officers over
a company should be allowed to go, when they heard of the blacks assembling, and tell
them that they must not assemble, or else treat them with powder and shot, —the same as I
would do myself.
126. The blacks are not increasing on the Macintyre,—from your own observation, do you
find that, since they have been more civilized, they have been increasing or decreasing in
numbers—has civilization the effect of increasing or decreasing the numbers of the blacks,
or of ameliorating their condition ? Looking to the whole country, from Maitland to the
Macintyre, I find that the blacks die out, as the white population increases. On the
Gwydir now, where I have seen, twenty years ago, 150 blacks, I don’t suppose that 50
could be mustered within fifty miles round.
127. And on your own station—have you observed much decrease in your own locality?
Vos, there are three dying out for one coming in.
128. How do you account for that decrease ? Well, I could not account for it. Some say
that it is from their connection with the whites.
129. Do you think they acquire our good, or bad, habits, —which do you think they
acquire


acquire ? In some instances they do, and in most they don’t, acquire our habits, but I
don’t’think that that prevents them from increasing,—that could not be asserted as a cause.
130. You have heard one cause of their decreasing in numbers? It is generally supposed
that the gins are so common that they don’t breed.
131. Are there any diseases common to the blacks up there 1 No, not any peculiar
diseases.
132. Have you ever known them afflicted at certain times with influenza, or any other
epidemic ? In winter many die away from cold and bad living ; they are not able to look
out for food so well then.
133. Do you think that they are more susceptible to changes in the weather, since the
white man came among them ? Decidedly I do.
134. Do you think that the appointment of the officers of the Force should be made by the
Commandant, or the Ministers of the Crown ? It is a difficult question for me to answer.
135. Those very officers that you were talking about as being so efficient were appointed by
the Commandant 1 Mr. Walker appointed Mr. Marshall and Mr. Pulford; he had the
appointment of some others, and he appointed those because he thought they would suit
the purpose they were appointed for. In my own mind I think it would be as well that
the Commandant should have the appointment, because in all instances he would take care
that no one was put to act under him, unless he were an efficient and well-qualified party;
whereas, perhaps, if the appointments were made by the Government, they would not know
as well what were the requirements of the service.
13G. By the Chairman : You have been speaking of the officers first appointed, and to
their efficiency, what was the characters of those officers generally. They were both
squatters.
137. No, no; what was their character while officers of the Native Police? First-
rate.
138. You are not aware that cither of them was addicted to drinking,—you mentioned
Mr. Fulford, are you aware that while Mr. Fulford was an officer of the Native Police
Force, he was addicted to habits of intemperance, and in the habit of remaining on the
spree, as it is commonly called, at squatters’ stations ? I heard so afterwards; but when he
was appointed I don’t think any one knew that he had those habits.
139. Do you know Mr. Irving ? No.
140. Do you know that he was addicted to habits of intemperance ? No.
141. Yhu are not aware that Mr. Fulford died from intemperance ? No.
1 i 2. Do you know that there has been great difficulty in providing for officers of the Native
Police ? I can only say that there ought to be plenty of officers, if they were looked
after.
143. You stated that if the officers now in the Native Police force were as efficient as
those you have been speaking of, that complaints would not be so frequent, are you not
aware that in consequence of the inefficiency of the officers a large number of the old
Police Force was disbanded 1 I believe it was.
144. Did you know Mr. Walker, the first Commandant? Yes, well.
145. Are you aware that he was addicted to habits of intemperance 1 Yes. Some years
after his appointment I heard so.
146. You are aware of the fact? Yes.
147. Speaking of the fact that it is necessary to have officers accustomed to a bush life—
since your arrival has the old Mounted Police been done away with ? I never saw any of
them.
148. Did you ever hear anything about them,-—that their officers, selected from officers of
the regiment in Sydney, turned out good bushmen—l don’t mean after blacks—after
bushrangers ? No.
ADDENDUM.
From a long experience of the habits of the blacks, I have been led to the conclusion
that they are quite unable to resist the temptation of drink, let them be ever so industrious ;
I should therefore recommend, with regard to the Native Police Force, that the troopers
should be kept exclusively to the out-lying districts, and not allowed to enter the townships;
I refer to the Native Police stationed in the thickly populated parts of the Colony,
such for instance as the East and West Moreton Districts. With regard to these districts,
perhaps, a more efficient and reliable Force would be one composed of white troopers with a
few black trackers.
THURSDAY;


THURSDAY, 9th MAY, 1861.
Present;
Mr. MACKENZIE, Mr. FEBBETT,
Mr. BLAKENEY, Mr. BOYDS,
Mr. GOBE, Mr. MOEEATT,
Mr. WATTS, Mr. EITZSIMMONS.
The Honohable il. 11., MACKENZIE in the Chain.
Dr. HBNBY CiIALLINOB, M. P., called in and further examined:-
1. By Mr. Eerrett : I understood you to say in part of your evidence yesterday that you
supported Mr. Bidley in some matter connected with the Aborigines—will you state what
those matters were ? I subscribed, I believe, ten guineas a-year towards his support as a
missionary to the Aborigines.
2. Did you take any other jteps in. reference to Mr. Bidley and his connection with the
Aborigines? I was one ofCommittee in Ipswich, and there was another in Brisbane,
appointed for the purpose of providing fur his support in that capacity.
3. In speaking of the dead blacks at Eassrfern, did I understand you to say that the skulls
of two of them were fractured ? Yes; two of them had their skulls fractured, and one
had not.
4. Did it appear to you that the skulls had been fractured by gun-shot wounds ? One of
them was considerably destroyed by the fire.
5. And what appearance did the other present ? The same appearance as the one at the
Dugandan Scrub, the front part of which was all fractured and the bones displaced, and the
exit wound could clearly be traced on the other side; I have no doubt the same cause pro
duced the wounds in each case.
0. Now you have mentioned the Dugandan Scrub, were not these blacks all at the Dugandan
Scrub ? No; there were blacks killed on two different days. On the Friday the blacks
were shot at the Dugandan Scrub, near where the road passes from the Peak Mountain
Station; that was on the Friday before Christmas Day; the other blacks were shot on the
Monday before Christmas Day. The camp at Eassifern was within sight of the head station,
and the bodies were only a few paces, one of them about 15 or 20 paces, from the edge of
the scrub.
7. How many blacks did you say were killed at both these places ? I saw four, but 1
received information that a gin had been shot the first day; 1 did not see the body, for I had
not a black to take me to the place where she was interred.
8. On which occasion was this ? On the first occasion.
9. By Mr. Gore : Was that sworn in evidence given before you? No; that was stated to
be the case by the blacks. I should have taken a black as a guide, and gone to the place,
but he was not to be found. I was taken to the spot where thd blackfcllow was interred,
and had him exhumed. •
10. By Mr. Eerrett ; Did I understand you to say that three blacks were shot in the scrub
near Eassifern ? Yes.
11. I believe I also understood you to say that, as far as you could learn, no provocation had
been given by the blacks in that locality ? Yes, at the time they were shot. There was
nothing in the evidence given before me which led me to believe that any provocation had
been given.
12. Did you not say something about huts having been pulled down and robbed, and
blankets taken away, and also that Mr.. Hardie said his bullocks had been speared and
hunted by the blacks ? Yes; but not on that day.
13. When was it that you understood Mr. Hardie had expressed a wish that the blacks
should be dispersed ? When I held the examination at the Court House, at Ipswich. I
commenced the enquiry, at Eassifern, on the 3rd or 4th of January. It was about the 7th
of January that I examined Mr. Hardie, on the day of nomination for West Moreton.
14. When was it you heard that the huts had been robbed, and that blankets and property
had been taken away ? I was only informed of it by the statements of Mrs. Bray; she told
me she had heard of it from a gin.
16. When did she tell you this ? When I took her evidence, which was two or three weeks
afterwards. I believe it referred to a report that was current a few days before the blacks
were shot.
16. When did Mr. Hardie say that his bullocks had been speared and hunted ? He said
the blacks had been collecting for some time back, and had been spearing his cattle right
and left, and that they were a great annoyance; he said he had been speaking to his neigh-
bours about them, and they had recommended him to send for Lieutenant Wheeler.
17. Did not Mr. Hardie state to you that it was on account of his bullocks having been
hunted and speared that he had sent for Lieutenant Wheeler to disperse the blacks? He
said he had been recommended to send for him. He stated that, when the Police arrived,
Lieutenant Wheeler told him he had heard at Coochin that Mr. Hardie wanted to see him.
18. Is it your opinion that the blacks should be allowed to hunt away the settlers’ stock ?
No; but I think the stocking of the country by the settlers should not be allowed to inter-
fere, with the blacks hunting game for their own sustcutation.
19. Thou


19. Then, do I understand you to say that the hunting away the settlers’ stock ought to be
a secondary consideration in dealing with this question ? I mean to say that the blacks
ought not to be at liberty wantonly to disturb the settlers’ stock, but that they ought not to
be prevented from hunting game for their own susteutation, even if the stock is disturbed
while, they are hunting.
20. By the Chairman: It was stated in evidence by one of the witnesses examined yes-
terday that a number of bullocks had been found dead with spears in them, and that no
portion of the bodies of those animals had been taken away or eaten. Now, how do you
reconcile this fact with your theory that stocking the country interferes with the sustentation
of the blacks. If the game had been scarce on account of the stock, would not the blacks
have eaten some of the flesh of the bullocks ? I have distinctly stated that I did not think
the aborigines should be allowed wantonly to disturb the settlers’ stock, much less to distroy
them.
21. But, in the case I have mentioned, they were so well off for provisions that they did
not think it worth while to cut off so much as a steak from the bullocks after they were
speared ? If they disturbed the stock wantonly they ought to be punished.
22. By Mb. Perrett : I understood you to say yesterday that you rode a considerable dis-
tance to ascertain some fact in relation to an injury inflicted upon Aboriginals, and that you
wrote to the Sydney Government about it! Yes; I ufeflte aboigt. it either to the Sydney
Government, or to Mr. Parkes, or to Mr. Jones, I forg'et’dvhieh/but I have a copy of the
correspondence somewhere. I was particularhyganxious lb say nothing that I had not
obtained from direct evidence, and my reason* flift riding so far was to see a person who was
a witness of the occurrence.
23. What induced you to go ? I had been, informed of the affair.
24. By blacks or white persons ? White persons.
25. Was that a case of shooting blacks ? No; the blacks were fishing in the Bundamba
Lagoon, and were driven from it by persons on horseback with stock-whips and dogs—that
is to say, I was told so.
26. Were any persons killed F No.
27. Did you take any evidence in this case ? No; it occurred before I was a magistrate.
28. I believe there has been something said about an affair at Coochin ? I was not aware
that there had been an affray at Coochin.
29. Were you not informed of a rumour that there had been some attack made by the
blacks there ? I heard that Mrs. Lester and Mrs. Wheeler had been attacked, and that
they had ridden over to Passifcrn ; and, I believe, a detachment of police with the Chief
Constable, were sent over, but that no traces could be found of any blacks having been
there; I believe the Chief Constable sent in a report, but I did not see it. Mr. Lester was
in town at the time.
30. By Mr. Moffatt : Was any allusion made yesterday to the affray at Dugandan ? I
was asked some questions about it, but I do not recollect what they were.
31. Do you recollect how many bodies were found there upon that occasion ? It was said
there were two, but I only found one.
32. What was the appearance presented by that body ? It was injured, evidently by gun-
shot wounds. I may say that besides those killed there were other blacks wounded.
33. Did you see them ? Yes; I attended one of them who had received a gun-shot wound.
In one case, the bullet appeared to have glanced round the rib, and come* out at the shoulder
blade, or else penetrated the chest. Another shot had fractured his finger. He had his child in
his arms when he received the wound in his chest, and the ball grazed the child’s shoulder.
That man recovered. Another elderly man, I think must have received two balls—one of
the wounds at the back of the arm, above the elbow, appeared like an exit wound; the
other wag in front, and appeared to be an entrance wound; the elbow-joint was fractured,
and the ball had traversed down the fore arm, and lodged in the palm of the hand; the
hand had come away, and the arm below the fractured part was completely dead, and would
come away also, if he lived long enough. His thighs were not thicker than my arm. lie had
scarcely any strength, and but for the sustentation afforded him by the Hospital Committee
he could never have lived so long. The last I heard of him, he was recovering, but he was
a most pitiable object.
34. Did you hear of any provocation given by those blacks ? No.
35. Or by any of the Aborigines ? One of the gins, who was said to have been carried
away, came back with her mother while I was holding the inquest, and stated that the only
reason the Native Police had for shooting the blacks was that the latter had killed sune
bullocks a long time ago at Carden Collins’ station. That was what she had been told at
the Native Police Camp, where she had been carried after the first affray on the Friday.
36. Have you made any proposition to this Committee in reference to an amelioration of
the present condition of the Natives ? No.
37. Have you any proposal to make on that subject ? I think it is desirable in the first
place that there should be some person who is conversant with their language to act as a
medium of communication between the various tribes and the Government, and to make
such explanaations as might be required. And I think the blacks should be protected in
their rights of hunting, or bo provided with some other mode of sustentation, in lieu of
their hunting grounds.
38. Do you propose that any steps should be taken to educate the young blacks as they grow
U p—do you think such a course would be advisable ? I believe them to be capable of
instruction.
39. Do you propose that any such steps should be taken by the Government ? As regards
religions instruction, I should be opposed to such a course.
' ( ’ 19. Without-


40. Without reference to religious instruction-—reading and writing for instance ? Yes,
since the Government have adopted a system of general instruction, I think the Natives
would come within its scope; but lam one of those who are of opinion that all educatiou
should be voluntary.
41. You would not coerce them in order to educate them ? No.
42. Then, would you leave them as they are, to do as they like ? There is this to be said
in favor of giving them secular education, combined with sustenlation, that it might be
considered a compensation for the hunting grounds which have been taken away from them.
Perhaps industrial schools would be the best mode of improving their position—l think
some encouragement ought to be given to them by the Government or by private individuals,
in order to civilise them, and that they should not be left to roam about in a half-naked state.
48. Are you of opinion that it would be advisable to set apart Agricultural Reserves for
them in certain parts of the Colony ? lam not prepared to submit any definite theory on
the subject, but I think some scheme ought to be devised to provide for their sustentation
if they are not allowed to hunt over the ground, and in the second place, to bring them
under the influence of education and religion. I think it comes legitimately within the
province of the Government to provide for their sustentation; their education might be
regulated by the view which the people take of the Government scheme. For my part, I
entirely object to any interference by the Government in matters of religion.
44. Are you aware that any such system has been tried ? I have heard so, but I have not
seen it myself.
45. Have you met with any natives who have been educated in this way ? I have met with
some very intelligent blacks—one of them was the nephew of a black who was shot in the
scrub at Dungandan; he was a first rate bullock driver, and I believe he was able to build
huts, and was a good workman about a station. I was also acquainted with a boy who
learnt to play chess, which, I take it, is a pretty good proof that he was not wanting in
intelligence; in fact, ho was an excellent chess player.
46. Do you think the customs of the natives ought to be interfered with, in order to make
them amenable to the British law ? Yes; in cases where life is affected. In proof of this,
1 may say that I issued a warrant for the apprehension of a blackfellow who had killed his
gin. I would make them just as amenable to the law as any one else.
47. Are you of opinion that they ought to be considered credible witnesses ? I must say,
the statements made by the blacks before me, in reference to the affair at the scrub leading
to Dugandan, were of such a nature that I could not entertain a doubt of them. I never
heard evidence given with more care, or with less exaggeration.
48. What test had you of the accuracy of that evidence ? Several of the statements were
corroborated by the evidence of other witnesses. Some of the blacks who were shot at and
wounded in the scrub were asked whether Mr. Wheeler was with his troop at the time, and
they said they had not seen him. One native gin only stated that she saw Mr. Wheeler,
and when she was made to understand that he was said to have been holding the horses of
the Native Police while they entered the scrub, she grew very angry, and was anxious to
explain that he was sitting upon his own horse, with a pistol in hie hand, at the edge of the
scrub; she was exceedingly careful in making this clearly understood.
49. Then, would you admit the testimony of blacks as evidence against Europeans where
life is concerned ? I think it ought to he given and to be taken for what it is worth—it
should he left to the jury to determine the value of the evidence. I may perhaps mention
another instance to prove that the statements of the natives may he depended upon. When
I went up to Fassifern, I called at a blacks’ camp to make enquiries, and I was told by a
Native in the camp where the bodies were; he said, amongst other things that he bad thrown
a red blanket over one of them, and that he was afraid to stop to bury him, for fear of being
shot himself. Afterwards, when the bodies were discovered, I saw this black with the red
blanket, and when the evidence was given, fhe body was clearly identified, and it was proved
that he had no blanket on when he was shot. Other instances might he cited to prove the
credibility of the blacks’ evidence. With regard to the pistol, in corroboration of the gin’s
statement, it will he seen, that when Mr. Wheeler dismounted at Fassifern, he had a pistol
in his hand—Mr. Hardie does not recollect the pistol, though he does not deny the statement;
but Farringdon distinctly swears to the pistol.
50. By the Chairman : You have stated that the evidence of a blackfellow should he
taken for what it is worth—do you think the life of a white man ought to he placed in any
danger whatever by such evidence ? I must say distinctly that I consider the life of a
black man to be quite as valuable in itself as that of a white man. I would take his
evidence, and leave it to the jury to judge of its value
51. By Mr. Gore: You have several times stated in your evidence, and have based several
of your arguments upon the statement, that the blacks were interfered with in their pursuit
of game by the white people : now, do yon seriously believe that, as a rule, anybody ever
interferes with the blacks to prevent them from hunting as much as they please—do you
state this from your own knowledge ? No; but I have no doubt from the testimony of Mr.
llidley that at some of the stations—l cannot say which—the blacks were driven from their
hunting grounds—l have no personal knowledge of the fact, but I believe it upon bis
evidence.
52. I believe you stated that you would interfere in some cases with the customs of the
Natives—cannibalism, for instance ? Yes.
58. And unnatural crimes ? Yes. I would make the blacks in everyway amenable to
British law,
54. Would you have any objection to prevent them from meeting in their borees, the
grounds where they hold their corroborecs, and commit all sorts of damnable practices ?
Would


Would you interfere with those as unlawful assemblages ? Unless they were conspiring
against white men, I don’t think they ought to be interfered with.
55. But how can you tell what they meet for—supposing they meet without any recognised
object ? There should be proof that they have met for an illegal object, otherwise Ido not
think their meetings should be prevented; but if it can be shewn that such assemblages are
injurious to the State, I should say they ought to be abolished.
56. Are you aware that white people have been prevented from trespassing on the Bundamba
Lagoon ? Yes; they are not allowed to shoot there. I have heard that people have been
prosecuted for trespassing on the Bundamba Station. With regard to the punishment of
unnatural crimes, 1 would observe that perhaps the Aborigines are not aware of the immo-
rality of the offence, and that it would come more properly under the province of a mis-
sionary to instruct them in these matters. If they are found guilty of unnatural crime or
rape against a white person, or of murder or assault among themselves, I think they ought
to be fully amenable to British law.
57. Would you interfere to prevent such practices ? I think, undoubtedly, that every
suitable means should be taken to abolish them.
68. And to disperse assemblages held for that purpose ? Yes; if it could be done without
violence.
69. By Mr. Moffatt : You stated that blacks had been driven away from the stations and
watercourses : was that in the outlying districts ? I said, upon tTffe testimony of Mr. Kidley,
that it occurred somewhere down the Named River; he was travelling through that part of
the country.
60. In reference to the amelioration of the present condition of the aborigines, what system
do you propose, by which life and property in the outlying districts would be secured ? I
am disposed to think white police with black trackers would form the most effectual means.
61. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: You mentioned a scrub near Fassifern where three blacks were
shot: was it a dense scrub ? A horseman could ride into it.
62. Do you think white troopers could ride into it? I have no doubt they could.
63. Or into any other scrub ? Ido not say that.
64. Are you not aware that the b acks when pursued always take refuge in the scrub ? I
have no doubt the scrub is one of their fastnesses.
65. Do you think that in those closely interwoven scrubs European police would be effective?
I know that British soldiers have had the same difficulties to contend with, and have over-
come them, and I cannot see why white troopers should not.
66. Have you ever seen British soldiers in scrub—how do you come to that conclusion ? I
know that British troops, when engaged with their barbarous enemies, have overcome
difficulties' of a similar description. Perhaps they would not be able to effect a capture so
instantly.
67. Would European police be able to follow the aboriginal blacks through those closely
interwoven scrubs ? Ido not think they would follow them so effectively.
68. By the Chairman : In speaking of the British soldiers and their success in th’s kind
of warfare, you must be aware of the great difficulties experienced in the Caffre war, and
also in New Zealand, from the disadvantage they were placed at in fighting the natives on
their own ground ? Yes; Rut the difficulties were chiefly overcome.
69 At an enormous cost of life and treasure ? I believe the cost of life was much greater
on the part of the natives, though the cost of treasure was heavier on the British Govern-
ment. With regard to the scrub, the trackers attached to the white police force might be
armed, and they would be able to act to a certain extent as Native Police, though they would
be fewer in number.
70. By Mr. Moffatt: What course would you pursue in punishing aggressions by blacks
on the frontier ? This has occurred to me. I think, by means of a good interpreter, able to
communicate properly with them, they should be informed that, if such depredations were
continued, they should be treated as if they were in a state of open warfare;. I think,
before retaliating upon them, some means ought to be adopted to make them acquainted
with the penalty.
71. But what steps do you propose to take in the mean time? I believe white men are to
be found who are able to make themselves understood by the blacks.
72. Can you point out anyone ? I believe Mr. Ridley could make himself understood : I
am told he is an excellent linguist, and readily acquires the language of the different tribes;
he could be employed as an interpreter. I believe there is another person in this place,
named Davis, who is conversant with the language, but I do not know him.
73. What would be the duties of the troopers? It would be their duty to punish the blacks
if they continued their depredations after having been informed of the consequences.
74. And if the blacks were not informed ? Then it would be their duty to act on the
defensive.
75. But it would be impossible to watch every station on the frontier—what course would
you pursue if a party of blacks were to commit an act of aggression, and murder your men ?
I cannot think it would be right to follow them and slaughter them promiscuously, unless
they had previously been given to understand that .such punishment would ensue.
76. You have stated that you considered they should be amenable to the law in matters
where life and property is concerned—do you not think they have an inherent knowledge
that they are committing crimes when they murder and steal property? Yes. They should
be punished, if the perpetrators of the outrage can be found.
77. But these attacks are usually made by stealth ? That is generally the case when they
are committed by white people.
78. And.


78. And what is to be done to them if they are tracked to their camp, and a portion of the
stolen property, and perhaps some of the clothes of the murdered men fortnd with them ?
I cannot think it is right, when the blacks are traced to a camp, that a promiscuous shooting
should take place, until they hare been informed that every tribe who harboured such persons
.should be held to he participators in their crime. I think it ought to be done in a different
manner.
79. And supposing in the meantime all the sheep and cattle are killed^—for we must take
an extreme as well as a moderate view of the case—would you temporise with them even if
they had committed murder? I think they ought to be placed in the same position as
white men.
80. But if you found a white man with the stolen property in his possession, would you not
shoot him ? If he attempted to escape. I know no difficulty was experienced in capturing
a black who had committed a rape near Ipswich,
81. I am speaking of the blacks on the frontier, and the protection of life and property
there : have you anything else to suggest, for I suppose you are anxious that the lives and
property of the white people should be protected as well as the others ? I think the pro-
tective force should be sufficiently powerful to prevent the commission of crime.
82 Have not murders of merchantmen by savages in different islands always been held to
be a casus belli, and have not men-of-war invariably been despatched to retaliate upon the
murderers ? I cannot say that I altogether approve of such a Course ; I would make the
authorities upon the island find out the perpetrators.
83. But there arc no authorities on the islands I speak of. I refer to islands inhabited by
savages, at which whalers may happen occasionally to touch ? There may have been such
cases, but I cannot say I approve of such a system of retaliation.
Lieutenant FREDERIC Hi WHEELER called in and examined ;
1. By the Chairman : You are an officer in the Native Police Force ? Yes.
2. How long have you been in the Force ? Four years.
3. Where have you been stationed during that period ? At Rockhampton, at Port Curtis,
and down here.
4. How long have you been down here ? Two years, —at Sandgate.
5. How many men are there in your detachment ? Eight.
6. Are they the same men you had at first 1 No, the ten men I had at first bolted; that
was at Rockhampton.
7. I refer to your present detachment? Yes, they are the same men.
8. Do you remember the affair at Coochin in December last? Nothing took place at. Coochin;
it Was near Dugan dan.
9. Were you sent for upon that occasion ? Yes, I received four or five letters from settlers
—Mr. Henderson, Mr. Compigne, Mr Hardie, and others —telling me that the blacks had
been robbing the huts, stealing the sheep, and threatening the shepherds. Mr. Compigne
had left part of his run on that account, and brought the sheep to the head station.
10. Did you go up there with your detachment ? I went up directly I received the letters
to Mr. Oompignffs station on the Logan.
11. Where is Dugandan ? On the Teviot Brook.
12. What did you do when you came from Mr. Compigne’s station? I went first to Mr.
Compigne’s, and from that to where the Albert runs into the Logan, but I did not find any
blacks there. I then went over to the sea-coast, and followed it down to Point Danger.
Finding no tracks there, I went over the mountains back again to Compigne’s, and thence
to Telemon; followed up Christmas Creek till I came underneath McPherson’s Range and
Mount Lindsay. I found the tracks underneath the ranges there, heading towards the large
Dugandan scrub, between the Ten-mile and Fifteen-mile stations. I found the blacks in the
large Dugandan scrub.
13. What did you do then ? I dispersed them.
14. How did you know they were the blacks who committed the outrages ? I followed their
tracks for a fortnight.
15. Had you any other evidence—were any of them recognized by wearing clothes or blan-
kets ? They were all naked.
Hi. How many of them were there? The camps extended for about three miles; there
were several different tribes ; they had been congregating there for some time. They usually
come down there before Christmas time; it is on the high road to Ipswich, between that
and the salt water.
17. Had you any direct evidence to shew that they were the blaeksAvho had committed the
outrages complained-of ? The shepherds at Mr. Compigno’s told me that the blacks had
come down from the Telemon side of the range.
18. Had they been by the Bunya scrub ? No.
19. Did they make any resistance ? I only dispersed the Telemon mob.
20. Not the whole of them? No, none of the others.
21. What led you to disperse the Telemon blacks ? They always do the mischief; the same
mob had been robbing Mr. Collins’s station at Telemon.
22. Were there any warrants out against those blacks ? No. Warrants are never given out
against the blacks for cattle-stealing, which is done by the whole tribe.
23. Did you recognize any of them ? It was getting dark, but I recognized two or three of
them.
24. Had you any information to prove that they were the same blacks -who rohhed Mr. Col-
lins’s station ? No, I only know from what the shepherds told me, that a certain tribe of
blacks committed the depredations, and that they had headed towards the sca-crast.
25, When


25. When yon come into contact with the blacks in that way, have you a proper control
over your troopers ? Oh, yes.
26. Do they ever get out of your sight ? Yes, when they go into the scrub; they then dis-
mount and take off their trousers.
27. Did you go into the scrub on this occasion? No, I went round the scrub to get the
Dugandan blacks away, so that they might not get shot.
28. How were you enabled to discern one portion of the blacks from the other ? They
form separate camps. Every squatter will tell you that the Telemon blacks are the blacks
who do all the mischief.
29. I wish to know upon what evidence or appearance you acted in separating the blacks,
dispersing one portion of them, and leaving the others ? The Dugandan blacks never go
over to Compigne’s; it is always the Telemon blacks; they come from Captain Collins’s
station. It was just sundown at the time, and I got a boy (Jemmy Murphy) to shew me
the different camps.
30. You say that you have proper control over your troopers—are they generally under the
proper control of their officers ? I cannot say ; I have never been out with other officers.
81. At the time of this affray the troopers were out of your sight ? Yes, they were out of
my sight for about half-an-hour.
32. Do those troopers understand English sufficiently to comprehend your orders? Oh,
yes.
33. Did you give them orders to go into the scrub ? Yes.
34. What was the nature of those orders ? I told them to surround that camp of Telemon
blacks, and to disperse them. .
35. What do you mean by dispersing? Firing at them. I gave strict orders not to shoot
any gins. It is only sometimes, when it is dark, that a gin is mistaken for a blackfellow,
or might be wounded inadvertently.
36. Do you think it is a proper thing to fire upon the blacks in that way ? If they are the
right mob, of which I had every certainty.
37. If I understand you aright, your instructions were to surround the camp, and fire upon
it, and tnat the troopers were allowed to go out of your sight. Now, you must be aware
if they received these orders, and were not under your immediate control, that there was
considerable risk of loss of life, particularly of gins. Was there any necessity for such an
indiscriminate slaughter upon that occasion ? I don’t think there was any indiscriminate
slaughter ; there were only two blacks shot.
38. But you did not see it ? I was in the scrub, but I was away for about half-an-hour in
another direction, to get the Dugandan blacks round me, to prevent their being shot.
39. I can understand this—if there are warrants out against certain men, and they take to
the scrub, that your troopers are ordered to follow them, and, if they do not stop when
Called upon in the Queen’s name, to fire upon them; but in this case there were no warrants
out. I wish to know what induced you to give those orders ? The letters I had received
from several squatters, complaining that the blacks were robbing their huts, threatening
their lives, and spearing their cattle and sheep.
40. What are the general orders of your Commandant ? It is a general order that, when-
ever there are large assemblages of blacks, it is the duty of an officer to disperse them.
There are no general orders for these cases; officers must take care that proper discretion is
exercised.
41. Did you see any of the property taken from the shepherds ? No, it was Mr. Compigne.
42. Was he with you on this occasion ? No, I never take any white people with me.
43. Then it was on the evidence of Mr. Compigne that you surrounded the scrub and fired
on the blacks ? On that of Mr. Compigne, the Messrs. Collins of Telemon, Mr. Henderson
of Tabragalba, Mr. Hardie, and other squatters.
44. How many dead bodies were there ? I saw two.
45. Was not there a gin shot ? Yes.
46. Don’t you consider this is a very loose way of proceeding—surrounding blacks’ camps,
and shooting innocent gins ? There is no other way.
47. When the blacks were called upon to disperse, did they offer any resistance ? Yes, they
threw everything they had at the Native Police.
48. But you were not present ? I was with them when the gin was shot; I thought it was
a blackfellow. I could not follow them at the time, and it is no use calling after them in
the scrub.
49. Then it is clear they were not under your control when the gin was shot ? That was a
mistake ; it was getting dark.
50. After this affair at Dugandan where did you go to ? I went to Fassifern, following up
the same track.
51. What occurred there ? I came upon the tracks there ; I think it was in the middle of
the following day or the next. I found a small camp of blacks, and dispersed them,
52. What number of blacks were killed on that occasion ? Two.
53. Did you see the dead bodies ? Yes.
54. Was not one of them an old man ? A middle-aged man.
55. Had he grey hair ? Not particularly so.
56. Were you with the Police then ? Yes.
57. With your troopers ? Yes. I dispersed that mob on account of having received a letter
from Mr. Hardie, stating that a mob of blacks had been threatening him, and that he could
not get rid of them,
58. Had they been spearing Mr Hardie’s cattle ? He said they had been spearing the cattle
at Moograh, and threatening the lives of the men.
59. In


59. In fact, you saw nothing yourself? No, I could not waste time to see whether a cow
or a hullock had been speared.
' 60. Were not you asked to go to Coochin ? That was later—in January.
61. Did you hear at Fassifern from Mr. Hardie that the blacks had threatened to surround
his house ? That was at Coochin.
62. Then at Coochin—when did this occur? After I had left, some time in January, I
received a letter from the Colonial Secretary—the very day I came into town, after having
shipped some recruits to Rockhampton—l went to the Colonial Secretary’s office, where I saw
a letter from Mr. Hardie, stating that the blacks had attacked Coochin Station, and asking
me to come up. I went up at once, but nothing occurred when I .got there. The Ipswich
White Police had been there.
68. What was the information upon which you went up ? The letter I have mentioned,
which reported that a large number of blacks had surrounded the house, and tried to force
their way into the bedroom.
64. I believe Mr. Lester was absent at the time ? Yes, and his stock-keeper also.
65. Was not your wife there ? Yes.
66. Were you not called upon to furnish a report at the close of these proceedings? Yes.
67. Have you sent it in ? Yes.
68. You mentioned that at the attack at Dugandan the blacks threw everything they had at
the Native Police. What did they throw 1 Chiefly nullah-nullahs.
69. Any spears ? I did not sec any. Afterwards they threw some spears at the men from
a little island to which they retreated.
70. In fact, they shewed fight ? That can hardly be called shewing fight.
71. Is it their custom after these skirmishes to bury their dead? No.
72. Did the Native Police leave the bodies lying where they were shot 1 Yes, but it was
some distance in the scrub. The blacks heap up a quantity of wood over the dead bodies.
In fact, they generally eat them, I have seen them eating them.
73. Are you often out on patrol? Almost always. I am now going to Durandur; the
blacks are coming down for their blankets.
74. Are the accounts of the blacks in your district generally pretty good ? Yes.
75. Have you generally found them troublesome 1 In some places.
76. Have they been quieter and better behaved during the last few years ? Yes, consider-
ably so.
77. Everywhere? Yes; we have driven them almost entirely away from the Logan. They
generally go to the islands in the Bay, over the Dividing Range, to the boiling-down estab-
lishments, and to the townships.
WEDNESDAY,\ 1 4th MAY, 1861.
present:
Mr MACKENZIE, 1 Mb. BLAKENEY,
Mb. WATTS, | Mb. FITZSIMMONS,
Mb. GORE, I Mr. EOYDS,
Mr. FERRETT, | Me. MOFFATT.
The Honorable R, R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
Captain JOHN COLEY called in and examined;—
1. By the Chairman : You have been a resident in Brisbane a number of years ? Nearly
nineteen years.
2. Since the first occupation of the country ? Since the latter end of 1842.
3. How long had the district been opened for settlement? About twelve months.
4. When you arrived ? When I arrived.
5. You have seen a good deal of the Aborigines since your arrival? Yes.
6. What state were they in at the time of your arrival ? The Brisbane tribe at that time
numbered about two hundred and fifty; that was about the number, at that time, of the tribe.
7. Have they diminished since then? They are all gone since then—they are all extinct.
The present blacks are the offspring of the Ningey Ningey and Bribie Island tribes.
8. Bribie Island ? Yes.
9. You tell the Committee of your own knowledge of what the number of the tribe was on
your arrival, that they have diminished since the settlement of the district ? Quite so. They
are all gone, altogether extinct.
10. To what do you attribute that ? Well, it may be accounted for in many ways. Disease
has carried off many of them; and I have known one black to have three wives in the course of
eight or nine years, who were eventually all killed by his own hand, or the hand of some of
his tribe.
11. Do you not think it is owing to the facility they have had for procuring liquor ? That
has much accelerated it. I have known others that have had two wives that shared the same
fate in the course of six or eight years. I saw a great deal of the blacks when I first came up
here. I built the first private residence in Brisbane, and they used to congregate about it, and
I have seen sixty or eighty about the house at one time. Women were not then admitted into
the settlement. They were kept out of Brisbane when it was a penal settlement. You very
seldom saw a woman then; they were not admitted when this was a penal settlement. My
information, at that time, was acquired from the native boys, many of whom spoke English
pretty


pretty well, having learnt it from the soldiers stationed here to protect the prisoners when this
Was a penal settlement, and from whom I acquired a deal of information concerning the
customs and fights of the blacks—their pullum-pullums; that is, corrohorees. At that time I
learned from some of the young hoys that they occasionally killed black fellows, and roasted
and eat them. The hoy who told me this was particularly careful to make me understand
that it was only the black old men—the grown men —not the hoys—that did this. I have
seen the bones of a hlackfellow the day after he had been eaten by the Ningey Ningey blacks,
at Breakfast Creek —a circumstance which the Police Reports will show.
12. How could you know that the body had been eaten ? Well, I was up at the Police Court
when the case was on, and afterwards we examined the body, and it had all the appearance of
having been roasted and eaten. It having been reported that a black had been shot, we
proceeded to the spot, and saw the bones as I have described. I have seen the foot of another
black, a woman, who was roasted in the gullies near Windmill Hill. lam speaking of the
years 1842—1844. From these facts, I feel convinced that there was cannibalism among
them then. Whether there is now or not I cannot say.
13. You have said that the Brisbane tribe disappeared altogether. What, do you think, was
the usage they met with during that time from the inhabitants of Brisbane ? They were most
kindly used.
14. You are aware that, during that period, several outrages in the neighbourhood of Brisbane,
such as assaults, took place by the blacks ? Yes, that is what they were generally fond of
doing—assaulting women on the road some distance from Brisbane.
15. They were in the habit of doing so ? Yes,
16. From your knowledge of the blacks, would you say that they have been ill-treated by the
whites ? To my knowledge, lam not aware of any attempt at Brisbane or Ipswich of that sort.
17. Have not white men been murdered by the blacks at Brisbane ? Yes, in some numbers.
18. Have you any notion of the number that have been murdered by the Brisbane tribes, in
the neighbourhood of Brisbane ? I know that several were killed between here and Durandur,
on the-north road. The depredations were mostly committed on-the drays, which were out
two months or six weeks on a stretch. This I can tell, but the whole of the outrages can be
traced in the Police Report which was forwarded to Sydney eight or nine years ago by Captain
Wickham. It showed that up to that time one hundred and seventy-four white men had
been killed by the blacks.
19. That is all over the District of Morton Bay? Yes.
20. Does it comprehend the Darling Downs ? Yes. I believe that up to this time there have
been two hundred and fifty killed—going over a space of nineteen years—in the Northern
District. The blacks were severely chastised on account of these murders. That I know
for a certain fact.
21. In what way have they been severely chastised ? For want of police protection, the
settlers had to protect themselves, and their retaliation was very severe.
22. By Mr. Blakeney : Did they retaliate by shooting ? Yes, by shooting.
23. By the Chairman : Do you think that the establishment of the Native Police is an
improvement on the old system of leaving, settlers to protect themselves ? I believe it has
been. On the Kilcoy Station, owned by Mr. Evan Mackenzie, there were two white men
killed, and an imported bull; and their retaliation was very severe on the blacks—they
destroyed hundreds of them.
24. In what way ? By shooting and poisoning them.
25. What with ? With strychnine and arsenic, in flour.
26. Are you aware that strychnine goes by the name of Mackenzie among the blacks ? I have
heard so.*
27. The Mackenzie alluded to is not the Chairman of this Committee, but Mr. Evan
Mackenzie ? Yes.
28. In your experience of the different murders of whites by the blacks, and of blacks by the
whites, on which occurrence has the greatest stress been usually laid by the public and the
press ? Those that have received the greatest amount of notice have been the murders of the
whites by the blacks—for instance, such murders as those of Mr. Gregor and Mrs. Shannon.
29. Do you remember that when some white men were murdered by blacks in the Bay, only
the other day —a boat’s crew of whites went with some blacks, and they were murdered, about
eighteen months ago —has much notice been taken by the Government or the public press of
this murder ? Some by the press ; little, or none, by the Government.
30. What kind of notice was taken by the press ? Merely that of relating the murders that
had taken place, and endeavouring to impress it on the Government that better protection
ought to be afforded to the people in the Bay.
31. Did you hear as much said about the men murdered in the Bay as of the blacks murdered
atFassifern? No, I did not.
32. Are you aware that any steps have been taken by the Government to bring the men to
justice? None.
33. Are you aware that the men who were with the whites in the boat are walking about the
streets perfectly well known ? I only know that by report.
34. By Mr. Blakeney : Have they been pointed out to you? Yes, one of them has, but I
have no proof that he was one of the blacks in the boat.
35. By the Chairman : It was considered a very atrocious murder at the time ? A very
barbarous murder.
* Mr. Mackenzie received a note from Mr. Plunkett, the then Attorney-General of New South
Wales, stating that he had received accounts of his having destroyed the blacks, and cautioning him, and
informing him at the same time that if the complaint were brought before him officially he would have
to take notice of it.
36. Supposing


36. Supposing the men had been caught and taken up under warrant, —-the blacks who were
present, who left in the boat with the white men, —if they were brought before a Court of
' Justice could they be proved to have been the murderers ? Only by black evidence.
37. You are aware that that could not be taken in a Court of Justice ? Certainly not.
38. With regard to the original Brisbane tribe, which you say amounted to two hundred and
fifty, and which has since disappeared—were there many murdered by the whites, to your
knowledge ? No, I don’t know of a single Brisbane black being killed by the whites.
39. You attribute their disappearance to entirely different causes? Yes, to different causes.
The attraction to the settlement brought the different tribes together, and they used to fight
among themselves. I have known sixteen hunched natives in the settlement, in, and adjacent
to, Brisbane at one time.
40. How did you count them ? I only guessed their numbers. They were the Ningey
Ningey blacks, the Bribie Island, Logan and Bay tribes, and the Ipswich blacks.
41. You can’t recall to memory any act of cruelty that the whites committed upon the blacks
to cause their disappearance ? No, not on the Brisbane blacks. lam not aware of any of the
Brisbane tribe having been shot or destroyed, but the reports at the Police Office would show.
42. Since the establishment of the Native Police Force, for the protection of the settlers
and the inhabitants generally from the attacks of the natives, have you heard of any cases of
poisoning or murdering on the stations ? Not of late years.
43. Do you know of any instance excepting the one at Kilcoy ? Yes.
44. Are they mere reports, or have they ever been proved in any way ? They have been
proved, as far as the accounts have been given to me, by the men who were the principal
actors themselves, such as old Captain Griffin. When they beset and killed some of his men,
he retorted in any way he could.
45. By Mr. Blakeney : Did you ever hear that there were seventy blacks poisoned at Mr.
Griffin’s station ? I have heard that there was a great sacrifice of life, but I can't say what
was the number.
46. By Mr. Gore : Don’t you think that these stories are exaggerated ? I daresay they may
be.
47. To a considerable extent ? Not to much extent.
48. Don’t you think seventy might be seven ? No, I do not. No, there were more than
that, though the number might have been exaggerated.
49. When the blacks attacked the stations that you spoke of within your own knowledge, in
the neighbourhood of Brisbane, in what manner had they been treated ? Those that were the
most kindly treated committed the greatest depredations.
50. Do you know that from your own knowledge ? I know it from the Eev. Mr. Gregor;
Mr. Gregor that had a brother at Cabulture, who was murdered by the blacks; he had
treated them in the most kind manner, as well as his housekeeper, Mrs. Shannon, who was
also murdered.
51. Was not that a very atrocious murder on the part of the blacks ? Very atrocious. From
information from several settlers that I gleaned, in 1844, 1845, and 1846, I believe that if a
more efficient Police had been established for the protection of the settlers in the interior,
when this Northern District was thrown open for occupation, scores of white men’s lives and
hundreds of blacks would have been saved, by the natives being kept in fear of an efficient
Police Force to coerce them in their ill deeds. As a proof of the want of Police protection in
1844, a detachment of soldiers was sent from Brisbane to protect travellers on the dray road
to the interior, when the blacks had taken possession of it between Ipswich and the Main
Range, and where they had to be stationed for about eighteen months, to protect the drays
travelling on the road, carrying supplies to the stations. At that time the drays always
travelled in company, three or four together, and all armed. Mr. Campbell, of Redbank, and
Mr. Hicks have been chased by blacks for their lives, and, having good horses under them,
made their escape. In that spot the soldiers were desired to camp. I believe the natives in
these localities have nearly all disappeared, many fiom natural causes, and many have been
killed ; for at that time they occasionally attacked the head stations. Mr. Uhr, a most kind
man to the blacks, was killed by them on his own station ; and Mr. Cootes, of Rosewood,
and all his men were baled up at the head station, and defended themselves from their huts,
which the blacks, in their stratagem, tried to set fire to, and not until numbers had been killed
and wounded did they desist.
52. There was a mission to the aborigines established at Dunnage, in the Bay—was that
broken up ? A Catholic mission—■
53. No, no ; I mean a Protestant mission. There was another one established quite distinct
altogether from that ? Well, I can’t say, but the first missionary that came was a Catholic.
He settled at Dunnage. He was there only a short time. I don’t know on what account he
left.
54. Have German missions been broken up in that way —have they given them up, when they
found they did not succeed ? Yes.
55. Are you aware of any good they have done, in civilizing the blacks ? Their efforts have
been a complete failure.
56. In your opinion, would any further attempts be a failure ? lam of opinion that there is
nothing to be done with the blacks but by coercion.
57. Do you think that the establishment of schools would be of any use ? I have seen the
natives taken home, and taken to Sydney and become almost domestic, but if brought back to
Brisbane they will remain two or three months with the parties who brought them, and will
eventually go back to the bush.
58. By Mr. Gore : You said, Captain Coley, that you have acquired a great deal of informa-
tion


tion as to the manners and customs of .the blacks from their boys. Have you heard that at
corroborees, or pullum-pullums, they are in the habit of committing unnatural offences with
boys ? That is a question I have never asked, therefore I can give no information.
59. By Mr. Klakekf.y : From your experience of the black Native Police, would you suggest
any change with regard to mixing the troopers ? lam not able to answer that. I have only
heard of the working of the Black Police, but not been with them. I think, at the same time,
that nothing could be done to improve it. It is a most efficient Force, and has been a great
saving of life to whites and blacks.
60. By Mr. Fereett : Captain Coley, do you know, of your own knowledge, of the blacks
having been shot and molested by the whites when they had done no injury F No. It might
have been the case, but it has not been so to my knowledge.
61. Do you speak of your own knowledge, or from hearsay, with regard to the Kilcoy affair F
It was related to me by several individuals on the station. The principal statement was from
Colin Mackenzie himself.
62. Did the Brisbane or Colonial press take as much notice of the white murder in the Bay
as of the affair between the Native Police and the blacks at Fassifern ? They did not take
half as much notice of the murder in the Bay as of the murder at Fassifern.
63. Do you speak of your own knowledge of the poisoning by Mr. Griffin and others at the
Pine River ? I only know of it from Captain Griffin’s having told me.
64. Then you know of it by hearsay ? Yes.
65. From what you know of the blacks, and of the scrub in this part of the country, do you
think that a white man can follow and capture blacks in a scrub ? I should say no ; they
would not be equal to a black.
66. From what you know of the blacks, do you think they could spear or injure the whites in
the scrub without being seen by them? Well, I should think so.
67. A man not used to go into the scrub would have a difficulty in getting on, and a black-
fellow might spear him before the white saw him ? Indeed, I have been in that position
myself.
68. Are you not aware that the blacks are very adroit in hiding in the scrub ? I am.
69. By Mr. Watts ; Do you think in that position the eye of a blackfellow would not detect
them much sooner than a white man? Most undoubtedly it would. I believe that white
police, without blacks, would be inefficient altogether as far as protection goes.
70. Have the blacks been quieter since the establishment of a Native Police Force, or not ?
Much quieter.
71. You stated it as your opinion that in order to keep them quiet, and that they might be
kept in a state of fear, an efficient Police Force was necessary ? Yes, and that Force, I stated,
was a saving of both white and black life.
72. You can’t give us any further information, or make any suggestion, as to what course it
would be best to adopt to ameliorate the present condition of the blacks ? To coerce them.
You would do more good in that way than in any other. You would then stand a chance of
prolonging their life.
73. But I want to know if you can give any other suggestion whereby their present condition
would be improved ? There is no suggestion that I could make that I think would succeed
with them. I have no opinion as to what would succeed with them.
74. Do you think that giving them blankets does them any good ? I think they were wasted.
They were the destruction of the Brisbane tribe.
75. In what way? By their living in blankets, and then being exposed to the night air. This
brought on chest complaints, which we had never observed until they had received the
blankets.
76. By Mr. Moffatx : Have you ever been in Tasmania ? Yes. ’
77. Do you know that the blacks have been collected together there, and put on an island ?
Yes.
78. Do you know what results attended that movement ? They died off very rapidly.
79. Do you know anything of the island ? It is one of the islands in Bass’s Straits.
80. Is it a large island ? No, a small island.
81. Were the blacks able to carry on their usual occupations of fishing and hunting—was
there any game ? There was no support for them. They were victualled and fed by the
Government.
82. And the consequence of that was they gradually died off 1 Well, the tribe had been
reduced very fearfully when I left.* This attempt was made with the idea of preserving them,
in the Christian desire of trying to see what could be done with the blacks. It was a complete
failure.
83. They were not coerced in any other w r ay than by being placed on the island? In no
other way.
84. You look upon that system as a complete failure ? A complete failure.
* I have heard since that the few that were left have been brought back to Tasmania.
THU BSD A }


THURSDAY, 1 6th MAY, 1861.
present:
Mk. MACKENZIE, Mr. ROVDS,
Mr. WATTS, Me. MOFFATT,
Me. GORE, Mr. BLAKENEY,
Me. FEREETT, Mr. FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
R. B. SHERIDAN, Esquire, called in and examined; —
1. By the Chairman : You arc Collector of Customs and Harbour Master, Mr. Sheridan, at
Maryborough, Wide Bay ? I am Collector of Customs, Harbour Master, and Water Police
Magistrate.
2. You have been there some time, have you not ? I have been there upwards of sixteen
months.
3. You were also for some years stationed here as an officer of the Customs ? I was.
4. How many years ? I arrived, I think, in February, 1853.
5. I believe, Mr. Sheridan, you have the character of taking a great interest in the aboriginal
population, and that you have made their habits and customs a study since you have been
here ? I have for nineteen years been acquainted with the blacks.
6. And have made their habits and customs a study ? I have.
7. And you know a great deal of the tribes about Moreton Bay and Brisbane ? I am ac-
quainted with all.
8. You are acquainted with what is called the Brisbane tribe of blacks ? Yes.
9. Are any of them in existence now —the Brisbane tribe, I mean ? I have not seen one of
the North Brisbane tribe since my arrival here this time.
10. To what tribe do those belong that are seen about the town ? Chiefly to the Cleveland
and Amity Point tribes.
11. What are called the Ningey Ningcy blacks? Yes; they are frequently about Sandgate
and the mouth of the Pine River.
12. Are they seen much about town ? I have not seen one of them since my arrival.
13. But did you when you were here before ? Yes ; I knew them very well.
14. What is the character of that tribe of blacks generally ? During my intercourse with
them I always found them of a very good character ; drunkenness in the streets was the only
crime I knew' them to he guilty of.
15. During your residence in Brisbane —since 1853—what treatment did the blacks receive
from the inhabitants of Brisbane and the neighbourhood ? It was very bad.
16. Will you state to the Committee in what way it was had? From their breaking faith
with them ; employing them and not paying them what they promised; and giving them drink.
17. Did any positive cases come under your knowledge of whites being punished in the Police
Office for their treatment of the blacks ? Yes.
18. Are such cases on the records ? They arc.
19. You state that the inhabitants treated them badly in giving them grog; are you not aware
that they could only get grog from the publicans in tow.n ? Yes.
20. The only persons that you have known of as punished for giving them grog were publi-
cans ? Yes.
21. They sold it to them, I suppose ? I believe so.
22. You think they were badly treated in being obliged to work, and not getting the payment
due to them ? Yes.
23. Did many cases come under your knowledge ? A case came under my knowledge of a
black who had been cutting wood for a man in the town, getting an order on a baker for pay-
ment of his labor ; in the evening the order was presented, and I have subsequently heard
that what was on the order, instead of giving him a loaf, got him kicked about his business
with very strong language.
24; Do you know any instances in which faith has been kept towards the blacks by the whites ?
A great many.
25. Which appears the largest proportion of cases ? Certainly, I think the opposite (to those
last mentioned).
26. Was it invariably the case that faith was broken with them ? I found that, when gentle-
men or respectable persons dealt with the blacks, they were well treated ; but a majority of
persons ill-treated them.
27. Can you point out how they were ill-treated in any other way ? Y r es, in a great many
instances.
28. Would you state one or two instances that came under your own knowledge ? I have
known cases of their women being taken away by white men,
29. By Mr. Blakeney : In the townships ? Yes, by men about the town.
30. By the Chairman ; Do you know anything else, —have any wanton or unnecessary attacks
been made on them ? There have.
3T. On what occasion ? Respecting the attacks made on them in Brisbane, I have only hear-
say evidence. I have not seen the attacks.
32. You


32. You have only seen them mentioned in the journals ? And also heard of them, because
the blacks have told me.
33. You arc not cognizant yourself? Not personally cognizant. I have seen them beaten,
struck, and knocked down, but I am not cognizant of these attacks in Brisbane.
84. To go beyond Brisbane, —the Police District of Brisbane ? No, not in the Police District;
further than that I have seen assaults committed on them.
35. Assaults such as you mentioned ? Yes.
36. What has been the behaviour of the blacks during the period you have known them?
As far as they ever came into contact with me, they were remarkably well behaved.
37. Into contact with you personally ? Yes.
38. You spoke of the treatment of the whites towards the natives in taking women away,—
are you aware that in several cases the blacks have committed rapes upon white women ? I
only know by hearsay.
39. You have not seen it in the police reports ? I have seen two instances mentioned in the
police reports; the two men were tried, and I was present. In one instance the black was
acquitted; and in the other, two men were hanged.
40. Do you not recollect another case, where a man was sentenced to so many years of hard
labor at Cockatoo, —named Basket ? I remember seeing the name of Basket. I think Basket
was tried and acquitted.
41. You don’t recollect that he was committed to gaol ? I was under the impression that the
man was tried and acquitted. I was under that impression, but I can’t say.
42. You recollect the case that occurred at the Bay about two years ago, where some whites
went in a boat from Brisbane in company with blacks, and where the whites were murdered,—
if lam not mistaken, you were sent in search of the blacks ? I was sent in search.
43. Did you find the bodies ? No.
44. They were afterwards found ? One was found before that, but none afterwards ;it was
in consequence of the body that had first been found that I went in search of the others.
45. But, were the bodies or remains of the bodies found on the island ? Only the remains of
one were found on Luggage Point, —the remains of a man, Collins, I think. I went in search
of the bodies, or the boat, afterwards, and I did not find either. I went to the North Island,
Bribie’s Island.
46. Do you recollect if any steps were taken by the Government to bring the men to justice
for this murder ? lam not aware.
47. Was there much noise made about it in the public journals? There wms.
48. Was there not a strong impression on the part of the people here that the whites were
murdered by the blacks that -went in the boat with them ? Yes.
49. And were there any steps taken to apprehend them ? lam not aware that there were.
50. Do you know why this was the case ? Ido not.
51. If at that time a white had murdered a black, and it had been known as well, would the
Government have taken any steps to bring him to justice ? I think they would, if they had
known him.
52. And some notice would have been taken of it in the journals ? I should think there
would.
53. You don’t think more notice would have been taken ? I can’t say ; I should hope that
some notice would have been taken.
54. In your experience, has it not been the case that murders of the blacks by the whites have
been taken more notice of than such cases as I have mentioned ? In my experience, it has
been quite the reverse ; I have never known till lately any notice taken of the murders of
blacks.
55. You have seen a little of the Native Police since you have been here ? I have.
56. Do you recollect the state of matters before the Native Police were organized ? I do.
57. Do you think that the establishment of the Force has tended to decrease murders on both
sides ? I can’t speak as to the northern districts (in reference to the Native Police); I have
lived principally in the south.
58. Were the Native Police organized when you first came to this district? I think they
were.
59. What is your opinion of that Force as a protective force, —I don’t mean, to fight against
the blacks ? I think in a great many instances it has been a great check on the probable
depredations of the blacks.
60. There was a case occurred at Maryborough some time ago, when you were there, in which
charges were brought against the Native Police officer ? If you allude to the particular case—
-61. I allude to the particular case in which Lieutenant Bligh -was concerned ? I was present.
62. And what did you see on the occasion ? I saw the Native Police, with their officer, wdiora
at that time I did not know to be Lieutenant Bligh at the moment. I saw them pursuing
blacks in the town of Maryborough.
63. Will you state the circumstances as you saw them ? Well, I think it was between seven and
eight in the morning, on 2nd of February, 1860, I heard a tremendous noise; I was at break-
fast at the time, and looked out and saw the Native Police in pursuit of blacks; some of the
blacks at the time were swimming in the river, some running along the land, one of whom ran
through my own verandah, pursued by a single trooper of Native Police. I made enquiry of
the persons present as to the cause of the disturbance, and they said that a warrant was out
against one of the blacks. I took no more notice of the matter, but, about two minutes after,
I heard some shots as the blacks turned round the corner of the house; almost simultaneously
with this, immediately in front of my house, where I was residing, there were a number of
blacks in the water, and there was a boat pursuing them ; some were captured and taken into
the


the boat, and others swam under the public wharf, and held on to the wharf for some time.
A considerable number of white people were congregated about the place, and the Native Police
officer, with, I think, some of the Native Police, and some white persons also, were in a boat.
Two of the black men, who were either under the wharf or in a boat, —I won’t be certain,
because the crowd was so great, —dived from under the wharf or swam off the boat, and a
moment after several shots were fired from the boat and the bank at them, —in all, one might
presume some forty or fifty shots.
64. By the Native Police ? Yes : I saw the Native Police officer, myself, fire four or five shots,
and I eventually saw the black man at whom he fired sink, —raise up his hand, and sink ; that
was the last that was ever seen of him.
65. Was that the only one you saw shot ? The only one I saw shot; I saw one wounded.
66. That is all you know, I suppose. Is there anything further ? I saw no more shot.
67. Are you aware that some of the blacks had been troublesome, committing depredations,
and that a warrant was out against them ? lam aware, as far as all the information that I
could acquire goes, that there were two blacks there that day, Darkie and Young Snatchem.
I am aware that these two blacks were there, because I had seen one of them myself in the
town, previously to this, working in a store near.
68. Are you not aware that when the blacks commit depredations, they generally come into
the towns to keep out of the way ? I am aware, from what subsequently took place, that
there was a warrant out against Darkie, as an escaped prisoner.
69. Not against the other ? I made minute enquiries, and as far as I could find out, there
was no charge against him.
70. You are aware that sometime after this occurrence the inhabitants of Maryborough—or a
portion of them —presented Lieutenant Bligh with a sword for his exertions in keeping peace
there ? lam aware that a meeting was got up two days after ; there was an inquiry on the
man found dead in the town, and the inquiry had been postponed, and in the meantime a
meeting was got up.
71. What was the result of the inquiry that was made? The result was, that the depositions
taken were forwarded to the Attorney-General.
72. Did you sit on the Bench on that occasion ? I did.
73. Was this meeting got up for the purpose of raising subscriptions for the object of presenting
a sword to Lieutenant Bligh ? I was so informed.
74. You are aware that this affair —not so much the shooting at the blacks as the presentation
of a sword to Lieutenant Bligh—raised much descussiou; a number of letters appeared in the
Maryborough Chronicle, signed by different names—“ The Sword of Damocles,” &c. It has
been broadly asserted that you are the author of these letters ? lam not.
75. Not of any of them ? I have never published one in connection with the Native Police,
with one exception, and that was not in any way commenting disparagingly on the Force.
76. If I understand you, you once wrote in the newspapers, but your letter had no connection
with the Native Police Force ? I never disparaged the Native Police Force in the public
journals; lam very glad this question has been asked, because lam aware that a number of
persons have accused me of being the author of these letters, which is not the case.
77. Now, as you have taken so much interest in the blacks, have you ever turned your
attention to any possible way of ameliorating their condition, or of making them useful
members of society ? I have.
78. Have you ever thought of any feasible plan for promoting their interests? I have
frequently considered the matter over, and I think—l have always thought—that one great
cause of their committing petty larceny in the towns was the distribution of blankets in the
towns ; my reason for stating this is that, as I have mentioned to Captain Wickham, a great
number of blacks congregate at a given spot; and, if there is no game in the place,
and the blacks are kept waiting one or two months sometimes for these blankets, and
they naturally must subsist, and therefore they commit petty larcenies.
79. Then you don’t approve of the distribution of blankets in the towns ? Not in the towns ;
this would lead to an idea 1 have of keeping the blacks in the settled districts tranquil. The
idea that has always been uppermost in my mind is that this could be managed, if the blankets
were distributed in each particular district, and the blacks were not allowed to leave without
being punished, and got a small subsidy from the Government, of tobacco, or flour, or sugar,
which would be stopped, if any depredation was committed, until the depredator was given up.
80. Has it not come under your observation that the blacks often sell their blankets for grog ?
I am not aware of a case, because if a single case came under my observation I should have
proceeded against the person who sold the grog.
81. Have you not heard that at one time the Government found it necessary to put the broad
arrow on the blankets ? I believe that it is quite necessary to do so, or to take some such
precaution.
82. You don’t think they might use their tobacco in the same way ? No.
83. Do you think that wdthout coercion they might be kept quiet by this plan of yours? I
think it would tend very much towards it.
84. Do you think anything further might be done towards civilizing the blacks ? I think it
would be imprudent to do away with all police interference or protection.
85. But I mean, could you point out anything that has occurred to you by which they could be
civilized —or is there any use in schools to educate the children ? In agricultural schools.
86. Have you heard of anything of this sort being tried elsewhere ? Never of agricultural
schools.
87. Have you heard of other schools being tried ? I have heard of some Missionaries who
had tried to educate the blacks
88. Are


88. Are you aware whether these efforts have been successful or otherwise ? I don’t think
they have been successful.
89. You say that you think the Native Police protection necessary? Yes.
90. Would you suggest any improvement in the present Force ? I would put in the settled
districts white police, with black trackers.
91. You have been long enough in the Colony to have known the old Mounted Police ? Yes.
92. Are you not aware that the mounted corps were good bushmcn, and very useful in tracking
bushrangers ? lam fully aware, of it.
93. Do you not think that such a corps would be equally useful in tracking natives through
the scrub ? Yes. °
94. Don’t you think that the natives have a great terror of them—that they (the white police)
have a great influence over the blacks ? Yery great.
95. Lou think that it would be an advantage to establish such a Force here ? I think so.
96. By Mr. Watts : Do you not think that the present Police Force is the best Force that
we can make use of? Ido not.
97. Would you suggest in any of the outlying districts that the same kind of Force that you
have now suggested would be desirable ? I think, from my knowledge, that a number of
trackers in the outlying districts, with more white men among them, would be very desirable.
98. Do you not think that if a Police of that description, composed of white men, were
obliged to follow natives through the scrub, there -would be some difficulty in catching any
depredator ? I don’t think they could catch depredators in the scrub.
99. Do you think that the present Force could catch black depredators in the scrub? I don’t
think they could. My present experience does not lead me to suppose they could.
100. Do you think that the practised eye of a native would not detect the natives, when
hidden, better than the eye of a white man? I think it would, except by very great experi-
ence on the part of the white man: with that, I think, that the white man becomes superior
to the natives.
101., With regard to the Police Officer at Maryborough, do you think that he exceeded his
duty ? I think that he did.
102. Do you know whether any instructions were sent by the Commandant of Native Police
requesting Lieutenant Bligh to take the course he did, or not ? lam not aware.
103. Do you know whether any general orders are given to the Subordinate Officers of Native
Police by tlxe Commandant ? lam not aware.,
104. It is usual, I believe, in all military forces that certain instructions should he given to the
subordinates by the Superior Officers ? The force could not be organised otherwise.
105. You are not aware whether any other blacks than those you mentioned were shot in the
neighbourhood of Maryborough about the same time ? I have not seen any.
106. Do you know anything of Mr. Bligh ? I have seen him —I have met him once.
107. Do you know anything of the case of the Mortimers, quoted in the newspapers ? Only
by hearsay,
108. Do you not think that in these cases it was beyond the power of the Native Police to
have captured the blacks without shooting them ? I feel certain they might have captured
them.
109. They might have been brought to justice without resort to fire-arms ? No doubt, the
man in the water could have been taken; there could have been no difficulty in reaching him.
110. What is the general opinion of the Native Police Force at Maryborough? I think it is
favorable towards them on the whole.
111. You think that it would be impossible to do without them? It would be very imprudent,
I think.
112. By Mr. Goee : You have said that you think it would be desirable to keep the blacks iu
their own districts ? Yes.
113. How would you compel them to remain in their own districts ? By refusing those little
induigencies which I have alluded to.
114. If they went out of the district, what would you do if yon wanted to punish them ? I
would stop their supplies.
115. But would you only punish them by stopping their supplics ? If they committed
depredations, of course I would punish them in other ways.
116. But you spoke of keeping them in certain districts—are you of opinion that there should
he a law preventing them from going out of those districts ? I think it would he an excellent
institution.
117. Of course you are aware of large numbers of blacks assembling at corrobborees, or
pullum-pullums 1 I am.
118. Would you discountenance these? I would ; they are most pernicious to society in their
effects ; all the mischief that emanates from the blacks is concocted in these meetings.
119. Would you take it upon you, if you had the power, to disperse these borees by a certain
degree of force ? I would, and have appealed to the authorities in Brisbane to do so.
120. Are you aware of any of their practices on those occasions ? I have had no experience
of them.
121. But you have formed some idea of them? Yes, it is a sort of initiating young men into
the order of grown-up people —into manhood.
122. Are you aware of the ceremonies they make use of? No.
123. Have you heard it said that they are guilty of unnatural crimes with those very young
men on those occasions ? No.
124. You have never heard so ? No.
125. Do they practise cannibalism on these occasions? lam not aware that they do on these
occasions.
126. Do


126. Do you believe that they practise cannibalism at any time ? I saw them have a man
roasted for the purpose of eating him—l was told it was for the purpose of eating him —in the
town of Maryborough.*
127. With respect to the Native Police, do you think that white troopers, mounted, could go
on long expeditions in the bush ? I think they could; I think they would be in every sense
superior to the natives.
128. But suppose their provisions were out, and they were pursuing a party of natives, do you
think that white troopers could maintain themselves ? I think they could.
1211. In what maimer ? I think their facility for catching game is quite equal to that of the
natives, with the means at their disposal.
180. But what sort of game? I refer to the means of sustaining life.
131. Do you mean to say they could cut out opossums, and shoot kangaroos and birds ? I don’t
suppose they would sustain life so well as the natives, because they go into the bush without
any weapon for catching or destroying game.
182. Do you suppose the white troopers would like to live on that sort of game ? They
would not like it, but it might sustain life.
183. Of course a man would take to it sooner than starve, but do you think he would, sooner
than return back to the next station ? I think the disposition would be to find good food, and
therefore that they might return without following up their pursuit.
134. And, therefore, on any lengthened expedition, do you think the expedition would be pat
a stop to, as soon as the rations were out ? I think so.
135. How do you think black trackers would work with white troopers? Very well.
136. Are you not aware that what were considered gentlemen got on better with the natives
than ordinary persons? Much better.
137. Don’t you think there would be a great deal of jealousy against the white troopers on the
part of the natives ? It would much depend on the style of men that were employed.
138. Do you think you could find men of the ordinary class of this Colony to work well with
blacks ? I think so—l may be allowed to add that I believe so —-because I see the bullock-
drivers always have a black man who serves them, and goes with them over the country on
long journeys.
189. Don’t you think that the circumstance of these blacks serving without wages, and being
of great advantage to their quasi-masters, induces the masters to humour them, and to live
well with them, in a manner which would not apply to white troopers in Government employ,
with no personal interest in the matter ? I think there would be very great inducements to
the troopers to keep the trackers attached to them.
140. Can you give any reason for what you stated —that what is commonly called a gentleman
gets on much better with the blacks than an ordinary man ? Well, I believe every black-
fellow is one of Nature’s gentlemen, in manner and disposition ; and that he dislikes coarseness
in every sense of the word.
141. In short, that there is a natural good breeding in the black that coincides with a similar
quality in others ? Yes.
142. I suppose if is on this principle that the Officers of the Native Police keep pretty well
Avith the men ? In cases, where they do so, I dare say that is the reason.
143. By Mr. Watts : Do you think it would be advisable for the Government to have a
white interpreter ? I think it would.
144. And do you think it. would be well for this interpreter to go from tribe to tribe to tell
them they would be punished in the event of their committing depredations; and that, if they
did not, do .so, they would be protected by the whites? I think it would he a most excellent
arrangement.
145. By Mr. Goee : Do you think that such a man could be found, —do you think a man
could be induced sufficiently to practise, and to learn the ways of the aborigines, to act as such
an interpreter ? Most tribes speak sufficient English to understand the difference between
right and wrong, as told them by the whites.
146. Have you any doubt that the blacks are perfectly cognizant of the fact that if they
commit murders, thefts, or depredations, they will expose themselves to the punishment or
vengeance of the whites ? I believe they are fully aware of that fact.
147. Without being told ? Yes.
148. Are you aware that the blacks consider that they are entitled to practise retribution—■
that is, to sacrifice a white life for every black life taken ? I don’t think so.
149 Don’t you consider these depredations in the light that we consider a public Avar ? I
do not—-I believe that the depredations principally arise from a desire on their part to get
something to eat, something that they like very much,
150. You do not think they are driven by hunger to these depredations? Frequently they
are.
151. In the bush ? I think in the same Avay they have a craving desire there for something,
and Avill have it. I think if their appetites Avore perfectly satisfied, that they Avould scarcely
think of moving.
152. By Mr. Feerett : Did you ever see whites following'in pursuit of blacks in the scrubs ?
Never.
153. Did you eA T er see blacks fighting in the scrub ? Never.
154. Of course you never saw Native Police following blacks in the scrub? NeA’er.
* The mart alluded to in this case was one of the men shot by the Native Police—was skinned, and
was being rotated in the presence of white people, who did or would not interfere, until I came there ; even a
constable told me that he did not consider it his duty to interfere, although ho was aware of what was
going on : thU occurred Avithin the town of Maryborough."'
155, Were


155. Were you ever with the Native Police following the tracks of the blacks in the scrub,
with power to apprehend them ? Never.
156. Have you been out in the hush for a month with four days’ rations ? Never.
157. Do you think the Native Police have ever been out under these circumstances ? I am
not aware.
158. You have been speaking of black trackers being attached to the white police—would
you place them on a level with the whites employed in the Force? No. I would allow the
whites to discriminate. ’ Sometimes they might attach several trackers, and sometimes they
might do with one.
159. Do I understand you to say that the black trackers should be servants of the whites
employed in that capacity ? Yes.
160. Do you suppose that black trackers —knowing their value as trackers —would condesend
to act as such (servants) ? Yes.
101. Have you ever had any experience of black trackers ? I have; I remember an instance
There were a number of Norfolk Islanders arrived on this coast, escaped from Norfolk Island
I was the principal means of capturing them, owing to the black trackers.
162. But these were white men you tracked? White men ; but they were tracked by blacks,
over a dry country, for perhaps thirty miles.
169. That was a special case, not a case where the trackers were employed for any length of
time ? It was the only case I have ever known.
101. Lou have been speaking before of the appointment of an interpreter between the
whites and the blacks ; do you know of any person that could interpret the different lan-
guages spoken by the blacks of the Colony ? No.
165. Do you know enough of the different languages to say whether it is possible that any
man should learn sufficient of them to act as interpreter ? I don’t think it would be necessary
that he should learn the languages.
166. Have you had much experience among the outside blacks of the really wild tribes ?,
I was one of the first white men ever seen among the wild tribes near Twofold Bay, in the
direction of the Gipps’ Land District.
167. About what time was that ? About nineteen years ago.
168 Have you any idea how many different languages are spoken by the blacks, in what is
now termed Queensland 1 I believe every tribe speaks a different language.
169. You have previously spoken with regard to the blacks making depredations from want
of food; are you not aware that, in the interior, there is abundance of food at all times for
the blacks ? lam not aware.
170. By Mr. Boyds ; Do you know any blacks in Maryborough that have been discharged
from the Force 1 Not any. .
171. Do you consider it objectionable that men should be hired from the locality where the
Native Police are stationed ? I think it would be.
172. Have you heard from the squatters in Wide Bay that they are generally satisfied with
the Force in that district ? I have heard various opinions—some for, and some against it.
173. Do you think, from what you have heard, that the blacks are generally well
treated in your district ? I think they are not.
174. In recommending white troopers, you mean to recommend one tracker for each section
of five troopers ? It all depends on circumstances. My reason for recommending that would
be that four might be away, while one might remain and keep charge of the camp.
175. Have you ever been attacked by blacks yourself? Never. I have never met the
slightest ill-treatment from the blacks in my lifetime.
176. By Mr. Fitzsimmons : You said in your examination that the wives of the blacks had
often been taken away 1 Yes.
177. Did you say so from report, or have you witnessed the aid 1 I have never witnessed the
actual offence, inasmuch as I should have prevented it, if I had.
178. But you never saw the act of force ? Never.
179. If you had, it would have been your duty, as a Magistrate, to take proceedings to stop
it V I think it would have been my duty, as a member of the community, as well as a Magis-
trate.
180. Was your knowledge of the blacks confined to large towns, or have you a knowledge
of the interior, and of the wild blacks ? I have been nineteen years in the Colony, and only
remained seven years in the towns. I look on Brisbane as being in contact with the blacks :
it was in Sydney that I lived for seven years.
181. By Mr. Ferret; You don’t consider Brisbane a town 2 Well, the blacks were very
numerous when I first arrived here, and my duties led me to pay a pretty considerable deal of
attention to them.
182. By Mr. Fitzsimmons : What do you suppose was the number of the blacks, at the
time the Lieutenant of Native Police fired on them ? ' I dare say there were half-a-dozen, that
appeared to me to he pursued.
183. Did many of those get on land across the river, or where did they go'to ? They plunged,,
into the river, as I think I said ;or some ran away without going into it. I know of only
four blacks that were accounted for : one was shot in the town, another was shot in the
river, another was wounded in the river, and another taken prisoner and paraded through the
town; 1 have never seen him since. .. .. ...
181. What was the number of the Native Police? I think twelve or fourteen. I think,
there were about a dozen—there may have been more or less.
185. Was the Lieutenant of the Native Police Force on land, or in the boat? In the boat,
and he fired five or six shots during the time. To the best of my knowledge I saw him fire
four shots.
168. You


186. You stated, in your evidence that there was a warrant for one of those blacks, of many
years standing ? It came out in the evidence—it was asserted at the Police-office.
187. What was the crime of which he was guilty ? The original crime was stealing tobacco
from Mr. Palmer. He ran away, was pursued and captured, tried, and sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment in Sydney Goal; he was placed on hoard the steamer Waratah, to he
taken to Sydney. She sailed to the Ear, hut returned, as lam informed, through stress of
weather. The black is represented as having been suffering from a loathsome disease, and the
sailors would not have him on hoard—-they broke his chains and let him go. During the time
he was about town, there was no further notice taken of him, till the day that he was shot;
he was an escaped prisoner.
188. Have you good grounds for believing the story of the sailors? It is generally
believed.
189. What was the complaint he was suffering from ? I have heard that it was syphilis.
190. Do the blacks contract that disease from intercourse with their wives? I never
could find out that the complaint existed before the whites came.
191. You were a Magistrate in Court, when the enquiry was made about the blacks shot
at Maryborough ? I was.
192. What was the reason given for pursuing and shooting them? That it was on this
warrant.
193. Were they not guilty of some other crimes? It only came out that they were
on hearsay: there was a report circulated which gained ground that, some six weeks
before, some drays had been stopped and robbed at a place called Six-Mile Creek, in the
neighborhood of Maryborough; I believe that this was the ease, because I heard
dissatisfaction expressed at no action being taken in the matter. I believe there was
a dray robbery, but not that it was the cause of the blacks being shot.
194. At the time of the investigation was there no cause assigned in the Court—did not
you, as a Magistrate, ask for some ? The cause assigned was the apprehension of an
escaped prisoner ; I believe the law is that if an escaped prisoner can not he otherwise
apprehended, he may be shot.
195. Did you not know at the time the investigation was made, that he was an escaped
prisoner ? Only from report.
196. By the Chairman : You have stated that you have had some experience to the
southward —in the hush that is to say? Yes.
197. And also of the old Mounted Police? Yes.
198. You never saw them pursuing blacks into the scrub ? Never.
199. You also stated that at Maryborough the people were generally satisfied with the
Native Police —I allude to the township ? Yes.
200. Why are they satisfied ? I can’t say, but they are satisfied with them.
201. You stated also that it would be imprudent to take away a protective force, Why ?
Because I think the blacks would be very-likely to become troublesome.
202. Do you know of any murders having been committed there the last year or two ?
There have been none to my knowledge.
203. You think a protective force quite necessary ? Yes.
204. Do you think the blacks would go the length of committing murders if the force
were withdrawn ? I think it possible they might.
205. Are you aware that since the Native Police Torre has been organised, the country
has been much quieter then it was previously to that 1 I never heard half so much of
outrages by the blacks in the olden time, as I have heard since the Police Porce was
organized.
206. lam speaking of the last year or two ? lam not aware that the country has been
more troublesome during that time than it was before.
207. Do you not remember that the newspapers were filled with paragraphs to the effect
that men had been murdered at tbis and that station, three and four at a time ? Yes.
208. Do yon see these notices now? No.
209. Is not that a proof that the Protective Force has done its duty ? I think it has
had a great deal to do in quieting the blacks.
210. Do you not think that there has been within the last year or two less loss of life
on both sides than there would have been if there had been no protective force ? I
believe that the loss of life on one side has been something dreadful.
211. On which side ? On the part of the blacks.
212. On what grounds do you say so ? From my having missed persons that lam
acquainted with.
213. In that part of the district ? Yes,
214. Do you think there is no other way in which they might disappear without being
killed by the whites ? I only judge from the reports of friends : 1 miss certain blacks,
and ask for them—l am told that they have been shot.
215. Recollect that we are speaking of the force as it stands, and not of any improve-
ment that may he effected in it. Are you aware that two or three years ago a great
number of the force were disbanded, and trained troopers turned loose among the blacks ?
I heard so.
216. And you are also aware that the Hornet Bank murder and others took place
immediately after ? I think the Hornet Bank murder was led on by a man that had
been in the Native Police Force.
217. Whatever course is pursued you would not recommend any disbandment? I
think the subject is fraught with the greatest difficulty.
218. Do


218. Do you think that if the same sort of men as the old Mounted Troopers could be
procxxred out of the regiments in the colonies, and an equal number of natives were
attached to them, that such a plan would answer ? I think it would.
219. Something was said about the trackers being servants to the troopers, Did I not
understand you that they should be servants to the white troopers? I think that it
would be an advantage that a trooper should attach a particular black to himself, as hia
friend and servant, whom he could depend on.
220. You think that in this way the force might be kept up without being disbanded—
if a white Police Force were formed on the coast, by substituting white troopers in the
place of the black troopers, the latter being sent to the frontier ? Yes.
221. You stated that blacks should be attached to the white troopers, have you known
any instances of the blacks remaining any length of time with wdiite men? Yes, I
have known a black remain with a white in this town four or five years.
222. Are such cases frequent ? Very frequent.
223. Speaking of an instance of cannibalism at Maryborough, did you ever know of
any in the neighborhood of Brisbane ? No.
224. Do you believe that it exists in Brisbane ? I believe it does, it is part of their
religious service to eat a portion of their relatives.
225. Have you heard that just before the establishment of the Native Police Force, a
number of murders were committed in all parts of the Colony—in all parts of what is
now Queensland ? When the Police Force was originally established I was in the
neighborhood of Twofold Bay, and did not hear what took place to the north.
Lieutfa'ant FREDERICK WHEELER called in and further examined:—
1. By Mr. Watts : You have said in your evidence that you never received any written or
printed instructions from the Commandant ? Not in reference to the services peculiar to the
Native Police. There are some general orders about the management of the men, and, to a
certain degree, in one clause you are instructed to disperse all assemblages of the blacks,
because they always lead to cattle spearing or sheep stealing—they always lead to that.
2. But you have no written or printed instructions ? No printed ones.
3. In what way then do you act ? I act according to the letters I receive from squatters.
4. Do you not think it is right that you should be cognizant of the facts before you take your
measures ? If a man has been murdered or sheep or cattle have been stolen, I generally go to
the station —go to the proprietor of the station —and ride about it, and pick up tracks.
5. Do you take the precaution to go and see any cattle, or camps, that have I eon reported to
have been rushed ? We could not track cattle far; where cattle have been killed, we some-
times come upon a dead beast, that is very rare—but we can generally tell whether they have
been rushed or not—whether the blacks have been through the- run or not; besides, the
proprietor of the station and the stock-keeper can tell us that.
6. Do you think it right to pursue these blacks—say a month after their depredations? Well,
yes, if you can be perfectly certain of the facts a month afterwards. I have always acted imme-
diately—whenever I have been called upon, I have gone up to the station immediately.
7. Do you not think that these depredators should be captured? You don’t know who they
are, it is the tribe you follow —you can’t see the depredators.
8. Do you not think there is any other way of dealing with them, except by shooting them ?
No, I don't think they can understand anything else except shooting them; at least, that is the
case, so far as my experience goes.
9. When you go to a camp, do you call upon them in the Queen’s name, in any way, to sur-
render ? No, because directly they see you they run ; you have to gallop to get on to them :
if you were to call upon them to surrender, you would never be able to keep them in sight.
10. In those particular cases which the Chairman alluded to the other day at Fassifern and
Duo-andan, had you any warrant to apprehend any particular man in that tribe ? I had old
warrants for several blacks that live about there ; there is one out against Cranky Charlie, who
committed a rape upon a girl many years ago, and I had an old warrant for a boy of the name
of Jemmy One-eye (Millbong Jemmy), for trying to commit a rape at the Peak Mountain.
11. Are your Police in the habit of taking the gins from the tribes? No, except with my
instructions.
12. Did they take any in that way in this case of Fassifern ? No, the gins came of their own
accord, they always follow the Native Police. The gins will follow the men, and I have some-
times nothing to do but to flog them off.
13. Did the Native Police take away any half-caste or gin that is at Fassifern House? Not
at Fassifern ; there are no young gins there, there are only old gins. Some young gins followed
us from the Dugandan Scrub, eight or nine miles away from Fassifern.
14. Are those gins still with your troopers? No, they only just stop anight, and get a piece
of tobacco in the morning, and go away, but we generally have to flog them off. They follow
the men all over the country. I have known them to follow the men for three days, and I have
had to flog them off in the middle of the night.
15. Do the Police do anything to induce them to leave their tribe to follow them ? No, it is
only customary to a certain degree : the men have seen them at the stations before, and some
of the gins are very much in love with the Police ; they generally meet the gins at the stations,
working - in the kitchens. That is the reason why I don't go to the stations where blacks are
kept—l always keep away. I rarely go to Fassifern.
1 ‘ ' 15. Do


16. Do you not think there should he some general -written or printed instructions given to the
officers of the Native Police? No, I don't think so.
17. By the Chairman : How often does the Commandant inspect your force ? He has been-
very often. When he was Inspector-General he was living here entirely.
18. No, hut as he is now, how often do you expect him to inspect your force ? Every quarter.
19. Do you send him reports of the proceedings of the Force? Yes of everything.
20. Does he send instructions, or interfere in the interval ? No, he never interferes with any-
thing I do.
21. You act pretty much on your own responsibility? Yes, I act on my own discretion, and
on my own responsibility.
22. By Mr. Gore : Do you think it would be practicable to take a black prisoner under ordi-
nary circumstances —for instance, if you met a camp of blacks in the scrub, would it be
possible to take any of them prisoners without their consent ? No, I don’t think so, not in a
scrub, you might on a station.
28. Is it not very difficult, almost impossible, for a white man to take a blackfellow ? I
think it would be difficult, but I think, if there was a chance in an open plain, you might run
a blackfellow up a tree, and you would soon get him there. Ybu could not take him without "
shooting him, or felling the tree.
24. I want to know whether you could take them alive ? Hardly; the black might kill him-
self, or drown himself, if there were any water near.
25.. Do you ever receive warrants against blackfellows guilty of offences ? Yery few, I have
received two
26. What do you do with them ? I try to execute the warrant, and if lam not able to
execute it, I send it back again.
27. By whose orders do you send it back—where do you send it to ? I send it back to the
Inspector-General of Police.
28. Who is the Inspector-General ? Mr. Morisset.
29. By whose orders ? By his own ; he was the Inspector-General, and kept them in his own
office. After having tried to execute it, and failed, I send the warrant back.
30. Don’t you think it would be much better that the warrants for this part of the country
should remain in your possession, so that you might be able to execute them as occasion offers ?
I have got copies—a copy is sufficient —the originals are kept in the office.
31. Do you know of a great many being in existence for various offenders ? Only of two or
three. Mr. Sneyd would know more about the matter ; I know of one for Nelson, and Millbong
Jemmy.
32. Against Nelson, for what? For murder of a woman and boy.
33. And Millbong Jemmy, for what ? Attempt at rape.
34. Are there any others —do you know of one for one of Mr. North’s blackfellows ? Yes.
35. For what? The murder of a gin.
36. By Mr. Moffatt : That was a Coroner’s warrant, was it not ? It might have been—or
a warrant from the Ipswich Bench.
37. By Mr. Gore : Are you not liable, in the course of your patrol, to meet with any of
these blacks ? Yery rarely.
38. Is it possible that they might belong to those districts you patrol ? Yes, they might
belong to them.
39. Of course, they keep out of the way, if they know you are after them ; but if they came
within your reach, you might meet them ? There might be a chance—a very little chance :
whenever there is a warrant out against any of them, they go away to some other part of the
country.
40. Do they not go to the Logan ? If that is not their country, they would be more likely to
go to Stradbrooke Island, or the Tooloom diggings ; the largest number of them go there.
41. Is not the passage between the Mainland and Bribie Island drying up ? I was never there ;
you might cross with cattle between Stradbrooke Island and the Mainland ; you might swim
bullocks across.
42. By Mr. Feerett : I understood you the other day in your evidence to say that there had
been some complaint from Mr. Carden Collins, also from Mr. Hardie, with regard to some
depredations, before you brought up the blacks to Fassifern ? Yes.
43. 'Then you were informed -of this by Mr. Compigne and others —did they say what tribes
had done it V Yes, they mentioned the tribe.
44. What tribe was it ? The Telcmon tribe —a large bad tribe.
45. What is the number, do you suppose, of this Telemon tribe? There might be GO to 100
lighting men in it there might be more.
46. By the Chairman : Warriors? Warriors. But with gins and piccaninnies, and old men,
no doubt they would amount to 200 or 250.
47. By Mr. Fereett : After being informed that it was the Telemon tribe, you searched
that country to find that tribe ? Yes, I did.
48. Was it the Telemon tribe you found at Dugandan? I believe it was —yes.
49. .When you came on these blacks at Dugandan, was it early in the day or late at night ?
Late at night—nearly dark.
50. What led you to believe that it was the Telemon tribe —had you any information ? I had
a black boy tracking with me, not a policeman, and I had been the last fourteen days on their
track. , . '
isl. Do I understand that this'was the same tribe that you followed on to Fassifern? We
followed their tracks, where they had run through the scrub,; two gins had run through, who
went to Fassifern: we followed these tracks through, and found some blacks there. I did this
on


on account of receiving a letter from Mr. Hardie, saying that the blacks had been killing-
cattle at Moograh, and that he could not get them away from the sheep stations. That letter,
with the other letters of complaint from the two Mr. Collins, and Mr. Henderson, the
Colonial Secretary has got. He has got five or six reports from different persons.
52. Did these letters complain of these blacks as the Telemon tribe ? Two gentlemen who
live at Telemon themselves sent word about their own tribe killing these cattle. I went out
with one of them —Mr. Arthur Collins, at Christmas Creek—they had driven away the men,
and robbed the hut.
53. I understood you to say just now something about the impossibility of looking after speared
cattle —do you mean by this, that if you waited to look for speared cattle, you would loose the
chance of overtaking the blacks ? No doubt, I should lose a great deal of time.
54. You stated to the Committee that you were aware that some warrants were out against
the blacks, have you the means of carrying warrants about with you, —are you supposed to
carry them about with you ? lam not supposed to do so : I have a pouch that I could put
them in, but they might he lost in a creek ; and besides, I could not execute a warrant.
55. Then warrants, by being carried by you, would be liable to he lost or injured ? Yes,
they would be liable to that, if I carried them, and I might never sec the man.
56. Is it not customary for the Native Police, when cattle are reported to have been speared,
to follow on the tracks of the blacks, and to force them to disperse ? Yes, it is customary,
after they have killed cattle.
57. Do you know of any other -way of punishing them ? No.
58. Could you suggest any other, way ? No, I don’t think I could, except by giving them
plenty of bullocks to eat, and then, perhaps, they might spare yours.
59. Do you think it possible that any white man could follow blacks in the scrub, and appre-
hend them ? No.
GO. Do you think, from what you know of the blacks generally, or the Native Police, that, as
trackers, they would work well in connection with white troopers, and do the same good
service as they do now ? A single hlackfellow would bring a number of white Police on a
track, but when they came on to a scrub, the white men could not go into it after 1 them. On
open plains—open country—the white troopers might follow them.
61. So you think that white police would he useless in the scrub ? I think so.
62. Of course you have seen the Native Police fighting in the scrub ? Yes.
63. Do you think they are useless in the scrub ? They are in their native country, in the
scrub.
64. They are not useless in the scrub ? Not useless; they will go into the scrub, and
remain there two or three hours when fighting a mob of blacks.
65. Do you think any other Police Force we have could follow the blacks in the scrub, and
apprehend them, hut the Native Police themselves ? No, I don’t think any others could do so,
hut the Native Troopers.
66. Do you think it possible that the Native Police should go for three weeks or a month
together, remain out, and yet live, without rations ? Yes, the Native Police could do so : I
have done it myself for seventeen days.
07. Do you think any white police could do the same ? No, I don't think so ; they might, if
they were good men—hut I hardly think so.
68. Could the white men, from what you know generally, support themselves in the hush ?
No, they could not. The troopers get me food when lam out with them.
C 9. Does it not sometimes happen, even with the Native Police, that a Policeman or two goes
astray in tracking? It sometimes happen that Policemen of the Force get away from the main
body. I have known them to part, and go a mile or two miles from each other, and then
meet, and come to the same point.
70. By the Chairman: Do you think a white man could do anything of that sort? No; a
white man could not see the track.
71. By Mr. Ferrett : Do you think that it is from a knowledge of the country that the
blacks do this, or from a kind of natural instinct ? They will each take one track, and follow
the one track from instinct ; and, after a time, —after they have been stationed sometime in a
district—they get to know the country as well as their own country—and get to know all the
short tracks and cuts.
72. Do they not sometimes do this in a country they don’t know? Oh, yes ! They follow
different tracks in a strange country, and go a mile away from each other, and meet again.
73. Do you know anything at all of the languages of the blacks? A little.
74. Have you any idea how many different languages we have along this coast? We have
several different languages.
75. Does any one hlackfellow know the whole of the languages along this coast ?
The troopers understand the language about Coliuton on the Brisbane, Cresshrook, and Mount
Brisbane. There is a great resemblance in the languages.
76. Do you think the blacks here understand the blacks of the interior—those on the Downs,
at Maranoa, and other places away to the southward? I think the blacks up at Coliuton
understand the blacks of the Downs; they go to Myall Creek, and the blacks from Myall
Creek come right to the Bunya Bunya district, and Eskdale and Cameron’s on the Teviot; tin?
blacks from the head of the Condamine go right to the head of the Clarence Eiver ; and I
believe they understand the natives there.
77. Are you aware that the blacks on the lower part of the Condamine speak the same
language as those at the head? I have never been there ; I can’t say.
78. From what you know of the hash, do.you think there is abundance of food for the blacks,
without interfering with cattle ? I believe there is a greater number of kangaroo than there
was former] v.
79. Fv


79. By Mr. Eoyds : Do you not consider that information received from squatters, as to
outrages, is quite sufficient authority to cause the Native Police to follow and punish the
offenders? Yes.
80. And also that the whole affair should be left to the discretion of the officer of the district ?
Yes, ho is responsible to the Commandant.
81. Do you consider that any stockholders would send to the Native Police if the blacks had
not committed outrages ? Never.
82. Do you generally find that stockholders are kind to the blacks, or otherwise ? They are
kind- They always have them about the stations, and if they commit depredations, of course
they are punished.
83. By Mr. Movi/att : How long have you been at Saudgate? Two years—more than two
years.
84 Do you think it is a central spot for the Police to be stationed at ? Not exactly a central
spot. There is no necessity for patrolling much about the Brisbane. Where lam generally
called out is on the Logan, the Teviot, and the Tweed Eivers. I very rarely patrol on the
Brisbane. The only place where blacks kill cattle is at Griffin’s, on the Pine Eiver.
85. Would you recommend the removal of the station towards the Logan, or Teviot Brook ?
When I first came I mentioned to Captain Wickham that it would be better to have the station
on the other side of the river, but he wanted me to camp at Sandgate, because the Bribie
Islanders used to come over in boats, and land up at the mouth of the Pine River. They used
to go up and steal corn from the Bald Hill farmers, and the Bald Hill farmers applied fox-
protection.
86. Are you aware that they asked Captain Wickham to have the station on this side of the
water ? They mentioned it to him.
87. Are you still of opinion that the station should be at Sandgate No, I think that, as the
blacks never go to the Bald Hill farmers now, it should be removed.
88. Do you think that the Mounted Troopers from here might patrol in that district?
Y’es.
89. How often does the Bunya Bunya season occur? Every two years. This is the
Bunya season.
90. Do you consider it necessary for an officer to patrol in the neighbourhood, in the Bunya
season ? Decidedly, if the Bunya is in the neighbourhood of his district. There is Bunya
Bunya in my district, at Cooyar, near Goode’s Inn.
91. Do you find that the blacks have become much more civilized since the Native Police has
been established at Sandgate than they were formally? That is a question lam not prepared
to answer, I know so little of the blacks. They run before me —-I never see them.
92. Can you state what number of outrages, since you have been stationed at Sandgate, have
occurred in your district ? The blacks have attacked and robbed the huts of Mr. Henderson,
on the Albert. Mr. Compigne is always suffering from them; he had to bring all his sheep to
the head station.
93. Do you know of any particular outrage? Only that attempt at rape, at the Peak
Mountain.
94. Do you know anything of a case of rape at Fassifern ? I did at Moograh.
93. What do you know about that case ? I know nothing about it except from hearsay. I got
no warrant to apprehend the man. I have seen the girl that was said to have had the attempt
made on her.
96. Is it known that this was the girl? She was pointed out to me as the girl.
97. But has your attention been attracted to no blacks that have been reported to have
committed a rape at Moograh ? Yes, I believe two —Cranky Charlie and Millbong Jemmy
—are reported as the blackfellows who committed this rape.
98. In the course of patrolling in that neighbourhood, if you saw these men would you think it
your duty to apprehend or shoot them ? I would not apprehend or shoot them, as there is no
warrant out against them, and the thing was hushed up.
99. What other outrage do you know of? Of their killing cattle at Griffin’s, on the Pine
River, and maiming Mr. Bigge's bullock-drivers, at Wivenhoe; also of their killing cattle at
Mr. Carden Collins’, and threatening to attack the station.
100. Do you know of any other cases of rape besides those you have mentioned ? Not exactly
rape, but assaults on little girls at Durandur, and a rape on a woman on the Dugandan
station.
101. Do you think the crime of rape is common among the blacks —is it on the increase among
them ? It is on the increase when they get civilized.
102. As they become civilized ? As they become civilized the cases of rape become more
frequent.
103. Do you observe much mortality among the blacks ? There have been a number of cases
since I came to the district. I hear from different squatters that they are dying off very fast.
104. Do you know of cases of their having died from drink, and of venereal disease ? Yes.
105. Do you approve of the system of giving the blacks blankets? No, it brings them to
town, and they kill cattle all along the road. Wo generally have to follow them.
106. Do you observe afterwards, on meeting them in the bush, that many of them have their
blankets? No, they throw them away, and they get destroyed. Very few keep their
blankets.
107. Do they dispose of them for grog ? I think it is very possible. They give them to
other blacks, and pass them along.
FRIDAY,


FRIDAY, Vlth MAY, 1861.
present ?
Mu. MACKENZIE, Mr. BLAKENF.Y,
Mk. W ATTS, Mr. FERRETT, '
Mr. FITZSIMMONS, Mr. ROYDS,
Alr. GORE.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
Mu. HENRY BABBITT called in and examined;—
1. By the Chairman ; I believe you have been travelling through this Colony for some
months ? Yes, for 14 or 13 months.
2. Throughout the interior, as agent for Colton’s maps ? Yes. I wish to state that Ido not
come here as a voluntary witness, and that I have no complaint to make in giving my evidence.
3-. By Mr. Watts : I believe you have been travelling in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton ?
Yes.
4. Will you state what occurred in that case in which you were concerned in connection with
the Native Police—where did you meet them? Near a station called Calliangal, in the;
Dawson District. , , ,
5. Were the Native Police, when you came across them, in search of a prisoner ? Yes.
61 Did yon see that prisoner ? I did.
7. Was he a. white man or a black ? He was a hlackfellow.
8. Do you know Iris name ? He was called Gulliver.
9. Do you know what was the nature of the crime for which he was supposed to have been
taken? Yes., It was the murder of a woman at Rockhampton.
10. For the murder of Fanny Briggs ? YYs.
11. 'Where did you see him ? I first saw him on the hanks of the Dee.
12. What was he doing ? He was in custody of a party of draymen—they had secured him.
13. Where did you see him next? After I had been there half-an-hour, or perhaps an hour,
the Native Police came up ; they had been in pursuit of him for some time, and the draymen
had captured him. The Native Police then put him into the carriage that I was travelling
with. Fie had boon intoxicated by the draymen when they took him, and quite stupilied with
liquor. He was hound hand and foot.
14. How was he hound ? His arms were fastened behind him with a cord, and the same
cord was fastened round his legs, which were drawn up so as to form a sort of triangle. That
was done by the draymen. When he was put into the carriage his legs were unfastened, but
his arms were still bound. The party then formed a guard round the prisoner. There were
two or three white men from the Calliangal Station, and the Native Police and their officers,
Lieut. JPowell and Cadet Genetas —quite a formidable party altogether. They formed a guard
behind, and a guard in advance, and one of them was in the carriage with the prisoner. We
then drove about four miles to a scrub. The station we started from lies about three miles off
the main road, and when we got to the junction of the main road with the station road, they
took Gulliver out of the carriage and put him under a tree.
15. Who put. him under the tree ? The police.
1(1; Did any one order them to do so ? The officers of the police put him there themselves;
I dare say the troopers assisted them. He was thoroughly stupified with drink. The
party belonging to the station then drove up with me to the Calliangal Station, from which we,
had-started in the morning. AYe started in order to bring Gulliver to the station, and met the
Native Police on our way.
17. What became of Gulliver after that ? I knew nothing further until a few minutes after-,
wards the Native Police arrived at the station without their prisoner. When they took him out.
of the carriage they said they were going to make him walk. They might have had the use of
my carriage as far as the station, if they had wished. I think one of the Native Police came
up first, and my impression was that he had merely come up for supplies, or something of the
sort. I asked him what they were going to do with Gulliver, and he said, “He no keep away,
any more.” Very soon, afterwards the rest of the party came up. Some time after that, when
I thought the police would he in a hurry to return to the place—where, as I supposed they had
left Gulliver tied to a tree —as there appeared to me to he something singular about the affair,
I asked one of the white men what had been done with Gulliver, and he said it was one of
those things which ought not to he talked about.
18. Did you afterwards ascertain the fact —whether Gulliver had been disposed of or not? I
said nothing further about it, hut I knew from that, that he had been killed. I did not ascer-
tain anything further. It was such a short time from my arrival at the station until the Native
Police came up, that there was not time for Gulliver to have come to himself and to have
made any attempt to escape.
19. Why did the Police not take him on in your carriage ? They did not give me any reason.
20. Have.you. anything else to state ? No. A long time after that I saw' a printed report of
the affair, and of Gulliver’s being shot, the particulars of which seemed so different from my
impressions on the subject, that I mentioned the fact to one or two persons, and I did not think
any further notice would have been taken of it.
21. Could


21. Could the Police have had your vehicle if they had wanted to take the prisoner into safe
keeping ? They might have had it, but they formed a large party, and it was unnecessary for
• them to use a vehicle. There were two or three Officers and two or three of the Native
Police.
22. By the CiiAmiiAV : Had you been to Rockhampton before that ? No; and I had not been
to Rockhampton then.
2d. Were you acquainted with Fanny Briggs ? I never saw her.
24. Are you aware that this, was a most atrocious murder ? Yes.
25. How did you a;certain that it was perpetrated hy the Native Police? At that time there
were conflicting opinions in reference to it. I heard Lieutenant Murray state, at Taroom,
that he did not think the Native Police had anything to do with it.
26. Were you not aware that this man Gulliver was one of the first who confessed that he was
c mcerned in the murder ? I beard it after I arrived at Rockhampton.
27. Were yon not aware, by the published report from the Police to the Government, that
Gulliver was shot while making his escape ? I saw that report.
28. You stated that Gulliver, when you saw him, was in a helpless state of intoxication ?
Yes.
29. Could he not have recovered sufficiently to make his escape ? Ido not think so.
30. Do you not-think the Native Police, seeing him in that state, might have been off their
guard ? I don’t think it was possible for him to have escaped, he appeared so perfectly
helpless.
31. Are you aware that there was a warrant out against Gulliver? I had heard there was.
Si. Arc you aware that when a warrant is out against a person, and he attempts to escape, it
is justifiable to shoot him ? Yes.
33. By Mr. Blakeney ; You say that , when you first saw Gulliver with the bullock-driven;
he was tied hand and foot, and that the Police unfastened his legs when they put him into
your vehicle ? Yes.
34. When he was laid down at the foot of the vehicle only his arms or hands were tied ?
His arms were tied behind him.
35. And his feet were not tied? I think not.
36. Then an active blackfcllow, with only his hands tied, could easily have made his escape ?
I think not; his arms were hound in a peculiar way, and he was in a very helpless condition.
His whole system, when he was taken from the carriage, was like a loose rag.
37. Might he not have been feigning ? It is possible, hut Ido not think so.
38. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: 'Were yon present when this man Gulliver was taken prisoner?
I was not; he was taken prisoner and tied hand and foot by the draymen, and word was sent
to the station, which was about seven miles .off.
39. Will you describe the carriage you were travelling in ? It is called an American buggy—
a light vehicle with four wheels.
40. Did the Officers demand as a right to put him in, or did you give them leave ? The
proprietor of the station, Mr. Robison, asked me if I would lend my buggy to bring the
prisoner up to the station. We started the next morning, and met the Native Police
halfway.
41. Did you hear the Officers in command say it would bean act of kindness to loosen the
bindings on the prisoner's legs ? It was done as a matter of necessity, because, in the position
he was in it was impossible to put him into the carriage so that he could ride ; it was not
done as an act of kindness, hut to suit his particular shape to the carriage. The carriage is
a small one, and there was very little room.
42. Did you ever see a man run with his hands tied behind his hack ? No.
43. Do you not think it possible for a man so situated to run ? I don’t think it is possible for
a man to run with the same speed as if his hands were loosed.
44. Now, will you tell this Committee what reason you have for supposing that this man was
shot ? 1 have no other reasons beyond those I have stated.
45. Will you state the reasons which led you to that conclusion ? W ell, when I left him,
Gulliver was a prisoner in tlie custody of the Native Police, and it was only a few minutes
after that that the whole party came up to the station without their prisoner ; and the next
morning they went away hy another road ; they did not return to the same place at all. They
remained at the station all that day, and went off the next morning in a different direction.
46. What time elapsed after yon left Gulliver with the Native Police until their arrival at the
station ? Only a few minutes, it might have been half an hour or an hour, but it only
appeared to me to be a very few minutes.
47. Will you answer what I asked you directly, instead of waiving the question hy explana-
tions, what was your reason for concluding that Gulliver had been shot ? X have given you
my reasons; there did nut appear to me to have been time for him to have recovered and make
his escape; and the blackfcllow told me “ that he wouldn’t get away again ;” and then the
police did not return to the place again, for I saw their tracks, and know that they went a
different way.
48. When the police took Gulliver out of your carriage, was it distinctly stated that their
object was to make him walk ? Yes.
49. By Mr. Watts : Well, don’t you think it would ho a natural conclusion to come to, that,
in order to make him walk, they had loosed him altogether ? Ido not know what is their
usual mode of treating prisoners.
70. By Mr. Fitzsimmons ; You have no reason to suppose that they did not make him walk ?
Is u reason at all; but, as I .said before, there was not time for him to have recovered and
made any attempt to escape. Besides which, his hands wore tied in such a maimer that Ido
not think lie could have got away.
51. Do


51. Do you know how much liquor had been given to him ? No; I heard the draymen say
they had given him as much as he could drink. I could not say from my own knowledge that
they had given him any, hut I heard that he had keen taken prisoner in that way.
52. One tiling appears to me singular in your evidence. You say that the Officers of the
Native Police handed the prisoner from the vehicle, were not the Police there to do it ? They
assisted. I know I saw one blackfellow assisting, and I think one of the white men. I
cannot speak exactly.
53. You cannot say positively that the white men assisted the Police ? I cannot say positively.
I know it was done by their orders. They were there directing the Police.
54. Were you in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton when you heard of the murder ? I
was not.
55. Was there not a great sensation in reference to the murder in the different places you
travelled through ? I believe it caused great excitement at every station on the Dawson, and,
in fact, throughout the country —it was talked about everywhere.
56. Did you hear that Gulliver was the principal in the outrage '? I was told at Rockhampton
that he had confessed something about it to a white man, hut nothing further was known,
57. Did you hear that he was the principal in the Frazer murders on the Dawson ? I did
not. I believed from what I heard that he had committed this murder, or that he had a hand
in it. I was informed subsequently that he had robbed a sheep station, and that a quantity of
stolen property had been found upon him—among other things a pair of blankets and a
carbine, which were returned to the owners by the Officers. I know the carbine was
returned.
58. Did you bear that a reward had been offered for his apprehension ? I was told so; I
. heard some conversation as to who was entitled to the reward.
59. By Mr. Ferrett : When this man Gulliver was handed out from your carriage by the
Police—or at any time previous to that —did the Police say anything in your hearing about
shooting him if he did not walk, or for anything else ? No.
60. Have I understood you to say that you came to the conclusion that Gulliver was shot ?
That was my own impression.
61. But, as the Police said nothing about shooting, what made you think so —did anyone else
say anything about shooting him ? Certainly not, at least I heard nothing. I have given you
my reasons for coming to that conclusion.
62. Did you ever see blackfellows mimicking white men, either when they are drunk or in any
. other form or shape'? I have never seen them.
WEDNESDAY, 22 nd MAY, 1861.
present t
Mr. MUFF ATT. Mr. FITZSIMMONS,
Mu. ULAKENEY. Me. WATTS,
Me. GORE, Me. FERRETT.
The Honorable 11. 11. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
The Honorable ALFRED WILLIAM COMPIGNE, M.L.C., examined by permission of
the Legislative Council ;
1. By the Chairman : I believe you are a squatter in the Logan district? Yes.
2. Were not the blacks very troublesome in your district about the end of December
last ? Yes.
3. Did you, about that time, write a letter to Lieutenant Wheeler, an officer in charge of a
detachment of Native Police ? Yes, I sent several notes to him at different times, and I
have sent messages when I required him.
4. On the occasion I refer to did not Mr. Wheeler go up ? Yes.
5. Did he call at your station? Yes. When he came up there were no blacks about the
station, as is usually the case.
6. What information bad you given him in reference to the depredations which had been
committed ? I gave him full particulars of what the blacks had done.
7. What bad they done ? They had robbed the lints, and stolen some of the sheep.
8. Were more than one tribe of blacks concerned in the depredations? Oh, yes; they
collect together from the coast and from the Richmond. We have sometimes 300 blacks on
the run.
9. Had yon anything to guide you as to the particular tribe who had committed the
depredations ? No.
10. Are the blacks generally quiet or troublesome on the Logan ? Yery troublesome in our
neighbourhood. Prior to the detachment of Native Police being stationed there I lost
from 400 to 1500 sheep every year; and the first time Lieutenant Williams came to the
station be found the blacks killing a bullock within 400 yards of my bouse.
11. Then


11. Then they are not so bad since the establishment of the Native Police ? No,, it is the
Police that keep them quiet.
12. Are they more troublesome during those periods when they collect together ? Yes,
they are rarely troublesome at other times.
13. At what periods do they congregate ? At no fixed periods, I believe.
14. Is it when they hold the borees ? There is always some mummery of that sort going
on when they collect.
15. Then you merely gave Mr. Wheeler general information in reference to the aggressions
by the blacks ? Did you tell him which way they had gone ? Y cs, I told him they had
gone towards Coochin.
10. And he followed them ? Yes.
17. Did you go with him ? No, I have never been with him off my own run.
18. Then you were not with him when he came upon the blacks ? No.
11). Did you hear afterwards what had taken place ? I heard that the Native Police came
upon the blacks in the scrub somewhere in the neighbourhood of Coochin.
20. Have the blacks committed any depredations since ? With the exception of robbing
one of my huts and a hut at Mr. Henderson’s station, they have committed none since.
21. They have not collected in such large numbers since that time? No, I think not ;
they seldom collect in such large numbers more than once in six mouths.
22. I think you stated that since the detachment of Native Police had been stationed there,
the blacks had been less troublesome ? Oh, far less troublesome; previous to that time I
could not send a married shepherd to any station except the head station, as the women
would be ravished by the blacks.
23. Were there any cases of rape ? Yes. I have but one married couple now ; they are
stationed within three miles of the head station, and when their time is expired I shall
have no married shepherds, except at the head station.
24. Have you known any cases of rape on your own stations ? Yes.
25. More than one 1 Yes.
26. Distinctly traceable to the blacks? Yes.
27. Were they prosecuted for the offence? No. Upon one occasion, some years ago, I
came into town and reported a case to Mr. Brown, the Police Magistrate, and he said he
could not send out any police, for they had gone out after blacks who had committed a
similar offence in this place.
28. Were none of the blacks prosecuted? No.
29. I believe you have had a good deal of experience of the natives in different parts of the
Colony,—have you not found that the coast blacks are generally the worst ? Yes.
30. Always the most difficult to tame ? Yes.
31. Why is that the case? Because their scrubs and swamps are always near the coast, and
their movements less circumscribed. The coast blacks are always larger, better fed, and
stronger blacks than the others.
32. Have any of their hunting-grounds been taken away ? No; they live chiefly on fish.
38. By Mr. Blakeney : Then they do not commit depredations from want of food ? No,
they are always very fat—at least all that I have seen have been so.
34. Was the damage to your property from the blacks considerable during the last year ?
No, the loss was not very great.
35. What did it consist of, —you say you had occasion to apply to Leutenant Wheeler 'i
There might have been about 200 sheep and about 20 cattle killed, besides which about
£SO worth of other property, such as flour, axes, blankets, &c., was destroyed or taken
away.
36. Do you recollect what time it was in December last that Lieutenant Wheel&r brought
the Police to your station ? Ido not exactly remember; he patrols the district
from time to time,
37. From your station, I understood you to say, he hunted the blacks to Coochin ?
Tiiey had left the station before he came, and I told. him where ho would find them—or at
least in what direction they had gone.
88. Was not that about Christmas time ? Yes, about that time.
39. How many years have the I'olice been stationed at Sandgate ? I cannot say exactly.
40. For several years, I believe? Yes, I think Mr. Williams was the first officer, and Mr.
Wheeler the second.
41. Have you derived great benefit from their being stationed in the neighbourhood? Yes ;
the mere patroling the district does all that is required,
42. Could this Police Station he done away with, with safety to the neighbourhood? No,
certainly not. I have one run now for which I have been paying assessment, and upon
which I dare not put sheep. I have had them driven off by the blacks.
43. Where is that ? About 45 miles from this place. It would not he safe for females in
that neighbourhood if the Police were removed. The blacks know that Lieutenant Wheeler
patrols the district, and if he were sent away they would fancy he was not coming back
again, and become very troublesome.
44. Have you found Lieutenant Wheeler an active officer in the discharge of his duties
since ho has been stationed at Sandgate ? I have never been acquainted with any officer
who has attended to his duty so regularly as Mr. Wheeler. 1
45. By Mr. Gore : Have you made any attempts to employ the blacks at your stations at
anytime? Yes, but I have had to get rid of them because they plundered my huts and
stole sheep.
46. Have you had them attached to your establishment? Yes; I have had stations where
6000 sheep were shepherded by blacks.
47. Did


47. Bid they not frequently leave their sheep upon very slight notice ? Yes, but there
were a few who could be trusted, and they would tell me when any of the others were about
to leave me without notice.
48. Did they frequently leave their work to go to borees, or corroborees? Yes,
whenever those meetings were held; but there were two amongst them who had been longest
with me, who used to give me notice of their intentions.
49. Still they always went ? Oh, yes.
50. Do you know what they do at those borees ? I cannot say that I do, except they cat
beef and mutton.
51. Don’t you think such meetings are very prejudicial to any attempt to civilize the blacks,
and that they ought to be put a stop to ? Yes, if they were stopped there would be no
depredations committed.
52. Is it not at those meetings that they concoct their schemes of aggression ? Yes, it is
always at the breaking up of these meetings that the mischief is done.
53. And the station blacks arc expected by their countrymen to attend ? Yes, they
must go.
54. Are you aware, from your own knowledge, that the station blacks have attended these
meetings from a sort of compulsion ? Yes, I have known many instances of it.
55. Do you think those meetings could be put a stop to ? Yes, because they are generally
known for weeks beforehand.
56. Could the Police put a stop to them ? Yes, I have known them do so. Those
meetings should be put a stop to, as the first step to be taken, if anything like civilization
is attempted-
-57. Is it dangerous to interfere with the blacks on those occasions ? It is dangerous for any
one to go near them.
58. Have you heard that unnatural crimes have been committed at those meetings 1 Yes,
I have heard so.
59. A.nd that the blacks practise cannibalism on those occasions? Yes, I believe they do.
60. Do you think it practicable to organize a Corps to consist of white troopers with a
certain number of black trackers attached to them ? No, I think the present Force,
properly looked after, is the best that could be had.
61. What do you think would be the result if such a Corps as I have mentioned were
organized ? Oh, they would laugh at it. The blacks attached to the Force would he
merely of service as trackers, and would not he sufficient for attack.
62; And supposing the Force were mixed—half of it composed of white men, and half of
black ? The blacks would constitute the only effective portion of the Force ; the white
troopers would be able to do nothing. This is not an ojien country, and they would he of
no service.
63. With reference to the strength and the organization of such a Force, do you think the
blacks would agree with the ordinary class of white troopers such as we should be able to
get,—would there not always be dissensions among them ? Yes, certainly.
64. Are not the blacks generally more amenable to the authority of any person whom they
consider a gentleman, than they are to the common hands of the country ? Always.
65. In case of the Native Police having to track the blacks for several days, through a
rough country, could not they support themselves and their officers by hunting ? OK, yes;
they constantly do it.
66. But they neither could nor would support the white troopers ? No, Ido not suppose
they would.
67. And the white troopers would not he able to support themselves ? I do not think so.
The blacks would provide for their own officer, whom they know, but not for anyone
else.
68. By Mr. Watts: You mentioned in the course of your observations just now that the
huts on your stations and in other places were frequently robbed, —are there no hut-
keepers at those stations ? Sometimes the huts are robbed when there is no hutkeeper; at
other times the hut-keeper is hailed up; and sometimes the blacks watch for an opportunity
when he leaves the hut.
69. Are the hut-keepers provided with fire-arms to defend themselves ? Yes.
70. Do you think if the men were desirous of protecting your property, and were to resort
to arms, they could prevent such aggressions ? Yes, in many cases; hut they arc generally
•taken by surprise.
71. Du you think it right and just that the blacks should he pursued and shot
indiscriminately ? Certainly not.'
72. I presume you know all about the case at Dugandan, that was quoted in the papers ?
No, I do not.
73. Do you think there is any way of catching the actual depredators and bringing them
into the hands of justice ? It is very difficult to identify them,
74. Are you not of opinion that some general regulations ought to be laid down by the
Commandant of Police for the guidance of the Officers ? Certainly.
75. Are yon aware that is not the case at present? I believe it is not.
76. Then you think the present system requires some modification ? Yes.
77. The Officers of the Native Police at present act according to their own discretion ? 1
believe they do.
78. And they are just as likely to retaliate upon a tribe who have not committed the
depredation, as upon the one who has ? No, I don’t think that.
79. Do you think it right that the Force should bo employed to punish a tribe some long
period after the depredation has been committed ? No, not unless the parties can he
identified.
Kb Would


80. Would you not then suggest that. If identified, the guilty parties should be taken, if
possible, and not shot? Yes.
81. By Mr. Fkiuiktt : Have yon ever seen a blackfellow apprehended in scrub ? I have
never seen one apprehended ; but I have known a black to be apprehended in a scrub by the
Native Police,
82. Do you think it possible for a white man to apprehend a blackfellow in scrub? It is
almost impossible.
88. Is it not almost impossible for a white man to get through the scrub, to say nothing of
apprehending 9, blackfellow? Yes; it would only be under very favorable circumstances
that a white man would have any chance with a blackfellow in scrub.
84. Is it not a very difficult matter to secure a blackfellow in scrub after he is apprehended ?
Certainly.
85. Are you aware of the means which the Native Police adopt to secure a blackfellow
when they have apprehended him in scrub ? They handcuff him, and tie his hands after-
wards. Generally, the blacks manage to shake off the handcuffs if their hands are not
bound as well.
85. Do not the blacks, after being apprehended, frequently get rid of their bonds and hand-
cuffs, and get away from the Native Police ? Occasionally.
87. Have you ever known a white man hold a blackfellow after he has apprehended him ?
He must hold him to apprehend him.
B'B. But I mean to secure the blackfellow after he has apprehended him ? I never knew a
black to be secured by a white man.
89. By Mr. Watts : During your experience of the Native Troopers, have you ever noticed
that they are in the habit of taking away gins from the tribes ? I have not known it from
my own observation, but I have heard that they do so.
90. Are you aware that when any injury is done to the blacks, they are sure to retaliate ?
It is natural to suppose that they would, but I do not know whether they always do.
91. Do you not think the taking away their gins would be likely to lead to retaliation
elsewhere, if not in the same place ? Yes, the blacks would retaliate in some form or
other.
92. Do they not consider that we are all brothers, and that, if they kill a white man forty
or fifty miles away, they do us the same injury ? I cannot say; I am not aware of that
feeling.
90. Is not that the general impression among them ? Ido not know.
94. Would you not suggest that, if the Native Police Force be retained, they should not be
allowed to go into the townships ? They never ought to go near the townships, unless called
there by duty. They must go there occasionally to get their horses shod.
95. Have you not heard that they generally get drunk when they enter a township ? Yes,
that is often the case. I have seen it myself.
96. And at those times they are not under the control of their officers ? No.
97. By the Chairman : Are you aware, Mr. Compigne, in speaking of the constitution of
the Native Police Force, that there are many complaints against it ? Yes.
98. Do you not think that these complaints, and the general feeling against the Force, tend
to weaken its efficiency and to risk its total annihilation ? Yes.
99. And do you not think the question might be met by altering the constitution of the
Force, by introducing into it more white troopers, in preference to doing away with it
altogether ? No ; I think, in order to be an effective Force, no white men should be
attache Ito it except the officers; but that great care should be taken in selecting those
office! s.
100. Have you had any opportunity of observing the Native Police Force in any other part
of the Colony ? No.
101. Do you think the troopers generally are under the proper control of their officers ?
Yes, where the officers are efficient men.
102. If a mixed corps were constituted, do you think they would be under proper control—
do you think there would be dissentions among the troopers ? Yes, the native troopers
would only obey one man.
108. But the men would be expected—whether black or white—to obey their officers. Why
should they disagree among themselves ? The white men would not associate with the
others upon terms of equality.
104. Do you consider that necessary to the efficiency of the Force ? Yes ; they would be
jealous of each other on account of the difference of pay. The Force should be wholly of
one class, either white or black—either white troopers, with one black attached to each
division ; or else all natives.
105. Have you been long enough in the Colony to remember the old Mounted Police ? Yes,
I remember them at Bathurst about twenty-one years ago, under old Serjeant Sandy.
106. What was your opinion of the old corps! It was a very efficient body of men, but
they were chiefly employed against bushrangers.
107. But still they were men selected from the different stations in the Colony, and were
all good busbmen, were they not ? Very good ; but there were no scrubs in that part of
the country for the blacks to get into, and when the troopers came near them, they had only
to draw their swords.
108. Were the blacks afraid of them ? Oh, yes.
109. Do you remember a ease where the blacks came in contact with the Police—on the
Namoi, I think ? Ido not remember the circumstance.
110. Yon have seen something of the Native Police Force in this Colony—do you think it
is properly officered? No, I don’t think they are the proper style of men.
lIP Do you think military men would be better? Far better.
112. Now


112. Now, with regard to the taking away gins by the Police, do you think .that—consti-
tuted as the Native Police Force is at present —there are any means of preventing this?
No, they are sure to take gins occasionally.
113. When a military force enters an enemy’s country, is there not always great difficulty
in preventing them from taking the females ? Yes.
114. I wish to ascertain whether you think it possible to prevent the native troopers from
taking gins, by any order given to the Force? The officers might do it to a certain extent,
but not wholly.
115. Do you think the practice of taking gins by the troopers lias a tendency to increase
the number of outrages against the whites ? Yes, to a certain extent, for, of course, it
annoys the blacks.
110. You think, then, the practice ought to be prevented, if possible ? Yes, it is the duty
of every officer to do so, if possible.
117. You say that the blacks, when they have committed an aggression, cannot be taken,
because they cannot be identified. Do yon think it is right to shoot them down without
identifying them ?' No, certainly not.
118. 1 suppose you are aware that the old Mounted Police could not act except under Her
Majesty’s warrant—in fact, the officers got their orders from the Bench of Magistrates? Yes.
119. Are you aware that was the case with the Native Police at one time ? lam not aware
of it.
120. Do you think it advisable that the same plan should he adopted now ? I think not;
a great many outrages occurred between the applications to Captain Wickham and the send-
ing for the Native Police. Besides which, the officer was jealous of receiving the order
through another person,
121. Do you think it right that the officers should be allowed to act without orders, either
from the Commandant, from a Police Magistrate, or the Bench of Magistrates of the Dis-
trict ? They ought to have general orders, but I think they should be prepared to start
immediately upon receipt of intelligence that an outrage has been committed.
122. If you were to scud for Mr, Wheeler, for instance, don’t you think he ought to get an
order to act ? It would take just double the time ; there might be a day or two lost in
seeing the Police Magistrate, explaining matters, and getting the order; and then he might
bo another day or two before be started.
123. Arc you aware of any general orders which the officers of the Native Police receive
from their Commandant ? lam not, but I imagine they must receive some.
124. Now, with regard to this outrage on the Logan, you stated—and it was also stated in
Mr. Wheeler’s evidence —that several tribes were present. Do you think they should all bg
treated as equal participators in the outrage, when the Police came upon them ? Certainly,
all that were there.
125. Are you aware that Mr. Wheeler singled out one particular tribe, and did not interfere
with the others ? I don’t imagine that he could do so.
126. By Mr. Ferrett ; Prom what you know of the blacks, do you think it is better, when
an outrage has been committed, that the Native Police should follow them up at once, ami
punish the tribe as they fall in with them, or follow them up, and not punish them, because
they cannot identify the particular blacks who have committed the outrage ? The blacks
should be punished on the spot; they don’t understand anything else.
127. It would be better to punish the tribe ? Yes, those who have taken part in the outrage,
128. You are of opinion that such a course would be more effectual ? Far more.
129. By Mr. Blakeney : By punishing the blacks, do you mean shooting them ? Appre-
hending them.
130. By Mr. Gore : Are you not of opinion that when the blacks commit outrages, they
go with one mind upon their warlike expeditions? Yes, the attack is planned, sometimes
for weeks, before it is made.
131. It is not, then, a depredation by individuals? No, except in rare instances.
132. And do not the blacks expect to be repelled by force if they are met with ? Yes.
133. Have you ever known a number of blacks selected by the rest of the tribe to commit
a depredation ? I have.
134. Will you state the circumstance ? On one occasion, when depredations were committed
at my station, they were planned by my blacks, and committed by the Richmond blacks;
and the whole blame was thrown upon the latter.
135. How did you know that ? I knew it from the gins beforehand.
A. C. GREGORY, Esq., Surveyor-General, called in and examined :
1. By the Cha.ib.hian: You are the Surveyor-General? Yes.
2. I believe you have been for many years in Western Australia ? Yes,
3. Are you a native of the Colonies ? No.
4. I believe you have had some little experience of this Colony daring the last few
years, as an explorer, as a settler, and in your official capacity? Yes.
5. Have you seen much of the working of the Native Police Force ? I have seen a good
deal of it in the outer districts. .
(5. la there any corps of a similar description in Western Australia? The corps there is
something similar, but it comprises a greater number of while men.
7. Will


7. Will you describe the constitution of that force ? It consists of Inspectors or Serjeants
of Police and Constables, each Serjeant having two black trackers or constables attached
to him.
8. These trackers are troopers, of course ? They are termed constables; they are armed
and mounted, and are equivalent to the troopers here.
9. What is the strength of the corps ? I can hardly state what its strength is. In any
district, say from sixty or seventy miles in diameter, there would be three white police,
each with his two constables or troopers.
10. Are those two constables or troopers under the control of the white troopers, or
under the control of the officers only ? Under the control of the superior officer who is
present at the time; but they are considered, under a general rule, to be strictly attached
to the white constables.
11. How long is it since that corps was established ? It had been established for about
seven or eight years at the time I left Western Australia, and I believe it is still in
existence.
12. Were the blacks troublesome in Western Australia ? They were very troublesome.
13. Were they as trouble some as they are here? Yes : I have known forty murders
committed upon individuals, with most of whom, I may say, I was personally acquainted.
14. Was that previous to the establishment of the Native Police Force ? Yes.
15. Has the working of that force been found successful? Yes.
16. Was it in consequence of the murders you refer to that the Police Force was estab-
lished ? Yes. It was first attempted to control the blacks by the military, but they
were found inefficient for the purpose, and they and the settlers wore continually fight-
ing with the blacks, and numbers were killed on both sides. The Grovernment then,
finding the system did not answer, appointed one or two individuals who had consider-
able influence among the blacks as Inspectors or Police Constables, and attached to them
several black constables, —two blacks to each white constable. That system seemed to
work well; in fact, it was very successful in operation,—particularly so in the settlement
of a new district; for the result was that, instead of the loss of twenty or thirty lives,
as would otherwise have been the case, not even one life was lost on the part of the
whites, although several attacks were made.
17. Was the white portion of the Force selected from the military or from civilians ?It
was not found desirable to select them from the military.
18. Why ? Because it was difficult to find a sufficient number of the right sort of
men among them. The men selected were those who had acquired some knowledge of
the language and habits of the blacks, and were to some extent personally acquainted
with them, and who had some reputation among them.
19. Were those white men selected from the district which they had to take charge of?
The white portion of the Police Force was generally selected from persons who had
resided in the district, and who had a knowledge of, and were known by, the aborigines.
20. And the native portion of the force ? They were selected from prisoners from other
districts who had behaved themselves well, and whose period of sentence had nearly
expired. They might be considered much in the same position as the ticket-of-leave
man, who, after serving a portion of his time, is allowed to go partially free, under
certain conditions.
21. Did. the Police Force so constituted work satisfactorily? Yes; more so than any
force I have heard of in Australia.
22. As a Protective Force ? Yea.
23. Did it put a stop to that constant warfare between the blacks and the settlers to
which yon referred ? There was much leas of it.
24. You said you had seen a good deal of the Native Police Force in the outer districts
of this Colony ? Yes.
25. What do you think of it ? As a frontier force, I think it is a very good one, and as
a general force, I think yon could scarcely find a better one, although there might be
some beneficial modifications.
26. What modifications would you suggest ? I think there should be a greater number
of white serjeants.
27. Not troopers ? They might either be termed serjeants or troopers.
28. Would yon recommend the adoption of the Western Australian system in this
Colony ? Not exactly ; there is a material difference in the character of the aborigines
on this coast. This, perhaps, may be attributable to a difference in the character of the
country rather than to any inherent difference in the character of the blacks. In Western
Australia water is scarce and the country is open, and it is not difficult to follow up a
black; in fact, he can scarcely escape if moderate energy is used to secure him. The
blacks are far more treacherous there, and never act in large bodies ; they fight with
spears, and usually come upon a person unawares, and run away on the instant they are
attacked. Here, the country inhabited by the blacks is inaccessible, and does not offer
the same facilities to the Police Force, who rarely get the chance of attacking the blacks.
The natives have plenty of water and plenty of food, and can conceal themselves with
perfect security in their inaccessible fastnesses.
29. Have you any other suggestions to offer? I think no Native Police under the pre-
sent system should he kept near any town. That seems to disorganize the Force, as far
as my observation goes,
30. Are you aware that the Native Police Force is at present very unpopular ? Yes, in
the towns, but certainly not in the country.
31. Are you sure of that ? Almost every person I have heard of or spoken to in the
country districts on the subject has given a favorable opinion of the Force.
31. Are


32. Have you ever heard a squatter complain of it ? I have heard various opinions
about it, but they have all tended to the general impression that the Force is an efficient
one, and as effectual as can be hoped for.
33. Have you ever heard the officers spoken of as inactive ? I have, some of the officers ;
others are well spoken of.
34. Do you consider that the Force is, on the whole, well officered ? I think the officers
are as good men as are likely to be obtained.,
35. Has there been any improvement of late in this respect ? There has certainly been
an improvement. About three years ago there was a decided improvement, and the
Force was brought under more effective and energetic management. I cannot tell what
the changes were, but they were certainly beneficial.
36. Are you of opinion that since that period the country has been more quiet, the out-
rages and murders by the blacks fewer in number, and that the blacks generally have
been on more friendly terms with the white people ? The blacks had been very trouble-
some in the Leichhardt district before this time, and the re-organization of the Police
Force was followed by an almost total cessation of attacks. There were demonstrations
and evidence of hostile intentions on the part of the natives, but they were immediately
suppressed, and but few actual hostilities ensued New districts have been formed since
then, without the occurrence of any particular difficulties with the blacks. There will
always be an occasional instance to the contrary.
37. Then you would not consider any particular instance of outrage by the blacks an
argument against the Force generally,—if one or two shepherds, for instance, were robbed
and murdered at newly-formed stations ? I should not be surprised at it, and I should
not consider such an occurrence as a proof of the inefficiency of the' Force, as it is
impossible to prevent aggressions from time to time.
38. Yon are of opinion that occasional aggressions are unavoidable ? Yes.
39. But, on the whole, you never knew the country so quiet, when so many new stations
were being formed, as it is at present ? I have never known the country as quiet as it is
at present. You can travel with greater safety through the outskirts of the Colony than
at any previous time.
40. Do you attribute this additional security to the efficiency of the Native Police Force ?
Yes.
41. You stated that in Western Australia the white men attached to the Police Force
were selected from among those who possessed some knowledge of the language and
habits of the blacks, —do you think the same sort of men could be selected here ? I
don’t think a sufficient number of men of that class could be found here.
42. Have not some attempts been made in Western Australia to improve the condition
of the aborigines ? Several attempts have been made; in fact, one constant and con-
tinuous effort has been made almost since the foundation of the 0 olony, in 1829.
43. Have those attempts been successful or not ? lam afraid they can scarcely be said
to have been successful; the success was only partial.
44. Will you explain to the Committee what has been done ? In the first place, an
attempt was made to collect the elderly natives together, and to teach them in schools,
which was found to be altogether impracticable. Following upon this, an experiment
was made to obtain and educate a number of young children; very young children were
obtained; some of them were orphans, others were purchased from their parents; as
many as possible were collected and brought in, funds for the purpose being supplied
partly by the Government and partly by private enterprise. The school was conducted
by the Wesleyan minister. But it was found that, when the children reached the age of
thirteen or fourteen years, they began to die off, and at least fifty or sixty per cent; were
lost in this way, until it became apparent that the system could not be carried on any
longer. After careful enquiry, the Colonial Surgeon gave his opinion that the case was
hopeless, and that the only way was to form a farm in the country, and give the children
at least two or three days’ schooling, and the rest of the week hard labor; and also to
give them some coarser kind of food.
45. Was it the confinement or the large supply of food that affected them ? The con-
finement w r as injurious, and the food they had been getting was, in fact, too good for
them. On the farm, the system of teaching the children had to.be almost entirely
dropped, but, as far as it went, it was tolerably successful. When they arrived at a
marriageable age, they were coupled off.
46. You are speaking of a kind of industrial school ? Yes. It was necessary to send
the police continually after the children, as they were always running away, and the
windows of the school-house had to be barred. When they were caught they were
flogged, to teach them not to run away any more, and shut up again. In fact, had it not
been for a good purpose, the system which was adopted was one which might be said to
have belonged to the barbarous ages.
47. Are those schools still in existence ? Yes. Another school was afterwards formed,
in wdiich the system adopted was perhaps a better one. At King George’s Sound, which
is also in Western Australia, but in quite a different part of the colony, a school of very
young children has been established by the Resident Magistrate and his wife, who are
both very enthusiastic in the cause. None of the children are above twelve or thirteen
years of age, and so far this school has been more successful than the other, and the
health of the children much better; they have been allowed more open-air exercise,
and have been more carefully attended to, and perhaps with a better knowledge of the
peculiar character of their constitutions. I believe also in that district the habits
of the aborigines are more nearly allied to those of the white population, and, conse-
quently, they are more amenable to civilization.
48. To


48. To what do you attribute the difference ? I can hardly give any reason for it.
Possibly, they have been so long in contact with white people that they have partially
lost their own habits and opinions. I will point out one singular difference between the
natives of Western Australia and the blacks in this Colony. In Western Australia their
numbers do not diminish in the same proportion, the deaths are not so frequent among
them ; they do decrease in number, but not so rapidly.
49. What do you think is the cause of that? The settlements of the whites are more
widely scattered, and the original habits of the natives less interfered with,
50. Then they do not congregate so much about the white people ? They congregate
more about the whites, although the latter are fewer in number in the district.
51. By the Chairman : How long is it since that school was established ? About eight
years, or perhaps a little longer,—about that period.
52. Do you look upon it as a success ? No ; the children are well taught, and a casual
observer would think the school was a great success ; but a person who resided in the
place for a short time, and came to know a little of the ins and outs of it, would perhaps
take a different view.
53. Can you state of your own knowledge how far it has proved successful ? I am
■speaking from my own knowledge as a resident in this part of the Colony. As long as
the young blacks can be kept under control everything seems to go on very well, but as
soon as they become able to provide for themselves they usually run away. The girls,
when they reach a man-iageable age, frequently marry white men, for there is a class of
white men who will marry them, and grants of land have been given to them on such
occasions.
54. Then, you do not consider that particular school to have been successful? No; only
partially so.
55. Is it supported by the Government ? A part of the funds for its support is furnished
by the Government; the remainder, and the management of it, is gratuitous.
50. What number of children does it comprise ? About twenty-four or twenty-five.
57. Then it was a mere experiment? Yes.
58. And not a very successful one ? No, its only success has been owing to the
enthusiastic character of the parties engaged in it.
59. Are you aware that similar experiments have been made in the other colonies ? I
have heard of them, but I have not heard that they have been attended with any
success,
00. Do you think it possible to carry out anything of the sort in Queensland ? lam
afraid not.
61. You think Industrial Schools would not be successful here? They might be tried
in order to see whether the character of the aborigines is the same here as if is in other
parts of the country, and then either followed up or abandoned as might be deemed
advisable.
62. Have you known any station in this country where the proprietors have tried to
utilize the blacks by making them shepherds or bullock-drivers ? Yes; that has
answered very well to some extent for certain purposes, such as hunting cattle,,
collecting horses or bullocks, but not for shepherding.
63. Do you think it possible to adopt any system by which they can be trained to make
themselves useful as shepherds, bullock-drivers, or stockmen ? No, you can only keep
one or two of them about a station, and for a particular class of work —not bodily labor,
but some work that is lighter, and which is more congenial with their own hunting
pursuits, such as looking after horses or stray cattle, but not for shepherding,
64. Do you think you have had s ufficient experience in this and other colonies to warrant
you in coming to this conclusion ? I have carefully watched the habits of the natives
whenever I have met with them, and have found few exceptions to the rule.
65. Do you think it would be advisable to bring the blacks in this colony more under
the control of the law, and to prevent those gatherings, or Borees ? Are you aware of
those gatherings ? Yes'
66. Are you aware that many blacks who have become partially civilized by being
employed about stations go to those meetings very unwillingly? Yes, I think the only
way is to disperse those gatherings at once, before the blacks become troublesome.
67. Do you think it would be politic to do so? Yes, I think it is one of the duties of
the Police quietly to disperse them whenever they assemble in disorderly numbers.
68. What do you mean by quietly dispersing them ? I mean, warning them when they
commence to assemble.
69. Can you recollect any instance where that has been done? Yes ; occasionally there
is a collision.
70. If a really organized system were put in force to stop these gatherings, do you think
it would answer ? It would greatly facilitate matters, and it is the practice at present
adopted by the Native Police. They are aware that when a gathering of this sort takes
place some particular piece of mischief will ensue if the blacks are not dispersed, and
they go to the gathering, and the blacks are w r arned, through some friendly natives, that
they must disperse,
71. Could not some means be adopted to prevent the blacks employed on stations from
going to these places ? I think it is impossible to prevent them. The whites have not
as much influence over them as their own tribes, and they know they would be murdered
if they did not attend.
72. Then the result of your experience is, that experiments to educate the blacks may be
tried, but that they are not likely to be successful ? I see no reason to hope for better
results.
73, What


73. What do you think would be the result on the frontier if the Native Police were
disbanded, as some people wish to see done, or if the organization of the force were
altered? The disbanding of the Native Police would just result in frequent attacks upon
the settlers, who would then take the law into their own hands. And as they are not
better than any other class of men, and would be under no control, they would frequently
take life unnecessarily, and the Government could not object to their protecting themselves.
74. Then, as a protective measure for the blacks themselves, the disbanding of the
Native Police Force would not be a philanthrophic act ? The best protection to the blacks
is an efficient Police Force I know of no other improvement to the Force unless it be the
combination of white and black police. A majority of blacks would perhaps be sufficient.
75. Have you ever been out with the Native Police ? Yes.
76. Have you observed whether the troopers are always under the control of their
officers ? Yes, as far as they can be expected to be. Of course, in the heat of an engage-
ment there is always some difficulty with them, but any person who has ever been out
with white men will admit that they are equally difficult to control, while they are far
more cruel than the others.
77. I believe military men, when engaged in battle, become quite maddened with
excitement when their blood gets up? Yes, they get mad with excitement, and are far
more uneontrolable than the aborigines.
78. You are aware, I suppose, that the Force was at one time partially disbanded ? Yes,
I think something of the sort took place about three years ago, but I do not recollect
what it was,
79. Were you on the Dawson when the Hornet Bank murders were committed ? No, I
was not there at the time.
80. Are you aware that those outrages were generally attributed to the disbanding of
the Force, and the turning out among the blacks of a number of black troopers ? Yes;
in fact it was the want of protection that made the settlers take the law into their own
hands, and it became open war between them and the blacks.
81. In all your experience of the Australian Colonies, have you ever seen any part of
the country, where the stations were so much extended, in a state of equal security ?
Not in greater security. This is, at least, equally secure with any I have seen.
THURSDAY.\ 23 rd MAY, 1861.
present;
Mb. MACKENZIE, Mb. GORE,
Mr. WATTS, Mb. PERRETT,
Mb. MOFFATT, Mb. BLAKENEY.
The Honorable R, R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
A. C. GREGORY, Esquire, called in and further examined : —•
1. By Mr. Watts : Do you think, Mr. Gregory, that any better way may be established
now to communicate with the blacks by means of an interpreter ? I think that there
are full and efficient means of communicating with them through the troopers for all
practical purposes, without going to the expense of interpreters.
2. And you would not recommend their appointment ? No.
3. Do you come to that conclusion from what you have seen on this side of the country f
I do.
4. Have you ever been to one of the borees or large meetings of the blacks ? Not in
this Colony.
5. Can you give us any idea of what is done at these meetings in other parts of Australia ?
I have not a perfect acquaintance with their proceedings ; they are mere meetings of
ceremony, and to settle disputes; generally speaking, they not only settle disputes that
exist, but revive old ones that have remained dormant. In fact, they commence new
ones, so that the meetings never lead to a settlement.
6. Do the depredations generally occur after these meetings ? Yes; where there is a
large collection of aborigines, food naturally becomes scarce, and they proceed to supply
themselves by depredations upon the stock belonging to the adjacent settlers.
7. Do you think the settlers, provided they were unprotected by a Native Police Force,
would retaliate much more on the blacks than the Native Police Force would themselves ?
Yes, decidedly; they would have to take the law into their own hands, to protect them-
selves, and there would be no governing power to control the operations of particular
individuals.
8. Then your opinion is, Mr. Gregory, as I understand you, that the maintenance of the
Native Police Force is the most humane way of dealing with the blacks ? Decidedly.
9. Do you think that, by keeping them in fear by a sufficient Force, they are always much
quieter than if there were no Force to prevent their depredations? The only way of
preventing personal hostility and other aggressions is, by having a sufficient Force to
keep them in awe ; and the most humane way of dealing with them is to have a sufficient
Force, so as to meet aggression promptly
10 You


10. You appear to have a great deal of knowledge of the interior of the Colony—can
you inform the Committee whether any great acts of cruelty are committed, generally
speaking, by squatters on the blacks? No; I have heard frequently vague reports of
such things, but, on following up the ease, there generally appears very little foun-
dation for the report.
11. On the other hand, have you not found that, generally speaking, the squatters are
very kind to the blacks ? As a whole, they certainly are, and exercise a great amount of
forbearance towards them.
12. Do you think there is any difficulty in apprehending by warrant any of these depre-
dators —any who commit depredations ? lam aware that it is scarcely possible in the
outer settlements— on the frontier ; but in the older and more settled parts of the country,
I think it would be possible to apprehend them ; but, unfortunately, the law is so im-
perfect that you are unable to convict them, though morally convinced of their being guilty.
13. Do you think that, whenever it is within the power of the Police, it is necessary for
them to apprehend blacks against w T hom there is a warrant out ? Certainly they should
apprehend them if they can, but the apprehension is usually resisted by force of arms.
14. Do you not think that it would be advisable to proclaim martial law on the outskirts ?
No, 1 think civil law is quite sufficient; because the civil law, if resisted, empowers the
Police to act with force.
15. Would you suggest that general instructions should be given to officers by their
Commandant—that is, written instructions ? In every well-organised force there must
be written instructions for the guidance of the officers of the department.
16. Do you know whether such a practice exists now in the Porce, or not ? I am not
aware, but I presume, from indirect circumstances, that there is some regular system of
returns.
17. If not, would you suggest that such should be the case ? Decidedly. I may remark
that, in Western Australia, there is a system by which the Police furnish monthly reports,
and in any case where they are brought into contact with the aborigines in apprehending
them, or under any circumstances in which collisions have occurred, they make a special
report of the circumstances.
18. You think that such a course would be a better means of enabling the Government
to answer any complaints that might be laid before them in reference to that Force ?
Decidedly ; I think such a system indispensable for the proper operation of such a Force.
19. In fact, the officers should keep a journal of their daily work ? Yes.
20. And how often would you send them to the Commandant ? Monthly reports, I
think, would be quite sufficient; it would scarcely be necessary to enter every day’s
proceedings, but the return for the month should state what has been done during the
month, and any given occurrence should be mentioned under date.
21. Now, with regard to the amelioration of the condition of the blacks, can you give
us any idea, from the way matters have worked in the Colony generally, whether giving
blankets to the blacks has been beneficial or not ? I look upon it as really of no benefit;
at the same time, there is scarcely sufficient evidence to show that it should be dis-
continued.
22. Do you not think that often—very often, in fact—they are in the habit of sleeping
in the wet in their blankets, and by that means catch cold, and inflammation of the lungs
ensues, and a great many are carried off ? It must be acknowledged that, after the issue
of blankets, a much larger number of deaths occur from their taking cold, or from pul-
monary affections, than at other times.
23. Do you think, on the whole, the great decrease among the blacks is generally caused
by their own intemperance, natural causes, venereal disease, or is it from the fact of their
having been destroyed—or what is the cause of their great decrease ? It is, first of all,
mainly to be attributed to the want of re-production ; it is not so much from actual
increase in the proportion of deaths, but from the remarkable fact, that as you approach
the settlements, the less the number of children in proportion to the adults. That is to
be ascribed to a combination of causes—to no one in particular; it is partly due to their
change of habits, partly to their women coming into contact with the whites—with the
shepherds,—when disease follows; there are diseases, also, which have been introduced
through the occupation of the country by the whites, such as hooping-cough and
meazles. I don’t know whether there is any small-pox among them; but, no doubt,
there is something allied to it. In fact, disease generally takes a different form among
them to that known among Europeans ; you seldom recognize the form. Intemperance
is another cause of their decrease.
24. Then you think that the great cause, after all, is their non-reproduction ? Yes.
25. Do you attribute that to the fact of their women being common to all ? I think
that has a very great influence.
26. Do you know, speaking on that, whether the Native Police have been in the habit of
taking away the women of various tribes ? No doubt; sometimes the Native Police
have obtained women from the different tribes, but I have not exactly ascertained the
circumstances under which they have obtained them; sometimes the gins leave the
tribes, and follow the Native Police; and, in fact, it has been impossible on occasions to
keep them away.
27. Don’t you think it is the duty of the officer in charge to prevent that as much
as possible ? Yes; or, at least, to control the Police—to prevent the gins from being
forcibly taken ; but I think it would be very injurious to prevent the Native Police from
having gins with them, for, if that were done by any regulations, whenever they attacked
the tribes they would secretly take possession of women, and that would cause endless
quarrels.
28. Do


28. Do you think it would be a good plan that each trooper should be allowed to have
his gin ? I think so, decidedly.
29. And if such were the case, do you think it would stop that outcry which is now
made, and which we see daily in the newspapers, with regard to the Native Police taking
young gins from the various tribes as they pass ? I think it is absolutely necessary that
the Police should be allowed to have gins, and that it would be the best mode of pre-
venting their taking the young gins from the tribes with which they come in contact—
from taking them forcibly.
30. Upon the whole, then, you think there is no other force that we could employ of
greater advantage than the Native Police Force ? No.
31. By the Cirairman : In Western Australia, if I am not mistaken, they have some sort
of prison discipline with the blacks—that is, when they commit depredations, they are
taken to a prison and forced to work ? Yes, there is a very different system practised
in Western Australia: whenever an aboriginal is convicted of any crime, he is sentenced
for a certain number of years to the native prison, a separate and distinct establishment
to that used tor the whites ; it would not answer if the prison were occupied by both
classes mixed. In the earlier days of the Colony, they used to send the black prisoners
to an island about ten miles from the main; there was a small guard of soldiers with
them, and two or three white men—civilians—to superintend them. They were employed
in building gaols and in the cultivation of the land, so that they almost gained a subsistence.
Besides that, they erected, at a very small cost, a lighthouse on the island—quarrying
the stone, burning the lime, and, in fact, doing everything but the mere fitting and
adjustment of the stones.
32. Don’t you think that a very superior system to the one followed here, of taking the
blacks to a common gaol, and mixing them with the white men ? Decidedly, I think
the system adopted here objectionable in the highest degree. The system I refer to has
been tided in Western Australia for at least twenty years.
33. Would you recommend its introduction here, with certain modifications ? Yes, with
some modifications. One point to be considered is that, as the punishment is really less
than that at present in this Colony, the apprehension of offenders is not so difficult, as
they are more likely to give themselves up. Here it is either no punishment to confine
blacks along with whites, or such as would break a wild aboriginal down ; it is cither
nothing at all or too much ; the discipline is unsuited to their character.
34. Speaking of the wild aboriginal being subjected to prison discipline, I thought you
said that the natives here would not be so easily subjected to it as those in Western
Australia ? No ; I think that, if the system were introduced with some modifications,
they would be as easily subjected here as the natives of Western Australia.
35. What effect has the discipline on the natives after the term of their imprisonment
has expired ? A very desirable one, and, in fact, if you meet a native who has been a
prisoner, and make inquiries as to his trustworthiness, he will tell you that you can
trust him, as he has been a prisoner.
36. Then you think the adoption of this system one step towards ameliorating their
condition ? Yes, and in Western Australia they always prefer one who has been in
prison to one who has not, because he has been taught our strength, and the necessity of
attending to the laws ; he has, in fact, become partially civilised. But, if you adopt the
system of simple imprisonment along with the whites, you will find it highly
detrimental.
37. They are made to fulfil their term of imprisonment—there are no tickets-of-leave, I
suppose ? If they behave well, the sentence is usually shortened, and remitted in part;
and generally those of the best character are sent out to the Police, to act as constables,
and they- make the very best constables ; in fact, almost the whole of the native con-
stables are of that class.
38. By Mr. Moffatt : Do you observe any difference between the habits and physical
condition of the blacks here and those of the blacks in Western Australia ? In what
respect ?
39. Do you think them a superior or an inferior race ? I think them as nearly'- an
equivalent race as possible. The character of the country, of course, influences their
habits to a certain extent, and you will find it so in each particular district: where
vegetable food is their principal diet, they are almost always cannibals ; where animal
food is their means of subsistence, they abhor cannibalism; where vegetable food is to
be found in abundance, they usually congregate in larger numbers, and fight more hand
to hand.
40. Do you think the same mode that is adopted in Western Australia, with reference
to the prison management of the blacks, would answer here ? With some slight modi-
fications.
41. I will ask you a question as to the advisability of proclaiming martial law in the
outside districts —do you think it would be advisable ? I think it would be unnecessary.
42. Why ? I think the civil law meets all the requirements.
43. But do you not think it would have an effect on the blacks—-the circumstance of the
proclamation of martial law in their districts ; —they understand that the civil law is in
force at present, but if martial law were proclaimed, it would have the effect of making
them more afraid of committing these depredations ? I think not; they are scarcely
able to distinguish the nice difference—which is a mere legal difference —between civil
and martial law, as regards depredations of the nature they commit.
44. By Mr. Ferrett : In Western Australia, did you know' of such outrages and murders
as those committed on the Dawson—for instance, those at Hornet Bank? Yes; not so
many' murders, perhaps, at one time, but exactly' of the same kind, on a smaller scale.
45. Murders


45. Murders of whole families ? Yes.
46. Mr. Watts, I think, asked you if it would not be advisable that general instructions
should be issued to the officers of the Native Police Force —would you advise that the
officers should act only according to the letter of such instructions ? Such instructions
should be general ; it would be impossible to furnish instructions that would provide for
every particular case that might arise. Of course, some discretionary power must be left
with the officers, except that whatever takes place must be reported ; that you will find
to be a most efficient check; and, moreover, if you make the instructions too minute, the
officers could depart much further from the spirit by attending to the hitter, than if you
gave them some latitude and responsibility of action.
47. I understood you to" say that the women of the tribes generally follow the Native
Police— can you tell me, of your own knowledge, whether it is from fear or not ? I
should rather think it was from their taking a liking to particular individuals in the
Police Force; sometimes, no doubt, it is from fear ; sometimes from one cause, sometimes
from another.
48. Have yon had an opportunity of seeing the women leave their tribes to follow the
Police ? I know of one case especially. In fact, I don’t think it would be practicable
to prevent the women from coming to the Police
49. You stated, in some portion of your evidence, that you would not allow the Police
to take gins from the tribes, and then suggested that the Police should be allowed to
have gins; how are they to obtain gins provided they are not allowed to take them ?
By taking them from the tribes, I meant taking them by force.
50. From what you know of the blacks, do you suppose that any tribe would object to
the Policemen taking their gins, when the blacks are in dread of the Police ? I scarcely
see what effect mere dread of the Police would have ; of course, if the feeling of dread
of their power w r ere brought to bear upon them to such an extent as to cause them to
give way contrary to their inclinations, it would look like an attempt at taking the gins
by force.
51. Are you not aware that it is a native custom for the blacks to take gins by force from
one another ? They frequently do it, but not always ; in fact, it is usual for a very
young girl to be betrothed to an old man, and, generally, the way a young man gets a
gin is by stealing his neighbour’s.
52. Does not this frequently lead to serious quarrels and fights ? Yes, it is the principal
cause of their quarrels—a bone of contention.
53. Do you suppose that this stealing of gins is recognized by what may be called native
laws ? It has become a custom —a long-established custom among them, and this has
the force of law, especially where there is no written law.
54. But why do they fight over it ? Naturally, if a man is dispossessed of his property
by another, he attempts to recover it; and necessarily, where one tries force, the other
uses force also to resist.
55. But do not the whole tribe, or tribes, enter into these quarrels? Yes, the quarrel of
an individual gradually gathers strength by friends taking part in it, and the result is
that at length it becomes a quarrel of the whole tribe.
56. You stated that you are aware that there is some kind of ceremony of betrothal
among the blacks—are yon not aware, as well, that the blacks are betrothed to Policemen
as well as to other natives ? I don’t know an instance, but I should think it highly
probable that such is the case.
57. Would it not prevent these quarrels and these fights if, in case the betrothal or legal
ceremony was adhered to, the Police were allowed to have gins ? As the children
are betrothed at a very early age, it would scarcely meet the case.
58. Are yon not aware that in many instances girls are not betrothed till of mature age ?
As far as my knowledge goes, the custom has been, in every instance almost, that a girl,
as soon as she is born, should be promised to a certain individual; she may be betrothed
afterwards to some one else, in consequence of the former husband dying or not taking
means to follow up bis claim.
59. Are not many betrothals made at eorroborees, and meetings of a similar description,
between one tribe and another, provided what may be called their caste does not dis-
agree ? Yes, they evidently seem at these large meetings to enter into these subjects,
and to discuss them more fully than at other times ; and also to go through any particular
ceremonies that they may consider necessary.
60. Are you not aware, from what yon know 7 of their forms, that it is death to any gin
to become what we should term married to any man not of her proper caste ? Yes, but
that applies to certain peculiar laws of consanguinity.
61. Does it not extend to all the blacks on this continent, wherever you have had an
opportunity of inquiring into their customs ? It does appear to extend to all of them ;
the system varies, but still you always find some rule of the kind, with regulations pro-
hibiting intermarriage within certain limits ; indeed connections are not allowed to marry
within certain limits.
62. Are you not aware that the Native Police, in stealing gins, pay no regard whatever
to these rules of caste ? I think it highly probable they do not.
63. Do you not think that this causes a great degree of ill-feeling towards the Native
Police—-don’t you think that much ill-feeling arises from that cause ? No doubt, in some
few instances ; but I think it would be found that the evil has been magnified greatly
beyond what is really the case.
64. As you say the evil has been magnified, have you not known many instances where
black men have been out shepherding, and their gins have been stolon by the Native
Police ? No, 1 don't remember a ease, though I don’t doubt the fact.
65. Did


65. Did you ever hear of such a case ? I have heard it spoken of.
66. Do you think such a cause likely to create a disturbance among blacks, who are the
best servants, perhaps, on an establishment? Certainly, if the case occurred, it would
be likely to create ill-feeling, but the quarrels would be more between native and native
than between the blacks on a station and the Native Police. '
67. Do you deprecate such a course as stealing gins ? As stealing gins in the way spoken
of; I should certainly consider that the thing ought to be prevented, if we could conve-
niently do so.
68. Do you not think that mixing black prisoners with the worst whites in the gaols
makes the black a much worse character than ever—than he would have been if he had
not been mixed up with such characters ? Yes, I have already stated that it is especially
undesirable to mix the white prisoners with the aborigines.
Me. SAMUEL SNEYD called in and examined :—•
1. By the Chairman’ : You were formerly, I believe, in the old Mounted Police of New
South Wales ? I was.
2. You were a volunteer from one of the regiments ? From the 4th regiment.
3. How many years were you in the Police Force ?’ For over seventeen years—seventeen
years and seven months.
4. You reached the rank of sergeant in that Force ? Yes.
5. After your long period of service, you must have had good opportunities of noticing how
the Force acted ; you must have seen many officers—were they all volunteers ? All volun-
teers from the different regiments.
6. Was it not the case that a greater part, if not all, of these officers showed a great
aptitude for the bush ? Most of them did; there were very few exceptions.
7. And the men equally so ? Yes.
8. That Force was employed principally in tracking and capturing bushrangers? I think
it was first used for that purpose.
9. It was of general utility in keeping the outer districts quiet ? Yes.
10. Were they ever employed after aborigines ? On several occasions ; I, myself, have
been so employed
11. It was not a duty that was popular with them ? They did not like the duty.
12. Why ? They thought it was a duty they had no right to perform, as they were used
principally after bushrangers.
13. Was that their only reason? It was their principal reason. The troopers that com-
plained thought it was not their duty, but still they went, if headed by officers or sergeants.
14. Was it not also unpopular from the supposed danger of being brought to a Court-
Martial for shooting any of the natives ? I never heard that mentioned.
15. Never ? Never. They may have supposed that it would have been dangerous if they
shot down any of the natives without a warrant.
18. Did you not generally consider that the troopers were not so efficient after blacks as
after bushrangers ? I have heard it stated both ways —that they'were as efficient after
blacks as after bushrangers, and I have also heard the contrary.
17. You say you were seventeen years in the Force ; were there not a number of troopers
in the Force for a great number of years ? Yes, some were there longer than I was.
18. And it was a popular service among them ? Yes, they liked it very much.
19. Why were they disbanded ? It was from want of a vote of the House.
20. What objections were made to the Force ? It was considered too expensive—too many
troopers were kept in Sydney.
21. It had become unnecessary? Yes, because sending convicts to the Colony had been
abolished.
22 Don’t you think that the plan of having the head-quarters in Sydney, and the men
being drilled there previous to their being sent into the bush, was not a good plan 1 They
would have been more efficient if drilled at the head-quarters of their divisions, because, at
that time, men could have been drilled and acquired a knowledge of the bush, while they
were being instructed in their drill, which was not the case in Sydney.
23. Your duty was principally patrol duty? Yes, the white patrol was constantly on the
roads.
24. Had you any particular stations anywhere on the line of roads ? From Sydney to Port
Phillip there were stations all the way—a sergeant at some, and a corporal at others.
25. How did the horses stand the patrol work ? The patrol was easy work—fifteen or
twenty miles a day, according to the country; starting early, and giving the horses a spell
in the middle of the day. Each trooper was responsible for the condition of his horse, and
was held accountable if his horse had a sore back.
26. They never had sore backs 1 Hardly ever.
27. Are you aware that the Native Police horses have, generally, sore backs? Yes.
28. What is that owing to 1 To want of knowledge of the rider himself, and the saddles
are not sufficiently large.
29. Do you think it is from want of knowledge of the officers, as not being military men
and up to their work ? I could not say that.
30. But all you have noticed have been in a bad state? Yes.
31. In condition, as well as in respect to their having sore backs ? Some that I have seen
have been very bad.
32 The


32. The old Mounted Troopers kept their horses in good condition ? They were always in
good condition.
33. Many of the Officers, as well as the Troopers, remained in the troop a long time, I
believe ? Every Officer went away with his regiment, but the troopers remained.
34. But many bf them were in the corps five or six years ? Mr. Christie was there the
longest—l think he was in the corps seven years.
35. Bo you remember Mr. Macalister ? How long was he in the Force 1 ? He left soon
after I joined, in 1832.
36. Bo you remember a circumstance that took place on the Namoi, some years ago, when
a number of white men were hanged for killing blacks ? Who gave the information of that
massacre ? I think a man of the name of Hobbs; he is now Chief Constable in Windsor.
37. Were you ever patrolling in the neighbourhood? I was.
88. Was it not the case that a number of whites—comrades of these men who were executed
—had been murdered ? It was reported that such was the case.
3d. That a number of the comrades of these men had been murdered by the blacks, and
that being left to protect themselves, the whites were goaded on to the massacre, and
attacked the blacks and shot some of them ? I heard that such was the case.
30. Who gave the information ? I understood that Hobbs was the principal person.
41. These men were apprehended and taken to Sydney—by whom ? By the Mounted
Police. I think by the Mounted Police; I was then over in another part of the country.
42. Who gave evidence against them on the trial ? I was not attending the Court at that
time.
43. Are you aware that they were convicted on circumstantial evidence ? I believe they
were.
44. What was the number ? Seven.
45. And they were all strung up in one morning ? Yes, I believe so.
46. Bo you think that any Government would dare to do such a thing at the present day ?
I could not answer that.
47. They were all prisoners of the Crown at that time ? Yes, I believe so.
48. Bo you remember that this affair raised a great outcry at the time against the Govern-
ment ? Yes.
49. And the Judges? Principally against Mr. Plunkett, the Attorney-General.
50. Is it not the case that the blacks broke out upon the Namoi again, and that a large
detachment of Police was sent down, after this judicial murder, for I can call it nothing
else ? I believe so—l believe it was the Mounted Police that were sent down in pursuit
of the blacks there.
51. What number of Police went out with Major Nunn? I think about twenty. Major
Nunn was in command of the party, and Lieutenant Cobham was second in command.
52. Were you among the number ? I was.
53. What occurred on that occasion ? Some of the blacks were shot after one or two of
our men had been wounded; the first assault was by the blacks.
54. The blacks actually attacked you ? Yes, and speared a corporal—Corporal Hannan—
in the leg.
55. What did Major Nunn do then ? We fired to defend ourselves, and some of the blacks
were shot.
56. Who gave information of this engagement to the Government ? I could not say who
gave it.
57. Was it not the case that Major Nunn was tried by court-martial, and that an inquiry
was held at Invermain ? He was not tried by court-martial, but an enquiry was held before
the Magistrates at Invermain.
58. An inquiry was instituted by Government? Yes, before the Magistrates at Invermain,
that being the nearest Bench to where the affair had taken place. I think one of the
Crown Solicitors was sent up to assist the Magistrates; I think it was Mr. Moore Billon,
if I recollect right. The case was heard and dismissed—there was no charge against
Major Nunn.
59. No charge proved ? No charge proved.
60. Was the Crown Solicitor engaged in getting up the case? I can’t say; I was not up
there.
61. Well, after this what was done ? Major Nunn still kept the command till his regiment
went to India.
62. The Government endeavoured, however, to implicate his name with the destruction of
the blacks ? I cannot say ; I never heard so,
68. You are quite satisfied that the blacks made the attack first? lam satisfied of that.
64. Have the blacks been quiet ever since, to your knowledge ? They were quiet for some
years afterwards.
65 You have seen something of the Native Police? I have never worked with them. I
know nothing more of them than what I have seen in Brisbane, as Chief Constable.
66. Bo you think it would be an improvement if the Force became a mixed one—that is, if
so many White Troopers were raised in the same way as the old Mounted Police, as volunteers
from the regiments in the Colony, and officered in the same way, with black trackers ? I
think it would be a more efficient Force, and cheaper for the Colony, because the Black
Police are getting paid better than the old Mounted Police were. (Witness handed in a
scale of the pay, allowance, and clothing of the old Mounted Police. Vide Appendix.')
67. Is not that scale, without clothing and rations, somewhat similar to the colonial
allowance to soldiers of the line ? I don’t know what their allowance is.
68. The only addition, if they were employed as troopers, would be the rations and clothing ?
I could not say.
69. Do


69. Do you think it would be an encouragement to such troopers to have a grant of land
made to them ? I think so.
70. That was not the case before (with the old Mounted Police)? No : but it would be a
great stimulus to their performing their duties efficiently.
71. By Mr. Gore : Well, Mr. Sneyd, on the occasion that you went after blacks, was it
open or scrubby country ? Principally forest land.
72. How do you think such a force as the old Mounted Police would do against blacks in a
country such as the Three-Mile Scrub ? With trackers, I think it would do well.
73. Could the Mounted Police follow the blacks—had they to dismount ? I have followed
the blacks myself.
74. Do you think such a force could ever catch them ? I have caught them myself, but the
old Mounted Police were not so active as the natives after blacks.
75. Say that in the far interior there were a force of that kind, could they go for ten days
or a fortnight without rations ? They could carry their rations with them. I have carried a
month’s rations with me, after bushrangers, after the Macdonnell party.
76. Do you think that was generally done—have others done the same ? Yes, very many
in the Force did the same at that time.
77. Do you think that we could procure men from the regiments in the colonies to do so ?
I see no difficulty; they could be procured now as well as they were then.
78. Are you not aware that there is a smaller force in the country now than there used to
be of regular troops ? Yes, than there used to be.
79. Don’t you think there would be some difficulty in getting a considerable number of men
of good character fit for the duties they would have to perform—that there are a limited
number of such men in the colonies now ? Not if you take into consideration Tasmania and
New Zealand—there might be in New South Wales.
80. Don’t you think that the Horse Guards, and the commanding officers of the regiments,
would make an objection to picking the best men—because they must be the best men—say,
a hundred of the best men out of a particular spot ? No objection was made at that
time.
81. No, but now? Perhaps, as they are so short-handed, they might now.
82. I suppose the amount required for Queensland would be something like a hundred men?
Now-a-days, as the Port Denison district has been opened up, we could not do with less.
83. Do you think it would be practicable to get that number out of any force that is likely to
be quartered in the whole of New South Wales and Victoria! Yes.
84. How many men are there in the regiments, in the colonies altogether? There are
something like a thousand in New South Wales and Victoria.
85. Do you think they would allow one man in ten to be diverted in this way ? I should
think they would allow two or three, if it was at the request of the Queensland Govern-
ment.
86. You would require black trackers for such a force as this ? A few.
87. How many for a division ? I would put not more than three or four to a division of
from twenty to twenty-five white troopers, according to circumstances.
88. And a black tracker to each detachment of the division ? No, that would be according
to circumstances.
89. Do you think that the men would get on amicably with these black trackers ? We
did.
90. Have you had them with you ? I have had one man with me for ten years. He went,
after he left me, to Tasmania, to track bushrangers.
91. You always found that you could manage them? Yes, if they were treated with
kindness.
92. Were these men dressed in uniform ? They had some of the cast-off clothes of the
troopers, and, perhaps once in two years, they would receive a new suit from Sydney. They
were allowed no pay, but received a ration in the same way as the mounted troopers.
93. They had horses allowed them, of course? A cast horse. They generally used horses
that were considered not fit to be mounted by White Troopers.
94. And were they perfectly efficient on all occasions? I always found the one with me
so. I very often should not have got bushrangers except through his means.
95. By the Chairman ; It has been reported that, when you were before the Native Police
Committee last Session, you stated that, with thirty of the old Mounted Troopers you could
keep the country quiet from one end to another ? I think that might be done if the
troopers were stationed on the frontiers, and formed a line of stations across.*
96. Do you think that a smaller number of White Troopers would do than of the Native
Police, which amount to 120 ? I should consider one White Trooper equal to three blacks.
97. Against blacks ? I do, in open forest country.
98. I was .not aware that you had regular trackers in the old Mounted Police ? Yes, our
best trackers were sent from Goulbourn.
99. By Mr. Watts ; Do you not think that there is great difficulty in apprehending blacks
in the scrub ? There is great difficulty.
100. Do you not think that the natives themselves are better adapted to take them than a
White Force, such as you have mentioned, would be? Yes, if they are well worked. I think
if you are going to apprehend natives in a scrubby country, you must have blacks well,
broken in, because you may have to follow them into the scrub for long distances.
101. At the time you mention, were you working under general orders from a superior, in
the late Mounted Police ? Yes, always under the orders of the Commandant, stationed at
Sydney.
102. Did
* Since Port Denison has been opened up a much larger number would be required.


102. Did you make any returns as to certain duties ? Yes, a monthly return, shewing the
number of miles each trooper had travelled. Dor instance, say we travelled from Brisbane
to Ipswich, halting at Woogoroo, a return would be made shewing the number of miles
travelled by each trooper, and the places he stopped at, with the time of his arrival and
departure.
103. In any force that you would suggest, do you think that it would be necessary that a
diary should be kept by the men ? A regular diary should he kept, and a copy of it sent
into bead-quarters every month, and if it was thought by the Commandant that this man or
that had not been to a certain place on the day mentioned, he could write to the gentleman
who owned the station, and ascertain whether it was a fact or not. That was the case with;
ourselves.
101. What weight were your horses ? Fifteen stone was the average weight they carried.
105. Inclusive of saddles ? Inclusive of saddles.
100. Do you not think that whatever force we may retain for this purpose, that it should
always be on the move ? It should always be on the move; and at certain places on certain
dates, the officers and sergeants should manage to meet. For instance, on a certain day
three or four might meet on the Logan, and then scatter. On an average, our men were
ten months out of the twelve in the saddle. They went at an easy pace, sometimes fifteen,
sometimes twenty miles a-day. We went sometimes not more than ten, and sometimes as
far as thirty miles in the day.
107. Do you not think that all the officers appointed to any force should have some military
knowledge before they are appointed? I think so. Military men would not work under
civilians. A civilian could not punish for any breach of discipline, Our’s were under
military discipline.
108. I mean, supposing the Native Police Force were retained as they arc, would you
recommend that the officers of that Force should be military men ? I think it would be
advisable.
109. You think, upon the whole, that it would be quite possible for such a force as you
have described to keep the country quite quiet ? I think so, with a few black trackers
attached to them.
110. Do you think that it would be able to deal with the blacks in the scrub or out of it ?
I don’t think it would be as efficient in the scrub as a Black Force, but in forest land, or on
open country, like the Downs, it would.
APPENDIX.
SCALE OF PAY, RATIONS, AND CLOTHING OF THE OLD MOUNTED POLICE.
Pay per Day;—
Major Commanding 9s. 6d.
Officers Commanding Divisions ..... 6s. Od.
Sergeant-Major 3s. 6d.'
Sergeants 2s. 4d.
Corporals Is. 6d.
Troopers Is. Od.
| Allowed forage for
j two horses each,
1
1 With Clothing and
j llations.
J
Rations per Day :—
24 ounces Flour
16 „ Meat
H ,, Sugar
i » Tea
L }) Tobacco
„ Salt
i „ Soap.
Clothing ;—•
1 Dress Coat and Girdle "
1 Dress Cap
1 Pair Bine Cloth Overalls >
1 Pair Wellington Boots and Spurs I
1 Stable Jacket J
1 Stable Jacket ,.
1 Pair Blue Cloth Overalls
1 Pair Wellington Boots and Spurs j
1 Troop Cloak
Every Two Years,
Yearly.
Every Three Years.
JOHN FRASER, Esq., called in and examined
1. By Mr. Watts : You have been a resident in the north, I believe ? Yes.
2. i lave you been resident many years there ? Yes : I have been residing in the north some
ten years —about ten years.
3.. And chiefly in the outskirts of the country? I have been chiefly residing in the Burnett,
Leichhardt, Morctou, and Port Curtis Districts.
1. During


4. During the time that you have resided in these districts, have you seen a great deal of
the working of the Native Police ? Yes, I have had many opportunities of seeing it,
5. What is your opinion of the Force ? I think it is a very desirable and necessary force,
and if we had not had it during the last three years, we should have had the fearful outrages,
which had just previously occurred, several times repeated.
6. Do you think the Native Police Force is the best kind of force that can be established for
the country ? Such is my opinion : it would be the very best force, with some modifica-
tions.
7. Can you suggest any ? I think the chief would consist in care being taken in appointing
officers.
6. Do you think the officers generally are a good lot ? Well, I think they are, as far as I
know them at present; there may ho some exceptions. lam not personally acquainted with
all, hut I think some of them are very efficient officers.
9. Have you heard of any cruelties committed by the Native Police ? Nothing, excepting
from reports in the newspapers, referring to Fassifern and other places.
10. You don’t personally know of any ? No, not personally.
11. Do you think that the country to the north is quieter now than it has been for many
years ? lam quite certain that for the last three years it has been quieter than it had been
for any previous similar period.
12. What do you attribute this to ? To the general efficiency of the Native Police Force.
13. Have you heard, lately, of any collisions between the Native Police Force and the blacks ?
I can’t recal any to mind.
14. Do you know whether the officers act under any general rules from head quarters or the
Commandant, or otherwise ? I have always supposed that they acted under general instruc-
tions from the Commandant —of course, with reasonable discretionary power.
15. What do you mean by reasonable discretionary power ? That is a difficult matter to
define ; it is impossible for the officer at the head of any department to provide for every
contingency that might arise, and he must leave a certain amount of discretion in the hands
of his subordinates.
1-6. Do you think that in the district you now reside in, a force composed of half white
troopers and half black trackers, would answer as well as the present one ? I think not.
17. From your knowledge of the squatters generally, in the interior, do they behave badly to
the blacks ? I don’t think so.
18. On the other hand, are they generally kindly disposed to the natives ? I think so. I
think it is their interest to he so, and that they are aware of it.
19. Is it your opinion that, in order to keep the natives in check, it is necessary to keep up
such a force as we now have ? I think so.
20. Do you know anything of the horees of the blacks ? Yes; so far that I know they occur
periodically.
21. Do you know what they do at the horees? I never attended one. I never had suffi-
cient curiosity to do so.
22. Do you think that if these horees, or great meetings, were prevented, it would he the
means of creating a better feeling between the whites and the blacks ? I think they foster an
ill-feeling on the part of the blacks, and that, if they were stopped, it would be the means of
preventing. a great many outrages. 1 was always under the impression that their grossest
outrages had been concocted and arranged among the blacks at these meetings.
23. Have you ever heard that the Native Police are in the habit of taking away gins? I
have seen that done occasionally in former years, not lately.
24. Do you think such a course likely to create a friendly feeling between the natives and
the Police ? Decidedly not.
25. Do you not think it is the duty of the officers, so far as they can, to prevent such a
course ? Certainly. .
26. Do you think it necessary for the officers appointed to this force, to have any knowledge of
military tactics ? I think it is quite necessary that they should have some military discipline;
hut a knowledge of military tactics is quite a secondary matter. I think their having been
accustomed to submit to control and to enforce discipline a necessary qualification. Some of
tiie officers who have been in the Force have had very little control over their men. I think
men who have been subject to severe discipline themselves, are in the habit of enforcing
d scipline better on others.
27. Do you know anything of the Hornet Bank murders? I was not on the Dawson at the
time' —I was on the Logan. I merely heard what people said; there was a good deal of
correspondence in the papers at the time, but I don’t know anything myself.
28. Do you think the Force you have now is quite sufficient to keep the country quiet ? The
fact of the-country being quiet is quite sufficient proof of that.
29. Are the natives very hostilily inclined, to the north ? Not at present, owing to the rapid
occupation of the country and the Native Police being at hand. I have had the blacks in
my neighbourhood continually. I have never had any trouble with them ; I never had occa-
sion to apply to the Native Police.
30. You know nothing of the Port Denison country ? Nothing at, all.
31. Do you know, by report, anything of the natives of that district? I believe it will be
necessary to have a Force out there ; the natives appear to he quite unacquainted with firearms,
and the power the whites possess over them.
32. Could you make any suggestions as to improving the conditions of the blacks ? I could
not at a moment’s notice; it would require a good deal oi reflection ; it is a difficult subject
to consider.
33. You don't know whether schools would he of any benefit? Well, I am afraid not;
experience has not shown that any good result is likely to ensi;e from such a course.
34. Have


34. Have you ever seen any schools in operation ? Never, hut I have known some hoys being
taken and educated in Sydney, and I have been told that they returned to their tribes, after a
lapse of ten years, and adopted their old kind of life.
35. By Mr. Ferrktx : Were you on the Dawson at the time the outrage was committed on
the Fraser family ? No.
36. From what you have heard on the Dawson, do you consider that the depredations com-
mitted there may bo attributed to the inefficiency of the officers of the Native Police Force ?
I think so.
37. It is since that time that you mean to say there has been a great improvement ? Yes,
there has been since that time a great improvement—as great as could have been expected in
the time, from the change that was made.
38. Are you aware what is the cause of that improvement —what has been the cause ? I
can only suppose it has only been the zeal and efficiency of the Commandant and the officers
under him ; I can attribute it to no other cause, as the Force is composed of exactly the same
materials as formerly. I may say that I have reason to believe that if the Commandant were
allowed more power in the appointment of officers a better selection would be made.
39. Are you aware that by the recommendations of a Committee of this House the present
Commandant has the power of appointing his own officers ? I was not aware of it.
40. In some portion of your evidence you have said that constant military discipline is
Peecssary in the Force—-have you seen military officers in the Native Police Force ? I think
there have been such, but, in speaking of military discipline I did not mean to say that military
officers were the most desirable, because I don’t think they would be; they are quite un-
accustomed to the habits that make our officers efficient; but men who have been a short time
in the army, brought up in a severe school, and accustomed to enforce discipline, are the most
efficient class that officers could be selected from.
41. Are you aware that Lieutenant Irving and Lieutenant Nicholl were the officers in charge
of the Dawson, patrolling the Dawson District, immediately before the Hornet Bank murders ?
I have heard so.
42. Have you been led to believe that both were very inefficient officers ? Yes.
43. Do you know that they were dismissed from the Force? I understood that Mr. Nicholl
had been dismissed ; I never knew that Mr. Irving had been.
44. Are there any other officers in the Force, to your knowledge, military men ? If I heard
their names mentioned I might be able to say.
45. There are none to your knowledge ? No,
46. Do you not think it is necessary that men should be acquainted with the bush—have a
good knowledge of bush life—-to be efficient Native Police officers ? Yes, I do.
47. Do you not think also that it is very necessary that they should know something of the
manners and customs of the blacks, and of their habits in the bush ? It would be very
desirable that they should.
48. From what you know of the Native Police, are you not led to believe that there is no
confidence to be placed in officers of the Police who have no idea of the bush ? I feel certain of it.
49. Do you think that any new arrival in the Colony, whether a military officer or common
soldier, could have any knowledge of the bush ? I think that he would require to have some
experience of that sort before being appointed.
50. Do you think it possible that any white men, without the assistance of blacks, would be
of any use in following up blacks in the bush ? I don’t think that any White Police Force
would be able to do so, without the assistance of the blacks.
51. Do you think that any White Police Force, even if mixed with black trackers, would be
an efficient Force in scrubby country ? I think it very doubtful.
52. By the Chairman : You have been long enough in the country to have known the old
Mounted Police ? Yes.
53. Are you not aware that the officers and troopers of that Force were good bushmen ?
Yes; but they had acquired a great deal of experience of the bush; they might not have had it
at first, but the Force grew from a small nucleus, and acquired experience and efficiency.
54. Are you not aware that many of the troopers were good bushmen immediately they joined
the Force—quite equal to the present Force ? It is quite possible they may have been.*
55. Are you aware that they used to employ black trackers ? I don’t remember, but I think
that they must have had some.
56. I think you stated in your evidence that military officers were not so efficient as thosd
employed in the Native Police Force ? Military officers over Native Police, I meant.
57. Do you think it any criterion of military officers, that two were dismissed and turned out
inefficient ? I think as a rule it is.
58. Do you think that those officers, to whom I have referred, would have been dismissed from
the Force if there had not been some serious charge of mismanagement or incompetency
brought against them ? I don’t think so.
59. By Mr. Ferrext : Did you hear of any charge of mismanagement or incompetency being
brought against any other officers of the Force, in consequence of which they were discharged
or dismissed ? I understood that charges were brought against Mr. Ross after the Hornet
Bank outrage.
60. Are
* With regard to the old Mounted Police, I supposed the question put by the Chairman had reference
to that Force as a General Police Force, employed chiefly in tracking bushrangers, and although they
may have beenjhighly efficient for that purpose, it is very doubtful, and. in fact, improbable, that they
would be equal to a well-organized Native Police Force in dealing with the blacks; and I may add, that f
consider the best class of men from which Officers could be selected for the Native Police Would ha
cavalry sergeants, who had first acquired a certain amount of general bush experience. The late Sergeant
Major Doolan I consider an instance, in support of my opinion.


60. Are you aware whether he was dismissed or discharged, or not ? I always understood
that he Was dismissed.
61. Was not Mr. Ross acting Under Lieutenant Nicholl or Lieutenant Irving? lam quite
unable to say whether he was subordinate to them or not.
62. Are you not aware that at the time of the Hornet Bank murder Lieutenant Nicholl was
the officer in charge of the Wandaigumbul Police Station ? I understood so.
63. Are you not aware that Lieutenant Nicholl's troop of policemen came over to Hornet
Bank immediately after the Frazer murder ? Yes ; about a mouth after that outrage ; I w r as out
there when they arrived.
64. But you say that you are not aware that Lieutenant Nicholl was the superior officer ? I
am not aware that he had any control over Mr. Boss.
65. Would you not recommend that every officer of Native Police should keep a diary—a
journal—stating where and how he is employed the whole of his time ? I think it would be
very desirable.
66. Would it not be a record of his proceedings, such as it would be desirable should bo
handed to the Commandant every month 1 Yes, I think he might be required to furnish a
copy monthly to the Commandant.
67. Have you not heard that such was the practice of the Native Police officers when Com-
mandant Walker brought the police over to the Dawson and Condamine districts? No.
68. Did you see the Native Police under the command of Commandant Walker in the early
part of the time when they first came over to the Dawson ? Yes, I have seen detachments
of it.
69. Did you consider them then efficient men ? Yes, highly efficient.
70 Did you consider Commandant Walker a very efficient officer or not? Yes, I did.
71. Do you think that any military officer could have had the Native Police troopers in better
command than he had ? Certainly not.
72. Did you ever see any body of White Police, or of Black Police in a more efficient state for
the duty they were required to perform than these men, under the command of Commandant
Walker? No, I can’t say that I did; in fact, I think they were in as highly efficient a state
as could be expected from such a class of men.
73. Do you not suppose that Commandant Walker would have held that high.position at the
present time had it not been that he fell into habits of intemperance ? I have no doubt
of it.
74. Would you not recommend that Native Policemen should not be stationed near towns, or
should be confined to country towns, so as to prevent them from getting intoxicating liquors ?
I think that it is very desirable to keep them at such a distance from towns as would be
consistent with the performance of their duties, to prevent the chance of their getting liquor ;
the officer in charge, if a proper person, will take care to keep his company away from it.
75. From your knowledge of the country, do you consider it necessary that this Police should
at any time be brought into town, unless the roads, along which they must travel, pass
through towns ? No.
76. Then you would recommend that they should not be allowed to enter towns, excepting in
such cases as where they are travelling a road on duty, and are compelled to pass through a
town ? Yes, I think so.
77. Are you aware that intoxicating liquor is demoralizing the Native Police troopers, as well
as the blacks generally, more than any other thing ? I believe it is,
78. Are you nor aware that when Commandant Walker first brought the Police to these
districts that they would not take spirituous liquors ? I have heard of instances of the kind,
in which men have refused to drink spirits; I have also known from my own experience many
of them who would not touch spirits, till long association with the people in the towns has led
them into it.
79. Do you not think that a great deal of the efficiency of the Native Police at that time may
he attributed to their not having given way to the demoralizing habit of making use of
intoxicating liquors ? No doubt that was one great cause of it.
80. Are you aware that there is any penalty at the present time for supplying them with
spirituous liquors ? I believe there is one provided by the Publicans’ Licensing Act.
81. Do you know' what it is ? I have never read the Act, but I understand it to be X'so.
82. From what you know'of the blacks being now supplied with spirituous liquors, do you
think the fine sufficiently heavy to deter the publicans from selling it them ? I believe it
would be sufficient if proof could easily be obtained of the fact of their being supplied, but there
are such various ways of evading that, that the fine becomes inoperative.
83. Could you suggest any means by which the law could be employed for detecting parties
who supply the blacks with liquor ? No : The only suggestion I can make is that of excluding
the blacks from the towns altogether. I may give an instance of the black’s procuring intoxi-
cating liquors in towns : —I was in Ipswich a few days ago, and met an old black fellow whom
I recollected as having been employed on my station ; I gave him some money, and in about
ten minutes I saw him reeling about drunk. I gave him the money for the purpose of buy-
ing bread.
84. From your experience, don’t you think that allowing blacks into the towns is very injurious
to the blacks themselves ? I believe it is highly injurious.
85. Especially from their being in the habit of getting intoxicating liquors? Chiefly on that
account.
86. Do they not often commit depredations, such as that recently at Rockhampton, when under
the influence of grog, that they w'ould not commit at other times ? I believe so.
87. And thereby both whites and blacks suffer to a very considerable degree ? Yes.
88. You consider that it would be very beneficial to the blacks that they should be excluded
from all the towns ? Ido so.
89. Giving


89. Giving as your reason that men you have known as good servants on stations have become
perfectly useless and demoralized by living in the neighbourhood of towns ? They have
become demoralized and perfectly useless—not to he relied on ; I have had experience of
that in several instances myself.
90. Do not the blacks in consequence of making use of spirituous liquors contract disease, and
die off much more rapidly in the neighbourhood of towns than they do at the stations ? lam
certain of it.
91. 'With a view to improving the condition of the blacks, would you recommend that they
should be compelled to remain on their own “ Yaroons,” or in that neighbourhood, in preference
to their being allowed to ramble about over the whole district, concoct mischief, and, in con-
sequence, become perfectly useless ? I think that all that the regulations could fairly enforce
would he to keep them from the towns and large corrohoree meetings,
92. You are not aware that Commandant Walker and Lieutenant Marshall adopted a plan of
keeping the blacks within their Yaroons, when they first came on to the Macintyre and Con-.
damine, and that it had a good effect? ' I am not aware ; but it is quite reasonable; if it could
be carried out, it would he the best mode of managing matters.
9 iff You are of opinion that if such a thing could be carried out it would have a very good
effect ? If it could be carried out without giving the blacks an idea that they were treated
unjustly or harshly.
91. Are you aware that the blacks in New England do not travel about in the way our blacks
tp the northward travel about ? I don't know; I have very seldom seen any blacks in New
England.
95. You know little of the New England I presume ? Beyond travelling through it
several times, I have no experience of it.
96. Are you aware if the blacks are cannibals or not ? I believe they are.
97. You can’t speak from your own knowledge as to whether they are or not? I never wit-
nessed any act of cannibalism, hut I could give reasons for believing it if you wish.
98. I should be obliged by your doing so ? A black boy in my service happened to camp with
some blacks to the north, some years ago, when we were travelling out in that direction, and
he told me a few days after that on going to supper with these fellows, he saw what he thought,
was a small kangaroo ; hut on picking it off the fire he discovered that it was a black child
that they had roasted, hut he expressed no surprise at all himself, and told it me as a mere,
ordinary occurence.
99. Have you ever heard that at the corroborees or borees of the blacks they commit any un-
natural crimes ? I have not.
100. Do you think that if they did such things you would have heard of it ? I think so.
101. Have you not been on the Macleay River ? I have not resided there, hut I have been on
that river.
102. In the Port Macquarie District ? Yes.
103. You know something of the manners and habits of the blacks there ? Yes.
104. Have you travelled through New England and the Beardie Plains District ? Yes.
1.05. Have you travelled through the Maclntyre District ? No.
106. You have lived on the Logan sometime ? Yes.
107. And have had opportunities of seeing the blacks there, and knowing their habits ? Yes.
108. You have been on the Dawson for sometime, and in the Burnett District ? Yes, several
years.
109. And also on the borders of the Port Curtis District? Yes.
110. You have often been in the neighbourhood of borees—you have seen blacks going to and
from them? Yes.
111. You have never in any. of these districts heard anything of the kind ? Never.
WEDNESDAY, 12 fh JUNE, 1861.
present;
Mr. MACKENZIE, Mr. FERRETT,
Mr. WATTS, Mr. ROYDS,
Mr. BLAKENEY, Mr. FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair,
i. Mr. J. DAYIES called in and examined ;
1. By the Chairman : Your name is John Davies ? James Davies.
2. You have been some years in this district? Somewhere about twenty-five years, I think.
3. Have you known this district nearly since the time of its becoming a penal settlement ? I
have known it from about five years of the time it was opened.
4. And have you from choice, during your residence in the country, spent some time with
the natives ?■ I think I was with them fifteen years and three months.
5. By Mr. Blakeney : You spent that time with them ? I was fourteen years, and never
saw a white man.
6. By the Chairman : Consequently, you must know a good deal of the habits, customs,
and language of the natives ? I ought, and Ido so.
7. Did you live during that time with one, or with different tribes ? With different tribes.
8. Did


8. Did you find the languages spoken by the different tribes the same? I found that the
language of every second tribe varied ; no two tribes spoke the same language ; they spoke
the language in different dialects.
9. What distance were these tribes from each other ? The distance averaged from sixty to
eighty and one hundred miles.
10. Could the natives of one tribe understand the language of another tribe at that dis-
tance ? Yes, at such a distance as 150 or 200 miles.
11. At a distance of 200 miles they could understand each other? Yes, very well.
12. Could you make yourself understood by all the tribes ? Yes, because I spoke four or
five languages.
13. But they could not all understand each other’s dialects? No : if you took one here on
to the Severn Elver, he would not be able to understand the language.
14. Have you noticed that any of these blacks are cannibals ? The whole of them are.
15. Without doubt ? I believe so, but I should not like to say that they are cannibals all
over the interior. As far as I have been—and I think I have been six or seven hundred
miles to the north—they are all cannibals.
16. You must often have seen them eating the blacks ? I have seen them eat hundreds of
them.
17. On what occasions do they generally eat them—do they eat their comrades after a battle ?
Yes, any young men or middle-aged men —men up to forty—-all the men fit for fighfingare
eaten ; they are skinned first, and roasted ; their skin and bones are kept for a remembrance.
18. The skin and bones of those that are killed ,? Yes.
19. lam to presume that they eat their comrades from choice, and not from starvation ? It
is not starvation—not at all; they just eat them from fancy for the food 3 they are very
fond of human flesh ; the bodies are very fat—children of two years old are quite fat, and
they are very fond of the fat.
20. Have you ever observed anything like religious ceremonies among them ? No, none.
21. Of course you have seen many of their meetings—corroborees and borees ? Yes : I
know everything connected with them.
22. What do they do at these borees ? The borees have always something to do with women.
23. Are the blacks not mischievously inclined when they meet at these borees—do they not
hatch mischief against the whites ? They do so, undoubtedly.
24. What is the largest number you have ever seen attend a boree ? I have seen about ten
tribes —a muster of about a thousand.
26. Do you think it would be advisable to put a stop to these borees ? I think it could not
be done.
26. Do you think it would be advisable, if it could be done ? I think it would cause a
great deal of damage to be done among the white men.
2J. You think the whites would be in a worse position than if they were left alone ? I
conscientiously speak the truth—if you w r ere to attempt to disturb the blacks at their borees,
they would commit depredations on the whites; that is my belief; they would carry on,
and if all the Police in the Colony were sent after them, they would go into the large
scrubs, in spite of them, and would not be beat.
28. There is nothing religious in what they do at the borees ? No, they have rules and
regulations of their own.
29. You were speaking of the large scrubs they would get into—what is your opinion as to
a Protective Force to prevent them from committing depredations on the whites—do you
consider a Black Force better than a AVhite one ? Undoubtedly I do.
80. Do you think a White Force could follow them into a scrub ? They would ho no use
after blacks over mountains or through a scrub, compared with the Native Police. I believe
in the Native Police in my heart.
81, What is your opinion of the Native Police Force ? As far as I have heard from the
blacks, and from what I have seen, they are in great dread of the Native Police when tracking
and following.them. No white man could track them in the scrub, but if a black puts his
nose to the ground, he can tell their track by blowing, and by his sight, which is very
correct.
32. They are in dread, you say, of the Native Police ? Yes.
33. More so than of the whites? Yes, more so by a great deal.
34. Do you consider, from what you have heard, and from what has come under your own
knowledge, that the country is quieter now than it used to be ? It is.
35. You don’t hear of so many murders as formerly ? No, not half so many : the squatters
could never prevent the murders and depredations, when left to protect themselves. When
I lived with the blacks, there was a AVhite Force, and they were quite unable to prevent the
murders of the blacks through the district. The whites require a road to travel on, hut the
blacks can take short cuts through the hush.
36. You don’t think it advisable that the troopers of Native Police should he recruited in
the districts where they are to remain on duty ? I don’t think it would he advisable.
37. Do you think, after having been so many years among the blacks, that anything could
he done in civilising them, or putting them to school ? That has been tried : it was tried
when I first came into the Colony, twenty years ago. There have been missions in all direc-
tions, and orphan schools, and they have tried all means with them, but I understood the
missionaries never could manage them ; they are a lazy race, and not inclined for doing any
good. They are all very well to ride a horse and so on, and go with bullock drays, but, for
agricultural purposes, they are no good.
88. There was a mission some years ago at Dunwich, on Stradhrook Island ? Y r es.
39. AY as that a Roman Catholic ora Protestant mission ? A Roman Catholic mission.
4.0. They did no good there, I believe ? What good they have done you can sc.e at this day,
11 Are


41. Are you aware if the missionaries ever Christianized a single black in this district? I
am certain they never made a Christian of a single black. I have never found a Christian
among them, and I can speak the language for hundreds of miles round.
42. How many years did the German missionaries act as such ? 1 think, on a rough calcu-
lation, close on twelve years
48. How long was the Homan Catholic mission at Dunwich ? I can’t exactly say.
44. A few years ? Yes, not long.
45. Ho you recollect, not many years ago, that a fresh mission of the Homan Catholics was
sent up here—within the last ten years —; the present Archbishop sent up some two or three ?
I believe so.
46. You are aware that they had to give the mission up ? Yes.
47. Then you do not think, from what you have seen of the manners, habits, and customs
of the blacks, that it is possible to do anything with them ? I think it would be impossible,
unless they were taken on to an island by themselves, from which they could not escape—an
island without timber.
48. By Mr. Watts : Ho you think that the Native Police are cruel to the blacks? Well,
I can’t say. I have heard of cruel acts from the blacks, but I hare never seen any. It is
my belief that the Native Police do their duty, and I highly approve of them.
49. Ho you think that the troopers are thoroughly under the command of their officers ? I
believe they are, from what conversation I have had with the Police. Some of the Force
can speak the same language as I can.
60. Ho not the blacks feel a spirit of revenge when the native troopers, or any persons, take
their gins away ? If the gins are taken by force, but not if they are given willingly.
61. Ho yon think, from what you know and what you have heard among the blacks, that
the Native Police are in the habit of taking gins away by force ? I never heard the blacks
say that the gins had been taken away, but I have heard them say that they had lent their
gins to the Native Police for their use.
52. Hid you ever hear them say that the gins could not be prevented from following the
Native Police ? Never.
58. You don’t think it likely that the gins would follow the Native Police ? I don’t think
it likely that a gin would follow a strange blackfellow.
54. Ho you not think it would be very advisable on the part of the officers to prevent the
troopers from taking gins ? Undoubtedly so.
55. As much as they possibly can 1 Yes, as much as they possibly can. I heard whilst at
Warwick, from some Callandoon blacks, that the Native Police officers were in the habit of
encouraging their troopers to take them.
56. How long ago was this ? It is getting on for six years.
57. You have not heard of it lately? I have not been in that direction.
58. You have heard a great deal, I suppose, of the communications in reference to the
Native Police that have appeared in the local press—the Courier and the Guardian ? I have
heard of them.
59. Ho you think that there has been any unnecessary cruelty used towards the blacks: has
it come under your notice, through the blacks, that any unnecessary cruelty was used at
Hugandan or Fassifern? Not from the blacks themselves.
60. Ho you think that the natives in this immediate neighbourhood could be dealt with by
a white force ; I mean at Cabulture and the Logan, the Bay, Fraser’s Island, and so on.
Ho you think it necessary to keep a Native Police force at Saudgate ? I think it would be
very advisable to keep a few Native Police there.
61. Ho you think it advisable to let the Native Force come into the towns at all? Only
when their business leads them to the towns.
62. Ho you not think they are in the habit of getting drink in the towns ? I do.
63 Owing to that you think it would be far better that they should not be allowed into
town ? Only when they require rations, or anything of that sort.
64. Ho you not think it would be better that they should have their rations sent to them ?
I don’t think that the rations could always be sent to them.
65. Supposing that in pursuit of depredators the Native Police fell short of rations, would
there be any fear of starvation in the bush ? No, not the slightest.
66. Suppose there were white troopers in the place of black I Undoubtedly there would
be.
67. Could the white force live upon the same food as the native troopers do ? It would be
very hard for them.
68. Is there any very great difficulty in getting game in the bush ? Not for blacks, but there
would be for whites.
69. Ho you think that the tribes have decreased within the last few years a good deal ?
Yes ; round the towns—such as this town and Warwick —they have decreased.
70. What is that owing to ? Chiefly to drink.
71. Ho not a great many die from disease ? They have a bad disease among them they
call ‘ phium. ’
72. Had they any other disease before the whites came among them—had they anything in
the shape of small pox ? They got that from the whites—all those diseases came through
the whites.
78. Hid the venereal disease come through the whites ? It did.
74. Ho you think that many of the blacks have died from venereal disease? That and
drink together, I suppose.
75. Are they not in the habit of dying from disease of the lungs? I never knew anything
of the sort among them.
76. Hid you know anything of the Tent Hill tribe ? Not by name.
77. You


77. You don’t know the blacks that live on the Lockyer Creek, where Mr. Pearce was ■“
originally ? I don’t know those. ;
78. Have you any idea whether it was a large or small tribe ? No, I have no idea of the J
tribe you are talking of.
79. As I understand you, the natives have decreased here—not so much from being shot or
destroyed by the Native Police or any other force—but chiefly through disease ? Yes, from
drink, and so on. Now and again they might be shot, or beat, or ill-used.
80. How did the blacks receive and treat you in the first instance ? First-rate—nothing
could be better.
81. By the Chairman : Knowing you to be a white man ? Yes ; they took me to be the
fhost of a blackfellow.
2. Did not Dr. Lang get a great deal of information from you ? Dr. Lang wrote as false
a book as ever was. Dr. Lang did not get his information from me; he might have got it
from other people. He only talked with me for about twenty minutes up at Mr. Griffin’s
station.
83. By Mr. Watts; Are there any unnatural crimes committed at these borees ? No; I
never knew those crimes to be committed among the natives. They are so particular that
they won’t allow the daughter to sleep at the same fire with the son, when they have arrived
at the age of puberty—and the mother-in-law is not supposed to look at the son-in-law.
84. How old are the females when they arrive at puberty ? From fourteen to sixteen.
85 By Mr. BIAKENEY : You were a great number of years with the blacks—during that
time were any whites killed by them ? No.
86. Or any attacks made on their stations ? There were no stations at that day.
87. During the latter period of the time you were with the blacks, were there any attacks
on the stations or lives of the whites ? In the direction where I was, there were no stations
—I was the first white man in that direction.
88, You mentioned that when the Native Police were at Callandoon, the officer encouraged
the men to take the gins ; was it any one now in the Force? I can’t say.
89. Do you know who the officer was? No,I only go by what the blacks said : they called
him Commandant —-that is a general name for officers among the Native Police.
90. That was six years ago, and you don’t know who the officer was? No.
91. Do you think that giving blankets to the blacks does them any good ? Yes, it does
them good—it shows them there is a friendly feeling between the whites and themselves.
92. By Mr. Ferrett : Is what you state to the Committee with regard to the borees from
your own knowledge, or from hearsay ? I speak from my own experience.
93. Have you not then experienced it to be the fact that the blacks have great horror of
such a thing as an unnatural crime ? I have never heard of such a thing in all my
experience of the blacks.
94. When such a crime has been mentioned as being committed among white men, have
you not heard the blacks express horror at it ? Yes, they express horror—they are aston-
ished at it.
95. Did I understand you to say that at these borees the natives do not concoct mischief
more than at other times ? When a crowd gets together they concoct mischief, but I think
it is impossible to prevent the borees.
96. In one of the questions, mention was made of the women following the Native Police,
do you not think they are induced to follow them from fear ? Not at all from fear ; my
belief is that no gin will follow a Native Policeman, unless she is acquainted with him.
97. Do you not think that the gins would follow the Native Police, if the Police ordered
them ? 1 don’t think they would, unless the gins were attached to a particular blackfellow.
98. Did you mean to say, in answer to a former question, that the borees were instituted for
the purpose of introducing young men and women? No; it is merely a ceremony for
the purpose of passing a lad into a certain stage of manhood, and to show him how to act
with a woman.
99. Do you consider the forms, and ceremonies used at the borees, injurious to the blacks,
in their standing with the whites ? They are merely forms and ceremonies of their own.
100. There is nothing criminal, or in opposition to our laws ? Nothing at all, nothing of
the sort; the ceremonies performed are not all of the same kind, they have reference to
their own busines, and are carried on by their own rules and regulations. There is nothing
criminal in their ceremonies that I have seen, and I have seen hundreds of them.
101. Do you know what circumcision is amongst the Jews ? I have heard speak of it.
102. Do you consider the forms and ceremonies gone through by the blacks at their borees
as any worse than circumcision ? No, I don’t think they are.
108. Do you think it possible for any body of white men to apprehend blacks in the scrub ?
They might catch one in five years, or one to a black-fellow’s ten. It is a difficult thing
for either blacks or whites to catch natives in the scrub; but if anyone can do it, it is the
Native Troopers.
104. When they have apprehended blacks, don’t you think it would be desirable that they
should have something in the shape of an iron collar, in preference to handcuffs, from which
the blacks often escape ? I think there should bo something round the neck ; I have known
several instances of blacks escaping with handcuffs on, and then sending them back to the
constables here; they have done that several times.
105. If the Native Police troopers secured them with an iron collar and chain, do you
not think it would save the life of many a prisoner 1 It is my belief that it would.
106. I understand you to say that you have known many instances of blacks escaping when
handcuffs and ropes have been used ? I have.
107. After the blacks are apprehended they are placed in gaol, don’t you think that their
mixing


mixing with the worst white characters in gaol has a very bad effect on the character of
the blacks ? It does the blackfellows no good.
108. Does it not often make the black man a bigger vagabond—a greater rogue—than he
would otherwise have been ? If it would do him no good it would do him harm—that is
my belief.
109. Then instead of being a place of reformation, you consider gaol makes the blacks
worse ? Association with the people in the gaol makes them worse, not the gaol itself.
110. From your experience among the blacks, would you consider military men more
desirable than Native Police ? You might as well send an old fish-woman after the blacks.
111. Do you think from your knowledge of the blacks, that there is any other mode of
dispersing a large mob of blacks—any mode so effectual as that of firing on them ? You
would scatter them so no doubt.
112. Do you think the blacks would be frightened of a party of whites if they did not fire
on them, —do you think they would disperse, if they knew the Native Police had not the
power to fire on them ? They might stand and show fight; there is no use in going among
them unless you are in proper condition, you run a risk of your own life.
113. Does not your experience lead you to this belief—that in nine cases out of ten, if a
party going out against blacks does not fire on them, the blacks make fight ? After they have
been committing depredations; in some cases they will listen to what you have to say, but
if you show violence first with them, and they get a chance of killing you, they will.
114. Have you ever known of any cases where blacks have surrounded whites, before the
whites had seen them ? I have not seen it done, but I have heard tell of it.
115. On the Big River some years ago, was not a party of whites surrounded by the blacks
and killed when they had not fired a shot ? I have heard it mentioned.
116. How do you account for what was done in this particular instance; the whites were
encamped, and had not come up with the blacks, yet the blacks came upon them and
speared all their horses ? Perhaps they had a suspicion that the blacks were hunting after
them. If a large body of them make up their mind to have you, they will have you if
they are able.
117. Is it your opinion that they oftentimes commit depredations on the whites, without
any provocation ? Undoubtedly so; they will commit depredations if you give them no
provocation. Hundreds of them would take your life for a blanket or a hundred-weight of
flour, when they get a* mob together. I would not trust them as far as I could throw a
bullock by the tail.
118. Would you suggest to the Committee as a means of preserving the lives of the blacks,
and for the general benefit of the country, that they should be kept in a continual state of
fear of the whites ? If you want peace and quietness the blacks must be kept in a state of
bodily dread; the more you give, the more they want.
119. I understand you to say that if you are not their master, they will endeavour to be
yours ? Undoubtedly so ; if they go up to a station, and the owner gives them two sheep
for nothing, they will come up the next week and demand four, and go on doubling their
demands every time they come up.
120. And after all the kindness shown them, have you not known instances of their com-
mitting depredations on the property of persons who have given them sheep ? I have not
the least doubt of it—l have known several instances myself; they are so greedy that
nothing can come up to them.
121. Prom your knowledge of the blacks, do you not consider them a most deceitful, false,
and cunning race of people ? They are the most deceitful people I ever came across, and
I have been among all kinds of people. The father will beat" the son, and the son the
father—the mother the daughter, and the daughter the mother; the brother will lie in
ambush to be avenged on the brother if he can’t manage him in fight,—-he will lie in
ambush with a spear or a waddy. The parents have no rule over the children at all, and
there are no more kings and queens amongst them than I am Prince Albert, that is all the
talk of the whites.
122. The ablest man among them is the greatest? Yes.
128. By Mr. Royds : Are you aware how the blacks are generally treated on the station
by the squatters ? No, my experience of the blacks was before the country was settled.
124. Do you think the blacks ever show any gratitude for kindness done by the whites ? I
don’t think they do much.
125. In many instances where the blacks have been to a place once before, although they
know nothing of the locality, they will go straight back from that place to the one they
started from, can you account for this—is it from natural instinct they do so ? Yes, it
comes naturally to them.
126. By Mr. Fitzsimmons ; Do you think that in the outlying districts an interpreter
would he of any use to keep the blacks quiet ? I don’t think you could find an interpreter
on this side the country. I would not myself undertake to act as one, and I would speak the
blacks’ language with any one.
TII URSUA Y,


THURSDAY, IZth JUNE, 1861.
Present;
Mr. MACKENZIE, I Mr. GORE,
Mr. FITZSIMMONS, j Mr. BLAKENEY,
Mr. WATTS, j Mr. MOFFATT,
Mr. ROYBS, j Mr. FERRETT.
The llonorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
Mr. AUGUSTUS ROBE, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman ; I believe you left Germany for this Colony some years ago ? I
left Germany in 1837.
2. For the purpose of establishing a Mission to the aborigines of Moreton Bay? Just so.
3. Was that your original purpose in coming to this country ? Yes.
4. How many years have you—in connection with those who came out with you—been
engaged in the duties of that Mission ? About 8 years.
5. The object of that Mission was to try and Christianize the natives? Just so.
6. Were your efforts attended with success ? Not much success, —1 can’t say we had much
—very little success.
7. Had you any success! I can’t say we had any.
8. How many persons were engaged in the Mission ? Twelve altogether.
9. What was your original inducement to come out to this part of the country ? I must
speak of myself personally. I had felt for a long time an inclination to make the Gospel
known to the natives ; and the door having been thrown open to me to come out to Australia,
of course I accepted by joining the Mission, —I joined it at Berlin.
10. You stated that about twelve persons were engaged in the Mission? Yes.
11. I suppose it was your sole occupation or nearly so ? Just so.
12. You stated that very little success had attended your efforts to christianize the natives.
Can you bring before this Committee any single instance of success? Well, I will tell
you: we made the grown up people work, we employed them about the stations, while we
kept a school for the children. We found the children always learned quite as fast as the
white children. We had some of our own children at school too.
13. And how did you get on with the older blacks ? A r ery little, we tried to express our
opinions about Bivinc things, but as they have no idols which they worship we found it
very hard to make them understand our meaning. We found it very difficult to make any
impression on their minds.
14. Bid you ascertain in your intercourse with the natives whether they have any idea of
a Supreme Being? Very little, I think in some few instances they were made to under-
stand that there is a Bivine Being.
15. But I mean in their natural state? No, I never heard them speak of it.
16. You stated, in speaking of a school at which the native children were taught, that it
was a mixed school—the blacks’ children and the children of the white people? Yes, most
all of them were blacks, there were a few white children.
17. What was the result of the black children learning so quickly ? Bid they become good
members of society,—did they, in fact, become civilized ? No, they turned back to their
own habits when they left the school.
18. Can you give no instance to the contrary—where the children have not returned to
their own tribes ? No, I cannot, they all returned. We taught some of them the Lord’s
Prayer quite perfectly, and they went into town to repeat it, and to get a penny for it—
they made merchandize of it.
19. With regard to the older natives, did you succeed in making them useful? Y r es, they
were useful for manual labor.
20. Bid they continue steady for any length of time ? They would not contiuue if there
was anything to attract them elsewhere. They would then throw away their spade or hoe
and go away, perhaps for months.
21. In consequence of this want of success then you gave up the mission ? It was not
because of the want of success, it was for Avant of support.
22. Support from the Government ? Yes.
23. If you had received support from the Government would you have considered it worth
while to have continued the Mission in spite of the want of success which you met with ?
Yes.
24. Upon what grounds ? Because we believed that we could do some good with the
young children, who are quick enough to learn. We could do A’cry little with the old ones.
25. But you have stated that during eight years’ experience you had received no encourage-
ment ? Yes. We taught them their letters and so on, and they went away again into the
bush and forgot what they had learned. I have been several times into their camps and
taught the children there day after day. But we found it very difficult to do anything with
them ; they were willing to learn, but they wanted to be paid. They seemed to think that
when they went to school they were doing us a service. Whenever we took out a little provi-
sion with us the children would learn their lessons, and when we did not do that they would
give it up.
26. It appears from what you say that you taught them their letters; Bid you teach them
the principles ot Christianity ? Yes, as far as it was in our power to make them under-
stand them
27. Would you, from the knowledge and experience you have had on the subject,
recommend the establishment of such a Mission here, under the auspices and encouragement
of the Government? I think so, I believe it would be beneficial. I would not have given
it up if vve had rccWed anv support, I would h ;±ve stuck to it.
’ 28. Bo


28. Do you think, if you belonged to such a Mission, supported by the Government, that
you would succeed in accomplishing what you failed to achieve in eight years ? I can
hardly answer that question ; I might have better success.
29. How many persons are there remaining of the original Mission ? About five.
30. Then you cannot give tnis Committee a single instance in which you succeeded in
civilizing the natives or making them useful ? I will give you an instance of one of my
travels I was travelling with two or three of my friends in company with some blacks and
I got ill; I think it was on account of the food, which was very bad. Some of my friends
prayed for my recovery which was observed by the natives, and they believed it was in
answer to their prayers that I got well. That was their impression. Well, some time after
one of the natives became ill, and after we had returned to the station one of them called
upon my friend and asked them to pray for the recovery of the black, referring to the
circumstance of their praying for me, and of my getting well again. I think that must have
made some impression upon them. This circumstance was repeated three or four times.
81. Do you not think a good deal of that arises from their superstitious feelings? I
cannot say.
82. Do you remember that the Mission paid a visit on one occasion to some stations up the
country, and that it was reported in the public journals ? That was Mr. Ridley, I believe.
33. Do you not recollect the account of a journey up the country published in the papers
by Dr. Lang, or mentioned in a letter to him ? It might have been a journey towards the
Dunya; I have been several times up that way.
34. Do you recollect visiting a station called Colinton ? No.
35. By Mr. Watts : Can you inform the Committee whether the natives have decreased
much in number lately ? Yes, I believe so, round the settlements.
36. Can you give the Committee any reason for their dying so fast ? I believe it is their
change of living, and the habits of the white people, and the use of intoxicating drinks.
37. Have you during your residence at the Missionary Station observed the working of the
Native Police Force ? I know a little about it, especially since it was established at Sand-
gate.
38. Can you give us any information with regard to the working of the Force? I believe
the establishment of the Force as it is at present is very good. I saw a letter in one of the
papers last week about it which was just to my mind. If there were white troopers and
they killed blacks, the blacks would kill white people in return. The white troopers could
never go through the hardships which the blacks go through—from the heat, and the scrubs,
and such things.
39. From your knowledge of the blacks do you think—if a white Force were established—
that the chances would be the natives would surround the troopers without their knowledge
and destroy them ? I would not say so exactly, but I believe that out of revenge they
would kill anything they came across.
40. Have you not found it necessary to keep the natives in fear, and that the Force which
keeps them most in fear is the one which causes the least bloodshed among them ? Yes,
that has always been my experience.
41. Do you think the Native Police are in the habit of using unnecessary cruelty towards
the blacks ? Not as far as my knowledge goes.
42. Are you aware whether the Native Police Troopers are in the habit of taking away the
females from the various tribes ? I could not say.
43. Do you think, knowing the natives so.well, that this practice, if pursued, would be
likely to enrage the natives ? I think it would.
44. Would you therefore suggest that as far as possible the officers should prevent their
men from doing so ? Yt s, it is very necessary
45. You know nothing I suppose about the working of the Native Police Force to the
Southward ? No. I believe most of the acts of revenge which the blacks commit are
about their females more than about themselves.
46. Have you found that the decrease of the natives in your neighbourhood has been
attributable to drink ? Yes, and to mingling with the whites and getting diseases from
them.
47. Can you suggest to the Committee any other plan whereby we can make ourselves better
understood^—the appointment of an interpreter for instance—to explain to them our laws ?
Well, I think that would be very good. If a man could be found who understood their
language to interpret the law to them, it might do some good.
48. Do you think if such an appointment were made it would prevent them from com-
mitting depredations among the whites ? lam doubtful of that, I think they know the
law very well.
49. Have you seen much of the Native Police? No, I have seen very little of them.
50. Do you think this giving blankets to the blacks is beneficial to them ? Well, I expect
it is good for the winter season, for blankets are the only things they value.
51. Do you think it is a means of keeping up a friendly feeling between the whites and
the blacks ? Yes.
52. And in this light it is advisable to continue the practice ? Yes,
CARDEN COLLINS, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You are a squatter on the Logan? Yes.
- 2. Some time ago, or during the course of the last year, I believe you suffered a good deal
from depredations by the blacks ? I did.
3. They


3. They killed or speared a good many of your cattle ? Yes : they hamstring the cattle, they
don’t spear them.
4. In fact, they did you a great deal of injury ? A great deal: I think they must have killed
from twenty to twenty-five head of cattle, besides injuring many others. They must have
done JBSOO damage, at the very least.
5. Was that an unusual breaking out on the part of the blacks ? It was with me—that is to
say, in my neighbourhood.
6. How long before that was it that any outrage had been committed ? For the last two or
three years there had been one or two of the cattle killed, but I took no notice of that,
7. What steps did you take on this occasion ? I took my black boy and went after them
myself, and drove them off the run.
8. Did you write to Mr. Wheeler ? Mr. Wheeler happened to come up the day after.
9. Are you aware that he went after those blacks ? Perfectly.
10. Is Mr. Wheeler well acquainted with the blacks who congregate on the Logan ? I
believe he is, perfectly.
11. Were you with Mr. Wheeler? Yes, I was with him when he went out.
12. Were you with him when he came upon the jdacks at the scrub at Dugandan, and dispersed
them ? No.
13. Have the blacks been quiet since that time 1 Yes, they have been quiet ever since.
14. Then you know nothing, of your own personal knowledge, of what took place afterwards ?
No, I only know it from hearsay.
15. Have you found the blacks in that quarter better disposed and more peaceable since the
detachment of Native Police has been stationed there ? Decidedly more peaceable.
16. How do you account for the blacks breaking out in this way, destroying cattle, not only at
your station, but all over the Logan ? lam quite unable to account for it, for I have always
treated them well; I have fed them and given them work. The outbreak was quite unexpected
on my part, and I could see nothing to occasion it.
17. Have you seen much of the Native Police Force since its formation 1 Yes, I have seen
them several times up my way.
18. Have you seen them in any other part of the Colony ? Yes, on the Macintyre.
19. What is your opinion of the Force 1 I think it is a most useful force ; I don’t see how
wc could get on without it.
20. Do you not think that, in the intermediate or settled districts, a white Police Force, with
one or two black trackers, would answer all purposes ? Ido not.
21. Are there many scrubs on the Logan ? Yes.
22. And the blacks, when they are pursued, invariably make for those scrubs ? Yes,
invariably.
23. Could white men follow the blacks into those scrubs ? No, they would not have the
slightest chance ; they would not be able to get at them at all.
24. At those outrages there were no means of identifying the blacks ? None whatever,
25. And the only thing to be done was to disperse them ? Yes.
26. I suppose you are not aware what was done at any other stations—after the Police left
your station ? Only from hearsay.
27. Do more than one tribe of blacks visit your station? All the Logan tribes come there ;
they go backwards and forwards ; sometimes the Lower Logan tribes come up, and sometimes
my blacks go below.
28. Have you ever been able to make the blacks useful 1 Yes, for a short time.
29. You mean that you have never been able to keep them continuously at work ? No, though
I have had a black hoy for six or seven years, on and off; but he is going to leave me now.
30. Is not that an exceptional case ? I think it is. Unless they are taken away from their
own part of the country, there is no doing any good with them.
31. Does the hoy you speak of belong to your paid of the country ? He belongs to Coreela,
on the Clarence Liver.
32. Are you aware that the Native Police troopers are in the habit of taking away gins from
the tribes ? lam not aware of it; they have never done so with me.
33. Have you never heard the blacks complain of it ? Never.
34. Do you think—supposing such a practice to exist—that it is a proper one ? Well, it is
only their own usage—their own style of warfare—and 1 don’t think the blacks care very much
about it.
83. Don’t you think such a practice tends to irritate them? Well, I think it does.
36. Could it be prevented ? Decidedly.
37. By the officers of the Police Force ? Yes ; hut I know many of the gins are very willing
to go with the Native Police.
33. Still you think it is in the power of the officers to prevent them ? They can prevent the
tr oopers from keeping the gins.
39. By Mr. Gore : You have seen a good deal of the blacks for several years past ? Yes.
40. And you have been on intimate terms with many of the younger blacks when you were a
younger man yourself ? Yes.
41. And have been considerably in their confidence ? I don't know about that, I have seen
a good deal of them about the stations.
42. Do you know that at the bovees, where they meet for the purpose of admitting boys to
the privileges of manhood, they are guilty of unnatural crimes ? Yes.
43. Whence did you derive your knowledge ? The blacks have told me so themselves.
44. Had you any reason to believe that they told you the truth, or otherwise ? I believe they
told me the truth, as they had no object to gain in deceiving me, I merely asked them what
was


was done on those occasions, and they told me. The natives rather seem to glory in it than
otherwise—they laugh at it.
45. Have you any doubt about it yourself? No, judging from what I have heal'd, I have no
doubt it is true. I have never seen one of their borees myself, and I never heard of but one
white man who had. I asked him about it, and he would not tell me ; he said I would not
believe him if he did.
40. Arc the blacks on the Logan cannibals ? I believe they are, partly —that is to say, some
of them —the old men. The young men have told me so.
47. W hat do you mean by partly ? Some of the tribes 3 others look upon it with horror, and
talk of the old men eating the bodies of those who are killed in battle with disgust.
48. What is your opinion in respect to the borees ; do you think it is desirable to put a stop
to them ? Yes, because they are the means of collecting the blacks for hundreds of miles
round, and then the mischief to the settlers is done.
49. Are not the station blacks compelled to attend those borees ? Yes they must always go.
50. Do they not often go very unwillingly? Yes.
51. Do you not think it would be advisable, in the settled districts, to disperse these assem-
blages ? Yes.
52. Do you think it could be done without bloodshed, by the police riding up and telling the
blacks to disperse ? Yes, I have no doubt about it, if the Police were well armed and in
sufficient force.
53. Do you think the blacks at those meetings concoct mischief against the whites ? I cannot
say ; I believe the old gins concoct most of the mischief at the camp fires at night time. The
gins are not allowed to attend the borees : if a gin attends one she is killed, but the old gins
abuse the young meii and incite them to take cattle.
54. But, although they are not allowed to attend the borees, they are only camped a short
distance off? Yes, about half a mile. Any gin that sees a boree is killed immediately.
55. By Mr. Ferrett : Have you had much experience of this Colony? Some fifteen or
sixteen years.
56. Have you, during that time, lived chiefly in the bush ? Yes, nearly all the time.
57. You have had opportunities of knowing a great deal about the blacks? I have.
58. From that knowledge of the blacks, do you think it likely that large mobs of them would
he dispersed by a small party of police, if the blacks knew the police wore not going to fire
upon them? No, in that case they would do all they could to kill the police.
59. Then, as I understand you, there is no effectual mode of dispersing the blacks except by
firing upon them ? No, or firing at them ; the report of the gun would be sufficient, mdess
they knew the police did not intend to hurt them—that would be a different thing altogether.
60. Are you not aware that when borees are held the blacks come from very long distances to
attend them, and that they congregate in very large numbers ? Yes, I have known them to
go some hundreds of miles.
61. Do you think any small party of white men could disperse the blacks at their borees
without firing on them ? Certainly not.
62. Do you think they would surround such a party, when they knew they were not going to
be fired at, and kill them all ? Decidedly they would—l have not the slightest doubt about it.
63. As yon have spoken of being on the Maclntyre, I will ask whether you have heard of a
party of whites some, years ago, having been surrounded by the blacks there and several of
them killed? Ido not remember the circumstance.
04. Do you know Lieutenant Wheeler, of the Native Police ? I do.
65. From what you know of him do you think it likely that he would use more force than is
necessary to disperse a mob of blacks ? No.
66. Is he naturally a cruel man ? Decidedly not.
67. From what yon know and from what you have heard as to what took place after your
cattle were speared, do you think the blacks that he came upon and dispersed were the same
who speared your cattle ? Yes, because we found the hones and the feet of the cattle at the
cam}).
68. Was that at Dugandan or at Fassifern ? No, on my own run ; it was before the outrage
at Dugandan, and I know that some of the same blacks were at Dugandan afterwards.
69. I)o you consider that apprehending blacks and putting them into prison would give a
greater check to their depredations than firing on them, as Lieutenant Wheeler did, at
Dugandan and Fassifern ? I think that putting them in prison and letting them out again
only makes them worse. I have seen several instances of it. When they get out they have a
blanket and tomahawk given them, with which they go back to their tribe, and think it good
fun to have been -well fed so long.
70. Do you think the mixing up the blacks with the, very worst characters among the whites
in our gaols and prisons makes them worse, or does them any injury ? It has a decided
tendency to evil.
71. Has it not come under your observation or knowledge that the blacks who have been sent
to gaol are far worse characters than before ? I believe it to be a fact that they invariably
are worse.
72. Do yon not think some other mode of punishment should he adopted ? Decidedly ; make
them work hard.
73. When the Police apprehend the blacks, don’t you think, in some cases, it is advisable that
they should adopt a different mode of securing them from the ordinary handcuff—such, as
for instance, an iron collar to be put round their necks, or something of that sort ? Yes, the
hlacklcllows' hands are much smaller than the hands of white people, and they can slip them
through the handcuffs more easily. I think some other mode of securing them is very
necexsarv.
74 Do


74. Do you think an iron collar, similar in form to the handcuff, would secure them ? I have
no doubt it would.
75. Have you heard, or do you know, that many blacks have escaped from constables or from
the Native Police from being so imperfectly secured as they are at present by the ordinary
handcuff? Yes, I have heard of several instances: Nelson, for instance, who murdered a
woman on the Logan road, was one.
76. Do you think it possible to Christianize the blacks in any way? I don’t think it possible,
unless by removing them entirely from the country, or to some very distant part of the
country.
77. Do you think educating them would have any beneficial effect ? It might in some
instances ; but, generally speaking, they will return to their old habits and mode of life.
78. Have you known any well educated blacks return to their former habits ? I have not
personally, but I have heard of some who have done so who have been educated and even taken
to England. There is a case now in this very place. The blackfellow in question was taken
to Europe by Mr. Campbell, and he has since returned to his tribe.
79. From what you know of the duties of the officers of the Native Police Force, do you
think it would be better to employ military men ? Not necessarily.
80. Do you think they would be an improvement upon the class of men we have now in the
Force ? No, Ido not.
81. Do you think a man should know something about the bush and bush life to be an efficient
officer ? Of course he ought.
82. Do you consider a high state of discipline and drill necessary to the efficiency of the
Native Police Force ? No.
83. Do you think it possible for any White Police Force to follow the trails of blacks for
days and weeks as the Native Police do ? It is utterly impossible, they could never do it.
84. Do you not think it is objectionable that black boys belonging to the stations of settlers
should be taken away by the Native Police officers for the purpose of recruiting the force ? I
think it is decidedly wrong, unless the boys are agreeable to it.
85. Do you think it necessary to prohibit the officers from doing so, and that it creates an
ill-feeling between the blacks and the settlers in the outer districts ? I agree with you there.
86. Does not the taking away the black boys from the stations frequently cause great incon-
venience to the settlers, from the fact.that they are left more open to depredations? Yes.
87. Because the blacks have no longer the fear of being tracked by the black boys ? Yes.
88. Can you suggest any improvement in the present constitution of the Native Police Force ?
Ido not think it can be better than it is. It is the only way of working the thing that I can
see in any shape or form. I don’t think it could be bettered in any way. As to white men
being with them, it would be a mere farce; they could never get through the scrubs.
89. Could the present Force be made more efficient than it is by being better officered, or by
the officers receiving orders from their Commandant ? I think they are as efficient as they
can be.
90. Do you not think it is very desirable, when an efficient officer is placed in charge of a
detachment of police, that he should be left to his own discretion as much as possible when
acting in reference to the blacks ? Of course, he must be.
91. From your knowledge of the Native Police Force, do you consider the troopers are under
proper and sufficient control when they come into collision with the blacks ? No, I do not ;
they cannot be stopped, and that is their only fault.
92. Have you ever been engaged in a skirmish with the blacks yourself i I have.
93. With white people ? No, not with whites.
94. Do you think, from what yon have seen, that a party of white men could be kept under
better control than the black troopers ? Well, I doubt it —I very much doubt it.
95. Do you not fancy, from what you have seen, that the whites would be even more cruel
than the blacks ? No, I don’t think that.
96. Was the tribe of blacks you speak of as having committed depredations on your station
called the Telemon tribe ? Yes, but I believe they were mixed up with blacks from the
Eichmond.
97. Do you think a mixed force—of say pensioners or old soldiers, with a few black trackers
—would be as efficient as the present Force ? No, Ido not.
98. Did you hear, some year or two ago, of an outrage —some murders committed on the
Dawson —the Frazer murders? I did.
99. Did you see as much notice of that outrage taken in the public press as was taken of these
Dugandan murders, or what were reported to be murders, by the blacks ? No, I think there
was more commotion about the blacks being killed than the whites.
100. Then, supposing the affair at Dugandan had been murder, do you not think there was a
great deal more favor shewn by the members of the press in that particular instance in giving
publicity to it, than there was to the whites in giving publicity to the murders on the Dawson ?
No, I can’t say that; because they both appeared in the public journals.
101. Was there not a great deal more said about the Dungandan affair? There was a grear
deal more said about it.
102. Do you know enough of the different tribes of blacks to state what is the difference in
their languages among the various tribes ? As far as I know, nearly every tribe has a different
dialect.
103. Do you think any one interpreter could be found to understand those different languages ?
No. I know when I take my black boys away —say to the Macintyre—they are quite unable
to express themselves: they generally speak in broken English.
104. Do you think if an interpreter, understanding their language, were appointed, as a
medium of communication between the white people and the blacks, it would have any effect
in preventing depredations ? Not the slightest.
105, Do


105. Do you not think, from your knowledge of the blacks, that they are deceitful, treacherous,
and false ? Yes, they are very deceitful and bloodthirsty ; they are also decidedly liars—that
is one of their peculiarities; I have always found them to be so.
106. Would you recommend that their oaths should be taken 1 Decidedly not.
107. By Mr. Royds : Do you think it necessary that a Police Force should still be kept up on
the Logan ? Decidedly ; the blacks have threatened me several times: they have threatened
to burn the house, and murder us all.
108. Have the settlements on the Logan interfered with their hunting grounds ? Not at all.
109. Have they as much game as they require ? Yea, more than they require.
110. Are they well treated by the squatters ? Yes, always very kindly. I have fed them,
given them work, and in fact done more for them than I ought to have done.
111. Then what do you consider to be the cause or motive of these murders ? That I cannot
explain.
112. Do you think it is the fault of the whites ? No, the blacks are generally the aggressors ;
they commence by hunting the cattle and robbing, or what is called cleaning out the huts.
116. You have just stated that the blacks threatened to murder you and burn your house,—
was this before or after Mr. Wheeler’s visit to you ? Before.
114. Have they committed any depredations since ? No.
115. When they destroy cattle do they eat them, or do they destroy them wantonly? They
frequently kill more than they want, but they do eat the most of them; it depends upon the
number of the blacks.
116. Is it for want of food that they destroy the cattle ? Decidedly not.
117. By Mr. Fitzsimmons; Have the blacks committed any murders lately in your neigh-
bourhood ? The last murder was committed by the black Nelson on the Logan road : that is
within the last two years.
118. Was he a black who was brought up about a station to associate with white people ? He
was Mr. White’s black boy, was always about the station, and was considered a very good
blackfellow. He could speak English very well.
119. Was he punished for the murder ? He was caught, but he got away again.
120. And is now at large ? He is now at large.
121. And I suppose the settlers in the neighbourhood apprehend some danger from his being
at liberty? Yes, 1 suppose so. He does not live in my part of the country, but about the
Lower Logan or Tweed.
122. I suppose the blacks in your neighbourhood are partly civilized, —they are not altogether
wild blacks ? Partly so ; they have all been to the head station, and can, most of them,
manage to ask for a little flour or tobacco.
123. Don’t you think European Police would be able to keep them in order? Ido not.
124. When they commit depredations, do they invariably have recourse to the scrubs ? Yes.
125. And for this reason European Police would be of no service? No; they would not be
able to follow the blacks.
126. But in the neighbourhood of large towns —say Brisbane or Ipswich'—do you think it
necessary to have a Native Police Force ? I think so, decidedly; there are scrubs near
Ipswich, which I am sure no white men could go through. But in the immediate vicinity of
the towns I have no doubt white Police would keep the blacks in a certain state of awe.
127. Is it when the troopers go into the scrub that their officers have no control over them ?
Yes, that is where they can do nothing with them.
128. By the Chairman ; Have you ever seen the experiment tried —I refer to a white Police
Force 1 No, except the soldiers who were stationed some time ago between Ipswich and
Drayton.
129. Do you remember the old Mounted Police ? Yes.
130. Were they an efficient body of men ? I think they were not of much service ; they were
better for bushrangers.
131. I am speaking of the old Border Police; each Commissioner had some half-a-dozen
troopers attached to him ? Yes, 1 recollect them ; I don’t think they were of any particular
use. 1 remember, when the soldiers were stationed between Ipswich and Drayton, the blacks
went up the One-Tree Hill and rolled down stones upon them, and the police could do nothing
against them.
132. What would the Native Police have done ? They would have driven them off the hill.
133. By Mr. Watts : I think, Air. Collins, you knew a good deal about the M acuity re Brook
a long time before the Native Police were established? Yes.
134. Do you remember what a state of trepidation the inhabitants of this part of the country
were in ? Yes, they were always afraid of attacks from the blacks, and 1 know that one or
two murders were committed. Perhaps you recollect the case of a little boy —a stockman of
the name of Kemp—who was taken away by the blacks and murdered.
135. Do you remember the impossibility of keeping stock in that neighbourhood ? Yes.
136. I believe it is a law among the blacks that the strongest man is the best man ? Yes, I
have always found it to be so.
137. Do you remember a fight between two blacks, at your own station on the Maclntyre
Brook, at which you and I were present ? Across the creek, —yes, I do.
138. Do you know what that was for ? About a gin, I believe.
139. To ascertain which was the best man? Yes.
140. What weapons did they make use of? Tomahawks, I believe, and spears.
141. And knives? And knives, certainly: the knife is their favorite weapon.
142. Do you remember what style of knife was used? It was a hooked shear blade—a shear
blade worked into a hook.
143. What is the mode of warfare ? Spearing, and cutting each other with knives. Do
yon remember that poor fellow who had his tin oat cut open?
144. Do


144. Do you not think they have exactly the same feeling towards the whites ? Decidedly,
more against the whites than against themselves.
145. Do you not think, if we had not some force to show the blacks our superiority, that they
would look upon us with contempt ? Yes, with contempt; and we (squatters) should have to
protect ourselves.
14G. Can you suggest any means of ameliorating the present condition of the blacks? I can
think of none whatever. I have thought the matter over and over, and the only way I can
see is to kidnap them and take them entirely away to ome islands, and make them work.
147. But that would be utterly impossible, on account of their large numbers ? Yes. They
never will be civilised: they will die first.
148. Do you think that the giving away blankets to the blacks is a means of keeping up a
more kind and friendly feeling between them and the whites ? Yes, it may create a more
friendly feeling, but I think it does them more harm than good in the end ; because they get
drunk, and pick up the vices of the Europeans, when the blankets arc distributed in the
towns.
149. Do you think it right that some general rules should be laid down by the Commandant of
Police for the guidance of the officers ? Decidedly.
150. And that the officers should be bound to make monthly returns, —to keep, in fact, a
daily journal of all their actions, to be sent in to the Commandant monthly ? Decidedly.
FRTDAY, Uth JUNE , 1861.
Present:
Mr. MACKENZIE, I Mr. FERRETT,
Mr. WATTS, 1 Mr. BOYDS,
Mr. GORE, Mr. MOFFATT,
Mr. BLAKENEY, | Mr. FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
Mr. FARRINGDON, called in and examined :
1. By Mr. Moffatt : What is your name ? Francis Henry Farringdon.
2. Where have you lately been residing ? At Fassifern.
3. Were you there on the 24th of December last ? Yes.
4. Were there any blacks on the station, or in the neighbourhood at that time ? Yes.
6. Had they been there any length of time ? There had been one or two for some length
of time, and some had been there two or three days before.
<3. Was there a large number of blacks there at the time ? I believe there were from
twenty to thirty.
7. Of all kinds ? Of all kinds.
8. Do you remember the 24th of December 1 Yes.
9. Did anything particular occur on that day in reference to the blacks ? Yes.
10. Will yon state what did occur 1 As far as I can remember—it is now a long time
since—some time in the morning I heard some shots fired in the direction of the scrub,
and saw the blacks looking very wildly towards the scrub, and I heard that the Native
Police were shooting the blacks. I believe that I heard that. Shortly after I saw
Lieutenant Wheeler. I think six troopers of the Native Police came up to the run from the
direction of the scrub, by the lane—there is a lane goes from the house between some
paddocks, crossing the creek towards the scrub.
11. At the back of the Fassifern station ? On the head station: the lane commences at the
office door.
12. You saw Lieutenant Wheeler and the Police come up to Fassifern head station? Yes,
up to the bouse.
13. What did they do when they got there ? I saw Lieutenant Wheeler give the bridle of
his horse to a trooper, and go into a bedroom.
14. Into what bedroom ? Into an end bedroom—a bedroom at the south end of the
house.
15. What else did you see him do ? He told the Police to go and camp out in the
paddock.
16. Did the Police go out again that day ? I am not quite sure, but I think they went
hack to the camp that day. Some two or three of them went to the camp at the scrub,
but they did not leave the station that day.
17. Did you go out to the scrub that day? No.
18. But the subsequent day ? Yes, the next morning.
19. What did you see there—did you see anything particular ? I saw some blackfellows
dead.
20. Did you examine them 1 Not particularly—l examined one, that is, I just examined
where he had been shot.
21. Did


21. Did you observe what was the cause of death ? I did not particularly observe, but I
saw some round holes which I took to have been made by the ball of a gun; they might
have been spear wounds, but I took them to have been made by the ball of a gun.
22. What state were the bodies in—were they decomposed—how did they appear ? They
appeared to have been dead a very short time; the bodies were fresh enough apparently,
but the head of one was greatly mutilated.
23. By what means do you think ? I should say from a tomahawk or nullah-nullah; it
appeared to have been from a nullah-nullah.
24. Had the blacks been fighting in this scrub ? Not since they returned to Fassifern.
25. During this visit to Fassifern you had not seen or heard of them fighting. No.
26. Had you been shooting dogs in that scrub ? No.
27. Were there no other persons shooting dogs in the scrub? Not before that time.
28. When were the dogs shot? The dogs were shot on the day following the one on
which the blacks were shot—on the 25th.
29. And had you been shooting on that day—the 24th ? No.
30. Did you kill any dogs ? I killed two.
31. What was the reason of these dogs being killed? Because they were a great nuisance.
After the blacks had been, as I believe, shot, the rest were camped round the station, because
they durst not go away to camp, and by that means the dogs stopped there, and made a
great deal of noise, yelling and barking; I got no sleep, and I have no doubt that several
persons besides myself had no sleep.
32. Were there many dogs killed on this occasion ? Yes, there were a good many killed.
33. A good many were shot ? Yes, several.
34. Were there any blacks shot on this occasion ? No.
35. Nogins? Nogins.
36. You are sure of that ? Yes, that is my impression.
37. Had you heard that the blacks had been committing any depredations on the stations
previously to the visit of Lieutenant Wheeler ? They had been some time ago, but not
lately.
88. Not at this particular time ? No.
39. Will you state what you heard had occurred previously ? I heard that a young girl on
the station had been ravished.
40. Do you believe that report ? It is generally believed. I was not on the station at
the time.
41. How long was it after you heard the shots fired in the direction of the scrub,
that the Native Police arrived at the head station? About twenty minutes—it might be
more.
42. It was within an hour ? Yes.
43. Do you know who it was that gave information to the Coroner in the first instance
about the shooting of the blacks? No.
44. By Mr. Watts: Of your own knowledge you cannot inform us of any person that saw
this—no white man saw the blacks shot ? All that I can inform you is that the blacks
were seen in the camp at the same time the firing was going on ; I think you have got it
there in evidence.
45. There was no pre-concerted plan at the head station with regard to killing the blacks ?
Not that I am aware of.
46. Do you not know whether the blacks had committed any depredations besides the
offence you have alluded to—ravishing a girl ? I believe they have done so, but I don’t
know of their having done anything particular on this occasion. I have seen things in the
scrub that have convinced me that depredatiofts have been committed.
47. What were these ? The bones of some cattle,
48. Do you know whether the blacks were in the habit of spearing cattle ? Ido not.
49. Is there now plenty of game for them? There are plenty of wallabies.
50. And you think-there is no necessity for their committing depredations? I don’t
think there is.
51. Generally speaking, from your own knowledge can you inform the Committee whether
the squatters in the neighbourhood of Fassifern are kind to the blacks ? Mr, Hardie uses
them well; in fact, I know that after the blacks had been shot at the Dugandan scrub, one
of them came over and showed Mr. Hardie his leg, where he had received a wound, and I
heard Mr. Hardie say—-“ If you had stopped here you would not have been shot, but when
you go and mix with the Logan blacks you can’t expect anything else ”
52. Is there any surgeon in that neighbourhood appointed to attend to the blacks ? I don’t
know of any surgeon there at all—we have no surgeon nearer than Ipswich.
53. Do you not know of any depredations that the blacks are supposed to have committed
on any of the back runs in the Logan district 1 No.
54. Have you not heard of any ? I heard some report of their spearing cattle at Carden
Collins’ station. #
55. Don’t you know whether these were the blacks that the Native Police had tracked to
that scrub ? I believe they had met with them at Dugandan, and frightened them on to
Fassifern. I got that from the blacks themselves.
56. Have you ever seen any person in connection with the station attempt to fire at or
injure the blacks ? No.
57. But they have al ways been kind to them 1 Yes, if they came and were willing to go to
work, and do any little trifle at all, they could get their rations.
58, By


58. By Mr. Fitzsimmons : And if they did not go to work, nothing was said to them ?
No.
59. By Mr. Watts : Did you recognise the blacks whose bodies you saw? No.
60. You don’t know whose they were ? I only knew the name of one, hut I could not
recognise him. I have since been told by the blacks that he was such a hlackfellow.
61. Did you hear any of the Native Police say that they had shot them? No.
62. Who were present when the blacks came up to the head station? They did not all
come together—they came one or two together.
68. Were any of the officers at the head station in expectation of the Native Police coming
there ? I don’t think so,
64. By Mr. Blakenby : How long have you been living on the Fassifern station ? Since
January of 1860.
65. Just a year ? About eighteen months.
66. But at the time this occurrence took place? Yes, a year.
67. During that year were you aware, of your own personal knowledge, of any damage
being done by the blacks on the station ? I never saw any.
68. There were no complaints made to Mr. Hardie? I did not hear of any; there were
some complaints of a single man’s hut being robbed, but it was supposed to have been done
by whites going to the diggings ; yet still it was laid on to the blacks.
69. Were you present on that day at any conversation between Mr. Hardie and Lieutenant
Wheeler ? No.
70. Were those men—those blacks —that you saw lying dead, old or young ? Very
old apparently.
71. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: All three? All three.
72. By Mr. Blakenby : Did you see Mr. Hardie and Lieutenant Wheeler together on that
day ? I did.
73. Did you hear anything that passed between them? I heard some two or three words.
74. What was the purport of them, as far as you can best recollect ? I heard Mr. Hardie
say that there were a great mob at the Logan, and that he had tried to drive them away
but could not.
75. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: Meaning blacks, I suppose? I believe so.
76. That was your opinion at the time? Yes.
77. By Mr. Blakenby : Did Lieutenant Wheeler say nothing? I did not catch what he
said.
78. You were speaking of having heard of a rape being committed by the blacks—that was
more than twelve months ago, of course ? It was some three years ago—it might have been
five years, for anything I know.
79. I suppose you know the features of a great number of the blacks who are in the habit
of frequenting that district ? No, Ido not, except of one or two.
80. Were any of those three, blacks you had ever seen before? I had seen one of them.
81. Do you know to which tribe —the Fassifern or the Logan—the black you recognised
belonged ? Ido not know.
82. Had you seen him off the station ? No; I had seen him half-a-dozen times during
shearing.
83. By Mr. Fereett : Do you know whether any of the blacks you alluded to as looking
towards the scrub—you said some blacks were looking towards the scrub when the firing
took place—afterwards shot ? No.
84. You say that among the three dead blacks you saw the next morning, there was one
with his head mutilated—did you see what you considered to be a spear or gunshot wound
on the body ? I saw two.
85. Do you know if the tribe or party of blacks at the Fassifern scrub were the Telemon
blacks or the blacks belonging to Mr. Carden Collins’ station ? Ido not.
86. By Mr. Fitzsimmons : Are you still living at Fassifern ? Yes.
87. You are a servant at Fassifern ? No.
88. Were you in Mr. Hardie’s employment at the time of this occurrence? I had a con-
tract under him.
89. You have had several opportunities of talking to Mr. Hardie 1 He is a man who never
speaks to his servants, except on business.
90. Did you hear that the Native Police were expected on the station at this time ? I heard
it from the blacks.
91. Were you examined before the Coroner on this occasion ? I was.
92. Did you hear no other cause assigned for the death of the blacks, than what
was supposed to be the cause—namely, their being shot by the Native Police ? I
heard no cause assigned.
93. Are you of opinion that the blacks could be dispersed without firing on them ? Yes.
94. You stated that you heard Mr. Hardie say that he could not disperse them ? Yes, T
have stated that I heard him say so.
95. Yet you are of of opinion that they could be dispersed without firing on them 1 I
think a good stockwhip would disperse any number of them
96. You have no actual knowledge that those blacks were shot ? No further than that:
I saw what I supposed to be bullet wounds.
97. And you have not received information by any other means ? I know no further than
what I saw, and have never been released from the opinion that they were shot.
98. Merely because you saw the blacks dead, and saw the wounds ? Because I saw them
dead and saw the wounds; I had heard the gun-shots.
99. You


99. You have had no actual experience among the .blacks ? I don’t exactly understand
your meaning.
' 100. Prior to your going to Fassifern, had you had any experience of the blacks ? I have
• been two hundred and thirty miles up the country, and I never found the blacks to molest
me. I don’t perfectly understand your meaning in using the word experience.
101. Have you had any knowledge of the wild tribes ? I have had that much, that I have
met them during the last seven years. I have found the blacks much more refractory in
the towns than in the bush.
102. I think you stated that Mr. Hardic was very kind to the blacks? Yes, so far as this
goes—if they go to work, he feeds and pays them.
103. And if they don’t, he does not molest them ? If they collect in large numbers he
will disperse them ; he will go and tell them that if they don ? t disperse he will stockwhip
them—but Mr. Hardie would as soon do that to whites as to blacks.
104. He would just treat whites and blacks alike ? Not exactly.
105. When the blacks are not well treated at any other place, would they run to Mr.
Hardie for protection ? They came there on that occasion.
106. You never heard that Mr, Hardie sent up for the Native Police for the purpose of
shooting the blacks ? No,
Mb. OWEN DALY called in and examined
1. By Mr. Watts: You live near Ipswich, I believe ? Y r es, on the Bundamba Creek,
2. Have you lived there long ? I have lived there these eight or nine years.
3. An occurrence took place there—a disturbance—about twelve or eighteen months
ago ? Yes, last August.
4. It had something to do, if I mistake not, with some persons coming and chasing the
blacks from the Logan ? From the Bundamba Creek.
5. W r ill you state the particulars? The blacks passed in going to Cameron’s from
Ipswich, and they stopped an hour or two at the water-hole where the generality of
whites stop while they have a pot of tea. This was late in the evening, and one of
them came to my place, and asked if I would allow them to stop on my ground that
night, and said that they were going away in the morning. I told him yes, and he got
me to come and point out where they might stop. I directed him to go and camp any-
where along the fence where the timber was felled. He asked me if it was not my
ground outside the fence, as well as inside; I said yes, and they went and camped on
it. Just after dark I heard a shot fired, and, three or four minutes after, there were two
more shots fired from two guns, or from a double-barrelled piece. I w T ent out then, and
could see the fire of the blacks, but could see nothing more plain at the time. A few
minutes after, my wife went to the water-cask for some water, and said, “ Daly, there are
some men walking about the fire.” I went out then, and could see them throwing dry
timber on the fire, and one man gathering with his hands, and throwing blankets and
clothes on to it; another shot was fired, and a dog sang out. I told my wife then to go
inside, and I went out in the direction of the fire until I came close to it, and then I could
see how the men were throwing wood on to burn the clothes; they were throwing on
some dry w r ood, and blankets and opossum rugs and tomahawks along with it. One of
them kept still holding the piece in his hand, and working like this (illustrating the
movement) with his feet, and the other man was throwing things on with both his hands.
I stopped there a considerable time.
6. Did they see you ? They did not see me : a man, where there is a great light, can’t
see a man in the dark.
7. Had the blacks been in the habit of camping there for any time ? For some time
until they had been hunted off.
8. Who hunted them from there ? Mr. Ivory and his superintendent or stockman,
9. Do you know of any reason ? No.
10. Who were the men that yon saw at the fire ? Mr. Ivory and his stockman,
11. Is the Bundamba lagoon on his run ? Yes.
12. Near the head station ? No.
13. AYas it because they were, fishing in this lagoon ? There were two round at the
lagoon, and I asked them what they wanted, and they said they wanted to catch a swan
for some man in Limestone, of the name of Peacock.
14. Do yon know of any reason that Mr. Ivory had for keeping them away from the
run ? No, unless he considered that they disturbed his cattle.
15. Are you in Mr. Ivory’s service? Nq, I have a piece of ground of my own round
there.
16. Is that on part of Mr. Ivory’s run ? It was,
17. Do you think that the blacks keeping round the lagoon, on the pretence of fishing,
don’t disturb the cattle ? I don’t think they do ; there is a main thoroughfare there,
from the Logan to Ipswich.
18. You say you heard shots fired on that particular night—were there any blacks shot?
No, merely their dogs.
19. You


19. You have been some years in the Colony—were you ever in any other part of it ?
I have never been out of this part; I have been as far as the Downs and Callandoon. I
have been living in this district for these twenty years.
20. Have you known of any other instances of the blacks being driven from their hunt-
ing or fishing grounds ? I know of no oases, of my own knowledge.
21. Have you seen them driven frequently from the Bundamba lagoon ? Yes.
22. You have never heard Mr. Ivory express any opinion on the subject? Ho.
23. Or his overseer ? I have heard him say that he would never allow them on the
run ; he considered that they disturbed the cattle.
24. Do you consider that they don’t disturb the cattle—when Mr. England was there,
did you never know him to hunt the blacks off, when Mr. Kent had charge of the
Government cattle ? I never knew him to hunt the blacks off, or cause them to be
hunted off,
25. Were you living there then ? Yes.
2d. Do Mr. Ivory’s cattle come to drink at the Bundamba lagoon ? Yes, his cattle, and
more also.
27. Is it not one of the main cattle camps of the run ? Which ?
28. The lagoon cattle camp ? It was when Mr. England lived there, but then there was
no person living there but himself. The ground has since been surveyed and sold.
29. Do you mean to say that there is no cattle camp at the lagoon ? There is no regular
cattle camp on the run ; the cattle camp is all covered with grass, because the cattle are
not looked after properly.
30. That is not my question—is not that the main cattle camp of the run ? It was one
of them.
31. You evade the question—is that a cattle camp or not? Some cattle camp there;
the main camp is Dr. D’Orsay’s camp.
32. In all ordinary seasons, is not that the main place for cattle to get water ? They
get water at the lagoon, and at other parts of the run; it is not the main place for water;
it is the main place for people who live in the neighborhood of the lagoon.
33. la there no camp on the run at all to which the manager or stockman runs
the cattle ? The cattle have never been run to a camp since Mr. Ivory got the station ;
when they are run, they are run to the stockyard.
34. It is a customary thing for stockmen and settlers to run the cattle to the main points
on the run ? It never has been done there since Mr. England left, and, consequently,
the camps are all overgrown with grass, and when the cattle are driven anywhere, they
are driven into the stockyards, branded, and let out again,
35. Do you know what amount of blankets, or other things, these gentlemen burned, or
what dogs were killed ? I saw one dead dog there, and got three tomahawks from the
ashes.
30. Were these far from your place ? They were along my fence.
37. Inside or out ? Outside, in the open ground; but both outside and inside are
mine.
38. Have you ever known the blacks commit any depredations among the cattle ?
No.
39. You spoke of Mr. Kent during the time that he had charge of the Government
cattle,—you don’t know whether the cattle were ever molested during that time ? I
never heard that they were, and I was stockman part of the time with Mr. Kent.
40. You don’t believe the blacks ever did touch them ? No.
41. What tribe of blacks frequents that place ? Generally the Ipswich—the Ipswich
blacks, and the blacks belonging to Mr. Carden Collins’ station —one of the blacks
generally shepherds for Mr. Collins.
42. You never saw anyone shoot at a black ? No ; I never saw anyone shoot a black
and I never saw a black that deserved shooting about there, or anywhere else,
43. By Mr. Blakbney : How far might it have been from the lagoon that you gave
permission to the blacks to camp that night ? About four hundred yards : my hut or
house is within four chains of the lagoon.
44. Are you quite sure that Mr. Ivory had no claim or right to the land? I paid for
the land, —it is my private property, and no other man has any right to it.
45. Did you see any guns with Mr. Ivory or his stockman ? I saw one with Mr. Ivory
himself; he held it in one hand, and had the stock-whip on the ground.
46. Did they appear to destroy many of the opossum rugs aud blankets ? They
destroyed all they got,
47. Did the destruction appear to have been considerable, —were there one or a dozen
blankets and rugs burned ? There were not a dozen, —there might be four or five
blankets. It was after their getting the Government blankets, and they had a few old
ones ; they had also some striped shirts.
48. Were they all burned ? They were all burned, and some trowsers they had given to
them by the people for whom they cut wood, and othlF'clothes as well,
49. Were these destroyed ? All burned,
50. By Mr. Ivory and his man ? Yes.
51. Did you make a report of this to any authority ? Yes.
52. To whom ? To Mr. Quinn,
53. The Chief Constable in Ipswich ? Yes.
51. Was any action taken on the report you made, —was there any enquiry—-or did tie
Police come out ? No, the Police did not come out,
55. Did


. 55. Did you mention the occurrence to anyone else ? To Dr. Challinor.
• 56. Did you not go to Dr. Challinor in the first instance—and did he not take you to
• Mr, Quinn ? Yes, I went and asked who was the proper authority.
57. And he brought you to the Chief Constable ? He told me to go to Mr. Quinn.
58. You went to Mr. Quinn ? Yes, and Dr. Challinor went also, and Mr. Quinn asked
mo whether the blacks were shot. I said that I did not know,- —that one of the blacks
had told me that one of them had been shot, but that I did not know myself.,
59. Do you mean wounded or killed 1 Wounded.
60. Did Mr. Quinn do anything further? He said that it would be no use to send out
the Police—that if they were sent out, and the blacks heard that they were in pursuit,
they would be all off'; but he asked me to get what information I could from the blacks,
and if any were shot he would get a warrant issued, if the black were shot dead; I said
that the blacks told me he was only wounded.
61. Nothing further than this was done ? Nothing further.
62. By Mr. Ferrett ; Did you see either of those white men, that you saw at the fire,
fire a shot ? No; how could I see a man fire a shot in the dark ?
63. You say you have been in these-parts twenty years, and that you have been about
the Colony a great deal—have you ever known the blacks do any damage ? I have not
seen them do it, but I have heard of it.
64. Of your own knowledge, have you not known of it ? Not of my own knowledge.
65. Have you never known them to rob huts, steal sheep, or destroy or spear cattle ?
No.
66. Never? No.
67. How long have you been in the Colony ? Twenty years.
68. Have you never been brought into collision with the blacks, from their depredations
committed on the property of any other person ? No, never.
69. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: You were in the employ of Mr. Ivory for some time, I
believe ? Before I got a place of my own, I used to shear occasionally for Mr. Ivory,
as well as for other gentlemen in the district.
70. Wore you employed on that establishment before Mr. Ivory came ? My establish-
ment was there before Mr. Ivory got his.
71. Was not this ground that you got supposed to belong to the cattle run ? Before it
was sold.
72. And a bad feeling existed between Mr. Ivory and yourself in consequence of your
having got the land ? I don’t know what kind of feeling he might have towards me.
73. Don’t you know of his having an objection to your living there ? I might think so,
but I can’t say so.
74. Are you on good terms with Mr. Ivory ? No; I never went to Mr. Ivory’s since
he came there.
75. You stated in your evidence that you went out, and saw Mr. Ivory and another
person at the fire ? Yes.
76. After having fired some shots? After I had heard the shots.
77. What distance were you from them at the time ? When I saw them, the fire was
about 150 paces from my hut—the lagoon was on the one side, and the fire on the other
I told my wife to go inside, and stop there. I then went about half the distance towards,
the fire—leaving seventy or eighty yards to it.
78. You could distinguish Mr. Ivory at that distance ? Yes.
79. At seventy or eighty yards ? Yes.
80. In the dead of night? You can see as well as ever on the darkest night, where
there is a large fire, when you are standing in the dark, and an object is standing by the
side of the fire.
81. Is this all the information that you can give this Committee—that a blaokfellow told
you that a black fellow had been shot ? All that I can say from my own knowledge is
that the blacks’ clothes were burnt.
82. Did you see these blacks the next morning ? I saw one of them.
83. Did the blacks commit any depredations after this occurrence ? Not that I know of.
84. By Mr. Blakeney : When you searched the fire the next day, what did you find
besides the remains of the clothes and the tomahawks ? Knives and tinder-boxes.
85. Were there any r rations ? There was tea, sugar, and flour scattered about.
86. Did you see any remains of blankets ? Yes, of blankets, and trowsers, and shirts.
TIJ.KSPAr,


TUESDAY ; mil JUNE\ 1861.
present:
Mb. MACKENZIE, Mr. GORE,
Mr. ROYDS, Mr. FITZSIMMONS,
Mr. BLAKENEY, Mr. FERRETT,
Mr. WATTS.
The Honorable 11. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
JOHN KER WILSON, Esq., called iu and examined :
1. By the Chairman : I believe you are a squatter of some years’ standing ? About
20 years.
2. In what is now called Queensland? I was a great deal in New South Wales, and a
great deal about the Maclntyre in the very worst times ; and also in Moreton Bay during
the first settlement in 1842.
3. Did you form one of the first stations there ? No, I did not form any station myself, I
was at Kilcoy with Mr. Evan McKenzie ; I went out with him to get some knowledge of
the country.
4. How long were you at Kilcoy ? Three or four months.
5. How long had the station been formed then ? It was not formed at all, we had just got
the sheep on it.
6. Were the blacks troublesome ? Yes, we had two men killed. I had some assigned
servants with me, and one of them, as well as a hired servant, were murdered while I was
there ; but that was done without our knowing anything about it; I mean we never came
in collision with the blacks.
7. During your residence there were any of the blacks poisoned, or reported to be poisoned 1
I heard something of that, but not until after we left. I first hoard of it from Mr. Mere-
wether ; I travelled with him in the same steamer with Sir G-eorge Gipps. Mr. Merewether
began talking with me about the blacks and gave me all the particulars. I had not the
slightest idea before that such a thing had occurred at all, but it must have happened some-
where about the time I was there.
8. Do you remember hearing of anything of the sort while you were at the station ? I
remember the overseer saying to me one day, “ don’t you think it would be a good thing to
giv ; these fellows a dose ?” Of course I expressed my abhorrence of the- suggestion and no
more was said about it. I never heard anything further on the subject.
9. How did it come to Mr. Merewether’s knowledge ? I cannot say.
10. Was it through the missionaries? Ido not know.
11. Where did you go to after that? I staid for a short time on the Hunter, where I took
a farm, and after that I went on to the Macintyre—that was in ’46 or ’47—and took charge
of cattle stations.
12. Were the blacks very troublesome ? Very much so.
13. Before the formation of the Native Police Force? Yes.
14. And you were left to protect yourselves ? Yes.
15. About what time did the Police first make their appearance ? Just after the Callandoon
station was stocked. I think it was in ’4B that the Police Force was first formed. Mr.
Morris thought if we had Police there, the horrible state of things which existed then would
cease, for we were not able to protect ourselves, being short-handed and often scant of pro-
visions ; and also iu those days very poor and unable to form large establishments. I think
it was Lieutenant Frederick Walker who first brought up a section of the men on to the
Macintyre, and about two months after that the blacks had become perfectly quiet.
16. Had they been very troublesome among your cattle ? Yes, I have counted 80 carcases
of cattle iu one morning on what is now the Callandoon run.
17. Had you evidence to shew that they had been killed by the blacks ? Oh yes, the
blacks’ dogs were all about the place, and spears were sticking in the carcases; some of the
heads were cut off and stuck up on sticks; other cattle were disabled—some ham-stringed
and let go.
18. Did you notice whether any of the flesh had been eaten ? No.
19. Then it was not hunger that induced the blacks to kill the cattle? No, they would
take what beef they wanted, but generally they would cut a little hole in the flank and take
out the kidney fat.
20. Were any white men murdered on that station? Yes, there were altogether sixteen
men murdered on what is now culled the Callandoon run.
21. Within what period? A good many of them were killed in 1843 and 1844—1
remember Mr. Otley had two men killed; John Larnach had five or six men killed ; and
Mr. Ogilvie had two men killed—the fact is, they were all driven from the place, and
when we went there it was only to take up the country after them. After I went there,
there was a man killed at Mr. Whiteman’s station, and another man at a back station,
near where Mr. Lowe is now, I forget the name of it.
22. Then of course you had to protect yourselves against the blacks? Yes,
23. Did any change take place after the arrival of the Native Police Force ? Some
change took place after a few gentlemen had come up and settled on the river. At the
time


time when the murders were the worst there were only stockmen there, and a great
many of the difficulties which took places with the blacks were owing, in a great
measure, to the stations being weakly manned, and from the fact that the men were
generally frightened; now when these men— hut-keepers, and others about a
station—get alarmed, they frequently shoot at a hlackfellow, or quietly give him a dose
of poison, and the blacks take revenge for it, not always by killing the same man, hut
hy taking the life of some white men. After Callandoon was taken up a good many of
the settlers came up and lived on the stations, and were much more vigorous in protect-
ing themselves against the blacks. It was made a rule never to touch any of the gins.
There were 4 or 5 murders after that which were known to have been committed hy the
blacks, and when it w T as found that they were committed by the fighting men of a cer-
tain tribe, a resolution was come to among the settlers, and they 'went out and shot 5 or
6of the blacks wherever they met them. That was the first thing that was done towards
quieting the blacks.
24. Then you have found the formation of the Native Police Force has produced a
quieter state of things ? Oh yes, much better.
25. And you have found the squatters have been willing throughout to live in peace
with the blacks ? Oh yes.
26. The Native Police have been of use in that way ? Yes, there have been fewer
murders on both sides, and a much better state of things has resulted. The Native
Police have never touched the blacks when they have remained quietly about the
stations, in fact they come to the stations because they feel that they are perfectly safe
there. There are a few of thewilder spirits among them who are not contented to live
so quietly, and difficulties occasionally arise with them.
27. What is your opinion of the Force as a Police Force ? I think it is an efficient Force.
28. What is your opinion of the officers of the Force ? I think a great deal depends
upon the First Lieutenant; he is an officer perhaps quite as important to the efficiency
of the Force as the Commandant—his local importance is greater —because on his con-
duct the acts of the junior officers in a great measure depend. But I think there is a
fundamental error in the constitution of the Force.
29. Are you of opinion that the officers now in the Force are better men than those
who were attached to it some years ago ? Oh yes, decidedly.
30. Before it was disbanded ? Yes, there is a great difference.
31. Do you recollect the officers of those days? Yes.
32. Were they addicted to intemperance ? Yes.
33. Have yon noticed a great change since that time? Yes, at that time the barracks
were in a ruined qondition. and no order whatsoever was maintained ; the gins used to
come and sleep with the officers ; and the men were in the most disorderly state. Now
they go down to the barracks in neat and clean trim, and go through a regular parade.
34. You mean to say that the force is in a very efficient state under the present
Commandant ? Yes.
35. Are you aware that many of these officers have been appointed under his recom-
mendation ? Yes.
36. Do you think that is desirable ? Yes. There was one very good arrangement in
Lieutenant Walker’s time, which was that every person who joined the Force should go out
with it five or six times before he was appointed. That was a very good arrangement.
37. What is the fundamental error in the Force to which you allude? Well, there is
always a difficulty in reference to the legality of their proceedings from the fact of its being
a Police Force, and it not being lawful for them to shoot the blacks.
38. Have you ever been out with the Native Police when they have come into collision with
the blacks ? Yes, upon one occasion, or rather the Police came towards me, it was a chance
meeting. I have never been out with them myself.
39. Were you with them when they came into collision with the blacks ? Yes, once.
40. Were the troopers sufficiently under the control of their officers ? Oh, yes.
41. As much so as white men would he? I cannot say, hut I think the system works
badly, because some of the settlers require as much control as the Police. In every district
there are always certain individuals who are more or less devoid of brains and common
sense, who are at one time over indulgent to the blacks, and at another time will shoot
them. A great deal of mischief arises from their treatment of the blacks, and much
damage results from it. If the magistrates are obliged to overlook the doings of the Police,
they must also overlook any imprudent acts committed by the settlers. The system does
not appear to me to he a legal one, and it would be impossible to pass any law to legalize
the acts of the Force, because yon would have to pass a law to render killing no murder.
But if a Military Force were established instead of the Native Police, then any district
requiring their services could be declared in a state of siege. The acts of the Force would
then be legal, and the magistrates could act with them ; besides which, the Government
would he relieved from a great deal of embarrassment.
42. Are you aware that the officers now hold commissions ? I was under the impression
that the appointments were honorary. It appears to me that such an alteration as I have
suggested would he desirable, because otherwise the public mind is sure to be continually
alarmed by exaggerated reports.
43. Are not the reports of disturbances with the blacks generally exaggerated ? Yes, I
know they are; there are always a number of persons up the country who go about from
house to house—-who, in fact, live by sponging upon the settlers—who tell and invent the
most dreadful stories about the blacks and the Native Police to amuse their hearers, their
sole


sole object being to be asked to sit down and have their dinners. Many reports arise in this
way which have no real foundation. I have heard many stories about white travellers being
killed, and of outrages of different kinds; they do not perhaps the most of them reach this
length, but they are very common up the country, and the further you go into the interior,
the more numerous they are ; that is the way they are raised.
44. Are you aware that some years ago the Police could not act without a magistrate’s
warrant ? Yes, that was the system at first.
45. Was not that found very inconvenient ? I cannot say; the officers were always
anxious to obtain a warrant, as a sort of self-protection.
46. They could not act without orders from the nearest Bench ? They had always some
such orders, but they never acted upon them.
47. Do you think that system was calculated to destroy the efficiency of the force ? Yes,
each Lieutenant should act upon his own responsibility under some general order. A great
deal depends upon the first Lieutenant, because it is his place to instruct and advise the
younger officers, who report everything to him officially or non-officially. If he is a shrewd
and sensible man he can do a great deal towards improving the character of the force under
his command.
48. I presume you are aware that public opinion has been unfavourable to the continuance
of the Native Police Force. Do you think it could be so organized as to be less offensive in
its constitution, yet equally efficient ? I don’t know, unless you adopt the suggestion I
have made. If necessary the Force down here might be differently constituted.
49. Would a force composed of white troopers with black trackers attached to them be as
efficient? No, I don’t think they would be efficient at all. I don’t think you could get
white men to remain for any length of time in the Force.
60. But supposing you could ? Well; you go into the scrub, the blacks are all around you,
and you can see nothing of them.
51. But I am supposing black trackers to be attached to the force? There would be
jealousy between them and the white men, and you would be able to do nothing with
them ?
52. We have already had evidence to show that a mixed force of this character has been
found successful in other parts of the country ? Y r es, I believe on the border some very
good men have assisted the stockmen, but there was no sort of regularity in their
proceedings.
53. lam speaking of a Force in one of the other colonies? lam not aware of it. 1 don’t
think such a Force would answer here in the interior as well as the present Force.
54. Do you think from what you have seen, and from the opinion you have been able to
form of the present Native Police Force, that, for the purpose for which it is required, it
could in any way be improved upon ? No, I don’t think it could be better.
65. How are the blacks in your part of the country ? v\rc they quiet ? Particularly so,
owing entirely to the presence of the Police. The whole of the Fitzroy Downs and
Macintyre is in a quiet state, and people are now to be found squatting peaceably down at a
distance of 50 or 60 miles from any other station, or human habitation of any sort. The
police continually patrol the district, and visit them every week ; I certainly never saw
anything like that before. Previous to the establishment of the Force, whenever we settled
in now country we had to keep close together for self-protection.
56. Then from your knowledge you can state that there arc now much greater facilities for
taking up new country ? Oh yes.
67. And now you seldom or ever hear of murders by the blacks—comparatively speaking?
No, they amount to-a mere nothing in comparison.
58 By Mr. Blakeney; How long is it since there was a collision between the Police and
the blacks in your district—a serious collision ? The most serious one occurred last year ;
there was one trifling affair since then, but that was of no consequence. On the occasion I
refer to there was a hand of blackfellows headed by a fellow named “Bilba,” who belonged
to the tribe of Hornet Bank murderers; about thirty of these blacks kept together and
lived in the mountains at the head of the Dawson. That hand sometimes came down upon
the stations, attacked them, and destroyed the cattle. Last year Mr. Ooxen had formed a
new station, and the quiet blacks about the place told him that Bilba’s party were about to
attack him. His people were greatly alarmed, and one of them went off for the police.
Well, the blacks did come, and made every show of attacking the station ; the Police arrived
just as they had surrounded the place, and the blacks turned round and attacked the
troopers; in fact, they showed fight, and sent a shower of spears at the white men. The
country being very boggy just then, so that, the horses were of no use, and the Police being
suddenly attacked, the men dismounted, and a regular light ensued, in which eighteen of
the blacks were shot.
59. Were those blacks all from the mountains'? Yes, that was the only dangerous band of
blacks.
60. What district was that in 1 The Marauoa District.
61. Were any of the officers or troopers wounded upon that occasion i I think one of the
officers received a slight wound.
62. Was it Lieutenant Walker? No, I think it was Mr. Carr, the second lieutenant.
63. By Mr. (tore : Upon the, whole, Mr. Wilson, you are favourable to the continuance of
the Native Police Force? Yes, decidedly.
61. Can you point out any improvements that could bo made in the constitution of the
Force? 1 may state in the way of improvement, though it can hardly be called an im
provemeut. Ilia-t in the even I <>!' a first Lieutenant i-Tiring, though it- would certainly
appear


appear very hard upon the next officer not to appoint him—the appointment being
such an important one should not be considered as a certainty.
65. In fact you would have promotion go by merit and not by seniority 1 Yes.
66. Are you of opinion that the Force should be recruited from the district in which it is
stationed ? No, by no means.
67. You think the men should be brought if possible from the other colonies? Yes, from
the south of New South Wales; the Murrumbidgee blacks are the best for the purpose.
68. Supposing the Legislature were to determine to give up the Native Police Force
altogether, what would be the result 1 It might be very serious.
69. What is your opinion on the subject? I think the Force would be to a great extent
absorbed by the different stations, but I think many more depredations would be committed,
and that we should hear of rapes and other outrages.
70. By Mr. Boyds: Do you think white troopers would be of any use against the
blacks in the scrub? No, not in the least. The other day I was out and I saw the Police
come in; they could not ride, the country is too heavy, and the only way these men were
able to got home was by hanging up their clothes on trees, leaving their horses and coming
in on foot: white men might be detained in a similar position for weeks together, and
starve.
71. Do you think white troopers could support themselves, under such circumstances, in the
way the blacks do ? No, particularly in the west, where the game is very scarce.
72. Is the Native Police Force a severe service for the men who are employed in it ? Yes,
it is hard work at times, and very tiresome work.
73. Supposing the Force were disbanded, what would be the consequence in the outlying
districts ? I think they would be in a worse position than they were before the establish-
ment of the Force, because the settlers have scattered themselves and extended their opera-
tions upon the strength of the security which the Police afforded them, to such an extent
that they would be ruined if that protection were withdrawn.
74 If the squatters had to protect themselves, would not more blacks be killed than under
the present system ? Yes, decidedly.
75. Do you think the blacks are much annoyed by their gins being taken away by the
troopers ? Oh no, I don’t think they care much about it; they generally give them away
themselves—they make no objection to that.
76. What is usually the cause of the different depredations which have come under your
notice? I think when the blacks have taken cattle or sheep it has generally been
attributable to the old men or old gins of the tribe, who incite the young men to kill
them, by complaining of rheumatism and illness, and saying that nothing but beef or mutton
will cure them.
77. Then, generally speaking, they are not incited by motives of revenge, arising from
aggressions on the part of the whites ? Occasionally they commit murders from motives of
revenge.
78. By Mr. Watts : I suppose you know a great deal about the working of the Native
Police Force ? I saw a good deal of it at its first formation, but of late years my observa-
tion has been chiefly confined to one section of the Force ; I have seen nothing of the
Police to the North.
79. Do you think it absolutely necessary that some general order should be issued by the
Commandant to the different Lieutenants ? I think it would be an advantage.
80. Do you think that the Native Police are cruel in their dealings with the blacks? No,
I don’t; decidedly not more cruel than the settlers.
81. And you think any white force would be less serviceable? I don’t thirk any other
force would answer the purpose as well, or would be so thoroughly under the command of
the officers.
82. Do you think the blacks would care much for a Police Force composed of white men ?
The great fear I should have, if the Force were composed of white men, would be that the
blacks would revenge themselves on the settlers for the acts of the Police. If any settler
or stockman kills a blackfellow, they will kill a white man in return ; and it would be the
same if the White Police killed a blackfellow, they would be sure to have the life of a white
man in lieu of him. They would take life for life in some shape or other, though it might
be years afterwards. I believe many of the murders we cannot account for—where single
men in huts and isolated places are murdered—are committed in this way, for motives of
revenge for some murder committed a long time ago. It becomes, therefore, a question for
consideration whether the formation of such a force would not lead to a greater number of
murders and depredations. But with the Native Police Force the blacks do not seem to
realize any connection with the settlers at all, nor do they seek to revenge their deeds
upon the white people—on the contrary, they frequently go to the white people for
protection against the Police.
83. Now, in the course of your travels in the busn, have you observed whether the settlers,
generally speaking, are kind or otherwise to the natives. I think the great mass of them
are.
84. There are instances of cruelty here and there ? Yes, and those instances generally
occur through fear of the blacks. The system is going down now a good deal, though it is
still in existence on the Balonne; I mean the system of keeping a single hutkeeper—
generally an old prisoner—at a station, which is, perhaps, in an isolated position ; those
men are usual y bad characters and they live in fear of their lives, and, actuated by their
fears, they will occasionally fire at the blacks. There are commonly a number of bad
characters who have escaped from the Police, or are afraid of meeting with them, about
those stations, and it is those sort of men who do the mischief. 84. Do


85. Do you know anything about the charges brought against the Native Police in the
newspapers ? No.
86. Is it not generally uneducated men, and not gentlemen, who commit these outrages on
the blacks? Yes.
87. You have stated that it is through fear that many of the cruelties are perpetrated upon
the blacks, which appears to me to be rather inconsistent—will you explain your meaning
more clearly 1 Yes. I have known in former times, on the Macintyre, where two or three
men might be living at a station together, who would employ the blacks and give them
rations and tobacco; well, these men would be frightened out of their lives by the blacks,
and not being strong enough to go out and fight them, and living always in a state of fear,
they would pop a gun through the slabs of the hut and fire upon them, and perhaps kill a
blackfellow ; at other times they would put poison in a damper and give it to the blacks.
It was never the case when the stations were strongly manned, and, therefore, as I said
before, fear of the blacks was the chief cause of these murders.
Mr. JOHN LEOPOLD ZILLMAN called in and examined: —
1. By the CHAIRMAN : How long is it since you came out to this Colony? Twenty-three
years.
2. The same time as Mr. Bode ? Yes.
3. For the purpose of establishing a mission among the aborigines of this Colony F Yes.
4. What was your inducement in coming out here ? Well, I had always from an early age
been desirous to assist in spreading the Gospel among all nations.
5. Did you receive any inducement from the Government to settle in this part of the
country ? Yes; the Government undertook to double whatever was given by the public.
6. Then there was a public subscription in support of the mission ? Yes.
7. How many years were you engaged in that mission? About six or seven years, I won’t
be sure; the Government of New South Wales after that, being in rather a low state, sent
word through Dr. Simpson that for the future we must care for ourselves.
8. Were your efforts to Christianize the blacks successful? Well, as far as we went, I think
we were successful.
9. How far did you go ? We used to make the adults work—we paid them for working ;
and we kept the children at school, and they used to learn just the same as our own
children.
10 What has become of those children ? They go about to repeat their lessons, and to
repeat the Lord’s Prayer, that they might get a shilling for it.
11 Have they become Christians ? No.
12. Did you succeed in making a Christian of any one blackfellow, young or old ? No.
13. Did the children remain at the school until they grew up,—was their attendance
regular ? No ; they would attend very well for a while, and then they would go away and
ramble with their parents, and come back again. But if we had been supplied with means
to continue employing the adults, we would have kept the children.
14. Could you keep them steadily at work? Well, I could always get men to work; they
were good men, and very willing to work, but there was not much dependence upon them.
But the employment we gave the parents was an inducement for the children to go to
school.
15. Then you cannot call to mind a single instance where the children kept regularly at
school ? No, I could not.
16. Would you attempt to form such an establishment again ? I have been contemplating
such a thing myself.
17. What prospects have you of success? Well, I have nothing to discourage me; I
believe the natives'are capable of being raised in some degree from their present degraded
state.
18. But in what way, since your evidence and that of Mr. Bode goes to shew that, after
eight years, you wore still unsuccessful ? Well, I think they have been already raised to a
higher grade by the white population.
19. When you contemplate establishing a mission again, how do you propose to pay the
expenses of your men ? Well, I have been corresponding with the Society about it, and 1
have spoken to Mr. Heussler, who was of opinion that they could send out a number of
farming men, who would be also capable of teaching—pious men, who would consider it
their duty to undertake this work —and I would assist them in forming a cotton-growing
establishment along the coast. I know a good spot which is calculated for such an enter-
prize. That is what I have in view, but I have not heard from the Society about it, yet.
20. What society do you speak of? The Missionary Society I came out from.
21. Then you propose to form a Cotton Company, and to employ the blacks on the
plantations, and to educate them? Yes.
22. Do you think such a scheme would be successful ? Yes; if I had not at present a
cattle station, which does not suit the blacks at all, I would enter into it at once.
23. Do you find that the blacks kill cattle on your station ? Ido not complain of that :
they have done so twice only during the twenty years I have kept cattle, —that was when
the Native Police were withdrawn, between the time Mr. Bligh left off coming and the time
Mr. Wheeler came up.
24. Did they kill many of your cattle ? 1 cannot tell, as 1 was not living at the station : I
think about a dozen, Do


25. Do you find the Native Police a useful Force ? Yes; I should be very sorry to see them
withdrawn.
26. I presume you are aware that several charges have been brought against the Force in
the newspapers 1 I am.
27. From your own knowledge, do you believe those reports were exaggerated ? In some
instances I am positive they were. It is possible that one officer may have exceeded his
duty, but in my opinion it is wrong to charge the whole Force with inefficiency on that
account.
28. Do you think the presence of the Native Police is a means of preventing murders on
both sides ? lam satisfied of it.
29. Do you think they are a better Force than a white Police Force would be ? I don’t
think a white Police Force would be very useful, on account of the exposure they would be
subjected to ; I don’t think they could stand it. When the Force comes to my station there
is one Lieutenant who sleeps at my house, but the black troopers camp out and make them-
selves tolerably comfortable. I don’t think white troopers could so easily be made
comfortable.
30. Now, to return to the subject of the mission : In your intercourse with the natives,
have you found that they entertain any ideas of religion, of a Supreme Being, or of a future
state,—l mean in their original condition ? I think they believe in a future state, although
they cannot fully comprehend it.
31. Have they any idea of a God, or Gods, or anything of the sort ? Well, I cannot say I
have seen anything that could be called idol-worship among them, although I have been
living in the bush with them for sis weeks at a time, in order to find out what they do, and
whether they worship any thing. There is nothing of the kind, and I have found it very
difficult to make them understand divine things.
32. About what age were the children educated in your school ? About six years.
33. It was a mixed school ? Yes.
34. Do you consider that a good plan ? Well, it was done for the purpose of showing the
black children the regular attendance and good behaviour of the white children at school,
so that they might take example from them.
35. Did you find the black children apt at picking up religious instruction ? They learned
to read and figure exactly the same as the other children.
36. But they would always go back to the bush—-you could not get rid of their natural
savage habits ? That was just the only impediment we met with ; but I believe that an
establishment in which the adult was employed would bo the means of keeping the children
about the place. They (the children) would get used to a regular life, and to being clothed,
and be less inclined to wander. The adult blacks would always be able to earn enough to
live upon by working on the place.
37. Would you make the work compulsory ? No.
88. Do you think the mission, if it had not been broken up, would ultimately have proved
successful ? I could not say ; it was too near the town, which was one reason why it was
given up.
39. A suggestion has been thrown out, that a number of these blacks should be collected
and taken away to some island. Do you think such a thing could be done ? No, it is too
illiberal a plan altogether. I think some liberal scheme should be adopted—some system
of feeding and clothing the blacks, and making them work. Educating the children would,
I think, be the means of raising them from their present degraded state.
40. Suppose the blacks would not work ? Then they would not be fed.
41. Then yon would make a selection of those to be fed and clothed ? Yes—those who
chose to work.
42. And teach their children ? Yes, in my opinion, that is the only liberal plan. I don’t
think exporting them would answer at all. If I had the means, say £IO,OOO, to start such
an establishment, —and if cotton can be grown with profit in this climate, which I believe
it can—l would make it self-supporting in the course of five years.
43. Then you think a sort of model industrial farm for cotton-growing, assisted partly by
the Government, and under the management of the mission, or of a company, would be a
good experiment ? Yes, I think a company would answer the best.
44. A Company of Missionaries ? Yes.
45. Missionary agriculturists ? Yes. I have found the blacks to be much the same as our
own race, —some very industrious, and some very lazy,—some very intelligent, and some
very dull. Our children would be just like them if they were not educated; and I suppose
oar race was at one time in something of a similar state.
46. Do you propose to form such an establishment in connection with the Society ? Just
so. 1 spoke to 'lr. Heussler, and also to Mr. Jordan, about it, but I have delayed writing
to the Society, in hones the Government would give us some support. Things have not
boon so prosperous with me lately, and 1 have not been able to do anything more. I gave
Mr. Heussler a letter of introduction to the Society, and I thought I would in the mean
time learn a little more about the way such a work should be carried out, so as to be able to
assist the Society if they send out more Missionaries.
47. You are aware, I suppose, that Missions to the Aborigines "have been established in
South Australia and the other Colonies, —have you seen any of their Reports? Yes.
48 Arc any of them in your possession? No, lam sorry to say; I had a
report of a meeting of the Moravian Society, held at Melbourne, at which the
Governor presided, and the Bishop and Dean were present, which gave great
praise to the Missionaries, and from which it appeared that the natives had actually begun
to


to think of a future state. The report stated that the Missionaries had commenced by
showing to the blacks pictures representing the Crucifixion and the Deluge, and by those
pictures had attempted to explain the plan of salvation and the drowning of the world.
Although that was not much, it was a beginning. The report went on to state that one of
the blacks had come to the Missionary on the evening of the next day, and said to him “ I
want to speak to you about my state.” The Missionary was astonished, and asked the black
what he meant. “ I feel,” said the blackfellow, “ very desirous to be saved. lam very
anxious about it; and, as you say Christ was the Saviour of men, I wish to know something
more about him.” The Missionary was very much surprised. He felt that what he had
been praying for, for so many years, had at last come to pass. He is quite satisfied that
this native is now a Christian. The blackfellow after that went away to his tribe, and
some time after his mother was asked what had become of her son, and she answered:—
“My son now preach to white men and blackfellows, —‘ Cabbawn’ preacher.” The fact
became known in the neighbourhood, and the blackfellow came to the meeting at which the
Governor and the Bishop were present. So you see that is a proof that there is a bright
side of the question.
49. You say you have not got that Report with you ? No ; lam sorry to say that I gave
it to a Mr. Carvosso, who published a number of letters in the Courier on the subject some
time ago. He took it away in mistake to Gladstone, where he is now. When I heard of
this Committee, I was sorry that I had parted with it; but I will write to Gladstone for it.
( Vide Appendix.) I may state, also, that the Rev. Mr. Wilkinson, the Wesleyan Minister,
who was stationed here, told me, in speaking of a mission at Bathurst, of a blackfellow who
was a very intelligent man. He used to accompany the Missionaries and address the white
people, and do a great deal of good; for, they used to say, “If a blackfellow can come and
talk to us about our souH, there must be something in the religion he preaches.”
50. Do you recollect how long ago those letters were published in the Courier ? About
twelve months ago.
61. Did you ever visit that mission at Bathurst? No; but I have seen reports of the
different Missionary meetings in Victoria and New South Wales.
62. Were those reports published in the regular way, as periodical reports ? No, they
were only extracts here and there.
63. By Mr. Watts : Did you suggest that, in the event of a Company undertaking the
formation of such an establishment as 3 r ou have described, the Government should assist
them ? That was what I suggested.
64. Do you think it would be a profitable investment; in what light would you look upon
it—as an investment which would yield profitable returns, or as a means of enlightening
and civilizing the blacks ? As a sort of National School among the blacks, the same as we
have for our own children, I believe that in the course of a few years, if the establishment
were properly managed, and cotton-growing answered in this climate, it would become
self-supporting.
55. How much capital do you think would be required to start such an establishment ? If
it were properly and carefully managed, I should say that £SOOO would be sufficient to
commence with, and to carry on the undertaking for five years : I really believe so. That
sum would not, of course, be sufficient to erect splendid buildings for superintendents to
live in. lam only speaking of spending £IOOO a-year upon the land.
56. What grant of land do you think would be sufficient for the purpose ? Well, on account
of the inconvenience it would cause to the neighbouring runs, I should say a section would
be necessary. I do not mean that such a quantity of land would be required for cul-
tivation.
57. You mean that you would require additional land for feeding stock upon ? Yes; a
section would be hardly enough, because it would be necessary to feed stock on it for the
maintenance of the establishment.
68. How much, then, do you think would be required ? About ten sections, I think.
59. But, if it were on the sea-coast, where there are no cattle runs, so large a quantity
would not be required ? No; I only say ten sections, supposing the land round about to
be leased
00. Then you would suggest that a smaller quantity—say 640 acres—should be granted by
the Government, and about ton sections leased fur the purpose of feeding stock ? Yes,
just so.
61. And you think the undertaking would require about £SOOO, to extend over a period of
five years ? Yes ; at all events, if I had the management of it, I would make it do, and
work the thing properly.
62. Would it pay for your own time and attention ? Yes, and if the Government could get
out such men as I have described, they would not require any payment at all, except for
their maintenance.
63. Then you would not use coercion towards the blacks ? No ; it would not be advisable,
in my opinion, to do so. Those who worked should be paid, and those who would not work
should get nothing.
64. And you think that, in the course of time, the blacks would find it better to remain
at work, and be well fed and clothed, than to wander about in the bush ? Yes. It
is not so much the adults that I should expect to do good with as the children. I think the
children would get used to a regular life, and would not like to leave it. Still, I should not
like to depend altogether for labor upon the blackfellows, for they might go away just at
the time when labor was most wanted. But this much I know, that I made a new station
about eighteen months ago, and I bad blacks to put up fencing for me, to clear the land, to
dig


dig up my garden, and to do that sort of work and they are regularly employed hy my neigh-
bours. 1 have worked my way up from nothing, and I have not had the means to do as 1
would have wished, or I would have had such an establishment before this time, I have
been twenty-three years in the Colony, and I have always considered it my duty to do what
I could to raise the blacks from their present degraded state. I am not in the least dis-
couraged, but I have a little more experience now than I had twenty years ago.
65. You think it is only among the younger blacks that you would have any chance of
success ? That is impossible for me to say.
66. Speaking from your past experience ? It is not impossible that the adults might he
benefited, but I should have more confidence in the children that we bring up.
67. Have you ever observed that any of the blacks believe in a Divine Being or in a Devil ?
Do they believe there is any Bad Spirit in existence ? I suppose I shall be allowed to
explain myself a little more fully in answering this question, I find that with the black-
fellows it is just the same as with us: they have a natural conscience, as we find in the
Epistles of Saint Paul, we have a natural conscience which distinguishes between the good
and bad. They have the same conscience, and the fear of doing wrong, and they feel a
gladness when they are doing right. When I have been speaking to them about their souls,
I have tried to explain myself in a homely way, so as to make them understand my meaning.
I have said to them that in the same way that they eat their fish and enjoy themselves in
this world, if they were good men, they would enjoy themselves for ever in Heaven ; and
again, that the wicked men are those who are always in trouble. I have tried to make
them comprehend me by figures more than by words, hut it is very difficult to explain
spiritual things to them. I find no difficulty in making them understand me when I talk
about nouns or substances, but when it comes to spiritual things, it is all very dark. Now, in
bringing up the children, this difficulty would be done away with; when they became civi-
lized, they would be able to learn about those things.
68. I wish to know whether, in your experience of the blacks, you have observed any feeling
among them that there is such a thing as an Evil Being, who is able to injure them, even if
they have no knowledge of a Divine Being—do they, in fact, acknowledge the existence of
what they call a “ Dehbil Debhil” ? Perhaps you did not catch my words; I meant to say
that they have this feeling in their conscience, although they are not able to express it.
69. Now, leaving that part of the question, do you think the white men, generally speaking,
have been kind or cruel towards the blacks? Well, some of them have treated the blacks
very shabbily and annoyed them a great deal; others, again, have been the means of bring-
ing them to a higher position. On the whole, I should say the white population have never
desired to injure the blacks.
70. Do not they generally feed them and give them clothes for any work they perform ?
Yes.
71. Can you account to the Committee for their great decrease in number ? Well, it is on
account of their irregular way of living, the spirits they drink, and the seasoned food they
get, and which they are not used to. I have observed that those blacks who are addicted
to drink have bad teeth, while, in their original state, their teeth are very good.
72. Then you do not attribute their decrease to any violence on the part of the whites, hut
chiefly to the change of food ? Not so much to the change of food as to the use of spirits.
73. Can you inform the Committee what is the cause of the various depredations which
have been perpetrated by the blacks—such as murders, robbing huts, &c.—-that we hear of
now and then ? I know that, in one instance, some blacks were driven from their
camps near the German Station, in the night, by constables with guns; they had been very
bold with the white men during the day. A few days afterwards they were killing cattle
in that neighborhood to a great extent. Some months after that, I was riding to the Pine
River, and we met some of the blacks, and Mr. Gerike who was with me rode up to them
and said, “ Why did you kill so many cattle ?” “ Why,” said they, " did you drive us from
our camp?” So you see it was clear that they killed the cattle out of revenge. The cattle
were not touched at all—l mean, they had not eaten them. Another case—of murder—l
recollect: Some blacks were employed to strip hark, and, when they brought the bark in,
they were found fault with, and the payment was not given to them • the consequence of
which was, that they got aggravated and killed a white man on the spot. I suppose I may
be excused from mentioning names.
74. Now, in the event of a White Eorce being established, you are of opinion that if they
were forced to take the life of a blackfellow, the blacks would take the life of a white man
in lieu of it ? Yes, so I think.
75. And that they would fear to do so with the Native Police Eorce ? Yes.
76. Why? Is it because they know the Black Police would track them? Well, they fear
anyone who is well armed; about twenty years ago, one armed white man could drive 10G
blacks before him. I have gone out myself with a gun which had no lock on it, and which
I threw away when I got home. They fear the Native Police more on account of the cunning
which they possess in common with themselves.
77. And, I suppose, from the knowledge they possess that the black troopers are able to
carry their threats into execution ? Just so.
78. Then you are of opinion that it is necessary to have some Eorce in existence which is
feared by the natives, although there may be no occasion for such a Force to shoot them ?
Such a Force is very necessary ; I know it from experience.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX TO ME. ZILLMAN'S EVIDENCE OF 18th JUNE, 1861
Mission op tub Moravian Church in the Wimmera District, May, 1861.
Through the presence of our Brother Spieseke in Melbourne, we are enabled to com-
municate to our readers that the Mission-work among the Blacks in the Wimmera district
is quietly progressing. The Blacks are diligent in learning to read and write, and in
receiving other useful instruction. Besides a particular talent for drawing, there is an
inclination among them to compose little songs or hymns, which they sing according to a
very monotonous wise. Mostly they are objects in nature on which they make their verses,
yet they compose them on other subjects also which make a particular impression on them,
viz : on the going along of the first steamboat on the Murray River, on her sticking in the
sand, &c. Among the great number of such poems, there has also been found one of religious
contents. Whether the same has its origin in times long past, or whether it is the fruit of
Christian instruction by the whites, we do not know. In the language of the Blacks it runs
as follows: —
Winya wallo neango mamamorek !
Nakum bangung yereru.
Wurruwin parrin!
Kaledia !
In the English language it would be—
How near is my great Father !
His Spirit came in me.
Make plain the way !
Great thy glory !
There is great mortality among them, so that it is beyond human power to uphold them as
a nation. Let us, therefore, while grace still calleth them, not become weary in praying
for their salvation. It is pleasing to hear that the lately baptised Nathaniel (Pepper) holds
fast the Christian profession; though he is not always enthusiastic, yet he is always
endeavouring to instruct his black fellow-men in the way of salvation. One evening, when
the weather was very unfavourable, Pepper opened his hut for such as sought shelter, and
used then the opportunity to read to them the Word of God, and to pray with them. Upon
some it seemed to make a favourable impression, especially upon one of his own brothers,
who afterwards desired after more instruction. They often talk of dreams, which they have
on spiritual things of which they have heard during the day. This is surely a sign that the
Spirit of God itself will take them in His school, and open their dark minds for their eternal
salvation. 0 that all Christians of Australia in their prayers more earnestly and fervently
might remember these unfortunate children of the wilderness, who, though still spiritually
dead, nevertheless have souls as precious as ours, and have the same right to the precious
merit of our great Redeemer !
Taken from the “Australian Christian Messenger for the Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia (Australischer Christcnbote fur die Evangclisch Lutherische Kirche
in Australien). Published by Matthias Goethe, Lutheran Minister in Melbourne.
May, 1861.
WEDNESDAY, YHh JUNE, 1861.
present >
Me. MACKENZIE, Mn. FERRETT,
Me. WATTS, Mr. BLAKENEY,
Mr. GORE, Mr. ROVDS,
Mb. FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable II. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
CHARLES ROBERT HALT, Esq., M.P., examined
1. By the Chairman : You have been a squatter here for some years, I believe ? Getting
on for twenty-two years.
2. You have been principally living in what is now called Queensland ? Yes, most of
the time.
3. In the Colony of Queensland, have you formed stations ? Principally here, on the
Clarence, and on the Gwydir.
4. You have seen a good deal of the natives since you have been here? Yes, a good
deal.
5. Have you found them troublesome when forming your stations at first ? They were
never troublesome on any station that I formed myself, though I have known them
troublesome, particularly on the Clarence, on a station I took charge of after it had been
formed a few months. On the stations that I have formed myself, I have had very little
trouble with the blacks, but on this station which I took charge of shortly after it was
formed, 1 had a great deal, ' 6. With


6. With regard to the stations you have formed yourself, was that before the cstabli sh -
ment of the Native Police Force —at the time the squatters were left to protect
themselves ? I can’t say, but I know that 1 never saw the Native Police .Force for
years after I went on to my present run.
7. How many years have you been on your present run ? From twelve to fourteen
years.
8. How is it you have had so little trouble with the blacks ? I account for it in this
way: as soon as I saw the blacks, I went up and brought them into my head station at
once, and I made them understand, as well as I could by signs and otherwise, that 1
was master of that ground, and that they were welcome to come and go as long as they
did what I told them —to make believe I was master, Captain —“ Cabhawn white
man,” in colonial phrase —and that I would only allow them to come on certain con-
ditions. I impressed them with this idea, and carried it out by making them camp
where I told them. Whatever I told them to do, they had to do, and then I gave them
what I thought a fair valuation for their labour. If they refused, I made them go to
the scrubs on the mountains, whichever were nearest, giving them to understand that I
was master on the open ground, and they were masters of the scrubs and the mountains,
I went on the principle that you must either be master of the blacks, or else they
would be your master. That was my idea, and I carried it out.
9. You brought them up to the head station immediately yon went there ? Yes.
10. Are you not aware that that course is generally disapproved of? Yes. generally ; 1
have not heard of another instance of its being adopted.
11. In your case it succeeded ? Yes.
12. No murders took place ? No murders on any station formed by myself, though on
the Clarence there were several. 1 was on the Clarence when Mr. Pagan himself
first came up. The blacks came up to the head station —to what waste be the head
station—and at first he made a great deal of them, and allowed them to go where they
liked and took no notice, when he told them they ought not to do so and so, and they
did not do it. At last they got so bold that they came and whipped my hat off my
head and ran away with it. I, knowing how savages were treated in America, know it
was not right to allow this, and jumped on my horse with the determination of chasing
the man through the mob, and getting my hat hack—not with the intention of killing
him. Mr. Pagan called me back, and asked what it mattered, and said that he would
make me a present of twenty hats sooner then 1 should go and stir up a row for a
cabbage-tree hat not worth 20s. I turned round much annoyed, and I told him it was
not for the sake of the hat that I was going after the man, but to carry out my idea;
that they would think they could be masters, and it was well known that every savage
had the greatest scorn and contempt for any man that appeared a coward, and looked up
to the man of their own tribe who was the bravest. Then he went and brought the
blacks back, and never asked them to give up the hat, but allowed them to go away with
it. I turned round and said, “there will be murder before three months are over—mark
my words.” Mr. Pagan then made presents of tobacco, and so forth, to the black's,
doing the very opposite to what I would have done. Before three weeks had passed, I
am sorry to say, he was brought in a corpse, murdered by the blacks. They
watched their opportunity till they knew I was away—l went away for three days—and
sneaked up to Mr. Pagan’s station. He was weighing out rations, and as he weighed
thorn he put them outside for the ration carrier to take away. When the rations were
all weighed out, he went out to see whether he had sufficient weighed out; when
lie went outside, ho found that all the rations had been taken by the blacks, and some
blankets as well, that were on the fence, and in going after them to recover his property
ho got killed—showing that if the blacks are allowed to take property one time, they
think they have every right to take it a second time.
18. You don’t approve of conciliating the blacks at first? No.
LI. .How can you manage without conciliating them on a station—how did you coerce
the blacks ? I maintain that a black by instinct knows whether you are determined to
cany out a thing or not —by the expression of your countenance' —it is no more than by
a certain instinct. Any man who has riden a hurdle race is aware that his horse knows
whether his rider is determined to go over a fence or not, and the blacks must know
the intention of a white in the same way. I may mention a case told me by the quiet
blanks. They have told me that, when I first went tip at the Bunya season, the blacks
I'iirne up, about throe or four hundred fighting men, knowing that I or my brother
was left perfectly alone at the but—all the men were out at work—one of us went
out to protect the men in the bosh, and one stopped at home to mind the
lint. In carrying out my theory, that where 1 told these blacks to came they'
should camp, 1 told them to go and camp at a certain place, but a short time after one came
across and camped near the hut. and I told him to go away without taking any particular
notice but instead of his going away another black stole up, and shortly a third ;
it was then that I thought it high time to make them go back to the cam]). I went
and armed myself with a pistol and a. gun, knowing that a display would have the
effect of intimidating them. I was as determined to shoot the blacks as 1 ever was to
do anything, if they had not moved. The blacks have since told me that if I had not
acted in this way, the blockfellows would have killed me—that an hour before sundown
1 should hav e been a dead man. They told me, “ You are not a coward, and If you had
not ilone so. before the sun went down you would have been a dead man.” It was
previously arranged at a coroboree to attack mo or my brother—it did not matter
which : they took not ire that only'one man was left in (lie but; they watched repeatedly
am'.


and found that this was the case. One man was to have jumped on me, and held me while
another was to have knocked my brains out with a nullah-nullah ; and then they were
to have robbed the hut.
15. You have seen something of the Native Police ? Yes.
16. Do you consider it an efficient Force ? When it was first under the command of
Mr. Walker it was a very efficient Force ; after that it fell off, I must say. Now, as far
as I have seen it when out with them, I can’t say that I have seen the Force in active
service ; but, so far as I have seen it, I have found the discipline superior to what it
was in Mr. Walker’s time. I have seen the troopers in Mr. Walker’s time mix with the
gins, and I can safely say that in no instance have I seen them mix with the gins since ;
at any head station the officers go and tell the troopers not to mix with the gins, and
camp by themselves. They ask for an old hut, or any place where they can camp.
17. Don’t you consider the Force efficient on the borders, and that it prevents murders
on both sides ? Yes, lam positive it does.
18. Don’t you frequently hear this, particularly on stations ? Yes.
19. You are also aware that a great deal of new country has been taken up lately ?
Yes.
20. In proportion to the murders of the blacks formerly, there is very little of the kind
now? Very little; and lam positive that if the Police had not come to my station,
the blacks would have enacted the same tragedy there as they did on the Dawson. My
quiet blacks described a man that I know very well by the name of Double-guts, as one
of the men who had been concerned in the Dawson murders, and two or three of the
Dawson blacks were seen by people about my station—by Mr. Cardew’s overseer, who
was then going out with Mr. King to take up a head station, and who knew them.
Some of these were seen among my blacks, who came and told me at 10 o’clock one
night not to go to bed, as the Dawson blacks were endeavouring to incite the neighbour-
ing blacks to attack me by night. I said I was not a coward, and I would fight; the
answer was that the whites never fought at night, they only cried. This put me on my
guard, and I formed a party and went after them; I saw my own blacks, but I could
never see the Dawson blacks. Subsequently' I went over and showed the Police where
my blacks were camped, but we could not see any of the Dawson blacks, they dispersed
when they found the Police had come.
21. Would you recommend any alteration in the constitution of the Force ? When I
was on the Committee last year, I put some questions with a view to show that a
mixture of White Police with the Native Police would be a good thing—that is my
opinion, but all the evidence I must say, went contrary to it. I put leading questions
as to whether it would not be desirable to have two or three whites for every five or six
natives, and all the evidence went direct .against it, so that it is only my opinion that
the mixture would be good.
22. You are aware that there has been a great outcry raised, since its formation, against
the Native Police, at certain periods; and the squatters have been accused of great cruelty
towards the blacks: from your experience don’t you think the reports very much
exaggerated? Very much, as far I can judge. I have no doubt that innocent blacks
may sometimes suffer, but you can’t tell, when they get in among the scrub, how the troopers
may act.
23. Is it from a feeling of dread at their skill among the blacks, that native troopers are
more efficient than whites ? It is; because they know that the Native Police can follow
them —they often laugh at the efforts of the whites to follow them.
24. Do you consider the Native Police are the means of checking outrages ? Without a
doubt, they check them to a degree that no man without experience can have any idea of.
25. By Mr. Boyds : Do not the blacks look upon the Native Police as perfectly inde-
pendent of the whites ? I should say so; one of my reasons is, that when my blacks hear
the Force is in the district, they come to get a pass to say they are “ buggery black-
fellows.”
26. No, but supposing a mixed force were established, would not the blacks consider them-
selves bound to be revenged on any white man that killed any of them, while they have
not the same feeling towards the Native Police ? Decidedly.
27. By Mr. Ferrett : From your knowledge of the blacks, do you suppose that if white
men were employed they would be able to capture blacks in the scrub % They would not
have the slightest chance; I have been after blacks myself on the Clarence, and they
laughed at our efforts to overtake them.
28. When the blacks are captured and committed to prison, do you think that their being
mixed up with the worst white characters has a tendency to make them better or worse ?
A great deal worse.
29. Do you think that the means at present employed to take prisoners to the lock-ups, by
handcuffs, would be improved by having an iron collar and a chain attached to it ? Iron
handcuffs have so often proved a failure that I think we ought to resort to some other
means I should think that a collar round the neck would be very good.
3fh Have you any suggestion to make for the improvement of the Force ? The only
suggestion that I would make is, that the mixture of one or two white men with each
division would be an improvement. I go from this, that not one man in a hundred
can command the troopers when after blacks ; the officer has not that command over them
which he would have with two white men to back him up.
31. Do you think that the officering of the present Force could be improved on by employing
military men as officers, instead of the men that are employed now ? I don’t think you
would


would get any military man to join the Force that was worth a rush—you might get men
wbo were soldiers, hut I don’t think you would get any officer to join the Force, unless it
were some discarded officer, a man who knew that he could not get on in his own
profession.
32. Then you don’t think that military officers would be an improvement on the men we
now have ? They would be if you could get them, but I maintain that you could
not.
83. Don’t you think it very necessary that officers of the Native Police should have a
knowledge of bush life ? No doubt of that; no man should be appointed to a command
without it. My theory is, that there should be subalterns to back up the officers, but that
they should not have a command, until they had been three years in the service.
34. Do you consider a high state of discipline necessary for the Native Police ? Not
being a military man, I could not give an opinion on that subject.
The Honorable MAURICE CHARLES O’CONNELL, President op the Legislative
Council, examined by permission of the Legislative Council: —
1. By the Chaibman : I have just been looking over the evidence given by you before a
Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, in 1858, and it
appears so complete that, to save the time of the Committee, I will direct it to be
printed as an Appendix, and just examine" you on some particular points, to ascertain
whether you have changed your opinion since then. Have you read the evidence over
lately ? Not since I gave it.
2. At that time you wore asked whether the Native Police Force was efficient—what is
your opinion of it as at present constituted ? My opinion still is that it has a vital
defect, not yet cured, of having been established under no proper organization. There
is no law for its formation in the first place. The punishments awarded to the men are
awarded without any law. In fact, the punishments are, in the eye of the 1 aw, assaults.
There is no Act, similar to the Mutiny Act, which authorizes and enforces the discipline
of the corps in a legal manner.
3. Your recommendation in this particular has not been carried out? No.
4. Do you think that, if an Act like that were passed, and the Native Police were placed
under strict discipline, that they would remain in the Force—would they submit to
such discipline ? I think it might be managed, but it would be difficult.
5. I see you recommended the formation of a Force of white troopers, with black
trackers—do you still adhere to that opinion ? I do.
6. You stated that in the scrubs of the Mackenzie and the Upper Dawson the Native
Police could follow the blacks with greater facility than whites could—do vou consider
that a white Force would be efficient in following blacks ? Yes, I do, in "all ordinary
cases.
7. Do you consider that the corps is better officered than it was when you gave your
evidence in Sydney ? I think it is.
8. Do you hear so frequently of murders now as formerly, taking into consideration the
very large extent of new country which has been taken up ? I have not heard of many
murders lately.
9. I see you have appended to this evidence “Remarks on the formation of a corps of
Mounted Police for service on the frontier districts of New South Whiles these recom-
mendations were not carried out ? No.
10. Do you recollect the substance of the Remarks ? I have a general recollection
of them.
11. Do you still adhere to them? Yes; they were made after some consideration. I
still adhere to the opinion that there should be a mixed Force, and to what I think I
stated in evidence—that it should be made amenable to discipline, and useful acting
under law —in reference to Europeans as well as natives.
12. From your great experience as a military man, do you think that such a Force as
the old Mounted Police —volunteers from the regiments—would be the best description
of force to employ ? If you could get the same class of men.
13. Do you think it would be better if the officers were military men ? Yes.
14. You are aware that the old Mounted Police were very efficient bushmen ? Yes.
15. And that the corps was a very efficient one? Yes.
16. You have been a good deal in the squatting districts ? As Commissioner of Crown
Lands, I have resided nearly fourteen years on the very outskirts of occupation.
17. You were asked as to the disposition of the Force, and recommended that the head
quarters should be at Gladstone ? Yes, on the Calliope.
18. Do you think it would be a good plan to have it there now? With the spread of
population, it would be necessary to have it further north.
19. One reason, I believe, for your recommending that as the head quarters was that
there had not been sufficient protection there; the Police had been refused, and the
people fancied they might bo attacked, and that it was necessary to have some protec-
tion


lion ? There has been since then a party of police always stationed in the neighbour-
hood. I think at that time, for one or two years, there had been some difficulty in
getting men for the Native Police Force.
20. Do you think that the interference of the native troopers with the gins is destructive
to their discipline, and liable to exasperate the natives ? I think so.
21. Have any instances come under your observation, in which the natives have made
complaints ? Yes.
22. Do you think it is carried on to any great extent ? I have not, of late years, had
much opportunity of observing, but I believe it is; I believe that the Native Policemen,
whenever they desire to take a gin from the tribes, do so, and that the natives themselves
are_ afraid to show any resistance, because their lives are held at the mercy of the
policemen.
23. Do you think that the officers are to blame for this—that they ought to prevent the
men from taking gins? My own opinion is, that the officers have very little control
over the men.
24. You don’t think that, when they come into collision with the natives, they have
sufficient control over the men ? I don't think they have any.
25. They have less than the officers have in any military force—from your experience
of battles, or of entering an enemy’s country, would you say that the Native Police are
under much less control, when their blood is up, than soldiers ? They are under no
control whatever. Soldiers are, at all times, under the discipline of martial law.
26. Have you not found it very difficult to protect females in any country through
wffiich soldiers have marched ? No, I have never found any difficulty" of that sort.
27. The troopers of the Native Police are, or ought to be, recruited from tribes distinct
from those with whom they may come into collision—ought they to bring thoir gins
with them, or ought they to do without them ? I think, with a little management, they
might obtain gins in the neighbourhood 'where they are stationed, under some system
not injurious to the natives themselves.
28. Do you think it would be of any use to send a number of white men to capture
blacks ? Yes, under officers that are good bushmen. If the object of the Native Police
is merely the destruction of the aborigines, they are a most efficient force for that
purpose. If you want to destroy the blacks by wholesale slaughter, you could not find
people more suited for the purpose than the Native Police.
29. Has it come under your notice that the natives have been used in that way ? Yes,
in the neighbourhood of Gladstone, where the tribes have been under my own obser-
vation. Since my first arrival they had always behaved very w T ell, and I have known
at different times six to be shot, without having committed, as I believe, any crime
whatever. I knew of one instance—which was reported to me by my overseer —on my
own station, of a black having been taken into custody by an officer and a party of
Native Police, handcuffed, marched away from the station, and never delivered over to the
regular police ; that man is believed, from the account of the blacks, to have been shot
dead at a short distance from the station. He was taken into the bush, and shot, and
his body was hidden so that no trace could be found.
30. Was that lately ? Two or three years ago.
31. You are aware that, at different periods, great outcries have been made against the
Native Police, and the squatters generally, and that many stories have been circulated
to their discredit—don’t you think that the reports have been in many cases exaggerated?
I fancy they may have been in some cases, because I believe that the horror of all right-
thinking people is very greatly excited by the knowledge that cruelty and injustice have
been committed under the guise of law, and there is also an instinctive feeling against
taking human life.
32. From your experience generally, do you think these reports are true ? In my
experience I never met any act of excessive cruelty towards the aborigines on the part
of the squatters. I believe it would be much fairer to allow the squatters and the
aboriginal inhabitants to settle their quarrels between themselves, than to bring in
natives of their ow T n race to act against them—men who have no compunction whatever
in taking life under any circumstances.
33. You think the old system of leaving squatters to protect themselves the best? It
is fairer to the aboriginal inhabitants of the country.
34. Do you think that, under this system, there w r ere fewer murders on both sides ? I
think there were. I think that, if the Native Police are left to pursue a wholesale
system of extermination, and to keep the blacks from all contact with the whites, that
you may protect the lives of the white population, but at a great sacrifice—and I believe
an unjust sacrifice—of the lives of the aborigines.
35. How would you deal with the natives when they break out in particular districts,
as the Logan, and spear cattle —what plan would you propose different to the present
one of firing on them, in order to disperse them ? I would suggest the plan of appre-
hending them, and, if they offer resistance, of firing.
36. A case was mentioned by Lieutenant Wheeler, in which the natives threw spears
and nullah-nullahs at the Police, and then dived into the scrub—do you think that suffi-
cient provocation for firing on them ? Certainly. They very soon know when they have
committed mischief, and must be punished for it, but there is no reason why they should
be indiscriminately slaughtered.
37. Have you positive proof that they are so slaughtered, as a rule, by the Native
Police—is it your belief that they are? I believe that when the Native Police com-
mence


mence firing on a camp, tlieir blood gets heated, and they slaughter all who come within
reach of them. 1 know one instance in which four or five Port Curtis blacks were killed,
* and the officer himself told me that he could not restrain his men.
■ 38. Have you ever been out with them ? Never.
39. Do you remember the case of Fanny Briggs ? I have heard of it.
40. What is your opinion of that as regards the Native Police—do you think that it
affects them as a corps ? I cannot but be led to the conclusion that it is hard to depend
on them, when brought into contact with any large body of civilized people.
41. That applies to the aborigines altogether. The impression is, that it is wrong to
allow them near a town —it was the circumstance that this young woman had given
them grog that led to her murder—? I think it is a very strong proof that they should
be kept under a closer supervision ; they would be much safer if mixed with white men,
as I have recommended.
42. You are aware that this Committee is sitting to enquire into the general condition of the
aborigines, and to see what can be done to ameliorate it—can you offer any suggestions to
improve it ? The only plan that has ever occurred to me, by which a slight amelioration in
their condition might be effected, is that of holding out encouragement to particular settlers,
who have a peculiar facility for dealing with the aborigines, by giving them at those stations
where the blacks are made most useful, the means of making a donation to them in the
shape.of flour, food, and so on. Among the settlers there are some who treat the blacks
more skilfully than others; and the Government, by taking advantage of this quality in
certain settlers, would enable those who were so inclined to improve the condition of the
aborigines in their neighbourhood. I think some good might come of such a plan as this.
43. Do you think it would be possible to civilize the blacks ? I don’t think more could be
done than has been done in the neighbourhood of Brisbane,
44. You are aware that missions have been undertaken to the blacks ? There have never been
any in my neighbourhood.
45. But you have heard of them, and that they have turned out failures ? Yes.
46. Are you aware that schools for blacks were established at Parramatta ? I don’t recollect
them.
47. What do you think of such a scheme as that of a cotton plantation being formed by
agricultural missionaries, such as the Germans, who would find employment for the blacks, and
keep their children at school, on condition of their remaining with them and working ? I
think it possible there might be some good from such a scheme, provided you could meet with
people who have that peculiar facility for the management of the blacks.
48. Do you think that the Government ought to assist, supposing such a plan as this were
organised ? I think that the Government might he fairly called upon to assist, where they
saw great good already in operation. It is very possible that when cotton cultivation is under-
taken here, the project I have alluded to might be carried out more successfully than on the
squatting stations. I recollect a case on the Burnett, where sixteen thousand sheep wore
entirely shepherded by blacks, with the exception of one flock.
49. Is it not.a great bar to engaging them in this way that at any time, for the purpose of
going to their corroborees or meetings, they will go away and leave you in the lurch ? No
doubt.
50.. That is a very great difficulty? Yes ; but in certain cases the squatters have the means
of getting over it. I know two or three stations on the Burnett, where the blacks are made
very useful indeed, and in that neighbourhood the Native Police were never required.
51. Do you think that, seeing the Colony is being rapidly settled and extended, a protective
force is necessary ? Yes ; but I think you will do great mischief if you lead the intending
settlers to depend entirely on the police for protection. I think that a man who goes out to a
new country, must depend on himself to a considerable extent.
52. It has come out in evidence that there were many more murders under the system of
allowing the settlers to protect themselves, than there have been since : men got exasperated at
the depredations of the blacks, and retaliated very severely ? It has not come under my observa-
tion that such was the case. It was not so in the Burnett District, and we had no Native
Police.
53. You have spoken of putting white troopers in the Force, are you not aware that the old
Mounted Police were not very efficient against the blacks, not for want of bush experience,
but because they looked upon it as dangerous to shoot a black : they thought if they shot a
black they were liable to be prosecuted for it ? I think that some protection should be thrown
round a force that has to act in a sort of border warfare. That was part of the plan I
proposed—that certain districts should be proclaimed as under martial law, and that in these
districts the police should be free from the ordinary operation of law.
54. Do you remember a case on the Namoi Eiver, where some stockmen were murdered by
the blacks, and their comrades were so exasperated that they are said to have collected together,
and gone out against the blacks ? It was before my arrival in the colony.
55. You are probably aware that it was necessary to send a detachment of the Mounted
Police, under the charge of the Commandant himself, and that they attacked and had a fight
with the natives ; and that afterwards an enquiry into their conduct was made ? I think that
it was very unfair on the police, to send them out to perform a service of that kind, and then
to enquire into the circumstances under which the aborigines lost their lives.
56. Don’t you think the feeling I have alluded to would operate against making white troopers ?
Not if you threw a protection over them, and they were acting within the law.
57. By Mr. Blakeney : How many years ago was it that the affair at Gladstone you spoke of
rook place ? It was last year.
58, To


58. In your evidence before the Committee in Sydney, you recommend the employment of
European troopers at three shillings and sixpence a day—do you think they could be obtained
at that pay ? With rations and quarters, I think so, decidedly, particularly if you got soldiers
from the army.
59. Are you not aware that the average pay of the police is close on six shillings a day, with
quarters 1 Not of the country police : they get five shillings and sixpence, and find their food
themselves.
60. Have they any quarters ? No quarters. In reference to the white troopers, I proposed
that they should have a certain amount of land, after so many years.
61. By Mr. Gore : Do you recollect an attack by the blacks on some drays on the Calliope, or
at Port Curtis, some years ago ? Such a thing has never happened since it has been a
settlement.
62. I presume that in speaking of those white men that you would wish to blend with the
Native Police, you would desire either soldiers, or civilians, who had been under strict
discipline ? I should prefer soldiers, if possible: I think it would save time to get ready-
drilled men.
63. Do you think, considering the limited number of soldiers in the Colonies, that you would
be able to get eighty or a hundred men from the regiments—do you think that the Horse
Guards would consent to it ? I think not; my project is to get cavalry-men, due for their
discharge, or men from the Irish Constabulary, from home.
64. They could never be made amenable to civilians? If a corps were formed, as I pro-
posed, it would be under a law passed for the purpose. We have the means of maintaining
discipline, as well as under the Mutiny Act.
65. That plan would necessitate the passing of something analagous to the Mutiny Act ?
Something of that kind. I think that no man ought to have arms put in his hands except
under a strict law of that description.
66. Do you think you would get men to undertake that hard life at the pay, and to stick
to it for several years ? I think that if the object was to obtain men from the regular
army, who receive one shilling and sixpence a day, the change would so improve their
condition that you would find a great number of candidates.
67. Do you think that you could prevail with the military authorities at home to get these
men,—do you suppose that you could get a sufficient number of men of the description you
require by applying to the military authorities at home ? I think that by applying to the
Horse Guards, men of the best description might be obtained—men of good character, and
able to read and write,—and who would not only be valuable for the purpose immediately
contemplated, but would also be a very valuable class of immigrants.
68. Don’t you think that a soldier due for his discharge would have had so much taken out
of him, physically, by service, that he would not bo very likely to make a good border
policeman ? A man is now entitled to his discharge after ten years’ service ; so that one
entering the service at seventeen or eighteen would only be in his prime at thirty, when due
for his discharge.
69. You have mentioned that a black was shot by the police, and you say that his body was
never found—what grounds have you for stating that he was shot ? The report of his gin,
who is walking about in the neighbourhood to this day without a husband; and the story
of the blacks in the neighbourhood.
70. Did any one say that they had seen the body ? If I could have obtained any evidence,
I should have issued a warrant.
71. Then you had merely hearsay evidence from the blacks? The man has disappeared
from his tribe.
72. You said that you would prefer to the present system, to allow the squatters to follow the
good old plan, and protect themselves ? I think that it would be fairer as between the two
races.
73. Would you take any cognizance of what was done in the heat of revenge by the
squatters, having left them to protect themselves.—ln the event of the Police Force being
done away with, so that the protection of the squatters was thrown entirely on themselves,
would you take any cognizance of what they did in carrying out this system of self-protec-
tion ? I would object to the same amount of cruelty as that now used by the Native Police;
but ray own impression is, that so long as the owners of stations had a management of this
kind in their own hands, no unnecessary cruelty would take place. There is an amount of
punishment absolutely necessary with a wild race, who don’t understand the rights of
property, till they are convinced that it is dangerous to interfere with them: in these cases
I would leave the matter to the discretion of the owners of the property. I think it would
be dangerous to leave it to their men, who would not act with sufficient discretion.
74. In the case of their own protection being thrown on the squatters, would you in any
case j ustify their firing on the blacks without being in personal danger ? No, decidedly
not.
75. By the Chairman : Not in protection of property ? If I found a man killing cattle,
of course I would send him away from them; and if he threw a spear or a boomerang, I
should then be justified in firing at him.
76. By Mr. Gore : Have you ever been engaged in any expedition against the blacks?
Yes.
77. Would you mention the circumstances, —have you been called out as a Commissioner ?
Yes, on an occasion, before there were any Native Police on the Burnett. I was once
applied to by the Superintendent on Mr. R. Jones’s station, when some mischief had
been done by the blacks to his cattle and sheep. I took with me my own orderly, and a
constablo


constable from Gayndah, and one or two of the men on the station. I had to take my own
black boy as a tracker. We followed on the tracks of the blacks for some time ; and on
coming to the edge of a scrub, we caught a black fellow in a tree cutting out an opossum,
who did not see us till we had surrounded the tree. We made him call up the tribe from
the scrub—we were in a large opening with scrub all round—and questioned them. The
overseer was satisfied that they were not the party who had committed the depredation, and
we left the place without doing them any mischief.
78. Did you go any further ? No ; wo did not succeed in finding the blacks we were in
pursuit of; we found that the blacks who had committed the depredations had gone in a
contrary direction, on the other side of the river, and we did not succeed in catching them.
79. Was that the only case in which you followed Macks? No; I followed them on the
occasion of Mr. Blaxland’s murder, who was killed on the Burnett. A party of squatters
on the Burnett were sworn in as special constables, followed the blacks, and surprised a
camp. We found the blacks in a scrub on the banks of the Burnett River ; surprised a
camp, and burned all the things in it; owing to the difficulties of the scrub, wc did not
succeed in getting the parties supposed to be implicated in the murder.
80. Then, in fact, these two expeditions were both fruitless as to your main object ? Yes,
as to securing the depredators.
81. You mentioned a case of sixteen thousand sheep being shepherded entirely by Hades, how'
long did they continue shepherding them —one week or two weeks, or how long ? Oh ! for
some months.
82. What is your opinion about disbanding the Native Police—what would he the result ?
I Hi ink it would be very imprudent to disband them, until some force had been appointed to
assume their duties.
83. Don't you think it would be very objectionable to turn these men, accustomed to a
certain degree to European comforts, ami touched with a certain degree of discipline, loose ?
I presume always that it would be done under proper arrangements, so that the men would
return to the districts from which they were recruited. They ought to be taken back to those
districts under the care of an officer.
84. Do you think it would be fair to these districts to turn the men loose on them ? I think
so ; I don’t think they would prove troublesome. I think they would be found useful on the
different stations.
85. They would not Join the blacks in any way against the whites ? No.
86. Even if the blacks were in a disturbed state iu the districts from which they originally
came ? I think not, if they were taken hack under proper care, and if they thought they had
been well treated. I think they would become very useful in the districts to which they
belonged, and would he employed as stockmen on the stations.
87. Are you aware that the disbanded police were accused of being the cause of the murders
on the Dawson 1 I don’t believe they were, but they were disbanded under a gross breach of
agreement on the part of the Government, and went away very dissatisfied.
88. By Mr. Feerett ; I think I understood you to say that you had never been out after
blacks with the Native Police ? Never.
89. I also understood you to say that you had only been twice after blacks who bad com-
mitted depredations ? That is all.
90. After the experience you have had in going after blacks, do you think that such a Force
as you recommend, of white troopers, would he likely to apprehend and secure black
depredators ? I think so, if they had black men with them.
91. Plave you, during the experience you have had, tracked blacks through the thick scrubs of
the Colony ? I have had a black hoy to track them, hut I have never followed any blades
through a scrub.
92. Don’t you conceive there would he great difficulty in the white troopers keeping up with
the black portion of the,Force when they came to scrubs? I think not; Mr. Walker, tire
former Commandant, could always keep up with his black men.
93. Have you never heard of instances in which, when whites have gone out with black
trackers, the whites have been left behind, and quite lost the black portion of the Force in the
scrub ? No doubt it would he difficult for the whites to keep up with the natives, hut if it
becomes a portion of the duty of a white trooper to keep up with his black comrade, and you
have a well organized force, he would do so. If the Force were in the state I contemplate,
the white troopers would be bound to keep up with the Macks.
94. Are you not aware that in a number of instances it is necessary in a thick scrubby
country for the Black Police troopers to leave their horses, strip off their clolhes, and go where
a white man could not possibly follow them ? I don't believe it is impossible for a white man
to follow where a black could go, though I grant it would he difficult in all eases.
95. I understood you to say that you considered if the Force were officered by military men,
it would he more efficient than it is now ? 1 think so.
96. Are you not aware that as far as officering the Fo-ce with military men has been tried, it
has proved perfectly useless? lam not aware of it, but I should draw no deduction from the
fact, if I knew it to be so, because it is very possible that those selected were not competent
for their duty.
97. Are you aware that the chief officer in charge in the neighbourhood of the Dawson, when
the murders took place, was formerly a military man —Mr. Nicholl ? The fact of one
individual proving incompetent is nothing. You must have a competent man in the first
instance, and that man will be improved by being a military officer.
98. Are you aware that this military officer, Mr. Nicholl, came to the Colony with very high
recommendations from Ids regiment at home ? lam unable to say. I don’t know,
99, Are


99. Are you aware that the lieutenant in command of the Force patrolling this part of the
country —the Dawson and Condaraine—before Lieutenant Nicholl, was also a military man—
Lieutenant Irving ? lam aware that Lieutenant Irving was.
100. Are you aware that both these officers were discharged from the Native Police Force on
account of their being totally unfit to manage it ? I know nothing of their conduct in the
Native Police.
101. A.ro you aware that it is the general opinion that if it had not been for the inefficiency
of these officers, the murders in that part of the country would never have been perpetrated ?
I have not heard anything on the subject. I don’t believe that the officer in charge was a
military man.
102. Arc you not aware that these very blacks that committed the depredations at Hornet
Bank were the Condamiue blacks, and many of them had been in the habit of frequenting the
Police barracks where Lieutenants Nicholl and Irving were stationed ? 1 know nothing of the
circumstances of the Hornet Bank murders, having been at Port Curtis at the time, but I have
heard something from an officer of the Native Police —Lieutenant Sweet —who told me himself
that he had been informed by a trooper then in the Native Police, that the murder of the
unfortunate women at Hornet Bank was in consequence of the young men who owned the
station having been in the habit of allowing their black boys to rush the gins on the camps of
the aborigines in the neighbourhood.
103. Have you never heard that the blacks in this part of the country became so daring from
the very fact of Lieutenants Irving and Nicholl proving their unfitness to manage their
troopers in attempting to follow up the blacks, after the murders of Mr. Kettle and others, on
Tchanning Creek ? I have no knowledge with reference to the conduct of Lieutenants Nicholl
or Irving.
104. I understood you to say that some black was shot, after having been taken away from a
station as a prisoner; don't you think an iron collar and chain, in place of the handcuffs now
used to secure blacks, would in some measure save the lives of prisoners similarly situated, and
prevent the necessity of shooting them? I believe that nothing would save their lives hut
strict orders to the officer in command not to shoot them.
105. As the law now stands, and under the present mode of securing prisoners only by hand-
cuffs, it is not likely that black prisoners when they come near a scrub would make attempts
to escape, and that then the Blade Police would be considered justified in shooting them? In
some instances they may do so.
106. Would it not he desirable to adopt some other way of securing them than by handcuffs,
as they so often get rid of the handcuffs, and make their escape ? I think handcuffs are quite
sufficient if properly used.
107. Have you not known of cases where they have slipped their handcuffs, in consequence of
their hands being too small'? I have heard of it, hut I have got the Native Police to bring
the blacks without shooting them. I have got them to apprehend them and bring them
to me.
108. Have you not heard, during your experience in the bush, of many blackfellows being
missing, or supposed to he shot in this way by the Native Police ? I have heard of such
cases.
109. Don’t you think it very necessary that some other mode of securing them should he
given to the Police ? I think the system of shooting them ought to be put a stop to.
110. Are you not aware that, as the law stands, the Native Police are quite justified in
shooting a prisoner if he attempts to make his escape 1 I believe in certain circumstances
they are.
111. Have you heard of a case of this kind on the Condamine, where a black, since allowed to
have been innocent, was shot in this way ? I have not heard of any particular case.
112. When blacks are apprehended and brought before a Court, would you advise their being,
if convicted, placed in gaols with the worst characters ? I would recommend their being
placed in security.
113. Do you not think that their being placed in gaols with the worst white characters is the
means of making them much worse than they would have been if they had never been placed
there ? I think it would he an advantage to have a separate place of confinement for the
blacks.
114. Do you consider it necessary that the recruiting of the Force should he made legal ?
Yes, decidedly.
115. Do you approve of the system now adopted of taking black boys by force from the inland
stations 1 Certainly not, I think it an act of great injustice.
116. Heverting to the white troopers you spoke of, do you think that white troopers could
exist, as black troopers now do, for as long as three weeks at a time without any rations, and
depend merely on what they could get in the Lush ? I think that in time they would learn
to do all that an ordinary bushman does. Settlers—masters and servants —are able to live
in the bush for several months. I presume that a well-organized force could do just as much
as any white people do at the present day.
117. Have you ever known a party of whites to stay out in pursuit of blacks for three weeks
or a month with four days’ rations ? No, but there is no necessity for doing so.
118. Have not black troopers done so ? Not to my knowledge.
119. By the Chairman : Do you not consider that the employment of two or three military
officers who had sold out, and probably could not succeed in their profession, militates against
the employment generally of such officers ? I think not.
120. By Mr. Fekrett : Did you know Lieutenant Irving or Lieutenant Nicholl sufficiently
well before they joined the service to say whether they had used up their constitutions, or were


in any way injured? I had no knowledge of Lieutenant Nicholl before he joined the Police ;
I recollect seeing Lieutenant Irving, and remarked that he was suffering under great debility of
constitution.
121. Are you aware what were the ages of these officers? No, I know nothing about their
ages.
122. Are you not aware that when Lieutenant Nicholl first joined the Force, and brought his
cbnvco against Commandant Walker, he was considered by many persons one of the most
e huem men in the Force, and, in every respect, a first-rate man ? lam not aware of these
Circumstances to winch you allude.
By Mr. Fitzsimmons : Supposing the Native Police Force to be retained, would you advise 1
that they should he kept near to the towns, where they would have an opportunity of mixing
with Europeans, and getting grog ? No, I think it would be desirable that they should be at
some distance from the towns —quartered at some distance from towns.*
123. Do you think there is a sufficient protective force among Europeans for the towns ? Yes.
124. Does not their coming into towns operate against the efficiency of the Native Police ? I
believe that the discipline of the Force is much injured by their facility of obtaining spirits.
125. Do you think that appointments to this Force should be given by merit, and not
entirely by interest ? Decidedly; I think that the number of officers should be lessened, and
the remuneration increased,
126. Do you not think that when an officer has committed so gross an act as that of allowing a
trooper to shoot a prisoner in custody, he ought to be immediately dismissed from the Force ?
Decidedly.
APPENDIX.
Evidence of Captain O’CONNELL, taken before a Select Committee in Sydney on the
Dawson Murders, in 1858, with Appendix thereto.
THURSDAY, 17 th JUNE, 1858.
Me. HODGSON, I Me. RICHARDSON,
Me. TAYLOR, | Me. CRIBB,
Mb. COWPER, f Me. BUCKLEY,
Mr. JONES, | Mr. DONALDSON.
AB/THUE- HODGSON, Esq., in the Chair.
Captain MAURICE CHARLES O’CONNELL, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman: Yon are Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District of Port
Curtis? Yes.
2. You have been there some time ? Rather more than four years,
3. You resided previously in the Burnett District ? Yes, for five or six years. It is ten
years altogether since I first was stationed frontier of occupation.
4. You have had many opportunities of seeing the working of the Native Police Force ? Yes.
5. Under Mr. Walker ? Under Mr. Walker, and since his removal from the command.
6. By Mr. Cowper : In fact. Port Curtis was the head-quarters of the Force ? No ; it never
was head-quarters. I had control, when I first went up there, of the detachment that
belonged to the Port Curtis District.
7. By the Chairman : Do you consider the Native Police Force, as at present constituted,
efficient ? Certainly not, at the present moment. It is very inefficient. It seems to have
broken down from a want of any proper system of organization. When I first saw the
Native Police, as originally raised by Mr. Walker, it struck me that he had worked a change
and improvement in the aborigines I was hardly prepared to think they were capable of;
he had got them into very creditable order; but since his removal from the command, as
far as my observation goes, the men are not kept together under proper discipline, or with
sufficient obedience to their officers, or even sufficient regard for them. At present it seems
almost impossible to keep the newly raised recruits attached to the corps. I believe, in
several instances, they have been deserting in considerable numbers.
8. Can you inform the Committee where the recruits come from ? I cannot. I know
nothing on that point, except from hearsay.
9. Do you think they come from the neighbouring districts, or from remote districts of the
Colony ? I have understood that some who have been brought to the Port Curtis district
were
* In reference to a request of a Member of the Committee that I would, in revising my
evidence, mention the towns from which I think it would be desirable to remove the Native Police, I
may state that I think they ought not to be permanently quartered in the immediate neighbourhood
of any town whatsoever.


were recruited in the Wide Bay District, which is the adjoining one, and these men, very
shortly after their arrival on the Fitz Boy, deserted.
10. Do you not think that would be a very probable consequence of their being employed so
near their own district ? I think it is very difficult to keep aborigines in the neighbourhood
of their own tribes.
11. By Mr. BiciiArdsox : You think recruits should not be obtained from the neighbouring
tribes ? I do.
12. Do you think it would be desirable to got them from distant districts, such as the
Murrumbidgee and Murray ? Yes, or from the Nainoi or Gwydir, or other distant districts.
13. Do you think the body can be rendered efficient at all on the present system? Ido not
think they can, without a considerable change of system.
14. By the Chairman ; Would you be kind enough to favor the Committee with your ideas
as to what is necessary for the reformation of the present system ? It appears to me that
the great want of the present system is a proper organization. Neither men nor officers are
trained to their duty, so as to understand what they have to do when called upon to perform
it. The officers have not that control over the men which they ought to have; and there ia
no esprit de corps. The duty is a particularly harassing and unpleasant one, and there is
nothing to induce to the zealous performance of it beyond the bare fact of its being a duty.
16. Could you propose any remedy? The only plan which has occurred to me, as one which
would be at all likely to be effectual, is that of raising a force under a law which, somewhat
on the example of the Mutiny Act, shall compel a due observance of discipline, and prevent
desertion. I think, under such a law, there ought to be a number of white troopers enlisted,
in the proportion of one white man to two blacks ; and in that way an efficient working
corps would be created. 1 do not think the expense would be much greater than it is at
present; and a body of men could thus be raised and disciplined who would really be useful.
16. Would you not prefer that the white troopers should preponderate ? I would, provided
the expense was not considered too great; but I think a force composed of one-third whites
to two-thirds natives would be efficient, and, at the same time, much less expensive than a
larger proportion of white men.
17. You recommend these proportions solely on the ground of expense ? Solely on the
ground of expense. In some parts of the country the native troopers are much more efficient
than white men would be in following up and punishing the blacks for outrages committed,
because they can follow them into the scrubs with greater facility—for instance, the scrubs
of the Mackenzie and Upper Dawson; but, in all ordinary cases, I think a corps of white
men with black trackers would be the most efficient.
18. By Mr. Cowper : In these scrubs you speak of, do you contemplate the Native Police
being allowed to penetrate and murder the blacks, apart from their officers ? No ; I think
such a system would be very objectionable. It is frequently the habit of the blacks, when
they have committed on outrage or murder, to seek shelter on the borders of a large scrub;
and when they find themselves attacked, they immediately disappear in the interior of
the scrub; they have then to be followed, and in the pursuit the natives will, in all
probability, get in advance of any white men who may be with them, though I have heard
of cases where white men —Mr. Walker for instance —managed to keep up with them all
through the scrub.
19-. By the Chairman: There are open spots frequently in these scrubs ? Yes, often. The
Native Police are in the habit of throwing off their clothes and entering the scrub with
nothing but their accoutrements—their ammunition and carbine. They have a quicker eye,
and they follow the blacks with greater certainty; they pick up a track with a sort of
instinct, which guides them unerringly, from early habit, and which the white man does not
possess.
20. By Mr. Cowper ; You have a division of the Native Police at Gladstone, under
Lieutenant Murray ? Yes.
21. Were they often called out? Not when we first went there. I can tell you what
happened when I first went up there, or very soon after Mr. Walker’s removal took place.
Mr. Murray reported to me that his men were all going away ; that they had stated to him
their intention of going to see Mr. Walker, and that they were, in point of fact, going to
desert.
22. By Mr. Jones ; Was any cause assigned 1 They said it w r as on account of Mr. Walker’s
removal from the command.
23. By Mr. Cowper : On account of their personal attachment to him ? Yes ; he having
raised them. I asked Mr. Murray if he thought there would be any use in my speaking to
the men. He said he thought it might have some effect; and I directed him to have his men
paraded. I then put on my uniform, and rode out to endeavor to induce them to remain—-
because it was a matter of serious importance to us at the time, as w r e were then on an unoccu-
pied part of the coast, surrounded by wild tribes, with a large extent of vacant country inter-
vening between us and the nearest settlements ; and had they left us, we should have found it
very difficult to communicate with the settled portion of the country. On speaking to the men,
I found they stated very reasonably their causes for dissatisfaction. They said they had
been promised by Mr. Walker that after a certain time they should be taken back to their own
country again to see their friends and relatives, and that they had now been five years in the
Force, and they were determined to go in. I could not prevail on them to change their
intention, until I remarked to them that the country they were serving—it was the time the
Russian war had just broken out —was then at war with other white people, and that it was
a disgraceful thing on their parts to desert us at such a tune. I pointed out that we were then
on the coast where our white enemies might attack us, and we might suffer from the want of
their


their aid; and they took the idea immediately, and declared that under the circumstance they
would remain, and they even followed me into Gladstone, to express more strongly their
determination to do so. I mention this, as I think it a strong proof that these aboriginals
are capable of generous impulses ; and they did remain until about two years afterwards. The
Force was in the meantime removed from my control; and I may here say that I think these
men were subsequently very unjustly discharged. On the occasion I speak of, I promised
them that the Government would find them the means of getting hack to their own districts
oh horseback. I reported this to Sir Charles Fitz Roy, and received a confirmation of my
pledge, and yet afterwards that pledge was broken, and the men were discharged to find
their way on foot to their own country. I believe they committed many depredations on the
road.
■24. By Mr. Jones : These men did not desert? No ; they were discharged.
25. The Government actually broke faith with them twice, Mr. Walker having, previously to
your promise to them, undertaken on the part of the Government to return them to their
own country —you have no reason to doubt that statement ? No ; but Ido not think there
was any time fixed by Mr.. Walker, so that we cannot say it was a breach of faith.
26. Did you ever ascertain from Mr. Walker at what time he had undertaken to return them ?
No.
27. You yourself, however, gave them a distinct, promise, and that promise was never fulfilled ?
Yes; that pledge was broken. I reported the circumstances to Mr. Parker, who was
Colonial Secretary, I think, at the time; but we were so distant, and the correspondence was
so long on the road, that it was too late to do anything in the way of remedy by the time it
came to a conclusion. •
28. By Mr. Cowpee ; Do you know what became of these men? I wrote to the officer at
the Condamine, to beg that he would find means of support for them to the extent of £2O,
pending my reference of the matter to the Government in Sydney, and I would be answerable
for that amount myself; but he wrote back to me to say that they had been about his place,
and had been committing depredations—that they had fired at a woman, and had been
stealing ammunition at the huts ; some of them, he said, had joined his force, but had,
behaved very badly after joining, and he did net know where the others were gone.
29. By the Chaieman : Do you know whether any personal attachment exists between the
present Commandant and his troopers ? I have no means of forming an opinion on this
point.
30. Do you know the feeling amongst the squatters in the northern districts with regard to
the Native Police Force? From expressions I have heard, I believe the squatters, generally,
ate not satisfied with the working of the corps. I presume they cannot be, for in my part of
the country there are no men—or at least not sufficient to be of service.
31. By Mr. Cowpee : Has Mr. Murray no men with him ? lam not sure of the strength of
his detachment at the present moment, but for the last two years it has been considerably
under its proper number. When I left Port Curtis, twelve men lately recruited had just gone
to the Fitz Roy, and I have since heard they have deserted.
32. By Mr. Jones ; What was the strength of Mr. Murray's force at the time you left ? He
has had very few men for the last year and a half. Ido not think there are more than four
or five men at Gladstone now.
33. By Mr. Richardson : Have the settlers themselves proposed any plan for the reorganiza-
tion of the Native Police? I have heard so many different opinions, that I could not say
what is the general opinion among the squatters,
34. By Mr. Cowpee ; Have you ever sustained any attacks on the part of the blacks yourself ?
Never.
35. Have there been any attacks within your district? Within fourteen miles of Gladstone,
at Mr. Young's station, they killed everybody on the place except a black boy; and within
the last year they killed three men on Mr. Tolson’s station, and wounded him.
36. By the Chairman ; Have you understood that the squatters are not disposed to co-oparate
with the Native Police ? I have never observed anything of the sort myself.
37. Are you personally aware how Mr. Walker is employed at the present time ? lam not.
38. By Mr. Cowpee : Have you considered this matter sufficiently to enable you to make any
suggestions to the Committee, which you think would advance the re-construction of the
Native Police Force, or the construction of a force in lieu of it ? Ido not think it possible
to re-construct the Native Police Force on the present system. I think any such attempt
would be likely to end in mischief, from the mixture of the old material with, the new. I
think, to do anything effectual, you must originate a new system; and until the new one can
be put in operation, it should be kept entirely separate from the old. To lay down what I
believe desirable for a new system, would perhaps require longer time than the Committee
are now inclined to afford me ; but I may state that I propose to lay before the Committee,
af another opportunity, a paper containing a design of that which I suppose to be the best
mode of forming another corps. (Vide Appendix A.)
39. By the Chairman: Leaving expense out of the question, what number of white men
would you emyloy in conjunction with the Native Police, in order to make the force as
efficient as possible ? Supposing the force to consist altogether of one hundred and twenty
men —a number which the last Committee presumed to be sufficient —I should say there should
be forty white troopers and eighty aboriginal troopers, independently of staff-sergeants and a
number of bat men.
40. You think a force of whites and natives combined in those proportions would work
efficiently ? I think so ; but it must first be properly organized before it is put to work.
The groat fault of the present system seems to me to be that there is no organization. The
men


men are taken from the bush, and the officers are selected from other walks in life, and the
two are put together, and told to perform certain duties for which they have had no previous
training, and they feel that awkwardness which all men naturally feel who do not understand
their duty.
41. By Mr. Oowpbb : Is not the proportion you name, of eighty blacks to forty whites, rather
at variance with the idea of using the blacks merely as trackers ? I only propose these
proportions for the sake of economy; but still I think the intelligence of the whites, combined
with the physical force which such a number of natives would give, would make it work as an
effective force, and they would be able to accomplish many duties they cannot perform now,
such as the execution of warrants, &c. An intelligent white sergeant, with two aboriginal
native troopers, with him, could perform many duties that half-a-dozen native troopers alone
could not perform, and many services which one white constable would not be able by himself
to accomplish.
42. By Mr. Richardson : Keeping expense out of the question, would it not be as well to
have two white men to one black? I think it would be better. If expense is not an object,
I think the larger proportion of whites would make it a more effective force.
43. By the Chairman: Are you at all aware of the number of the force at present? No,
I am not.
44. Are you at all aware of the difficulty the present Commandant has in increasing the
Force ? I am not ; but I presume there must be great difficulty in recruiting, from the native
troopers being so scarce in the Port Curtis District. In order to induce the men to remain
in the service, I think it would be a great advantage to give a band at head-quarters, and all
the paraphernalia of a regiment to this corps. Where it is all hard work and no play, you
must do something to induce the men to join. It would tend to induce an esprit de
corps.
45. You have not yourself been a resident in any districts where the blacks have been com-
mitting outrages ? Yes; in the Burnett.
46. Were they very mischievous there at the time of your residence? They killed a number
of men in different parts of the district. I think some twenty were killed in the space of
five years.
47. Could you give the Committee any idea of the extent of country in length over
which you consider a proseotive force necessary ? If I had one of the maps shewing
the Electoral Districts as proposed, I think I could explain to the Committee what I
think are the best positions in which to locate detachments of the force. (A map being
produced , the witness proceeded to point out the various positions which, in his opinion, the force
should occupy.) The country to be protected would be about four hundred miles in
length, by about 150 or 200 in breadth. I think there is a very good position for a central
depot on the Calliope, where Mr. Walker himself once fixed on a spot for head-quarters.
The situation is one from which most of the different districts, now that occupation has
progressed to the north, could be relieved periodically with the greatest ease. There
might, I think, be out-stations at Taroom, Eannes,the Fitz Roy, Maryborough, Brisbane,
Nanango, and I think at the Condamine—in all seven stations, independently of the
central one. The object of the central depot is to have some place where the force could be
organized—where the recruits could be trained, and from whence relief might be sent to
the out-stations as required. It is absolutely necessary, in my opinion, to bring in the
men from the out-lying stations to head-quarters at certain intervals, in order that they
may have their horses, clothing, saddlery, arms, and so on looked to, and that they may
have a certain period of rest. I think also that there should be a system of constant
patrolling kept up by all the different sections, so that the blacks in the intermediate
country might be kept in awe. That would be likely to prevent a good deal of mischief.
I am convinced an efficient system of patrol is the only way to work the Force in a
proper manner.
48. By Mr. Cowper ; Is it not the fact that these outbreaks are chiefly confined to one
district at any one time. For instance, it now appears that the Upper Dawson is the
district in which the blacks are most threatening—would it not therefore be better to
concentrate in that particular district a powerful force, rather than to have a number of
stations scattered over a wide extent of country ? The object of a depot would be, that
you might at once mass a large force on any given point. I propose that there should
always be a considerable number —say thirty men—at head-quarters, and in the event
of outbreaks similar to that on the Upper Dawson, the whole of these men could be
moved to the spot at once, and other parties might likewise be moved towards the same
point. In this way a large amount of force could be brought to bear on any disturbed
district, until the outrages had been put an end to.
49. By the Chairman : Your plan would involve the erection of barracks ? At the
head-quarters, certainly.
50. Not at the out-lying stations ? lam not prepared to say that. I think the officers
ought to have quarters ; it is hard work for Europeans to compel them to sleep out every
night, year after year.
51. Are they not well received at the different stations ? Yes, I believe they are ; but I
think it would be as well they should stop with their men.
52. Do you think the amalgamation of white and native troopers would bring about
much jealousy on the part of the latter ? I think not.
53. Not even though the white men should be made sergeants and leading men in each
division ? I think not. They would of course require selection. It would be necessary
to make a selection of those who were best adapted by nature to govern and lead th e
blacks


blacks. It is not every man who is fitted by disposition and intelligence to command
the respect and attention of the blacks.
54. Do yon consider the number of officers now employed—seventeen—excessive or not ?
They would be decidedly too many under the system I recommend. But I recollect now
that most of the officers at present are merely substitutes for sergeants. The men
formerly employed as sergeants -were found to be of such bad character that it was difficult
to keep them in order, as they were not enlisted under any law ; and one of the Com-
mandants—l think Mr. Marshall—fancied it would he better to get young men of
education, who should be called officers, but do the duty of sergeants. Under that view
there are not too many.
55. Can you tell the Committee whether that idea of Mr. Marshall’s has been carried out
with any effect ? I think not. Ido not think it has answered the purpose.
56. By Mr. Jones : Have you ever been concerned with black troopers in any engagement
with the aborogines ? No.
67. Have you ever heard any statement, on authority on which you can rely, as to the
general conduct of the black troopers when they have been engaged with blacks who
have committed depredations —I mean as to whether they exhibit undue ferocity ? Ido
not believe they are at all imbued with any feeling of humanity, as far as consideration
for human life is concerned.
68. You do not believe they would act with the same circumspection in a case of that kind
that the white troopers would ? No ; I believe they are quite beyond the control of their
officers when once lot loose.
59. You think in engagements of this kind the black troopers would take life more
recklessly than white troopers would do ? I think so.
60. Do yon think they would exercise any discrimination between the males and the
women of the tribes on whom they make attacks in these cases ? I cannot give an
answer on that point from any personal observation. Ido not know whether they would
themselves have any hesitation in sacrificing the lives of females; but I incline to think
they would avoid doing so.
61. By the Chairman : Do yon not know that in the skirmishes -which do take place the
women are invariably saved —that they are not killed except by accident? I believe
that where it is possible the women are saved ; but in an indiscriminate attack they may
accidentally get shot.
62. By Mr. Jones : Do you think the native troopers would, as white men would do,
avoid destroying the women in such a case ? I think they would. Ido not think they
would voluntarily shoot the women.
63. But you believe that, as compared with white men, they would be reckless in taking
the lives of the male blacks ? Quite so. Ido not think they ought to be trusted by
themselves.
64. You think it would not he safe to employ them, unless in conjunction with a
sufficient number of white men to keep them in cheek ? Just so.
65. By Mr. Richardson : Yon think it undesirable that the blacks should preponderate
so much as they do ? Decidedly.
66. By Mr. Jones : What is the ordinary conduct and demeanor of the native troopers
towards the neighbouring tribes when not actively engaged against them ? 1 think,
whilst under control, their conduct is very good; but if not restrained, I believe they
would seize upon the women of the neighbouring tribes, and would in a very short time
become exceedingly troublesome in consequence. I had an instance of the sort myself;
hut I put a stop to it at once. When I first allowed the wild blacks to come into my
camp at Port Curtis, they soon complained that the Native Police had taken one of their
women. It caused great excitement amongst them, and I immediately rode out to the
police camp, and requested Mr. Murray to parade his men. When that was done I told
them the woman must be returned by sundown. Mr. Murray’s men indignantly denied
that they had had anything to do with it, hut said the woman had been taken by a
trooper who had come down on escort from Ramies ; and they promised they would have
the woman returned, which they did.
67. Do you think that, with regard to the women, there would be any material difference
between the conduct of the black troopers and of the white troopers—that the conduct
of the blacks would be worse than that of the whites under the like circumstances ? I
think so, decidedly. It would he more easy to keep white men under control in that
matter.
68. Taking into consideration the average character of the officers whose services we
may expect to secure, do you think it possible to ensure a proper state of discipline where
the' force consists exclusively of native troopers ? I should say it is very difficult to do
so; there are few men I should consider competent to control such a force.
69. It would, I apprehend, be much easier to ensure a proper state of discipline in a
force composed mainly of whites, than in one consisting entirely of blacks ? Of course ;
but there must be a stringent law to govern e ven the whites. _
70. With or without such a law it would, as a rule, be easier for the officers to manage
whites than to manage blacks ? That would depend a good deal on the temptation to
which they are subject. I think a number of white men collected together under
circumstances of temptation, without a law to govern them, subject merely to their own
ideas of right and wrong, with no penalty but dismissal, would be rather more difficult
to retain under any strict discipline than a similar number of blacks.
71. But


71. But, under such a law as you speak of, you think there would be comparatively little
difficulty in managing a force of white men ? Quite so.
72. While the management of the blacks would depend on the tact and skill of their
officer ? Entirely on Ids personal character.
73. What do you regard as the relative value of white and black troopers in a case of
this kind : —Say it requires a force of one hundred blacks for the protection of a certain
district, 'what number of white men would yon consider equal to the same amount of
duty? Ido not think any great difference could be made in the numbers; because,
having in all these cases a large tract of country to cover, you would, I think, require
nearly the same number of one description as the other.
74. In the event of disturbances leading to engagements with the wild tribes, would von
not consider a force of ten white men equal to the work of twice that number of blacks ?
You mean blacks by themselves ?
75. Blacks, with one white officer to lead them. Would not an officer go into an
engagement with ten white men with the same confidence as with double the number of
blacks ? I think not in these peculiar districts. I think an officer accustomed to the
blacks would feel himself quite as confident as if he had an equal number of whites.
76. Then, if the character of the Force he changed by the introduction of a larger
proportion of whites, yon do not think it would be wise to diminish the total number of
the Force on that account? I think not. The amount of physical force required to bring
an engagement to a successful issue would be much the same, whether whites or blacks
he employed ; hut the introduction of a larger number of whites into the Force would
make it more efficient by increasing its moral power ; because the whites could perform
many duties which require a certain amount of intelligence and education, but to which
blacks alone would be quite incompetent. For instance, one white man and two blacks
w r onld make an efficient patrolling party; but you could hardly trust three ordinary
black troopers by themselves as a detachment for a similar purpose.
77. By Mr. Cbibb : Do yon not think a force of eight white troopers with two blacks as
trackers, would be more efficient than an ordinary troop of twelve black troopers with
one officer to lead them ? They would be more efficient for many purposes, hut for the
purpose of following up and punishing blacks who had committed outrage, I do not
think they would.
78. Would they not be more under control ? If you are talking of the Force as it at
present exists, I grant that the whites would be more efficient; but if the black troopers
were under a proper system, and as well disciplined as they should be, and certainly
were under Mr. Walker, 1 think twelve of these would be as efficient for that particular
purpose as eight whites and two black trackers.
79. Taking the force as it at present exists, would not eight whites and two blacks be
more efficient than twelve blacks under their present officers ? Decidedly more efficient
than the present force.
80. By Mr. Jones : Do you not think the black tribes would stand more in awe of a
force composed mainly of white men ? Iso; they are desperately afraid of the Native
Police.
81. By Mr. Buckley : Do you think white troopers would he able to follow the blacks
through scrubs of the same density as black troopers would get through after them ?
No ; I say they would not in that peculiar country.
82. In attacking the blacks, it frequently happens that the Native Police are obliged to
penetrate dense scrubs, for which purpose they strip themselves of everything, merely
taking with them their arms and ammunition—would white troopers be in a position to
follow the blacks with the same facility through these scrubs ? I do not think they
could get so rapidly through the scrubs.
83. Could they get through at all? Yes, with black troopers with them as I propose.
84. Bv Mr. Jones : What is the state of feeling among the blacks, are you aware, as
compared with what it was a few years ago —are they less afraid of the whites than
they were prior to the disorganization of the Native Police Force taking place ? Judg-
ing from the frequency of outrages and murders on the Dawson, I should be inclined to
believe they are less afraid of the whites than they were, and less under awe of punish-
ment than they used to be.
85. Do you think that feeling is an incresing one at the present time ? I have no
grounds upon which to offer an opinion on that point.
86. I presume the blacks are still very numerous in the Northern Districts ? Yes.
87. Supposing this feeling of boldness were to grow on them, and lead to its natural
consequences, do you not think it would require considerable expenditure of life and
money to restore the state of things that now exists in those districts ? Yes; 1 have
no doubt of it.
88. Then you think it better to take effective measures at once, to convince the blacks
that any country the white people once take up they will keep? Yes; no doubt of it.
The wisest and most humane system is at once to cause prompt punishment to follow
all outrages.
89. 1 o you think it possible that result can be arrived at, with the Native Police Force
as at present organized ? 1 think not.
90. Then you believe it is absolutely necessary to re-organize this Force without delay ?
Yea.
91. By Mr. Donaldson: Public attention has been lately drawn to some very remarkable
circumstances, namely, that the blacks in the Northern Districts, especially those about
the


the Dawson, not only travel by night, and fight by night, but that the men separate from
the women; and that tribes supposed to be hostile combine their fighting men for the
purposes of aggression—have you in any way noticed these peculiarities ? The
combination of the tribes is new to me, and if it be true, it is a very dangerous feature
in their character.
92. You do not know that it is so ? Ido not.
93. With regard to leaving their women ? That I have seen—at least I know they do
it when going to their own corroborees.
94. Do you know anything about their attacking at night ? That they do.
95. That is a new feature, and a very dangerous one ? It is. Formerly it was under-
stood that superstition prevented them from attacking at night; and they must either
have outgrown that superstition, Or these must be tribes that are not subject to it.
96. By the Chairman : Can you tell the Committee the amount of pay received by the
Native Troopers ? I think it is eighteen-pence a day, to cover their feeding and clothing.
97. Should you recommend a difference of pay between the white and native troopers,
on the new system you propose ? Decidedly. I assume that the native trooper should
get his eighteen-pence a day, as at present, and that the white trooper should get three
shillings and sixpence a day, and rations.
98. Do you anticipate that any feeling of jealousy would exist on account of the
difference of wages ? I think not at all.
99. Would you recommend, as ah immediate remedy, to prevent any more murders on
the Dawson River, that a body of white troopers should be sent up, if possible, from
Sydney ? Doubtless that would be the best mode of providing for the present emer-
gency that could be adopted, if they were men fitted for the bush.
100. By Mr. Richardson ; Would it not be desirable that they should be men accustomed
to the bush ? Decidedly, it would be an advantage ; but under the plan I was sketching
an idea of, they would all undergo a training at head-quarters before being put to active
service in the different districts.
101. Supposing a number of Captain M‘Lerie’s men were sent, do you think they would
be efficient at first ? They would soon get into working order, if well commanded.
102. By Mr. Buckley : From your own knowledge of the disposition of the aborigines,
should you imagine that these murders on the Dawson have been committed in conse-
quence of too much freedom having been permitted with the blacks ? I have never seen
the blacks do mischief without some previous injury being inflicted on them by the
whites.
103. Are you aware whether there was any thing of the kind in these cases? No.
104. But, from what you know of the blacks, you do not think they are likely to do it
wantonly ? As far as I have any knowledge of them, I should think not.
105. By Mr. Taylor ; Do you think the Commandant should habitually reside at the
depfit ? After he has once formed his corps he would be at liberty to move about, and
should do so occasionally; but at the commencement I think his presence "would be
absolutely necessary at the head-quarters, as he himself would be the very soul of the
system to be established.
106. By Mr. Buckley : I think you stated that Maryborough would be a good station for
a detachment of this Force—do you not think Gayndah would be better? No; the
blacks are more troublesome, and very numerous, at Maryborough. At Gayndah they
have never been troublesome.
APPENDIX A.
Remarks on the Formation of a Corps of Mounted Police for service on the frontier Districts of
New South Wales.
1. There can he no doubt of the vast importance to the Northern Districts of this
Colony, and to its pastoral interests generally, for the disposal of whose surplus stock these
districts now form the chief outlet, of devising and carrying into execution, with as little
delay as possible, some more efficient system for the protection of life and property against
aboriginal outrage than any which is now in operation.
2. I have therefore much pleasure in laying before the Committee on Aboriginal
Outrages on the Dawson River, in accordance with the promise I made when under examina-
tion, a carefully-prepared memorandum of what appears to me the best mode of providing a
force adequate to the task of affording police protection to tbe frontier and disturbed
district.
3. I believe the fundamental error in the constitution of the Native Police Force as
it now exists, and the cause of its consequent inefficiency, to be the want of primary organi-
zation—that is to say, the institution of the corps without any organized and arranged
system for its government and discipline, as well as the absence of any method in the drill
and training of the officers and men who compose it.
4. The mere clothing and arming a certain number of undisciplined men, be they
either whites or blacks, is not a sufficient preliminary precaution before you call upon them
to perform duties which, alike important and arduous in their nature, require also skill and
intelligence in their execution. It appears to me that all who, either as leaders or followers,
are liable to be placed in such a position ought undoubtedly to be thoroughly grounded in a
knowledge of the work they have to perform ; and that such has not been the case with the
N ative


Native Police, is in my eyes quite a sufficient reason to account for the failure of that experi-
ment, notwithstanding the undoubted zeal and desire to succeed of many of the gentlemen
appointed as officers.
5. The great objects to be held in view in the organization of a body of armed mon
intended to act in concert for the accomplishment of any particular purpose are, in the first
instance, to render each individual member of the force as expert in the use of the weapons
entrusted to him as he is capable of becoming, and then, by establishing a system of united
action, to give to the whole body a cohesion which shall make its operations the result of
regulated efforts and not of occasional and isolated impulses—in fact, to establish individual
efficiency and combined discipline.
6. But to accomplish these ends it is absolutely necessary men should'be brought
under some more stringent laws than those which enforce the fulfilment of civil contracts;
and as a preliminary measure to the organization of any armed force, laws should be passed
authorizing enlistment, constituting tribunals for the trial of offences, and enacting summary
punishments for infractions of discipline, and crimes which are more dangerous to the com-
munity when liable to be committed by men with arms in their hands, and assembled
together in large numbers, than when springing from the actions of isolated individuals
amongst the masses of society.
7. For the particular purposes under the con ideration of the Committee also, there
ought to be a law empowering the Executive Government to proclaim any particular district
in which frequent outrages occur as a “ disturbed district,” and to institute therein some
more summary process for the trial and punishment of crimes of violence than a resort to
the ordinary tribunals of the country will allow.
8. With these protections from the Legislature—and I confess I think them very
necessary ones—l apprehend there would be little difficulty in organizing an efficient force
for the purposes contemplated by the Committee —the said force to consist of an admixture
of Europeans and Aboriginals, in such proportions as may be determined on.
9-. In accordance with this view of the nature of the Force to be instituted, I have
drawn out and append a detailed and numerical return of its strength and organization, and
Ladd estimates-of the probable amount of expenditure.
I, I have already stated that I believe the great cause of the inefficiency of the
Native Police as now constituted, to be its want of organization and training; and I would
here impress upon the consideration of the Committee the absolute necessity of giving to
any body of men raised either to supplement or supersede that Force, time and opportunity
to be brought together, trained, and organized, before being called on to enter on their
duties; and I should say, considering the small numbers to be drilled and disciplined, six
months from the time the recruits are brought together might be the period allowed for this
purpose.
11. A primary consideration, also, with reference to the future efficiency of this
Force, will be the choice of the localities in which recruiting for aboriginal troopers is to
take place; and I would recommend recourse should be had to districts as far removed as
possible from those in which the men are to be called upon to serve. I believe the Namoi,
Gwydir, and older settled western country generally, would afford the best description of
recruits.
12. With regard to the European troopers, they must of course be, in the first
instance, obtained in Sydney; and so soon as a sufficient number are engaged, I would
recommend their being despatched by sea to the spot which may be determined on as the
central depot for the corps; and I would suggest for this purpose the neighbourhood of Port
Curtis, on the banks of the Calliope River, as strategically the best point to select, and as
affording many facilities for the transport of supplies; it being quite possible to chose a spot
having, with every other advantage of soil and situation, water carriage to thevery depot itself.
13. The place havinge been decided on, no time ought to be lost in commencing the
erection of the neccessary buildings, and fencing in about 2,000 acres of land.
14. This being the central depot of the corps, all horses purchased will have to be
brought there in the first instance, to be broken in and trained; all horses sick or disabled
will bo left there for treatment or recovery ; and detached sections will occasionally be
brought in to recruit the condition of horses overworked and requiring rest. For these
purposes, and to prevent the straying of horses to be an impediment to operations when a
party happens to be suddenly called on for duty, I think the provision of a few good pad-
docks absolutely essential, and I propose 2&00 acres as affording pasturage for about 200
horses.
The buildings which would be required, would, I presume, be nearly as under :
One Commandant’s quarters.
.Six Officers’ quarters, with mess-room and kitchen.
Barrack accommodation for about 60 men, with hospital.
Stabling for, say 30 horses ; and
A guard-house and cells.
But as these needs only to be constructed of cheap materials (slabs and shingles) I have no
doubt the entire expense of building and fencing would not exceed ,£SOOO.
15. Whilst these buildings are in course of construction, the organization and
training of such men as had been engaged could be going on—they being under temporary
huts in the meanwhile; and as successive drafts of aboriginal recruits could be obtained, 1
would propose they likewise should be forwarded via Sydney to their destination by sea.
16. The Committee will perceive I have included in my estimate an expenditure on
account of a band for this Force ; and I will explain why I consider this necessary.
17. B


Proposed Strength and Establishment of a Corps of Mounted
Police for
service on the
Frontier Districts of New South Wales
Regimental Staff: —
£
s.
d.
1 Commandant...
1 Adjutant and Riding Master, per annum ...
.. 365
0
0
1 Paymaster „
... 365
0
0
1 Surgeon „
... 365
0
0
1 Sergeant-Major ,,
... 150
0
0
1 Saddle Sergeant „
... 120
0
0
2 Farriers, at 3s. 6d. per diem, each
... 127
15
0
4 Rough-riders, do. do....
... 255
10
0
Establishment of 2 Troops or Divisions of 60 Effectives each, irrespective
of Non-commissioned Officers and Supernumeraries :—
2 Officers commanding divisions, ,£450 each ...
... 900
0
0
4 Subalterns, at £300 each ...
... 1,200
0
0
2 Troop Sergeant-Majors, at £120 each
... 240
0
0
2 Pay Sergeants, „ „
... 240
0
0
40 European Troopers, at 3s. 6d. per diem each
... 2,555
... 1,058
0
0
15 European Supernumeraries, do. do.
2
6
80 Aboriginal Troopers, at Is 6d. do. do.
... 2,190
0
0
Extra pay of Is. per diem to 20 Sergeants...
... 365
0
0
Total of Pay
£10,496
7
6
Band :—
17. It must be recollected that the duty on which these men are to be engaged is of
the most monotonous description, entailing much fatigue, discomfort, and privation ; that a
' great deal of that duty, and a very important portion of it, viz., the patrols, has to be pcr-
' formed by small sections of the corps, released from all observation of their superiors; and
that it is of the highest importance to ensure the diligent performance of its duties, to
create in this body of men an esprit de corps. In fact to lead each individual member of it
to feel and act as belonging to a body whose general character he knows to be effected by
his conduct.
18. Now, to create this feeling, and to train it to its best uses in incitement to a zealous
discharge of duty in support of the character of the corps with which the individual is
connected, it is necessary to give him some pride in the connection itself—some idea he
belongs to a body whose services are important to the public; and with a corps such as that
I am now contemplating the formation of, I know of no measure I could suggest as more
calculated to produce the desired effect than that of attaching a band to its head-quarters.
19. The depressing influence of a monotonous routine of duties carried on from
year’s end to year’s end, in the most desolate and thinly peopled portions of the country,
ought likewise to be taken into consideration, as the most energetic individual organization
is liable to become broken down and stale under such a pressure. I believe the stimulus
given to the spirits of the men by marching out a section to its bush duties, or marching
one in for occasional rest or relaxation, with a band of music at its head, would do more
good in the maintenance of discipline and zeal than would a whole volume of written com-
mendation, or an hour’s verbal praise.
20. I think also a band would have a great attraction for the blacks, and render
recruiting much more successful. But although 1 look upon the expense as not to be weighed
in the balance with the good which may be anticipated from this measure as a means to an
end, this ite can be struck out of the estimate, without directly affecting the other portions
of it, if the Committee see fit so to do.
21. I must remark, likewise, that I have provided, on “ the establishment of the
corps,” for fifteen supernumararies (dismounted) —whom I mean as “ men in training to
supply vacancies,” “ Officers’ servants,” and generally to perform any services which might
otherwise withdraw effectives from field duties.
22. The total annual expense, therefore, of this Force, according to my estimate,
would be about £16,446 7s. 6d., irrespective of the pay of the Commandant, which I have
not included, as its amount would, have to be decided on by Government, under many con-
siderations lam unable to take into account; but whatever this item may be fixed at, it is
evident that even with an improved constitution of the Force, by the reversal of the pro-
portion I have taken of Aboriginals to Europeans, and employing eighty of the latter to
forty of the former, the annual expenditure may yet be kept a good deal within £20,000,
and the Colony be provided with a body of men in every way adequate to the performance
of their duties, and who would form a nucleus for extension in the event of any sudden
emergency requiring us to arm hastily for defence against hostile attack from without.
23. I have added, also, an estimate of the preliminary expenses which will
unavoidably have to be incurred ere the Force can be brought into working order; and it
only remains for me to point out that, in the event of any such plan as that I have suggested
being adopted, it would be necessary to make provision for the gradual absorption of the
officers and men of the present Native Police into the new corps.
M. C. O’CONNELL.
June 24 th, 1858.
APPENDIX B.


Bpnd ; —• Brought forward...
£10,496
7
6
1 Bandmaster, and 12 Bandsmen
... 1,090
10
0
Contingent Expenses :—
80 Jlations—allowance in lieu of, at Is. each, per diem..
... 1,460
0
0
Annual Clothing, say
... 1,400
0
0
Remounts and Contingencies
... 1,000
0
0
Forage
1,000
0
0
16,446
7
6
Extra expense of 40 Europeans in lien of 40 black troopers 1,490
0
0
£17,936
7
6
Estimated Amount of Preliminary Expenses in
raising Frontier
Mounted Police.
Purchase of Horses ...
5,000
0
0
Recruiting Expenses ...
... 2,000
0
0
Buildings and Pences...
5,000
0
0
Arms and Accoutrements
... 2,000
0
0
Forage, first year, extra
... 2,000
0
0
Six months’ Pay, and Allowances, say
,_... 8,000
0
0
£24,000
0
0
STATIONS.
Commandant.
Staff Officers.
Officers.
StaffSergeants.
Troop Sergeant
Majors.
Troopers.
Super-
numeraries.
Band.
Farriers.
Rough Riders.
Total.
1.
Head Quarters
1
3
1
4
30
10
13
2
4
68
2.
Taroom
2
i
20
2
25
8.
Condamine
»..
10
10
4.
Ramies
10
10
5.
Nanango
i
i
10
i
13
6.
Maryborough
i
10
i
12
7.
Brisbane
i
20
i
22
8.
Pitz Roy
10
...
10
Total
1
3
6
4
2
120
15
13
2
4
17
APPENDIX C.
Memo — Say this expenditure amounts to £30,000, I think it might be very properly
covered by a loan, to be raised for this purpose; and which loan might be gradually
paid off by a light assessment on the property to be protected.
Probable Distribution of Frontier Mounted Police, for 1858.
Under ordinary circumstances, each detachment would be four months at Head Quarters,
and eight months at out-stations, during the year.
THURSDAY, 20//t JUNE; 1861.
present:
Mr. WATTS, Mb. FERRETT,
Mr. BLAKENEY, Me. lIOYDS,
Mr, MOFFATT, Mr. GORE.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
JOHN HARDIE, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman ; I believe you are a squatter, living at Fassifern ? Yes.
2. About the end of last year, or the beginning of the present year, were not the blacks very
troublesome in your neighbourhood? Yes, very.
3. Spearing the cattle and robbing huts ? Yes.
4. Did you communicate with Lieutenant Wheeler on the subject by sending him a letter ?
Yes. °
5. And you requested him to come to your station and disperse the blacks ? Yes.
6. When did he make his appearance at your station? About a week or ten days
afterwards.
7. Was that the end of last year or the beginning of this? It was last year; the blacks
came oyer from the Telemon side and from Compigne’s. Lieutenant Wheeler did not receive


my letter, but he heard that the blacks about my place had been very troublesome, and that 1
had written to him.
8. Will you state to the Committee what was the nature of the depredations which were the
cause of your writing that letter ? The blacks had been spearing our cattle.
9. To what extent? I saw several cattle that had been speared come into the yards when we
were mustering them, and I saw a beast speared close to their camp. They camped near to a
large mob of cattle and frightened them off; they camped there for a month or two. Cattle
have always a great terror of the blacks,
10. Did Mr. Wheeler when he came to your station communicate with you at once ? Yes,
he came up and stopped with me that night.
11. And what did he do the next day ? The next day he went to Coochin.
12. Did he disperse any of the blacks on your station ? No, I don’t think he did.
13. I suppose you are aware that one or two of thorn were killed there? I heard that one or
two of them were dead, but I don’t know how they were killed.
14. They were found dead—who found them ? Some of the men on the station.
15. I suppose you heard it reported that some blacks had been shot? Yes.
16. But you are not aware, from your own knowledge, that Lieutenant Wheeler went out
and killed any blacks on your run ? No, I merely heard people say so.
17. Where were the bodies found ? Within a paddock about a quarter of a mile, or perhaps
a little more, from the station.
18. I presume you are aware that information was sent to the Coroner of the district. Dr.
Challinor, to the effect that some blacks had been found dead ? Who sent the information ?
I am not aware that it was sent.
19. Do you not know that Dr. Challinor came up and held an inquest on the bodies ? I
believe he did, hut I was not at home at the time.
20. Did not you give evidence before him ? Yes, at Ipswich.
21. Oh yes, it was at Ipswich—you gave evidence on oath? Yes, on oath.
22. Arc you aware that Dr. Challinor wrote to the Attorney-General impugning your
evidence, and charging you with falsehood ? Did you take any notice of that ? I did not.
23. Do you not think that was a very grave charge to prefer? Yes, I came down to consult
the Attorney-General on the subject.
24. What grounds do you think Dr. Challinor had for accusing you of falsehood, and Mrs.
Hardie of perjury ? I know of none. I look upon the whole thing as a downright
malicious lie.
25. Dr. Challinor says, “ The story about a rape committed by two blackfellows on the
daughter of one of the shepherds, eight months ago, may or may not be true, but after the
false statements he made respecting the shooting of the aboriginals on the 24th December last,
I should hesitate to believe it on his testimony alone,” Was that evidence given on oath,? I
am sure I cannot say where he got it from.
26. You have stated to the Committee that you were not cognizant of anything further than
the fact that there were some dead blacks found on your run, and that you wrote to Lieutenant
Wheeler, requesting him to come to your station. Do you know anything more about it ?
No, I merely know that the blacks were dead, and it was said by some persons that they had
been shot. Ido not know that they were.
27. Did you hear any shooting near your station or on your run ? I heard some shooting,
but we had a man out shooting game. I cannot say that any blacks were shot.
28. Did not Lieutenant Wheeler leave your station with the intention of dispersing the blacks?
I did not see him that day ; I saw him the evening before.
29. Did not he tell you he would shoot them % No, he said he would disperse them.
30. Did you see any of the bodies ? I saw one body.
31. Was death in that case caused by a gunshot wound? It looked more like a wound from
a waddy. There had been several tribes of blacks about there lately, and several fights had
taken place, and a blackfellow might have been killed in one of them by a blow from a
waddy.
32. Did you recognise that hlackfellew ? No, 1 didn't know him by name.
33. Was ho a young or an old man? .An oldish man.
34. Had he white hair ? His hair was a little grey.
35. Have the blacks been troublesome-since, in your neighbourhood? No.
36. By Mr. Watts; Were you at home when the Native Police came to your house?
Yes.
37. Did the Native Police officer say anything about having come into collision with the
blacks before he came to your house ? No, I don’t think he did ; I don’t recollect it. I told
him I had been wanting to see him, as the blacks had given us a great deal of trouble about
Moograh.
38. Did he say when he left your quarters that it was with the intention of following the,
blacks and tracking them ? That was when he came to my station.
39. Did he say anything about having shot any blacks on the road? No.
40. Now do you think any provocation had been given to the natives to cause them to kill
cattle in that neighbourhood ? None whatever.
41. Is there plenty of game for their support ? As much as they can eat.
42. From your knowledge of the settlers, do they not give the blacks food, clothing, and in
fact money sometimes for labour performed by them ? I always do, and lam quite certain
my neighbours do the same thing.
43. Can you inform the Committee whether any of your neighbours have been cruel to the
blacks, or have shot any of them ? I have never heard of anything of the sort I know that
at


at Rosevale the blacks about the station always get a few shillings a week, and I always pay
my blacks when they do anything for me.
44. We have evidence here that a rape was committed by a blackfellow on a white girl at
your establishment—was that the case ? Yes.
45. Was that case ever brought before the public ? No.
46. Why was that ? Because the girl asked as a favour that it should not be published.
47. What was the.reason for withholding it? Because the girl is a very respectable girl, and
she was anxious that it should not be made known.
48. By Mr. Blakeney : Was it not upon. Christmas Eve that Lieutenant Wheeler came to
your station ? It was about mid-day, just before luncheon time.
49. What time did you say you saw him on that day? I saw him shortly after he arrived.
50. Was it before he arrived at your station that he dispersed the blacks ? I believe so,
51. Then whatever was done was done before you saw him ? I believe so.
52. Now recollect Mr. Hardie: Did Lieutenant Wheeler tell you that he had dispersed the
blacks?—because there has been evidence to show that he had some conversation with you.
Well, I think he told me that he had dispersed some blacks.
53. Is not the common acceptation of the terra “dispersing” in reference to the blacks,
“ tiring at them 1 ” Well, you may disperse them without firing at them.
54. Yes, but is not that the general acceptation of the word ? I believe it is.
55. Was it about a year and a-half before Christmas that this girl was violated ? I think
it was about that time.
56. But complaints had been made about it soon after the occurrence of the outrage ? Yes;
none of us were at the station at the time, but it was reported to us,
57. From whom did you first learn of the perpetration of the outrage ? From the hutkeeper
at Moograh.
58. Did you make any enquiries of the girl, or any inmate of the house, in order to ascertain
the truth of the allegation ? Yes, she was questioned.
59. Did you question her ? No, but Mr. Wienholt did, and told me about it.
60. Your partner examined the girl ? Yes.
61. And from what transpired had you any doubt as to the truth of the girl’s story? None
whatever.
62. What were the circumstances that came to your knowledge ? I believe the blackfellow
went to the sheep station where the girl was living, and told her she was wanted at the head
station, and then, having enticed her out, knocked her down on the road.
63. Was he a blackfellow belonging to the neighbourhood ? Yes, he is there now, going about
Dugandan: I know him well enough.
64. By Mr. Moffatx : Are the blacks in the habit of camping constantly at your station ?
Yes.
65. Are those blacks well conducted ? They have been so until the last season.
66. Do you know what tribe of blacks those are who committed the outrages you have
spoken of? Well, I think one of them belongs to Dugandan, I can give you his name if you
wish it.
67. Do you know what blacks they wore with whom Mr. Wheeler and the Native Police came
into collision ? Ido not.
68. Was it upon your application that Mr. Wheeler came over ? I have already told you
that I wrote to him and requested him to come. He did not get my letter, but he heard that
I wanted him.
69. What was the name of the blackfellow who committed the rape upon this girl ? His name
is Charley. I can give you the names of several who have robbed our huts, dozens
of times.
70. Do you think it right and proper that an aboriginal who has committed such an outrage
upon a defenceless girl at a sheep-station should be permitted to go at large ? Certainly not.
71. Do you not think it is a false spirit of sentimentalism which prevents the man from being-
apprehended on this charge ? Certainly.
72. Do you recommend that any steps be taken about it ? Yes ; I should recommend that the
Native Police should keep a look out,, and, the first time they see him, shoot him.
73. Yes, but he must be punished upon some evidence ? The Police know him very well.
74. Could you undertake to make this girl swear to the fact, so that a warrant might be taken
out against him ? I don’t think she would like to appear at all. the circumstances of the case
being of a very delicate nature.
75. Are the blacks in the habit of committing outrages at your station ? Before 1 wrote to
Lieutenant Wheeler they were in the habit of robbing the lints and taking away tea, flour, and
sugar : they have done so on several occasions.
76. Is that a common occurrence? When they congregate in large numbers, and there is only
one hutkeeper on a station.
77. Do you think these outrages are planned at the large meetings of the blacks ? I do.
78. And you think some steps ought to he taken to disperse such meetings? Yes, I think
when they congregate near a station in such large numbers they ought to be dispersed. I have
uo objection to the blacks about the station remaining there always.
79. Have the blacks on your station ever been interfered with in their hunting? Never.
80. Do your neighbours ever interfere with them ? I have never heard of their
doing so.
81. I believe there is abundance of food for the natives in the neighbourhood of your station.
—large scrubs full of game ? Yes, there is plenty of game,
82. And the waters are full of fish ? Yes. any quantity of them.
33. So


83. So that it cannot he from any lack of food that they commit these outrages ? No ; in fact
they prefer hunting to doing a little work and getting their rations.
' 84. Do you employ any of them now ? lam employing strange blacks now.
85. As shepherds ? No ; I have one as as a stock-keeper, ami another as a bullock-driver.
86. Do you find them trustworthy V Not the tribes that live on the station —only the blacks
who come from a distant part, of the country, ajid who are unacquainted with the station
blacks : the latter will not associate with them.
87. Can you assign any reason for their not associating with the strange blacks ? No ; the
blacks about the station would kill them, if they had a chance ; —in fact, they have given them
notice that they would do so.
88. Have you ascertained, during the length of time you have been at Fassifem, whether the
blacks have decreased in number, —whether there has been any increased mortality among
them ? No, the number seems to he much the same.
89. Have you ever heard that the blacks on your station have threatened the lives of any of
your men V No, I don't think I have.
90. Do you consider the Police Force necessary on the Logan, and in that neighbourhood ?
I do.
91. What would he the consequence to the blacks if the Force were withdrawn ? Of course
they would commit misdemeanors, and everyone would have to protect himself.
92. If the settlers had to protect themselves, what would he the consequence to the blacks ?
A great many more of them would he shot.
93. Would white troopers he of any use in preventing depredations? Not the slightest.
94. What is the nature of the country about Fassifem ? Very broken country.
95. Such a country as white men would ho unable to follow the blacks through ? They never
could attempt it ; the blacks would get away into the scrub, and laugh at them : they would
poke fun at them.
96. Have you ever lust any sheep through the blacks ? Yes, I have had some killed once or
twice : I saw three fellows eating a sheep, one day, in one of the paddocks.
97. Have you ever lost any considerable number? No; the great complaint against the blacks
is. that they annoy the cattle by hunting them about; and that they rob the huts, and commit
misdemeanors on the station. I have no objection to the station blacks remaining on the
station ; hut what I complained of to the Government was, that they congregated in numbers
of from two to three hundred, and remained in the place for five or six weeks at a time.
98. Do they usually hatch mischief at those meetings ? Yes, the mischief is generally done
after those meetings.
99. Do you think these large assemblages should, if possible, he prevented ? Certainly.
100. Do you think it could be done ? lam sure of it.
101. By Mr. Feerett ; Have you had much experience among the blacks? No, I have not.
102. Do you know anything at all about their habits and customs ? Oh, yes.
103. Are you aware that, previous to the commission of depredations, they enact a great many
ceremonies in reference to the performance of those depredations, in their corrohorees ? No, I
am not so intimately acquainted with their customs and habits as you are.
104. Are you aware that they never commit a depredation without first having a consultation
at their camps? I never heard of that, custom.
105. You have stated your opinion that when the blacks congregate together in large
numbers, they should he dispersed ? Yes.
106. Do you think a large assemblage of blacks could he dispersed by any small force of
Native Police—or by any other small force—if the blacks knew that the Force had not the
power to fire upon them if they did not disperse ? Ido not know ; of course, if the Police
had no power to make them, the blacks would say they would not go.
107. Do you think a small force, such as the Native Police Force, could disperse a large
body of blacks without firing upon them, especially in the scrub? No, not a large meeting of
blacks.
108. Do you think any force composed of white men could follow and apprehend hluckfellows
in the scrub. No, I don’t think so.
109. From what you know of their habits in spearing cattle and robbing huts, do you think
the whole tribe of blacks should he punished, or do you consider it necessary to trace the
depredation to any one hlackfellow who may tomahawk or spear a beast, as they are all
implicated—with the view of prosecuting the black who may have struck the first blow ?
I would do all in my power to find out the men who actually did the mischief.
110. But would you punish the tribe, as they would he all interested in the depredation, or do
you think punishment should he delayed until the actual perpetrator could he found out ? I
think they should all he dispersed, as aiding and abetting. By all means try and find out the
men who did the deed; hut if you allow two or three hundred blacks to remain in a camp
until you found out who perpetrated some particular piece of mischief, you might wait for a
very long time.
111. Are you aware, from your own knowledge, that it is the old men and the old gins who
concoct most of tbs mischief, and that they then hold a meeting among themselves to arrange
certain depredations, which they send one or two young men to commit V I believe they do.
112. Then would you not consider, in such a case, that the whole tribe should he made
answerable ? I believe the young men are incited to commit depredations by the old men and
women.
113. I wish to know whether in such a case you would not consider it advisable to follow up
the whole tribe and punish them? No, I don’t think so. What do you mean by lunishing
them---do you mean pinching their oars ?
' " 110. It


114. It has been suggested that horsewhipping is punishment for a hlackfellow, but I can
hardly call it so. Do 1 understand you to say that such a conspiracy would not warrant you
in punishing the whole tribe ? If you will put a direct question, I will answer you.
115. When a conspiracy has been entered into for the purpose of committing a depredation,
by a tribe of blacks, and they send one or two of their number to commit the depredation,
I ask you whether the tribe should not be made answerable for the offence, and whether you
consider it desirable that they should he punished ? Certainly, if the tribe send half a dozen
strong fellows to tight for them.
11G. In such a ease, supposing murder to have been committed, would you consider it justifiable
to fire upon the blacks? Yes.
117. lint not for robbing a hut? No ; but I would when murder had been committed, and I
believe that by this means the ringleaders would be secured: they would he given up by the
mob.
118. By the present law, before the Police are authorized to fire at a hlackfellow, they must
get out a warrant for him. Under that law, don’t you think there is great difficulty in punish-
ing them when they do wrong. The great difficulty is in knowing the names of the black-
fellows who commit the depredations ? Yes, that is a very different matter.
119. Then don't you consider the law should be amended to meet these cases? Certainly, it
wants amending.
JOHN MORTIMER, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You reside in the Burnett District ? Yes.
2. At a station called ? Manumhar.
3. Is that near Toomcul? Yes : lam proprietor of Toomcul also, hut I reside at Manumhar.
4. I believe you have a brother residing with you ? Yes.
5. If I mistake not you were the author of a letter or communication to the Courier about
three months ago, relative to the death of some blacks? Yes.
G. And that letter contained charges against the Native Police Force ? I put in an advertise-
ment some time ago on the subject you refer to.
7. If you had any complaints to make, how was it that you did not make them direct to the
Government, instead of adopting the unusual course of publishing them in an advertisement ?
I had several reasons.
8. Will you explain your reasons? One reason was that I thought my object would be
accomplished without writing direct to the Government, and I thought 1 should prevent similar
outrages being committed in future without any further trouble to myself, and without taking
up the time of the Government. I did not think it necessary to write to the Government
about it.
9. You received a communication from the Government shortly afterwards ? Yes, I have it
with me. [See Appendix A.]
10. Did you answer it ? I have a duplicate of my reply, which I can produce [see Appendix B] ;
it is a rough sketch, and perhaps there may he a few words altered, hut the meaning is the
same [handing in both letters ].
11. Will you state some more of your reasons? I have stated my principal reason—that I
did not wish to have any trouble about it myself, and I did not wish to put the Government to
any trouble about it. I had seen Commissions appointed by the Government, the issue of
which had been contrary to what I expected* and I thought it might he the same thing in this
case. I did not therefore think it necessary to notify the facts to the Government.
12. If I recollect right, the substance of your advertisement was an address to the Native
Police Officers to the effect, that if they chose to come and kill blacks upon your run, they
should not leave them unburied? Yes, that was the substance of it.
13. Were you cognizant of outrages having been committed further than seeing the dead
bodies of the blacks ? Well, you will see if you read my correspondence. [The Chairman
here read the letters handed in by witness, referred to above.']
14. I believe you have resided for some years in that part of the country'? Yes.
15. Were the blacks very troublesome when you first went there ? They had been trouble-
some a little before we went there, hut they were not so troublesome when we first went up.
16. Did you ever apply for a detachment of Police to he stationed in your neighbourhood?
Not to the best of my recollection, but after we had removed from Toomcul to our present
station, and had been up there some years, we applied to the Police for assistance.
17. Did you not after that express to other persons besides the officer of the Police that you
had been benefited by their protection ? Not that I am aware of, either to the officer or to
any one else.
18. Did your brother ? My brother has only lately come to the Colony, and knows nothing
about it.
19. You have stated in this letter that a large gathering of the different tribes had taken
place ? Y r es.
20. I suppose you have been long enough in the country to have seen the large assemblages
of blacks in the Bunya season. Yes.
21. At that period they collect in large numbers, ami are usually very troublesome ? My own
opinion is that they are not more troublesome at those times; I was at first under the
impression


impression that they would be, but I have never found them so. It is perhaps necessary for
the settlers to he a little more vigilant than at other times—that is all; the cattle will,
perhaps, get frightened, and run away from them.
22. That is your own experience, but do you know that they do not commit depredations
at those times? I have enquired of some of my neighbours who live in Bunya districts, and
of those who are most favourable to the Native Police, and they have attempted to evade the
question ; hut, when I have put the question in this way, “If you were put upon your oath
could you say you have had more trouble during the Bunya season than at other times ? ”
they have been obliged to answer that they had not.
23. Had the blacks been committing depredations in your neighbourhood previous to this
affair ? I did not hear of any.
24. Hid you hear that they had been giving trouble at Mr. Mackenzie’s station, Collandale,
and that they had threatened his wife and family ? I never heard of that.
25. You are not aware then that any outrage had been committed by the blacks at that
particular time ? I did not hear of any, and I was not aware that any depredations had been
committed.
26. Ho you know a station called Imhil ? Yes; I have never been to it, but it is near our
station.
27. Have you heard of any depredations committed there lately? I have heard reports.
28. What were the reports ? I heard from a young man residing at Yahber, who is down
here now, that some blacks were shot at Imhil ?
29. It has been broadly stated that upon this occasion some 30 or 40 natives were killed by
the Police ? I never stated that.
30. How many dead bodies did you see ? I saw parts of four.
31. What was in your opinion the cause of death ? Ido not know.
32. You have stated in your letter that bullet wounds were the cause of death ? Oh! I
understood you to moan the cause of the outrage. There is no doubt about the cause of death
in my opinion.
33. What reason have you for thinking so? Well, I judged from hearing the report of fire-
arms, and from the appearance of the wounds. The rest of the people on the station heard
the firing, and when I walked towards the place I met Lieutenant Morisset, about 300 yards
from the camp.
34. Are you satisfied that they were gunshot wounds ? lam satisfied in my own mind.
35. You have stated to the Committee that for anything you knew to the contrary, the blacks
had committed no outrages,- —do you think it right that the Native Police should go and
murder them in cold blood ? Certainly not.
36. Have you heard any reports of such doings ? I have read them in the papers.
37. Do you know where they came from —how they got into the Press ? No.
38. You can speak from your own knowledge of the death of four blacks ? Yes, hut I am
convinced there were many more.
39. What grounds have you for that belief? The blacks invited me to go and see the bodies,
and although they frequently tell lies, they do sometimes tell the truth.
40. Why did you not go to see the bodies ? Because I was satisfied with what I had already
seen —or rather dissatisfied with it.
41. The Committee are extremely anxious to know the exact particulars in relation to this
alfair ? Well, I will tell you what I saw, and the grounds upon which I believed that there
were many more killed. The blacks, as I have stated, wished me to go and see the other
bodies, but I would not go. They then told me that the Police, in riding along a bridle
track from our station to Yahber, had met a blackfellow, and that they u had left him in
the scrub;” that they met another black about five miles further, and ‘deft him in the scrub.”
And further,-Mr. Swanson informed mo that, when they went to Yahber, on the way they
apprehended two deserters from the Police, and that they camped there that night, the
blacks being camped near the head station. When they saw the Police coming, some of
Mr Swanson’s blacks came to the head station, and one of them left his blanket there;
one of the Police took it, and the black came back and demanded it of him ; the trooper
would not give it up, and threatened to shoot the blackfellow, who then went to Mr.
Swanson ; Mr. Swanson went to Mr. Morisset, and identified the blanket, and the man
had to give it up. Well, the next day they went out on the run, Mr. Morisset and his
troopers, and Mr. Swanson wanted to go with them, in order to stop them from shooting
any of his blacks. He started with them, and took one of his own blacks with him, and
after going over part of the run Mr. Swanson went home, and left the black to point out
to the Police any of the quiet and peaceable blacks. Afterwards they came upon a camp
ot natives, and the Police fired upon the camp; some of the blacks ran away, and some
stopped, and one fellow, who had been shepherding for Mr. Swanson, and for me also, was
so confident of his safety that he would not run, and he stopped about the horses with Mr.
Swanson’s black. This man was singing out to the Police, “ This fellow Mr. Swanson’s
blackfellow, baal shoot him,” and he was shot at the tail of one of the horses. I have no
doubt at all about that. Another blackfellow, I believe, was killed, and put into a hollow
log. I believe those blacks were all shot, two between the stations, and four at cur station
which I saw myself.
42. As I understood you, Mr. Swanson was not present when the shooting took place ?
No.
43. Then this is merely evidence from the blacks themselves? From Mr. Swanson.
44. But you say he was not present ? He was present when the Police had to give up
the blanket.
15 You


45. You are aware that this is a very serious charge, and that it ought to rest upon sub-
stantial evidence. You have stated that the blaekfellows tell the truth at times, and at
other times they do not. Here is a statement that three or four blaekfellows were murdered
by the Police : now, do you think it right that any officer should bo tried and convicted
upon the evidence of those blaekfellows ? I think their evidence should not be admissible,
but we believe them just the same.
46. I)o you believe that these reckless statements, based upon such hearsay evidence, should
go forth to the world through the public press—l think the number of blacks stated in the
newspapers to have been killed was thirty or forty, while you say there were four ? I think
that statement had reference to another case about which reports were circulated.
47. Was that lately ? I believe so; I heard of it before this took place at our station.
48. What detachment of Police was concerned on the occasion that the four blacks were
shot—where did they belong to ? They were upon our run ; I had never seen - the officer
before; I did not know him,
49. Or the troopers ? No; I believe they came from Widgee Widgee.
50. Were they from the Maryborough District ? I believe so.
51. Where was the occurrence you refer to as having been reported to have taken place
when thirty or forty blacks wore killed ? The reports were so very vague that I do not
pretend to know anything about it.
52. Are you aware that a change has taken place lately in the Police Force at Wide Bay ?
I am aware that Mr. Bligh has been removed lately.
58. I think you have stated in your communication to the Courier that you entertained a
favorable opinion of the Native Police Force ? I did not condemn the Force, but I found
fault with the way the natives are treated at the present time. I am rather favorable to the
Force as a Force.
54. Do you consider the country to be quieter now than it was before the formation of the
Force ? The Police were on the Burnett before I went there; I cannot give an opinion
about it.
65. Have you known of many instances of cruelty committed by the Police towards the
blacks ? I have not.
56. Do you know of any instances where they have killed thirty or forty of them ?
No.
67. Have you heard of any worse case than this upon your own run ? I have not; I have
heard vague reports of similar outrages.
58. But they have not come under your own knowledge ? No.
69. What improvements Would you suggest in the Force ? I am hardly competent to
suggest any improvements, hut I may state my opinion on the subject: I think one thing
would be advisable, which is, that the Police should visit the stations more frequently; it
would be a great means of preventing the necessity for so much severity. The Police have
not been at our station, previous to this occasion, for eighteen months, and when they are
absent for a long time, the blacks almost forget that they come there at all. I also think
some moans should be adoped of getting at the Commandant or party in charge with less
trouble. At one time, for six months, during which time the blacks had been stealing
sheep, we had been writing all the time to the Commandant, without being able to get any
answer to our letters. My partner went to head quarters once, and saw the officers and
troopers there, but they said they could not come to us, and we did not know what to do.
We did everything in our power, but could obtain no assistance.
60. Might not that be an exceptional case, for one of the complaints against the Police is,
that they are hanging about the stations too much ? There are none of the squatters that
I know but like to see the Police passing by occasionally. The passing by a station by the
troopers is a very wholesome sight.
61. Do you think the Force would be improved if it were composed of white troopers with
two or three black trackers attached to it P Well, I can hardly give an opinion about it
myself, but I have had the opinion of most of my neighbours about it, and they think it
would not be an improvement. The general opinion among my neighbours—and I don’t
pretend to be any wiser than they are—is that the white troopers and the blacks would not
agree and the Force would not be improved.
62. Would the white troopers be of any use in following the blacks into the scrubs ? Well,
I don’t know; I have had to do it myself.
63. Were you successful in capturing any of the natives in that way P It was not exactly
to capture them that I went, but to frighten them away.
64. How did you manage it? By following them to their haunts.
65. Were you armed or unarmed 1 Armed.
66. Did you fire upon them ? Not in the scrubs, I did not got a chance.
67. Would you if you had got a chance ? Well, I went between them and my property—
to watch it; they came to take it away, and I would not let them.
68. Are you of opinion that, as a general rule, white troopers are unable to capture blacks
in the scrubs ? I don’t think they can.
69. You have seen a good deal of the natives ? I have.
70. Do you think it would be possible to improve their condition in any way —to civilize
horn or make them useful? Ido not think it impossible, but it would be very difficult.
71. Have you ever made any attempts to improve the condition of the blacks about your
station, or to make them useful ? 1 have some very useful blacks about the station, some
of them drive bullocks very well, wash sheep, and attend to the lambing.
72. Can yon depmd upon them for any length of time? No; with the exception of one
or


or two whom I have had almost from their infancy; one of them is a bullock-driver, he
breaks in horses, and makes himself useful in that way.
73. He has been with you for some years? Yes, from boyhood.
74. And what success have your neighbours had in the same way ? Much the same.
75. Then you think it is not a hopeless case to make the blacks useful ? I think not.
70. You think their condition might be improved by educating and civilizing them ? They
are very apt at learning their letters —some of them learn them in a very short time.
77. Ho you think it possible to wean them from their savage habits? Well, not the old
ones, perhaps some of the younger ones.
78. I mean the younger ones—supposing them to be brought up from an early age ? I
think their condition might be much ameliorated at all events.
79. Who is this person you stated had come down from Imbil ? From Mr. Swanson’s
place, not from Imbil; he is a young person who has been storekeeper there for some
mouths.
80. What is his name? Albert Tyror.
81. Do you think he could give any evidence that would be useful to the Committee? I am
not aware of any particular evidence he could give, except that he could tell you the'same
story I have told you about the Police. He is stopping at M f Adam’s. He might know a
little more about Imbil.
82. You have seen your neighbours I suppose since this occurrence—since you inserted that
advertisement in the paper ? I have.
83. Is it the general opinion among them that this outrage by the Police was very un-
warrantable —-that the Police were not warranted in killing those blacks ? Not from any
circumstance that occurred in that neighborhood.
84. By Mr. Watts : You were giving an opinion just now about the Commandant of the
Native Police. Would you recommend that he should migrate from place to place, or
remain in one place, leaving the duty to be performed by the lieutenants—that he should
have stated head quarters ? I think he should remain at head quarters principally, but that
the officers should patrol the districts.
85. Do you think if the Commandant is four or five months in the year absent from bis
duties, that the Native Police Force can be properly carried on during that time ? Ido not.
86. Do you know whether the Commandant has been actively engaged in his duties during
the last 12 months ? I know nothing about him.
87. Do you not think it necessary that the lieutenants should keep record of all their acts ?
I do.
88 And that I hose records should he sent to the Commandant immediately after there has
been any collision with the blacks ? Yes.
89. And also that it is necessary the lieutenants should inform the Commandant ef any
outrages that may have been committed by the blacks against the whites? Yes, certainly.
90. Now with reference to this case about which you have been examined, do you think
that the injury done by the blacks justified the lieutenant, or whoever it was, in shooting
those blacks? Ido not.
91. Do you think any evidence can be obtained to show that he did shoot them ? Mr.
Giles, junior, from Widgee Widgee, was present, and his evidence is of course admissible.
92. Did you ever say anything to that lieutenant about shooting the blacks? I merely asked
him if he had been after the blacks, and he said “ Yes, the wretches have been spearing
cattle.”
93. Do you think that, for merely spearing cattle, the lieutenant would he justified in shooting
them in that way ? Ido not, unless it might be some notorious ringleader who was known all
through the district; he might then be justified in shooting one of them, hut not for an indis-
criminate slaughter.
94. By the Chairman : Do you think it is the duty of this Committee —supposing he has
committed the outrage —to recommend his dismissal ? Yes.
93. Do you know of any other case of the same sort? No.
96. By Mr. Watts; Do you know how they recruit the Native Police Force—from the
blacks in the, neighbourhood or not ? No; I believe not. At one time Mr. Bligh went to the
Clarence to recruit his force.
97. Do you think any compulsion ought to he used ? No ; I think it would he an improve-
ment not to remove the officers from the district. My reason for that is, that they become
acquainted with the blacks, and they know the had ones among them. It is my firm belief
that if Mr. Bligh had remained in the district, none of those quiet blacks would have been
shot. It may be necessary to remove the troopers, but not the officers. The officers also
become acquainted with the settlers, and I think it is a very had plan to remove them.
98. Do you think it advisable to appoint the officers by merit, or merely by interest? There
can he no question hut that they should be appointed by merit.
99. How do you recommend that the appointments should be made ? Well, I have never
thought of any other way than the way they have been appointed, which is, I believe, through
the Commandant, Ido not know that I can give any opinion about it.
100. You think the Commandant should choose his own men? I think, perhaps, the Force
would work as harmoniously that way as any other.
101. Will you inform the Committee what is the n'ame of the officer who was in charge on
the occasion on which these outrages were committed ? To the best of my knowledge it
was Lieutenant Morisset.
102. Is ho any relative of the Commandant? I cannot tell.
103. Was


103. Was there any other officer in charge ? No; he was with Mr. Giles, junr., of Widgee
Widgee.
104. Do you think the Committee would be able to obtain any evidence of value from Mr.
Giles ? Ido not know; he is brother to the Superintendent at Widgee Widgee ; he was
there at the time. The young man that I spoke of who is down from Yabbcr, stated that
he had left Widgee Widgee, but I cannot say whether he has.
105. Are you of opinion that a missionary station, established for the purpose of growing
cotton, with a view to the employment and improvement of the older blacks, and the
education of the children of the various tribes, would bo of any benefit to the natives ? I
think some such scheme would be worth trying.
106. I am supposing such an establishment to be in the hands of good and pious men ?
Yes j I believe there is a good deal of immorality even among the officers, and the blacks
soon get their ideas from them.
107. Then you think that in the appointment of officers, care should be taken that they
should be good moral men ? I do, men of sober habits and strictly moral character.
108. Do you know any of them who are not so in the present Force ? I may have reason
to think so, but I do not know.
109. Do you think any improvement has taken place in the appointments of officers lately ?
I cannot say. Ido not see them often.
110. Do you think it would be advisable to prevent the Native Police from going to the
towns, or near the towns ? I don’t see what use they are about the towns, at all events.
111. Do they not drink and get into loose habits about the towns ? There is not a doubt
about it.
112. Would you suggest that the quarters of the police officers should be fixed at one
station, or that they should range about from station to station ? I think there should be
some depot where it would be known that the officer in charge could be got at when he was
wanted—some convenient place.
118. But you would suggest, at the same time, that the police should not stay for any
length of time in the barracks ? Yes, it should be imperative upon them to visit the
various stations in their district for a number of times within the twelve months, —they
should be constantly travelling round the stations.
114. Do you think it is difficult for them to apprehend the blacks who commit depredations
and bring them to justice ? Very difficult.
115. I suppose you are aware that the putting handcuffs upon blackfellows is hardly any
security, as they generally contrive to slip their hands through 1 lam not aware of it, but
I believe they do slip them through.
116. By Mr. Blake ney : Is the Maryborough Police station the nearest to your place ?
Yes.
117. What distance is it ? It is said to be 90 miles by the bridle track, but it is further
by the dray road.
118. I believe Mr. Bligh has been the Lieutenant stationed there for some years? Yes.
119. And he was the officer who used to visit the stations in that district? Yes, he used
to visit them frequently.
120. Did Lieutenant Phibbs ever visit them ? I have had visits from him.
121. Were those two the only officers ? Yes, that I recollect.
122. And hey have been removed lately ? Yes
123. Did Lieutenant Bligh give satisfaction 1 He did to me, and also to every one that I
have heard speak of him.
124. Did he stand high in the opinion of the settlers in that district 1 Yes, as far als
could hear.
125. Since Lieutenant Bligh left, have you received visits from any other officer except
Lieutenant Morisset ? Ido not recollect any.
126. How long is it since you have received a visit from an officer of the Native Police,
with the exception of Lieutenant Morisset ? I think it was 18 months from the time that
Lieutenant Bligh last visited us until Lieutenant Morisset came to us.
127. Had there not been, about that time, a great gathering at the Bunya Kange, near
your station 1 At what time ?
128. A short time previous to the shooting of these blacks ? There were, perhaps, fewer
blacks than I have seen for many seasons.
129. Were you there at the Bunya season this year ? Yes; there were a few blacks
collected, perhaps 200 altogether.
130. When they disperse from the Bunya meetings are the blacks not in the habit of
spearing cattle 1 I have heard so, but from my own knowledge I cannot say they are.
131. Is not that the general opinion? Yes, that is, I believe, the general opinion, but it is
not my experience.
132. How long had they broken up from the Bunya meeting when this unfortunate affair
with Morisset’s party took place ? It w r as during the Bunya season.
138. You have stated that some of your blacks were wounded ; were any of them killed ?
No.
134. Had they been at the Bunya gathering ? Yes.
135. And had they returned to their homes when they were shot ? They were among the
Yabber blacks at the neighbouring station • the Bunya is over all the stations in that
neighbourhood.
136. They had not returned to your service 1 No ; they were not then immediately in my
service.
137. How


137. How long had they been absent 1 ? I cannot say; they had been absent for some time.
138. Were they at a neighbouring station when they came into collision with the blacks?
Yes; there were some of my blacks on my station that were shot at, but not wounded or
killed.
139. Did you hear that any cattle had been killed during that Bunya season—did you hear
of any complaints from the squatters ? No ; I did not.
140. Did you hear it from any one else besides Lieutenant Morisset ? No.
141. Did you make enquiries as to whether any cattle had been speared ? I heard after-
wards that Lieutenant Morisset had been sent for on account of the blacks having speared
some cattle at Imbil.
142. Whose station is that 1 It belongs to Mr. Lawless; but the Police did not come
direct from the station at Imbil.
143 Did you see Mr. Giles in company with Lieutenant Morisset ? Yes.
144. Did you speak to him, or he to you ? Yes.
145. What occurred between you ? To the best of my recollection he asked me if any of
their blacks were at our station—any of the Widgee Widgee blacks, and I said some of
them were occasionally with me, but that they were employed, and had been employed at
my station before he came into the district.
146. You mistake the purport of my question. I wish to know whether Mr. Giles said
anything to you about the shooting of the blacks ? No ; he merely asked me if any of the
Widgee Widgee blacks were at my station.
147. Did you not ask him anything about the shouting of the blacks ? I did not know of
it at the time.
148. When you spoke about it to Lieutenant Morisset, and he said “ the wretches have
been spearing cattle,” was not Mr. Giles present? He was riding by the side of Mr.
Morisset.
149. By Mr. Moffatt : How far is Widgee Widgee from Manumbar ? From 18 to 20
miles.
150. Does this Imbil station, at which the outrages took place, join Widgee Widgee ? I
don’t think it joins Widgee Widgee.
151. It must be near it? It is about 40 miles distant.
152. And how much further is it from your place—Manumbar ? I should not go to it
from Widgee Widgee.
153. You would cross the Range ? Yes.
154. Is there not a great deal of scrubby country between the two places ? A great deal.
165. Will you inform the Committee bow long you had been connected with the Toomcul
station 1 It belongs to us still.
156. How long is it since you went there in the first place ? About 10 years.
157. Did you suffer any outrages while there at the hands of the blacks ? No.
158. Did they ever interfere with your stock ? Not that I can recollect.
159. Did you have any men killed by them ? No.
160. Then have you had any trouble with the blacks since you went to live at Manumbar ?
Yes.
161. W r hat did they do ? I have had sheep taken by them in the presence of the
shepherds; in fact I could scarcely get the shepherds to stop. I heard one of them offer
any man £2O if he would do six months of his time for him.
162. Did those depredations occur frequently ? Frequently.
163. Did the blacks take your sheep in any numbers? Sometimes. Sometimes they
would come into the flock, and kill and skin a sheep in the presence of the shepherd and
carry away the carcase.
164. Did they take sheep out of the folds at night time? I never saw it done, but 1
have reason to believe they did.
166. Did they rob the huts? Yes.
167. Did they ever kill any of your men ? No ; at one time one of the women com-
plained of being pulled about by them—by one of them in particular.
168. Were your losses altogether considerable? Yes.
169. Do you remember at the time you were corresponding with the Government —of
New South Wales I suppose ? Yes—Who was at the head of the Force ? Mr.
Morisset.
170. ’Was he under the control of the Inspector-General of Police who was resident in
Sydney ? lam not sure, it was very shortly after Mr. Morisset was appointed.
171. Do you remember that the Native Police Force was at one time acting under
instructions from head-quarters at Sydney ? I do.
172. And that it was considered objectionable ? Was it your opinion and that of y r our
neighbours that the operations of the Force were much trammelled by that arrangement ?
I remember that there was a good deal of dissatisfaction among the squatters at that
time.
173. Had you ever given the blacks any provocation to induce them to commit the
outrages you have spoken of? No, none.
174. Then they could not have acted in retaliation for any injury done to them by you?
No.
175. Do you consider that your district is particularly secure from attacks by the blacks ?
Well, I don’t like the idea of protecting myself; I think some protective force is necessary.
176. Would you recommend the withdrawal of the Force from your district ? I would not.
177. Then you think it a valuable force for the protection of crime? Yes, properly
officered.
.178. By the Chairman : Do you think that since the Commandant has had the appoint-
ment


meat of the officers the Force has been improved—on the whole ? I know of no
rnprovements in it.
179. Then you think there is still room for great improvement ? I do.
180. By Mr. Boyds : If the Police were removed from your district, and the squatters had
to protect themselves, do you think the blacks would suffer more than they would other-
wise ? I think very likely they would.
181. Then the Force to a certain extent protects the blacks from being destroyed ? My
opinion is, that if the settlers were left to protect themselves, they would perhaps punish
the blacks more severely.
APPENDIX A.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 19 th March, 1861.
Gentlemen,
The attention of the Government having been directed to an advertisement in
the Moreton Bay Courier, bearing your signatures, and having reference to an outrage alleged
by you to have been committed by an Officer of the Native Police against the blacks on your
station, I have the honor to request that you will inform me whether that advertisement was
inserted by your direction, and whether there is any truth in the statements therein contained.
Until further informed, the Government are unwilling to believe that circumstances so
minutely detailed as in the advertisement referred to can have occurred on your station, and to
your personal knowledge, without your feeling it incumbent upon you to bring them forthwith
under the notice of the Government; and I have to request that you will at your earliest
convenience forward to me all information upon the matter that you may be able to furnish.
I have the honor to he,
Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
Messrs. J. & A. Mortimer.
APPENDIX B.
Manumbar, 3rd April, 1861,
Sir.
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication, dated
the 19th ultimo, respecting an advertisement in the Aloreton Bay Courier , bearing our
signatures, and having reference to an outrage committed by an Officer of the Native Police
against the blacks on our station: and in reply we beg to state that the advertisement was
inserted by our direction, and that we are in possession of sufficient evidence to convince us of
the truth of all the statements therein contained. We did not think it incumbent on us to
bring the circumstances under the notice of the Government in any other way than we have
done, tor various reasons which we do not think necessary here to state. We may state,
however, that the advertisement alluded to would have appeared much earlier had it not been
for the irregularities of the mail service between Brisbane and Nanango, occasioned, wc
believe, by the flooded state of the Brisbane Biver. In accordance with your request, we
annex and forward to you all information upon the matter that we are able to furnish.
On Sunday, the 10th February last, a little before sunset, our attention was attracted
to the report of firearms discharged at no great distance from our head station. A few
minutes after the firing ceased, a black, who was shepherding a flock of sheep, left them, and
came running to the head station, telling us that policeman been shoot him blackfellow. We
asked him to go with us to the place where the blacks had their camp, and immediately
proceeded in the direction pointed out by him. When we had proceeded about a mile and a
half from the head station, and within about two or three hundred yards of the place where the
blacks had been encamped, we were met by Mr. Giles, junior, from the station of Widgee
Widgee, a party of Native Police, and another gentleman whom we did not recognise; but,
presuming him to be the Officer in command of the Police, we asked him if he had been
amongst the blacks. He said he had. We asked him what mischief they had been doing,
lie said the wretches had been spearing cattle, and asked us if they had been doing any harm
on our station. We told him that they had not. After some more conversation we returned
to the head station, Mr. Giles, the Police, and the Officer in command, encamping near the
place whore we left them. On Monday, the blacks about the station kept telling us that
policemen been shoot good many blackfellow, and that they had now gone to Yabber. They
also told us that one fellow was “ Bong likin waterhole and as the waterhole they spoke of
was about a mile and a half above the head station, and formed part of the creek from which
the station is generally supplied with water, we went, on Tuesday morning, to see whether such
was the case, and if so to have the body removed. On our way to the waterhole, and about
one hundred yards before we reached it, the black who was in company with us pointed out to
us the dead body of a black, laying at full length on its back, with the arms spread out, and a
wound, apparently a bullet wound, in the breast. Decomposition had begun to take place,
and foam was bubbling out of the mouth. We then went to the waterhole, where we found
another dead body, floating with the face downward, and a good deal of coagulated blood about
the back of the head and neck. We did not examine it minutely, but on having it, removed
from the waterhole by some two or three blacks that had by this time gathered about, they
turned over the body, and we perceived what we considered to be a bullet wound in the side.
The waterhole in which we found the body might bo about half a mile distant from the place
where


where the blacks had their camp on Sunday, the 10th February. We then went to the place
where the blacks had their camp on Sunday, and there we saw the charred remains of a dead
body, the extremities having been consumed to ashes. The blacks wanted us to go with them
and sec some more dead bodies. We did not go; but shortly after this, being out on the run,
near the old camping ground, looking for some sheep that had been lost, we came upon a
portion of another body very much decomposed. Our two station blacks were wounded, as
described in the advertisement, not upon Sunday, the 10th February, hut upon Tuesday,
the 12th February, upon the station of Yabber, belonging to Mr. A. Swanson, and we have
good reason to believe by the same party of Police that visited our station on Sunday, the
10th. Mr. A. Swanson informed us that a party of Native Police accompanied by their officer,
Mr. Morisset, visited the station of Yabber, on Monday, the 11th February ; that, upon their
arrival, there, they apprehended a deserter from the Native Police, implicated in the murder of
Fanny Briggs at Rockhampton; that on Monday night the prisoner was handcuffed and left in
charge of the party of Native Police ; and that be (Mr. Swanson) suggested to the Officer that he
thought there was some danger of the prisoner making his escape before morning, and it turned
out as lie surmised. That on Tuesday, the 12th February, whilst the aforesaid Officer, with his
party of Native Police were riding over the station, came upon a camp of blacks, tired upon
them, and amongst others shot a black who had for the last five or six years, with the exception
of some short occasional furloughs, shepherded a flock of sheep on the station of Yabber, and that
he was not aware that he had ever been charged with a crime of any kind. A few days after-
wards, (we cannot now give the exact date) our two blacks arrived on the station, wounded, as
represented in our advertisement. We examined the wounds minutely, and dressed them
repeatedly, and we have no doubt hut they were bullet wounds. Their own account of the
way they came by the wounds is this ; —that they were encamped on the station of Yabber,
with a number of other blacks from various tribes that had come to the Bunya Bunya; that
the Police came upon the camp ; and that most of the blacks, except themselves, as soon as
they saw the police, ran away ; that they waited at the camp until the Police came up, and
when they presented their carbines at them that they cried “ Baal you shoot me belonging to
Mr. Mortimer.” That the Police took no notice of what they said, but fired upon them. We
may here state that we have never known the Native Police to fire upon blacks if they did not
attempt to run away from them ; and we have always warned our blacks of the danger of trying
to run away from the Police, and instructed them as well as we could to stand and tell the Police
where they came from. The above is all the information upon the matter that we are able to
furnish.
We have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servants,
J. &. A. MORTIMER,
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary.
FRIDAY, 21 st JUNE, 1861.
present:
Me. MACKENZIE, Mr. FERRETT,
Mr. WATTS, Mr. ROYDS,
Mr. GORE, Mr. MOFFATT,
Mr. BLAKENBY, Mr, FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
LEONARD EDWARD LESTER, Esq., called in and examined; —
1. By the Chairman ; You reside at Coochin, I believe ? I do.
2. Do you remember a detachment of Native Police being in that neighbourhood about
Christmas of last year ? I do.
3. Did they visit your station at that time ? They did.
4. Had the blacks been spearing cattle there, or been otherwise troublesome? Not at Coochin,
but in the neighbourhood, I believe.
5. Did they pass Coochin on their way to Fassifern ? I did not see them.
6. Were you at home, on an occasion subsequent to that when they visited the station?
I was not.
7. Are you aware of the circumstances that took place on that occasion ? Well, any
evidence that I could give, would be from hearsay, and I presume you don’t want that.
8. You were absent from the station at the time? Yes, I was in Sydney.
9. 'What did you hear when you returned ? I heard that the blacks had visited the
station about three or four o’clock one morning.
10. They attempted to break into your wife’s bedroom window, I believe ? Yes.
11. Was your wife alone at the time ? No, a latly was stopping with her.
12. That lady went there when you went to Sydney ? Yes.
13. And was there when you returned ? Yes.
14. It was Mrs. Wheeler, I believe ? Yes.
15. The blacks did not succeed in their attempts? No, they were intimidated, I be-
lieve, by Mrs. Lester discharging a revolver,
10, You


16. You are aware that a communication was sent to the Government against the
blacks? Yes.
17. And a party of Police was consequently sent up from Ipswich ? Yes.
18. And they did not find the blacks ? I was not at home; I had left for Sydney.
19. Did not Mrs. Lester receive a summons to attend the Committee? I believe she
did.
20. Why did she not attend ? It was not convenient.
21. By Mr. AVatts: Can you give me any information as to the steps that should be
taken to ameliorate the condition of the blacks ? I can’t.
22. Do you know of any acts of cruelty committed by the whites against the blacks ? I
do not.
23. Do you know whether the settlers are, generally speaking, kind to the blacks, or
otherwise ? Kind, most unquestionably.
24. Do you know of any cruelties that have been committed, by the settlors in your
neighbourhood? Did you ever witness or hear of any? No, not in my neighbour,
hood.
25. You have been a long time in the bush? Twenty-four years.
26. Were the blacks ever troublesome on the Condamine ? They were troublesome, but
not at my station, on any occasion.
27. Have you any knowledge of the Native Police ? Yes.
28. Do you think that it is a beneficial Force? No doubt it is. I don’t think you
would hold the country without it.
29. Do you think that if it were disbanded, it would be the means of causing more
deaths amongst the natives—by the settlers being compelled to protect themselves —than
now ? I think it very likely.
30. Then you know nothing of any of the cases that have appeared in the paper with
regard to the blacks being shot at F assifern—on the Logan ? Ido not.
31. Have you had any conversation with regard to the occurence ? I have heard people
talk of it, but I know nothing of my own particular knowledge.
32. Do you think that any scheme, such as that of giving missionaries a piece of land
for the purpose of growing cotton with black labour, and so teaching the children of
the blacks, would be the means of Christianizing them or otherwise ? I don’t think
it would .
33. Can you give any reason for thinking it would not answer the purpose ? Well;
they are such a very difficult race to manage, —such an indolent race, —-that I don’t think
anything would induce them to attend to missionaries or anyone else. Unless their
children were taken from them by force, they would never be instructed, I am satisfied.
34. By the Chairman : How many years were you on the Condamine ? About ten
years.
35. You have seen a good deal I think of that neighbourhood ? Yes.
36. What is your opinion of the officers of the Native Police Force generally, so far
as they have come under your knowledge ? Well, I have seen some very good ones,
and some very indifferent ones.
37. Do you know any of intemperate habits ? I have known them to be intoxicated.
38. Do you think it right that the officers of such a Force should be drunkards ? No,
certainly not.
39. Do you not think that it is the duty of the Commandant, in cases of drunkeness, to
report and recommend that the officer be immediately dismissed ? Most unquestionably.
40. Don’t you think the character of the Force is much injured by such men being in
it ? No doubt about it.
41. Have you ever been in a position where you have had an opportunity of seeing the
working of the Native Police Force ? Yes, when I first went on the Condamine, I was
the outside settler, and the blacks were very troublesome. After I arrived, they
committed depredations within twenty-five miles of the head station, but not on the
station.
42. Do you consider that the Native Police, if well organized and better officered, would
be a good Force ? The most efficient Force that could be employed.
43. With all its faults, it is highly beneficial ? No doubt about it.
44. Could you make any suggestions to the Committee as to any alterations that it
would be desirable to make ? I have no recommendations to make, except as to the
selection of officers.
45. You think that a matter of primary importance ? I do.
46. Don’t you think an infusion of white troopers would be desirable ? I think that
it would be very useless.
47. Do you think such an arrangement not worth trial? Not in a scrubby country
like this.
48. You are speaking of the country to the North ? Yes ; the Lower Condamine is all
scrubby country.
49. But don’t you think it would be desirable, if we had trackers to go into the scrub ?
No, I don’t; I dont believe that White Police would be of any service in the scrub
whatever; in open country they would be preferable in many respects.
50. Are any of those officers addicted to intemperate habits still in the Force ? None to
my knowledge.
51. That is if there are such, they have not come under your observation r i know ot
none; I have not seen any.
52. But formerly there were officers of this description ? Yes.
53 Do you know any officer in the Force at present, of intemperate habits'? No.
" J ‘ 54. There


54. There are a good many that you have never seen ? Yes.
55. Do you think it advisable for the Native Police Officers to allow indiscriminate
slaug’hter on the part of their men—to shoot any or all of a tribe ? It would depend
entirely upon what the provocation might be.
56. Do you think it right, if the Native Police follow up a tribe, and are pretty certain
that depredations have been committed, —for them to kill the natives wholesale ? I
think they ought to be dispersed when they collect in large bodies in that way. If
they can’t effect the security of the settlers in any other way, it must be done so; if you
can’t manage it by fair means you must by foul.
57. Do you think if the officers talked quietly to the blacks, and did not lire on them,
the blacks would disperse ? lam quite sure they would not.
58. By Mr. Gobe : Don’t you think there is too much power in the hands of the officers ?
Not if the officers were properly selected.
59. But do you think they are sufficiently under the control of the Commandant ? I
don’t see how they could be more so.
60. Suppose that an officer in a state of intoxication had command of a party of the
Native Police Force, don’t you think that it must lead to an unnecessary loss of life ?
I don’t think that such things ever occur ; of course there is no saying what a drunken
man will do.
61. You think it not right that such things should be allowed ? Most unquestionably,
not.
62. By Mr. Moeeatt : Do you think that the appointment of officers should be vested
in the Commandant, or the Government ? That would depend on the style of Com-
mandant we had.
63. Considering that the Commandant is responsible—or ought to be—for the manage-
ment of the Force, ought he to have the nomination of officers for that Force, in order
to carry out its management ? It is a very doubtful question I think; I think the
Commandant ought to have a better opportunity of knowing the style of men adapted
for officers, than the Government.
64. By Mr. Boyds ; Do you consider it still necessary to keep up a Native Police Force
in your neighbourhood, and at Fasaifem ? Most unquestionably; 1 think that the
blacks would be serious torments, if some force were not kept in the district.
65. By Mr, Mofeatt ; Have you known the blacks to be prevented from hunting or
fishing on your own, or on neighbouring station ? I have never known them to be
interfered -with. On the Condamine, years ago, when they were rather troublesome, I
never interfered with them, and never knew any of my neighbours to prevent them from
hunting. So far from interfering with them, I had an interpreter—a man who had been
to India—and I told him to let the blacks know that I should never interfere with
them while they left me alone,—that I should never interfere with their hunting on the
run, provided they kept away from the sheep stations. In consequence, they never
interfered with me in any shape,' except perhaps, occasionally by stealing a sheep, which
was never proved.
66. There is no lack of food amongst them? No; there is a great abundance.
67 Was there on the Condamine ? Yes, when I left, three or four years ago.
68. Do you think that the blacks should be permitted to hold corroborees—to assemble
in numbers'? I don’t think that their private affairs ought to be interfered with in that
respect.
69. Do you think that any evil results from the congregation of blacks in large bodies ?
Yes; no doubt mischief is hatched at all their large meetings.
70. And would you approve of any measure that would prevent their collecting together
in these large bodies ? I don’t think it would be fair to prevent their mustering for
borees. I think the only thing to be done is to watch their proceedings when there is a
large meeting of them. But the Native Police are always aware when these things take
place, and the only thing is for them to be in the neighbourhood, watch their proced-
ings, and endeavour to prevent depredations. But I don’t think it would be just to in-
terfere with their private matters.
71. By Mr. Gore : Are you not aware that the attendance of half civilized blacks is often
compulsory—that half-tamed blacks are compelled to attend? Yes, I have often
heard so.
72. You are convinced that borees are occasionally dangerous ? I have no doubt they
are.
73. Don’t you think they might be looked upon as unlawful assemblages, as certain
assemblages of white people are? No, Ido not.
74. By Mr. Boyds : To your knowledge, when blacks have been shot by the Native
Police, do they ever consider themselves warranted to take revenge on the whites ? Not
when they are shot by the Police—there is no feeling of revenge when their
companions are shot by the Police; but there is when they are shot by private indi-
viduals.
75. If shot by squatters ? If shot by the squatters or their men, they have a feeling of
revenge.
76. That feeling -would extend to white troopers, if they were introduced into the
Force ? I don’t know; I can’t say. They seem to feel that these men (the Native
Police) are appointed for the protection of the white people, and not to have any feeling of
revenge, when shot after committing depredations.
WEDNESDAY ,


WEDNESDAY, 2 Qth JUNE, 1861.
present:
Mu. MACKENZIE, Me. WATTS,
Mb. GORE,' Mr. ROADS,
Mr. BLAKENEY, Mr. EERRETT.
The Honorable 11. R. M ACKEXZIE in the Chair.
THOMAS PETRIE, Esq., called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman :—Are you a native of this district ? No.
2. But you have been a number of years residing in it ? Yes.
8. I believe you came to this country as a boy ? Yes ; I was only three months old when
I left home.
4. And you can speak the language of the blacks ? Yes, just the same as they do them-
selves —that is to say, the blacks of this tribe.
5. You have, of course, seen a great deal of the blacks? Yes.
6. Were you here at the time that the German Missionaries were at work among them ?
Yes.
7. From what you have heard from the blacks themselves, are you aware whether the
missionaries met with any success in their efforts to Christianize or civilize them ? No, I
do not think they did
8. Did you know the old Brisbane tribes ? Yes; they are nearly all dead now : there are
only about five of them left.
9. How many of them were there when you first knew them ? I dare say there were about
200.
10. To what cause do you attribute this great decrease in their number ? To drink.
11. Not to any ill-usage they have met with at the hands of the white people? No, it is
chiefly to the drink. They get intoxicated; and when they are in that state they lie out
and catch cold. They are also continually cutting one another when they get drunk.
12. What tribes of these blacks belong to this place,—that is, about Brisbane ? They are a
lot of mixed blacks—the Moorooroochee, the Bunya Bunya, and the Bribie blacks.
18. Then, from what you know, they have received no ill-usage from the white people
except that they have had drink given to them—you have heard no complaints among the
blacks themselves ? No ; they would be very useful if they could be kept from drink.
14. I believe you have a station on the Pine River ? Yes.
15. Do you make the blacks useful about your station ? Yes, but they will come into
town.
16. That is when you pay them, I suppose, they want to come into town to get drink ?
Yes; one of them came down with me some months ago, and I would not give him any
money; I took him to a shop and bought some clothes for him ; but this time he would not
have it—he wanted the money.
17. Do you know anything of the Native Police ? Yes. I was going to say that the bad
conduct of the blacks is in a great measure the fault of the white people themselves, and
the way in which they treat them. I have been living where no one else was able to
remain, and I have had several hundreds of the blacks about me.
18. What do you mean by their own fault? They make promises to the blacks, and do
not keep them.
19. Have you ever heard any opinions of the Native Police from the blacks ? Yes; they
do not like them at all: many of them were shot by the police.
20. What were they shot for ? It was said they were shot for cattle stealing, but the
blacks said that no cattle were stolen at that time.
21. What detachment of police was concerned in that affair ? I think they were from
Sandgate.
22. How long ago was it ? About six or seven months ago.
23. Arc the blacks more afraid of the Native Police than of any other force i Yes, they
are very much afraid of them.
24. More so than of the White Police ? Oh, yes ! They only laugh at white police : the
blacks have such queer ways with them : they go into the scrub or into the river, and poke
fun at the whites, who are unable to follow them.
25. Do you think a white police force would be of any service in lieu of the present
Force? No; if the Native Police Force were done away with, the blacks would be
encouraged to commit robberies and murders ; they are in great dread of the native
troopers, because they can follow them to their haunts.
26. Are you of opinion that the blacks in your neighbourhood have been better behaved
since the Police have been stationed at Sandgate ? Yes.
27. Do you think they could be made useful ? Yes, I think so.
28. What do you think of the plan proposed—that a party of missionaries should establish
a cotton-growing plantation, on which the older natives should be kept at work, while the
children were put to school and taken care of ? Yes, it might answer, if they were kept
out of the town, and not allowed to go where they could get drink. There might be some
trouble with them for the first year, but those who came would tell the rest, and it might
do some good.
29. 1 am


29. lam speaking of it as an experiment? Yes, but the missionaries would have to be a
little different from the last.
30. What was their fault ? They did not teach the natives much ; they kept them at work
in their own gardens more than at anything else.
31. But they had a school for the young ones? Yes.
32. Do you not think it is advisable to keep the blacks employed ? Yes, but the missionaries
were unable to speak English, and the natives used to poke fun at them.
33. They can speak English now? Yes, I believe they can.
34. How long have you been here altogether ? About 26 or 27 years.
35. I mean constantly in contact with the blacks ? Yes, about that time, except occasionally
for short periods.
36. Your opinion then is, that the blacks could be made useful if they were kept out of
the towns ? Yes, if they were kept away from drink.
37. Has any instance of cannibalism on the part of the blacks come under your knowledge ?
Oh, yes; it is not long since they eat a blaekfellow near my place, across the river. I have
often seen the skin of a black who had been eaten.
38. Do they speak of the practice among themselves? Yes.
39. Do you entertain any doubt about it in your own mind ? Oh, no.
40. Your station, I believe, is at no great distance from the Bunya scrubs? Yes.
41. And I believe the blacks meet there in large numbers every two or three years ? Yes,
every three years.
42. On those occasions there are great gatherings ? Yes.
43. Is not a great deal of mischief done at those times 1 Yes, I think when they collect
there for their fights they ought to be dispersed.
44. What arc those meetings called—borees I No, they call it “ Choolong,” that is a
meeting where they collect for fighting, and it is in coming to and from those meetings that
the mischief is done. If they were dispersed the blacks might be kept more constantly at
work. But you see they have no religion, and do not believe in any God.
45. Have you ever observed that they entertain any idea of religion or the existence of
a Supreme Being ? No ; they do not believe that they die a natural death. If one of
them dies, they believe that a blaekfellow with a stone out of his belly has killed him
beforehand, cut him into pieces, and put him together again. They used to believe that
when they died they would “jump up whitefellowsbut they don’t believe that so
generally now.
46. What do you mean by cutting into pieces ? That is their belief. If a blaekfellow dies
they believe he has been previously killed and cut up by some other blaekfellow, and then
when his death really takes place they attribute it to that cause.
47. Then they believe in two deaths ? Yes.
48. By Mr. Blakeney : Whereabouts were those blacks shot about six or seven months
ago ? At Mr. Griffin’s station, on the Pine Kiver.
49. How many of them were killed 1 Five.
50. Was that done by Mr. Wheeler’s detachment from Sandgate ? I think the Police were
from Sandgate: lam not acquainted with the officer, but I think that was his name.
51. Was any allegation made as to the cause of death? It was stated that they had been
spearing Mr. Griffin’s cattle.
52. But you said something about no cattle having been speared ? That was what the
blacks said.
53. Have you any reason for knowing the truth of the matter, except by the reports of the
blacks ? No.
54. Was any public notice taken of it? No.
55. By Mr. Gore : Do you not think the blacks are likely to have exaggerated the reports
a good deal ? Yes, they do generally.
56. Then you do not place implicit reliance in their statement ? No, but I know there are
two or three of the blacks missing, who were in the habit of coming to my place.
57. But they might be away for a short time, and come back again ? Yes, they might.
58. Are you aware that several rapes have been committed by the blacks in the vicinity of
this town ? Yes.
59. Are there any white women at your station ? Yes.
60. Do you consider them particularly safe there? Quite safe.
61. Why should they be more so there than in the vicinity of the town? I do not know,
but I can trust the blacks with everything I have ; they would not do me any injury, I
have known them so long.
62. Then they have a sort of private friendship for you? Yes.
63. But do you not think, if a stranger were to settle in the district, they might not be so
well behaved towards him ? Perhaps not.
64. You mean to say that, from your long acquaintance with the blacks, you have a certain
control over them, which another person would not possess ? Yes.
65. Do they not assemble at stated periods for the making “ kippers,” as they call it? Yes.
66. Are you aware of any particular ceremonies which they perform upon those occasions ?
Oh yes, I have seen them.
67. Have you ever seen a boree ? No, but I have seen the blacks making kippers.
68. How is it done ? The strong blaekfellows take the boys from other tribes to some place
away from the gins, where they have to go through a certain ceremony. The boys are not
allowed to speak or to scratch themselves; they must also hold their heads down, for they
are told


are told that if they hold their heads up the rain will come down and swamp them. The old
blacks tempt the boys to speak, which they dare not do, or they would be speared—that is
their law. Then they are marched away by the blackfellows to a camp some 500 or 600
yards from the place of meeting, where they camp all night; they have to lie down in a
circle, with their heads on each other’s hips; then the blackfellows take a large humming-
stick-—which they make the gins believe is an old man, who is able to swallow up the young
men—and swing it over the heads of the boys ; the swinging makes a humming noise, like
that of a top.
69. What sort of a stick is it ? It is a stick shaped like a canoe, with a piece of string
through it, with which they swing it round the boys’ heads.
70. Now, we have had evidence from several witnesses, who possess a good deal of knowledge
as to their habits, who say that the blacks commit unnatural offences with the boys on those
occasions. Is that the case ? No, I don’t think so —at least, as far as my knowledge goes,
they do not. I cannot say what may be done by the blacks in other parts of the country,
but I have never heard of such a practice -when they make kippers.
71. You are aware, I suppose, that it is against the law to give drink to the blacks ? Yes.
72. Can you suggest any mode of ensuring a better observance of the law ? The only way
is to keep the blacks out of the towns. Then, if a piece of land were taken for them, as
has been suggested, they might be made to work* but the missionaries ought to know their
language well.
73. Now, do you consider it right, in such a case, that the constables should drive the blacks
out of the towns —I mean, for the good of the blacks themselves? Yes; they ought never
to come into town, unless with a pass, or accompanied by their masters.
74. Would you not suggest that the persons who give them grog should be punished? They
ought to be punished.
75. Are you aware that it is the usual practice among the small settlers about the towns,
when the blacks chop wood, fetch water, or do other work for them, to pay them in rum ?
Yes, a good many of them do.
76. And is it not a fact that almost every evening a mob of blacks may be seen going out
of town in a drunken state towards Fortitude Valley 1 Yes.
77. Then, we may infer from your evidence that the great diminution in the Brisbane tribe
of blacks is entirely owing to the practice of giving them grog adopted by the small settlers
in the neighbourhood ? Ido not think they get the grog from the small settlers so much as
from people in town.
78. I mean in and around the town ? Yes.
79. Now, can you think of any possible way of preventing this—say that you were at the
head of the Police Force for instance ? Ido not know how it could be done at all, as long
as the blacks are allowed to come into town, for they will get grog one way or other.
80. Do you not think that people in and about the town are in considerable danger from
these blacks when they get intoxicated, particularly women and children who arc living in
the bush ? Yes, for when the blackfellows get liquor, they become very excited.
81. Do you think, on account of that danger, it is necessary that a detachment of Police
should be stationed at Sandgate, where they can be sent for if required ? Oh, yes.
82. You are of opinion that the presence of the Force there is likely to have a beneficial
effect, although it may not be necessary to send for them ? Yes.
83. Are you in favor of disbanding the Native Police Force ? No,
84. Do you think, if the Force were disbanded, that a good deal of mischief would be done
by the disbanded troopers ? Yes, they would put the other blacks up to a great deal more
than they know at present.
85. Are you in favor of the Native Police Force on the whole ? Oh, yes.
86. I think you have stated positively in your evidence that you think white troopers would
be entirely inefficient to follow up the blacks ? Yes.
87. What is your opinion of a mixed force, that is to say, a force composed of white
troopers, with a certain number of black trackers attached ? That might do, but the whites
would be unable to stand the fatigue, or live upon the same food as the blacks; they would
also require stations for their rations.
88. Would not the white troopers be always behind the others in following the blacks ?
Yes.
89. Do you think a mixed force, composed of the ordinary class of constables and some
black trackers, would agree among themselves ? Oh yes, I think they would.
90. Don’t you think the white men would be apt to expect too much from the blacks ?
Well, that is another consideration ; very likely they would ; they would want the blacks
to do everything for them, and the blacks might turn round upon them.
91. Are you not of opinion that, as a general rule, the blacks do not get on so well with
the common hands as they do with those they consider gentlemen—like the officers of the
Force, for instance ? Yes.


The Honorable ALFRED HENRY BROWN, M.L.C., examined by permission of the
Legislative Council.
1. By the Chairman : You are a squatter in the Wide Bay District? Yes.
2. You were examined before a Committee on the Dawson murders, in Sydney, in the
year 1858 ? I forget the exact date, but I think it was about that time.
3. I have been looking over your evidence, which I see is very complete ; but I wish to
ask you a few questions, to see whether you have changed your opinions at all since
that time. In the first place, I wish to ask you—as you are, I believe, opposed to the
present Native Police Force, and we are anxious to get evidence on both sides of the
question—whether any of the letters—a number of which appeared in the newspapers
some time ago, one of them signed “One who has seen too much of the Native Police,”
the authorship of which was attributed to you—were written by you ? Ido not think
you have any right to ask that question, and I decline to answer it. I shall be happy
to give evidence upon the subject before the Committee—the Native Police—upon which
I understood you were desirous of examining me ; but I do not consider that you have
any right to question me about letters that have appeared in the newspapers.
4. Ido not wish to attribute anything to you; I merely wish to ask you the question ?
I must say that I consider it an intrusive question. I have seen the letters you refer to,
and Ido not see that there is anything in them to be ashamed of. At the same time I
think you have no right to ask me any questions about them,
5. You must be aware that the only object the Committee have in view is to elicit the
truth ? I still think the question is an extraordinary one, and I cannot see what it has
to do with the state of the Native Police Force
6. Certain charges have been made against the Force, which we are anxious to investigate
well. In your former evidence (referring to evidence given by witness before a Select
Committee on the Dawson murders, in Sydney, in 1858,) in reference to the Native Police,
you say, in reply to the following questions,—
“Do you consider them an efficient corps ? Ido not.
“ Did you ever consider them efficient ? They were at one time—at the com-
“ mencement.
“ Who was Commandant then ? Mr. Frederick Walker.
“ Their efficiency has ceased since Mr. Walker was superseded? Yes,
“ Will you bo good enough to state some of your reasons for drawifig that con-
“ elusion ? I think the principal reason of their inefficiency is that they have
“ inefficient officers. Some of the officers appointed are not at all adapted to
“ the command of the Force.
“Do you include the present Commandant ? Ido not think he is an efficient officer.
“ I do not think he understands his business, <fcc.”
Mr. Morisset is the present Commandant? Yes.
7. Have you had any reason to alter your opinion since giving that evidence ? None
whatever.
8. You considered the officers were inefficient? The majority of them.
9. Including the present Commandant ? Yes.
10. And you have seen nothing to alter your opinion of him? Nothing whatever.
11. Have you seen the state of the country since the Force has been organised by him.
There was a gap or interregnum between the dismissal of Mr. Walker and the appoint-
ment of Mr. Morisset, and a number of the Police were disbanded ? I really forget
those particulars.
12. Do you not think the relations between the blacks and the whites are improved since
that period ? Ido not think they are so good as they were.
13. You think there are more slaughters among them than there used to be ? Certainly,
more committed by the Native Police, and I think on both sides.
14. Do you think there has been any improvement in the Force, as a protective force ?
I do not think so.
15. You speak of the majority of the officers as being inefficient ; can you give us any
reasons for forming that opinion—any particular instances that have come under your
observation ? No ; lam speaking of them collectively, as a force. It would be rather
invidious for me to point out any particular officer.
16. To what cause do you attribute the inefficiency of the officers generally? Well, the
chief reason is their want of a proper knowledge of the mode of managing the Native
Trooper, their want of energy is another reason, and in some cases their habits of
drunkenness.
17. Referring to question No. 15, in your former evidence
“ Will you be good enough to state to the Committee any instances of inefficiency
“in the officers that have come under your notice, not mentioning names ? I
“ consider that one essential object of the employment of the Force is that
“ they should be continuously patrolling the country, which they do not. I
“ consider they adhere too much to the roads, instead of following the blacks,
“ and patrolling the bush. I consider, also, that the officers do not keep up
“ that degree of discipline amongst the troopers that certainly was maintained
“by Mr. Walker, and to which I attribute his efficiency. I have frequently
“ seen officers entirely led by their troopers ; and I consider that the troopers
“ ought not to know in which direction they are going out, for this reason, —
“ that at the station they make acquaintance with the blacks, principally
“ through the women, and I believe they give them information which they
“ ought not to possess, as to where the next movement of the Force will he,
“ That is one reason of their inefficiency, and I think the principj.il one.”
Is


la jour opinion now the same as that expressed in the answer I have just read ? Yes.
18. I suppose you are aware that some of the officers are guilty of acts of intemperance ?
I am.
19. Do you not think that intemperance is one of the principal causes of their
inefficiency ? I am certain it is.
20. But still you must be aware that the Committee find it very difficult to arrive at
facts when they have before them only charges of such a general character ? Yes, but
I consider it is the Commandant who is to blame. It is all very well to examine a
number of witnesses in reference to the efficiency of the officers, but you must be aware
that the fault lies with the Commandant.
21. In the evidence I have been referring to, you speak very highly of the efficiency of
Mr. Walker. Are you aware that he was said to be intemperate ? I think you will find
that my remarks applied to his efficiency prior to his habits of intemperance.
22. Since Mr. Walker was superseded you say the Force was not so efficient. Referring
to Question No. 46 :
“ In speaking of the Force since Mr. Walker’s dismissal, do you mean to say that
“it was never inefficient under Mr. Walker himself? No, Ido not say that it
“ was not inefficient at times.”
That is the question I was going to ask you ? I mean to say that Mr. Walker’s original
management of the Force was good, and 1 think you will find that I have given evidence
to that effect.
23. You are aware that up to that date the officers were appointed by the Government
of New South Wales, and that the Commandant had no voice in the appointments ? If
you refer to my evidence, I think you will find that I strongly recommended the
appointments should rest with the Commandant.
24. Are you aware that it is only lately that the Commandant has had the appointment
of the officers 1 No, I am not; but I will explain my reasons. I consider that the
Commandant is more likely to possess a proper knowledge of what is essential to an
officer of the Force. He knows the duties of the officers, and is better able to judge of
the men most suitable to the office than the Government can be. It is for this reason
I consider that, in his appointment of inefficient officers, the Commandant has been far
more to blame than the Government.
25. You have stated in your evidence in Sydney that you considered the appointment
of very young officers objectionable? Yes, I think it would be ; they do not possess,
generally speaking, that experience and moral control which they ought to have.
26. Do you adhere to the opinion you expressed, in reply to Question No. 21, of your
former evidence :
“ From what cause '? Because the officers have been appointed by persons in
“ Sydney who know nothing about the Force. I consider that the Com-
“ mandant ought to have the entire appointment of his officers. If you wanted
“ officers for a force composed entirely of blacks, for the remote districts, you
“ might then make a selection of officers for that purpose from the whole. I
“ could go now and perhaps select six good officers; their sections are mode-
“ rately efficient; whereas some of them are worse than useless.”
Do you adhere to that answer? Yes, I endorse that opinion, as far as lam acquainted
with the officers; but a good many officers have since been appointed to the Corps, with
whom I am not personally acquainted, and of whose efficiency I cannot, therefore, judge.
27. I see you were examined as to the propriety of altering the constitution of the Force
by introducing a certain number of white men. In reference to this, I will read Question
No. 30, and your reply :
“ In the districts you have spoken of, where the scrubs are dense, would you have
“ any proportion of whites at all in the Police Force ? No; what I meant was
“ to have no whites at all in such districts, where you can get efficient native
“ troopers. I have known white men to attempt to follow the blacks in the
“ scrubs, but it is abnost impossible to do so ; they are obliged to strip off
“ their clothing, in order to get through rapidly.”
That was the opinion expressed by most of the witnesses examined, and I suppose your
opinion remains the same upon this point ? I do not think white Police could follow
blacks through the scrubs, but I think, at the same time, that the Force might be so orga-
nized that any pursuit of the blacks would be rendered almost needless. By a proper arrange-
ment for patrolling the districts, the amount of crime would be considerably reduced.
28. I will read Questions Nos. 16 and 17, and your answers :
“ Could you make any suggestions to the Committee, with a view of making the
“ Force more efficient ? It struck me that the addition of a white force with
“ them would be beneficial.
“In what proportion ? I think the same proportion would not be applicable to all
“ districts. From what I know and have heard of portions of the Leichhardt
“ District, where scrub so much abounds, I scarcely think a white force there
“ would act well; but I would suggest that in my own neighbourhood, which
“ I consider moderately quiet now, there should be a force of, say, four white
“ men, and say two blacks, as trackers, beside the officer. Such a force would
“ be sufficient in moderately quiet neighbourhoods ; but in outlying districts,
“ where scrub is so very general, through which it is exceedingly difficult, or
“ I might say impossible, for white men to follow the natives with sufficient
rapidity, I would have a body of Native Police, or two, at disposal, so that,
*' f in case of necessity, they could follow the blacks through the scrubs.”
Ther


They are very plain answers ; do you still adhere to them—because the questions are
exactly such questions as I should ask you ? I think the Force should be principally
worked by Europeans, but, in case of emergency, I think there should be a black force
to follow the natives into the scrubs.
29. Do you think it would be advisable to do away with the Native Police Force
altogether ? Yes, I would go upon the broad principle, and do away with it altogether.
30. Do you think it would be advisable to disband the troopers, and turn them loose ?
I should, recommend you to send them to New Zealand, and their officers with them ; I
think it would be unwise to disband them. Many of the troopers now in the Force
have been taken from places too near the districts they are intended to patrol, and the
consequence of their being disbanded would be that they would become troublesome to
the settlers. If that has been found to be the case in single instances, what would be
the case if a large force of them were disbanded at one time ? A proposal might be
made to the Government of New Zealand, who might be glad to accept the Force.
31. What do you think would be the consequence if they were sent away ? I would
not propose that they should he sent away until another force was organized.
32. Do you not think, if a white element were introduced into the Force, it should bo
done gradually ? No ; I think, if it is to be done, it should be done as soon as possible.
33. The change might be commenced, but not carried out at once ? No : I think the
alteration should be commenced and completed at once.
34. Would you have it entirely a white force ? Entirely a white force, although I
believe there are some gentlemen in the extreme bush who would prefer a black force.
35. Do you not think it would be a better plan, in introducing this white element into
the Force, to commence with the settled districts, and to keep the present force on the
frontier until their numbers became reduced by desertion, or by other casualties ? No ;
I should recommend an entire change.
36. Are you aware that persons who have arrived here from the other colonies are
taking up stock to the outlying districts, and that they are doing so on the faith of the
present Protective Force ? I presume they are aware that we have a black Police Force,
and they expect it to protect them ; but if we furnish them with a better force, they
ought to be very well satisfied.
37. But how can you say that we can furnish them with a better force, when you admit
that white Police would be unable to follow the blacks into the scrubs ? Ido not think
a white Police Force would be so effective in following the blacks into the scrub ; but I
think the white Police would keep the district in such a state of security that it would
rarely be necessary for them to do so. They would be effective in preventing crime
rather than in punishing it.
38. Have you gained any experience of the blacks in any other part of the country ?
No.
39. How long have you been in the Wide Bay District? About twelve years.
40. I believe it was about twelve years ago that the Force was first organized? Yes ;
I was in the north a short time before the Force was raised.
41. Are you aware that there were, previously, two Forces in existence—the old Mounted
Police and the Border Police; and that, in spite of them, the settlers were obliged to
protect themselves ? Not in the north.
42. I merely mention them to show that such a force as you suggest has been tried, and
found wanting ? I am aware that such a force was in existence, but, judging from
reports, 1 do not think it was sufficiently numerous.
43. It was as numerous as the present Native Police Force, and the extent of country
to be gone over was not one quarter as much ? That I cannot speak of.
44. Are you not aware that the settlers were left to protect themselves, and that
slaughters and murders were carried on to an extent unknown at the present day ? I
believe that, before any of the Police arrived, there were fewer murders, both on the
part of the blacks and the whites; and then the squatters had to protect themselves,
and they always found, whenever it was necessary to form a party of settlers for the
purpose of pursuing and punishing the blacks for some marauding expedition, that the
country was much quieter for some time afterwards.
45. Do you not think the present Native Police Force, properly officered, could be made
much more useful? Yes, but never properly efficient; and 1 maintain, from what I
have seen, that it would be almost impossible to make it so. A very peculiar class of
men would be required for the service—men who would not care to hold the office of
Lieutenant in the Force. I mean to say that it is a very difficult matter to obtain men
suitable for the purpose.
46. Do you think military men would do ? That would depend entirely upon their
characters.
47. I will just read question and answer No. 108 ;
“ Do you think that even in the more remote districts, whore the scrub abounds, it would
“ exercise a beneficial influence on the character and usefulness of the Force if there
“ were a small proportion of white men, so as to make the Force more manageable,
“ and to give the officer more confidence in acting ? In places where they are
“ likely to be required, I would suggest that the Force should be composed entirely
“ of blacks, good officers being appointed to command them, for the sole purpose of
“ pursuing the natives through the scrubs; and where scrubs do not abound, I
“ would have a chiefly white force, because I consider white men would display
“ more enterprise. One of the objections I have is, that some of the officers permit
** what are called corroborees —the gathering together of blacks from all directions,
north


“ north, south, east, and west, to one spot; that has a very baneful effect. The
“ blacks whom we employ as shepherds and stockmen, and who are very useful to
“ us, and very beneficial to the country, are obliged to attend these meetings, on
“ pain of excommunication, or something of the kind. I have known many blacks
“ who did not wish to go, but they told me they were obliged to do so. These
“ corroborees I have frequently wished the officer of the Native Police to disperse,
“ but he would merely ride among them, and send them away a few miles, without
“ seeing that every tribe went to its own neighbourhood. I attribute many murders
“ and outrages to these corroborees.”
Do you think it would be a wise thing to put a stop to these borces and corroborees ? Yes, I
think it would be very advisable.
48. Do you think it would be practicable ? I think it would.
49. Do you think the blacks would submit to such an interference with their customs ? Yes.
50. Do you think a force composed of men either selected from the regiments at home, or
from ( the military out here, and officered by officers from the regiments, with a certain number
of black trackers, would answer as troopers ? Yes; that is very similar to the proposition I
made; it embodies the principle I advocate.
51. Would it not be better, if such a proposal were carried out by the Government, that it should
be done gradually ? No, I think not; the sooner a decided change in the Force is effected,
the better it will be.
52. And the troopers shipped off to New Zealand, with their officers ? I have no doubt the
Government of that country would be glad to accept them, and that they would distinguish
themselves.
53. I now come to questions Nos. 109 and 110; —
“ You do not think any good would arise by sending any white force to the frontier
“ scrub districts ? I would have one or two sections of a purely native force at the
“ disposal of the Commandant; j:mt in some districts, within a few miles, there
“ might be a station where a combination of white men and black would be
“ judicious.”
“ I understood you that you would keep a sort of special corps for scrub service ?
“ Exactly; I would place both white and black men at the disposal of the Com-
“ mandant, and allow him to distribute them.”
And question 111 :
“ With regard to those divisions intended for scrub country, you would make it a sine
“ qua non that the officer in charge of each should be really a competent man ?
“ Yes; not because it is a scrub country, but because it is a force of blacks.”
Now, apparently you do not adhere to that opinion ? I do not altogether recall that opinion,
but, on the broad principle that, if a change is made, I would make it entire, I think the
Force ought to consist entirely of white men, with the exception of the black trackers.
54. But those trackers would be Mounted Troopers ? Yes, but the trackers would be essential.
55. Referring to questions Nos. 112 and 113 :
“ Have you had any opportunity of observing the conduct of the black troopers in their
“ encounters with the native tribes, as to whether they needlessly destroy life ? I
“ think not; my experience is, that they do not.”
“Do you think they are under the control of their officers in these encounters ? Yes,
“ moderately so. There are some instances in which they are not, but that I attribute
“ to the inefficiency of the officers. I think, if they are well officered, and the officer
“ acts as he should, they would be under control.”
Is your answer directed to the inefficiency of the officers ? And to the character of the
troopers. If I were to alter my answer at all, it would be to explain that my opinion is based
more upon what I hear, than upon what I have seen. Since I gave that evidence, I have
never been in company with the Native Police when they have had an engagement with the
blacks. I cannot speak from personal experience, but, at the same time, there have been some
very painful rumours of murders and other outrages.
56. By the Native Police troopers ? Yes.
57. By Mr. Blakeney : Have there been any blacks shot in your neighbourhood of late ? I
have not actually seen the bodies of any that have been shot.
58. Have you heard of any ? I have.
59. Where was it? I have heard of three or four near Gladstone.
60. Was that lately ? About nine or ten months ago.
61. Near your station ? Close to it.
62. Have you heard of any others ? I have heard of a great, many in the neighbourhood of
Rockhampton, but that is so far away that I do not consider it in my district.
63. From w T hat you know and have heard of the Force, do you consider there is any improve-
ment in it since you gave this evidence in 1858 ? If there is any change, it is slightly for
the better, but it is not much.
64. Du you approve of the system of appointing Cadets, so that those who join the Force have
an opportunity of learning their business before they are made lieutenants ? Yes, it is
certainly better than appointing officers who know nothing of their duties.
65. That is the present system. The Cadets are placed for several months under the
immediate inspection of the Commandant ? Yes, that is an improvement without doubt, as
they thus get an opportunity of learning their duties.
06. And the Commandant has an opportunity of testing their efficiency ?_ Yes.
67. If the present Force of Native Police were disbanded, do you think the settlers would
keep on pushing further and further into the interior—beyond Rockhampton and Maryborough
—-as they are doing now? Certainly, if a sufficient protective force were afforded them.
68. But


68. But as a white force would be of no service in the scrub, they would not care to settle
in a scrubby country ? I don’t think that would check them. I base my opinion upon what
has transpired prior to the formation of the present Force—when there was no force at alb
scrubs and similar obstacles did not prevent the settlers from pushing further towards the
frontier.
69. Yes, but at that time the settlers took up new country with the full knowledge that there
was no force ; but now they are doing it on the faith that a protective force is provided for
their security ? I think they ought to have protection, which they would have if a European
force were organized.
70. If the settlers were deprived of protection, would it not be necessary for them to go out
in greater numbers, in order to defend themselves ? No, I do not think they would
calculate upon it.
71. But, in the olden time, when there was no force, did not the settlers take a larger
number of men with them up the country than they do now ? Ido not think they made
any calculations about it. A certain number of men are always required at the head station,
who are always sufficient to protect it.
72. Would they not require more men if there were no Police ? No ; I think it is a great
mistake to suppose that a large numerical force is required; they do not take that into
consideration. I understand you to ask the question on the supposition that there was no
force of any description.
73. Yes, because you seem to doubt the efficiency of a white police in scrub country? Yes,
but while I recommend the disbanding of the Native Police, I wish to be understood that I
consider a European Force necessary. lam of opinion that the frontier men should have
the fullest protection ; but I think, if the districts were properly patrolled, there would
rarely be occasion for them to come into contact with the blacks.
74. Do you not think the payment of a white Force would involve a much greater expense ?
No, I think it would be considerably less.
75. What grounds have you for coming to this conclusion? In a European Force, the
number of troopers would be so much smaller, and there would, consequently, be fewer
officers. I believe the troopers number about one hundred and forty.
76. By the Chairman: About one hundred and twenty, although, taking into calculation
those in the new Kennedy district, there may, perhaps, be one hundred and forty. How
many, do you think, would be required, if a white Police Force were organized ? It strikes
me that about sixty would be sufficient. I think such a force would be an efficient one.
77. By Mr. Watts : Are you not of opinion that, whatever conclusion the Committee may
arrive at as to the constitution of the Force, it is absolutely necessary for the officers in
command to be moral and sober men ? It would certainly be better that they should be
moral men, but it is essential that they should ho sober.
78. You think that ia not the ease at the present time ? Do you mean the Commandant ?
79. No, the officers ? They are not all temperate, I think.
80. Do you think the reports which are prevalent, that the troopers are in the habit of
taking away gins from the various tribes, are true or not ? Perfectly true.
81. Is not that practice likely to irritate the natives very much ? It does, lam satisfied.
82. Do you think it possible for the officers to prevent it ? They might, to a certain
extent, if they attempted it, by compelling the troopers to camp apart from the natives, and
by giving them instructions not to go to the blacks’ camps.
83. Do you not think the same thing might occur, though not to the same extent, with
white troopers ? I dare say it might, but perhaps the blacks would make less objection to
them.
84. Do you think, then, it is possible to arrange those matters without causing any ill-feeling
to arise between the natives and the troopers —that the troopers should take the gins without
any objection on the part of the blacks ? I think that is a point on which the natives are
particularly susceptible, where strange blacks are concerned.
85. Prom what has come under your notice, can you say whether the gins run after the
Native Police ? I have never seen them.
86. Have you ever known an instance where it has been necessary for the officer to flog the
gins away from the camp ? No.
87. Do you not think it is from fear that the gins go to the Police camp, rather than from
any love of the Native Police ? Ido not think they have any particular attachment to the
troopers.
88. Do you think, if a White Force were established, and they were to come into collision
with the natives, and one of the latter were killed, that the natives would revenge them-
selves upon the Force by killing some white man, which they would not do in retaliation
for any punishment inflicted upon them by the Native Police '? I think not; I think they
would view a white force in the same light as they do the present Native Police Force, and
not visit their acts upon the settlers.
89. By the Chairman : Do you know Mr. Baker, an officer in the Force ? Yes.
90. Do you consider him an efficient officer ? Comparatively so.
91. Is he not in the habit of giving information to private individuals about what goes on
in the Force ? Not that lam aware of.
92. Nothing of the kind has come to your knowledge ? No. You are speaking of general
information ?
93. I mean to ask whether you are aware, from your own knowledge, or from what you
have heard from others, that Mr. Baker is in the habit of giving information to private
, individuals about what goes on in the internal management of the Force ? He is not in
the habit of doing anything of the kind, as far as my knowledge goes.
94. on


94. You must be aware that for some time past numerous charges have been made against
the Force, by means of anonymous communications to the Press, and that it is impossible
for the Committee to investigate charges which can only be traced to some anonymous sig-
nature. Do not you think the Committee are very much trammelled by the writers of
those communications not coming forward to substantiate their statements —do you think
any attention should be paid to them ? If the object of this Committee is to inquire into
any matters referred to in the newspapers, ask me any questions, and, if I have any know-
ledge of the matter, I will answer them as well as I can.
95. I am not referring to you, I disclaim all personal allusions ? Well, any information
I can give you, I shall be happy to afford.
96. Do you not think, in a matter of such grave importance, that those who prefer such
serious charges ought to come forward to substantiate them ? I can only say that lam here
to answer your-questions. But I have seen no particular charges; I have certainly made
none myself—at least no serious charges.
97. By Mr. Gore: Have you ever taken up new country in a district where the blacks
were troublesome ? I have taken up new country in the Port Curtis district, and I have
also been connected with others in taking up land in the Wide Bay district.
98. Were the blacks very bad there ? They were very troublesome.
99. Have you ever been in the Macintyre District ? No.
100. Have you not heard that the blacks are very troublesome there ? I know nothing
about it.
101. Your experience is confined to the Wide Bay district ? Yes.
102. Did the blacks commit man outrages there ? As far as my observation goes, they
were not proportionally worse than the blacks in other districts. I cannot compare the
district of Wide Bay with other districts, as I have not been in any other.
103. How many men do you think have been murdered there by the blacks in the course of
a couple of years ? There might have been twelve.
104. Were cattle driven wholesale out of the district ? No, but sheep were.
105. Were cattle killed by hundreds? No : there were no cattle to be killed-
-106. Were sheep driven away by thousands ? No, but by hundreds, —and recovered by the
settlers.
107. Have you ever been engaged in a conflict with the blacks? Yes, in recovering sheep
on the occasion I have referred to.
108. Or in revenging murders done by the blacks ? Yes.
109. Were you able to inflict punishment upon them ? Once or twice, when we found the
individuals who committed the outrages.
110. Supposing a murder had been committed by the blacks, and you had followed up their
tracks, what would you do when you came up with them ? If I were satisfied that they
were the blacks who committed the murder, I should very probably punish them.
111. Yes, but by punishing them, do you mean apprehending them ? I should first ascertain
whether they were the same blacks.
112. I am assuming that you follow their trail, with an armed party, and come up with
them ? That is a difficult question to answer : I should be guided by circumstances.
113. Would you try to catch them ? I should not attempt to noose them.
114. Or would you let them get away ? No, I should not do that. I should shoot them,
115. You would attack them, in short, without further ceremony, as anybody else would ? Yes.
116. Then you have not had any very extensive experience of the state of a disturbed
district, or of the Native Police ? Yes, I have,
117. Only in the Wide Bay district? I have had experience in one district, which is a
fair guide or criterion of any other.
118. Yes, but you know nothing about the really bad districts ? Wide Bay has always
borne a very bad character, as far as the blacks are concerned.
119. It was not like the Macintyre; I gather this from your evidence, and from other
evidence given before this Committee ? I speak from my own experience, which appears to
me to be the same as other persons’.
120. By the Chairman : Referring to Questions Nos. 31, 32, and 33, in your former
evidence; —
“ You stated that, in your opinion, the present Commandant is not an efficient man?
“ Yes.
“ Supposing any number of white troopers were sent up from Sydney to the scene of
“ the recent outrages, do you think he could manage them ? He would not control
“ them as well as a better man. I consider that a man peculiarly adapted for the
“ post may be one in five hundred.
“ Do you think the Commandant is likely to improve—he has not been there long ?
“ I believe he does his best—perhaps he is above the average.”
Do you consider, from what you know of the Commandant now, that he is above or below
the average ? He is about an average man.
121. By Mr. Ferrett : Were you in the Wide Bay district when a Mr. Bales had a station
there ? I was not, but I have heard of him.
122. Are you aware that he had a white protective force ? No.
123. Then, of course, you are not aware that it was a complete failure ? No.
124. I understood you to say that you have been in an engagement with the blacks. Have
you ever been engaged with them in brigalow or coast scrub ? I have in coast scrub, which is
more dense than brigalow.
125. You say coast scrub is more dense than brigalow—have you had any experience in
brigalow scrubs ? I have been in them frequently, but I have never been engaged with the
blacks in them. 126. In


126. In the coast scrubs where you have had engagements with them, did you secure any
of them? At the time I speak of, a species of warfare existed between the blacks and the
i settlers. We had to fight them with their own weapons, and we did not think of securing
' any of them ; some of them wore wounded.
127. Do you think white troopers, if employed with the blacks on similar occasions in the
scrubs, could secure them, or take them prisoners? Perhaps not as readily as the black
troopers, but I think there would be very little difference between them, and for this
reason : the troopers rarely capture the natives in scrub, although they tj-y to do so.
128. Do you not think from your experience, that it is very difficult to get sight o c a
blackfellow in the scrub ? It is easier for a native than for a European.
129. But are you not aware, from your own experience, that the black troopers are much
more efficient for apprehending the natives, and that they know their whereabouts much
better than the whites? Yes.
130. In the event of apprehending a black in the scrub or elsewhere, how would you
secure him ? I would tie him hand and foot,
181. Then how would you march him away from the spot? I would handcuff him if it
were necessary to take him away.
132. Has it never come under your knowledge that the blacks frequently slip their
handcuffs? Yes, if the handcuffs are too large for them.
133. Is it not often the case that their hands are smaller than their wrists, and that for
this reason they can easily get rid of the handcuffs ? I think not.
134. Have you never heard that such is the case ? No ; nor do I believe it.
135. Then you are not aware that many of them do slip their handcuffs and leg irons ?
Perhaps they do when they arc not properly secured —that is to say, when the handcuffs
are too large. I Lave known instances which proved the truth of my assertion, that the wrist
is not larger than the hand. Many of the blackfellows have been seen running away into
the bush with handcuffs on, and have had them broken by other blacks because they were
unable to slip them off.
136. Do you know anything of the habits and customs of the blacks? Yes.
137. From your own observation or from hearsay ? From my own experience.
138. Have you ever been present at a corroboree? Frequently,
139. Have you ever been present at a boree ? Never.
140. Are you aware that at their corroborccs or borees they generally concoct mischief, and
when about to commit murder, they usually enact the ceremony of murder at one of those
meetings ? From information I have obtained from among the various tribes, I believe they
do so, and that also, subsequently, at their corroborees, they enact the tragedy of the
murder that has taken place. I believe the greater portion of the injury done to the settlers
is concocted at those meetings. That is why lam particularly anxious that they should he
put a stop to.
141. Then you consider a corroboree or boree to be a disorderly meeting ? Decidedly; it
has a pernicious tendency.
142. Arc you aware that it is one of their rules, in any engagement or warfare, to take life
for life ? I have heard so, but I much doubt it. I believe it is their custom when one of
their number has been murdered, but I think it does not extend to general engagements.
143. Do you understand the rule of taking life for life to apply to the whole race of white
people, or simply to those who may have killed a blackfellow ? I think, if a blackfellow
has been killed, the blacks will visit the offence upon the family who have killed him, but
not upon the whole race of whites.
144. Then you have not known an instance where a blackfellow has been killed at one
station, and the blacks have retaliated upon the white people at an adjoining station ? No
instance of the kind has come under my knowledge, and, from my own experience, I believe
they confine their revenge to the family who have injured them.
145. Do I understand you to say that you have not had sufficient experience of the blacks
to know anything of that custom ? I did not admit that; I have had sufficient knowledge
of the blacks, but my experience is that they do not make reprisals except to revenge them-
selves upon particular individuals.
146. By Mr. Boyds :If the settlers in the outlying districts w 7 ere left to protect themselves,
would not many more of the blacks be murdered than at present, while the districts are
under the protection of the Native Police Force ? I do not think there would be more
killed, but at the same time, I wish to explain, I do not approve of the settlers being left to
protect themselves.
147. But if they were? No, Ido not think so.
148. Do you think a force of white troopers could live in the bush for a month at a time,
without rations, as the- Native Police often do ? No, I think not, and what Is more, Ido not
think the Native Police ever live a month without rations; if they do, the instances are
very rare. ‘ I may add, as far as my experience goes of their means of livelihood, that I
generally see them about the stations, and very seldom iu the bush ; that is one of my
grounds of complaint against the Force.
149. What would you propose that the pay of the white troopers should be per dicra, with
or without rations ? 2s. 6d. a day, with rations. I have referred to this question in a
written statement, which I will give as an appendix to this evidence. (See Appendix.') I
have been asked by a gentleman to-day whether I consider the working of the Force
economical.
150. Do you think it is so ? Ido not.
151. In what way is it expensive ? Ido not think the police rations arc purchased in an
economical way. Perhaps you arc aware that the officers buy the rations in small quantities,
just


£
5.
d.
Pay of 3 Lieutenants at £400 a year ...
... 1,200
0
0
,, 70 men at 2s. 6d. a day
... 8,193
6
0
Extra pay of 12 Sergeants at (id.
... 109
10
0
Rations for 70 men, and 30 extra, —100 at £30
.. 3,000
0
0
Olothina of 80 men, £7 12s. fid. each per annum, ...
610
0
0
Accoutrements, Saddlery, &c., 80 at £4 12s. fid. each per
annum 37 0
0
0
Stores, &c.
... 150
0
0
Renewing Anns (average per year)
250
0
0
Remount Horses do.
... 250
0
0
Medical Attendance
... 150
0
0
Incidental expenses
... 250
0
0
Clothing and sundry expenses for native trackers
... 467
14
0
£10,000
0
0
just as they require them. I have known them purchase provisions in the towns at retail
prices, which are enormous, particularly in some of the newly-formed townships. The
mechanical services required by the Force are employed on the spot, instead of which they
should be contracted for upon an economical scale. The Police have to pay the same price
as the settlers; for instance, in the town of Gladstone the price charged by a smith for
shoeing a horse is eight shillings, and I believe all the troopers’ horses are shod at the same
price. Now, I think a contract should have been entered into to do the work at a much
lo.wer charge. A great profit is made out of the supplies furnished to the Police in many
articles, especially in, saddlery. I have heard of one storekeeper who was supplying many
of the troopers with flour per lb.
152 Are you not aware that the Police generally get their rations from the different
stations as they patrol the district, and that they are charged at the usual price of one
shilling and sixpence for each ration ? I am speaking of the supplies they get in the
towns.
153. Are you not aware that it has been recommended to station men at the barracks who
are able to shoe horses ? I am not aware of it, but I know that the Camp Sergeants are
generally idle fellows) I think they ought to have something to do.
APPENDIX A.
In place of the Native Police Force now in existence, I would propose to form a body
of Europeans from the army, each corps of which shall be attended by two natives as
trackers or assistants j these should be brought from some distant locality.
I believe that a sufficient number of meu may be obtained from the infantry
regiments, and they would be permitted by the Government to volunteer for this service.
Their present pay is one shilling per diem, from which each soldier has to refund threepence
half penny for his daily' ration of 1 lb of-meat and 1 lb of bread) therefore the actual cash
payment is about £l3 a-year to each man.
To induce men of good character to enrol themselves in this Force, I would offer
them one shilling and sixpence a day in addition to the Imperial pay of one shilling, give
them a full ration of flour, meat, sugar, and tea, and supply them with clothing. The
pay at two shillings and sixpence a day will be some £4t> a year, winch, in addition to
clothing, would I believe, tempt many really good men to join. But besides this daily
pay, &c., I would further agree that at the termination of the period for which they should
have engaged (say r five years), and on producing a certificate from the officer, of good
conduct during that period, such men should be entitled to a grant of land or land order
to the value of £5O. #
It will of course he requisite that all the men in this Police Force remain under
Martial Regulations, and be liable to be returned to their duty in any case of breach of
discipline.
I believe that seventy men would be ample for not only the Patrol, but also for
such as may be needed for home duty, such as Camp Sergeants, and these should be chosen
for their ability to shoe horses, repair saddlery, &c., and thus effect a large saving in the
expenses, as these hitherto have been sources of heavy outlay.
Ten of the seventy men I should look upon as supernumeraries ; the remaining sixty
I would divide into twelve sections of five men each, from which five men one should be
selected as Sergeant, and have the charge of the section when on active duty.
The twelve sections I should divide into three, and each such division should he
in charge of an officer as Lieutenant, who would have a defined portion of the Colony
allotted to him, and which should be under his immediate charge. He would he responsible
for the general working of the division, both as regards the patrol and also all official
business. All his communications would be with the office direct, and not as hitherto,
through one superior.
The sixty men would he distributed as follows :
Twenty men with Lieutenant for the District of Moreton and Wide Bay.
Twenty men with Lieutenant for the District of Burnett and portion of Leichhardt.
Twenty men with Lieutenant for portion of Leichhardt and Kennedy.
It is very possible that, as the new country lately open for tender (the Kennedy) will need
especial protection, a few more (say ten) may be desirable, hut I consider that the sixty
men proposed will he quite equal to the work that has been done by the Police to this date.
The annual expense I estimate as follows :
Tim*,


Thus, instead of a white Force costing so much more than the present Native Police,
as has been suggested it would, I believe that a European corps may be worked for about
two-thirds the cost, as on the Estimates for the last two years, a sum of about or over
=£15,000 was placed upon them for this branch of service.
ALFRED H. BROWN.
APPENDIX B.
Evidence of ALFRED, BROWN, Esq., taken before a Select Committee in Sydney on the
Dawson Murders, in 1858.
THURSDAY, 15 th JULY. | 1858.
present:
Me. BUCKLEY, Mr. HODGSON,
Me. CRIBB, Me. JONES,
Mr. FORSTER, Mr. RICHARDSON,
Mr. TAYLOR.
ARTHUR HODGSON, Esq., in the Chair.
ALFRED BROWN, Esq., called in and examined ;
1. By the Chairman : You are a resident in the Wide Bay District ? Yes.
2. In what part ? Gringin is the name of my station.
3. What is the distance from Maryborough ? About seventy miles.
4. And from Port Curtis ? About a hundred miles.
5. Have you been long there ? Four or five years.
6. Did you form the station yourself? No ; it was formed by Mr. Forster.
7. Have you had many opportunities of noticing the conduct of the Native Police ? I think
I have had every opportunity.
8. Do you consider them an efficient corps ? Ido not.
9. Did you ever consider them efficient ? They were at one time—at the commencement.
10. Who was Commandant then ? Mr. Frederick Walker.
11. Their efficiency has ceased since Mr. Walker was superseded ? Yes.
12. Will you be good enough to state some of your reasons for drawing that conclusion ?
I think the principal reason of their inefficiency is that they have inefficient officers. Some
of the officers appointed are not at all adapted to the command of the Force.
13. Are you speaking generally ? It is so in many cases, or I might say in most cases.
14. Do you include the present Commandant ? Ido not think he is an efficient officer •, I
do not think he understands his business. I have seen personally very little of him ; but,
if I may judge from the officers, and the way in which the Force is conducted, I think he
is to blame in some points.
15. Will you be good enough to state to the Committee any instances of inefficiency in the
officers that have come under your notice, not mentioning names ? I consider that one
essential object of the employment of the Force is that they should be continuously-patrolling
the country, which they do not do. I consider they adhere too much to the roads, instead
of following the blacks and patrolling through the bush. I consider, also, that the officers
do not keep up that degree of discipline amongst the troopers that certainly was maintained
by Mr. Walker, and to which I attribute his efficiency. I have frequently seen officers
entirely led by their troopers; and I consider that the troopers ought not to know in which
direction they are going out, for this reason, that at the stations they make acquaintance
with the blacks, principally through the women, and I believe they give them information
which they ought not to possess, as to where the next movement of the Force will be. That
is one reason of their inefficiency, and I think the principal one.
16. Could you make any suggestions to the Committee, with the view of making the force
more efficient ? It struck me that the addition of a white force with them would be
beneficial.
17. In what proportion? I think the same proportion would not be applicable to all
districts. From what I know and have heard of portions of the Leichhardt District, where
scrub so much abounds, I scarcely think a white force there would act well; but I would
suggest that in my own neighbourhood, which I consider moderately quiet now, there should
be a force of, say four white men, and two blacks, as trackers, besides the officer. Such a
force would be sufficient in moderately quiet neighbourhoods ; but in outlying districts,
where scrub is so very general, through which it is exceedingly difficult, or I might say
impossible for white men to follow the natives with sufficient rapidity, I would have a body
of Native Police, or two, at disposal, so that in case of necessity they could follow the blacks
through the scrubs.
18. You would vary the number of white men according to the-nature of the country ?
Yes.
19. By Mr. Jones : In some districts you would have a force consisting chiefly of whites,
and in others, a force consisting chiefly of blacks ? Yes.
20. By


20. By the Chairman : You would place the whole force under one Commandant ? Yes.
My view is that the present disorganization of the force is owing principally to its being
very badly officered.
2 1 . From what cause ? Because the officers have been appointed by persons from Sydney
who know nothing about the force. I consider that the Commandant ought to have the
entire appointment of his officers. If you wanted officers for a force consisting entirely of
blacks, for the remote districts, you might then make a selection of officers for that purpose
from the w hole. I could go now and select perhaps six good officers; their sections are
moderately efficient; whereas some of them are worse than useless.
22. That you should say from your own observation ? Yes.
23. If it wore possible to send up twenty troopers from Sydney, would you not place them
immediately under the control of the Commandant, and allow him to dispose of them as he
thought proper ? Yes. I think everything should be left to the direction of the Com-
mandant. I do not know what powers are vested in the Government Resident at Moreton
Bay 3 but he appears to have the control of this force in some way. I do not think he ought
to have anything to do with it. Brisbane is quite out of the way of its operations.
24. Where would you suggest that the head-quarters of the Native Police should be ? The
head-quarters should be as nearly central as possible. If otherwise, I would have it more
to the northward, where the force is more wanted.
25. Where would that be ? I think the Burnett would be as good a place as any; that is
where it was in Mr. Walker’s time; but now the squatters have gone out further to the
north than they were then.
26. Would you approve of Maryborough ? No; the only advantage would be, that it would
bo economical for the supply of the force ; but that gain would be very inconsiderable. I
think Gayndah a good place.
27. There would then be inland carriage ? Yes, eighty miles, from Maryborough. The
Native Police generally get their rations at stations, so that there would be very little
carriage.
23. Do they get rations at stations without any difficulty ? They have not latterly ; many
persons have objected to supply them on account of their inefficiency; and not only that,
but the difficulty of getting the rations paid for under Mr. Walker’s management.
29. The difficulty of getting paid has ceased, has it not ? For supplying the present force
we have always been paid. I allude to money that has been due.
30. By Mr. Richardson : In the districts you have spoken of, where the scrubs are dense,
would you have any proportion of whites at all in the Police Force ? No; what I meant
was, to have no whites at all in such districts, where you can get efficient native troopers.
I have known white men to attempt to follow the blacks in the sernbs, but it is almost
impossible to do so. They are obliged to strip off their clothing, in order to get through
rapidly.
31. Yov stated that, in your opinion, the present Commandant was not an efficient man ?
Yes.
82. Supposing any number of white troopers were sent up from Sydney to the scene of the
recent outrages, do you think he could manage them ? He would not control them as well
as a better man. I consider that a man peculiarly adapted for the post may be one in five
hundred.
33. Do you think the Commandant is likely to improve—he has not been long there ? I
believe he does his best. Perhaps he is above the average.
34. Do you think it necessary for the native troopers, when first enlisted, to undergo any
training at head-quarters ? No ; Ido not think there could be any benefit from that. I
think a few recruits should be put with a force that is in training, and be sent out at once
on an expedition. They could have no better training,
35. As I understand you, you do not think the present system a good one, where the scrubs
are not so dense as to render it necessary that native troopers should be employed to pursue
them ? No; I suggest that there should be some white troopers in such cases. If a black
force were well officered, I dare say it would do, and it would be economical; but the wild
tribes require to be followed, and a constant system of patrolling to be kept up, and, as a
general rule, the black troopers are not suited to these duties in open country so well as
white men. Their habits and dispositions are the reverse of energetic ; and it is only under
excitement that they work well. I consider that a white force would be much more diligent,
and always willing to do some work.
86. You said that one reason of the inefficiency of the present force is, that the native
troopers toll the blacks where they are going ? That is one element of inefficiency.
37. That could be easily obviated ? If you had proper officers it could; but that is the
difficulty. Some of the officers of the force are intemperate in their habits.
38. By the Chairman : That is generally known to be the case, is it not ? Yes, that some
of them arc intemperate.
39. By Mr. Richardson : Would you enlist blacks as troopers at a distance from where
they are to be employed ? Decidedly.
40. Where do you think would be the best place to enlist them ? I should think some-
where about the Murray. You could not have a better class of men than those Mr.
Walker brought from that part of the country.
41. Do you attribute the circumstance of Mr. Walker having got good blacks to his good
management ? Perhaps so. That was partly the reason of his efficiency. I think he had
tact in the management of the force.
42. Which you think the present Commandant does not possess ? I have not seen so much
of the present Commandant as I did of Mr. Walker; but from what I can gather, I think
he has not as much tact, 4-3, By


43. By Mr. Forster ; Bo you consider that the presence of the Native Police Force, in its
present condition, is useful or mischievous? I think it is mischievous.
44. Bo you attribute the occurrence of a larger number of murders than usual to the
inefficiency of the force ? Yes,
45. Bo you think that if there had been no force at all so many murders would have
occurred ? I do not think they would.
46. In speaking of the inefficiency of the force since Mr. Walker’s dismissal, do you mean
to infer that it was never inefficient under Mr. Walker himself? No, I do not say that; it
was inefficient at times.
47. Bo y m not consider that it was in a very inefficient state long before his dismissal;
Yes, decidedly.
48. Bo you consider that his dismissal was a necessary act ? Yes, an act of justice; because
he was so intemperate.
49. May it not be, then, that the inefficiency to which Mr. Walker reduced the force has
remained from that day to the present—that in some degree he was the cause of its present
inefficiency ? Yes, but from a different reason,—it was from his intemperate habits that his
inefficiency arose.
50. You consider that his intemperance led to his becoming unfit for his post? Yes.
51. In what respect do you consider him to have been so far superior to other men in
managing this force—was it from a natural power of command, or from his long familiarity
with the natives ? I cannot describe it better than by saying that he had more tact.
5 2. You mean that he understood the natives ? He understood the native character, and
what was necessary to make them act as a force.
53. I think you said a man of that kind it is very difficult to obtain ? I think so.
54. Then, in fact, the inefficiency of the force, if it arises from a want of that kind, is
exceedingly difficult to remedy? Yes; you not only require the Commandant to be good,
but you require his subordinates to be so also.
55. Bo you attribute any of the pro ent inefficiency of the Native Police to the circumstance
that the troopers have been selected from districts too near the scene of their employment ?
Yes; they have selected men where they ought not; they have taken them from the
neighbourhoods where they are to act. I have stated that the force, in its present state, is
worse than useless, and that is one reason. These men, being near their own tribes, are
constantly running away, and are now amongst the blacks, who, through them, are acquainted
with many of our tactics.
56. Amongst the secondary causes of inefficiency, you place the selection of troopers from
tribes in the neighbourhood ? Yes.
57. Bo you not consider also, that another of the secondary causes is the constant intercourse
carried on by the black troopers with the women of the tribes in the neighbourhood ? I do
not think that would be of much consequence if the officer did not tell his troopers where
he was going.
58. You are aware that wherever the Native Police encamp they are always attended by a
large number of the women of the tribes ? They are in some instances ; but Ido not think
it is general.
59. Where it does occur does it not inevitably lead to the dissemination of the intended
movements of the force amongst the blacks? Yes. The troopers themselves should not
know what was going to occur.
60. Then you think that if the officer in command exercised a proper discretion in keeping
silence as to his intentions, no harm would result otherwise from this intercourse ? Not so
much harm.
61. Bo you think the presence of these native women, and the intercourse thus going on,
might not lead the troopers, in some cases, to neglect their duty—to show, in fact, a sort of
favoritism to one tribe more than to another, when they are required to act ? Yes, I think
it would.
62. In that way it would act prejudicially ? It does now, because the troopers are chosen
from the immediate neighbourhood. If they were selected from the Murray, or any distant
district, Ido not think it would have so much effect. Again, if they were constantly on
the move, as they should be in patrolling, they could have very litile connection with the
women of any particular tribe.
63. Bo not the gins travel with them ? They do; but they are said to belong to each
trooper.
64. They are their wives in a certain way ? Yes. Each trooper is supposed to have a
spare horse, and I have repeatedly seen the gins riding these spare horses. That is a thing
the officers are to blame for.
65. Bo you think it is for the public benefit that the wives of the troopers should accompany
them in that way ? I should imagine not.
66. It would be impossible, I presume, to prevent the troopers from having access to the
native women ? I think it would.
67. Have you observed at all that the officers since Mr. Walker's time have in their
demeanour and in their intercourse with their men shown an improper familiarity—that
they have treated them in a way that has led to their entertaining rather a feeling of con-
tempt for their officers ? I think they have.
68. Have you observed that very often to prevail amongst the young officers ? I cannot say
very often; instances have come under my notice.
69 It leads to insubordination amongst the troopers ? Unquestionably.
70. In many cases, do you not think the troopers have had the management of their own
movements —that they could do as they liked, because the officer felt himself unable to
eontro


control them ? In.some cases that has been so. That arises from officers being sent up who
know nothing of what should be done; and when once they have yielded themselves to be
guided by their troopers, they cannot well regain their authority.
71. Do you not think that young men might be selected who would get over that first
incapacity ? I have seen instances of it.
72. Rave not the cases you allude to been those, not of young men, but of men with regard
to whom there is good reason to suspect that they were previously of intemperate habits
habits which, in fact, unfitted them for other offices, but which were overlooked when they
were transferred to these remote localities? Yes.
73. So that the objection does not lie so much against young men, if properly selected, as
against men who have been found unfit in other places, and have been put into these offices
for which they are also unfit ? The objection is against men that should not have been
appointed—that I would not myself have appointed—from the evident failing they had.
74. Yon do not approve of the combination of blacks with whites, in general, as troopers?
I think there should he rather more white troopers than blacks, in ordinary cases.
75. Do you not think a proportion of one white trooper to two blacks would be sufficient ?
I think a larger proportion of white men would be better.
76. The presence of white men would give the officer in command of each section greater
confidence in doing his duty, and in controlling his force ? I think it would, in a general
way.
77. May not the want of control that you speak of on the part of young officers have arisen
very often from a feeling of insecurity and a want of confidence in themselves, which would
have some chance of being removed by the presence of w r hite troopers ? Exactly so. Eor
that reason I recommend an almost entirely white force, where the country is tolerably
quiet.
78. Has it come under your notice that a proposal was made some time ago that the
Denches of Magistrates should have power to report as to the condition and proceedings of
the Native Police, without any power of interference with them ? lam aware the proposal
was made.
79. Do you approve of it ? I do.
80. You think it would have a beneficial effect? I do.
81. You w r ould not give the magistrates any powder of active interference? No; I think
the direction of all active matters should he left entirely to the Commandant. If you have
not confidence in him you can dismiss him.
82. Would you give the absolute appointment of his officers to the Commandant, or would
you allow the Government to exercise a veto after he had appointed ? He ought not to be
swayed in any way by the Government.
83. Might not the entrusting this power solely to the Commandant lead to something like
the same state of affairs as that which existed in Mr. Walker’s time, so that serious dissa-
tisfaction might arise long before a remedy could he applied ? Of course there must he
some resource in cases of that kind.
84. How would you propose to check the exercise of this extraordinary power on the part
of the Commandant? In any case, it would not he until after the appointment was made
that any officer would be found to be unfit. If the appointment were left in the hands of
the Government, and the Commandant were to recommend an unfit man to the Government
for appointment, the Government would of course, in blindness, approve of it—not being
able to tell whether ho were fit or unfit.
85. Have you not been aware that several appointments have been made of men who, from
the very first, were obviously unfit for the office? Yes.
86. Such a thing might occur again, even under the Commandant, if he were a bad officer—.
he might appoint unfit men. Might not, in that case, a state of things, arise that would
lead to serious mischief before a remedy could be applied? Perhaps it would he wise to
leave some power with the Government; but I would interfere as little as possible with the
Commandant.
87. By Mr. Buckley : What course is adopted in the event of the tooopers being obliged
to pursue the blacks into the scrubs—are white men found to he of any service ? They are
not generally found serviceable ; they are not quick enough.
88. How do the officers manage when the blacks are pursued into the scrub by the native
troopers? They generally stay outside.
89. Would not that he the case with white troopers? I think they would get over it. 1
do not imagine they would ever he as well able to got through the scrub as blacks ; but they
would acquire a degree of celerity by practice.
90. If there were a very strong party of blacks to drive out of a scrub, what would he their
position if the number of native troopers in each division were not sufficient to drive them
out ? A few troopers could drive out almost any number. I should not he at all afraid of
eight men attempting to drive out a hundred blacks.
91. Have you never heard of two or three hundred being in a scrub 1 There are seldom
more than two hundred fighting men together.
92 Do you think eight men would he sufficient to drive out that number ? Quite.
93. By Mr. Jones : Are black troopers difficult to manage, in your opinion, generally ? No,
I think not, provided they are managed judiciously from the commencement.
94. What is necessary to their judicious management? They never should be allowed to he
idle for any time together. A degree of discipline should also be insisted on—particularly
with regard to cleanliness, and the proper condition of their arms and accoutrements.
95. You think it is difficult to get officers to manage the blacks properly ? That is one of
the difficulties. You require sixteen or eighteen officers, and out of these you might get six
or eight good ones. 96. From


96. From jour knowledge and experience of the Native Police Force, you think it is difficult
to obtain the services of men who are competent, and have a natural aptitude for managing
blacks ? I judge that it is difficult from the late appointments.
97. In the majority of cases you think the persons appointed are not well qualified ? That
is my impression.
98. And in consequence of that the force has been inefficient, and, in some eases, actually
mischiev. us ? Yes.
99. Looking at the difficulty of getting competent men, as proved by the selections already
made, do you not think some change in the composition of the force is shown to be necessary 1
I do.
100. Do you believe that white men are more easily managed, by the average class of officers,
than black troopers ? I think they are.
101. You think there are special requisites, not often found in men, to enable them to
command black troopers ? Yes.
102. It is only such men as Mr. Walker, men of the same stamp, that are likely to be
successful in their management ?Do you allude to the Commandant—l thought you were
also speaking of the junior officers ?
103. I speak of the officers generally, —are you not led, by the experience you have acquired
of the management of the Native Police, to believe that it is very difficult to find men with
these special requisites ? I think it is quite possible to find them if you pay them well
enough.
104. Can you account for the circumstance that they have not been found up to this time ?
I do not think the Government have taken sufficient trouble in selecting proper men.
105. Do you think any guarantee can be taken that the Government will act differently in
future —that what has been is not likely to be again ? I think it is very likely to occur again.
I have no confidence in the appointments by the Government.
106. Do you believe that if the character of the force -were changed to a certain extent, —
that is to say, if a certain proportion of white men -were combined with it, —it would be
more easy of management than it is as a purely Native Force ? I have expressed my opinions
before on that subject,—that in some districts au entirely Native Force would be advisable, and
in quieter districts, where a patrol only would be possibly necessary, that nearly all white
men should bo employed.
107. But the point, on which I wish your opinion is, whether, if a change were made in the
composition of the force —if there were an infusion, more or less, of white men—it would
be likely to he better managed than a purely Native Force ? It would.
108. Do you not think that even in the more remote districts, where the scrub abounds, it
would exercise a beneficial influence on the character and usefulness of the force if there
were a small proportion of white men, so as to make the force more manageable, and to give
the officer more confidence in acting ? In places where they are likely to be required, I
would suggest that the force should be composed entirely of blacks, good officers being,
appointed to command them, for the sole purpose of pursuing the natives through the scrubs ;
and where scrubs do not abound, I would have a chiefly white force, because I consider white
men would display more enterprise. One of the objections I have is, that some of the officers
permit what are called corroborees —the gathering together of blacks from all directions, north,
south, east, and west, to one spot. That has a very baneful effect. The blacks whom we
employ as shepherds and stockmen, and who are very useful to us and very beneficial to
to the country, are obliged to attend these meetings, on pain of excommunication, or something
of the kind. I have known many blacks who did not wish to go, hut they have told me they
were obliged to do so. These corroborees I have frequently wished the officer of Native
Police to disperse ; but he would merely ride among them and send them away a few miles,
without seeing that every tribe went to its own neighbourhood. I attribute many murders and
outrages to these corroborees.
109. You do not think any good would arise by sending any white force to the frontier scrub
districts ? I would have one or two sections of a purely native force at the disposal of the
Commandant ; hut in some districts, within a few miles, there might be a station where a
combination of white men and black would bo judicious.
110. I understood you that you would keep a sort of special corps for scrub service? Exactly.
I would place both white and black men at the disposal of the Commandant, and allow him to
distribute them.
111. With regard to those divisions intended for scrub country, you would make it a sine
qud non that the officer in charge of each should be really a competent man ? Yes ; not
because it is scrub country, but because it is a force of blacks.
112. Have you had any opportunity of observing the conduct of the black troopers in their
encounters with the native tribes, as to whether they needlessly destroy life ? I think not.
My experience is that they do not.
113. Do you think they are under the control of their officers in these encounters ? Yes,
moderately so. There are some instances in which they are not; but that I attribute to the
inefficiency of the officers. 1 think if they are well officered, and the officer acts as he should,
they would be under control.
114. Do you think they are likely to be as much under control when actually engaged in
encounters as a white force would ? Not quite.
115. And, therefore, there is more risk of their taking life unnecessarily than (here would he
with a white force, or a force containing a large proportion of white men? Yes, I think
there is.
116. By Mr. Taylor : If there were more white men than there are at present, would they
require the same number of officers ? Yes,. I think so, for this reason, that there must he
an officer


an officer to each section. The sections are small. With regard to the selection of officers,
I would suggest that you would be more likely to hud the description of officers you require
in the way of sergeants —in that rank in life.
117. By the Chairman ; Would you approve of a white trooper being attached to a body of
native troopers to look after the saddlery; are you aware that the saddlery is very much
neglected ? I think very likely it is.
118. Do you think one white man to each section of black troopers would he sufficient to
look after the saddlery ? I think one white man to twenty blacks ought to he sufficient for
that purpose, or he might look after forty.
119. I mean that this man should be a trooper, but that he should also see that the native
troopers take care of the saddlery 1 Unless that saddler were a good trooper, I would rather
pay a saddler to attend to the whole force.
120. You do not approve of Brisbane as head-quarters? I do not.
121. On account of its not being central ? On account of its not being central.
122. Arc you prepared to point out to the Committee what would be the best spot ? If
Brisbane does not require protection from the force still, I would have it even more north
than Gayndah. I think if you have a seaport town, Gladstone would he the best place.
123. Is not Gladstone central ? It is very central now. There are always teams going in
and out thence in every direction.
124. Under all the circumstances within your knowledge, would you consider that sending
up from twenty to twenty-five troopers from Sydney to the scene of the murders would be
beneficial? Yes.
125. Is that your decided opinion ? It is.
12(5. Have you allowed the blacks in at your station? Yes.
127. Always? Always.
128. Have you suffered from them ? I have had no person killed on my station, hut I have
had them injured.
129. Are the blacks generally allowed in, in your part of the country? Yes. There is
scarcely any station in my neighbourhood where they are not allowed in. I speak of the
station where we are living ; but I am forming a station where we would never think of allow-
ing them in.
130. By Mr. Richardson : Do you think it desirable they should he allowed in ? I think
so, where they are quiet.
131. Can you gather anything of what is going on amongst the tribes, or of their intentions,
from the blades who come into the stations ? Very rarely.
132. How would you enlist the troopers? I think it most essential that some power of
control should be possessed by the officer over the men, and in the enlistment of the natives I
would advise the adoption of regulations very similar to martial law. At present the troopers
leave with impunity. We appear to have no power of punishing. In the case of European
troopers also, a desertion by them I would treat, or rather have the power of treating, with
severe punishment.
POLLET CAEDEW, Esq., called in and examined : — ■
1. By the Chairman : Y r ou have been a squatter for some years in the Upper Dawson
District? Yes, for some years.
2. Before the establishment of the Native Police Force? Yes.
3. When the squatters had to protect themselves ? Yes.
4. Were you out when the Police first came up ? Yes, in the District of Moreton.
5. Do you think the establishment of the Native Police Force has had a beneficial effect ?
Yes, altogether, I think so.
6. Do you remember that a few years ago, in consequence of some stories which were
circulated about the Police, such as have been brought forward now, the Force was dis-
banded ? Y r os.
7. And that the Commandant was dismissed for drunkenness and inefficiency? Y r es.
8. And for a considerable period there was no Commandant at all ? Yes, I recollect the
time.
9. Was not the Force placed under the Superintendent in Sydney ? Yes.
10. Y r ou had a station then upon the Dawson? Yes.
11. Do you remember the Frazer murders ? Yes.
12. Was not that a horrible affair ? Yes, there were eleven persons killed in one
night.
13. Including the murder of some women ? Yes ; Mrs. Frazer and her four daughters
w T ere murdered, her three sons, and their tutor, and two men.
14. To what cause do yon attribute those murders ? To the inefficiency, at that time,
of the Police Force ; in fact they were unable to do anything. Mr. Eoss was the officer,
but he had only a boy and a man with him, and was quite incapable of affording pro-
tection.
15. The Force was then in a very inefficient state ? Yes, perfectly useless.
16 Is it not true that some of the disbanded troopers were concerned in that outrage ?
I cannot say; it was reported to be the case.
17. It was believed that they were at the bottom of it ? Yes.
18. 'Without


18. Without reference to those murders, was not the district in a very dangerous state ?
Yes, the blacks killed eight men on my station, and two on Mr. Yaldwyn’s, all within
the period of eleven months.
19. When was that ? It was in 1857 and 1858 that my men were killed, and 1 think
the others were killed in 1859.
20. And it was in consequence of those murders that the Government of New South
Wales determined to re-organize the Force ? I think it was re-organized before that,
although it was not in proper working order. Mr. Morisset was out on the Dawson just
after these murders, on my station.
21. The force, in fact, was in process of re-organization, but not complete ? Yes.
22. It has been completed since ? Yes.
23. What has been the state of the country since the Force was in an efficient condi-
tion ? As far as I know, there has been no trouble w T ith the blacks out there. Of course,
they will occasionally rob the huts, but there have been no murders.
24. Do you consider that the Police Force, in its present state, is the means of prevent-
ing murders on both sides ? I do.
25. You are aware that a great extent of new country has been taken up lately? Yes.
26. And you are also aware that the squatters take up country with much greater security
than they did before ? Yes, certainly.
27. Do you ever hear of outrages now committed by the blacks upon the whites? No,
nothing serious.
28. Do you consider the Native Police Force at present in an efficient state? Yes,
nearly as much so as it is possible to be. I think some little improvement might be
made in the working of the Force.
29. What improvement do you suggest ? I do not think any alteration is required in
the Force, but I think there might be some improvement with regard to the officers. 1
think, too, the best officers should be sent to the moat difficult stations.
30. You are aware, I suppose, that a good many charges have been brought against
them—that they have been charged with slaughtering the blacks unnecessarily? Yes
I have seen statements of that nature in the papers.
31. Have any such cases come under your notice ? No ; I have heard of them only.
32. Are the Native Troopers generally under the proper control of their officers ? Well,
I think so, generally: I have never observed anything to the contrary.
33. Have you ever been out with them ? Yes ; that is, some years ago.
34. Do you think the fault at present is in the inefficiency of the officers? Yes, if there
is any fault, that is where it lies; they do not possess sufficient judgment in all eases.
Of course, the proper working of the Force depends entirely upon the officers; that is
generally acknowledged.
35. Are you aware that some of them are addicted to intemperate habits ? I have never
seen it myself. I think the officers, as a body, are generally too young, and they want
experience.
36. Then you would not recommend any alteration in the constitution of the Force ?
No.
37. Do you think the plan which has been proposed, to incorporate white men with the
Force, would answer ? No, it would never work.
38. Have you ever seen it tried ? I have never seen it.
39. But that is your opinion ? Yes, I think the Police should be withdrawn from all
towns, and kept entirely as a Border Force.
40. It has probably come to your knowledge that a large extent of country has been
taken up by new arrivals from the other colonies, upon the strength of the existence of a
protective Force of that kind ? Yes, undoubtedly without a protective force few per-
sons would risk taking up new country as fast as has been done lately.
41. You are aware that formerly the officers were appointed by the Government of New
South Wales ; that such a course was objected to ; and that since then the appointments
have been made by the Commandant. Do you think that is an improvement ? I think
the Commandant ought to have the power of recommending officers to the Government,
as he must be the best judge of their efficiency.
THURSDAY, 27 th JUNE, 1861.
present:
Mb. MACKENZIE, Mr. FERRBTT,
Mr. WATTS, Mr. RO.YDS,
Mr. GORE, Mr. MOFFATT,
Mr. BLAKENEY, | Mr. FITZSIMMONS,
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
Lieutenant CARR called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman :• You are an Officer in the Native Police Force ? Yea.
2. How long have you been in the Force ? Going on for five years.
3. You received your appointment from the New South Wales Government? Yes.
4. Where have you been stationed during this period 1 All through the Colony—at
Port Curtis, Rockhampton, the Lower Dawson, the Upper Dawson, Maranoa, and the
Condamine. 5. Where


5. Where have you been lately stationed ? lam at present stationed in the Maranoa
district.
6. As Second Lieutenant ? Yes.
7. Who is the First Lieutenant there ? Mr. Walker.
8. When did you join the Force ? It was just when Mr. Morisset was made Com-
mandant.
9. Where were you stationed when the Frazer murders took place on the Upper
Dawson —at Hornet Bank ? On the Lower Dawson. I was brought up then to the
Upper Dawson.
10. After that affair took place ? Yes.
11. Do you find the country quieter in general than it was when you first joined—are
there fewer murders of whites by the natives, and of natives by the whites—fewer on
either side ? There are certainly very much fewer murders by the blacks—in fact they
are of very rare occurrence.
12. You were once, I believe, —about two years ago, if I recollect right—travelling with
a party on the Lower Dawson, and encamped at the station of a Mr. M‘Nab, who is
since dead? Yes.
13. You were encamped there one night, and during the night in question, you were
attacked by the blacks ? Not attacked.
14. Well, will you explain the circumstances to the Committee ? I was encamped at
Mr. M‘Nab’s station ; I was in Mr. M'Nab’s hut, and my troopers were encamped in a
tent, as the night was bad, at, I should say, about a hundred and fifty yards from the
house. I was in bed—it was an open kind of arrangement, the house was not com-
pletely finished, and there were no doors to it—and I was awoke by the firing of a carbine,
and jumped up. I knew the report came from the direction of my camp party, and
found my troopers scattered about over the place. When I could get up with any of
them, I found that, just about the time I heard the carbine discharged, one of them, the
corporal of the section, had been to light his pipe—he got out of the tent to light his
pipe, and saw a black standing close under a tree near him; he then looked about, and
saw several more in the neighbourhood. He awoke the remainder of the men quietly,
and started out after the blacks, fired on them, and hunted them off the station. They
saw the tracks of the blacks, and followed them.
15. Were you not with them? No; I was awoke by hearing the carbine fired, and
when I got to the camp the troopers were dispersed after the blacks.
16. Who was the corporal in charge—white or black ? Black. I saw the tracks of the
blacks. There was a rumour afterwards that this was all imagination on the part of the
troopers, but it was not so ; I have documents with me in Brisbane to prove it. It was
found necessary to have the case investigated, and I have copies of the documents
relating to the investigation.
17. Were any of the blacks killed? No.
18. The blacks in that part of the country are in the habit of making attacks at night,
are they not ? A little before daylight, generally.
19. By Mr. Blakeney ; You were brought, you say, after the Hornet Bank murder to
the Upper Dawson ? Yes.
20. How soon after the Hornet Bank murder were you there ? A very short time ;
I should say four or five days, to the best of my recollection.
21. Did you follow the tracks of the party of natives who had committed the murder ?
I followed the blacks connected with the murder, but I did not follow their tracks from
Hornet Bank; I followed them from another station, knowing them to be the blacks
concerned in the murder.
22 Did you come up with any of the blacks ? Yes.
23. Did you shoot any ? I did.
24. About how many ? Three or four.
25. Was any property found, and identified ? Yes; there were some clothes in their
possession.
26. Were the blacks that you shot in possession of any of the property ? There were
clothes in the camp that belonged to these blacks.
27. Were these clothes identified by the surviving Mr. Frazer, as having been taken
from Hornet Bank ? I can’t remember.
28. Or by any other person ? I think they were by some one, but lam not sure.
29. As part of the plunder of Hornet Bank? Yes.
30. Do you recollect being sent for to Mr. Coxen’s station, in the month of March,
twelve months ago ? Yes.
31. What occurred there ? I arrived there, and found a mob of blacks encamped close
to the head station.
32. Do you know what blacks they were ? All Dawson blacks.
33. Well, what occurred? We had a row.
34. Did they make any attack on you? Yes; I got to the camp, and was about to
parley with them. I endeavoured to find out what their object in coming up to the
head station was, and to investigate the charge made against them, and then they
attacked me.
35. In what way ? They sent a shower of spears, nullah-nullahs, and boomerangs after
us.
36. Were you struck? Yes ; and my wrist was severely hurt. Several of my men were
struck, and one speared.
37. You then fired on them, I suppose ? Yes.
38. Were any killed ? Yes. 39. How


39. How many ? Fifteen.
40. Are these Dawson blacks a bad -set ? The worst blacks lam acquainted with.
41. Did you remark any particular one killed, that you knew to have been accused of
being concerned in the Frazer murders, of the name of Baulie ? Yes.
42. Had you a warrant for the apprehension of Baulie ? There was a warrant out
against him.
43. As one of the Frazer murderers ? Yes, as one of the principal men,
44. Did you know him personally ? Yes.
45. He was one that attacked you ? Yes, he w 7 as there during the fight; even when
several of the blacks were shot, he encouraged them to go on fighting, by telling them
not to give up —that we were near the end of our cartridges, which were, close up, done.
He saw me giving cartridges out of my own pouch to some of the boys with me. With
my own ears I heard him say that in good English.
46. Do you recollect the murder at Mr. Macartney’s? Yes; I was the officer who
punished the blacks in the first instance.
47. Did you come up with the blacks ? Yes, about thirty hours after they committed
the murder.
48. Were any of the blacks killed 1 Yea, several.
49. Did you find any stolen property in their possession? Yes; about a hundred
weight.
50. Of what description ? All kinds—books, clothing, fire-arms, ball-cartridges,
powder in flasks, cannisters of caps, frying-pans, shot-belts, Ac., Ac. It required five
gins to carry it back—we put it in four sacks.
51. That property was identified? Yes, by Mr. Macartney; he was with me at the
time.
52. Were you in the district where the Castle Creek murders took place, at Mr. Deed’s ?
Yes.
53. How many were murdered there ? Five men,
54. Five of the servants ? Bushmen and shepherds—they w r ere all whites. I believe
it was five—either four or five.
55. Did you follow the blacks up then? Hot in the first instance : I was on duty "on
the Upper Dawson, and was afterwards called back, on duty, to my own district. Mr.
Murray followed them up, and gave them a severe dressing.
56. Did you follow them afterwards ? On getting back to my station, I found instruc-
tions from Mr. Murray, directing me to make a patrol in a certain direction, where these
blacks were supposed to be. He had had a skirmish with them, and expected them to
come in by another way ; and, acting on these instructions, I intercepted them. There
were eight men killed, and they had got some property which they had taken from a
hut—among other things, wedges for splitting, and a small axe, which were identified
by Mr. Deed, of Castle Creek.
57. Were any of these blacks identified as those who committed the Frazer murder ?
Yes, one, to the best of my belief, who was commonly reported as one of the leading
men concerned in the Frazer murder.
58. He was one of those that were shot ? Yes—a man named Double-guts.
59. That was the tribe that committed the Hornet Bank murders ? lam not sure what
the name of the tribe was.
60. Did Mr. Frazer state the number that attacked his place ? Yes.
61. Was it a pretty large mob? Yes, a large mob : I can’t remember what was the
number.
62. I believe they are now mostly extinct ? Well, the Dawson tribe is considerably
thinned, and I think the worst lot of them have disappeared. There is one man we have
warrants for, and who gives us any amount of trouble at the present time.
63. Do you allow your men to fire on the blacks indiscriminately? Never.
64. Do you ever fire on them, unless you are tracking them after the offence of murder,
or attempt to commit murder? Never.
65. When you track them after cattle stealing, what is your practice ? I must correct
myself in answer to the former question, about firing indiscriminately. There are cases
in which, in dense scrub, the blacks get out of sight close to the camp, and in attacking
a camp we often have not the means to direct a pursuit, and have been obliged to fire
upon them.
66. Has it been when out after blacks, who had committed, or attempted to commit
murder, that you fired ? Of course.
67. Men against whom you had warrants? Yes ; I have tracked men from the scenes
of murder, as in the case of Baulie.
68. When you are after blacks, who have been stealing or slaughtering cattle, what is
your practice ? Well, I had a case of that the other day, in the Maranoa district; and
I acted then, as I always do act, when I get the blacks in such country as I can deal
with them. The other day I tracked a mob of blacks from killing cattle ; I tracked
them for about sixty miles, and came up with them encamped in the scrub—a pretty
open one ; when we came in sight of the blacks, they attempted to break into the scrub,
but I gave the troopers instructions, coming up, as to how they were to act, if we got an
opportunity. So they intercepted them—got between them and the main scrub, and
brought every soul of them back to the open country.
69. About how many were there ? I should say about 130 or 140.
70. What did you do when you got them surrounded ? When we had surrounded them,
1 got off my horse, and witu one or two troopers went through the camp and examined
the contents, and found a quantity of meat, quite fresh. 71. Quite


71. Quite fresh ? Yes.
72. You tracked them till you came upon them ? I never lost the trail for half a
minuute from the scene of the cattle slaughtering.
73. Did you make any prisoners t Three of the principal, on whom I found the fat and
the meat—and, in fact, they deserved a much more severe punishment than I gave
them.
74. But you did not Are on that mob ? Not a shot was fired.
75. You make a distinction, then, in following blacks against whom you have warrants
for murders, or attempts to commit murder, and those who have beeu stealing or
slaughtering cattle? Indeed I do—a very great distinction ; the latter, generally get off
pretty easily.
70. Unless in the dense scrub, have you full control over your men ? Perfect control.
/7. Tou have held this perfect control over your men during four years and a half?
Indeed I have.
78. You have never been absent from duty-till this week from the day you joined the
Force ? I never have been.
79. What is your opinion, from your large experience in the Force, with regard to
mixing the blacks with white troopers ? I would not entertain any idea of it.
80. Do you think it could bo managed ? No, Ido not.
81. For what reason ? For several: I have considered the subject a good deal : and, in
the first place, I don’t think you would get blacks and whites to work amicably' together
—I don’t think yon could do it. In the next place, I know that white troopers would
be perfectly useless in the bush, in anything like scrubby country. Of course, if we had
the trackers with us, and they stuck to us, we should be brought into the neighbourhood
of the blacks, hut we should see nothing of them. Black troopers can come up with
them, hut it would be perfectly impossible for a body of white men to do so.
82. Would whites he able to subsist in the bush, when their rations wore consumed ?
No.
83. Have you had any instance brought under your notice of the rations of the black
troopers being consumed, mid of their subsisting without them 1 Yes, they are very
frequently out of rations, when on duty.
84. For how long ? I can remember their being without rations for as many as nine
days, on one occasion.
85. How do you subsist generally' ? By the troopers providing mo with food.
86. You and your men fare alike ? 5 es, on those occasions we live on roots, and a few
odd opposuma. On one occasion we wore very badly off, when after blacks who had
committed a very serious outrage ; we could not act, as on other occasions, and shoot
game.
87. You do not think wdiite troopers would be able to do that ? No, indeed, Ido not.
Another serious objection to having black trackers with a body of white men in the
bush is, that there might be a row, which you might not hear of at the moment, and
there would bo nothing to prevent these trackers—who, of course, would be obliged to do
all the duty of tracking, and to go out to find horses—if they took it into their heads,
from walking off, and leaving me and my' white men in the bush. That might take
place in a strange country, and it might take us weeks to get hack—if, in fact, we got
back at all.
88. How is the service now supplied with regard to clothing ? At present our supplies
are not regular.
89. I believe January is the usual time for issuing blankets and clothing to the troopers ?
It has not been the usual time since I have been in the Force, but I presume it ought
to be.
90. Have you up to this period received any blankets or clothing this present year ?
No.
91. Have the troopers suffered much in consequence ? Of course, they have suffered
from cold.
92. In what state is the saddlery supplied? The saddlery we have had to work with
since I have been in the Native Police Force, seems to have been made for the purpose
of cutting the horses" backs.
93. Is it very' bad? Very bad. I saw the new saddlery for the Burdekin Police, of
which I approved. I think it is a wondrous improvement upon the present saddlery.
94. In what state arc the arms? Very miserable, indeed—very old, and half useless,
almost.
95. Are you supplied pretty regularly with ammunition ? We are out at present; in
my' division there is no ammunition, but I understand from the Secretary, that he has
just made up some to send us.
96. Have yon been obliged to make it, of late ? Yes; it has been made at the Police
Camp for the last three months.
97. Have you been unable to attend a requisition lately, in consequence of a want of
ammunition ? Not altogether from that; but that has been one of the principal reasons.
98. Where is your station at present ? Our barrack is on the Bungil Creek, in the Cou-
damine district.
99. Would you suggest any alterations in the disposition of the Force there, or that any
outposts should be formed? There are three sections stationed at the Bungil Creek; a
division comprises three officers, and three sets of men—twenty-four men
100. Would you suggest that anyone of the sections should be stationed at another part ?
Yes, on the Maranoa [liver. [ know that has been recommended some mouths by' tiie
Lieutenant—by the senior officer. 101, About


101. About what distance is that from the present barrack ? About eighty or one
hundred miles.
102. Do you think that an improvement in the protection of the settlers in that part of
the Colony is very necessary ? It must be effected; there are people out on the river
this minute with sheep.
103. Does your Commandant issue orders to the officers ? We have had orders issued
since I have boon in the Force.
104. Written orders '! Yes.
105. You have always had them ? Yes.
106. Have you got them here with you ? No, I am sorry to say I have not.
107. From recollection, can you say what instructions you have with regard to coming into
collision with the natives ? We are instructed, when outrages are committed, to lose no time
in following up the blacks, and punishing the offenders; at the same time there is no kind of
severity to be used, and wc arc to bo moat particular in questioning the information we get,
as it is quite likely that one black may he mistaken for another, in making a charge against
them. We are also hound, in a case of collision with the blacks, to give immediate notice of
it—send a report.
108. Where any blacks are shot ? Yes.
109. You give immediate notice ? Yes.
110. Is that from officers, no matter of what rank, or from the senior officer ? It is sent by the
officer direct to the Commandant.
111. Each officer has to send direct to the Commandant the particulars of any collision with
the blacks ? Yes.
112. Have you since you went into the force, kept a diary of your proceedings ? Yes.
113. Have you that diary ? 1 have it at the Police camp ; we are bound to keep a diary ;
that is part of the orders —'One of the particular instructions of the Commandant in the general
orders. We make a report of every day’s duty done in the quarter, and of every day we
have been in camp, and that is submitted to the Commandant by the lieutenant of the division
at the end of each quarter,
114. Have you any suggestions to make as to anything that has occurred to you as an im-
provement to the Force ? Upon my word, I think if they improved our accoutrements —our
arms —it would be sufficient; there is no great improvement that I see necessary : 1 think the
Force is in a very efficient state, generally speaking.
115. Beyond giving more regular supplies, and improving the clothing, saddlery, and firearms,
you would not suggest any alteration ? If our supplies were more regularly issued, and the
saddlery and accoutrements -were improved, I really think there would not bo much more im-
provement needed.
116. Have you frequently desertions among your men ? Do you mean from myself?
117. Yes, There has never been any desertion, except on one occasion.
118. Yfou have never had but one deserter —one man leave you ? That is all.
119. Have you known of many desertions ? Yes.
120. Have you known a section to leave altogether ? Y'es, 1 have known an entire section to
leave; the other day Mr. Patrick, from Rockhampton, was on the Zamia Creek, and I believe
his section deserted altogether.
121. Have you known of any other officers losing men, whom you assisted in recruiting? Yes,
Mr. P. Phibbs.
122. How many ? I am not sure ; I know of five.
123. For what district were they intended? They were going to Rockhampton, for the
Burdekin.
124. Do you think it would be more prudent to have troopers who have been a long time, in
the Force than fresh levies, in that district ? I am not aware what troopers have been sent.
125. I don’t ask that, but don’t you think that it would be better in a new country, like that,
to send old troopers, instead of raw levies ? 1 certainly think that the more experienced men
should bo sent there ; I should feel very uncomfortable in going with new men to new quarters
—witli raw recruits.
126. Would you make any suggestions as to improvement in the mode of distributing
blankets to the blacks ? Indeed I would ; 1 saw and approved very much of a letter written by
Mr. John Murray, the lieutenant of the Wide Bay district, suggesting to Government that the
issue of these blankets should be entrusted to the Native Police officers, as they thought the
officers of the Native Police knew more about the blacks than perhaps a Commissioner would,
some 150 miles away from the part of the country where they were issued. They might be
given into the hands of the lieutenant, who would distribute them to the second lieutenants
stationed in different parts of the district, and the troopers would be able to distribute them to
the deserving blacks.
127. Do you know any objections to the present distribution of blankets ? Vos, 1 know that
the distribution is made at present by the Commissioner and Clerks of Petty Sessions; that a
number of blankets are given to each station for distribution, and the blacks are sometimes
told they have all been served out, when that is not the case. I think 1 know of a case in
which the Government blankets, or rugs, have not been all served out.
128. Have you a personal knowledge of this case ? I have spoken as nearly on that subject as
I care to do.
129 By Mr. Watts : You have said that you have been out of ammunition for some time ?
Yes.
130. Would you be kind enough to inform me what is the cause of that? "We ran out of
ammunition, applied for more, and have not yet received it.
131. To whom did you apply? To the Secretary of the Native Police.
132,, Is


132. Is it his duty to inform the Government immediately of your wants ? I am not aware
what his duties are ; I should think that from our applying to him, we may presume that he
would lose no time in sending the supplies.
133. How long since was it that your application was made ? I think it must have been about
four months.
184. In the event of your not receiving your Supplies regularly, do you not make a Complaint
to the Commandant ? We generally receive a satisfactory reply to our applications to the
Secretary, saying that they will be attended to; of course, if things go beyond putting up
with, the Commandant is informed of it. I saw the ammunition we applied for for the
Maranoa district, in the store yesterday : it may be three months yet before we get it.
135. Do you think it would he a good plan to remove the various officers of the Native Police
from one district to another ? I think the Commandant’s idea is, that the officers should not be
removed.
136. By Mr. Blakenet : What is your own opinion ? I think that officers are all the better
for knowing the district, I think in many cases it would be much better to leave the officers
in the district in* which they had been stationed.
137. By Mr. Watts: Do you think that many of the letters of complaint written to the
newspapers have been written in consequence of new officers being appointed to districts where
they did not know the blacks, and where, consequently, some have been shot who would not
have hcon shot if the original officers had remained in the district ? I have not considered that
question, and I really would not like to say that I thought so.
138. Do you think that such a thing is not likely to occur ? I think it possible,
139. Are you aware that Mr. Bligh was removed from his district —Maryborough? Yes, I
think he is now in command of the first division at Rockhampton.
140. He was removed from Maryborough ? Yes.
141. Have you heard that any collisions with, or outrages against the blacks by the troopers
have taken place under his successor ? I have heard that collisions have taken place.
142. Do you think that many might have been avoided if Mr. Bligh had remained at Mary-
borough ? I think that Mr. Murray knows the district quite as well as Mr. Bligh.
143. Was there any other officer there who came into collision with the blacks ? I
don’t know.
144. Did you hear of the occurrence at Mr. Mortimer's station ? I saw an advertisement
in the paper, by Mr. Mortimer.
145. Do you know anything about the occurrence—you don’t know anything personally
yourself? No, I got all my information on that subject from the papers.
146. Do you not think it is the duty of the Commandant to see that you are well sup-
plied with the necessary accoutrements ? lam sure he does so, to the best of his power.
147. Has he been absent from head-quarters any length of time, so as not to have had
an opportunity of attending to apjdications ? I can’t say.
148. Blow often do you see him ? I have not seen him lately.
149. When did you see him last ? At our station, I think, about eighteen months ago.
150. Do you not think that any person holding the office of Commandant should visit
regularly the various stations of his subordinates ? I think it would be impossible to
name a day—to say the exact time—at which the Commandant should visit the stations.
151. That is not the question. Do you not think it is the duty of the Commandant to
visit every station occasionally ? 1 know that he does so.
152. Do you not think that he should go to their stations—you say you have not seen
him for the last eighteen months ? In consequence of being appointed Inspector-General,
he wars unable to leave in the early part of last year, and then, I believe, he had a great
deal to do in arranging matters for the Burdekin and Port Denison, and I know that he
was frequently backwards and forwards between Wide Bay and Rockhampton. The
time taken up in that way, I should think, would prevent his visiting the stations regu-
larly. Before that he visited the various camps very regularly: I have seen him every
four or five months.
153. You say a great many desertions have occurred in the Police Force? I have
known of a great many.
154. Can you give the Committee some idea of what is the cause of this desertion ?
Many desert from disliking their officers.
165. On account of inefficiency on the part of the officers ? 1 would not say inefficiency.
I have known several desert from being rather severely treated.
166. What do you mean by severely treated—flogged? Yes, I think that desertions
have taken place on various occasions on account of men being flogged.
157. There is no rule laid down as to your general guidance in reference to the punish-
ment of troopers, by the Commandant ? No, not expressly.
158. Don't you think such a rule would be advisable ? I don’t see any necessity for it.
159. Would you leave it to the discretion of every officer to deal with his troopers as he
liked ? I don’t know anyone who could give instructions to suit every particular case.
If one is not allowed to deal with a refractory trooper in a summary and severe way,
there would bo no use in his being left under the officer’s charge.
160. Then you think that such a, course as that followed by the army and navy would
not act well with the Native Police 1 lam not aware what is the course followed in the
army and navy.
161. You are aware that there are certain rules and regulations for the guidance of the
officers in their treatment of the men ? Oh, yes; you can take a soldier, and confine
him in gaol; but 1 don’t think that these rules are adapted to the Native Police Force,
162. Do you not think, in recommending officers to a command in the Native Police
Force,


Force, some better system should bo adopted than the present—do you not think that
the system of recommending anyone merely through interest, who does not know any-
thing about the work previous to his is a very bad one ? I think such
appointments are not advisable.
163. Would you suggest any other course ? I believe there is a rule in the Force at
present, in accordance with which the Commandant appoints a man to the office, of cadet,
and from that he is made Second Lieutenant, and so on. I think that is a good system,
as, during the time that the men are cadets, they have an opportunity of being made
acquainted with the duties of officers.
164. Do you know what period these cadets have to serve ? lam not aware, of my own
knowledge, that there is a cadet in the Force ; I never saw one.
165. Do you know whether the settlers, generally speaking, are kind to the natives'or
otherwise ? Generally speaking, I think the settlers are kind to the natives.
166. By Mr. Goke ; Can you tell us—have you any idea—what is the reason of this
delay in forwarding the ammunition ? I believe that it has been applied for, and the
delay has been occasioned by the correspondence which has taken place -with the Store-
keeper’s department in Sydney.
167. Had the wet season anything to do with it? lam not aware.
168. Don’t you know anything of the duties of a cadet? I have not an idea, further
than that 1 suppose they accompany the other officers, and by this means get a know-
ledge of their duties.
169. Have you known the natives make a determined stand against your men on more
occasions than one ? Yes, they leave fought my troopers on more occasions than one,
in country where they could not get cover.
170. The natives were greatly superior in number ? Yes.
171. You mentioned a ease of driving the blacks out into open country—suppose
those blacks had not been aware that you had the power of firing on them, do vou
suppose they would have rim before you? Ko ; if they bad not believed that they
would be fired upon, I don’t think they would have been brought back.
172. They did not make any resistance when you attempted to gather them together ?
Ho.
173. Did they appear to understand plainly for what jmrpose you wore following them ?
Quite —perfectly.
174. Did they make any promises of desisting from such courses for the future 1 I
believe I gave thorn advice, and told them I thought T was letting- them off very
leniently—and I am sure I did ; but I promised them that on a future occasion, if 1 had
to undergo the same hardships in getting up with them—the country was wretchedly
boggy—l certainly would visit it on them.
175. Were you obliged to leave your horses behind ? Ho.
176. You led the horses ? Yes, in some places.
177. Do you suppose, in case of our having a mixed Force, that, if the trackers could
be persuaded to hunt for the white troopers, they could get a sufficient quantity of game
for them ? Hot, if they were expected to do any work. If they were taken out for an
hour in the morning, and camped at 10 o’clock, and were sent off to get opossums and
kangaroos, and so on, they might do it
178. Do you suppose that if they could get game, the whites could eat it for any length of
time ? No, they could not for any length of time ; they would not stop out on such diet for a
week or a fortnight as we have to do. lam sure they would not.
179. Do you think tire Native Troopers, as a rule, are more bloodthirsty in action than white
persons in similar circumstances ? I really could hardly say that I think so.
180. Have you ever been among white men in action, when out against blacks ? No ; but I
should say from one or two that accompanied me, that they would" have been as anxious to
net against the natives as (he black troopers themselves.
181. Then it is your decided opinion that any attempt at a mixed force would be a failure ?
Yes.
18 i. Would it not give the officers a very lazy life ? Yes, we should have quite a pleasant life,
if in command of white troopers.
18 i. How do you find the sort of subsistence you get in the bush agree with you ? Very
badly; the last time I tried it 1 got a severe attack of dysentery.
184. In short, it is only the consciousness of doing your duty, and anxiety to discharge it
properly, that enables you to put up with the sort of life you lead ? Indeed that is (he only
reason ; anxiety to act well with the troopers has sustained me more than anything else.
185. I )on’t you suppose that ordinary white troopers would ho inspired with the same feeling?
I think that they would, where you could get men of a better class; I should rather like
white troopers, as far as ease is concerned—it would be much better for me.
186. Don't you think it likely that, if the Force consisted of equal proportions of while and
black troopers, there would be continual heart-burnings between the blacks and the whites ? I
think it would be quite impossible to get the men to act together. We have white camp
sergeants at present, and though the troopers must obey them, I don’t believe that they
have much respect for them, and I don’t think, as a body, they at all like them ; I have known
a single seageant at a camp, an eternal cause of squabbles. The troopers don’t believe in
camp sergeants, nr in any white man with them, except their-own officers.
187. Have you not observed that the troopers get on much better with educated men—•
with gentlemen—than with others? They get on much better with gentlemen.
188. Can you give any probable reason ? I think that educated men and gentlemen treat tie
troopers in a kinder and better manner than those others, who knock them aluut, and all that
sort of thing. 189. by


189. By Mr. Eoyds ; Were the blacks allowed at Macnab’s station at the time the affair took
place you spoke of? No.
190. Have you ever heard of any unnecessary cruelties committed by the settlers on the :
blacks ? I can’t recall any to mind.
191. Did you over know of the squatters sending for the police without sufficient cause? I
have been sent for for very frivolous causes; but as a general rule, I think there is sufficient
provocation in causes where we are sent for. In case of any frivolous cause being assigned, I
always take care to investigate the matter thoroughly.
192. If the Native Police Force were done away with, and the squatters left to their own
protection, would there not be many more blacks killed ? In my opinion double the number
at least; I know that perfectly well.
193. And more white people murdered ? Yes.
191. Do you think it objectionable to allow the large assemblages of the blacks, called borces ?
Yes, I think that at these borces most of the mischief is concocted.
195. Is there an order from the Commandant to disperse these meetings ? Yes, it is his
opinion that at these assemblages all the murders are concocted.
196. By Mr. Blakeney : And it is one of his instructions to yon to disperse them? Yes.
197. By Mr. Boyds ; Can you disperse borees without bloodshed ? Yes.
198. By merely showing yourself? Yes, I think so.
199. You generally do so whenever they have these assemblages? Yes, I always make my
appearance, and disperse them by showing myself. I have known a section go and disperse
300 men, by merely showing themselves on a station.
200. Did you ever hear a report of a blackfellow, Baulie, being seen at Charlie's Creek after
the affair on Coxen’s station? No, 1 have never heard so; I knew Baulie personally, ami I
saw him shot.
201. Could you recommend any alteration in the clothing, in the way of getting cheaper and
more serviceable jackets 1 Well, that is a matter I am hardly competent to speak about; I
think it is a very good idea they are acting on —that of getting blue shirts, striped, with a red
facing.
202. Have you not reason to believe that many of the reports you have seen in the papers
with respect to outrages committed by the police, are mere fables ? I know that a number are ;
a number of those charges brought against the police in the press are groundless; —theie
are not the least grounds for them.
203. Is there not always a sort of standing gossip, as to what the troopers and the blacks are
doing? Always; the Native Police are always a standing topic of conversation; you are
entertained at almost every place with the acts of the Native Police.
204. Both by those who are favourable to them and otherwise? Yes. Indeed there is an
enormous amount of exaggeration going on.
205. By the Chaibman : Are you not the officer who took a black supposed to have deserted
from the Native Police on Cockatoo Station, on the Upper Dawson ? Yes.
208. Did you take him on the station? Yes, we took him on the head station.
207. What was his name ? Tahiti.
208. He was formerly a trooper with Mr. Walker ? Y r es.
209. Mr. Walker brought charges against you in respect to this circumstance ? Yes, hut they
have all been investigated by the New South Wales Government, and the result was favorable
to me.
210. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: Is it the duty of Native Police officers to patrol their districts, or
to remain at home till sent for? Most decidedly to patrol their districts; I never wait at
home; lam generally on patrol.
211. Have you ever heard of any eases to the contrary? I know that some remain more at
home than others.
212. More than they ought ? I would not undertake to answer that. We are obliged to send
in a return of duty performed each quarter ; I sent in a return for the present quarter, and I
had been sixty-two days out of the quarter on patrol—sixty-two days out of ninety; and I
have three other officers to divide the duty with me.
21 3. By Mr. Feeeett ; Do you think the hand-cuffs at present made use of when the blacks
are captured as prisoners, a secure mode of keeping them? 1 have kept blacks with the
handcuffs 1 have used.
214. Have you not known blacks, when secured by band-cuffs, to free themselves —to get
away ? Yes.
215. Do you think them likely to get away if secured with an iron collar similar to the hand-
cuffs, with a chain fastened to it. I think they would be as likely to get a chain out of your
hand as anything else. 1 have seen them going along with handcuffs and with a rope fastened
to the handcuffs, and held by a man on horseback.
216. Do you not consider a collar and chain, if fastened in some way to the horse and held
by the trooper, a much safer way than the one now used with prisoners? If you have a ring
in the saddle and a chain fastened to that and to a collar round the man’s neck, you would, of
course, be aide to hold him ; but I should like handcuffs as well; in fact, 1 would rather chance
the handcuffs than the collar.
217. Do you not consider that something more is necessary now to secure blacks than the
ordinary handcuffs ? I have secured them with the ordinary handcuffs, and I think it can be
done, bat with a great deal of watching and precaution.
218. Have yon not had blacks escape in handcuff’s, who would not have escaped if they had
been secured by a collar round the neck and a chain fastened to the trooper s saddle ' I could
not say. not having tried the latter way of securing a prisoner.
219. i will ask you —have not blacks, us prisoners, been tired at or Plot in gelling away from
the Native


Ltf'ul. Chit,
27 June, 1861.
the Native Police when secured by handcuffs ? No doubt blacks have been shot in attempting
■ to escape front the Native Police : we had a case the other day where a black escaped and
carried away his handcuffs with him.
220. Do not blacks invariably make an attempt to escape, whether in handcuffs or not, the
moment they come near a scrub ? I know that they are very likely to do so ; I feel quite
nervous while I have a prisoner in charge, knowing, as a general rule, that they attempt to
escape whenever they have a chance—there is no doubt about it.
221. Have you not known blacks to escape from the Native Police by jumping into a water-
hole when iu handcuffs ? I have no doubt of it; I remember a case of my own knowledge.
222. Did not a black escape from you, as prisoner, on his way from Mr. Bligh’s station,
by jumping into a waterhole ? No.
228. Did not a black escape from you at all in taking him from Mr. Bligh’s station 1 Yes. I
apprehended a black, and he attempted escape on the road.
224. Not by jumping into a waterhole? No.
225. Was it at a scrub ? Yes.
220. Is it your opinion that the black would have escaped if he had had a collar round his
neck fastened to the trooper’s saddle ? If there were a collar and chain of the description we
spoke of, and the chain were fastened to the saddle in that way, 1 don’t believe they could
escape during the day when on the road; you would have to fasten them another way at night
or they might escape.
227. Do you not think it probable that the lives of many prisoners might be saved by using
some more secure way than that now practised by securing them with handcuffs ? No, I don’t
think so.
228. In how many instances have blacks been shot in attempting to got away from the police,
to your knowledge ? To my knowledge there have been either two or three, I think.
2211. Have you not arrested a black and found on investigation, Loth before yourself and a
magistrate, that lie was improperly charged —was the wrong person ? Yes.
230. In such cases as that don’t you consider it necessary that the black should have every
protection afforded him, so as not to run the chance of being shot? I think so ; in the. case I
instanced the man was discharged by the magistrates.
281. Don’t you think it more than probable that if you had any distance to take a black, he
would attempt to make his escape ? I think so.
232. If blacks attempted to make an escape that you arrested under the authority of a
warrant, would you not consider yourself justified in shooting them ? Oh ! decidedly'.
FRIDAY ; 28 th JUNE, 1861.
present:
Mr. BLAKENEY, | Mb. BOYDS,
Ma. MACKENZIE.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
CII ABLE S PBBDBBICK DOYLE BABKIN SON, Esq., called in and examined
._ 1. By the Chairman : You have been residing at the Kenilworth Station, in the Burnett
District? Y r es.
2. How long have you been out there ? Nearly five years.
3. You were not living in the bush as a squatter before that period ? Yes, I have lived on
the Lower Condamine, and on the Brisbane Biver.
4. But not just before you went to Kenilworth? No.
5. Within how many years ? Within two years.
6. I mean to say you have had no great experience of the interior before taking up your
residence at Kenilworth ? No, not much ; but I have been on an extreme outside station
before,
7. Do you recollect an occasion when the blacks were very troublesome in stealing cattle in
that part of the country ? Yes.
8. Have yon visited Gonondale, Mr. Donald Mackenzie’s station? Yes.
9. Was Mr. Mackenzie at homo when you went there ? No, Mrs. Mackenzie, and two
women and one man, were on the station at the time.
10. Did yon go there on a visit, or for any particular business ? I went there to get some
horses.
11. W’hat did Mrs. Mackenzie state to you upon that occasion? She saidthc blacks were
camped there, and that I could see the smoke of their camp fires, which .1 did distinctly.
She said the blacks had been killing the cattle, and that they could get no meat at the
station; that they had only one man, and were in great need of assistance.
12. Had the blacks been up to the station? No.
13. Did you see them ? I saw the smoke of their camp fires.
14. How far is your station from Conondale ? About ten miles.
15. What had the blacks been doing up there ? Killing cattle.
16. To what extent ? They had killed a considerable number ; they had been killing cattle
as far back as four years. I had placed 1270 cattle on the run, out of which 700 were
breeding cows; we had branded cattle up to 2500, and up to the present time there are
only
C. F. D. Park-
inson, Esq.
28 June, 1861.


only 1094 head; instead of which, allowing for increase, there ought to be at least 2500,
or more.
17. What proof had you that they were killed by the natives ? I have frequently seen the ,
cattle with their tails bleeding; I have seen others hooked, and otherwise injured. ■
18. How many have you seen in this condition? A good many. Mr. Frazer has seen
them; they would be all right in the morning, and in the evening five or six of them would
be seen at the camping ground, with their tails bleeding, On this occasion he found all our
owu blacks at the head station, round about the house, and they told him that strange blacks
were killing our cattle The blacks camped in sight of the station, across the paddock.
He went down with some of our blacks, and dispersed the camp, and he then found
their nets and other convenient articles for carrying away the spoil, filled with ribs of beef,
newly killed, the flesh still quivering.
19. When did this occur ? It is now some months ago.
20- Within this year ? Either at the beginning of this year, or the end of last.
21. Were many cattle killed on that occasion ? I cannot say how many were killed; they
generally kill a great number of calves.
22. I mean at the particular time to which you have referred, when the blacks were so
troublesome ? They were very troublesome when I wont to Cunondale, and had been so for
some weeks before that time. The Native Police officer,. Mr. Morisset, was on his way
back to Maryborough with horses at the time, and as the country was then in such a dan-
gerous state on account of the blacks, we asked him to stay with us, or to come back with
one or two troopers, but he said he could not, because he was obliged to take the horses on
to Maryborough, but he said he would tell Mr. Murray, and if he (Mr. Murray) did not
come to our assistance, ho would come back himself. After be left, the blacks became
more outrageous than ever. When we went to one part of the run, they would be com-
mitting some mischief in another. A few days before we heard anything of Mr. Morisset,
the blacks bad gone to Billi Creek ; we saw the smoke of their fires there. We ran their
tracks as far as Mr. Lawless’ station, Imbil, and there we found Mr. Hickson, the Super-
intendent, in a great state of fright; he had been kept up all night, and had been barred
up in the house all day by the blacks, who had threatened to take his life, and that of Mr.
Knaggs, another Superintendent, who was up there.
v 3. What occurred after Mr. Morisset went to Maryborough? I heard nothing more about
the blacks at that time, until Mr. Frazer came up to our station, and told us the blacks had
been threatening him and killing the cattle. They told him they should kill as many
cattle as they chose; that Mr. Bligh had been removed, and that they did not care for the
white men. They made use of very strong language, and called Mr. Frazar by a good
many abusive names. He was not strong enough to cope with them, and had to come home.
We agreed to wait for three days, and then to send to Kiicoy for help to drive the blacks
away. The cattle were being killed hourly.
24. How far was Mr. Mortimer’s station from that? About 80 miles across the bush.
Well, as we were about to send off for assistance, we heard of Mr. Morisset having shot
some blacks at Mortimer’s station, or in that direction. A blackfellow came in and told
us that.
25. Now, if I understand you, Mr. Mortimer’s run is separate from that part of your
country? Yes, the blacks from Mortimer’s used to come down to our station, and to Imbil,
and on to Widgee; and my domestic blacks, who would remain quietly enough round our
station, would go off to other places and kill cat le.
20. Didyou see Mr. Morisset ? I did.
27. What detachment bad he with him? I believe he had eight men.
28. To what detachment did they belong ? They were some of Mr. Murray’s men.
29. W r as Mr. Morisset stationed under Mr. Murray ? I think not.
HO. Then Mr. Murray had given him a, detachment of men to go up with ? Yos.
31. What happened then ? Did you go out with him ? Yes, that was when I went up to
Mackenzie’s. We did not succeed in coming upon the blacks; it appears that they were
watching us from the top of a mountain. The police horses were knocked up, and we had
to mount the troopers with horses from the station.
32. The report was, that a number of blacks were killed; but you appear to deny this in
your evidence, though you stated that you had heard Mr. Morisset’s party had been killing
them ? I never denied that they had been killing blacks.
33. There were none tilled when you wont out with the Police? No
34. Were any blacks killed in your neighbourhood ? Ido not think so.
35. What do you call “dispersed?” Some of them were shot; I believe they were dis-
persed three different times.
36. By Mr. Blakeney : By this same party belonging to Mr. Morisset ? Yes, I believe so;
Mr. Morisset informed me of what had occurred up to that time.
37. You say that Mr. Morisset was on his way to the North with horses. Can you explain
how it was that he was entrusted with this duty by the officer in charge ? 1 believe the
officer in charge had only just come up, and his horses were not in a fit state for travelling.
38. Has Mr. Morisset been long in the Force ? Ido not know.
39. He is ayoung man. is he not. ? Yes.
40. And inexperienced ? No, I do not say that; he has been out to the North a good
deal.
41. Bat not in connection with the Police Force ? That may be.
42. Do you think it right or proper that a young and inexperienced officer like Mr. Morisset
should be placed in charge of a detachment of I’olice? He has had more experience than
many other young men who have been appointed to the Force. I was told—if you will
allow


allow me to mention it-by tho blacks at Kilooy, that on the occasion that the blacks were
shot at Mr. Mortimer’s station, Mr. Mnrisset drafted off the Kilcoy blacks and told them
to go away, with a view of protecting them ; and that tho Police did not commence
firing until a black boy from Widgee Widgee, who was with the Police, and young Mr.
Giles, put, them on to tho track of the blacks, which they followed up ; and this black
boy, while the drafting was going on, fired both barrels of his gun.
43. Where did he get the gun from ? it was given to him to protect himself, and upon that
the blacks began throwing their spears and nullah-nullahs, and the Police were then
obliged to tire upon them. With regard to the shooting the blacks at Mr. Mortimer's
station, I may also be allowed to state, that I met a Mr. James Swanson, at Durandur, who
told me that he knew the blacks in question to be, without exception, notorious cattle and
sheep stealers, There was one black in particular—he laid great stress upon this—whose
name was Shingle, whom it was intended to protect. This man was standing by the crupper
of one of the horses, and a stray shot hit him in the head ; he lived four days afterwards.
He was the quietest black on the run, but Mr. Swanson told me that he had stolen and
killed eighteen sheep some months before that.
44. Do you not think that is a very loose way of proceeding? I don’t know, accidents will
happen.
45. Was it, one of the black trooper’s horses he was leaning against ? No, it was the
horse ridden by the black boy who was with the Police.
46. By the Chairman : Yon have mentioned the name of Mr, Giles, junior. Can you say
where he is to be found now? At Widgee; his brother is Superintendent there. Ike was
there about two months ago.
47. Was he not with the Police when this took place? Vcs, he put the Police on the
track, he and the black boy; and the Police ran the track up to the broken country. The
whole of the Bunya country, on the Mary lliver, would he untenable without the protection
of a Native Police Force; no white force could protect it,
48. You think a white force would be of no service there? lam quite certain it would be
of no service in that country. There is so much scrub there; the whole country is inter-
sected with scrub, and the blacks have so much shelter. You can go for twenty-seven miles
through scrub, without once seeing daylight.
49. Did you hear how many blacks were killed at Mr. Mortimer's station ? Eight.
50. Have you seen many of the officers of the Native Police Force ? Yes, I have seen
them lately, as well as some years ago.
51. What is your opinion of them ? 1 think they are very efficient—most of them ; I have
only seen one whom I thought inefficient, but I hear he has become very efficient lately.
52 Who was that? Mr. Williams. I remember him when he was not efficient, hut that is
some three years ago. I believe him now to be one of the best officers in the Force.
63. Are any of them addicted to habits of intemperance ? No.
64. Are they not found remaining about the stations instead of keeping more in tho saddle?
Ido not think so. I remember when they wore much more so.
55. Do you think a mixed force, of white troopers and blacks, would be an improvement ?
It would not be of the slightest use.
50. Have you ever seen a force of that kind? No; but I know that white men cannot get
through the scrub. We have tried it with our own black hoys, and we had not a chance
with them. A white Police Force might do very well for open country where there is no
scrub.
57. By Mr. R.OYDS ; From what you have heard of the affair at Messrs, Mortimers’ station,
do you think the Police were justified in shooting those blacks? Decidedly ; those blacks
were among the mob, if not actually the men, who threatened to take the lives of Mr.
Lawless’ men at Imbil.
58. How do you come to that conclusion ? How was it that Mr. Morisset, being an officer
unacquainted with that part of the country, knew the blacks who had threatened Mr.
Lawless’ men ? Because their tracks were run down from Imhil to the Widgee Diver. Mr.
Morisset -was put on their tracks at Widgee. He did not know at that time that they
had threatened to take the men’s lives at Imbil.
59. By Mr. Blakeney : Do you imagine that there is any possibility that squatters can live
in that part of the country without the protection of Police ? If so, they must shoot every-
thing they see that is black.
60. And what would that lead to ? To exterminate the blacks ; the squatters would have
to do it. ’
61. It would cause a vast deal more effusion of blood ? Yes, for one black that is shot now,
there would be 50 or 60 at least.
62. Are the blacks not in great dread of the Native Police, and docs nut that act as a great
check upon them ? Yes, they disperse as soon as they hear the Police are coming.
63. And were not they emboldened when they heard Mr. Bligh had left ? Yes.
64. What improvements can you suggest in the working of the Force ? I would increase
the strength of the Force, and I would provide a greater number of horses. The troopers
are frequently unable to visit tho stations, because their horses are not serviceable.
65. Ought not each trooper to have two horses? They ought to have more, because acci-
dents will occasionally happen to the horses; there ought to be some spare horses.
Tin 'HSOA Y,


THURSDAY, 4th JURY, 1861.
Present;
Ma. MACKENZIE, I Mr. KG YDS,
Mr. WATTS, | Mr. BLAKENEY.
The Honorable R. R. MACKENZIE in the Chair.
JOHN McDONNELD, called in and examined :
1. By Mr. Ur.AKKNKY: What situation do you fill ? I am Secretary of the Police
Department,
2. Does that include the Native Police? Yes.
3. You act as Secretary to the Native Police as well ns to the Constabulary? Yos.
4. You are the sole officer in Brisbane connected with the Native Police ? Yes.
5. Do all the communications with regard to the Native Police come through you ?
Not all.
6. What other department are they addressed to ? Some are directed to the Colonial
Secretary.
7. You act, then, under the Colonial Secretary? Y r es.
8. The greater number of communications come to you ? So far as the stores and
monetary matters are concerned, they come to me.
9. Do the reports from the officers come to you in the first instance, or do they go direct
to the Commandant ? They go to the Commandant.
I. Do any of them come to you ? No, not at present, they used formerly, but they go
to the Commandant now.
11. How long is it since the communications have been sent elsewhere ? A short time
after the office of Inspector-General of Police was abolished.
12. About a year ago ? About eight months; his office was abolished, I think, in
August last, but he did not leave till the end of September.
13. Prior to that the reports came direct to your office ? Yen
14. And accounts of the various proceedings of the Native Police officers ? Yes.
15. Is there any particular rule with regard to the reports ? The various officers send in
their reports —they used to send them in at stated times —at the end of the quarter.
10. But occasionally when anything very material occurred, they sent in the report at
once, without waiting? Y r es.
17. But the routine return was only once a quarter? Yes.
18. Y r ou also have the management of the stores? Yes.
19. How long have you been in your present office ? I was first in the Inspector-
General’s office.
20. Well, how long altogether ? Prom the fith of February of last year.
21. Where do you got your stores supplied from mostly ? From Sydney.
22. Is there any particular period of the year at which clothing and blankets are
distributed to the Police Force? They ought to be distributed in the early part of each
year.
23. Have any been distributed yet this year? A portion of the stores, but none of the
clothing.
24. No blankets and clothing up to this period? A few blankets have been distributed.
25. To the portions of the Force near here? Yes.
26. But not to the Force generally ? No.
27. How comes the clothing not to have been distributed ? On the recommendation of
Mr. myself, it was to be procured from the Storekeeper of Now South
Wales—he bad a large supply on band—and it was considered more expeditious and
economical to get the supply from him, as all the goods were ready there, and had boon
some six or eight months; up to this present time, however, none of the clothing has
been received, and within the last few days, I drew the attention of the principal under-
secretary to the fact, and he promised to remind the storekeeper of New South Wales,
and get the things as quickly as possible.
28. How long is It since the first application was made to him ? I was in Sydney in
January, and I spoke to the Acting Storekeeper, and he promised to send it immediately
on receipt of an order from Brisbane, in the usual way, through the Colonial Secretary.
29. Was any such communication sent? Such communications do not go direct trom
me, they should go from the Colonial Secretary" of one Colony" to the Colonial Secretary
of the other.
30. Have you enquired whether such a communication watt sent ? Yesterday I wont to
the Colonial Secretary to find out what had been done—six months is a long time to
elapse before getting the things, which were ready" to be sent in January and Mr.
Manning promised to look up the matter.
31. And did you let these, six months go by without making any enquiries ? I spoke to
Air. Manning several times about it.
32. Did you send any written communications —any" official application with regard to
this unreasonable delay? No, 1 did not.
33. Was it rot your duty to draw attention by letters —is it not always customary in
official matters to communicate by writing, not verbally ? Yes.
J Si. How


34. How is it you have not done so ? For this reason : I went to Mr. Manning and
asked him whether I should do so, because 1 thought I might save unnecessary
correspondence—there has been an immense quantity of correspondence in my office,
and I wanted to save any that was unnecessary—d went to Mr. Manning and asked him
whether I should draw his attention to the matter by letter, and he said, “ Let it rest
with me and I will see about it.”
35. How long ago was that ? A short time since—l think this week,
36. Was that the first application you made to him? No, I have spoken to him before;
but I left it to the Colonial Secretary’s office, because they undertook to get the things.
37. Have there been, during the last six months, applications made from various
stations of the Force for clothing, for this year? No, there have been no applications.
33. No applications whatever for clothing? The usual applications came in in the early
part of the year.
39. Have there been no applications —no remonstrances from any of the officers, on
account of the non-delivery of the clothing or blankets ? None, except from the third
division. I think Mr. Walker drew attention to the fact.
40. What became of his letter ? It is in my office.
41. Did you forward it to the Colonial Secretary ? No.
42. Why ? It was hardly necessary to forward it, if I looked after the things ; he merely
mentioned that the clothing had not come.
43. This communication was touching the non-arrival of the clothing ? It was more in
respect to forms and things of that sort that he had ordered; he made mention of the
clothing at the end of one of his private letters—the letter respecting forms I took to
the Colonial Secretary's office, and left with Mr. Manning, who promised to look after
the things.
44. Had you any communications from Sydney as to the non-arrival of the things'?
They would not come to me ; I have notiiing to do with the matter, except in the way
I have mentioned.
45. Now, with regard to ammunition, have you plenty in the office ? Yes ; a short time
since we received a supply.
40. Where from ? From New South Wales ; it was ordered in the early part of last
year —the ammunition that was required in the early part of last year, was ordered from
the Colonial Storekeeper of Now South Wales on the 25th April, 1800, and I drew
attention to the non-arrival of it some time after by letter to the Colonial Secretary.
They afterwards advertised for the ammunition, but when I saw the advertismeut in
the Gazelle, I stated to the principal under-Secretary that we had already advertised,
and got no tenders, and had been obliged to fall back on New South Wales for a supply.
Mr. Manning then undertook to send a letter in the usual way, and see about it. When
I was in Sydney I spoke to the acting Colonial Storekeeper about it, and he said they
must have overlooked the matter the office had been upset, and great changes had
been made in it, and so the supply of ammunition must have been overlooked; but he
promised to send it up immediately.
47. That was in January? Yes; when I got back, I told Mr. Manning, and we got a
supply a short time since.
48. How long ago ? I can’t say exactly.
49. Within the last mouth V No, further back than a month, because in May I sent a
whole lot away: I sent some to three divisions.
50. Which were they ? They were all on the sea coast; I sent ammunition to Sandgate,
Maryborough, and Rockhampton; I sent some also to Rockhampton, to be forwarded to
Port Denison, and now 1 have to send some up to the third division.
51. 'The Condarnine division ? Yes.
52. Since you have been in the office—about a year and a-half —has any ammunition
been sent to the third division? No, none.
53. During that period you have never been able to send any ? No. •
54. They have been left to their own resources ? Yes, to whatever they had on hand ;
there has been no ammunition in the colony at all.
55. Ry the Chairman : We have got it in evidence from you that there has been great
delay, not sufficiently accounted for, in transmitting clothing and ammunition to the
Native Police Force—has the Commandant ever sent any remonstrance on the subject V
No.
53. Never ? Not a remonstrance, but the last time he was here, going up from Sydney,
1 mentioned that I was trying to send the things off as quickly as possible, but that
they were coming in very slowly, and ho asked me to be sure and send them off as soon
as 1 received them.
57. Has he, in the last six months, ever addressed any remonstrance to the Government
or the Colonial Secretary? Not to my own knowledge.
58. Don’t you consider it part of the duty of the Commandant to inspect as to whether
tire troopers are properly provided? Yes.
59. With regard to your accounts being sent in quarterly, can you explain this to me—
by the 31st December the officers are supposed to have made up their accounts to send
to you; admitting that there may have been a certain amount of delay in forwarding
them to Brisbane, it so happened this year that the statement of the Auditor-General as
to the expenditure of 1800, was kept open till the month of May to get in these Police
accounts —will you explain how some should have come in since ? How is it such
delays take place in getting these accounts in? You arc aware that I am correct in
what 1 have stated? Yes.
60, Are


60. Are you aware that when the accounts of the year are closed, it creates great
confusion when fresh particulars are sent in ? Yes.
61. Can you explain how it happens that it takes six months to get in the accounts of
the quarter ending 31st December ? T only know that we got the accounts very late for
that quarter. Within a very short period of the present time I got some other accounts,
and the only reason that Mr. Murray gave was, that the people w'ould not send in their
accounts to him.
62. Did you not lead the Auditor-General to believe, when you sent in the last vouchers,
before he made out his statement, that vonr accounts were closed for the year 1860 9
Yes.
63. How could you, who are supposed to keep books, make such a mistake ? It would
be impossible tor me to tell whether or no there were a few outstanding accounts : the
officer who sends them is hardly aware himself. He is not supposed to keep in his head
all that occurs in referenpe to the accounts.
64. Don’t you think it would be advisable if you or the Commandant issued a notice
that if people’s accounts arc not sent in within a reasonable time, they should not
be paid ? People should be paid their money, unless the time prescribed in the statute
of limitations has expired.
65. But they ought to send in their accounts before the accounts of the year are closed—
could you suggest any better way of keeping the accounts than that adopted at present ?
Yes ; there is a vote of the Assembly for an allowance in lieu of provisions, to the
troopers, of Is. 6d. each per diem ; instead of having a multiplicity of accounts sent in
for the gross sum that Is. 6d. amounts to for a number of troopers at so much joer head,
let the officers arrange for the supply of provisions to these men. The Government
would then have nothing to do, except with the Is. 6d., putting sufficient confidence in
the officers to furnish the men with supplies. In 1855 there was an instruction from
the Inspector-General of Police, under whom the Native Police were at that time, to the
effect, that the disbursement of this sum should be placed in the hands of the officers
who were entrusted with the supply of the troopers, the object being to economise as
much as possible ; the money so saved was to bo returned to the Government. I
believe that when a sum of money is voted by Parliament, to be paid to certain persons
as salary or allowance, that sum becomes the property of the person for whom it was
voted, whether natives or whites. The camp sergeants are voted an allowance of 25..
and they can spend it as they like ; the officers take the allowance for the black troopers,
and it is supposed, while certain provisions are supplied them, that if there is any
saving it becomes the property of the Government, For instance, the troopers are
allowed Is. 6d. a day, and if the rations could be procured for Is 3d. the 3d, would
become the property of the Government. It is very desirable there should be as much
simplicity as possible in the accounts, and I think the simplest way of dealing with the
matter would be to adopt the suggestions I have made.
66. By Mr. Watts : Do you not think it ynnr duty to look out very sharp after the
supplies for the Native Police ? Yes.
67. How is it you have allowed these six months to elapse, knowing these parties are
so far up in the bush and not able to get what they wanted —how could you allow all
that time to elapse ? Hardly six months have elapsed, because the letter from the
Government intimating that several tenders had been accepted was dated the end of
February. I could not expect a return to the communication from this Government to
to that of New South Wales for some long period after.
68. Is it not your duty to write every week to the Government, in the absence of
supplies being furnished ? No, not until after the lapse of a certain time; I have not
written, but I have spoken to Mr. Manning.
69. Do you not think written communications the proper course to adopt in such cases ?
I should have written, but Mr. Manning asked me to let it rest, and said that he would
enquire into the matter.
70. Do you not think that the Native Police Force is almost useless without sufficient
ammunition ? Certainly ; but this Colony has been in a peculiar condition with regard
to stores : there have been no stores to fall back on, and it has been impossible to get
ammunition.
71. Do you think if my station were out of stores, I would find no ways and means of
procuring them ? Your remark hardly applies to ammunition: there is a certain
description required ; all the carbines are made to a certain government bore—we can
get plenty of ammunition, but not suitable to our wants.
72. But don't you think in a case of this kind it would have been proper to have
employed men to oast bullets, and to have sent up powder to the troopers ? They were
at perfect liberty to purchase powder, and, in some instances, the camp sergeants have
been employed in making cartridges.
73. Do yon think it a proper course to adopt with a force appointed by Government—to
compel them to purchase or make their ammunition; they might have to come 300 miles
to procure it ? I think it very unadvisablo, and I made a suggestion to Mr. Manning that
there should bo a store here of carbines and ammunition, and other, things required from
time to time. The Government are about ordering from England a proper supply of
things. The absence of a colonial storekeeper has been a great drawback here. In New
South Wales they have an immense stock of all things—ammunition, clothing, and so on—
and if we had a store here from which a large supply could be procured, we could, on all
occasions, despatch the things by the next conveyance.
74. Do you think it necessary to wait till the time comes round to send these supplies—
don’t


J. MrDonnell.
4ih Jill}', 1801.
don’t you think it necessary, owing to the great drawbacks to getting up the country, that
supplies should bo sent up regularly, whether written for or no? I think that provision
should be made for the wants of the troopers without waiting for requisitions—l think the
stores ought to be sent in that way.
75. Do you not think that if they were sent in that way it would he much cheaper for the
country than the plan of allowing the troopers to buy a bit here and a hit there as they are
often obliged to do 1 Of course it would.
76. Don’t you think it would be advisable to send such supplies as flour, tea, and sugar, to
the different depots, under the charge of the officers of the various divisions? I have not
looked into that question.
77. Are you aware that some of the squatters in the far interior charge a shilling a pound
for flour ? I have heard so.
78. What is the cost of carriage from Brisbane paid for these supplies ? I can’t say.
79. Have you made any calculations as to the difference of expense ? Not in the supply of
flour, tea, sugar, and so on.
80. Can yon inform the Committee what length of time the Commandant has been at homo ?
Since he left office he has been in Rockhampton, I believe.
81. What period has he been away from his duties since he left his office as Inspector
of Police—how long has he been absent from duty ? I cannot say.
82. By Mr. Boyds : Don’t you think that a Colonial Store ought to be established here?
Yes.
83. Ought there to he a Colonial Storekeeper ? Yes.
84. Are you aware that any such change is contemplated? Yes, a change is going to take
place; the Government are about to set aside a portion of the old Commissariat Store as a
store for the Colony, of which I am to have charge, and no doubt, in time, all the things that
generally pass through a colonial store will pass through that store.
85. Have you had any complaints about the inferior quality of the saddles, clothing, arms,
and accoutrements of the Force? No, not lately • there were certain complaints in former
years, but now we have the very best kind of saddles, &c., that can be supplied.
86. Have you not been making improvements lately ? Yes, in every way possible ;wo
have invited recommendations from the various officers of the Force.
SATURDAY, 6th JULY, 1861.
present:
Mr. BLAKENEY, I Mr, GORE,
Mb. WATTS, I Mb. BOYDS,
Me. FITZSIMMONS.
The Honorable R. R, MACKENZIE in the Chair,
E. M. Y. MORISSET, Esq., Commandant of Native Police Force, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You are Commandant of the Native Police Force ? Yes.
2. Have you not lately sent in your resignation (not yet accepted) ? Yes.
3. What are your reasons for resigning ? 1 have been obliged to reside at Rockhampton, and
my wife’s health will not allow of her remaining there.
4. You are aware that an enquiry has been instituted into the management of the Native
Police Force, in consequences of charges having been made against the Force, of outrages com-
mitted by them in the performance of their duties ? Yes.
5. Do you know anything of these charges? Most of the circumstances, on which the charges
were founded, have been reported to me.
6. The officers have sent in reports ? Yes ; continually.
7. The first charge, if I recollect right, was that of the misconduct of the Native Police, in
the case of Fanny Briggs, at Rockhampton, I believe there is no doubt but that she was
murdered by the troopers of the Native Police ? I believe she was.
8. How near is the Police Station to Rockhampton ? It is two miles and a-half off.
9. Do you think it a good thing to have the Station so near ? No, I think it is very had.
10. Had you not instructions from the Government as to its removal ? Yes, but we waited
till the Report of the Committee was sent in.
11. Where would you suggest that the head-quarters should be moved to ? To a spot about
ten or twelve miles from Rockhampton, or even further off you could get a good site.
12. Don't you think it would be better to have the head-quarters in the centre of the line of
patrol? I think not the head-quarters, because I think they ought to he near some shipping
port, where the supplies could he had quickly.
13. Was Fanny Briggs on good terms with the police ? Yes, 1 believe she was.
14. As to the cause of the murder—was she not in the habit of supplying the troopers with
spirits, when they went to look after her horses ? I believe that was the case : 1 have been
told so by Mr. Murray.
15. You don’t know it of your own knowledge ? No, excepting that 1 saw in a letter she once
wrote to Mr. Watts, that some of her mares had been lost, and that Toby was going out the
next day after them, and that she had promised him a bottle of grog. The next she was
murdered. 16. Toby
E. M. V. Mo-
Esq.
Gtli Ju1y,1661.


16. Toby was one of the troopers? Yes; one who was constantly there.
17. You saw the letter yourself? Yes, and several others saw it.
18. Are you aware that statements have been made in the public press, to the effect that Fanny
Briggs was in the habit of supplying the troopers with liquor —have you seen such statements ?
Yes, I think I have.
19. Was it not stated in the inquest ? lam not aware ; I w r as not at the inquest. I think
1 have seen it in some of the papers.
20. What became of Toby? He was passed through the district and turned loose.
21. There was another man concerned in the affair —one Gulliver ? He was shot by the
Native Police.
22. Evidence has been given before the Committee, to the effect that ho was captured by some
bullock drivers, and handed over to the Native Police ? Yes.
23. Was he shot in attempting to make his escape ? So it was reported, and I believe the
report was true.
24. Who was the officer in charge of him ? Lieutenant Powell.
25. Did he report to you that Gulliver was well secured, and in a state of insensibility from
drink, and put into a person’s carriage? He told me he had been carried, and bound hand
and foot, but that he was only feigning intoxication.
26. And this took off the attention of the troopers, and he thus attempted to make his escape ?
The troopers had been sent away to procure rations, and Mr. Powell, and I think another
officer and trooper, were left alone with Gulliver; he said the rope was cutting his feet, and
they took it off; he then attempted to escape, and Lieutenant Powell, or the trooper with him,
shot him.
27. Lieutenant Powell shot him himself? I am not sure whether it was Lieutenant Powell
or one of the troopers.
28. Lieutenant Powell was present ? Yes,
29. Whore is Lieutenant Powell now? On the Burdekin.
30. The next charge brought against the Police is that of killing some old blacks and gins on
the Logan and at Fassiferu. What report was sent in to you by Lieutenant Wheeler, in
reference to that ? It was reported to me that the blacks had for some time been spearing
cattle in that district, and Lieutenant Wheeler, in consequence, went to Mr. Compignb’s
Station, where he got on the tracks of the blacks, and followed them to the Dugaudau
scrub. They bad been robbing huts as well as killing cattle.
31. Lieutenant Wheeler stated that when after the blacks, he came upon throe or four tribes
together, —that he divided these blacks, taking those he believed to have committed the depre-
dations, and that he sent the troopers into the scrub, in the dark, and ordered them to fire on
these blacks, and that a gin was killed. Do you not consider that exceeding his instructions?
Do you think that a proper way of acting ? No ; if that is exactly what he did, he certainly
did exceed his instructions ; it is not part of his instructions to fire on the blacks without a
cause.
32. What general orders do the Native Police officers act under? Under written instructions.
33. Can you state what they are, or give a digest of them ? Well, they are very long.
34. But do they act under your written instructions, as Commandant ? Yes.
33. Can you provide the Committee with a copy? Yes, I will [Vide appendix A.) The
instructions were issued when I was first appointed Commandant, and every officer, since
appointed, has received a copy.
36. Has Mr. Wheeler a copy ? Yes, I believe he has; if not, it is some oversight. But
although I can’t say whether lie has received a copy, I am certain he has seen the instructions.
Every officer who has been to bead-quarters have seen them. Mr. Wheeler received several
letters stating that the blacks were troublesome, and went up with the purpose of dispersing
them.
87. Can’t they be dispersed in any other way ? It depends a groat deal on the number of
blacks that arc met together ; if there are only a few, they will disperse on seeing the police
coming up; but if there is a large number of them, they will not disperse, unless fired on.
One of the troopers was killed here not long ago by the blacks, in attempting to dispense them.
38. By Mr. Gore ; What do you mean by here ? In Brisbane, under Mr. Williams —some
two or three years ago —before he loft. The troopers’ horses are frequently speared, and the
men knocked off with waddies.
39. Mr. Wheeler is a very good officer, I believe? A very efficient officer,generally speaking.
30. Don’t you consider he was rather indiscreet in the case referred to? Yes, I think so.
31. Have you ever taken him to task? I have never had occasion, except in this instance,
at Fassifern.
32. Butdo you think in this instance heexceeded his instructions somewhat ? I think he must
have been rather indiscreet.
33. How long has ho been in the Force? I think some four years; he has boon on the
Fitzroy, and at Port Curtis.
84. The next charge brought against the Native Police, is that of slaughtering a number of
blacks unnecessarily, in the neighbourhood of Mr. Mortimer’s Station, on the Burnett. Mr.
Mortimer has been examined by the Committee, and also Mr. Parkinson, and certainly the
Native Police do not come favourably out of the enquiry. It appears that Lieutenant
Morisset, of the Native Police, was travelling up the country with horses. Had he any in-
structions to deviate from his route, and take charge of a detachment of Police ? No instruc-
tions from me, but he received instructions to return back from Wide Bay, from Lieutenant
Murray.
35. How long lias Lieutenant Morisset been in the Force 1 Hardly twelve months, I think.
36. Do yon not think it improper to entrust such a young officer with the charge of a detach-
ment.


juaut. iu such a case ns this ? I don't think so, because, although Lieutenant Morisset had
nor bei ii Imn . moo, he had hud us much experience with the Native Police Puree as
ninny of the oiiiivrs.
37. " ].)o you think Mr. Murray we s justified in giving him charge of tiie detachment ? I think
Mr, Murray should have gone himself.
38. It appears from the evidence of Mr. Mortimer and another, that the detachment in charge
of Limitenaut Morisset was sent up on the representations of Mr. Parkinson and some others,
and that they killed a number of blacks, and left them lying dead about his run—we have
heard of at least eight found dead in that way. Do you think this a justifiable act under the
circumstances ? Yes, I think so ; perhaps I may he allowed to explain. I received a report
from Mr. Morisset [Tide appendix B.) which is now in the Colonial Secretary's office; lie was
on his way to head-quarters with a number of horses, ami when he got to this district on his
way up to Wide Bay, he was informed by several squatters that the blacks were very trouble-
some killing cattle, and that they threatened to attack the horses. He reported this to Mr.
Murray, when he got to Wide Bay, and Lieutenant Murray sent him back with a detachment
of his own men. When Mr. Morisset got back, ho found the blacks in large numbers at the
Bunya Bunya, and, I think, he first dispersed them there, and then met them again somewhere
else—at least, the blacks found he was following them, and went in towards the station of
the Messrs. Mortimer, and got close to it, when the Police came up with them. I believe they
thought the Police were coming to shoot them, and made the first attack. The report, that
has been sent in to the Colonial Secretary has not explained that as fully as I have done, as I
collected more particulars from my brother afterwards, having examined him when he came in
to head-quarters.
39. Don't you think the report should have been as full a one as possible ? It should ; but
it was written before I had seen my brother.
40. Was it not the duty of Lieutenant Murray to have reported? I received a report from
Mr. Murray also.
41. Does "each officer report direct to you, or to hia immediate superior ? To the Lieutenant
commanding his division.
42. Mr. Parkinson has slated that on three different days the blacks were attacked, and some
killed near his station? I am not aware whether they were attacked on three different
occasions. From my brother's report, I understood that he saw them first at the Bunya
Bunya, and found them assembling again close to Mr. Mortimer’s Station, and followed them
there.
43. You think Mr. Murray was to blame in sending your brother ? I think, if ho was in the
district, he should have gone himself,
44. How long has Mr. Murray been in that district ? About six months.
45. Lieutenant Bligh was stationed there sometime ? Yes.
46. Were the blacks tolerably quiet then ? They have always been troublesome at the head
of the Mary,
47. la it a good plan to remove officers from a district, when they get used to it ? No ; but
in this case I was obliged to remove Lieutenant Bligh.
48. Why ? Because I wanted him at head-quarters, where he was much more useful than
at. Wide Bay.
49. Have you hai a report of the circumstances connected with the charge against the Native
Police, of killing the blacks unnecessarily at Maryborough ? Yes ; and it was forwarded by me
to the Colonial Secretary.
50. Mr. Bligh can give us all the necessary information on that subject ? Yes.
51. Are yeti’aware that a great many letters have been put in the papers anonymously, in
reference to these charges? Yes, a great many.
52. Don’t you think that on an occasion of this kind, where serious charges were made, and
a Committee was pitting to enquire into the circumstances of the case, those who made them
should have come boldly forward, and substantiated them ? Decidedly.
53. Do you think that such anonymous charges should be taken any notice of? No.
54. Mr. Bligh is very much liked at Maryborough, I believe ? Y’es.
55. He was°presented by the inhabitants with a sword ? Yes, and with a testimonial,
signed by almost every one there.
56. A great many letters have appeared in the newspapers, signed—“ One who knows too
much of the Native Police”—have you any idea who wrote them ? I might guess, but I
could not tell with any certainty; I think the letter I have seen with that signature must
have been written by Mr. Alfred Brown.
57. This letter enters very minutely into the management of the Native Police, and looks
as if the writer had received his information from an officer of the Force —have you any
suspicion who this might have been ? Yes ; lam certain that the information was derived
from one of rhe officers, and the letter I allude to states that the officers at Port Curtis were
served out with the worst pack-saddles and horses, and reflects generally on my management.
I believe that the letter was written by Mr. Alfred Brown.
58. From whom do you suppose he got his information ? From second Lieutenant Baker,
Port Curtis.
69. Were not some letters written to the newspapers against the Native Police, signed
William Henry Walsh ? I don’t remember any.
CO. Has he not brought charges against the Native Police ? Not lately,
61. Some time ago? I don’t remember any ; I have not seen them; I very seldom read
the papers.
62. Now, as to the present management of the Native Police Force: I think you were
appointed Commandant at the time the Force was re-organised? Yes.
Go. \\lj at


63. What state did you Cud it in ? In a perfect state of disorganisation.
64. How long ago was that ? Nearly four years.
65. What state is it in now ! Generally speaking, I think it is very efficient.
06. Do you consider that an improvement lias taken place, so far as the protection of the
squatters goes —is there less loss of life on both sides ? Yes ; that is what I judge from in
saying the Force is efficient.
67 Do you think there is room for further improvement ? The only suggestion 1 could
offer is, that a system ot cadetship should be introduced, by which we could get really
efficient officers —everything depends on the officers.
68. Up to a certain point, the officers have been appointed by the New South Whiles
Government, without reference to the qualifications of those they appointed ? Some were
so appointed.
69. Since separation, according to your suggestion, the appointments have been by your-
self? Yes.
70. "Who harm been the officers appointed under your recommendation, by the Government ?
Mr. Patrick, Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Genetas, and Mr. Matveieff.
71. Have these appointments all turned out efficient officers? Yes, pretty well.
72. Are you aware that many of the other officers are addicted to intemperance ? I am not
aware of many.
73. Are you aware of any ? Yes.
71. As far as the evidence goes, it appears that the ineffectiveness of the Native Police
Force is entirely owing to the inefficiency of the officers. I am going to take the officers
seriatim, and ask your opinion of them. How long has Lieutenant Murray been in the
Force ? About five years.
75. Do you consider him an efficient officer ? He certainly has been, till he gave way to
habits of intemperance—none more so.
76. Have you seen him in a state of intoxication ? Yes.
77. More than once ! Yes.
78. How is it you never represented the matter to the Government, and recommended his
dismissal? Because he always promised to reform; and another reason was, that I thought
it a very delicate matter, having been appointed Commandant over his head.
79. Do yon consider that any delicacy of feeling on your part should interfere with your
duties as Commandant ? I don’t think it should have done.
80. Do you think it conduces to the efficiency of the Force that there should be officers in
it addited to these habits? Certainly not.
81. Don’t you think that an officer addicted to these habits might be in a state of in-
toxication, when out patrolling, and might in that state come upon a tribe of blacks ? No,
I don’t think it possible.
82. Why ? They could not get grog in the interior.
83. Might they not get grog at the station they started from in the morning—don’t you
think it. likely ? Tam sure that would not be the case with Mr. Murray.
84. There have been instances, to the knowledge of a Member of the Committee, in which
this has been the case. The late Mr. Fulfill'd and Mr. Irving have been known to be drunk
at stations for days together? I did not know anything of Mr. Fulforcl; he died before I
was made Commandant.
80. As it is your intention to leave the Force,can you conscientiously recommend that Mr.
Murray should remain in it, supposing that the present Force is not disbanded ? If he con-
tinues in habits of intemperance, ho would be unfit to carry out his duties.
86. The next officer is Mr. John O’Connell Bligh—how long has he been in the Force!
Nearly eight years.
87. Do you consider him an efficient officer ? Yes.
88. Perfectly temperate ? Most particularly so.
89. Energetic ? Y T es.
90. Altogether a good officer? Yes, I should say the best in the Force.
91. Mr. "Walker has resigned, I believe? YMs, but his resignation has not yet been
accepted.
92. Was he a good officer ? Yes.
93. Temperate? Most temperate and efficient.
94. The next is Mr. Powell—how long has he been in the Force! I should think about
five years.
95. What occupation did he follow before he went into the Force ? He followed a creaq
many ; he was in Mexico, and also some time in California, and for many years a sailor.
96. How did he got his appointment ? He was recommended by Mr. Murray.
97. His appointment took place since you have been Commandant? No, before.
98. Do you consider him an efficient officer! Ho was for gome timej but he has latterly
been addicted to intemperate habits
99. But apart from intemperate habits ; do you think that aman who has followed a great
many occupations, and just takes up the profession as a dernier resort, a good man for an
officer ? lie certainly was a. very good officer.
100. But to your certain knowledge, Mr. Powell is addicted to drink ? Yes.
101. Also, if he was at one time energetic, he has become very much the reverse lately ?
He has certainly shown a great deal of inactivity lately.
102. Now, Mr. Morisset, seeing the great importance of an efficient Police Force to the now
district of Kennedy, may I ask, should Mr. Powell have been sent there in charge of a detach-
ment, chiefly of raw recruits ? It was. only when Mr. Powell got his promotion that I per-
ceived ho was unfit for the position ; but the men scut up were not all row recruits.
103. War


103. Was it right to send any 1 It was not fair to rob the first division of all the best
men.
104. Could you not have made a selection from all the divisions ? I could not have made
a better selection than I did. Mr. Powell, who ought to be as good a judge as any one,
knew them all, and was perfectly satisfied.
105. Was it not the case that, instead of accompanying the detachment overland, Mr.
Powell went by sea, by vessel ? Yes ; he stated that be had met with an accident, and pro-
duced a doctor’s certificate.
106. Do you think that, if he had a doctor’s certificate, he was a fit man to send ? The
accident would not incapacitate him from ever going out there, and I expected he would have
recovered almost in time to proceed with the detachment. I thought he was going with the
detachment, but I was obliged to proceed to Brisbane on business, and found after I had left
that he had not sufficiently recovered to go overland.
107. Who was the officer second in command to Mr. Powell 1 Mr. Williams.
108. What sort of an officer is he 1 A very good officer—very energetic.
109. Temperate 1 Yes.
110. Lieutenant Carr ? Mr. Carr is a very efficient officer.
111. One of the best ? As good as any.
11 2. How long has he been in the Force 1 About four years—rather more than four years.
113. Mr. Williams has been about the same time in the Force? He was appointed at the
same time.
114. You consider the last-mentioned officers as very efficient, and would recommend their
retention? Yes, I would.
115. The next on the list is Mr. Moorehead—where did he come from 1 He was recom-
mended to me when I was first made Commandant.
116. What was he doing at the time 1 He was Adjutant to the Volunteer Artillery in
Sydney.
117. Was he not an old soldier ? Yes he had been in India some time.
US. What is your opiuion of him—is lie ffn efficient officer ? I think he is almost too old
for the Native Police Force, though he has performed his duties very well.
119. Do you think him lit to command a detachment? 1 should not recommend him for
any position of trust or responsibility.
120. What duties does he perforin now ? Merely patrol duties, under Lieutenant Walker.
121. Next on the list is Mr. G. P. M. Murray—is he any relation to Mr. John Murray?
Brother ; he is a most efficient officer.
122. How long has he been in the Force 1 Nearly four years; he was appointed soon after
Mr. Carr.
123. All these officers whom you have mentioned as efficient, you have so mentioned as
being efficient in their dealings with the blacks ? Yes, very much so.
124. The next is Mr. J. T. Baker—what is your opinion of him ? I think Mr. Baker
has proved an efficient officer, generally speaking,
125. Where is he stationed ? At Port Curtis; there is certainly not much to be done
there.
126 Is he not an old soldier, or policeman ? Yes, he was in the Mounted Patrol on the
other side of the country.
127. Who recommended him? He was appointed by the New South Wales Government ;
I think he was recommended by Sir Alfred Stephen,
128. Would you recommend his retention in the force ? Yes, I think so.
129. What age is he ? I should think about forty-three.
130. Does he not suffer a good deal from rheumatism? No, I never heard so; I believe
not.
131. Do you think it right for an officer of Nalive Police to give such information as you
stated that you suspected Mr. Baker had given? Certainly not.
132. The next officer is Lieutenant Phibbs—how long has he been in the Force? Four
years.
133. Who was he appointed by f By me.
134. What had he been doing before I I had known him for some time ; he was first of
all omployd in Mr. Sandernan’s store, and afterwards had charge of his station in the Wide
Bay district.
135. Where has he been stationed of late? At Wide Bay, whence he was sent to the Dar-
ling to obtain recruits; ho is at present on the Upper Dawson.
136. What is your opiuion of Mr. Phibbs 1 I think him a very good officer as lie is—■
under an officer such as Mr. Bligh,
137. Is he not of intemperate habits 2 Occasionally.
138. lias he been brought under your notice on that account 1 Yes, he was reported to
me by Lieu'enant Bligh.
139. You say he came up with recruits from the Darling District—did he not lose a
number of them on the road 1 He lost four.
140. Had he many / Altogther twenty-four.
141. Do you not think that hia losing the recruits was owing to his carelessness —stopping
at stations drinking 1 lam sure not, as far as I can learn from enquiry.
142. Would you recommend him to be retained if the Force is to be kept, up and gives
satisfaction to the country ? I should.
143. Though he has been reported to you for being intemperate? Yes; I think him a
very good officer.
144. 1 ask again—do you not think it injurious to the Force, if there are officers in it in
any


any way addicted to intemperance ? Yes, I think the example to men most prejudicial ;
but Mr. Phibbs is not a confirmed drunkard.
145. Is he not likely to become so 1 I don’t think so. . j
146. Are you not aware that there are more private charges brought against Mr, Phibbs
for intemperance than any other officer ! No, I am not aware —it is certainly not so to
my knowledge, and I have seen a great deal of him.
147. The next on the list is Mr. Marlow—where did he come from ? lie was recommended
by Mr. Sinclair—he was highly recommended to me.
148. And he has since done very well 1 Yes.
149. Is he a young man 1 A middle aged man.
150. How long has he been in the Force ! About twelve mouths, I think.
151. You think he is an efficient officer! Yes, Mr. Walker speaks well of him ; he is
under Mr. Walker on the Maranoa.
152. The next on the list are Messrs. Darley and Matveieff, one of whom is dead and the
other has resigned—were they both efficient officers! Yes
158. The next is Mr. C. J. Blakeney—who recommended him! Mr. Herbert first spoke
of him to me.
154. How long has he been in the Force 1 Nine months, I think.
155. What is your opinion of him 1 I think he will make a guod officer when he
has had a little more experience.
156. Had he not some knowledge of drill before he entered the Force ! Yes, he is a very
fair drill.
157. Is he of temperate habits! Very.
158. Then there is Mr. Patrick—how long has he been in the Force! Not more than
twelve months.
159. Do yon consider him a promising officer ! Not very promising ; he is very steady.
160. Do you think him likely to be a humane man in his dealings with the natives !
Yes, I think so.
161. Next is Mr. Genetas—is he a commissioned officer! Y*es, ho was appointed second
lieutenant.
162. What is your opinion of him—do you think him a good officer 1 He is very zealous,
and particularly steady ; the only thing against him is his imperfect knowledge of the
language.
163. You have stated that it would be a good plau, if the Force is retained, to have cadets,
and a recommendation has been made by you that young men should be appointed to the
Force, as cadets, who are likely to turn out well, and that according to their qualifications
they should receive commissions 2 Yes; they should serve as cadets for a period of six
months at least, and should then be turned off if not found suitable.
164. What class of men would you recommend in general for officers ! Men accustomed to
the bush and to the blacks.
165. Not military men! I think there would be no advantage in having military men.
166. Have you not heard that the officers of the old mounted police were excellent bush-
men—that there were hardly any to equal them! I have not heard that; I believe
they were efficient after bushrangers,
167. Have you had many desertions in the Force lately ! Not lately.
168. But have you lost many at different times ! Yes.
169. Don’t you think when desertions occur, it is owing to the want of attention and
neglect of the officers ? In some oases; undue severity on the part of the officers has
occasionally made men desert.
170. Are there any rules of discipline in the corps by which the officers are guided ? As
to the discipline, the men all thoroughly understand that, if disobedient, they will cither be
obliged to mount guard for a certain number of hours, or if it is anything very bad, that
they will be tied up and flogged.
171. Do they submit patiently to these kinds of punishments! Yes, they understand it
thoroughly.
172. Do you think it a safe or proper thing to give unlimited discretion to the officers as
to where, and how, and to what extent they should flog the Native Police 1 If a trooper
requires punishment, when away from head-quarters, of course the amount of punisbmeut
must be decided by the officer under whom he is placed.
173. Can you state that there are instances of undue severity! Has that been brought
under your notice ? I know of it merely by hearsay.
174. But when you hear of it, do you not institute an enquiry 1 Yes.
175. You think that this undue severity leads to desertion ! I know that it did in one
case.
176. I have forgotten one of the officers —Lieutenant Morisset—what is you r opinion as to
his efficiency ! I think him a very efficient officer ; he has had a great deal of experience.
177. Do you think that ho did not act with very great indiscretion in the affair at the
Messrs Mortimer ? I think not.
178. Du you think he had any business to deviate from the instructions given by the
Commandant; and take charge of a detachment of Lieutenant Murray’s? I think he could
not help doing so in a case of emergency such as that was : Lieutenant Hurray was his
senior officer, and ho could not well refuse to obey him.
179. I again ask—do you think that a young officer should be intrusted with a detach-
ment, and go blazing away into the blacks in that way! I don’t know that ho should go
blazing away into the blacks, but his former experience was quite enough to entitle him to
take char™ of a detachment in any case.
180. Is


ISO. Is it a rule (hat any superior officer in the Force should pick up a junior officer,
travelling through the district, to do Ids duties ? It has never been done bef re, and no
order in the instructions bears on the case ; the only reason that I can suppose for Mr.
Murray’s doing so is, that he was unable to leave his camp, and, this being a case of
emergency, ordered the first officer he saw to attend to it.
181. By Mr Watts : You think that officers should be selected, as at present, from men
acquainted with bash life, and not from military men ? Yes.
182. Is it not the duty of the Commandant constantly to visit the out-stations \ Yes, if
ho can do so.
183. What is to prevent him ? Business at head-quarters connected with the department—
correspondence, and so on.
181. How long since did you visit the I bird division ? I have not been there for some
time—since I was appointed Inspector-General.
185. Haw long ago is that ? Twelvemonths.
18G. Have you been unable to do sol I have never had time to visit it since ray appoint-
ment as Inspector-General : while Inspector-General, I could nut leave Brisbane, and since
then I have been without a secretary, and have had a great deal to do at head-quarters.
187. Do yon nut think that it tends to cause inefficiency in the Force—the Commandant's
not visiting the different divisions 1 I think it does in some cases, but I don’t think it has
done in that of the third division : I know .Mr. Walter to be a very efficient man.
188. You have said that you had not time; you have had leave of absence—to what
extent has that been given 1 I have had six weeks’ leave.
189. Altogether, during the last eighteen months—since Separation has taken place ? I
have had three months’ leave altogether.
190. Are you aware that the third division, and other divisions, have been left for a long
period without clothing and ammunition, and other supplies 2 Yes.
191. What has that been caused by t 1 can’t toll. I consider it is the duty of the Secre-
tary of the Police Department to supply us with what is wanted, I believe he has been
constantly written to ; I have written to him on the subject.
192 Have you written to him, remonstrating? Yes.
193. But did you never go beyond the Secretary of Police, and apply to the Colonial
Secretary's Office ? I don’t remember doing so-
ldi. Did yon receive any reply from the Secretary of Police ? Yes—that he had not been
able to send the ammunition, because he had not received it from Sydney.
195. And the clothing ? He always said that the clothing had not arrived.
190. Don’t you think there must be something wrong in the Department of the Police
Secretary, when .the Force is kept in that way ? lam aware that cons derable delay has
occurred ; I am not aware whether it has been his fault, not having been on the spot.
197. The officers and different witnesses have been examined very strictly as to the practice
of the troopers, of taking gins from the different tribes —what are your instructions 'I 1
generally allow them to receive gins from the blackfellows, who either give or self them ; in
other respects, tire orders to the officers fire, not to allow the troopers, under any pretence,
to associate with them.
198. Do you think that, if an officer does his duty, he will prevent this to a great extent ?
1 am certain of it.
199. Do you find that they attend to your instructions 1 I believe they do. Almost all
the troopers have gins, but they are not taken by force from the blacks.
200. Mr. Walker, I believe, has resigned, as well as yourself—what reason does he give for
sending in his resignation ? 11l health.
201. To your own knowledge, he is in a bad state of health 1 I don’t think him strong.
202. No other officer has expressed his intention of resigning ? No, except Mr. Aatveieff,
who has resigned.
203. What was the cause of Mr, MatveiefTs resignation ? He received another appoint-
ment from the Government, and, being a married man, I suppose he did not like being
separated flora his wife.
204. Do you think it would be better if the officers generally were single men ? I
think so.
205. Can you offer any suggestions to the Committee, as to an}' alterations that could bo
made in the organization of the Native Police ? I could not suggest anything, except the
appointment of cadeis. I believe, if the Force were well officered, that no further im-
provement could be made in it; everything depends on the officers,
200. Do you think a mixed Force of whites and blacks would answer well 1 I don’t think
it would answer.
207. Have you ever heard of such an experiment being tried ? No, 1 have not,
208. Are you not aware that there is such a Fotce in Western Australia 2 lam not aware
of it
209. Do you think they would work well together ? No, I don’t think they would.
210. Why? I don’t believe, in the first place, that the white and black troopers would
agree ; the whites would consider the native troopers inferior, and the natives would know
that they were the whites’ equals.
211. By Mr, Blakeney : Are you aware what the contract for clothing is—at what rate it
is ? cm, lam not.
212. Do you know' how it is suj plied, or by whom ? It is supplied by different people ;
one man supplies caps, and another man jackets and trousers, and another shirts.
213. You are aware that at present the clothing is contracted for by several ? I believe so.
211. And all in Sydney ? Yes; the Colonial Secretary opens, and determines upon all
contracts. 215. Can


215. Can you inform the Committee, from your own knowledge, whether Ihe present rate
of contracting exceeds that which prevailed before Separation 1 Yea, I believe it docs.
Most of the things were formerly imported from England by the contractors, but they arc
now made in New Sou;h Wales, which makes them more expensive.
216. Now, as to the saddles Mist are supplied to the troopers—l believe the horses are in
a bad condition throughout the country from sore backs 2 No, I don’t think that : some
are perfectly sound ; they are so in the first division, for instance,
217. What sort of saddlery have they there 1 They have the same as the others.
218. Do you attribute the sore backs to neglect of the troopers, or the fault of the saddles,
in some divisions? In some divisions the horses’ backs are not taken so much care of as
in others.
219. Would you suggest any improvement in the saddles ? No ; I don’t think any further
improvement could be made,
220. Is not an improved kind of saddle used by the Brisbane constabulary? No; with
one or two altera'ions, the saddles are the same ; the only difference is that the pomel
takes out, to enable the officer or sergeant to stuff it, as is frequently done on their
journeys.
221. 1 believe the beginning of the year is the usual time for distributing the clothing?
It ought to be.
222. None has yet been distributed this year ? None.
228. To whose fault do you attribute that? 1 fancy they can’t got it made fast enough in
Sydney —I fancy so. T am not certain.
224. You said something about the Secretary of the Police Department—do you think it
an advisable plan that one and the same person should be Secretary to the Native Police,
and also to the constabulary? No, certainly not.
225. You don’t think any one man could perform all the duties properly ? No.
226. Do you consider that one man would be able to act as Secretary to the Police Depart-
ment and Storekeeper ? I should think so.
227. Would you recommend a Government Store here for the supply of all the things
in entioned ? I think so.
228. Do you consider it absolutely necessary (hat the supplies should be forwarded regu-
larly ? Yes.
229. And there should be a proper store for them ? Yes ; I think it indispensable to have
the things sent regularly to the different divisions—the clothing and ammunition ; the men
often become discontented if not properly supplied. 1 have known some of the men in
the Force going about in rags.
230. They have had no blankets up to this time of the year ? No, except what they have
bought out of (heir own pay.
281 Would you suggest any difference in the clothing ? It might be made of much more
lasting material, but it would add considerably to the expense ; that is why the clothing is
at present made of colonial tweed.
2-i2. Do you think ihose blue jumpers they wear are good ? Yes, for the bush.
238, And you believe they are not expensive ? No, very cheap.
281. Do you think there should be jackets for the men to appear in parade in ? Yes.
285. Taking into consideration that you have a station at Maryborough, or in its vicinity,
and another at Rockhampton, do you consider a station ai Port Curtis necessary—could it
not to advantage be pushed further north—you stated that the officer there had not much
to do ? I think the presence of the Fores at Port Curtis does much in keeping the blao' s
cpiiet. I don’t think it would be safe to remove it altogether; I think it would be better
to remove it to some distance from the town, but not out of the Port Curtis District.
236. Would you recommend it to be removed some distance from the town ? Yes : in
fact, all police stations should be at some distance from the towus.
237. Do yon think eight or ten miles would be sufficient ? Rather mora would be better :
1 should say fifteen miles ; that is quite close enough to the town, in ease they were required
suddenly.
238. You stated that the head-quarters should be near a shipping port, in reference to pro-
curing stores? Yes, I think so.
239. Has the Commandant a s cretary at head-quarters 2 Not at head-quarters.
210. Do you thins it would bo desirable that he should have one ? I think there ought to
be a clerk to keep up the correspondence, while the Commandant is on tours of inspection.
241, Are you aware that in the Estimates there is a salary for such an officer? Yes, but
I am also aware that he has been retained in Brisbane as Secretary to Ihe whole of the
Police.
242. But was there not a salary down for a Secretary at Brisbane, and also for one to the
Commandant at Rockhampton ? I don’t know whether the money was voted ; there never
has been a secretary to the Commandant at Rockhampton.
213. Have you made any applications for a clerk 2 Yes, to head-quarters—to the Colonial
Secretary ; and I was ordered to got in one of the junior officers, and to keep him at head-
quarters : bat at the time I could not spare one.
214. And have you not been obliged to do the work principally yourself 2 Yes.
245. What description of firearms are used—would you suggest any improvement in the
firearms? Yes, if it were possible to arm all the men with Terry’s breech-loaders, I think
it would be desirable to do so, particularly in new country, where the blacks are trouble
some.
246. Are not the present firearms very old and inferior 2 Some are; we have two
descriptions of carbines —single and double; the double-barrelled are very good.
247. Only


247. Only some of the divisions have the double-barrelled carbines 1 Only a few troopers
of the first division arc armed with them,
248. The third division have not got them ? No.
249. You would recommend the issue of an improved description of carbine? Yes, if you
could get Terry’s breech-loaders ; otherwise I would recommend that all the troopers should
be provided with double-barrelled carbines such as some of them have at present.
250. How long is it since you first applied to Mr. McDonnell for supplies? I could not
tell without referring to the book ; when we were starting the Burdekin expedition, sobn
after I left this place to go up to Rockhampton, was the first time I applied.
251. Would it not be his duty immediately to communicate with the Colonial Seototary ?
1 should think so.
252. You would not think a verbal message a proper communication 1 No, I think every
thing official should be in writing; we have been worse oft for ammunition than anything
else ; we have not received any ammunition for twelve months, except a very small quantity,
sent up the other day.
253. Do you not think it adds materially to the expense of the Force that the officers should
be obliged to purchase ammunition at different places all through through the country ?
No doubt.
254. Would you not advise the Government to purchase a sufficient quantity of stores—
flour, sugar, and tobacco—and send them up to the different divisions—don’t you think it
would be more economical than the present plan ? I don’t think so.
255. Do you think the stores can be procured just as cheaply in the country as if they
were sent up from here, after the carriage had been paid ? I think so ; the head-
quarters of the different divisions are all supplied by contract.
256. But you think it essentially necessary that the Force should be supplied with ammu-
nition, accoutrements, arms, saddles, bridles, and clothing from Brisbane '? Decidedly so.
257. How do they manage when they are in want of ammunition and clothing? They
have to make cartridges—and as for clothing, they have to do the best they can without it-
they have to wear their old clothes however ragged.
258. You were speaking just now of Mr. Moorehead, one of the officers—are there any other
circumstances, except those you alluded to, that would disqualify him as an officer? lam
not aware of anything else : he is an old man, and that is against a Native Police officer.
259. Is Mr. Moorehead a married man ? Yes, and has a large family.
260. Does he hear a good chara. ter ? Yes, I think so ; I have not heard of anything against
him.
261. Do you not think that officers appointed to this Force should he humane men, and use
a great deal of discretion in firing on the blacks ? Yes, I think they should ; I don’t think
they ought ever to fire unless it is absolutely necessary'.
262. You think that mere spearing cattle should not induce the officers to shoot the blacks
indiscriminately ? I don’t think it should; I think that if they knew of a black who had
speared cattle or committed depredations, they would be justified in shooting him, if they
could not apprehend him.
263. In these cases, where certain blacks are known, would it not at all times be advisable
for the officer to take a warrant ? I think they do.
264. Do you not think that if a Force were established of white and black troopers, and it
were found necessary to shoot any of the blacks, that they would retaliate on the other
whites of the Force? I don’t think white troopers could shoot a black—they could not
come up with him.
265. Don’t you think, as it is customary among the blacks, in reference to the whites, to
take a life for a life, there would, in the event of a mixed Force being established, be more
killed than at present The blacks know very well what they are shot for—they can only
understand brute force.
266. Brute force ? Y’es, the more lenient you are the worse they become.
267. You thiuk that it is only the dread of punishment by the Native Police, and their
knowing that they are able to follow them, that keeps the blacks quiet? Yes.
268. It is only our having Native Police that keeps them in order? Yes; if they found
that the white Police could not catch them, they would become worse than ever; they
would do mischief out of bravado.
2G9. It is customary, when they have committed depredations, to take themselves off thirty
or forty miles, to the most inaccessible places ? Yes.
270. Do you think white men would have the slightest chance of capturing them? Not
the most remote; I don’t believe they would know which way they had gone
271. It is only the practised eye of a native that is able to track them at all ? That is all.
272. Do you not think it right that Government should give good blankets every year to
the tribes—do you not think it is the means of keeping up a friendly feeling with the
natives? It can’t possibly do any harm, I think; I think it is a practice that ought to he
kept up.
273. Would yon suggest any change in the distribution of blankets, as to the parties by
whom they should he distributed? It might be an Improvement, perhaps, if they were
distributed by the Commandant of Native Police—l hardly know whether it would be, after
all ; our great object is, on all occasions, to keep the troopers and the natives as much
apart as possible, and if the blankets were distributed by the Police, it might be an excuse
for the blacks coming to the camps and talking to the troopers.
274. Do you know whether any blankets or clothing have been distributed this year at
all among the blacks to the North ? 1 fancy I heard of some at Rockhampton • —yes,
there were some distributed there.
275. Have


275. Have you heard any complaints about their being bad ? I think 1 heard Mr.
Bligb say so ; he went in to try and get some blankets for the policemen’s wives, and
found them all gone, but he said it was not of any consequence, they were all so bad.
276. By Mr. Boyds : Lieutenant Wheeler mentions that in the attack at Dugandan
Scrub, the blacks threw all their waddles at the Native Police, was not that sufficient
provocation? Quite sufficient; I think lie would have acted very improperly to allow
them to attack him, without retaliating.
277. Have yon ever known Lieutenant Wheeler to use undue cruelty or indiscretion ?
No, except in the case at Fassifcrn ; if ho was indiscreet in that case, that was the only
case, and I speak in reference to that merely from what I have heard here to-day.
278. Have you not often found great difficulty in keeping the gins away from the
troopers ? Yes, I have had to flog them out of the troopers’ camps.
279. It is very seldom that the troopers take them by force ? They dare’nt do so ; they
can’t keep them without the knowledge of the officers ; they are not allowed into the
camp without the the officer’s permission.
280. If the Native Police Force were done away with, and the squatters had to protect
themselves, would there not be many more murders of the blacks ? I should say far
more murders —or at least, much greater loss of life.
281. They are a protective force both to the blacks and the whites ? 1 think so ; for
the Native Police Force deters the blacks from outrages.
282. By Mr. Fitzsimmons ; You have been living at Rockhampton for some time ? Yes.
283. You have travelled some distance to the North ? Not lately.
281, Gould you mention any places, where it is more necessary to have the Police Force
than where they are stationed at present ? Not unless there is an increase of the Force,
I beg to hand the Committee an account of the distribution of the first division. {Paper
handed in by witness.)
285. Do I understand from that, that no police are to be stationed between Rockhampton
and the Peak Downs ? None ; but the division at head-quarters will patrol the country
between Rockhampton and the point to which the Peak Downs Police will come ; in
fact the patrols will meet.
280, The distance between Rockhampton and the Peak Downs is about two hundred
miles ? I think so.
APPENDIX A.
(INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMANDANT TO OFFICERS AND CAMP SERGEANTS
OF NATIVE POLICE.)
Head Quarters, Maryborough, Wide Bay,
January, 1858.
Ist. The officers in charge of divisions or detachments will bo careful that under no
circumstances are blacks, not being troopers, to be allowed into the Police Camp, and will
use every exertion to prevent the troopers from having any communication whatever with
the Aboriginees of the district in which they may be stationed, or through which they may
be passing.
2nd. Every such officer will keep a public journal of all incidents happening in the
course of public duty, whether in patrol or in camp, in order that he may at any time be
able to furnish the Commandant with a report of the daily duty performed by himself or
others of his division or detachment, or of any circumstances that may have occurred within
his district, in which he or they may have acted in his or their official capacity.
3rd. They will be particular in collecting and forwarding to the Commandant’s
Office, at the conclusion of each month, all accounts against their own, or any other out-
standing accounts belonging to any other division or detachment that may have passed
through their district; but the latter are not to he entered on their own Divisional Abstract,
but on a separate one. These accounts must be made out on proper vouchers, and the
officers must be very careful that the proper signatures are attached thereto,
4th. They will be held responsible for the general duty of their divisional
detachment, and the proper fulfilment of the separate duties by the subordinate officers
under their command.
sth. They will be careful to instruct their Camp Sergeants as to the duties they will
be required to perform, which are as follows, viz,—
1. To take charge of the Stores, and servo out Rations to the troopers, night and
morning. They will he held responsible for all Stores placed under their charge,
and will keep a strict account of all Stores and Rations issued to the division or
detachment, and which will be laid before the officer in charge at any time he may
wish to inspect the same.
2. To drill the troopers every day they are in camp un il they arc perfect in their
exercise, mounted and on foot.
3. The Sergeants will be responsible for the discipline of the Camp during the absence
of the Officer, and will perform any camp duties which may be necessary under
the order of the Officer in command,
()th. Officers, hergeants, and Troopers will at all times wear correct uniform when
on parade.


on parade, patrol, or other duty, and on this point it is particularly necessary that the
Officers should be careful in shewing a proper example, as thorough cleanliness in person,
clothing, and accoutrements must be rendered compulsory on the part of the troopers,
every inducement should bo held out to them to assume a smart and soldierlike appearance.
7th. In no case are any of the Native Troopers to be allowed to lake spirits from
any otic except their Officer, or medical man in case of sickness.
Bth. No cartridges are to be expended by the troopers without the orders of their
Officers.
9th. The whole of the horses to be mustered regularly every morning
by the troopers in turn, and a note to be made in the Officer’s journal of any
horses absent; their backs must be carefully attended to, and always washed upon the
troopers dismounting, and well rubbed down before saddling; the saddles to be
examined frequently by the Officer in charge, and the saddle-cloths and girths kept clean.
The troop horses are on no account to be used by the Officers.
10th. It is the duty of the Officers at all times and opportunities to disperse any
large assemblage of blacks ; such mootings, if not prevented, invariably lead to depredations
or murder; and nothing but the mistaken kindness of the Officers in command inspired the
blacks with sufficient confidence to commit the late fearful outrages on the Itiwson Uivor.
The Officers will therefore see the necessity of teaching the aborigines that no outrage or
depredation shall be committed with impunity—but on the contrary, retributive justice
shall speedily follow the Commission of crime ; nevertheless the Officers will be careful in
receiving reports against the blacks, as it frequently happens that mistakes are made as to
the identity of the agressors. In case of any collision with the aborigines a report is to be
forwarded to the Commandant without delay.
(signed) K. V. MOIUSSKT,
Commandant Native Police.
APPENDIX B.
(OFFICER’S REPORT, &c„ IN REFERENCE TO AN ATTACK ON THE BLACKS
AT MANUMBAR.)
Rockhampton, 14th April, 18G1.
Sm, —I have the honor to enclose, hj the instructions of Lieutenant Bligh, Copy of
the Report sent in by me, on my return here from Brisbane, Lieutenant Bligh having loft
on patrol, for the Upper Dawson, the day of my arrival here.
I have, &e.,
(Signed) E. V. MORISSET,
Second Lioutcuat Native Mounted Police.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary,
Brisbane.
Rockhampton, 10th April, 1861.
8m, —I have the honor to inform you that I arrived here yesterday, with (32)
thirty-two horses, the same having been purchased by me for the use of the Native Police.
On my way up from Brisbane I found it necessary to rest the horses for some time
at "Wide Bay, and in consequence of the numerous complaints sent in by the squatters, of
the frequent and daring outrages of the blacks at the Bunya Buuya, I received instructions
from Lieutenant Murray to patrol the district with a detachment of men. I found the
blacks collected in several places in very large numbers, and also that they had been killing
cattle at nearly all the stations in that district; and on two or three occasions I found it
necessary to fire upon them before they would disperse.
At Messrs. Frazer and Parkinson’s, and also at Mr. Lawless’ cattle station, they
were spearing cattle even while I was on the station.
I have the honor to enclose brands and descriptions of horses purchased by me.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. V. MORISSET,
Second Lieutenant Native Mounted Police.
The Commandant or the Native Mounted Police to the Honorable the Colonial
Secretary, with reference to an advertisement bearing the signatures of Messrs. F.
and A. Mortimer, of Mannmbar.
Rockhampton, 25th March, 1861.
Sir, —I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 10th instant,
enclosing an advertisement signed by Messrs. T. and A. Mortimer, of Mannmbar, and to
inform you that I have applied to Lieutenant Murray, in whose district the above station is
situated, for his report on the subject by return of steamer.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. V. MORISSET,
Commandant Native Mounted Police-
MONO A r


MONDAY, Bth JULY, 18G1.
Present:
Mr. GORE, | Mr. ROYIKS,
Mb. BLAKENEY, | Mr. FITZSIMMONS.
J. WATTS, Esq., in the Chair,
[Mr. MACKENZIE (Chairman) entered the room in the course of the examination.]
JOHN O’CONNELL BLIGII called in and examined
1. By Mr. Watts: What is your name? John O’Connell Bligh.
2. I believe you are Acting Commandant of f c Native Police Force ? I have not
received an official notice to that effect, but I believe lam to be. Mr. Morissot has
received one, which I have seen.
8. Do you know an officer in the Force named Phibhs ? Yes, ho has been acting under
me lor the last three years.
4, Will you inform the Committee whether he is a man of temperate habits ? Yes,
generally speaking.
5. Did you ever place him under arrest ? No, never.
(j. What do yon mean by “generally speaking?” I made use of that term because upon
one occasion 1 had to report him for being drank.
7. Did you over bear of his falling from his horse in the streets of Maryborough ? Yes,
that was the occasion I refer to.
8. Was that caused by drink ? Yes.
9. Have you known of any other instance of a similar nature? No.
10. Now, Mr. Bligh, do you not think, if the officers are addicted to intemperance,
that is one of the chief reasons that the Force is not so efficient as it ought to be ? Most
decidedly I do.
11. Do you know any of the other officers who are addicted to habits of intemperance ? Yes,
I know of another—that is to say by report,
12 Is Mr. Murray one of them ? Yes.
18. Do you know any others ? Do you wish me to say what I have scon myself?
14. What you have seen, and what you know ? Aes, Ido know another ; I cannot say he
is addicted to drink, but I have seen him in a state in which no officer ought to he,
either in public or elsewhere.
15. Who was it 1 Mr. Powell.
li. How long has lie been in the Force ? I think since ’55 or ’5O; I am not quite certain.
17. Is he an efficient officer in other respects ? Yes, he has always borne that character;
I have never worked with him myself.
18. Do yon not think, when an officer takes to such habits that it impedes his manage-
ment of the force under his command ? Decidedly, very much so.
19. And that his example has a great effect upon his troopers ? Yes, very great indeed.
20. Are you not aware that the troopers, generally speaking, pay a great deal of attention
ti a person of gentlemanly habits and bearing ? Yes.
21. And they would not pay the same attention to a person whose habits were intemperate ?
No.
22. Now, Mr, Bligh, there have been certain charges brought against the Native Police
Force, in reference to an occurrence at Maryborough. I observe in some of the evidence
that a charge has been made, against you for shooting some blacks on the 2nd February,
1890. Will you give the Committee some information on the subject ? During the twelve
months previous to that there had been continual complaints from the inhabitants of
outrages committed by the blacks—
-23. Of what nature were those outrages? They were chiefly assaults committed upon
women.
24. Were any rapes committed ? No rapes wore committed, but there were several attempts
at rape; drays were robbed and various other offences committed which I cannot enumerate,
of which complaints wore made continually. 1 have, generally speaking, refused to act in
the townships, because I know that if I could not apprehend a biaekfellow there was no
other course but to shoot him, or let him escape. On this occasion I had followed the
blacks for about six miles from the place where they had committed a robbery. I followed
their tracks and came upon them as they were entering the township. On seeing me they
ran away, and two of them got under the public wharf, where they remained for about an
hour. T got one of my men who spoke their language to act as an interpreter, and told them
that if they came out no harm should he done to them At last I sent two of my men
under the wharf to get them out, and the men took their clothes off-—-
25. Had you warrants for them ? Yes, for those two.
2G. Then you know those two blacks ? Yes— when the troopers had taken off their clothes
and were getting under the wharf, the blacks struck out towards the other side of the river,
and I got into a boat and followed them. I fired at one biaekfellow whom I knew—one
who bore the worst character and fos 1 whom I had a warrant—and I believe ho was shot, but
Ido not know it; I suppose ho died from the effect of the gunshot wound.
27. You did not take him? No, I never saw him afterwards. I never saw him in any
position in which I could apprehend him, except when he was under the wharf.
28. What was the nature of the warrant ? I think it was for robbing some store ; Ido not
remember 2d, \\ a


29. A\as that blackfellow ever apprehended before '? No, not that lam aware of.
■dO. Were either of thorn ! The one about whom there was a magisterial enquiry, was an
escaped prisoner.
81. What was he apprehended for before ? Ido not remember, it was a long time ago.
3d. And was the warrant you bad in your possession a warrant for any offence committed
against the law since that period ! Yes, for a second offence, after his escape.
33. Had you two warrants in your possession? No, only one.
34. Was he shot ? i, believe he was shot by one of my troopers. I should mention that
both of them were bad characters, and were supposed to have committed many outrages for
which no warrants were out against them.
35. Do you know anything of the outrages committed at the Messrs. Mortimer’s station ?
I know nothing about them.
30. Have you seen any of the reports in the newspapers in reference to them ? Yes, but 1
know nothing of the occurrence myself.
87. Do you think it advisable to remove officers from the districts they arc well acquainted
with 3 Certainly not, unless perhaps in some particular case.
38. Do you not think a good deal of mischief is perpetrated by the blacks in consequence
of such changes? Yes, I think the officers ought not to be moved, except in special cases.
39. Now, for instance, you would know any of the blacks in a district which you were
accustomed to patrol ? Most of them ; I should know all the bad characters.
40. If an outrage had been committed and warrants were out against certain parties, von
would know them ? In most eases, but not always.
41. Would that be the ease in any other district ? No.
42. Therefore, whatever changes may be made among the troopers, you think it advisable
to retain the officers in their several districts » Yes, as much as possible, it is not always
possible.
48. To your knowledge are the settlors, generally speaking, kind to the natives or otherwise ?
(Jenerally speaking, kind—as far as I know.
44. Are any of the outrages committed by the blacks caused by injuries done them by the
white people ? I think so ; perhaps not so much for what is usually termed bad treatment,
as the violation of promises made to them by the whites of payment for work done by them.
They take a groat deal of offence at that; I think they feel it more sensitively than any-
thing else.
45. Do you think it is the duty of the (iovernment to give blankets and clothing to the
blacks 3 I think it is a very good thing to give them blankets.
46. Can you suggest any better mode of distributing them? No, I think the present mode
is a very good one ; the blankets are distributed at the Police Station, or sent to the dif-
ferent squatters who apply for them.
47. Do you think that is a proper course ? I think it is a very good plan, because the
knowledge which the blacks possess that they will get blankets at the station tends to pro-
mote a friendly feeling towards the settlers.
48. Do you not think it would be better to entrust the blankets to the officers of the Native
Police Force ? Ido not think so,
49. What is your reason for thinking so? Well, I never allow the blacks near my camp,
and I rather think that would tend to bring them about. With regard to clothing, I think
the blacks are far better without it—they only sell their clothes for grot
50. Now, with reference to the Native Police establishments, would you suggest that any of
them should be removed ? I should recommend that the head-quarters at Rockhampton
should bo removed, but not to any great distance, it is too close to the township; and also
the head-quarters at Port Curtis—they should always be twelve or fifteen miles from the
township. It is necessary that they should be somewhere near water carriage.
51. Do you think the Force should be stationary, or do you think they should be continually
patrolling the districts? Yes, the different sub-divisions should he constantly patrolling.
52. Do you think any other force would be as efficient as the Native Police Force ? Not
after blacks, decidedly.
53. Do you think a mixed force composed of white men with black trackers would be as
efficient? lam quite sure it would not.
54. Will you give the Committee your reasons? lam sure white police would not stand
the same hardships as the black troopers do ; they would not go on short rations, and if they
were successful in finding the blacks in or near the scrub, I am quite sure they would see
nothing of them afterwards. I judge from my own experience ; I can never keep up with
the blacks, and it is very bard work for the native troopers. L generally keep one of my
men with me in the scrub.
55. Do you think any means could be adopted to apprehend these depredators and bring
them to justice? No; I never could apprehend them, except in open country, or at a
station—never in scrub. I consider it impossible
!)(). Will you state to the Committee the reason you cannot apprehend them in scrub ?
Because they move so fast that it is very difficult to see them. I don’t think it would be
possible to apprehend them in scrub. They go through it quite as fast as the native
troopers; indeed they go faster, for the trooper is encumbered with his arms, and, although
he only carries his carbine and pouch, it makes a difference.
57. Do you ever allow your troopers to fire upon the blacks except the blacks first attack
them ? No.
58. Do I understand you to say that they never fire no the blacks, except in eases where
they have warrants out, and where there is no other means of apprehending them 3 Yes.
59. Would you consider that the mere killing cattle on the part of the blacks would
authorise


J. O‘C. Bligii.
/ N
8 July, 18G1.
authorize you to fire upon them ? No I should not—not in all cases. If I caught them in
the act I should do so, supposing I could not apprehend them.
60. But you think you would not be justified in firing upom them on the strength of any
information which you might receive from the squatters in reference to cattle killed on
some previous occasion ? No.
61. Do you think that it is generally done by the officers of the Force ? No; I have no
reason to suppose so. I think the officers generally follow their tracks from the scene of the
depredation. That is the usual course.
62. Now, you know a good deal of the habits of the wild blacks—do you think if a White
Force were formed that the blacks would care anything for them? No; I feel sure they
would not.
63. Do you think, in the event of the Native Police Force being disbanded, there would be
more blood shed than at present? 1 think so; judging from what I heard when I first
arrived in the colony, about 12 years ago—when the squatters had to protect themselves—of
the massacres which used to take place on both sides.
04. Generally speaking, the country now is quiet ? Fes; for the last six mouths the whole
of the Leichhardt has been perfectly quiet.
65. Are there many blacks there now ? Yes; a groat number, I should add—with the
exception of occasional petty crimes
66. And you think this has been caused by the dread which the blacks entertain of being
followed by the Native Police, and the knowledge they possess that if they commit a
depredation 40 or 50 miles away the Police are able to track them to their haunts ? Yes.
67. You think it is nothing but this fear of the Police which keeps them in order ? Yes ;
I am convinced of it.
68. Have you ever known that any blacks who were reported to have been shot, were still
in existence ? Yes ; I have known one or two instances.
69. By Ma. Blakeney ; Do you consider the Maryborough and Port Curtis Police Stations
absolutely necessary for the protection of the district? Fes; I think so, for the present;
bat, as I said before, I should recommend that the barracks at Port Curtis should be moved
further from the township.
70. Would you recommend any other changes in the localities of the Police Slations with
the exception of those which are too near the townships? No; Ido not think of any at
present.
71. With regard to these two men whom you say were shot in February, 1860, in Mary-
borough, was it possible to capture either of them on that day ? It was perfectly impossible.
72. Did you and your men make every endeavour to capture them ? Yes; we made every
effort that it was possible for men to make.
73. And how long were your troopers endeavouring to apprehend the blackfellows under
the wharf? A very short time, because when they saw the troopers taking off their clothes
they struck off to the other side of the river, and they were nearly on the other side when
I fired. 1 endeavoured, while in the boat, to seize one of them by the hair of his head, but
he dived, and when 1 saw him again he was so far away that 1 very nearly lost him
altogether, I did all that I could to capture him, and I also used persuasion.
74. You parleyed with them? I parleyed with them for at least an hour, and told them,
through a man who spoke their language, that if they came out and gave themselves up
they should nt)t be hurt. Of course I should then have taken them to the lock-up,
75. By Mu. Gore: You have mentioned Lieutenant Phibbs—he is a Second Lieutenant?
Yes.
76. Would you recommend him for promotion to the rank of First Lieutenant ? Yes; he
is a very good officer.
77. Do you think his intemperance was only a casual occurrence ? Yes ; it was only on an
occasion when he met a good deal of company. I was with him in the township; still it
occurred in a public place, and it was my duty to report him.
78. Did you see an anonymous letter which appeared in the Press—it was in the Courier I
think ? Do you refer to a letter signed “ The Sword of Damocles ?”
79. No Oh, I remember the letter you mean ; 1 have seen it.
80. Do you know to whom it referred; 1 believe it mentioned something about some of the
troopers having put an officer into a wool press and flogged him while he was drunk ? Ido
not believe anything of the sort ever occurred.
81. Do you remember wbat the other charges were ? 1 can give some explanation of them.
It was stated that I had tied one of the troopers to a dray and flogged him. I was at Mr.
Bell’s station, at Fort Curtis, and one of my troopers was insubordinate ; I had tied him up
to a dray, and Mr. Bell interfered, and said he would not have the man flogged ; 1 said it
was very extraordinary for him to interfere, but eventually he turned my horses out of his
yard, and told me that ho did not wish to see me at bis station again, and then walked into
his house.
82. What are your usual means of supporting discipline in your force, supposing for instance
that one of your men got drunk ? I make the troopers fall in for punishment, and then
punish the man myself.
83. With a riding-whip ? Yes.
84. And you are quite sure the men would not stand being punished by the other troopers ?
Yes, when L first went out I used to make the other troopers inflict the punishment, but 1
found it would not do, they did not give half punishment enough.
85. What is the feeling among the troopers with regard to punishment ? I think they
know very well that they deserve it, and they take it as a merited punishment.
86. I suppose it is much the same feeling which schoolboys entertain ? Yes.
87. Do you flog them on the back ? Yes 88, You


88. You take their sliirts off ? Yes.
HO, 1 suppose the punishment is not really severe? Oh no, not very.
9u. In what light do the wild blacks regard the h’oree—as butchers, or as fair enemies? I
think as officers of justice, to punish them when they deserve it.
01. And are they not perfectly aware that by their depredations they incur some punishment ?
Yes, I am quite sure they are.
92. And they look upon us much in the same light as the New Zealanders do, and make
war upon us in the same way ? I think they do, and nothing hut fear prevents them from
carrying on a regular system of warfare.
!):!. Ami if we did not repel force by force they would drive us out of the country ? Yes,
J think it is the most merciful way of dealing with them.
94. Then, on the oc asion of an attack by the blacks, the Force is necessary as much for the
assertion of our superiority, as for the purpose of punishing them for their depredations ?
Yes.
!).>. And if we did not punish the blacks they would look upon it as a confession of weak-
ness ? Yes, that is exactly my opinion.
94. It is a question as to which is the strongest race—if we submit to them they would
despise us for it ? Yes.
97. When they commit outrages, are they not perfectly aware that retaliation will follow ?
'They are perfectly aware of it.
08. When a district has become comparatively quiet, what is the feeling of the blacks
towards you and your troopers ? Tiiey never show any fear of us,
00, They would go up to the barracks if they were allowed? Yes, but I never allow
thorn.
Till. What is the feeling among them in respect to the taking away of their gins by the
Native Troopers ? They never take gins away; the blacks give them, and the gins frequently
follow the troopers. I never knew an instance where a gin was taken away by force or
intimidation.
101. Are the blacks generally willing to give up the gins? Generally they arc.
102. Do you think that is in consequence of the terror they entertain of the Force ? Partly,
aud because they wish to curry favor with the troopers.
l‘)tS. Do you find that the gins are willing to follow the troopers? Yes, I have frequently
known them to do so. I have had to drive them away.
194. You have stated that you thought the police should be always patrolling the district,
1 presume you mean that they should be constantly on the move, for they must have some
sort of homo, as they require a place to keep their horses in? Yes, they must have some
place to keep their spare horses in, as they cannot take them about the country with them,
or the horses would never be in condition.
1 Do. Who was this Mr. Bell ? A squatter at Port Ourtis,
-101 >. Have you any idea of the meaning of his proceedings on the occasion you have
referred to ? Not the slightest; I was not flogging the man, as has been stated, in front of
his house, but behind a woolshed at some distance from the house.
107. What was the offence for which you were punishing the trooper? His offence was
this—l had told him to go after the horses, and I found him between the blankets. When
1 spoke to him ho answered me rat er sharply, and 1 struck him Then we closed and had
a little hit of a scuffle, in which he got considerably the worse of it, and I put the hand-
cuffs on him, and was going to flog him when Mr, Bell interfered.
1 98. Had Mr. Bell signalised himself in any way as an opponent to the Force? No, and I
was very much surprised at his interference.
109. I Suppose if you were to overlook such au offence you would lose your influence with
your men ? Yes, I could not think of such a thing.
110. Is such insubordination frequent ? No, it very seldom occurs
111. On what terms do you generally live with your troopers? On very friendly terms,
I am on much more familiar terms with them then I could be with white men,
112. Do they submit willingly to the restrictions imposed upon them 1 Yes very willingly,
under proper management.
Hi!. Do they keep their accoutrements clean? Yes.
114. Aud do they take great care of their firearms ? Yes, most of them, some of them
are rather stupid.
1 if). Do they understand the mechanism of their instruments? Oh yes, they have single-
barrelled carbines, which arc of very simple construction. The serjeaut always takes them
to pieces w hen the locks require to he oiled or looked into,
lib. But the troopers keep them clean and wash them ? Yes.
.117. Is it not necessary to take the barrels off to wash them ? No.
118. Do you find much difficulty in making the troopers take care of their horses’ backs?
Yes, that is where I have the most difficulty.
119. Are not the saddles too small ? Yes, some of them ; the last lot which were sent up
the other day are much better; generally they arc too narrow and too short.
it'd. "What were they originally made for? They wore made expressly for the Force by
Messrs. Hall and Alderson of Sydney.
121. Are they constructed in the way that troopers’ saddles are usually made, with the idea
of making the troopers ride with long stirrups? Yes, I believe they are.
122. And of course that is not suitable for your work ? Yes, I think it is, they arc less
Iff le to aive Use horses sore backs.
12i). But still you say the saddles are not large enough ? No, there is not room enough in
the vat.
124. What


124. Wliat room is there between the cantle and the pommel, there ought to be eighteen
inches ? Ido not know exactly, but they are decidedly 100 small.
125. Bat the last-made saddles you say arc better ? Yes, there were some half dozen sent
up lately which appear to be muck bettor.
126. Are they made so as to keep the cantle of the saddle off the spine? Yes. I think so.
12,7. Are you not of opinion that the person who acts as Commandant should inspect the
different divisions, and exercise some supervision over them? Yus.
128. Is not that a most important part of his duty, and one on which the efficiency of the
Force mainly depends ? Yes.
129. Have you made any complaint about stores not being properly supplied'? I have
written two or throe letters about it. I wrote one under the direction of the Commandant,
and I have written others myself, requesting that the supplies might bo attended to; I have
seen Mr. McDonnell since and he says that he could not get the clothing.
130. What was the reason ? I cannot say, 1 have represented it several times, and stated
that my men were very badly off for clothing.
131. Do your troopers ever take their swords with them when they go out ? No,
132. Then the swords arc entirely useless ? Yes.
133. Do you drill them in the use of the sword? Yes; because I think it is a good plan
to give them plenty of drill.
134 Do they like it ? Yes ; they never use their swords, except on parade.
135. The swords then are of no practical use ? No.
136. By Mb. Mackenzie : I believe you have been subjected to a good deal of annoyance
before you left Maryborough and since, in consequence of certain anonymous charges which
have been brought against the Force through the Press, Do you know the authors of the
charges against you ? I have my own idea about it.
137. You may as well mention it? I think some of the letters were written by one of the
Messrs. Brown.
138. Which Mr. Brown ? I think it was most likely Mr. Alfred Brown, and I have also
suspected that Mr. Melville and Mr. Sheridan have been concerned in some of them.
139. Has not Mr. Walsh written some of them—has he not written a letter in his own
name ? Ido not think so ; not that lam aware of.
140. On what sort of terms have you been with these persons ! Mr. Melville has always
had some cause of enmity against me, and Mr. Sheridan also; I do not know why.
141. And Mr. Brown ? I never knew that he had.
142. These charges being all anonymous, of course you did not consider it worth while (o
reply to them ? No ; I did reply to one letter signed “ Rod Indian.”
143. Who do you suppose was the author of “ The Sword of Damocles”? Either Mr.
Sheridan or Mr. Melville.
144. Was it in consequence of those letters that you were removed from Maryborough ?
No ; I think not.
145. Referring to the question that was asked you about Mr. Phibhs—what was done upon
that occasion when he fell from his horse ? I reported him to the Commandant, and 1
know that he received a reprimand, and an intimation that if the offence were repeated he
would be dismissed from the Force.
146. By Mrs. Roms : Could the number of troopers at present stationed at Wide Bay be
reduced, or moved elsewhere? There are only 10 men there at present; the pr per
number is 18, but since Mr. Murray went there, there have only been 10.
147. Do you think the number now set down for the first division is sufficient to protect
the country now being taken up at Nogoa and the Peak Downs? Yes; if the eight men
who ought to be at Wide Bay were added to the first division, I think they would be
sufficient,
148. Were any other blacks shot besides the two you have mentioned? No; not at that
time.
149. If a white force were established and they shot blacks in the execution of their duty,
would not the blacks feel themselves called upon to retaliate upon other white persons ? I
think they would.
150. Have not several troopers deserted from your division! They have deserted from the
Force several times.
151. From the farce under your charge? No; not many.
152. What has been the cause of their desertion generally ? There were six troopers
—recruits—sent up by steamer from the Logan, a short time ago. 1 had them drille dfe r
several months ; I was obliged to go away on a tour of inspection to the Comet lib er,
and when I returned they had bolted.
163. Was that caused by any undue severity on the part of the officer in charge ? No ; I
do not think so.
154. Do yon not think there ought to be a superior sort of carbine to the old single-barrelled
carbine ? I think the only 7 improvement would be to have double-barrelled carbines of the
same description.
155. How do the troopers usually carry their carbines ? In a bucket.
156. Can you suggest any better mode ? No. I think that is the lest way. The barrels
are not long enought to admit of their being carried as the Cape Mounted Rifles carry their
pieces, with the butts downwards.
157. If it were determined to disband the Native Police, and to appoint a White Police
Force, how would the change affect you —as to your case and private comfort ? It would 1 c
a groat improvement in that respect, and if it were only for that 1 should be glad of tl e
change.
158, Will
J. O’C. Bligh.
8 .Inly, 1861.


158. Will you explain your reasons ? I should have no anxiety about keeping the men
from deserting, and 1 should be more comfortable in every way. I should always have one
of the white troopers as to v servant, to ride about with me ; and I should not have so much
camping out.
159. In short, you would not have so much hard work ? No.
160. And I presume you would not go so often into the bush without rations ? No;.l
should never go without radons.
I 01. Why ? Because Ido not think the white troopers would stand it. Now, when lam
in the bush and got short of rations my men always find me sufficient to eat.
102. I)o you think they would provide for white troopers if a mixed force were formed ?
No; and they would not have time enough to provide for three or four men, although they
can always find enough for me.
Kid. And would the white troopers eat the food if the blacks provided it for them ? No,
1 don’t think so, for I have always found that men from the loiver orders never put
up with the same hardships, or eat the same food, that I do,
104, 1 suppose it is because you consider that your respectability and credit as an officer
require it, while they have no such motive ? It is partly so. But I have never experienced
any very great inconvenience from it. I never carry any meat with mo if Igo for a month
in the bush, I only take flour, tea, and sugar,
165. I)o you think the white men and the black troopers would agree? No; I think the
white men would try and make the others their servants, and 1 do not think the black
troopers would stand it, because they do nut pay much attention to any person unless he is
what they consider a gentleman,
100. By the Chairman: Do you think it would economise and improve the general working
of the force to establish a chain of posts to bo constantly travelling from the Maranoa to
Port Denison ? Ido not think it would; as far as I can judge I think it would be more
expensive, and it would not work so well as the present system, which is to push out with
the first settlers. There is a division now gone out with Mr. Hood to Theresa Creek.
107. By Mr. Fitzsimmons: Are the troopers well supplied with horses ? Yes; T think
they are well supplied, but we have a good many old horses which want casting.
108. How many horses have they ? Two horses to each trooper generally.
109. Do you think that is sufficient ? Yes.
170. They are nut obliged at any time to stay at home to rest their horses? No, not in the
ordinary way, two horses are generally sufficient.
171. You say that some of the horses ought to be parted with ? Yes; some of them are
very old horses.
172. Have you been north of Rockhampton much? No; I have not had time—or rather I
have not had an Officer to leave in charge,
173. It is stated that the distance from B.ookha,mpton to the Peak Downs is 200 miles?
Yes, it is over that I think.
174. Is there any detachment of Native Police stationed between the two places? There is
a detachment at Collaroy, but that is not exactly between the two places.
175. Do you think some force is required there? I think if I had a Second Lieutenant or
a Cadet at head quarters it would be sufficient, as he could go out and patrol the country for
100 miles from Rockhampton towards the Peak Downs, and also towards Priuchester, where
there used to be a detachment which has been removed lately.
176. Are the blacks very troublesome about the M'Kenzie ? Yes; I have heard of their
killing cattle and stealing sheep there.
177. Are there any Police in that neighbourhood to protect the settlers? No; the reason
of that is that the Banana detachment has been taken away to be sent to Port Denison, and
at present there are no (ifficers or men to supply their places.
178. But if you had an increased number of men do you think it would be a good plan to
leave some of them to protect the settlers on the road ? Yes; I could do that if the com-
plement of 68 men were made up.
179. Did you hear of one of Mr. Stuart’s men having been killed on the M'Kenzie in
October last—a Chinaman I believe ? No, I never heard of it,
180. Do you not consider that it is the duty of every Officer in command of a detachment
to send in a monthly report of his actions to the Commandant ? Yes.
181. Would you enforce such a system? Yes; since I have been in command of the first
division I have always received monthly reports. I wrote a Circular requesting the Officers
always to keep a diary, and they have always done so. There was not the same occasion tor
that in the second division, because there I had only one Officer and he was always with me,
and I used to send in a report to the Commandant for the whole division.
182. Would it add to the efficiency of the Force to give eacli of the troopers another horse, so
as to enable them to do more work ? No, I think not.
183. Do you think the system of appointing cadets is a good one ? I think it is the only
way of rendering the Force efficient. There will have to be two or three appointments made
shortly, and 1 think it would be better to appoint cadets than to make the officers second
lieutenants at once. No cadet should enter the service except with a full understanding that
his promotion depended entirely upon his efficiency.
I Hi, 'Would the Commandant or the officer in charge be the judge of that? The Com-
mandant, from the report of the officer in charge, and from personal observation.
185. The cadets are supposed to live and associate with the officers at head quarters?
Yes.
1 -si. How many white sergeants are there in the Force? Six in the first division, one in the
second- —I think eleven or twelve altogether.
187. From


187. From what class of men arc they generally selected ? They are, generally speaking, J. O'O. Bligh.
selected from the constabulary, or old soldiers. / ,
188. llecommended by whom ? They are appointed by the Commandant. 8 July, ISGI.
189. Do you think the sergeants at present in the Force are efficient men ? As far as I know
they are. Ido not know many of them.
190. What are their duties? Their duties arc laid down in the paper I now produce.
(Witness produced copy of Commandant's instructions—Vide Appendix A, to Mr. Morissefs
Evidence.) It contains instructions from the Commandant to the officers and sergeants.
191. Would you have any difficulty in obtaining recruits to keep the Force up to its proper
number? It will he a work of time, hut it will not be very difficult. It will be desirable to
send as far as possible. The settlers on the Lower Darling have informed me that there are
plenty of first-rate blacks to be found a little above the navigation of the Murray, I think the
best way of sending for them would be by water.
192. Are your troopers under your control when they go after blacks in the scrub ? Yes, I
have never had the slightest difficulty with them.
SEPARATE APPENDIX.
APPENDIX A.
('COPY OF A LETTER TO THE SECRETARY OF THE HOARD OF NATIONAL
EDUCATION, SYDNEY, BY W. A. DUNCAN, ESQ.)
Brisbane. 22ml January, 1852.
SIE,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 15th
instant, transmitting copies of a letter of the Colonial Secretary, and a Despatch of the
Secretary of State on the subject of the improvement of the condition of the Aboriginal
Inhabitants of the Colony, and requesting that I may offer any suggestions that occur to
me for giving effect to His Lordship’s views in the establishment of a School for the
children of both races at Brisbane.
1. If the subject of Education generally is surrounded by acknowledged difficulties,
that of the Aboriginal youth of this Colony appears to baffle all human efforts, and it is
with great diffidence that I offer the result of my reflections on this branch of the subject.
Such as it is, how'ever, I lose no time in laying it before the Board. It has at least the
merit of having been arrived at after a careful study of the aboriginal character during
several years,
2. I think Earl Gray’s plan of Industrial Boarding School, free of all charge to
parents, excellent, and I have no doubt that one or more such schools in this district, under
the direction of the National Board, would be taken advantage of by all the Shepherds and
Hntkeepers who have families; I think also, that if such an establishment existed, many
married persons would be induced to take employment in the interior who arc now prevented
from doing so by the impossibility of procuring at the stations any education for their
children. There is, I am aware, an opinion somewhat generally existing, that education
should never be given altogether gratis, on the principle, that what costs nothing is not
valued at its worth. I think, however, that ton much stress has been laid upon this assumed
principle. Poor parents, who know the value of education, will thankfully receive it for
their children gratis, and those who do not know its value (a large class here) are at least
as likely to avail themselves of its reputed advantages when it costs them nothing, as they
would be if they had to pay for it. lam quite of opinion, therefore, that this part of
Earl Grey’s scheme should he adopted. The cost, when so great an object is to be gained—
so groat an evil avoided—should be no consideration. Besides the schools being of an
industrial character might be made, partially at least, self-supporting. I would not, however,
place the schools in the interior on the Commissioner’s Stations, as suggested by His
Lordship. On the contrary, I would place them in the suburbs of the principal towns. In
such towns only arc there Churches of the various denominations to which the parents
belong; and independent of the acknowledged necessity of religious ministrations, the
congregating of children in a locality where there are no churches would furnish hut too
powerful a lever for the Clergy and other opponents of the National System. As regards
this division of the Colony, I would recommend that the first of the proposed schools should
bo established in some healthy locality near Brisbane. The allotment at present set apart
for an industrial school in the Eastern suburbs is objectionable only from its smallness, it
being only one acre, but I think there is some unsold land contiguous.
3. The next point to be considered is the availableness of the proposed school for
the children of the aborigines—of their capacity for instruction there is no doubt whatever
in ray mind—in this respect I believe that they arc quite equal to the white children ;
opinions quite ah variance with this have, 1 know, been put forth, but they may generally
he traced to persons who have occasionally suffered by the occasional depredations committed
by the


hy the Native Tribes, and who, as some excuse for I heir illegal retaliation, seek to reduce
their enemy to the level of the brutes. I have no such injuries to resent, and no affection
to bias me on the other side, except that arising from regret at seeing a race of intelligent
beings gradually swept from the earth by disease and violence, whilst all counter efforts to
ameliorate their condition have proved abortive, With this well considered opinion of
their natural capacity for education, I feel equally certain that by no human possibility
can they ever be educated, unless their education be made compulsory. With the children
themselves there would bo little difficulty, but so absolute is the control of the parents, and
older relatives of the children, over all their acts, and so numerous are their ceremonies,
spurts, and exercises, from which they dare not absent themselves, that unless the connection
between the old and young is completely severed—an act repugnant at first view to all our
social and political notions, —there is, I am convinced, no human power of civilizing or
even of perpetuating the race, who, while they are rapidly disappearing hy disease and other
sauses, receive but little increase in the natural way, in eonserpience of the promiscuous
intercourse of their women with the white men.
4. If government should think proper to adopt this absolutely necessary step, and
there is a precedent for compulsory education in Prussia, and other civilized states. I
think all the other difficulties would vanish before ordinary perseverance. It would only
be necessary to keep them at school until they were thoroughly grounded in the usual
branches of elementary education, and well instructed in some branch of agricultural
industry (say, for example, cotton growing for the boys, and cotton picking for the girls )
By the time this were effected they would be at the age of puberty (which with them is
early), they should then be regularly married from school, and some assistance should be
rendered them to commence cultivating the soil on their own account. Magistrates and
persons in the service of the Government should be specially instructed to protect them,
until they became numerous and independent enough to protect themselves. With these
and a few other precautions which would suggest themselves in the working of the system,
I still think the Australian race might be preserved from the destruction to which it 'is now
hastening apace, and to which preservation I repeat, the breaking up of the tribe habits,
superstition, and influence, by the withdrawal of the young of both sexes, seems to me the
first and necessary step. The mixture of the children of both sexes in the same school,
would I think present no difficulty, but would, on the contrary, be greatly desirable.
5. The Native Police is an excellent institution, and 1 think it might be much
improved, hy having a school at each Police Station where they might be taught to read and
write. That so much could be done with them as with the children, it would not be
reasonable to expect, but something at least could bo effected in the way I have mentioned.
Such are the suggestions which occur to me on the deeply interesting subject on
which the Board have done me the honor to consult me; to which I can only add, that if 1
can be of any assistance to the Board, in carrying out their object, nothing will afford me
greater satisfaction.
I have the honor,
&0., &0., &c„
(Signed) W. A. DUNCAN.
The Secretary
Board of National Education,
Sydney.
APPENDIX B.
(MISSIONARY SUCCESS AMONG THE ABORIGINES.)
From the “Christian Times,” of March 3rd, 18(!0,
On Monday evening last a most interesting and numerously attended meeting
was held at St. Paul’s school-room, Swanston-street, to receive tidings from tire Moravian
Missionaries on the Wimmera, and to express sympathy with their objects and efforts.
Tire Chair was occupied by His Excellency Sir Henry Partly, who was supported
on the platform by the Eight Itev. the Bishop, and the Dean of Melbourne ; and sur-
rounded by a considerable number of the more prominent clergy and laymen of the
diocese. Among whom wo noticed the Revs. D, Seddou, S. L. Chase, C. T. Perks, R.
B, Dickenson, FI. H. P. Handheld, together with His Honor Mr. Justice Molesworth,
and the Hon. Mr. A'Beckett. The entire room was crowded to excess, many persona
being unable to obtain seats during the whole evening.
After a hymn had been sung, and prayer offered by the Rev. D. Seddon, His Ex-
cellency expressed the more than usual satisfaction with which he had responded 1° the
invitation to preside on the occasion. He had taken a deep interest in the proceedings
of the mission since his arrival in the Colony. It was perhaps owing to him, in some
measure, or to his suggestions, that the site of the missionaries’ present field of labour
had been fixed upon. If was therefore truly gratifying to him that they had cause to
believe that the choice had been a judicious one. He had hoped that ere this the Go-
vernment of the country would have been able to take some action and adopt some
general and comprehensive measure for the benefit of the aborigines, based upon the
report ami papers that had recently been brought before the Legislature. But the tact was,
that the Commissioner of Lands, and the Surveyor-General, had both hud their hands so
complitevl


cornph:Tf'ly full of measures of more general and urgent importance, that this had been
hitherto impossible. He feared also that it would be some time before the Government would
lie aide to bestow sufficient attention upon the matter to enable them to initiate measures
of relief. Unless, therefore, some non-official Members of the Leg'alature took the
matter up, he feared little could lie hoped for in that direction for some time to come,
lie would now call on the Right Rev. the Bishop to address them.
The Bishop of Melbourne next gave an interesting account of the formation of
the mission, and a sketch of its proceedings from its formation to the present time. The
site first pitched upon had been Lake Boga, near the banks of the Murray, where for a
time the missionaries had laboured amid many discouragements. .Not only had they to
contend with the ordinary difficulties arising out of varied dialects, the wandering hajiits,
and the natural depravity of the aboriginal population, but he feared he must say that
some of the settlers in that district, at that time, had not been friendly towards the
Mission or disposed to facilitate tire efforts of the missionaries. Then again the Mission
had been established directly in one of the main routes of the country, along and through
which a stream of European population was constantly passing and re passing to one or
other of the many diggings then in vigorous operation,■which threw additional obstacles
in the way of the missionaries. Under these circumstances the missionaries had been
discouraged and the Mission had been abandoned. But as it was a principle of the
Moravian Missionary Society at home never to abandon a Mission once commenced,
unless further operations wore impossible, the Central Board of Idrectors resolved that
the Mission should bo recommenced, which had accordingly been done. This time,
through the kind offices of Ibis Excellency, a more favorable site had been fixed main
in tlie Wimmcra district, where the missionaries labored with comparatively little
interruption from a migratory European population, and where the sutlers generally
heartily approved of the object of tiro Mission, and willingly assisted tiro agents of the
Society. Uere tlie missionaries had labored zealously, and patiently for a long time,
and now it would appear that the Lord had blessed and rewarded their labour. 'What
they (the meeting), would presently hear, he had no doubt would remove irorn their
minds the impression—if it had ever existed—that the aboriginal population of these
colonics were, mentally incapable of being savingly benefited by the preaching of the
Gospel of Christ, lie knew that this impression had got abroad, and they had all most
likely been more or less influenced by it. It was. liowex or, undoubtedly au error, and
an error that wars alike dishonouring to the Gospel itself, and to its Divine Author; for
that Gospel was designed for all mankind, —it was to be preached to “ every creature;"
and it was therefore doubtless adapted to meet the wants, and to grapple with the
depravity of every nation, tribe, and family, of the children of men. His Lordship
concluded hy a most solemn and affectionate appeal to those present, who, in comparison
with the poor benighted savage of Australia, might indeed bo regarded as the “Children
of the kingdom.” If then they were unmindful of their mercies, and profited not by
their privileges, they would see at the Last Great Day many of these poor benighted
and too often despised aborigines, received into the kingdom of God, while they them-
selves would be for over—“ shut out! ”
The Rev. S. J,. Chase next road the communications which had been received,
and which will be found at length below. The reading of the correspondence was
listened to with marked attention by the audience ; and when it had terminate d, fee
Rev. Mr. llanfield read the 118th Psalm, and the whole assembly sung wdtb much spirit
and an evident appreciation of the justness of the tribute, —“ Braise God from whom
all blessings flow,” Am.
We regret that our limited space compels us to dispose of the subsequent pro-
ceedings in a few words : —Tie two following resolutions were unanimously passed : a
vote of thanks was awarded to Ills Excellency for presiding on the occasion ; and the
Bishop concluded (by prayer and the benediction.) one of the most interesting and
gratifying meetings it has been our lot for some time to attend. The subjoined cor-
respondence will speak for itself: —
The amount collected at the doors was Tl 9 2s. 9d,
Resolution L, (moved by the Very Rev. the Dean of Melbourne, and seconded bv
IDs Honor Mr. Justice Molesworth), “ That this meeting- desires to record its deep teit
joy at the tidings it has received; its thankfulness to Almighty God for this visitation
of a race long sitting in darkness, and its hope that He who has begun a work of grace
will continue it until the day of Jesus Christ.”
Resolution 11,, (moved by the Rev. Mr. Dickenson, and seconded by the Rev. C.
T. Perks), “That this meeting desires to offer its cordial congratulations to the Moravian
Missionaries, and through them to their Mission Board at I lonic, for the testimony to
tlie word ot IDs Grace which God as vouchsafed them, and to acknowledge the duty
which it desires faithfully to discharge of affording assistance in the work to tile utter-
most of its power.”
CoBBESPON.DENCE. No. 1.
“ Mission Station, Wimmera.
“ February 14th, 1800.
“My Dear Tmran.— Your letter is of somewhat an inquiring nature, but I do
not wonder, as it is after a thing which is au object of your earnest supplication, and
desire of heart.
“ You have heard about the state of our yet feeble and yet young mission, from
some fraud.', and I shall gladly give you more, though concise, particulars about what
the Lord


the Lord has done to us. I must say I feel somewhat timid in doing so, fearing that
something of my own should creep in, —hut to facts: —Soon after my return from town
the blacks began to disperse, until all had left us except Pepper. We had little to
encourage us, hut plenty cause for grief and sorrow. Pepper, too, although he attended
our meetings, came to school, &c., gave hut little or no hope. Our faith was weak; hut
the Lord enabled us to go on. By degrees the blacks again began to gather round about,
and, though often in great weakness, we ventured upon the Lord’s command and promise,
to sow the seed of the Word of God; and wc may firmly believe that the Holy Spirit
was working to bring the Word home to the heart and conscience of this dark people,
although our weak human eye could nothing detect.
“On the 15th of January—it was on Sunday, after service—l took thirty large
Bible-pictures, given to us by some friends in Altoua, and showed and explained them
to some of the young people. The deluge, and the Saviour in his agony in Gethsemane,
were particular objects of attraction. Either ou that evening or the following, 1 spoke
to them at some length of our Saviour's wrestling in the garden for us—(Mr. Hagcnauer
being little at home at the lime).
“On the afternoon of the 18th, I had Pepper and two others in our room, trans-
lating John xi. 25 and 26, and John x. 17. When the last verse of the Good Shepherd
‘ was finished,’ Pepper exclaimed, ‘O, that is so very sweet!’ In the evening, they (nine
of the ton staying here) astonished and gladdened me by their quick and joyful coining
to our meeting, after having been invited to it. Shortly after the conclusion of that
meeting, and after I had sat down to write a few lines, Popper came to mo and said, ‘ Oh !
1 want to speak to you about my slate.’ He was outside, and 1 asked him to cone in. At
first he made a few inarticulate remarks about the liking he had for a certain book, hut soon
began:—‘O, I do not know how I feel. I have wept about my sins. Last night I could have
cried aloud, before I went down to the river for to fetch some water ; and 1 have
thought, and have thought—l have thought about how our Saviour that night went
into the garden, and prayed there till the sweat came down from him like drops of blood,
and that for we.’ I spoke with him, prayed with him, wept, shook hands, and parted.
It was to me like a dream, and yet it was reality. How I felt and how I spent that
nloht 1 cannot tell I was afraid at the thought, how this tender plant of Divine grace
is exposed to so much that can hinder the growth thereof, how old customs, flesh, the
still wicked heart, Hie world, and what therein is—how all this will strive to get the
upper hand, and to cheek this plant in its first hud, and springing up. I was afraid.
1 wanted to go after him and speak more to him, but I did not, and gave him over in
my humble prayer into the careful hands of the Heavenly Gardener. The following day,
Mr. Hagenauer returned, and our friend Mr. Ellorman, came to us, and we rejoiced, and
thanked the Lord together for what he had done. Pepper soon began to speak to his
countrymen about what he felt, and invited them to partake of the same blessings. The
following Saturday he and Boney went to Upper Regions, a station 14 miles from here,
and had, on the Sunday after, prayer meetings with the blacks staying there. Ou
Monday following he returned, and brought several others with him. Ills mother came
too, and said to Mr. Hagenauer, ‘ My word, my pieaninny keep him prayer longe block
fellow ; not longe station but longe bush.’
In the meantime more came to us. There are now again about sixty staying
with us. The work of the Holy Spirit, since Pepper’s awakening, has been going ou
among the black*, and although no other case of so striking a nature as that of Pepper’s
has occurred, we may, nevertheless, firmly believe Unit the Holy Ghost is preparing
many a one from among them for the great marriage feast of the Lamb. Many of them
are more or less stirred up, wish for the knowledge-of their eternal salvation, and like to
get instruction at school. Pepper has made fair progress in learning, and reads several
Psalms, This has stimulated many who are now hard over their lesson-books.
“ Last Saturday I went to one of the neighbouring stations, to spend Sunday
(here, from which I returned last night. On Saturday night they had a large corroboree,
which, when hoard hv Brother 11., caused him to go to them; but as soon as they
perceived him, many of them crept under their blankets not to be seen. Brother If.
spoke to them about their doings, that it could not be well-pleasing in the sight of God,
and how their doings were wrong. Charley, Pepper’s brother, said, • I see nothing
wrong in that; and whitcfcllow does the same.’ However, the grand corroboree was
stopped, and some took the boughs from their legs with these words, —‘ lis done:
no more.’ On mv way from the station (oh, 1 must uot forgot to mention
that to our joy, that Popper, who lately avowed ‘to follow the Lord all
his life,’ had not joined in the corroboree, but hud kept in his hut). On my
return yesterday from the station before mentioned, I called at Mr. Ellerman’s
place, where 1 met Brother Hagenauer. It was sundown when we left and hurried
home for the evening service. When we arrived at the camp of the blacks it was dark,
but, to our surprise and exceeding joy, Pepper bad before bim, in a semicircle, between
40 and 50 of his fellow-men, some sitting, some standing, and with attention, listening
to the invitation he gave them to the kingdom of heaven He modestly stojrped when
we arrived, but we desired him to go on. I prayed afterwards. So you see the Lord
does his work without us. We went home—for the meeting was a short distance from
the house, under a large gum tree —fell on our knees, and thanked our Saviour. Soon
after a quarrel ensued in the camp, and we went to see what wars the matter. When
arrived at the spot, we saw at once that it was a fight or struggle between light and
darkness. Some of the old, especially old Boney. young Boney’s lather, demanded from
the blacks to leave our place, and go to one of our neighbouring stations, to attend a
corroboree


oorroboree of a large (in the sense we take a large number of them) gathering of blacks.
The majority was against it; they insisted upon to remain. Out of the quarrel a fight
ensued, and a certain young man of the name of Brown, in a spirit of that of Peter, took
his waddie, and used it like Peter when taking the sword and cutting off the ear of
Malehus. Our coining to them stopped the fight, but too many of the minds wore too
much excited, and it lasted a good while before everything was quiet. One man said :
‘ I care about heaven now, and I like to stop here.’ Pepper, Kurney, Young Boney, and
Talliho, both sons of old Boney, did not meddle in this affray ; they sat quiet, shook
their heads, and said : ‘I do not know what to think about the blacks.’ The agreement,
however, they came to was, that some should go but soon return. The women, voung
men, and children should remain. To-morrow it is likely they will start, and we shall
see who will go. Some of the old and middle-aged said : ‘We will not go ’ When thev
—some of them—asked me this morning whether we would let some of them go ; 1 told
them, ‘You know we never keep you, each one can do in this as ho pleases.’ • Very
well,’ they said, ‘ some go, but come back soon.’
Oh, dear friend, could you have seen this morning 50 or GO dark children of the,
Australian hush gathered before us under a large gum-tree, listening with" attention to
the gospel, and hearing their voices sing—
Jesus is our highest good,
He has saved us bj his blood, &e.
you would, with us, have thanked the Lord. “But what shall 1 say now in conclusion.
To the praise of our Immanuel I can say: ‘A work of the Holy Spirit has begun among
them. The dead, indeed, hear the voice of the Son of God.’ They listen differently to
what they did at first. They listened always to what was said to them, sat always
quiet at meetings, but often only like a machine ; but a different preacher speaks to
them, and their listening is a different one too. But your prayers, and the prayers of
all the Lord’s people, we want still. We rejoice, although with trembling. The Lord,
however, is almighty, and he not only begins a work, hut he also performs it. As soon
as our paddock fence is finished by the blacks, under our direction, we shall, if the Lord
permits, begin with the erection of a place of worship, and huts for some of them. We
intend to do this with the blacks too. Has dear Mr. Goodwin gotten my letter ? 1
should be glad if he could send me a few lines. You said, dear friend, ‘ your mission
must be carried on in faith ;’ but that must be the case with every doing for the kingdom
of God : hut have the assurance, your work carried on in faith, your labour in the Lord
will not be in vain. Wait a bit; and what wo cannot discern here, that day of
revelation will reveal.
“With kindest regards to Mrs. Chase and dear children, ami other friends, and
with kindest regard and love for yourself,
“ Yours faithfully,
“F. W Spiesekk.”
No. 2.
“ Wimmcra Mission Station,
“ Monday, February B!th, 18(K).
“My Beau Mb. Chase, —ln biking up my pen in order to answer your very kind
letter of the 3rd of this month, I must say to you, ‘ O that you, my very dear friend,
could be here and see the wonderful works of the Lord among our poor fellowmen! ’ I
must confess I am rather bashful in stating to you some facts of the powerful workings
of grace which we see day by day. Things which I could believe before arc now, as T
can see them, more difficult for me to believe, and I am sure many other believers will be
in the same state. ‘Sir/ told me yesterday an old shepherd, who attended one of our
great prayer-meetings, with the blacks under a great gum-tree, ‘ Sir, I never could
believe what I have scon and heard at your meeting; the Lord gives success to your
work/ &o. The old man was quite moved—and so was I myself. But first to the
answering of your kind letter. I received it at Horsham, last week, just after the
conclusion of a meeting for our mission in the Court House, of which I will tell more at
the end of this note. I was entirely overpowered, anti so I handed it over to Mr.
Ellerman. who read it to me. I would have written to you a few weeks ago, even to
IBs Lordship the Bishop, but I was a little too bashful, and would first sec more proofs
of the great news. Your first question is—‘ls it indeed true that God has raised the
dead, and that one of the dead has heard the voice of the Son of God, and lives To
the glory of God be it said, it is a fact, it is true ; and many more are inquiring and
seeking the kingdom of God. The Lord has answered the many prayers which
were offered for this poor people, and the time is come that even those
who were in the fetters of darkness and sin can enter the courts of the Lord
with praise. I never before saw the grace of God working so mightily as in Pepper
(that is the name of the boy) —feeling his sins, weeping o ver it, and at the same time
seeing Christ as a crucified Saviour, who suffered and died for the sins, or, as Pepper
said, ‘ and that for me.’ Shortly after this Mr. Ellerman came over to a prayer-meeting,
wherein Pepper said, ‘ that he felt in his heart/ and so on. On that very hot Saturday
he went away to Upper Ilegion Station, in order to keep prayer with the blacks there.
He took them all (about 40) into the mallee, and kept service, prayed and read Psalms
out of his book. \V hat a wonderful work of the Lord ! The poor heathen, without any
white man. in the wilderness assembled together for prayer! The whole blacks here at
the distiict


the district are stirred up, and many are waiting of tlxe great light in their hearts, as
several of them told me yesterday in these words : —‘ O, i wish I could feel and know
it as .Pepper docs; bat lam stupid.’ Shall the Lord not answer those humble wishes';'
I believe lie does.
“ I could toll you a great many things, which you sludl hear either personally
from inn, or in my next letter. Even so will Mr. Spieseke write to you about the
wonders which the Lord now dues here. 1 only toll you of one day ( from yesterday, which
1 can scarcely state without tears'). Mr. Spieseke wont away on (Saturday to Mr.
Scott’s station, in order to preach to the whites and to the blacks, with a young
gentleman, Mr. S. Wilson, who was here to see the Lord’s work among the blacks—so I
was alone. 1 had a great number at prayer here in the hut, every one of them very
attentive. After prayer, those in the camp went back, those in the little hut (Popper,
Boncy, and Corny) had a conversation, and went to bed. Late at night, when I was in
bed, I heard in a far distance the blacks singing a song of a corroborce, so I prayed and
went to it. They made a eorroboree. I went into the midst of them, and said 1 was
very sorry about this, and so on. One of them said, ‘O, sir. it is no harm in it, and (ho
whites do just the same when they have a dance.’ My heart -wasmoved in compassion ;
we sat down, and I spoke to them of the great love of Jesus Christ; after a while, one
who sat near me opened the strings wherewith he had fastened the gum-branches around
his legs, and said, —'It is done, now no more,’ and in a short time all others did so.
None of them who are touched by the grace of God were amongst them. I did not know
that night that at the same evening had arrived 25 to 30 new blacks from Pine Plains,
who made the corroborce; this I saw the next morning. Yesterday morning 1 kept an
open-air service, at which that old shepherd attended. About sixty blacks attended.
Many are inquiring, and some long very much after knowledge. After service I went a ver
to Mr. EUcrman’s —Pepper, Bouev, and Corny came with me, I said to Pepper that I
should write to yon, and asked what I should tell you? Answer, ‘I uillfollcw the 1. t.rd
Jesus all my life..' So Ido not want to write anything more. Corny, your little Wim-
mera’s brother, and Boncy, said ‘ yes’ to Pepper’s answer. At Antwerp, Mr. and Mrs.
Ellerman, and the three blacks, had another prayer-meeting. Mr. E. road the 23rd
Psalm, Peppier the 130th. Mr. K, myself, and Boney prayed, O, my dear Mr. Chase,
had you been with us, your heart should have rejoiced, and your eyes should have been
quite so wet as Mr. and Mrs. Lllermau’s. "When wo came home, another great prayer-
meeting was held in the open air. OLordl how merciful art Thou ! Glory und honor
to Thy name !
“ Tire work of the. Lord is acknowledged in the district. We had a small meeting
at Horsham; formed a society of the district: and an application to the L. C. was made
and signed by many, all who were present among them, three J.P.’s, and the policeman.
The subscription list showed a sum of £7S. You see the Lord can not only open the
hearts, but also the pockets.
“ Mr. Quarter-man and 'Wilson came with us to the station, and have seen ami
heard. I think Mr. Qnartorman soon comes to town. Could you see him, he will toll
you. Ho will speak to Mr. A. Campbell too.
“About the relations of little Wimmera nest time. His old grandmother is here
and very sick. The poor woman is very much afraid for ganta-galla (hell), and oiled
one time fearfully. 1 spoke to her of Jesus Christ. Corny, his brother, goes on very
well.
“If it is the Lord’s will I shall very soon come to town, where you shall hear every-
thing, and where we could speak more on the other subjects. Remember me kindly to your
family, the Bishop, the Dean, Mr. Macredie, and so on— and praise the Lord, for His merry
euduretli for ever.
“ Your friend and brother,
“ Fr. Aug. Hagenauee,
I Mr. Spieseke soon will write to you. I send his best respects.)
“ Monday night, February 13th, 1800.
“ I am constrained to add a few lines more, my dear Mr. Chase, because the name of
our gracious Saviour must be glorified His works are great and marvellous, praise the Lord !
“ After I had finished my school and work to-day—(the blacks in the same
inquiring state, and very attentive), 1 went over to Air. Hlemian’s to meet Mr. Spieseke,
who came from Scott’s Station, where the blacks are longing after prayer. We arrangtd
matters about our stores for the blacks, and of a trip to Melbourne, to inf ran you more
fully. We came home a little late, just after sunset. "When we came to the ctnup, the
blacks were standing in a large half-circle, and Pepper before them, and kept] ruyir,
or spoke of the wonder of salvation to his fellows. After he had spoken a long time
we kneeled down, and Pepper asked us whether one of ns would new pray. Mr.
Spieseke prayed. About sixty blacks are here. About forty were at the meeting ; the
others are mostly sick. ISothing more. When I come you shall hear it fully.
“ I am, yours,
“F. A. Haghxauek.”
“ Two hours later at night, Monday, Feb. 18th.
“ Once more 1 must take up; my pen to add a few words more ; I spoke in (he
other little paper of the great power of the grace of Cod—now 1 n ust tell you how
strong the power of the Prince of Darkness in his fury comes to battle. Just after w 6
were


were home from the blessed prayer-meeting which Pepper kept, and I began to write,
we heard great noise in the camp, so we went down. A fearful tight took place, which
is now stopped. A tight between light and darkness. None of those who feel the truth
of the Gospel took part in it. The reason was, some of the old blacks wanted to take
all away to another Station, but some others who are seeking the light, made opposition,
and took at last their weapons against the old, because they will not go away, I can
assure you a fearful scene it was, but I believe those who wanted to stay, and defended
the Lord’s cause in the darkness of their minds have gained. The shield and waddy of
one who wants to know the Lord, and took part in the light, now lies under my table,
and during the writing of this little note, are my feet resting on it. It is very late at
night, now. We hear even Pepper praying in liis hut with some young men, Boney and
Corny. When I come, I hope soon, more about it. lam yours,
“F. A. Hagenader.”
“Antwerp, February 15th, 1860.
“My Dear Mr. Chase, — I have to send you another short leaf of paper of the
state of yesterday. All the blacks very attentive. A great number in school, even so
at prayer. We did not sleep last night. Mr. Spieseke had a prayer-meeting last evening
at 2 o’clock. A young, stout, and very good blackfellow, who fought for the Lord's
cause the night before in ignorance, died suddenly. The blacks asked for prayer. We
had another meeting, even after two. Pepper would speak afterwards. This morning,
after sunrise, another prayer in the camp —some were weeping. We want more help,
and Air. Ellerman advises me to come to town. To-day we expect more blacks. Pray
with all the friends for this wonderful work. Iteinember to the Bishop, Dean, Mr.
Macredie. I wrote to Air. Lees to go to you and hear our letters. Yours truly,
“F. A. ILuiENAUEn,”
APPENDIX C.
(CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MEANS TO BE ADOPTED FOR CIVILIZING
THE ABORIGINES OP AUSTRALIA, SUGGESTED BY A THREE-YEARS’
MISSION AMONG THAT PEOPLE, AND INFORMATION SUBSEQUENTLY
GATHERED FROM DIFFERENT QUARTERS, BY THE REV. W. RIDLEY,
B.A.)
I. Such is the prevailing opinion concerning the destiny of the aborigines among
Australian colonists, that the first and most important observation to be made to one who,
like his Excellency, is taking up the question of their improvement is this: That
NUMEROUS UNEQUIVOCAL INSTANCES PROVE THE CAPACITV OP THE ABORIGINES I'OR
SOCIAL AND SPIRITUAL IMPROVEMENT.
In the course of my journeys in the Namoi and Banvan district, I met several
aborigines engaged as shepherds, who had been taught at the Mission Station under Mr.
Watson's charge, at Wellington Wale, who were decidedly more intelligent and useful in
their station than those who had not had the same advantages.. Because Mr. Watson’s
scholars did not settle down in a body and organize a society on the European model, many
colonists pronounced the Wellington Yale Mission “ a failure.” But I found, at a great
distance froin that spot, some of the good effects of the instruction received there several
years before. And there are not wanting decisive earnests that the labours of Mr. Whitson
and Mr. (.! anther were “.not in vain in the Lord.” Within the last two or three weeks the
Sydney Moruina Herald contained, in the obituary, a short notice of an aboriginal woman
who had been brought up under their instruction, who died “in full assurance of Heaven
through faith in the atonement.”
But by far the most successful effort for the aborigines of Australia, as far as my
information goes, is that at Poonindi, Fort Lincoln. The Governor of South Australia
takes a lively interest in that mission, and reports of its progress have appeared from year
to year in the Adelaide Observer. Poouindi has been occupied as a mission for 12 years,
during which time many aborigines have there been trained to habits of industry, and to
the knowledge of Christianity. One remarkable fact in the history of this mission is that
aborigines who have remained there a few months have generally become so attached to the
place that they would never forsake it. They go out to visit their tribes, sometimes 300 or
400 miles distant, but soon return and bring others to share with them the benefits of the
mission. There have been instances of aborigines from Pooniudi being seized with fatal
disease while away among their tribes, and hastening back to die and be buried at the
mission. In almost every missionary effort the greatest difficulty lias been found in
attaching the aborigines to any spot, so that the success which has attended the effort to
secure their attachment to Poonindi is remarkable. Prom 40 to 60 blacks are there
regularly employed under suitable superintendents—the men in agriculture and the charge
of live stuck, the women in dairying and needlework, &c., the children in school ; and all
receive religious instruction in the evenings and on the Sabbath. About two years ago a
blacklbilow from the .Murray Hirer, named Toodku, who for six or seven years had led an
exemplary life at Pooniudi, learning to read and write, teaching other aborigines these arts,
diligently fulfilling his duties on the farm, and going out as a Christian Missionary to
persuade his brethren to come with him to the place where they might be instructed in the
Gospel, ended his career with the expressions of faith, resignation, and holy triumph on his
lips


lips. Mr. Hammond, the Missionary, in recording his brief memoir, affirms that there were
at least 18 aborigines whoso life and death he had witnessed at Poonindi, who gave him
good reason for believing that they bad become Christians in heart.
The Rev. George King, of Sydney, bears similar testimony, to some extent, as to
the effect of Missionary labours among the aborigines of Swan River.
Whatever may be the prevalent opinion among the colonists of Queensland and their
representatives, I trust His Excellency will not loss sight of the fact that there are indis-
putable evidences of the capacity of the aboriginal mind for Improvement.
11. It is evident, from experience, that an attempt to civilize aborigines, to be
successful, must be on a somewhat extensive scale. Many a blaekfellow brought up among
civilized men has been tractable and quick at learning up to a certin time, and then has
suddenly thrown aside the garb and habits of civilization. And looking on such instances
good people exclaim that their supposed improvement is but superficial, that their nature is
incorrigible ! But is it reasonable to expect that they should lose their attachment to their
kindred and the customs of their fathers?—that a solitary black, among people who look
on him as an alien in blood, will be content to remain a stranger to his own people also ?
Buugaree, who after taking prizes in Sydney College, speaking good Latin, and
behaving as a gentleman in elegant society, returned to the bush, and then entered the
black police, once said in a melancholy tone to Lieutenant Fulford (who repeated the remark
to me at Surat, on the Condamine,) “ I wish T had never been taken out of the bush, and
educated as I have been, for I cannot he a white man , they will never look on me as one of
themselves ; and I cannot he a blaekfellow, I am disgusted with their way of living.”
Now in any effort to improve them a considerable number should be brought up
together. Then a spirit of union will grow up among them, as at Poonindi, and their
attachment to new and elevating pursuits will be strengthened tenfold by tlioir association.
111. Connected with the necessity for consulting their social instinct, is the allow-
ance to be made for their singularly fitful habits of life. An attempt to drill them at once
into the exact modes of European labour would drive them off in disgust. But let them be
placed under the superintendence of men somewhat acquainted with their life in the bush,
who know how to lead them willingly through a succession of various employments. In
the course of the day let a few hours gardening, then road making, then burning off and
fencing, with an interval for opossum hunting, or honey getting, or fishing; divide the time
from sunrise till dark. Though their work might seem fragmentary at first, much more
might be thus accomplished than by a vain attempt to force them into the usual routine of
civilized habits.
Aboriginal children generally prove quick at learning to read; but it is in vain to
attempt to coerce them into long continued study. Their hours of school should be short,
and an abundant variety of out-door work should be provided for them. Instead of
attempting to force children or adults into habits foreign to their nature, let there be such
an adaptation to their peculiarities as is here suggested, and the results will, I am confident,
prove satisfactory.
IV. The training institution should bo a safe distance from townships and settle-
ments of colonists, to secure the inmates from the two most fearful causes of destruction
that ever cut down the aboriginies, ardent spirits, and the illicit sexual intercourse of that
abandoned class of white men, who, in the indulgence of their vile passions, have introduced
among the aborigines a deadly disease before unknown to them. The Mission Station at
Poonindi, where benevolent enterprise has proved successful, is situated far from any
occupied part of the Colony, on a lone promontary ; and this separation has probably saved
them from ruin, which those two snares would otherwise have brought upon them.
V. As the dialects spoken in the neighbourhood of More ton Bay are numerous and
diverse —at least three very different languages being spoken between Brisbane and the
Glass-house Mountains—and as the aboriginal children very quickly learn to speak good
English, 1 think the English should be at once adopted as the channel of instruction. It
would bo next to impossible to be giving lessons in sor 6 dialects in one school. In some
parts of the interior there are dialects which prevail, with slight variations only, over
hundreds of miles, such as “kamilaroi” and “kogoi”; but along the sea coast they are
much more limited.
Mr. Joseph Hobarton Carvosso, who for some time noted as schoolmaster at the
Institution for Aboriginals, at Mount Franklin, Victoria, was, and for aught I know still is,
keeping school at Brisbane, He might be able to give valuable information on the subject.
WILLIAM RIDLEY, B.A,
APPENDIX D.
(LETTER FROM DR. CHALLINOR, M.P., ADDRESSED TO THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE COMMITTEE.)
Ipswich, July 8, 1801.
Sib,
In accordance with the request of the Select Committee of which you are the Chairman,
1 now forward you the suggestions I have to offer with regard to a Protective force for the
interior, anil the treatment of the Aborigines.
I tit ink if would bo desirable that in every district a competent person of known
sympathy for the aborigines should he appointed their Protector; one of whose duties should
ouch


be to communicate with the chief of every tribe, and inform him what, according to British
law, constitutes a person in criminal matters an accessory before and after the fact, and that
each chief would bo punished who harbored or refused to give up any member of his own
tribe (or of any other tribe taking refuge with his people) who have been guilty of committing
an offence against white people or their property. Mr. Haly states that he has found this
method very effectual for the prevention of crime. On the other hand, the aborigines should
be informed that they were empowered to investigate into offences committed against the
blacks, and they should endeavour to show them how much better it would be to lodge their
complaints with the Protectors than to avenge themselves for injuries they had received at the
hands of white men. If the charges were sustained by legal evidence, of course the
perpetrators ought to be dealt with according to law. If the allegations rested solely upon
their own statements, then such complaints should he laid either immediately before the
Colonial Secretary, or immediately through'Some person charged with the management of that
department. lam afraid, however, that the aborigines cannot receive substantial justice until
their statements are admissahle iu Courts of Paw for what they are worth. It would appear
that in the British possessions in China, the evidence of Chinamen is thus received in judicial
Courts without the imposition of an oath; and why should it not be the case with regard to
the aborigines iu this Colony ?
With regard to the Protective Force to be employed, I still think that it ought to consist
of white men and black trackers, and that it should be sufficiently numerous and efficient as to
deter, if possible, from the commission of crime. If, however, the sole object of a Protective
Force is to pursue the aborigines into scrubs and there slaughter them without discrimination
or remorse, I think no force could he better adapted for that work than the present Native
Police Force. But, as this mode of protection appears to me as utterly repugnant to British
law as it is to every principle of justice and equity, 1 could never consent to the continuance of
such a system.
I have the honor to he, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY CHALLINOB.
The Honorable E. R. M&ckexzif..
Authority : From T, P. Pugh’s Printing Office, George Street, Brisbane.
