

Immigration
Advisory Council
ovV
H W
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED TO INVESTIGATE
CONDUCT OF MIGRANTS
Vi*** 1
Composition
i. The Committee consisted of the following Members
of the Advisory Council -
Chairman; Mr. W„R O Dovey* K O C. ,
Mr o To Dougherty, Federal Secretary,,
Australian Workers Union,
Mr* J* Neagle, Federal Secretary,
Ro So So A. I* L* A* ,
Mrs* J O Go Norris, M.A*, National Council
of Women of Australia o
PART I
Terms of Reference
2* The Minister for Immigration in establishing the
Committee considered it desirable to seek the advice of an
independent body which would report on such matters as -
(a) the general standard of conduct of persons
brought to Australia under the Commonwealth
Governments* post-war migration schemes;
(b) the incidence of serious crime amongst non-
British migrants and whether it is unduly
high in relation to crime in the community
generally;
(c) whether there are any particular circumstances
associated with offences committed by migrants
which should be brought under notice;
(d) whether there has been any noticeable increase
\ the number of serious crimes committed since
the commencement of post-war migration schemes:
and
(e) whether it can be said that the incidence of
crime throughout Australia is attributable to
any particular section of the community*
3» No restriction was placed on the scope and nature
of the Committee’s inquiries*
Findings and Conclusions
ln order to facilitate the reading of this Report
the Committee decided to begin with its findings and conclus-
ions which are supported by detailed discussions contained in
the Report as a whole*


(a)
The Committee is satisfied that in proportion
to numbers the incidence of serious crime is
appreciably lower amongst migrants than in the
Australian population generally.
This conclusion is based on examination of
statistics which make no allowance for these
important factors which tend to add emphasis
to it, viz:~
(i) The statistics of offences include those
committed by seamen and other transients.
(ii) The statistics of aliens include a large
number of pre-war migrants who entered
Australia before the present methods of
careful screening were introduced.
(ill) It is an accepted fact that the majority
of crimes are committed by males between
the ages of 20 and 33 years. Not only is
the percentage of males higher amongst
migrants than in the Australian populat-
ion generally, but the proportion in the
age group 20 to 33 years is also consider-
ably higher (hi,ss amongst migrants
compared with 23,7$ in the Australian
population).
The total figures of convictions for serious
offences dealt with in Superior Courts over a
period of 12 months ending November 1951
(30.84 per 100,000 adult aliens and 47,10 for
the Australian adult population) indicate that
the incidence of serious crime is in proportion
at least 50$ higher in the Australian population
than it is amongst alien migrants. If the figures
for the more serious type of offences dealt with
in Magistrates* Courts are added, the figures
(383,67 per 100,000 adult aliens and 320.11 per
100,000 Australian adult population) indicate
that the incidence is still more than 33$ higher
in the Australian population than amongst migrants.
Upon a consideration of all the available
evidence the Committee is satisfied that there
has been an overall decrease in the incidence
in crime in Australia during the period of post-
war large scale immigration.
In those crimes which may be regarded as
repetitive, namely crimes against property,
forgery and similar crimes, and which
consequently might be expected to be committed
by persons with previous criminal records, the
incidence amongst migrants was approximately
half the Australian rate. Of convictions
recorded against migrants for offences of this
character over 90$ were in Magistrates* Courts
and less than 10$ in Superior Courts. This would
suggest that the majority of the convictions were
for minor offences. \
(f)
While the incidence of crimes against the person
dealt with in Superior Courts was lower for
migrants than for the population generally, in
minor offences of this character dealt with in
Magistrates* Courts the position was reversed.
The Committee is of the opinion that this can be
attributed to two main causes, namely to the
conditions under which migrants work and live.


and particularly to the grouping of numbers of
men of different nationalities in hostels, giving
rise to arguments amongst themselves based on
national jealousies or arising from an insuffic-
iency of the social activity found in the normal
community, and to the attitude of a section of
the Australian public who* through lack of
experience in dealing v*ith people of foreign
origin (and particularly those who have not a
good knowledge of English) are inclined to be
suspicious or resentful of migrants* The Committee
Suggests that further inquiry be undertaken into
convictions of this character in order to ascertain
whether more could be done to overcome the basic
reasons for this aspect of migrant behaviour*
The incidence of sex offences amongst alien
migrants and dealt with in Superior Courts was
only about a quarter of that in the population
generally, but in minor offences heard in
Magistrates* Courts it was again higher. This
again would appear to point to the social in-
adequacy of hcs tel life and the Committee
recommends investigation into all possibilities
which might lead to more normal social life and
a better balance of the sexes in areas where
migrants are employed and live.
The Committee desires to invite attention particul-
arly to the adverse effect which lack of proper
balance of the sexes both in local areas and in the
total intake of population has upon the behaviour
of migrants, and it urges most strongly that steps
be taken to correct the balance as soon as possible
and to the greatest extent that economic and other
considerations will permit.
(i)
The Committee considers that the only types of
offenders that could be expected to be detected
by selection teams would be those given to
repetitive crimes such as burglary, forgery and
the like. Because of the low incidence of these
offences, the Committee feels there are no grounds
for criticism.
The Committee is unable to suggest any method
which would enable selection officers to detect.
a migrant likely to commit offences against the
person such as murder, manslaughter, sex offences
and assault.
The Committee is of opinion that the relatively
low incidence of serious c rime generally amongst
migrants and the high standard of their behaviour
in all aspects of their daily life reflects con-
siderable credit upon those responsible for their
selection, those who have aided their assimilation
and upon the migrants themselves.
(o)
The Committee undertook investigations into the
ordinary behaviour of migrants as members of the
community. In this connection its Members personally
obtained the views of employers, trade unions,
professional and businessmen, and State and local
police officers in areas where there were concent-
rations of migrantsj education authorities and
various other people in different walks of life
who were competent to express a considered opinion*
The views of these people in all States of the
Commonwealth were unanimously complimentary to the
social conduct of migrants. They indicated that but


with few exceptions migrants are well "behaved,
honest and seized with their responsibilities
as members of the community*
(k) Particular inquiry was made into the behaviour
of school children, with a view to detecting
any early undesirable tendencies,, In this field
also no unfavourable comment was offered and the
unanimous opinion expressed was that migrant
children are fully absorbed into both schoolroom
and playground activities, and behave in the same
manner as normal Australian born children*
(i) While the Committee does hot regard the commission
of any crime with equanimity, it does not feel that
there is any cause for alarm in regard to the
commission of offences by alien migrants, That
small minority of post-war migrants which has been
responsible for the commission of the few crimes
of a most violent and serious nature has been dealt
with by the law and in all cases where deportation
is warranted the Committee is satisfied that depor-
tation action has been or will be taken*
(ra) The Committee feels that the assimilation
activities being undertaken by Good Neighbour
Movements and New Settlers 1 Leagues and their
member organisations are a valuable corrective
to the conditions amongst migrants that lead to
unlawful conduct and urges those bodies to continue
and intensify their efforts to have fully
absorbed into sporting, social and other community
activities. It urges them moreover to pay particular
attention to the problems that arise where large
numbers of male migrants are segregated in hoar tele
or workers 1 camps.
(n) The Committee urges the Government and private
employers to endeavour to arrange the employment
of migrant workers in such a way that they come
in contact to the greatest extent possible with
their fellow Australian workers.
(o) The Committee recognising the powerful Influence
wielded by the press in the acceptance of migrants
by the general public urges it, tn carrying out
its obligations to the public, to-avoid attributing
to migrants generally the shortcoalßffi ®f individuals
(p) In conclusion the Committee wishes t© place on
record its sincere appreciation of the whole-hearted
co-operation of the Commissioners of Police, respons-
ible officers of Commonwealth and State instrumental it
ies and indeed to all those whose advice and assist-
ance was so readily made available.


PART II
METHOD OP WORK
(a) INCIDENCE OP CRIMB
It has been thought by some people that there has
been either an increase in crime generally in Australia as
a result of the admission of some 300 9 000 foreign migrants
over the last few years, or alternatively, that there has
been an increase in certain types of crime for the same
reason* One of the purposes of the Committee has therefore
been the collection and examination of such statistics on
the subject as are readily available*
6* It seems desirable to make it quite clear at the
outset that statistics of crime generally and of crime
committed by aliens as a class, or by new Australians as
a sub-class of aliens, are not normally compiled by State
Authorities ; that such statistics as are available are not
uniform in each State and that the discrepancies in the
methods of compilation of such statistics as are available
in each State, make it extremely difficult to make any
telling comparison between incidence of crime in Australia
in recent years and the incidence of crime in Australia
prior to the influx of migrants under the Displaced Persons
Scheme and similar arrangements*
7. In order to be able to arrive at some useful
conclusions, the Committee therefore set out to compile
from each State, with the assistance of the Police
Authorities, all particulars which were obtainable at
fairly short notice dealing with the subject matter of
the inquiry* Pull co-operation was received from the
State Police Departments and, as a result of this valuable
assistance, it has been possible to arrive at certain
conclusions*
8„ Crime is defined in Kalsbury’s Laws of England as
11 an unlawful act or default which is an offence against
the public and renders the person guilty of the act or
default liable to local punishment”* It will be appreciated
that within this definition there are offences which are
serious in their effect upon the public and offences in
which the public does not suffer any serious injury* Crime,
in fact, ranges from high treason to riding a cycle without
a light and from burglary to smoking in a non-smokers
compartment in a railway train*
9* Because of the Committee f s terms of reference
which directed attention to the incidence of serious crime
only, it was thought desirable to exclude from its
consideration convictions recorded in inferior., courts
presided over by magistrates whose jurisdiction is limited*
However, one Committee had available information furnished
by the Police Authorities of the various States of convict-
ions recorded in both superior and inferiour courts e This
information was classified into five main classes t
M ) Offences against the person
(2) Offences against property*
(3) Forgery and other serious offences
(h) Offences against good order
(5) Offences against specific acts*


10 0 A point which the Committee wishes to stress is
that it has concerned itself only with those cases in which
an actual conviction has "been recorded* An additional
feature which it has "been impossible to take properly into
account is the severity, or otherwise, of the penalties
imposed by the various tribunals. It is obvious that a
severe sentance may be imposed because of the circumstances
in which the c rime was committed or because of the previous
criminal record of the person, while a light sentence, such
as a small pecuniary penalty or a short term of imprisonment
together with a release on bond, may indicate extenuating
circumstances, a first offender or other factors concerning
which no information is available from the existing record.
( h ) CONDUCT OP MIGRANTS
11. In order to investigate the standard of conduct
of the migrants in the community, the Committee decided
to adopt several parallel courses of action. It was
realised that the most valuable sources of information
would be employers. Trade Unions, Education Authorities,
the staffs of migrant centres, State Police Authorities,
and accordinglyvarious Members of the Committee were
directed to interview representative persons in all these
Authorities and seek their co-operation and their views on
the matters under consideration. Assistance was readily
afforded to the Committee by all persons approached.
12. In particular the Commissioners of Police were
interviewed and a sked for their opinions on the conduct
and behaviour of migrants and their views as to whether
the influx of alien migrants over the last few years had
resulted in an increase in the incidence of crime in the
Commonwealth.
130 At the same time, with a view to ascertaining
whether any influences could be detected which might
affect the behaviour of future citizens, the Directors
of State Education were approached and asked to report
on the conduct and behaviour of migrant children in
State schools. Special interviews v/ere sought with
employers of migrant labour and with reliable persons
who were constantly associating with migrants.
The reports, statistics and statements thus
obtained were carefully examined by the Committee.


25,000
130,000
9,000
70,000
234,000
DETAILED EXAMINATION OP STATISTICS
OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
15. Approximately half of the Australian post-war
migrants haveheen British, However, with the exception
of Queensland, police have not kept records separate
from Australian residents for their convictions and they
have had to he excluded from consideration in this report.
Registration of all aliens of 16 years and over (with the
exception of Diplomatic staff and certain temporary
visitors) is a policy in Australia, The hulk of registered
aliens (16 years of age or over, totalling at the
31st October, 1951) are post-war migrants.
16, At the end of the war there were approximately
49,000 aliens registered in Australia* These were prohahly
people who had heen in Australia for a long time and had
not heen naturalized and partly migrants who had left in
1938-1940, A proportion of these people had heen naturalised
in the meantime and others had left Australia permanently.
The number of pre-war migrants on the aliens record at
present would therefore he in the vicinity of 25,000 people.
Thus the 234,000 alien post-war migrants at present
registered comprises approximately
Pre-war migrants
Displaced persons
introduced under a
migration agreement with
the International Refugee
Organisation
Other assisted passengers
including Allied ex-
serivemen and migrants
under Dutch and Italian
Assisted Passage Schemes
Landing Permit Holders who
arrive as full-fare
passengers
Total
17. Landing Permit holders, with a few exceptions,
were nominated hy Australian residents who are respons-
ible for their accommodation and to some measure, have
also vouched for their character. Among them are close
relatives of their nominators.
18. Displaced persons, on the other hand are a
special category. With few exceptions they originate
from what are today the Iron Curtain countries: Poland,
the Baltic States, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Yugoslavia.
These people were taken as forced labour when their
countries were overrun by the Communists and were found
in Germany when the country was occupied by the Allies*
The Germans were quite indiscriminating in their
"recruitment". They herded up well educated people,
tradesmen, labourers, peasants and possibly included
criminals.


190 For political reasons most of* these people were
unwilling to return to their home-lands which were then
under Communist domination and "became the responsibility
of the International Refugee Organisation, Their migrat-
ion to Australia was based on an agreement between that
Organisation and the Australian Government which
commenced in 1 9U7.
20 e Actually Australian alien population at any given
time may be expected to exceed the figure of registered
aliens, since transitory personnel, such as tourists, sea-
men and business visitors, who are here for a short time
only, are not as a rule registered, although it is a fact
that thsy liars been convicted of crimes and minor offences
during the period of their stay and that these convictions,
appear in the statistics examined by the Committee, It has
not been found practicable to make allowance for this fact,
and the Committee merely wishes to record the fact and to
point out that the inclusion of these people in the number
of convictions has the effect of presenting the aliens in
a less favourable light from the point of view of the
incidence of crime among them*
21, If the incidence of crime is to be used as a
measure of the effectiveness of selection of migrants,
the Committee desires to draw attention to the number
of pre-war migrants who entered Australia before the
nresent methods and criteria for selection and
screening were introduced*,
22 0 The following table is a summary of convictions
for serious offences recorded against alien adults in the
superior courts of Australia during 1951 and a summary of
similar convictions recorded against all adults in the
community during 1950,
230 It is to be regretted that the all-Australian
figures for the same period are not yet available. However,
in order to achieve some effective comparison, the Committee
nas examined the figures for Australia for the previous year.
2Uo The Committee considered that the table following
paragraph No, 3k showing convictions in Australia from 1939
to 1950 revealed such a slight annual variation that the
figure for 1950 would provide a reasonable basis for
estimating the incidence of crime in the Australian
population.
INCIDENCE OP CRIME, AUSTRALIA
Mean Adult Population (over 16) 20,6,1950 - 5*857*000
Number of Aliens registered 20,6,1950 - 220,380
Supreme Courts
Alien Adults (over 16) All Adults (over 16)
Convictions Per 100,000 Convictions Per 100,0
Crimes
Adults Adults
1, Offences
against the
Person
12.25
860
Ili o 6o
2,Offences
against
Property
18.13
1835
31.15
Forgery and other
serious offences
.2*6
1,3 1
Total more serious 68
offences
30.82*
2772
2*7. ; o


2f50 It will be seen that the overall incidence of serious
crime dealt with in Superior Courts was proportionately more
than 50$ higher in the Australian population generally than
amongst the Alien (30*80 per 100*000 adult aliens migrants
and 47*10 per 100*000 adults in the Australian population).,
26, Moreover* within each of the main sub-groups of
offences dealt with by Superior Courts* the incidence was
proportionately also lower amongst aliens than in the
Australian population*
27* Although, in the Committee’s opinion* offences
dealt with in Magistrates 1 Courts could not generally be
regarded a? ”serious crimes” it noted that in respect of
one group of offences dealt with in these courts, namely
offences against the person, that the incidence was proport-
ionately higher amongst alien migrants than amongst the
Australian population generally. By far the greatest
preponderance of these offences was ’Common Assault’,
23, Overall, however, including offences dealt with
in both Superior Courts and Magistrates’ Courts, the
incidence of offences which may be regarded as being of a
serious character (whether or not the degree of culpabil-
ity in individual cases could be regarded as serious) the
incidence was proportionately over 33%> higher amongst
Australians than amongst migrants. (38«5 per 100,000 alien
adults and 52 per 100,000 in the Australian population).
29* The Committee consideres that the incidence of
offences against the person is a reflection of the conditions
of war and stress under which alien migrants were forced to
live for many years prior to their reception in Australia,
as well as to the conditions under which they are temporar-
ily obliged to live in Australia by reason of their work
contracts and the housing shortage. Where many males are
congregated together, as in hostels; and where there are
so many nationalities in constant contact with each other,
it is to be expected that national rivalries may result
in argument and culminate in assaults, whether major or
minor in character* When all these migrants are able to
live with their families in houses of their own it is to
be expected that the causes of friction will be
substantially removed*
30, It is perhaps pertinent, at this point, to remark
that, particularly where homicide and suicide are concerned,
it is not reasonable to expect that any method of screening
or selection will prevent the admission to Australia of
persons who commit these crimes* They are not crimes of a
repetitive nature, nor are they crimes, the tendency to
commit which can be revealed by any known method of
examination or interrogation prior to their commission.
31 * The Committee was aware that the masculinity
ratio of the alien migrant community was approximately
20% higher than the masculinity ratio of the Australian
population. This is a factor which must be stressed in any
comparison between the incidence of crime among the alien
population and the all-Austral!an figures*
32 0 The Committee believes that evidence and practical
experience over a number of years shows that considerably
more than half the crimes committed are committed by males
between the ages of 20 and 33 years - those age groups in
which the majority of migrants belong*


Year
1939
19 44
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
36.91
40.72
38.81+
37.45
35.68
33.44
33.50
330 Since this Committee was appointed, we have been
invited to consider a statement made in New South Wales
that not a day passes in that State without a new
Australian being convicted of some major or minor crime.
In the year 1946, which is the last year before the influx
of alien migrants to Australia began, there were 1396
convictions in New South Wales for serious c rime before
superior courts, and 11+,870 for serious crime before
Magistrates* Courts, It appears therefore that in 1946,
not a day passed in New.South Wales without 44 persons
being convicted of some crime, major or minor. Since
the alien population of New South Wales is one-thirtieth
of the total population in that State, it might be expected
that on a proportionate basis more than 1 of the 44 would
be a new Australian, The Committee ventures to suggest
therefore, that it is not a proper inference that the
influx of new Australians into the community has caused
any increase in the record of crimes committed in that
State.
34* The Committee considered that not only has there
been no increase in the incidence of crime during the
period of large scale migration but that the statistics
which appear below amply demonstrate that on a Commonwealth-
wide basis there has been an actual decrease in the incidence
of crime in the Australian population generally since* large
scale migration commenced in 1947.
CONVICTIONS IN AUSTRALIA
Per 10,000 of mean total population
Magistrates* Courts
for serious crimes
Superior Courts
3.2
3,3
5,h
3.8
3.7
3*7
Not yet. available from
C*wealth Stat.
1950
3.3 (compiled by the
Committee)
DETAILED REPORTS ON VARIOUS ASPECTS OF
MIGRANT BEHAVIOUR
INDUSTRY
35, Detailed reports from employers regarding migrant
workers were examined by the Committee, Briefly it may be
said that the consensus of opinion among those employers
who have numbers of new Australians on their payrolls is
that they compare very favourably with other Australian
employees. Their behaviour generally is good and attendance
and application to their work Is satisfactory. In most cases
they mix very well with their fellow workers*


36. Trade unions have expressed the views that conduct
of' migrants was generally good, that they have shown them-
selves appreciative of the benefits of trade union member-
ship when these are fully understood by them, and are not
hesitant in taking advantage of the facilities available.
Their assimilation is being assisted by participation in
union activities and on the whole they are loyal, interested
members of the union movement.
37c So far as the children of migrants are concerned,
the reports received are entirely favourable. The children
have been found to be normal, friendly and confident. They
are generally amenable to discipline and apt in their
studies few cases of mis -demeanour, and those not of
a serious nature, have been reported. It is the conviction
of the Committee that Australia has nothing to fear and
much to gain when the migrant children now at school
become citizens.
BATHURST AND BONEGILLA AREAS OP CONCENTRATION
38. Senior officers at each Centre, police officers
and a number of leading citizens were interviewed and asked
to express their views generally with regard to the behavi-
our of the migrants. Conduct, as a rule, has been highly
satisfactory. Shopkeepers report that the migrants are well
behaved, honest and generally good customers. The police
speak highly of the standard of behaviour and indicate that,
in the matter of offences against good order, such as dis-'
orderly conduct, drunkenness and similar conduct, the
migrants compare favourably with the general standard in
the community. There has been a noticeable lack of serious
crime, with the exception of one case of homicide, in which
there was held to be provocation sufficient to produce the
comparatively light sentence of four years, which was
subsequently reduced to two years.
CANBERRA AND COOMA
390 Reports are available on two other areas where
there is a high proportion of migrants, viz., Canberra
and Cooma,
hQo The Chief Officer of the A.C.T. police in a
statement dealing with criminal offences in the A.C c T.
stated
15 The absence of new Australians in cases
of serious nature however was a good indication
of satisfactory assimilation in the A.C.T. and
of a good class of migrant. 11
. Investigations by a member of the Committee at
Cooma where 2,500 of the total population of h*ooo are
migrants elicited a most favourable expression of opinion
on the general behaviour of migrants. Of special interest
were the comments of the Police Sergeant who stated that
the behaviour of migrants was good. They v/ere inoffensive
although there was some re-action to drink.
h2. The charges recorded by the Police were
particularly illuminating, for at Cooma Australian and
migrant workers both live to quite a large extent in.
the same sort of barrack type accommodation. Of 9-
charges entered from 1/8/51 to 17/12/51. nineteen were
listed against alien migrants (out of an alien component
of 2,500) and 75 against Australians (out of an Australian
component of 1,500).


430 The Committee regards as being of great significance
the fact that the behaviour of migrants in these areas, where
the concentration of post-war arrivals is perhaps greater than
elsewhere, is so satisfactory, and considers that this provides
a valuable indication of the conduct of the new Australians who
have entered Australia since the present selection methods and
criteria have been in operation,,
OPINIONS OP POLIOS COMMISSIONERS
hk* It might have been expected, having regard to the
conditions under which many migrants have lived prior to
entering Australia, the strange conditions in which they found
themselves after arrival, their lack of acquaintance with local
laws and language,that there would have been some appreciable
effect upon the incidence of crime in the community. The Police
Commissioners in each State,- when interviewed however, all
expressed the opinion that the standard of conduct of new
Australians was satisfactorily high and that there was nothing
to indicate that the incidence of crime in the community had
risen as a result of the intake of over 300,000 aliens.
PACTORS OUTSIDE AND INSIDE AUSTRALIA
AFFECTING THE BEHAVIOUR OP MIGRANTS.
45• The following notes touch on some of the factors
which the Committee considered had some bearing on the
behaviour of migrants,, It should not be assumed that the
Committee considered that these lead to any abnormally high
incidence of crime amongst migrants, but only that through
the operation of some of thesefactors it may be higher than
it otherwise ’would have been.
k6o The opinions expressed in this section cannot all
be backed up by factual evidence, but they represent the
sum of the impressions gained by members of the Committee as
a result of discussing various aspects of the matter with a
wide range of people who have been associated with migrants
in a variety of different ways.
OVERSEAS CONDITIONING
hio Foreign migrants come to Australia from a wide
range of countries and from all social levels and all
sorts of family backgrounds within each of those countries.
Any generalisation regarding the home-country influences
which are likely to be reflected in their present conduct
is therefore difficult and likely to be controversial.
48. Perhaps the only common factor is that almost
without exception they lived for a period in countries
which either were battlefields, were occupied by foreign
military forces or were severly affected by the war. in
the majority of c ases the normal social structure of their
countries was disorganised and different codes of moral
values were temporarily adopted, e„g, acts for which members
of resistance movements were acclaimed would in many cases
be serious crimes In peacetime.
i+9* Individually many of the migrants themselves
suffered directly at the bands of those placed in authority
by the vicissitudes of war. This applies particularly to
displaced persons and refugees who were uprooted from their
homelands and required to undertake forced labour in other
countries.


30* At the conclusion cf the war in Europe, food and'
employment were difficult to obtain, and survival became,
in many places from which migrants have come, a matter of
exploiting every legal and illegal avenue of personal gain
to the maximum extent that was possible without retribution*
51* It might be expected that these conditions would
engender amongst the people subjected to them a general
pre-disposition not to co-oerate with authority and to
flout both the letter and the spirit of the law*
52 e In general, however, while in some cases there has
been an attitude of suspicion of authority in the period
immediately following arrival in Australia the Committee
found, no evidence that this was manifest in anti-social or
criminalb ehaviour beyond that found in a c ross-section of
the Australian community* This would seem to indicate
either that -
(a) Australian assimilation methods are working
effectively; or
(b) selection procedure has been responsible for-
weeding out a considerable percentage of
undesirables or
(c) that migrants tend to conform to the behaviour
pattern of the community in which they find
themselves*
METHODS AND STANDARDS OF SELECTION
33* The Committee had available amongst others the
report of the Deputy Chairman of the Immigration Advisory
Council and past president of the Employers* Federation,
Mr* o*D*A* Obergj, who made an independent enguiry into
selection methods overseas* This report covered the principal
areas from which Australia ha s selected foreign migrants.
Other inguiries by members of the Committee into selection
methods and criteria supported Mr# Oberg*s remarks, the
relevant portions of which are guoted hereunder:-
Extract from report "by Mr* O.D«A a Cberg dated
6 thT"&o •v emb erT^Tsffl'
”1* Australia has consistently secured the highest
standard migrants, as evidenced by the fact
that only about 10$ of those passing through
I*R S O* hands for resettlement abroad were
accepted*
2* The Australian Organisation, especially with
respect to health and security safeguards, was
the best in the field*
3* The standard of the officers in the Australian
Mission, was not excelled (and in few cases
egualled) by other countries* representatives*
6* The system adopted to safeguard Australia*s
interests,both with respect to health and
security and closely integrated on the latter
aspect with the British and U*S*A. Zones,
ensured full protection of our country’s
interest*


"9. When the operations cease, Australia will have
secured over 170*000 new citizens, under the
loßoOo Scheme boc arefully screend with respect
to all essentials, that the ultimate benefits
cannot be over-estimated."
ATTITUDE OP THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC (INCLUDING PRESS
sko The Committee also took the opportunity of examining
a long and detailed report of Mr* R*D e Huish, President of
the Queensland Branch of R 0 S* S* A* I* L*A* , compiled as a result
of his inquiries into the recruitment of migrants overseas* So
far as it dealt with the subject matter of this report,
Mr* Huish 1 a conclusions were Ir. full agreement with those
reached by Mr o oberg o
55® Until the post-war period, many Australians had had
ve2*y limited contact with people of foreign nationality* This
has given rise to a very natural attitude of shyness and even
suspicion, amongst many Australians, of anyone who does not
speak English or whose background is radically different from
their own*
56* This attitude adopted by Australians has in turn
made it very difficult for migrants to become absorbed into
normal community activities; and they tend to be thrown upon
their own resources to fill in their leisure hours* Where
the migrants comprise families the result is that they tend
to withdraw into their own national groups while still main-
taining a high standard of personal conduct* Where, however,
they comprise mainly single men, there appears to be a tend-
ency for them to consume alcohol, the strength and quality of
which is unknown to them, with the result that the incidence
of minor offences is higher than it would otherwise be* (This
is almost parallel to the wartime experience with large
numbers of troops quartered near a town which did not offer
adequate social amenities, and is in no way peculiar to
migrants)*
37« Quite apart from the influence of alcohol however,
the Committee feels that the absence of normal social inter-
course places a considerable strain upon groups of male
migrants who are accommodated in hostels and that any improve-
ments in this direction would be reflected in improved conduct
of migrants*
58* The effect of the attitude of suspicion adopted by
many Australians unfortunately tends to be cumulative in its
effects where conscious effort is not made to arrest it* A
"community attitude" is adopted which is very difficult for
individuals to break through* This "community attitude" tends
unfortunately to be fostered, albeit unconsciously, by the
Press* If an Australian commits a misdemeanour, responsibility
for it is attributed to him individually* If a migrant commits
a similar misdemeanour it is usually reported in such a way
that the fact that te is a migrant, rather'than the' crime'
itself $ IS-featured, and responsibility for the offence is thus
shared by the whole migrant population*
59. The Committee considers that this has been one of the
biggest factors in building up an apparently popular mis-
conception that the incidence of crime amongst migrants is
higher than in the Australian population generally* The
Committee feels that if attention is drawn to it
reputable ? ress will take all necessary steps to correct it*


60c Correction is desirable, not only in the interests
or assimilation of the many excellent settlers who have
come here as migrants but also because the continued effect
of press reports and the feelings they engender in the
population, may tend to goad some of the less stable migrants
into antisocial activities which they would not undertake
in a more friendly environment.
61, The action being taken by the Good Neighbour
Movement and by all its member organisations is a valuable
corrective to the factors outlined above and the Committee
strongly recommends that their activities be continued and
intensified.
LIVING AND WORKING CONDITIONS
11. Grme reference has already been made to this in the
preceding sab-section. The Committee feels that the following
additional points are relevant.
63, Very large numbers of foreign migrants work together
on jobs where there are few Australians engaged on tasks in
close proximity to them. Similarly very many of them are
accommodated in all-migrant hostels.
6i+ s Although they are all migrants, they include many
different nationalities some of which still tend to nurture
national jealousies and feuds. Under such conditions of
working and living there is little opportunity for them to
absorb a broader Australian point of view. To some extent
crimes of violence committed by migrants upon fellow
migrants mustb e attributed to those international jealousies
combined with the general frustration of living under hostel
conditions.
63, Amongst the migrants quartered in hostels are many
heads of families whose dependants are accommodated in
Holding Centres in other districts. The general worry and
frustration Involved in the separation of members of famil-
ies from each other is in the Committee’s opinion a further
unsettling factor which has an influence upon the general
conduct of migrants.
66, The Committee recognises that in the circumstances
the grouping of migrants in work and in hostels is unavoid-
able as is also the s operation of members of the same family.
Since this cannot be avoided, it urges Good Neighbour Councils
and New Settlers* Leagues and their member organisations to
pay particular attention to the social problems of migrants
living in hostels, and to use their utmost endeavotirs to
assist these people to become absorbed in the normal community
life of their towns and cities. It also urges the Government,
and employers to endeavour to arrange the employment and
accommodation of migrants in such a way that they work and
live side by side with Australians,
67, The Committee appreciated that the categories of
migrants that can be brought to Australia or placed in any
particular locality are dictated by economic considerations
of considerable complexity. Nevertheless, it urges the
Government to take the earliest possible steps to ensure
a proper balance of the sexes, both amongst migrants
introduced Into the country and in local areas where
migrants are concentrated.


III I III I III
II II I
I I
III II II
Pi
I
LANGUAGE DIFFICULT!ES
6b* For non-English speaking migrants, language
difficulties intrude into almost every aspect of their
dally life* Apart from the difficulty this creates in
making friends amongst Australians and the general
irritation which results, there Is no doubt that many
of the offences of which migrants are convicted can be
directly attributed to language difficulties.
69e Instances of this vary from the convictions
which follow drunken brawls arising out of misunder-
standings, and the unfortunately not uncommon resentment
by Australians of hearing languages other than English
spoken, to brushes with she police (and particularly
plain-clothes police) where the migrant does not under-
stand resents interference and resists arrest.
70m in addition to the effect of language difficulties
upon the number of incidents giving rise to charges, the
Committee feels that of the convictions recorded* some
would have been acquittals had the migrants concerned been
able to understand better the c barges laid against them*
and been able to give evidence in English*
71. There does not appear to be any short terra
solution to the problem of language difficulties*
Fortunately the problem tends to solve itself as more
and more migrants learn English and can make themselves
understood or interpret for theirfellcw s* and as more
and more Australians recognise the problem as such and
adjust their ownbehaviour accordingly*
ASSIMILATION DIFFICULTIES AND DIFFERENCES IN
WAY OF nIFE IN AUSTRALIA AND HOME COUNTRIES
72* Under previous sub-headings some of the
assimilation difficulties which beset migrants have
already been listed*
f J
73* In general it may be said* additionally* that it
Is usually not hostel life or language difficulties or
any other single factor which alone tends to affect a
migrant * s behaviour; but ..each of these factors* in
combination with one or more of the others* tends to
build up in a raignrantu s mind a feeling of frustration
and of being unwelcome in Australia unless positive
steps are taken to counter it*
7k* Under these conditions it is very difficult for
a migrant to feel the sense of responsibility which is
theb asis of good citizenship and good social behaviour.
75® When this is combined with a nostalgia for the
way of life to which he was accustomed in his own
European country or a loneliness for feminine companion-
ship it Is easy to understand that tempers are readily
aroused and many minor offences against the person* such
as common assault can result*
76* The answer to this does not lie in providing
migrants with charity handouts and teaparties but in
ge/ting them fully absorbed into the social* sporting
and other community activities of
environment*
their immediate
