

REPORT
OF THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
OF THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
ON THE SUBJECT OF
PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS,
1856-7.
VICTORIA.
TOGETHER WITH THE
PROCEEDINGS OF COMMITTEE, MINUTES OF EVIDENCE, AND APPENDICES.
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED 30TH JULY, 1857.
By Authority:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
D 13.— a.


EXTRACTED FROM THE MINUTES.
Wednesday, 26th November, 1856.
Penal Establishments. —Mr. Hood moved, pursuant to amended notice, The appointment of a Select
Committee of seven members, to be chosen by ballot, to inquire into the working of the penal
establishments of the Colony, with power to examine witnesses, and require the production of
books and papers.
Debate ensued.
Question —put and passed.
The Council then proceeded to the ballot, and the following members being reported to have the
greatest number of votes, were declared by the President to be the members of the Committee,
viz.:—Messrs. Hood, Hervey, McCembie, Mitchell, Strachan, Miller, Cruikshank.
Thursday, 27th November, 1856.
Penal Establishments. —Mr. Hood, with leave of the Council, moved, That the name of Mr. Thomson
be substituted for that of Mr. Strachan on the Penal Establishments Committee.
Question —put and passed.
Thursday, 4th December, 1856.
Penal Establishments. —Mr. Hood moved, with leave of the Council, That the following eight members
be added to the Select Committee on Penal Establishments, viz. : —Messrs. Clarke, Cowie,
Guthridge, Keogh, Patterson, Stewart, Tierney, and Williams, and that the Committee have power
to sit during the adjournment.
Question —put and passed.
Tuesday, 16th December, 1856.
Penal Establishments Committee. —Mr. Hood moved, with leave of the Council, That the Select
Committee on Penal Establishments have leave to sit during the recess, and that three form a
quorum of the said Committee.
Debate ensued.
Question —put and passed.
Tuesday, 24th February, 1857-
Penal Establishments. — Returns. —The Honorable J. Hood, with leave of the Council, moved, That
the following unopposed Returns be laid on the Table of the Council: —
(1.) A* Return, in precise accordance with a form to be supplied by the Penal Establishments
Committee, of all articles, exclusive of articles of clothing or any articles supplied in compliance
with requisitions from other departments of the Public Service, made on station at the manu-
facturing branch of the Penal Department, at the main depot, Pentridge stockade, from the Ist
day of July, 1855, to the 30th June, 1856.
(2.) A Return, in precise accordance with a form to be supplied by the Penal Establishments
Committee, of all prisoners discharged from the hulks or stockades by the Inspector General of the
Penal Department from the Ist day of January, 1856, to the Ist day of January, 1857, with a
statement of all additional punishments or sentences inflicted on them ; of the periods at which
they were severally entitled by law to discharge by indulgence, with good conduct, and of the
authority and circumstances under which they have been longer detained ; and further, for a
statement whether prisoners or gangs of prisoners have been placed by the Inspector General’s
order or sanction in chains, without any report to Government, they not having been sentenced
in chains.
(3.) For a Return, in precise accordance with a tabular form to be supplied by the Penal Establish-
ments Committee, of the names, numbers, and other details of information referring to prisoners
in the Melbourne gaols and in the Pentridge and Collingwood stockades, on whom additional
sentences have been inflicted by the Yisiting Justice of these prisons, from the Ist January, 1856,
to the Ist January, 1857, and the authority and circumstances under which such sentences have
been imposed.
Question —put and passed.
Penal Establishments. —The Honorable J. Hood brought up a Progress Report from the Committee
on Penal Establishments, and moved that the same be received.
Debate ensued.
Motion, by leave, withdrawn.
Wednesday, 29th July, 1857.
Penal Establishments. — Report of Select Committee. —The Honorable J. Hood, as Chairman of the
Select Committee appointed to inquire into the working of the Penal Establishments of the
Colony, with power to examine witnesses, and require the production of books and papers, brought
up the Report of the Committee.
Ordered —That the Report lie on the Table.
Thursday, 30rn July, 1857.
Penal Establishments. — Report of Select Committee. —The Honorable J. Hood, in accordance with
notice, moved, That the Report of the Select Committee on Penal Establishments, brought up by
him on the 29th instant, be printed, and its consideration be made an Order of the Day for
Wednesday, sth proximo.
Question —put and passed.


REPORT.
The Select Committee of tlie Honorable the Legislative Council,
appointed on tlie 26th November last, “to inquire into the
working of the Penal Establishments,” having examined a
number of witnesses in regard principally to the condition of
the Penal Establishments of the Colony, and the system of
penal discipline administered therein, have agreed to the
following report :
1. Your Committee regret that, in consequence of the unfinished
state of the Parliament Houses in the first instance, and afterwards the
repeated adjournments of Parliament, and the melancholy events that have
taken place in connection with the Penal Department at Williamstown, it
has been impracticable to bring to a close at an earlier period of the present
Session the investigation with which the Committee was charged.
2. From the circumstance that evidence taken by your Committee
has not been taken upon oath, and from the fact that in various important
particulars it is evidently contradictory, it has been impossible for the
Committee to arrive, with any degree of certainty, at the truth in reference
to facts and circumstances of an important bearing on the general question
submitted for its decision. At the same time, there are certain conclusions
to which your Committee have been led in the course of their investigation
that will serve, in some measure, to account for the past, and afford the
means of guidance towards a better system for the future.
3. That the condition of tlie Penal Establishment is (to say the least
of it) unsatisfactory.
4. This has arisen chiefly from the want of adequate accommodation
for the carrying out of a proper system of penal discipline, and from the con-
sequent impracticability of enforcing the necessary classification of criminals;
but the Committee are also impressed with the opinion that the reformation
of criminals, or indeed their capability of being reformed, has not been allowed
to exert that practical influence upon the management of the institution
which its importance demands.
5. As the bulk of the reliable evidence goes to show the utter
hopelessness of accomplishing anything efficiently of a reformatory
character with the present establishments, your Committee are of opinion
that a properly designed building, commensurate with the wants of the
department, ought to be immediately commenced, and completed as speedily
as possible.
JOHN HOOD,
Chairman.


PROCEEDINGS


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.
THURSDAY, 27th NOVEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Hervey, Mitchell, McCombie, Thomson.
Course of proceeding 1 discussed.
during 1 to Chaiman d ° a to the Council for for this Committee to sit
Secretary" to*" take the™** 6 Clerk . of tbe Council be instructed to request the Hon. the Chief
Committee of such nrisonerrn^t eP r f ° r procurin^(the attendance, from time to time, before this
to examine P nsoner s of the Crown or warders as the Committee may deem it necessary
Ordered— That this Committee be adjourned to Monday next at two o’clock.
MONDAY, Ist DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Miller, McCombie, Thomson, Hervey.
the Atwfpv p nff a f te " ded and stated t 0 the Committee that he had been advised by the Hon
Committee of the Lcgisla&e Council of Victoria
Report read accordingly.
Course of proceeding- further discussed.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till to-morrow at two o’clock.
TUESDAY, 2nd DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Miller, Mitchell, Thomson.
No quorum.
FRIDAY, sth DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Guthndge, Patterson, Thomson, McCombie, Clarke, Hervey, Stewart, Miller
Dr. Tierney. ’
John Price, Esq., Inspector General of Penal Establishments, called in and examined.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till two o’clock on Monday next.
MONDAY, Bth DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
_ Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Dr. I ierney, Messrs. Patterson, Miller, Keogh, Hervey, Stewart.
Crawford Pasco, Esq., visiting-justice of penal hulks, called in and examined.
Mr. Angus McPherson, superintendent of the penal hulk President, called in and examined.
H 13 0rdered ~ That this Committee be adjourned till two o’clock on Wednesday next.


WEDNESDAY, 10th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Dr. Tierney, Messrs. McCombie, Patterson, Hervey, Guthridge.
Ordered—That the Inspector General of Penal Establishments be requested to furnish this
Committee with the following- Returns, viz.:—
1. The names, with date of engagement and resignation or dismissal of any superin-
tendent, warder, overseer, or other officer who has left the department since the
present Inspector General took charge.
2. The salary of each such superintendent, warder, or overseer.
3. If dismissed, the reason.
4. The amount of pay due to each when dismissed, and how much left back, if any.
5. With respect to those who left on their own accord, their reason for resigning if
given. ° b ’
G. The names of those now engaged in the whole of the department in any capacity,
with the pay attached to each, together with the date of their ■
distinguishing each hulk, prison, or stockade.
7. A copy of the proceedings, and notes of evidence taken at an investigation on the
case of Thomas Bourke, held by the Inspector General, on Wednesday, 3rd day
December instant, at the Collingwood Stockade. J
Mr- John Duffy called in and examined.
Ordered—That the days of sitting of this Committee be every Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, at one o’clock. ’
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock to-morrow.
THURSDAY, 11th DECEMBER, 185 G.
Members present . —
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Dr. Tierney, Messrs. Keogh, Thomson, Hervey, Clarke, McCombie.
The Rev. Sam Corrie called in and examined.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock on Tuesday next.
TUESDAY, 16th DECEMBER, 185 G.
Members present: —
* Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Hervey, Mitchell, Keogh, Thomson, Miller, Patterson, Dr. Tierney.
Rev. Sam Corrie called in and further examined.
Mr. John Berkley called in and examined.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock to-morrow.
WEDNESDAY, 17th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr Hood, in the chair.
Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
Rev. W. C. Currie called in and examined.
Mr. John Berkley called in and further examined.
The attention of the Chairman having been called to the fact that the quorum of members
fo a°t on°e n „’iT “* “ burned tie Co mmi “eeTn t U
THURSDAY, 18th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
. Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs Guthridge, McCombie, Patterson, Thomson, I)r. Tierney.
John Singleton, Esq., M.D., called in and examined.
Mr. Charles lye called in and examined.
Ordered 1 hat this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock to-morrow.


FRIDAY, 19th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Clarke, Guthridge, Patterson, Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
The following returns, furnished by the Inspector General, were laid before the Committee.
1. A Return of the persons now employed in the Penal Establishments.
2*. A copy of the proceedings and notes of evidence taken by the Inspector General of
Penal Establishments, in the case of Thomas Bourke, at Collingwood stockade —
( Vide Appendix L).
Geo. M. Webster, Esq., M.D., called in and examined.
William Welsh called in and examined.
Mr. John Berkley called in and further examined.
Mr. John Duffy called in and further examined.
The Clerk of the Council having reported to the Committee that Mr. Angus McPherson
had made extensive and material alterations in the copy of his evidence, sent to him for revision—
Ordered —-That, in accordance with the practice of the House of Commons, an instruction
be given to all witnesses examined before this Committee, to whom copies of their
evidence may he sent for revision, to the effect that such witnesses can only make
verbal corrections in their evidence, inasmuch as corrections in substance must be
effected by re-examination.
2. That the corrections made by Mr. Angus McPherson, in Ins replies to Questions
Nos. 398, 463, 469, 470, and 483, being corrections in substance, the same cannot be
allowed by the Committee; but that Mr. McPherson be informed that the Committee
will be ready to re-examine him at any future sitting, should he wish to correct any
errors in substance which he may have fallen into in his former examination.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock on Tuesday, 30th instant.
TUESDAY, 30th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. McCombie, Miller, Williams, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. W. P. Burne called in and examined.
Ordered That this Committee be adjourned till one o’clock on the next day the Council shall
meet for business.
WEDNESDAY, 31st DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Williapns, Guthridge, Mitchell.
James Edwards called in and examined.
Committee adjourned till Thursday, Bth January, 1857, at one o’clock.
THURSDAY, Bth JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Clarke, Guthridge, McCombie, Miller, Mitchell, Patterson, Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
The following Returns, furnished by the Inspector-General, were laid before the Com-
mittGG *
1. A Return of the Warders and Officers who have left the service, from the 22nd
October, 1856, to the sth December, 1856.—( Vide Appendix M.)
2. A Return of Tickets-of-leave issued to Prisoners during the years 1854-5-6, by the
Inspector-General of Penal Establishments —( Vide Appendix N.)
3. A Return of Deaths which have occurred on board the Penal Hulks, and at the
Marine Stockade, at Williamstown, from the date of their occupation to the 31st
December, 1856.— {Vide Appendix 0.)
Mr. Angus McPherson called in and further examined.
Adjourned till one o’clock on Tuesday next.


TUESDAY, 13th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Clarke, Hervey, Miller, Patterson, Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. N. W. Pollard called in and examined.
Mr. R. C. F. Smith called in and examined.
Adjourned till one o’clock to-morrow.
TUESDAY, 20th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
Mr. Thomson, in the chair.
Messrs. Hervey, Mitchell, Patterson, Tierney.
E. C. F. Smith attended, and laid before the Committee a Paper written by him on
Penal Discipline.—( Vide Appendix P.) J
The following- Return, furnished by the Inspector-General, was laid upon the Table
viz.:— r ’
Return of Officers, Warders, &c., who have left the department since the present Inspector-
General (John Price) took charge, up to the 31st December, 1856, showing- the dates
' . °* ™ieir appointments, their salaries, the dates and reasons of their dismissal, discharg-e
or resignation; amount of pay due to each when leaving-, and how much (if any) left
Adjourned till Thursday next, at twelve o’clock.
THURSDAY, 22nd JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
Messrs. Guthridge, Thomson, Clarke, McCombie, Hervey, Mitchell, Dr. Tierney.
Count John Dembinski called in and examined.
Mr. Alexander Willis called in and examined.
• a j r ‘ Kentish attended the Committee, and submitted a Paper recommending- the
introduction of the assignment system. * 6
. Fetter from Mr. W. P. Burne, enclosing Report on Penal Discipline, as carried out in
iNew South Wales, laid before Committee.—( Vide Appendix S.)
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned till half-past one o’clock on Monday next.
MONDAY, 26th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
Mr. Hood, in the chair.
. Mr. Patterson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. George Wintle called in and examined.
W. McCrea, Esq., M.D., called in and examined.
AppendilV) ™ mber ° f P “ PerS re ' a ‘ iTe *° * he CaSe ° f a COnvict na ” ell
Committee adjourned till one o’clock on Wednesday next.
WEDNESDAY, 28th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—
The Honorable J. Hood, in the chair.
ihe Honorables J. H. Patterson, W. H. F. Mitchell, R. Thomson, Dr. Tierney, H. Miller.
Mr. M. H. Smith called in and examined.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned sine die.


WEDNESDAY, 3rd JUNE, 1857.
Members present :—
The Honorable J. Hood, in the chair.
The Honorables Dr. Tierney, J. Cowie, N. Guthridge.
Dr. Youl called in and examined.
Moved by the Honorable Dr. Tierney, That certain documents forwarded to the Committee
by Mr. Kentish be returned to that gentleman, with the thanks of the Committee.
Agreed to.
Ordered—That Mr. Schultz be thanked for his suggestions on Penal Establishments.
Adjourned till two o’clock on Thursday next, to consider a Draft Report.
THURSDAY, 4th JUNE, 1857.
Members present: —
The Honorable J. Hood, in the chair.
The Honorables J. Cowie, Dr. Tierney, N. Guthridge.
Moved—That a Sub-Committee of three be appointed to draw up a Draft Report; such
Committee to consist of the Honorables J. Hood, W. H. F. Mitchell, and Dr. Tierney.— {Hon.
J. Cotvie.')
Agreed to
Adjourned sine die.
TUESDAY, 14tii JULY, 1857.
Member present : —
The Honorable J. Hood.
No quorum.
Adjourned till ten o’clock on Wednesday, 15th instant.
WEDNESDAY, 15th JULY, 1857.
Members present :—
The Honorable J. Hood, in the chair.
The Honorables J. Cowie, N. Guthridge.
Draft Report read by the Chairman.—Ordered to be printed for use of the Committee.
Sit again on Wednesday, 22nd instant.
WEDNESDAY, 22nd JULY, 1857.
Members present :—
The Honorables J. Hood, N. Guthridge.
No quorum.
Adjourned till Wednesday, 29th instant.
WEDNESDAY, 29th JULY, 1857.
Members present :—
The Honorable J. Hood, in the chair.
The Honorables Dr. Tierney, W. H. F. Mitchell, N. Guthridge, J. H. Patterson, R. Thomson,
W. J. T. Clarke.
Amended Draft Report brought up and read by the Chairman.
Clauses 1 and 2 read and passed.
X) 13.—c.


° laU <-3 3 ThaUhfSiUn of ,he Peoal Establishments is (to say the least of it) unsatis-
factory, and that the results arrived at are rather the increase and aggravation
than the diminution of clime, and the degradation rather than the reformation of
criminals, is evident and undeniable.” „
Moved That the whole of this clause he struck out after the word unsatisfactory.
(Hon. W. H. F. Mitchell.')
CWs n 4^nd5 a read a as e fmended hy the Hon. N. Guthridge, and passed.
Clauses 6,7, 8,9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 not put to Committee.
Clause 14 c omm i ttee would heg to draw attention to the evidence of Mr. George
Wintle, wherein is disclosed one phase of prison discipline, the most deplorab e
that can well he imagined.”
Moved —That this clause he struck out.— (Hon. W. H. F. Mitchell.)
Question—put and passed.
Clause .15 read - =- a 3 edited in the evidence of Mr
McPherson, and the large number of officers of all kinds, m piopoition to t e
number of prisoners under their charge in these vessels, demonstrate at once the
inefficiency of the system, and the utter worthlessness of this particular part of its
general machinery.” , „ N
VMoved —That this clause he struck out.— (Hon. W. H. F. Mitchell.)
Queston —put and passed.
Clause 16 ‘ , constructed prisons on land, a proper classification of the criminals—
which is quite impracticable either on the hulks or stockades might easi y e
effected ; and if prisons are found in America and the West Indies sufficient
not only to render a gaol or penitentiary self-supporting, hut to afford a con-
siderable surplus revenue to the state, there can be no reason why a prison
conducted in the same manner here should not also pay the whole cost of its
management, hut he a source of revenue to the Colony.
Moved—That this clause he struck out. — (Hon. W. 11. F. Mitchell.)
Question —put and passed.
Clause 17. read Committee WO uld direct particular attention to the evidence of Mr.
Pollard in regard to the management of prisons in America. Without being
committed to the details, your Committee would only observe, that there can
he no doubt that a prison established on the same principles would he equal y
successful in Victoria.”
Moved—That this clause he struck out.— (Hon. W. 11. F. Mitchell.)
Question —put and passed.
a (t pg_ Considering, however, the difficulty, if not the impracticability, of obtaining
reliable evidence except on oath, your Committee would most earnestly recom-
mend the appointment of a commission, with power to take evidence on oat i,
on all matters connected with the Penal Establishment, with a view to the
speedy and entire abandonment of the present system of penal discipline, and
the establishment of a proper system throughout the Colony.”
Moved —That this clause he struck out.— (Hon. W. R. F. Mitchell.)
Question —put and passed.
The Chairman instructed to report to the Council.
MINUTES


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
FRIDAY, sth DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present : —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Guthridge, Mr. Hervey, Mr. McCombie,
Mr. Miller, Mr. Patterson, Mr. Stewart, Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
John Price, Esq., Inspector General of Penal Establishments, examined.
1. By the Chairman. —The Committee are desirous to hear what you have to say in
answer to the questions that have been forwarded to you by the Clerk of the Council ?—Perhaps
in the first instance I had better name the different establishments under my charge.
2. The first question is, state generally the way in which the different Penal Establishments
under your superintendence are managed; in particular, describe how prisoners under your charge
have been treated and disposed of after receiving sentence, beginning at such as are sentenced to
the shortest punishments, and proceeding up to the severest ? The different establishments under
my charge are, Pentridge, the accommodation in which is for 450 ; Collingwood, in which I can
accommodate 364 prisoners; the penal hulk Success, with accommodation for 130 ; the Sacra-
mento, capable of containing 128 ; the penal hulk President, 80 ; and the Lysander, which is not
looked upon as a penal hulk, which is capable of containing 300. When I receive notification from
the gaoler in Melbourne, or when in my visits to the gaol I see that it is overcrowded, it
is desirable to remove prisoners, I attend personally, and, together with the gaoler, select from
the prisoners in the gaol prisoners to supply such vacancies as may exist in the various estab-
lishments. Long-sentence men, over ten years, unless specially recommended for another station
by the gaoler, are invariably removed to the hulk President, as also such men as have been
refractory since their punishment. Pentridge being the manufacturing department in which it is
necessary that I should have tradesmen, I then ascertain what tradesmen are left; if those men
arc well conducted men, they are removed to Pentridge to be employed in the shops. I then
select such prisoners as may be required at Collingwood, choosing from among the short-sentence
men such men as have been previously convicted, as I require a few of them, both at Pentridge and
Collingwood, for the purpose of being placed in positions in which it would not be desirable to
place long-sentence prisoners. I then select those short-sentence men who have been originally free,
not previously convicted, and they are transferred to the Lysander. The invalids and sick are
likewise sent to the Lysander, as I have no hospital accommodation for them elsewhere. There may
be occasionally some eight-years’ men sent to tbe hulk Sacramento, in which they do not undergo
so rigid a discipline as at the other hulks, they are more in association there. On arriving at the
stations the prisoners are searched, and have their hair cut, and are washed and clothed, and
then told off to their gangs by the superintendent. If any of those men fall out from the gangs
in which they are placed, and say they are unable to perform the labor of that particular gang,
they undergo an examination by the medical officer, and he declares whether they are fit for hard
labor or otherwise. No prisoner after having complained that he is unwell is sent to work,
except under the direction of the medical officer. The artizans are told off to the workshops, and
when any vacancy occurs in a workshop, which I am unable to fill by a mechanic, I select from
among the men a man to learn the trade. At the Imlk President the men remain a fixed period,
according to the President hulk regulations-. Those men are placed in irons, and the men
remain in the President from twelve months to three years, according to their sentences and
conduct. When vacancies occur in the penal hulk Success I myself go round the cells of the
President and hear what claims each prisoner has to adduce for removal, and if those are supported
by the superintendent of that hulk, I submit their names to His Excellency for removal. The
men then come on full rations, and commence to work. At the President no labor is performed
by any of the prisoners, except by billetted hands in cleansing the ship; and indeed that work
formerly was performed by prisoner seamen, but prisoner seamen some twelvemonths ago almost
ceased to exist as a body of prisoners, and I was obliged to call upon the men themselves to
cleanse their vessel. The men in the Success work at quarry work and learning to cut stone.
When vacancies occur in the Sacramento I select in the same way from the prisoners at the
Success for the hulk Sacramento, where they are employed in similar work; and as the men
evince a desire to behave themselves and be industrious they are passed on to the Lysander, from
whence they emanate to the stockades at Collingwood and Pentridge. With respect to the diet
which is alluded to in one of the questions forwarded to me, I beg to hand in a scale of rations
served out in the different Penal Establishments. — \_The witness delivered in the same Vide
Appendix A.] At the hulk President all men receive the penal rations except those that are
billetted. Those that are billetted receive the full rations. Those rations have undergone the
review of the principal medical officer, Dr. McCrea. —"No. 3.”—“Prisoners at hard labor in gaol
or on board hulks and at stockades” —men who are at hard labor get that. Incorrigibly idle
prisoners get number 4or number 5. Those rations have all been laid out by the chief medical
officer. When a man is sick, or locked up for trial, he receives half ration until the medical officer
has seen him. I would at the same time put in a list of the prisoners’ clothing.- \_lhe witness
delivered in the same —Vide Appendix B.] In addition to the list of clothing put in, the prisoners
are allowed to retain any plain colored flannels, or neck handkerchiefs, their own property ; and
Penal.—a.


if the medical officer deems it necessary that they should have extra flannel clothing, they are
supplied with it. Men who are at work in the blacksmiths’ shops are supplied with blanket
clothing in addition to their other clothing. Those who work in the water are supplied with
canvas clothing lined with flannel, and extra boots, so as to enable them, when they come out, to
have an entire change to keep themselves dry. The inducements that are held out to prisoners
for good behaviour are, with respect to those at the hulks, removal from the penal hulks, to those
in which the men are in association; and with regard to those at the stockades, the indulgence
of tickets-of-leave to those under sentence of hard labor on the roads, whose sentences are longer
than two years; and a mitigation of one-third of their sentences to those under two years.
Those prisoners who are eligible for tickets-of-leave at a fixed period can reduce that period, by
good conduct, one third; so that a prisoner who has to serve six years for a ticket-of-leave becomes
eligible to be discharged with that indulgence at the expiration of four years, if he conduct
himself properly. I will take the instance of a prisoner who receives a five years’ sentence. He
is eligible for his indulgence at three years if he is well conducted; but if he is favorably
reported by his superintendent, chief warder, and overseer, that man receives his ticket-of-leave
in two years. I beg to hand in a table shewing the periods to be served by prisoners before
obtaining tickets-of-leave. [The witness delivered in the same —Yid e Appendix C ] When a
prisoner has undergone one half of the period he has to serve for his indulgence, he is at liberty
to apply for his ticket-of-leave. Those applications are invariably gone through by myself.
They are sent in at the beginning of the month, and before the 10th of the month I generally
receive the reply of the Governor sanctioning or approving of the indulgences.
3. By Mr. McCombie —What is the nature of the ticket-of-leave; are the men let loose
on society again ?—They are ; they are allowed to work for their own benefit in a particular
district which they are allowed themselves to select, such district not being allowed to be selected
from the gold fields or in the county of Grantor the county of Bourke.
• 4. Flow do you enforce the regulation as to district?—The day a prisoner is discharged
I notify to the Chief Commissioner of Police that I have discharged into a particular district the
person whose description is annexed.
5. That district being limited to a prescribed boundary ?—Yes; as for example, Portland
or Belfast. Very few of the ticket-of-leave men, I believe, remain in the colony. There are a
great many recently taking their tickets for Wangaratta, and it is my own suspicion that the
ticket-of-leave acts as a pass as far as Wangaratta, and then they have only about forty miles to
go over the Sydney boundary, and they are gone and we hear nothing more of them.
6. By the Chairman. —Do they not remain on the Ovens gold fields?—No; I had a
ticket-of-leave man returned to me the other day from Sydney. *
7. Could you tell how many ticket-of-leave holders have been sent throughout the country
in the last twelvemonth ?—I cannot now; the Committee shall have that information to-morrow.
I discharge annually free men and ticket-of-leave men about 500 from the department.
8. Can you tell what becomes of them after leaving you ?—I have nothing to do with
them; they fall into the hands of the police after they leave me, and I find that a great many of
them are gazetted as absconders. They are lost sight of and do not make their appearance.
9. Are they obliged to report themselves ?—Yes; they should report themselves.
„ 10. Were not the ticket-of-leavc men in New South Wales required to show themselves
once a month in the district to which they went?—Yes; our ticket-of-leave men are required to
report themselves immediately at the police office, but I very seldom hear that they have reported
themselves; and not having reported themselves, they are gazetted as absconders.
11. Are instructions given, in case they do not present themselves, to have them
re-arrested ?—lnvariably; I have some half dozen men now in the stockade who have been
re-arrested out of their districts; but the greater portion leave the country, and we do not hear
of them. Amongst the re-convictions there are very few of the ticket-of-leave class.
12. At what periods, and under what circumstances, are irons put on prisoners, and what
are the weights of the irons ?—Prisoners, when they reach the penal hulk I‘resident , are placed in
141 b. irons. Those irons are, I think, about 271bs. lighter than the irons used in the working
chain gang at Port Arthur. A man continues in those irons until, by his good conduct, I believe
that I can safely place him in lighter ones, as anything less heavy than 141 b. irons a man can
strike with the greatest facility. With regard to punishment irons, the heaviest pair there is in
the department is 401b5., and I think there is only one pair of 401 b. irons in the department,
361 b. irons are considered the heaviest class of irons that are issued, and I remember the
circumstances under which the 401bs. pair were made. It was owing to there being no lighter
iron on the station when the blacksmith was working them, and I think it was two-inch iron that
was used in the manufacture of the basil. The weights of the irons are 71bs., 141b5., 281b5.,
and 361bs. The 281bs. and 361bs. are both of the heavy class. The regular weight of heavy
irons is 361b5., many of the 71b. irons do not weigh above or 51bs.
13. At what periods and under what circumstances are those irons put on ?—When
prisoners are drafted in to the President they are invariably put on. At the stockades they are
not put on except under special circumstances.
14. What period must a man serve before he gets lighter irons ?—lt depends entirely upon
the class of man; I have men that I know that I would not remove the 141 b. irons from if they
were with me for six years. I have a man down at the Sacramento at this minute, that I should
be very sorry to remove the irons from. I know a great many of these men, and I know what
they have done elsewhere. I have known many of them for the last eighteen years. I have men
down there whom I have known sentenced three times to be hanged, and who are, at this minute,
absconders from Yan Diemen’s Land.


15. Are the irons put on as soon as the prisoners are removed from the dock to the
g ao l ?—X think not, unless they are under sentence of irons. They are put on when I receive
them.
16. By Mr. Hervey. —Those men having been sentenced in the ordinary way, without any
mention of irons in the sentence, if they had remained in the gaol, that addition to the punishment
would not have been inflicted, would it ?—I apprehend not.
IT. The irons are used to keep the men in better custody?—Yes; and it is absolutely
necessary.
18. By the Chairman. —Then it is the mere fact of the hulk existing that necessitates the
U3e of irons ?—Yes. If there were proper buildings the men could be restrained without irons at
all; but so long as you have the hulks so long you must keep the men there in irons.
19. Are the Committee to understand that where a prisoner is sentenced, say to seven
years on the roads, the first two years in irons, the prison authorities have power to keep the man
the whole seven years in irons ? —Those men are placed in irons irrespective of the sentence.
20. In order to their better security ?—Yes.
21. Then men not sentenced at all to irons, wear irons?—Yes. In every case I receive
the Governor’s authority for what I do.
22. Or his sanction for it afterwards ?—I have within twenty-four hours to report to the
Governor and receive his authority in every case.
23 By Mr. Hervey. —The great fact with regard to wearing irons on board the President
is, that men are sent there to undergo punishment in irons, which punishment, in irons, if they
had remained in gaol they would not have had to undergo ?—Yes.
24. With regard to prisoners on board the President, they being’confined in the solitary
way they are, and being surrounded by water, what are the facilities of escape which render the
use of irons necessary ?—I can adduce evidence to show that the prisoners on board the President
concocted a scheme to seize on the doctor’3 boat. I had information given me that several men
were going to feign to be sick and when their irons were off, they were to rush upon the sentry,
and take possession of the boat. If those prisoners were not in irons, I could not keep them a
week there.
25. Of course it is only when the prisoners get out upon deck that they would be
dangerous ?—The cell doers are very frequently open; we must open the doors at dinner time and
at cleansing time for inspection and so on.
26. But only one at the time ?—Yes, and then you have the men upon the deck ; besides,
there are two men on each deck, long-sentence men, employed as ward cleaners.
27. By the Chairman. —Are any of the warders, or officers, or overseers, men under
sentence ?—None whatever.
28. They are all free men ?—Yes, all free men ; I would not stop one minute if there
were prisoners set over those men. It was in consequence of that suggestion from the
Comptroller General that I should have prisoner officerg at Norfolk Island that I refused to remain,
and Norfolk Island was broken up.
29. By Mr. Hervey. —If those convicted are sent to gaol to undergo punishment, is it at
their request that they are sent to the President, or is it on account of the overcrowding of the
gaol?—lt depends upon the length of the sentence; I have sent a short sentenced man to the
hulk when very insubordinate. In one case which has been publicly mentioned, that of Michael
Ryan, I transferred him to the President; but he was a most refractory man and an old
acquaintance of mine in Norfolk Island, and not the free emigrant he is represented to have been.
30. To be transferred to the President was a greater punishment than that to which he
was sentenced ?—Yes.
31. By Mr. Miller. —Will you explain,the case of Ryan, which was mentioned by Dr.
Singleton at a recent public meeting ?—He was here with me by the name of Michael Ryan. I
knew him by the name of Mick Pheeney in Norfolk Island. He was a soldier, who served a
sentence at one time in Wooloomoloo gaol. He went home with his regiment from New South
Wales, and was transported by the Duchess of Northumberland for seven years for stealing,
together with his wife, fifty sovereigns. He was sent to Westbury probation station in Van
Diemen’s Land, where his conduct was so violent against the officers and visiting justice that he
was transferred from that place to Fingal, separate treatment cells; the officers there lost all control
over him, and he wfis sent to me at Norfolk Island to complete his sentence. He was one of the
most fearful ruffians I ever encountered in my life; his conduct was so violent, that I was unable
to allow him to work with the rest of the men, for fear he should violently assault them; and in
consequence of that he was employed in pulling cotton tree from the runs by himself; he was not
allowed to work with another man; his conduct was always of the most outrageous character. I
sent him up either in the Lady PranJclin or the Governor Phillip to Van Diemen’s Land, via
Sydney. On board the vessel he became so violent that they would not take him to Van Diemen’s
Land, but landed him in Sydney.
32. By Mr. Hervey —He was then free?—Yes. In Sydney he immediately received
another sentence, and the Van Diemen’s Land authorities were blamed by the Sydney people for
having imported such a scoundrel. He camo on here, and I think he has undergone three sen-
tences in the stockades; and he has been most violent and insubordinate and insulting to his
officers. Once, when I was at the Marine Stockade, when he was in solitary confinement, I walked
into his cell, and I saw that his face was completely raw on both sides, and noticing that it was
begrimed with black, I asked him what was the matter. He replied to me, “ Blown up in a
colliery, Mr. Price.” I said, “Blown up in a colliery; what do you mean?” “ Why,” he said,
li I shall work upon this when I get out.” “ Work upon it when you get out,” I said, “ what do


you mean ?” He said, “ Why, it is only a bit of coal, sir.” And he was grinding that into his
face to give him the appearance of having been blown up in a colliery.
33. He was not insane, was he ?—Not he; he was a real mad, wild Irishman. I have
hardly ever seen such a man; he is one of the most violent characters you can ever meet with. ]
very rarely meet with such a character. I have met with one or two such in my time, but they
are very scarce. After he became free he again got into the Marine Stockade, and there he
completely beat the officers, and they entreated me to remove him.
34. Where is the Marine Stockade ?—lt was at Williamstown, but it has been closed for
a considerable period. He asked me to take him to Collingwood, aud promised to behave himself
He went on quietly for a short time, but his conduct was so violent and his language so bias
phemous and horrible that he was recommended by the visiting justice for removal, and I tolc
him that I should remove him to the President; and he asked me to do so, and I did so.
35. Who was the visiting justice at Collingwood ?—Hr. Youl. Ryan was removed to the
President, and after he had undergone some three or four months there, I removed him to the
Success, and one day he came out when the gang was mustered and put his hand on my shoulder
and asked me to remove him back again to the stockade. I told him I would do nothing of the
kind, his conduct had been so bad at the stockade that I should retain him at the hulks until he
was free; he had then only a few months to remain; he then threw down his tools and told me
he would not do another stroke for the Government, and I might send him back to the President.
I told him I would comply with his request, and I did it.
36. By the Chairman. —What was he sentenced for the last time ?—I think it was for
drunkenness.
37. How long was he sentenced for ?—I think six months.
38. How long did he serve altogether in the stockade and hulks the last time ?—I cannot
say without referring to my papers.
39. The main features of Ryan’s statement, viz : that he was sentenced to six months’
imprisonment and kept for two years are correct ?—That may be so.
40. Are the Committee to understand that if this happened with Ryan it might possibly
happen to any other man who might be very noisy and boisterous from being badly used ?—I
never see men badly used ; the prisoners see me and see the visiting justice, and they can make any
complaints they like, and I will adduce evidence to show that the assertion of my refusing to
hear what the prisoners say is not true, for when I get down amongst the men I can hardly get
away again.
41. By whom were the punishments inflicted, in the case of Ryan, bringing up his time
to two years ?—By the visiting justice.
42. Is that legal ?—Yes; the Act of Council makes every sentence a man receives from a
visiting justice cumulative.
43. The punishment must be six months of good behaviour ?—Yes.
44. Hoes that also apply to summary convictions before a magistrate ?—Yes; all the
punishments are inflicted by the visiting justice, no other man has the power of extending a
prisoner’s sentence one minute
45. By Mr. Ilervey. —That man Ryan was sentenced to six months in gaol was he not ?
.He was sentenced to imprisonment and hard labor in the House of Correction and all our establish-
ments are proclaimed as houses of correction, and the Governor has the power of removing those
prisoners to the stockade and hulks.
46. How long has Ryan been at liberty now ?—I think he has been out about four
months; and during that time I have seen him in the gaol under another sentence. It was the
practice before I took office for the assistant-superintendents of the hulks and stockades to inflict
punishments of solitary confinement, but immediately on my taking charge of the department I
stopped it—it being illegal.
47. The visiting justice now only does that ?—lie is the only person that can pass
sentence.
48. By Mr. Thomson. —How often does the visiting justice visit the hulks ?—He is
obliged to visit them once a week.
49. He does not always do that, does he ?—Yes; I think you will find that he is pretty
regular.
50. It is the duty of the visiting justice to visit once a week ?—Yes; he is an officer
entirely independent of me, and he has instructions from the Chief Secretary’s office.
51. By Mr. Ilervey. —Had not Ryan cumulative sentences which brought up his original
sentence from six months to two years’ confinement in the penal establishment ?—I am not
certain what his extensions were, I cannot say, and I should be sorry to speak without the took,
but they were all legally inflicted.
52. By Mr. Thomson. —The extensions were all made by sentence of a magistrate ?
Every one.
53. Hoes the visiting justice invariably write the sentence himself?—l believe he does
generally, but I am not there to see, so I cannot speak positively.
54. By the Chairman. —Is there any possibility of your being mistaken as to the identity
of Ryan ?—Not the slightest; I believe if you once saw him in the street you must know him
again—he is a very peculiar man.
55. By Mr. McCombie. —lt is on old Sydney Act under which the sentence is lengthened,
is it not ?—No ; a Colonial Act.
56. By the Chairman. —Are all criminals treated alike without reference to their previous
habits or character. Supposing two men sentenced at the same time, one a strong man and the


other a small delicate man, would they both be set to do the same work, or have you any means
at your disposal to classify the prisoners in respect to their work ?—Yes; I have to a great extent,
where quarrying is going on and general labor.
57. You are aware that what would be only play to one man might be death to another ?
Yes ; and I brought that fully under the notice of the Government, when I recommended the
abolition of task work. Some men were in a position.to work off their time much quicker than
others who were nevertheless better conducted men, and' I suggested that good conduct and willing-
ness to do what a man might be put to should be taken into consideration.
58. Then again, with regard to solitary confinement, to some men that would only be a
rest and no punishment at all, whereas to other men that is excruciating murder—does the visiting
justice or medical officer ever take that into account ? —The medical officer has nothing to do with
solitary confinement unless he sees a man is unfit to undergo his punishment, and then he has
power to remove the man immediately. The medical officer has at all times power to remove the
irons.
59. By Mr. Miller. —Is there any corporal punishment under your rule ?—No ; and lam
perfectly satisfied that if such a thing occurred, I should hear of it immediately.
60. If such a thing has occurred, it has been against orders ?—Such a thing never has
occurred.
61. What are the punishments in use in your establishments ?—Solitary.confinement and
deprivation of rations. A lazy man is put upon the lazy ration, and if he continues to persist in
his laziness he is taken before a visiting justice, and he is the only person who can pass a sentence.
62. Are there any other punishments inflicted ? None, whatever.
63. Have you observed that it has been stated by the convict Melville, that there is a
species of torture allowed on board the President hulk—that a man is suspended in such a way,
for a number of hours, that he suffers a torture ?—Yes, I have read that statement of Melville’s.
64. Is it true ?—Melville himself will not say that it has occurred since I took charge of
the department, which was on the 25th of January, 1854. On the 26th of January, 1854,
Melville was taken before the visiting justice for insubordination and inciting to mutiny, to which
he pleaded guilty,—that offence occurred before my taking charge. He received a sentence of
one month’s solitary confinement, and while he was undergoing that sentence, I went into his cell
and had some conversation with him, pointing out to him the excessive folly of the way in which
I heard he had been conducting himself, and he promised that he would conduct himself better;
and from that hour to the present I never had to speak to him and never heard him reported, and
no officer ever found fault with him; and he has gone on peaceably and quietly, and not any of
those punishments to which Melville alludes have taken place since my having charge of the
department; they took place prior to my joining the department; I never heard of them and
know nothing of them.
65. No such punishment has taken place since you joined, which was on the 25th of
January, 1854 ?-—No ; I have seen Melville continually and spokea to him, and never heard the
slightest complaint from him since the 25th of January, 1854. Shortly after that he asked me
to be allowed books and a slate, pointing out that he did not know how to employ his mind. I
spoke to the officers about the matter, and they requested me not to allow him a slate; I asked
them why, and they said he would take the frame off and make a weapon of it. I went back and
talked to him, and I said, “ I would have some slates and try them.” On the Bth of May a requi-
sition for eighty slates was sent in tome for signature, but in consequence of what the officers
had said to me.about supplying these men with slates, I cut down the eighty to eight. I have the
original requisition. We were supplied with eight slates merely as a trial, and finding it worked
well I have supplied the men regularly with books and slates, and now they have a hundred;
every man has his slate and the use of the library books. I. beg to hand in a return of the
number of books and.slates at the various *penal establishments. — [The witness delivered in the
same —Vide Appendix D.~\
. 6®. To revert, to the punishments. It has been stated that men are subjected to be put
into. the shower bath in a way similar to the treatment of lunatics?—There is a shower bath, an.d
previous to my joining the. department, it was used, I believe, as a punishment, but I prohibited
it. Melville alludes in his defence to a soldier who was put into the shower bath, but you will
hear, from the officers in the regiment what description of man he was, and I will give you my
version of the 3tory. The first time I visited the President I heard a man making a most
tremendous row there in his cell.
67. By Mr. Hervey. —At what date was this?—A very few days after I joined. I went
into the cell and I saw this fellow stripped stark naked, and all his clothes torn up, and his cell
covered with his own filth ;• I, nevertheless, went into the cell and spoke to the man ; I got nothing
but the most abusive and disgusting language from him; I went out and said to the superintedent,
“Has that man been brought under the notice of the medical officer?” He said, “Yes, he has.”
I said, “ What does he think of him ?” He said, “ The medical officer believes he is only
feigning lunacy;” and a few days after the superintendent said, “ The medical officer wished that
man sent to the Success so as to be put into the shower bath ?” and the officer said, “ Can I take
him to the Success and give him a shower bath ? ” I said, “ No, Ido not do my business that way;
if the medical officer wishes me to remove that prisoner to the Success , he shall be removed upon
warrant,. but unless I get the medical officer’s certificate I shall not remove him;” I said, “You
will get into a. hobble some of these days, and it will be said you are putting men into the shower
bath as a punishment.” I have kept the documents connected with that case and have them
here.. [The witness delivered in the same —Vide Appendix E.~\ Upon the certificate of the
medical officer that man was removed to the hulk Success , there to be treated by the medical
Penal.— b.


officer. The next time I was in the Bay I saw that man, he was sane and he talked to me
rationally; I saw the medical officer and he told me, “ As I anticipated, that man has come round,
he was only feigning insanity.” I cannot say, of my own knowledge, whether the man was put in
the shower bath or not, but I believe he was.
68. If he were put in the shower bath, you cannot say whether it was by the doctor’s
orders or not?—No, but I believe it was by the doctor’s order.
69. If such a thing occurred it was the exception and not the practice ?—Decidedly.
70. Is that the only case in which the shower bath has been resorted to except for
cleansing purposes?—lt is always used under the doctor’s instructions.
71. Is it frequently resorted to by his instructions? —Not frequently. This man had
been fourteen times in prison before he came to us, as I saw by his indent; he was a very violent
man and was taken before the visiting justice and punished. One day I was at the hulk and I
went in, as usual, to his cell, talking to him, and I noticed that he had a bad cough, and I said,
“ Walker, you have a bad cough.” He said, “ Yes, I have.” I asked him “If the medical officer was
treating him.” He said, “ Yes, and he was getting on better.” A few days after that there was a
complaint against Doctor Wilkins, relative to some improprieties in furnishing medicine to the
free officers, and Dr. McCrea and I went down together to investigate it; after the investigation,
I asked Dr. McCrea to go round and visit the prisoners in the hulks with me, and we went round,
and when I came to Walker’s cell, I asked him how his cough was, he said his cough was very
bad still, I asked if the doctor was attending him, he said, “ Yes,” and, as I was going out of the
cell, he said, “ I have a swelling in the belly, sir.” I said, “ Have you spoken to the doctor about
it ?” “No sir,” he said, “ I have not.” I said, “ Let me look at it;” I turned round and made the
man take down his trousers, and I saw that his belly was very much distended, I said, “ What is
the matter?” He said, “It i 3 only the wind', it will go off.” I said to Dr. McCrea “ Just look at this
man’s belly?” He did so and said, 11 He is seriously ill, you must have him removed.” I said, “I
have no place to put a sick man in, he will be just os well treated in his cell as any where else,”
then I thought for a minute or two —I had no hospital belonging to the department—and I said
he can be removed to the Marine Stockade, and I gave orders to that effect, and I went on shore
and told Dr. Wilkins he had better go off and see him at once, and he did so. Two or three days
afterwards I saw this man in the Marine Stockade suffering from dropsy, of which he eventually
died; there was an inquest held on him and a post mortem examination made, and I ascertained
that the result of the post mortem examination was, that there was cancer of the liver induced
by habitual drunkenness. I saw Dr. Wilkins the other day and asked him if he recollected the
case and he said, “ Yes, and that he had a piece of the man’s liver left yet.”
72. Do you know whether Dr. Wilkins went on board that same night?—He left me to
go on board immediately.
73. 'By the Chairman. —Melville, in his defence, stated that certain warders and others
were kept back who would have given evidence favorable to him, and that he had reason to believe
they were dismissed, have any warders been dismissed since the 22nd of October last ?—Yes ; a
great number. There is an instruction, that if there is an outbreak of prisoners at night a rocket
should be thrown up; and when this outbreak of Melville and his associates occurred I had a
shipkeeper of the name of Berkeley, belonging to the hulk Lysander , a man who turned out to be
more timid than I thought he was, he went down to the store room to get a rocket, although it
was-between four and five o’clock in the afternoon, and he actually set fire to it between decks,
and when the rocket went off it fell into the oakum aud set fire to the oakum, and there was a cry
of “ fire,” and one of the warders was ordered on deck to give the alarm, the prisoners set up a
most fearful yell, they were all in their cells and began pulling down the fixings, getting out, and
they did remow two or three of the bars. There was a boat ordered to take off some of the
females from the hulk. This warder, who had not returned to his duty, jumped into the boat and
away he went from his post, and I dismissed him for it. There were two warders who left the
hulk at the very time they should have been there to have rendered assistance, they jumped into
the boat and away they went, and I dismissed them.
.74. Are there any inducements held out to prisoners that their time of servitude will be
shortened provided they can give the authorities notice of any contemplated outbreak or plan of
escape ?—No; I do not wish the Committee to understand, that if I gain intelligence that an
outbreak is coming off, and I ascertain that it really is coming off, that is, if I sec from my own
observation, or the observation of the officer, that such and such a thing is done, I should not
recommend the man who informed me to three or six months’ remission of his time. A short
time since, when some men went away from Pentridge, there .was an old Van Dieman’s Land
constable of the name of Lewis, who had urged on several men to abscond; they did abscond, and
Lewis, directly he saw the men absconding, came up to the station to give information. I
ascertained from the prisoner who was shot that Lewis was- the person who advised them to go,
and Lewis admitted that he did so; and I recommended to the Governor to send him to the hulk
President for the way in which he had conducted himself. There are but two or three who have
received any indulgence at all for giving information ; there is no necessity for it, their own evil
passions and hatred of one another will induce them to come and give me notice of what is
going on. . . . . ,
75. Do you ever receive any verbal or written communication in your department, other
than through the proper channel of your immediate subordinates ?—I have received one or two
anonymous letters. # . •
76. It has been stated in the] newspapers that you have been in the habit of receiving
letters and verbal messages from prisoners and warders about their superior officers, and about the
prisoners ?—lt is not true. I presume the question alludes to a letter written by Mr. Carter, the


late superintendent, who was dismissed for misconduct in the Collingwood Stockade; I presume
he alludes to my having sent an instruction which arose through Mr. Carter’s misconduct, feome
police information had been passed on through the Chief Warder and Mr. Carter to me, and that
information got wind. Mr. Carter did not know how to keep his own counsel, and the information
got wind ; he was drinking and could not be depended upon, and I gave an instruction that 1
would receive police information without the intervention ot the superintendent.
77. By Mr. Ilervey. What is the nature of police information ? —Men that have
committed crimes outside • I have received information of numbers of robberies and horse-
stealing of every description. . . „ .. x . ... , ,
78. By the Chairman.—ln yesterday’s Argus a list is given of punishments inflicted oil
a man since being in the hulks; one is, that a man was punished for looking over his cell, what is
that ?—I presume it is for climbing up the cell and looking over into the next one, if the case is
looked into: lean hardly suppose the magistrate would inflict a punishment upon a man for
looking over his cell, it would go further than that, it would be foi communicating. .
b 79. By Mr Ilervey. —Is it part of the hulk regulations that no man is permitted to look
through the bars of his cell ?—I will not say whether it is or not; I can hardly carry the minor
details of the regulations in my head. I presume it is promulgated in the regulations, because
the magistrate would hardly inflict the punishment unless there was a regulation for it.
80. By the Chairman— From the statistics of crime at home, it appears that one per cent
of the criminals are considered irreclaimable; do you consider a larger per centage than that are
irreclaimable here ?—I can hardly believe that that is a fair calculation. The English mcorn-
gibles were sent to me at Norfolk Island; and the first draft I received was sixty-four men.
Immediately after that that vessel was followed by the William Jar dine , and she had, I think,
some 136. . ... o T
81. This calculation alludes to the period since they have stopped transportation (—l
think it must be under-estimated. „ v
82. By Mr. McComhic. —You are the chief officer of the whole establishment. Xes.
83. Do you in your punishments look to the reformation of the criminals?—l do not
know what view the Committee may take of "reformation;” but if it is "reformation from pnn-
ciple, I am afraid we shall never be able to attain that. I believe the utmost "reformation we
shall ever attain with the prisoner population, speaking of the old prisoner population, not of the
vagrants and emigrants, who are an infinitely better class, is, that you will fix in their minds that
"honesty is the best policy.” I believe that is the highest principle you can bring them to.
84. Do not you think, that if the Government had carried out the recommendations ot the
Committee of the Legislative Council of 1852, and built larger premises, and attempted to carry
out the reformatory principle, the same as in America, it might have been done to some advan-
tage ?—The system of a great many small hulks is a bad system. I have brought the whole
matter under the notice of the Government; and I have suggested the propriety of a penitentiary
being built—that was approved last year, and the drawings were prepared m July 1855, tor that
penitentiary; and we have been quarrying and cutting stone for that purpose ever since ; we are
erecting a hospital now in the same way. In 1854 I applied for a hospital, there being no
hospital whatever, and the money was awarded. We were building workshops and wardeis
quarters up to the end of 1854 ; and when the clerk of the works was in a position to send out
material for the erection of the hospital in the commencement of 1855, he was informed that the
vote had lapsed and that no money was forthcoming. In 1855, as the Committee may reco ec ,
Sir Charles Hotham stopped all public works, I applied to him for the erection of the hospital,
and had two or three conversations with him, shewing him the wretched condition in which wo
were, that I actually had not got a place to put a dying man in. I was refused. I then went to
Dr. McCrea, and asked him to back my application. I said, "Well, McCrea, if Charles will not
listen to me, perhaps he will attend to your suggestion ; for God’s sake write him a letter about,
it.” He wrote a letter, I minuted it, and it was Sent in to Sir Charles Hotham It was still
refused. The Governor said he could not do it then ; and I was told to put it in the estimates for
1856. In 1856 the estimates did not pass till late in the month of March. It was then about
the month of July, I think, before any material was furnished me for the erection of the
hospital; but I continued cutting stone for it; and I am now putting up a building in which I
shall be able to place about 100 patients; and a better hospital, I will say when it is done, 1 do
not believe there will be in the colonies. It has been done under the sanction of the principal
medical officer. _ „
85. By Mr. Ilervey.—ls that at Pentridge ?—Yes. We arc up nearly to the first floor now.
86. By Mr. Miller.—Yon are going on with the penitentiary now ?—We are ; and there
will be ample accommodation for 1500 men there. _ . .
87. Is there a grant of money available for the work ? —There is an unexpended balance
with which they are now supplying me with lime, and timber, and iron ; and I thinx there 13
£IO,OOO put on the estimates for the material for next year. . > .
88. Is there any sum available for the present year ?—Quite sufficient to find material tor
the time. . . , -
89. Can you tell the Committee what amount of money you will require to go on with tor
the year 1857 ?—I think that about £IO,OOO is put upon the estimates.
90. Will that be sufficient to keep the prisoners employed with the work they are now
on ? I think it will. ... ,
91. Supposing the £IO,OOO to be voted, what progress do you calculate you will make
during 1857 ?—I think at the end of 1857 we shall have the cells and part of the boundary wall
erected.


92. And how long will it take you to complete the work ?—I think it will take three year
from the end of this year.
93. Is not that a very lamentable delay?—l do not see how it can he avoided; Captain
Pasley has the whole of the plans and the report of the clerk of the works.
94. Inasmuch as the erection of this penitentiary, with the view of providing proper
accommodation for the safe custody of the prisoners, was recommended as far hack as 1852, and has
not yet been carried out, would it not be very desirable to take the ordinary means, by free labor
for erecting a proper penitentiary; do you see any objection to that coufse, except that of expense
Yes. I should not be able to keep my prisoners away from the free people. I have 450 prisoners
at Pentridge and I should not know where to place them.
95. Will it take three years to complete the penitentiary ?—Yes.
96. By the Chairman. —Why do you not take the men from .the hulks to complete it. 1
could not house them.
97. By Mr. Miller. —During those three years this hulk system will have to go on ?—lt will
98. Can you suggest to the Committee’ any remedy for that ?—The only remedy I can
s u gg e st is, that you should expend close upon ,£400,000 for the erection of a penitentiary, which
if done by prison labor would cost about £30,000 to £35.,000.
99. By Mr. ffervey. —How many men are working at it?—The mechanics’ gang is from
120 to 160, including 77 stone cutters. * So soon as the hospital is done, which will be'very shortly,
that is in four or five months, I can throw 200 more men into the hospital, and that will enable
me to bring those 200 men more to work on the penitentiary.
100. By the Chairman. —\\ ould it be possible to modify or do away with the present
system of punishment in the hulks if you had a proper penitentiary ?—Yes.
101. Do you think there would be more chance of reforming the prisoners if they were in
a penitentiary ?—I must say that my hopes of reforming men are gone. I started once with the
expectation of reforming men and I have now many man who will not thieve again, and will not
come back as criminals, but they are not morally reformed.
102. What trades have you at work at Pentridge?—l have twenty-seven tailors. The
whole of the police clothing is made at Pentridge. I have a gang of thirty-two or thirty-three
shoemakers, I have eleven forges at work, I have a great number of fitters, carpenters and wheel-
wrights, tinsmiths, plumbers, painters, turners and coopers.
103. Do you not think that employing the men in those trades tends to give them
industrious habits ?—When I look round and see the men, I have men who could get their pound
a day if they pleased, if they were out of prison ; I do not think it is from want of knowing how
to labor that they have taken to thieving. I believe that in about another thirty years there will
be a very different class of prisoners here to what we have at present, but the class of prisoners
we have here now must be kept down by a strong hand.
104. Do you not think they could be taught habits of industry ?—I think if any one
visited Pentridge they would find habits of industry there inculcated. I have been a great deal
amongst prisoners and I never saw men \frork so cheerfully as they do with me.
105. What is your opinion of the solitary system as practised in Philadelphia? Ido not
approve of the solitary system. I think in the penitentiaries at home they have been obliged to
do away with the solitary system and place the men in association.
* 196. Is that the case at Pentonville ?—Yes; 1 believe they have placed the men in
association there.
107. By Mr. Hervey. —As the principal superintendent of Penal Establishments you
would not recommend any more rapid erection of the penitentiary than you have spoken of?—I
should be very glad to see the building up.
108. Would you back it by a recommendation ?—I do not see how the work is to be done
without mingling the free and the bond. I have now 400 prisoners on the work and if there were
400 free men amongst these prisoners how should I be able to manage them.
109. Is the hospital a part of the general plan ?—Ye3. The whole of it has been planned
out since July, 1855.
110. And the works will be carried out according to those plans?—Yes. The cells will
be the next work to be undertaken directly the hospital is up.
111. And there is no plan which you could adopt of increasing the number of laborers
from the hulks or stockades?—Yes; as soon as the hospital is up I can house 200 more men.
If I had the means of housing and feeding the men at Pentridge, I could take 300 men from the
Collingwood stockade.
112. What would be the cost of erecting-a temporary housing; would it add so materially
to the whole cost of the construction as to make it undesirable, or would it be quite a reasonable
rate of outlay that would accommodate those 300 men ?—I would rather consult the clerk of the
works on that matter.
113. You could apply that extra labor if you had it?—l could apply a great deal of the
labor, but I should have to open fresh quarries, and it takes a long time to get a good face to a
quarry; you cannot put in 100 men at once upon a quarry, it must be opened by degrees.
114. By the Chairman. —What would there be to hinder the free men from doing the
building and the bondmen doing the quarrying and dressing ?—I have about seventy stone-cutters
at work now, and four men will lay all they do, so that you would only offer employment to a
very few free laborers if that system were adopted.
115. By Mr. Miller. —Are the buildings and works carried on under Captain Pasley’s
direction?—Yes. I am consulted as to the requirements for the accommodation of the prisoners,
and I consult the chief medical officer as to the ventilation and the amount of space.


116. Was there any estimate of the cost of the construction of the whole building made
do you know ?—There was a rough estimate of £86,000, independently of the prisoners’ labor and
rations.
117. By Mr. Thomson. —Do the prisoners receive any religious instruction ? —Yes, they
have school books and slates furnished on the requisition of the religious instructor or a clergyman.
118. By the Chairman. —Do you not consider that the cells in the Success and President
on the lower deck, are calculated to injure a man’s health if he is in solitary confinement in those
cells for any lengthened period ?—I think not. I think you will find that the number of deaths
and amount of sickness is less in my department than almost anywhere in the world. Only two
men have died since I have been at Pentridge, which i 3 close on three years. I have 450 men
there; one died the day before yesterday, from dropsy, and the other from strangulated hernia,
and neither of the men who died there had been afr the hulks The date of my first report of
the necessity of a hospital was the 9th of March, 1854. The sanction to the expenditure for the
works was given on the 30th June, 1854; and on the 21st July, 1855, His Excellency declined
to sanction the expenditure, intending to consider the subject of penal buildings. On the 15th
August, 1855, the letter of Dr. McCrea and my minute, soliciting authority to erect the hospital,
was forwarded to His Excellency, and which was refused on the 29th of August, 1855. In
January, 1855, I requested authority to use postage stamps for prisoners’ letters, as I believed it
would have a good effect, if any good were left in the prisoners, that they should be allowed to
communicate with their friends. That was not acceded to, as the auditor reported that it could
not be done. On the 16th November, 1855, I requested that some relief might be afforded to
prisoners who had been discharged. I saw the necessity of it, as several men were leaving me
almost destitute, and I thought they must revert to crime, and when prisoners were going away I
frequently had to give them clothing myself, and money out of my own pocket.
119. By Mr. Ilervey. —Did that application meet w r ith no favorable reception?—lt did
not. All the prisoners’ monies were confiscated, and I suggested that any man who was convicted
and came into the hands of the Government with any sum under £5 should be allowed to retain
it, and I was told that it could not be done; and the prisoners generally came to me without a
shilling. I have known some which I considered very hard cases, where large sums were taken
by the Government.
120. Do you know what becomes of that money ? —lt is paid into the general revenue.
121. By Mr. Stewart. —When prisoners leave you, do they leave in the prison dress ?
No. I have never known a prisoner leave me, except one, in the prison dress, and I should like
to mention the circumstances connected with that case. I have had men sent up to me in prison
dress who had no means of obtaining any other clothing, and I have purchased it for them myself.
Before I came to the department all prisoners going to the hulks had everything taken from them
and destroyed or thrown overboard—everything, good clothing and all, was destroyed. Directly
I found that out I stopped it. The prisoners’ clothing at Pentridge was under a tent in bundles,
the tent was on the ground and I daresay there was a heap of clothing five feet high, and the
whole mass was saturated, and completely rotten and smoking. I then had to apply to the
Government for authority for the materials to put up a building in which to place the prisoners’
clothing, and now, when prisoners come, a list is taken of everything they have, and their
clothing is washed and put away, so that they can have it again when they go away. There is a
case which has been before the public recently of a man named Martin, who is said to have been
put ashore at Williamstown and discharged in prison clothing, and who was taken to the hospital
with his toes rotting off. Martin was not discharged at Williamstown. Every man is discharged
at my office in Lonsdale-street, and Martin was brought to my office for discharge. Seeing the
man in prison dress with 8.0. on it, which is not our mark, I immediately expected that he had
been sent to me with gaol clothing, the B O. being the Board of Ordnance mark and that
clothing being in use at the gaol. I said to him/ “ How come you in gaol clothing?” He said,
“ This is what I was discharged in from the gaol to the hulk Lysander.” I said, u Where is
your clothing?” He said, “Itisup at the gaol.” I said, Ido not believe you have any
clothing. I daresay you came in covered with filth, and they supplied you with these slops at the
gaol.” I said to the warder, a Goup to the gaol with this man and inquire for his clothing;”
and I said to Martin, “ If it should turn out, as I suppose, that your clothes have been destroyed
at the gaol, you come up to Pentridge and I will give you a suit.” I never saw the man after-
wards, and I ascertained the warder did as I directed him, went to the gaol with him, and
ascertained that he had no clothing; but the man never came near me and never came to Pent-
ridge, and I never saw anything of him, or heard anything of him, until I heard that he was
picked up and taken to the hospital.
122. By the Chairman.—lf a prisoner has a complaint to make, who is the proper officer
to make it to ?—He tells the superintendent that he wishes to make a complaint, and the super-
intendent passes it on to me; and if he does not do so, of course every time the visiting justice
comes round he has full power to complain.
123. By Mr. Ilervey. —ls it part of the visiting justice’s duty to visit each cell?—Yes.
There is a complaint here [ producing the Penal Hulk President Visitors’ Book ] against me,
“ prisoner James Morgan, 145, desires to lay a charge against John Price, Esq., Inspector General
of P.E., for forwarding prisoner Joseph Newman to Sydney, under the plea of his being 1 an
absconder from N.S.W., Mr. Price knowing at the same time that Newman had been guilty of
rape and robbery, for which offence he had never yet been tried, but his accomplice had been
executed.” This man had given me the information, and I told him that the prisoner had been
handed over to the police, and brought up at the City Court, and that the woman had been sum-
moned but she would not identify him, and that the magistrates discharged him. I believed
Penal —c.


him to be an escaped convict from New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land ; but I could not
find out his right name. The prisoner Morgan had been in possession of that statement from me
some days before he laid that complaint before the visiting justice. Newman had been handed
over by me to the detective police; and the woman had been summoned, but she refused to
recognise him and the man was discharged, and this man Morgan knew, this at the time he made
the complaint, for I had told him of it.
124. By the Chairman. —Supposing a prisoner makes a complaint to Lieutenant Pascoe,
is it his duty to forward it to you or to the Government ?—lt is his business to investigate it, and
immediately report upon it to the Government; and it is his business to enter it in the book.
125. Supposing Lieutenant Pascoe thinks there is anything in a statement made to him,
what course does he adopt?—He forwards his report to the Government, and the Government
send it to me. I have nothing to do with the visiting justice. He communicates with the Govern-
ment. He does not communicate with me ; and if the visiting justice makes a remark in the
book he immediately sends a transcript of it to my office, and when there is any complaint the
Chief Secretary sends it on to me for examination
126. By Mr. Hervey. —Are the complaints numerous from the prisoners in the hulks? —
More numerous relative to their sentences than anything else.
127. Very few with regard to ill treatment?—Very few. They complain occasionally of
their rations, but recently they have complained very seldom of their rations. I had a complaint
to-day of the potatoes, but I think it is almost the first complaint I have had, and it is what we
have a right to expect at this season of the year. I had a great deal of trouble last year with the
contractor, we had very bad rations, but this year we have had very good rations.
128. The chief complaints are with regard to the food ?—Yes.
129. From your evidence it appears that a man may be sentenced without reference to
irons, and that in order to carry that sentence out, the man is put in irons because he is obliged
to be put into a hulk ?—Yes
130. That is no part of the original sentence ?—ln some cases not.
131. That is the fault of the existence of hulks?—Yes.
132. Do not these men complain of being subjected to a tyranny which their sentences do
not embrace?—Yes, but they are generally men of a very refractory class.
133. Do not you think it leads to exasperation. Part of the punishment appears to be
that on transference from the gaol to the hulk President the men are placed in irons ?—I do not
think it leads to exasperation, because we have a great many, men who pass through this treatment
without committing any offence.
134. If penitentiaries existed would these men have to go through the same amount of
solitary confinement in order to carry out their sentences ?—I think in many cases of men of
outrageous character, those men should be kept in separate treatment, but not solitary; they
should be allowed to associate three or four together in the yard, but I think they should always
be kept separate.
135. The use of irons in the President is for the purpose of breaking the spirit of the
men, that they may be tractable in all time coming ?—Yes, some of the men are more like wild
beasts than men, when they come to us.
136. And that does so subdue them as to make them tractable ?—lf you leave them to
themselves quietly they come to; there is no mistake about it.
1 37. Have you ever tried the reverse system of putting them at once to hard labor ?
When first I came I found that none but short-sentence men were kept at the stockades I think
there were none with sentences over seven years at the stockades. I took several ten-years’ men
to Pentridge, and I very nearly lost them and with them a good many more men; they were
most outrageous and violent in their conduct, and I hardly knew how to manage them, and I
know pretty well what to do with men, and I had to transfer those men to the hulks, I could not
hold them.
138. Were not the buildings so temporary that they almost offered a temptation to the men
to attempt to escape ? —One of the buildings out of which they went was not very temporary. You
have no idea of what the strength of a building must be to retain an old convict.
139 But the ship President would retain the men, would she not, without their being
placed in irons ?—Not a week.
140. By the Chairman. —What is the use of putting a man in irons when he is in a cell
almost below water mark ?—You would scarcely imagine it possible that, in the case of Melville,
the day after he was confined after this last outbreak, there was a long knife found on the top of
his cell. Men’s lives would not be safe unless the prisoners were ironed.
141. How did that knife get there ? —I cannot tell how it got there; my impression is
that it was placed there by one of the men engaged in cleaning the ship, and I think it was
placed there with a view of enabling Melville to kill one of the warders.
142. Of course all the men sent to the hulk from the gaol are well searched ?—Yes; but
those men have always got means of communicating, they know as well as possible at the present
moment, what is being done out here; they know of all these meetings, and of everything that
has been said just as well as you do; they know everything as fast; and I can get more news
from the President than I can from any other establishment.
143. What is the use of putting irons on the men down in the cells ?—To restrain the
men from violence ; they would take the officers’ lives in a minute.
144. That is from the small guard there is on board ?—Yes.
145. The guard is not sufficient to prevent an outbreak without the men being ironed ?
They would kill the officers, some of them, if they were certain of being hanged for it. On one


occasion some of the men on the deck intended taking the doctor’s boat, which I suppose is the
fleetest boat in the bay. When the medical officer comes off, the superintendent generally goes
down with him, and the officers go below with him, leaving merely the sentry on deck; and those
men intended seizing the doctor’s boat, overcoming the sentry, hoisting sail and making off.
Not long ago, I received an intimation from the detective police that the prisoners meant rushing,
and in going over the hulk Sacramento X looked round and found all the men but four were in
irons. I went up to the gaol afterwards, and a prisoner I had known for many years said he
wished to speak with me privately, and he said, “ Mr. Price, the prisoners at the Success are
going to make a rush of it; they are either going to make a rush of it, or kill you; they have not
determined themselves which they will do.” I had been changing the men’s irons at the time—
putting on a lighter class of irons; indeed I was putting a good many of the new men in 71b.
irons. Next time I went down to the Success there were about two-thirds of the gang stepped
out to have their irons struck and lighter ones put ou. I immediately refused, and one man
began to blackguard me, and I said : “Well, I shall change your irons and give you a heavier
pair.” From the information I received I knew that those men meant making a push at all
hazards and getting away.
146. By Mr. Thomsen. —Where were they working ?—Down in the quarry. Until you
have a sufficient penitentiary you must keep those men ironed, and keep them in a heavy class of
irons; 71b. irons are no restraint to a man.
147. But the whole proceeding Is absolutely illegal ?—lt is not illegal. I have full
authority to do it. The Governor has power to make regulations ; and the Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, did make these regulations, that the men should be in irons.
148. By Dr. Tierney. —Would there be no possibility of making cells at Pentridge, so as
to carry on the works there with the men from the hulks ?—The cells are thfe next work to be
undertaken, and I think it is very possible we might get those cells up in less than three years.
149. And you might get the very refractory people from the President hulk put there? —
I think those refractory criminals might be got into the cells.
The witness handed in the following papers :
Hours of labor at the Penal Establishments, Victoria.—( Vide Appendix F.)
Description and dimensions of cells on board the Penal Hulk President, with plan.—( Vide
Appendix G.)
Description and dimensions of certain cells on board the Penal Hulk Sacramento. —( Vide
Appendix H.)
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to Monday next, at two o'clock.
MONDAY, Bth DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present :—Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Hervey, Mr. Keogh, Mr. Miller,
Mr. Patterson, Mr. Stewart, Dr. Tierney.
Crawford Pasco, Esq., R.N., examined.
150. By the Chairman. —You are visiting justice of the penal hulks ?—Yes.
151. Have you any written instructions under which you act ?—Yes.
152. Have you those with you ?—I have not.
153. How long have you been visiting justice ?—From the first establishment of the hulks,
nearly four years ago I think.
154. What course do you pursue when prisoners make complaints against warders or
overseers ?—Any complaint that a prisoner has to,make to me I go fully into, to see whether there
are any grounds for such complaint, and whenever their complaint is well grounded I forward the
same to the Chief Secretary.
155. Direct?—Direct.
156 Does the Chief Secretary always answer those reports; what answer do you usually
get ?—Simply an acknowledgment of the letters. The only acknowledgment has generally been
that they have been referred to the Inspector General and there it ends. Any consequence
arising out of my reports I am always ignorant of.
157. How many officers are there in the hulk, not in number, but in grade ?—Superin-
tendent, chief warder, and assistant warder, who is a sergeant, two corporals, who are lockers,
and I am not sure of the number of warders.
158. Are those always free men ?—So far as I am aware; that is to say, at all events, free
at the time, not men under sentence or tickets-of-leave. I have heard of there being some men
who were formerly prisoners.
159. Do those men ever get promotion, or once a warder always a warder? —No: warders
may rise to be superintendents of hulks.
160. Have you ever known a prisoner to be punished at any time without the intervention
of the visiting justice ? —I only know of one instance in which I had cause to complain, and which
was admitted by the Inspector General to be a punishment. I commented upon it rather strongly,
and his minute was that the punishment should not be so great in future.
161. What was the name of that prisoner?—John Thompson.
162. You complained about it? —Yes, to the Chief Secretary.
163. And the answer was, that it should not be done again ?—No; I got no answer, as far
as the Chief Secretary was concerned.


164. You visit the hulks once a week ?—At least; generally more frequently.
165. If a prisoner committed a fault the day after you are there, is he not punished until
your next visit ?—He should not be.
166. Is he not putin solitary confinement awaiting your arrival?—No; he is kept in
from the works on the reduced ration awaiting trial.
167. Then he is put in a cell and ironed ?—They are all ironed. His irons are not put
on in consequence of his coming in for trial.
168. Has the Inspector General the power of putting men in irons ?—I never have been
made acquinted with the authority for it.
169. He does do it ?—Yes.
170. You do not know whether he has authority for it or not?—No. I have frequently
brought it under notice, but never arrived at any conclusion upon it.
171. Have you ever known the case of a man sentenced to eight years on the roads being
put in irons in the hulks ?—Many.
172. Is that the general rule?—Yes; I know very few prisoners that are not in irons,
though hut few are sentenced to irons.
173. The Committee have it in evidence that men are frequently put in irons, not on
account of the crime they are then suffering for, but because they have been previously known to
some of the authorities over them as doubly or trebly convicted characters, or supposed to be such ;
do you know that to be the case ?—I cannot say. I have no idea what the irons may have been
put on for.
174. What is the proper course that a prisoner ought to pursue if he has a complaint to
make; to complain direct to you or to the warders ?—When I visit the hulks weekly, the prisoners
have the opportunity of speaking to me directly; but if anything occurs in the interim of my
visits, they should, through the officers who visit them, express a wish to see me; and then it
would be the duty of the superintendent to send for me.
175. Do you know how often the medical man ought to visit?—Every second day, I
think; but lam not aware what his instructions are; that has been his usual practice.
176. Do you know if prisoners, warders, or overseers are ever in the habit of giving
information to the Inspector General direct, and not through the proper channel ?—I have under-
stood that prisoners have done so. When I say that prisoners should let their complaints go through
me, Ido not say they have no right to make a complaint to the Inspector General; they are so
far under him that they may have many things to communicate to him ; for instance, their removal
from one hulk to another, or up to Pentridge, would be in the hands of the Inspector General.
177. Are any inducements held out to prisoners to give information direct to the heads of
the department of any escape concocted, or rushing ?—I have known indulgences granted for such
services after they were performed. I never heard of any inducement being held out to them, but
I believe it is pretty generally understood among them, and they give information with that view.
178. Then a complete system of espionage is going on from one prisoner to another? —
Yes, I should say there was.
179. Do you know anything of the case of Eyan, who got six months for drunkenness and
beating a constable ?—I do not recollect the particular prisoner.
180. Are you' aware that if the magistrates seutence a man to six months’ imprisonment
Here, under their summary jurisdiction, it is quite in the power of the authorities to keep him for
six months in irons?—l do not know about the power.
181. Do you know whether they do it or not; have you ever met with such a case ?—I
have known magisterial sentences to be passed in the hulks, and while in the hulks the prisoners
are liable to be ironed.
182. And if they rebel they are liable to other sentences cumulative upon their first
sentence ?—Yes.
183. What is considered to be hard labor when awarded as a punishment ?—A man may
be sentenced to six months’ hard labor, and he is then put to such work as there may be for him
on the public works of the Colony.
184. Is it understood that any man who gets six months’ imprisonment is necessarily to be
put to hard labor ?—Yes. The magisterial sentence is generally to hard labor.
185. Have you ever remonstrated to the Government upon the treatment prisoners were
receiving, either verbally or by letter ?—Do you mean generally ?
186. Yes, or in particular cases; you have mentioned one particular case?—Yes.
187. But generally, have you remonstrated in general terms?—Yes: in the very early
establishment of the system I recollect speaking of the system being anything but reformatory.
188 Is there any examination of prisoners made when they come on board the hulks so
as to classify them ?—That lam not aware of. I have no right to interfere with the prisoners
beyond such complaints as are brought either by them or against them, and taking cognizance
also of the general order of the prisons, cleanliness, and so on, and inspection of the prisoners.
189. Do you know the ease of a man McGuire, who was said to be out of his mind, who
is now understood to be in the hulks ?—I do not think he is in the hulks
190. Would you furnish the committee with a copy of your reports to the Chief
Secretary ?—I have them here—[ producing the same']. The first reports are copied in full;
latterly, the ordinary details are as usual, and are left out; and when there are any complaints of
prisoners I have given the details. I have also here a copy of the depositions taken in the case of
the prisoner John Thompson—[ producing the same].
191. By Mr. Hervey. — It appears to be the practice, that, after prisoners receive sentence,
the gaols are cleared by sending numbers of prisoners to the hulks ?—Yes : there or elsewhere.


192. They are drafted first to the President, are they not?—The President is called the
punishment hulk. The Inspector General has the disposal of the prisoners when once in his
hands, and if he thinks a man is an unsafe and refractory character, he will send him at once to
the President, although a short-sentence man, subject to Governor’s approval. .
193. And during the first part of his residence at the hulks he is put in irons? —That I
believe is also in the hands of the Inspector General; but they are all in irons, with very few
exceptions. I think, without any exception, they have all been in irons in the Success and
the President. . . ...
194. Do you consider that there is any possible necessity that those men should be put in
irons from any cause that you are aware of? —No.
195. You can suggest no cause why they should be put in irons ?—No : particularly in
the President, where each man is locked in a separate cell.
19G. You do not think it necessary for the safety of the hulk ?—No : I think when the
men are in the cells they are perfectly secure. Any amount of irons or no irons at all could
make no difference, and when they are let out for excercise they are put in handcuffs, in addition
to the leg irons already on.
197. From your knowledge of the hulks do you consider that the prisoners could be safely
guarded without the necessity of ironing them ?—I cannot see the object of irons when the
men are not out at work. When 200 men are on shore at work under a small guard, irons may be
absolutely necessary. _ .
198. You think the men at the President would be quite as safe without irons as with
them ?—I think so. .
199. You think very little of the insecurity of the hulks as a necessity for ironing ttie
men ?—I think there is less cause probably for irons in the hulks than if the men were in a
stockade. * ,
200. From your visits to the hulks, especially the President, where the men are connnca
on an average for from two to three years, with an occasional hour s exercise only, do you ever n
the effect of the ironing to be exasperating to their minds in any way ? No; Ido not think 1
have noticed the effect of the irons to be such, insomuch as the poor wretches seem to become used
to it. .... 9 v
201. Have there been no complaints made from the fact of their being in irons. Yes;
there have been complaints that they have been suffering in irons when they were not sentenced
to . _ __
202. By tie Chairman. —Has that been a frequent cause of complaint ?—Yes.
203. By Mr. Ilervey.— Have you submitted those complaints to the proper quarter?—Yes;
where they have occurred they will appear in the reports which I have handed in.
204. In visiting the hulks, do you generally at each visit call at each cell ?—There is a
general inspection; but, sometimes, having other duties to perform, I have not all the day clear.
When I have time to devote to it, I visit each cell; but I invariably go round the decks, and the
prisoners know that I am therq; and any prisoner can call my attention if he wishes to see me.
205. Your object is to see as to cleanliness and proper treatment, and to hear any com-
plaints ?—Yes. , ,
206. Have the complaints been very numerous, and are they still so : lhere nave been
many complaints. , ,
207. And you are still liable to hear many complaints ?—Yes; I must confess they have
been more numerous within the last fortnight. ,
208. Have they been of a more substantial character ?—No; I think the complaints have
become more numerous now from the idea that there will be more attention paid to them.
209. Could you give the Committee any idea of the general character of the complaints
that are made to you. Are they as to the warders treatment ?—No : those complaints have been
very seldom well grounded. On investigating them, I have found that the men were merely
feeling the acuteness of discipline, and had no just cause of complaint.
210. Could you, in a general way, say what is the nature of the complaints —do they
partake of one character, as to insufficiency of food, for example?—No; there is very seldom any
complaint as to food. There is one complaint which is very common with them : those who are
second-conviction-men are not entitled to a certain indulgence which is open to those who have
been convicted for the first time—that indulgence being a remission of sentence; and some of the
prisoners complain that they are worked as second or third-conviction men, having only been
convicted previously under the <l Vagrant Act” or for drunkeness, and not for felony.
211. Presuming the men were known to the Inspector General as being old convicts in
some other Colony, would that affect their sentence ?—No: that is merely marked against their
original sentence as being bond. , . ,
212. The case which you have now mentioned to the committee is the only one in which
you have had any serious complaint against any officer of the hulks for ill treatment ? That is t e
only one.
213. Have you seen no case of ill treatment where you have found it necessary to remon-
strate, but not sufficient to warrant a report ?—Yes, I have sometimes mentioned to the war ers
that I thought they were rather exacting and calculated to provoke ill conduct.
214. What relief have the prisoners for their minds during their confinement, can they
read ?—Yes for some time past they have had books. . . .. ,
215. Can they read those books on the lower deck ?—Yes, occasionally; it is lighter on
one side of the vessel than the other. _ > , T r .
216. Do the prisoners have to resort to some expedients for increasing the light. it they
Penal. — d.


just set their tin pot over the scuttle it acts as a reflector and increases the light, but it is not
absolutely necessary on the sunny side, on the shady side there is scarcely any light; that is a thing
that could not be well counteracted.
217. Do you consider the ventilation good?—I have called the attention of the medical
officer to it once or twice, but we have never found any ill effect from the want of ventilation.
218. Are the men generally healthy?—Yes.
219. After serving in the President for several years, are the men passed to the other
hulks as a relaxation from solitary confinement ?—That I believe depends on the Inspector
General.
220. Have you known men kept in the President ever since you have been visiting
justice ? —Yes, there are some there who have been therefrom the beginning, with the exception
of when the hulk was under repair.
221. Can you state any reason why that was necessary ?—I cannot.
222. Was there anything in their conduct to lead you to think it necessary ?—No. I think
among the correspondence there will be found some complaints from the men for being in the
President so long. A man who has a certain sentence, say seven years, will be due by good
conduct for indulgence, say in four years; but if he goes to the President, so long as he is there,
I am informed, he cannot apply to reduce his punishment, and the Inspector General might choose
to keep him there for the whole seven years. I have been given to understand that while prisoners
are in the President they cannot apply for their indulgence.
223. Is it the fact that some of the long-sentenced men are still on the President who
were there when you first became visiting justice?—l think so.
224. Have they been worse conducted men than those who have been allowed to pass to
labor ?—I think not, I think some of the most refractory have been removed to the Success.
225. Why ? —That I cannot say.
226. That does not come into your department at all ?—Not at all.
227. So that a man who from your own knowledge was very well conducted you would
have no power to recommend for relaxation by passing him to another hulk ?—I am not aware
that the removal from the President to the other hulks is in any way dependent upon their good
conduct. I may recommend.
228 Nor do you know what it is dependent upon ?—No.
229. There is no doubt as to the stringency of the punishment at the President being
very different to that of any other hulk?—lt is different inasmuch as it is extremely monotonous.
230. The prisoners are not allowed to labor there ?—No, each man is in a separate cell and
has his hour’s exercise.
231. And being passed to another hulk is relaxation in the eyes both of the prisoners and
of the authorities ?—Yes.
232. So that there is not a doubt of the penal discipline at the President being greater
than that at the other hulks? —She is termed “ the punishment hulk” I believe officially.
233. By Mr. Miller. —Had you any experience in the management of convicts before you
arrived here ?—Never.
234. You have been in the navy ?—Yes, nearly twenty-seven years.
* 235. How long have you been in charge of the hulks as visiting magistrate ?—From
their first establishment —four years.
236. What are the punishments in the navy which you have been accustomed to see
inflicted? —Corporal punishment in olden times, but it is very seldom resorted to now.
237. Corporal punishment is still in use in the navy, is it not ?—Yes; it has never been
entirely abolished.
238. How many lashes have you seen inflicted at the time ?—Four dozen is the extent.
239. Is corporal punishment allowed on board the hulks ?—No.
240. What are the punishments there?—Solitary confinement is the only punishment
which can be given in the President, with the reduction of rations, and a certain number of days
in a small cell, on bread and water, and without any light.
241. Are you aware whether or not the men on board the President are selected for the
bulks as being the worst of the bad ?—I am not aware of that, but lam under that impression.
242. Do you know anything of the antecedents of those men—the prisoners generally in
the hulks?—Yes; their original condition is recorded on their tickets. Many of the men in the
President and the Success were originally bond.
243. Is there any register kept in the hulks showing the crimes the prisoners have com-
mitted fo merly ?—No ; I think not.
244. And showing their propensities and characters ? —I am not aware of any such record.
245. Then you can form no idea of the character of the men on board further than their
conduct comes before you?—Just so. I have nothing whatever to refer to, to give me any such
information.
246. Do you look on those men as capable of being reformed ?—Unquestionably.
247. You think there is still a possibility of reforming them?—l think so. I can never
conceive any human being out of the reach of that.
248. Generally speaking, you think that no man gets so bad as not to be capable of
reformation ?—I have seen evidences in those prisoners of certain feelings which would induce
that hope.
249. By the Chairman.— Do you not consider that the present system of prison discipline
is almost calculated to destroy any hope of reformation ?—I have frequently stated so.
250. By Mr. Miller. —Are you aware that it was the practice in England to select from


tho prisons there certain men as being utterly incorrigible and send them to Norfolk Island ?
Yes. I have understood Norfolk Island to be the receptacle for incorrigibles.
251. But you do not think any man incorrigible ?—lt may .have been the opinion of those
that sent them to Norfolk Island that they were incorrigible; but I would not place even them
outside the line of hope of reformation.
252. Are not some of those prisoners at the hulks now men who have been sent to
Norfolk Island ?—Some of them are.
253. And you have found that the system pursued at present towards those men does not
reform them?—They have a better means of reformation than they had formerly, because of the
introduction of books into the hulk.
254. What means of moral and religious instruction is afforded to those men on board the
hulks ?—They have a library, which is passed round in proper turn; and they have had the
visitations of a religious instructor during the last two years.
255. What religious instructors are there ?—There is only one appointed one, but there
are several who have visited.
256. Clergymen ?—Ministers of different denominations.
257. Are they allowed access to the prisoners?—Yes.
258. Have you observed what effect the visits of those clergymen have had upon the
men ? —I cannot say that I have had reason to remark that those who have given most satisfaction
to the instructor have been less frequently before me; nor have I, on the other hand, remarked
the contrary.
259. Then, as far as you have observed, it has had no effect? —I would not say that the
effect is visible.
260. Have you observed any of those men discharged from the hulks? —No ; I have never
seen them. They are never discharged direct from the hulks. When a man is approaching his
time of discharge he is returned to Pentridge.
261. Have you had any opportunity of ascertaining whether those who have been
discharged have become reformed members of society or not ?—The only ones I have ever met
with who have been discharged have been those who have returned immediately to the hulks.
262. Having committed fresh crimes ?—Yes. Those are the only men I have met with
since.
263. By the Chairman. —How many have there been of those who have returned again
during the four or five years you have been there ?—Not many. I have seen a few only.
264. By Mr. Miller. —Do you think men could be kept in safe custody on board the hulks
without irons ?—ln the hulks I think they could, but not in the stockades.
265. You think on board the President they might be safe without irons?—l think so.
266. Are you aware whether that is an opinion entertained by men who have been
accustomed to guard and keep those prisoners, warders and other men who have been in charge of
convicts ?—I have never heard a similar opinion expressed by those who have been accustomed to
the convicts.
267. Have there been religious instructors and others visiting the hulks whose visits have
been forbidden at any time?—None have come within my knowledge; that is to say, I have never
been informed of it.
268. You are not aware that the visits of some of those parties have been prevented because
it interfered with the discipline of the prisoners, that those parties did not confine themselves to
religious instruction ?—I never heard of it.
269. By the Chairman. —Has ever a case occurred where the superintendent of the hulk
has lodged a complaint against a man, where you have dismissed the complaint as not deserving
of punishment?—Yes; and many others which have been of so trifling a character, that I have
expressed my regret that they should have been brought up.
270. And in the mean time those men have been under a species of punishment, illegal,
as they were kept under separate diet and cells awaiting trial ?—Yes.
271. Then the fact of your dismissing the case would lead to the conclusion that they had
been punished unjustly ?—So far it was an anticipation of conviction.
272. By Mr. Miller. —The punishment on board the President is very severe, is it not?—
Yes, it is intended to be such ; she is styled the “ punishment hulk ” for the worst characters.
273. The whole punishment of keeping those men in irons, and in confinement in cells, is
probably as severe as could be possibly invented, is it not, or punishment worse than death ? I
would not say it was worse than death, but it is as severe a punishment as men could well have;
the immense length of sentences which many have to serve.
274. By Mr. Patterson. —Are the hulks moored in such a position as that they do not
ship water now ?—There are one or two which do, the Success particularly, she is the outside one.
275. What is done with the prisoners when the water comes into their berths?—There
are scuttles for shutting the water out, and then the prisoners are deprived of light and air.
Within the last week a man was reported for not shutting his scuttle, for allowing his cell to
get wet.
276. Was it his fault ? —Certainly not; I dismissed the case at all events ; the scuttle was
open and the sea came in.
277. In what position are the prisoners’ beds —do they get wet ?—lf the sea comes in at
night they would, the bedding is not kept in their cells during the day time, it is only given in
in the evening. ...
278. By the Chairman. —Do you know if there is any regulation as to the manner in
which the prisoners must fold their blankets and rugs?—Yes.


279. Are the authorities very particular about that ?—Yes.
280. Have you ever had a prisoner brought before you for folding his bed half an inch too
large or half an inch too small ?—Not so exact as that, but men have been brought up for wilfully,
carelessly infringing the regulation.
281. Might not a warder or overseer complain of a man and shove him about and punish
him because his bed was folded an inch or two too big ?—lt is possible; but very likely it would not
come before me.
282. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you think the cells are sufficiently ventilated?—l think they are.
283. Do you think persons can be healthy in that confined atmosphere?—The proof is
that the medical officer always has reported favorably of the general state of health of the prisoners.
284. Do the medical officers frequently visit and see after the food ?—The one medical
officer does.
285. By the Chairman. —You say some time ago the Government appointed a religious
teacher ?—Yes.
286. What denomination does he belong to ?—The Church of England.
287. What is his mode of teaching, or lecturing, or exhorting ?—By visiting the prisoners
individually in the President, and in the Success there are three or four in a cell.
288. Does he take them all without exception ?—All of his own denomination; those that
object are not compelled to hear him.
289. He is paid by Government ?—Yes.
290. Do you know whether other denominations have visited the hulks equally steadily ?
Not latterly; but prior to the appointment of the religious instructor I have referred to, the
Presbyterian minister visited very regularly.
291. Did he get any pay?—No, nothing, so far as I am aware.
292. The Government did not appoint the Church of England reader until there were
funds to pay him. At the time Mr. Corrie was attending, this lay reader was not in attendance ?
No, he was not; he did not come until he was under pay; but lam not aware by whom he was
appointed.
293. By Dr. Tierney. —l find in the year 1853 the following entry occurs in the Visiting
Justice’s Minutes : —“ The question is put by some prisoners, ‘ Why are they kept in irons,’ not
having been sentenced so, or that the period mentioned by the judge ' in irons’ has expired.”
You say, “ A reply to this query is requested.” There is an impression abroad that a great many
of the prisoners in the President are illegally in irons. Do you think that any of the prisoners
at the present time are illegally in irons in the President ? —I am aware that many are in irons
not upon the warrant of the judge who sentences them.
294. Then how are they legally in irons ?—The question was put there three years ago,
and that question I have never yet had a satisfactory answer to.
295. You say, “ A reply to this query is requested.” Did you ever get a reply to that
question officially ? —No, I did not.
296. Do you or do you not think that, at the present time, some of those men in the
President hulk are illegally in irons?—l do unquestionably. lam not aware of any right that
there is to put them in irons.
297. I see in this book, on the Bth of March, 1853, you say, “ Charles Halliday desired to
see a Romish priest, but I cannot recommend such indulgence without being apprehensive of
evil.” What apprehension of evil had you about a Romish priest more than any other person ?
There had been an instance previous to this of a Romish priest being closeted with one of the
prisoners. It was reported to me by the superintendent of the President that he had got himself
enclosed in the cell unknown to the warder, and I suggested to him that any person violating the
privilege of visiting the prisoners in that way should be prohibited in future.
298. Did you inquire into the fact, and satisfy yourself that what the warder told you was
true ?—lt was not the warder, but the superintendent, who complained to me of that.
299. What is his name ?—Mr. Price; not the Inspector General, but another Price.
300. What measures are taken to reform prisoners in the hulks ?—The only thing that is
done in the shape of education is through Mr. Maccand; there is nothing in the shape of clas3 or
school. Lately they have had slates, but there is no classing; they have abundant means now of
improving themselves by education. I have known instances of men who were perfectly illiterate,
who, when they came in, did not know their alphabet, but who now can read and cypher.
301. And you consider that that is the only measure-that is taken to reform prisoners in
the hulk President ?—Yes.
302. Are there other measures taken in the other hulks ?—No; there are only the same
visitations from the same instructor; but for a long time past no Romish prisoner has been
supplied. I communicated recently with Dr. Geoghegan, requesting that he would provide some
one to visit those prisoners who wished to see a Romish priest.
303. What accommodation is there in the shape of a hospital in the hulks?—There is a
hospital ward in the Lysander, with beds that would probably accommodate twenty.
304. By Mr. Keogh. —When the men are sick, do they complain to you of ill treatment,
or do they go on with their work—how are they treated when they are sick ?—They are kept in
then from work until they are reported cured by the doctor.
305. But according to you, it is the greatest punishment to be kept in—does the same
punishment extend to a man when he is sick as when he is well ?—Of course if a man has a
sprained back, or is under any illness, he cannot work. He must be in the hulk for medical
treatment.
306. How is he treated there ?—Medically.


307. How is he as to his cell —is he kept in his cell in the same manner as if he had been
in good health ?—Just the same. There is no alteration whatever in the discipline excepting
that he is excused from certain points of discipline while under medical treatment.
308. Are the irons kept on him all the time he is unwell ?—lt is in the power of the
medical officer to recommend their removal.
309. How are the prisoners generally treated in that respect ? —The irons are invariably
kept on, unless there is some extent of malady requiring their removal.
310. Are they kept on in the hospital ward ?—There is only a hospital ward in one
hulk, and there the men are not under irons. In the other hulks, if there is anything serious, the
irons are removed.
311. Do the sick prisoners receive any medical comforts?—lt is in the power of the
medical officer to issue them.
312. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you know a person of the name of Willis?—Yes; he was
superintendent of the Sacramento.
313. What was he dismissed for, or did he leave himself?—He was dismissed. lam not
prepared to say what the fault was. As visiting justice, lam not aware of any fault on his part.
314. Who had the power of dismissing him ? —The Inspector General, I believe, or of
recommending his dismissal.
315. Without any inquiry into his conduct? —I am not aware.
316. You did not sit to inquire into his conduct?—No; and I always thought highly of
him as a superintendent.
317. Have you seen his statement in the Herald to day, corroborating what Melville has
said ?—Yes.
318. Do you think there is any truth in it ?—lt struck me with respect to the statement
of Melville, that it was an exaggerated one.
319. On the whole, do you think there is a good part of it true?—Yes; the simple fact
of his being handcuffed in his cell, and so on.
320. By the Chairman. —Who is the paymaster of the department —how are the warders
paid?—That is out of my province. I rather think the superintendents receive the pay from the
Inspector General’s Office. I think the head of the department draws the money and the super-
intendents disburse it.
321. By Dr. Tierney. —As you are the visiting justice, are the committee to understand
that the servants of the hulks may be discharged without your being consulted, or your opinion
being asked ?—I have nothing whatever to do with them.
322. You do not inquire into them?—No, not into their complaints even. If they commit
a breach of discipline, it i 3 disposed of by their own deparement.
323. Are you ever interfered with in tlfe execution of your duty as a visiting justice ?—ln
hearing complaints the court is entirely my own; but in procuring redress for complaints made
by prisoners, I have had much cause to complain —points on which I expected to be enlightened, I
am still in the dark upon.
324. Are you restricted in your duties at all as visiting justice, by being dictated to by any
one ?—There is no dictation about it; it is the duty of the visiting justice to inquire into com-
plaints made by or against prisoners, and it is the duty of the visiting justice to obtain redress
for the prisoners’ complaints, and the only means the visiting justice has of obtaining redress is
by communicating to the head of the Government.
325. Do not you inquire into the complaints to see if they are true ?—I have not the
means of inquiring. I write to the Chief Secretary to say that such and such a complaint is
made; it is not for me to take the Inspector General to task for anything a prisoner complains of.
I communicate the complaint to the Chief Secretary, and it is then left in his hands to deal with.
326. Are you ever asked by the Chief Secretary to go and investigate a charge ?—No ; I
think the general reply to me has been, that the complaint has been referred to the Inspector
General, and that his reply is satisfactory.
327. And that is the first and last you hear about it ?—Yes.
328. Then you are restricted in the discharge of your duty ?—My powers are limited in
that manner; it is not in the power of the visiting justice to obtain that redress which he may
think necessary.
. 329. Have you the power of taking off or putting on irons ?—I have the power of putting
on irons by sentence.
330. Are any of the prisoners in irons at the present time under your sentence ?—There
are some, but very few.
331. Has that been for insubordination ? —No, not for insubordination, but for absconding,
or attempting to abscond.
332. By Mr. Hervey. —Have complaints reached you from the prisoners that the complaints
made by them on previous occasions have not been attended to ?—Yes. The complaints have
been repeated again, and I have also called attention to them. That will be found in the
correspondence; or sometimes the men have complained that the reply to their complaint was
unsatisfactory.
333. Then that shows that some attention had been paid to them ?—Yes; as for example,
that their complaint had been referred to the Inspector General.
334. Do you communicate the replies to the prisoners ?—Yes, the substance of them ; and
the reply not being satisfactory, the complaint is repeated.
335. You do not know whether they ever get a final and satisfactory reply ?—No. I will
give the committee an instance. In the case of a prisoner who had undergone solitary confinement
Penal. — e.


for a considerable time, the medical officer had considered it necessary to deprive him of a
certain portion of his rations, fearing that the full rations would be prejudicial to him. The
prisoner complained of this, and condemned the treatment he had been subjected to, and requested
that he might have other medical advice. He said, “ I think the medical officer has acted unfairly
with me ; he has given me this not for my health’s sake, but out of spite, and therefore I request
I may have other medical advice,” and that was denied him. It was referred, as a matter oi
course, from one department to another, and to the chief medical officer; and in this particular
instance which I am speaking of, in the case of the man Thompson, the medical officer, instead oi
coming down as the prisoner had hoped for, to see whether his state of health required the
reduction in his rations, referred it to the medical officer of the hulk wko had submitted him to
this treatment, and was satisfied with his report.
336. By the Chairman. —Has the case ever occurred of an absconder getting away and
being subsequently re-taken for committing another crime ? Supposing an absconded prisoner
commits a larceny, and is taken up before the magistrates and committed, and sentenced at the
Supreme Court, and is brought back to the hulks and recognised as an absconder, has he then to
serve out his previous term of imprisonment as well as his subsequent sentence —has such a case
ever occurred ?—I have never known it. There was a case a few days ago, where a man complained
to me. He had been an absconder in 1851 or 1852, when he was under sentence for three years.
He absconded and was not apprehended until the expiration of the term of his sentence, and then
was sentenced under an Act which was not in existence at the time of his absconding.
337. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you had many ticket-of-leave holders brought before your
bench in your magisterial capacity ?—Never any ticket-of-leave holders.
338. Have you any idea what becomes of the ticket-of-leave holders ?—I have no know-
ledge ; I presume they are required to keep themselves within a prescribed district.
339. You do not know what ultimately becomes of them ?—I know of one instance of
a prisoner now in the hulks who was out on a ticket-of-leave, and while out he was brought into
the goal for some offence, and his ticket-of-leave was cancelled by the visiting justice.
340. Are you aware whether any notice is taken of those ticket-of-leave holders, when
they are sent up the country ?—I am not aware what surveillance they are under.
341. By Mr. Keogh. —The prisoners in the hulks, unless they can read and write, have no
instruction, have they ?—I could instance the case of an Irishman who could neither read nor
write when he went into the hulk President, who can now cypher. He was instructed by a man
in the next cell.
342. Are the pisoners allowed to communicate with each other ?—Each prisoner is allowed
to communicate with the man immediately adjoining him through the bulkhead.
343. By the Chairman. —Then they can communicate from one to the other right round
the ship ?—They do communicate in that way.
344. By Mr. Keogh. —There is no punishment for communicating in that way ?—Not for
ordinary conversation.
345. By Mr. Herverj. —They are not allowed to communicate across the deck?—No. The
system was originally essentially a silent system, but it has been considered an indulgence to
allovp each man to speak to his next door neighbour.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Angus McPherson called in and examined.
346. By the Chairman. —You are superintendent of the hulk President ? —Yes.
347. How long have you been there ?—Since the 20th June last.
348. How many warders are there employed in that hulk ?—Twelve belonging to the ship;
but out of that number there are two on board the Deborah. We have twenty officers in all.
349. How many prisoners ?—The complement is eighty; at present we have only sixty-
eight.
350. What pay do the warders get ?—Ten shillings a day.
351. Is there a head warder?—There are two corporals that receive sixpence a day extra;
the sergeant gets 12s. a day; and, there being few men in our ship, I combine both the duties of
superintendent and chief warder.
352. What grades are there in the service ?—There are twelve ordinary warders at 10s.
a day; two lockers or corporals at 10s. 6d. a day; one sergeant or assistant warder at 125.; a
storekeeper and clerk at £275 a year; a shipkeeper at 15s. a day; myself as superintendent and
chief warder at £4OO a year; and we have two boatmen —seamen who receive the same pay as the
warders, 10s. a day.
353. And those men are or can be always armed ?—The warders only ; the shipkeeper and
storekeeper and boatmen are never armed.
354. Then it takes one man to take care of every four prisoners ?—Yes.
355. Is not that rather an expensive system?—Very.
356. When a prisoner misbehaves by talking loudly, or breaking any of the prison rules,
what is the ordinary course pursued ?—The sentry on duty, in which ever deck it may happen to
be, reports the case, by putting his name in the prisoners’ report book, and it is then brought
before the visiting magistrate for his decision.
357. The visiting magistrate comes once a week ?—Yes; or not exactly once a week, but
his visits will average four times a month.
358. If a man commits an offence the day after the visiting justice has been there, is he
put in irons, or is any species of punishment resorted to until the visiting magistrate comes
again ?—Not unless it was a case of assault; not for an ordinary offence.


359. What do you call 11 an ordinary offence ? ” —Talking loudly, or using bad language, or
insolence.
360. The complaint is laid before the visiting magistrate when he comes, and he has the
power of punishing the offender or dismissing the case ?—Yes.
361. He sometimes dismisses the complaints, does he not ?—Yes ; he sometimes dismisses
cases, and very often admonishes only. The conduct of a prisoner may be against the hulk
regulations, and then it becomes the duty of the sentry to report him, and he has nothing
further to do with it.
362. What constitutes an assault ?—Striking an officer or a warder.
363. A prisoner might threaten a warder or be abusive and yet not strike him, or it
might be that the prisoner was struck first. Are the prisoners so much in the power of the warders
that a warder can goad a prisoner to such an extent as to make him rebel; and if so, is he then treated
in the same manner as if he had had no provocation whatever ?—From my own experience, I
should say that the prisoners are not goaded, so far as I have seen ; it may happen occasionally
when an officer is not present.
364. Was there a man of the name of Michael Ryan on board the President ?—Yes.
365. Could you give the Committee the history of that case ?—I knew him at Collingwood,
when I was there. He was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for drunkenness, and his
punishment in all, from magisterial sentences, cumulative upon his original sentence, amounted
to two years and five months. He was discharged from me at the President; but while he was
there, he received no punishment.
366. By Dr. Tierney. —Was he in irons on the President ?—All the prisoners on the
President are in irons without any exception.
367. What was the weight of his irons ?—7 lbs.
368. You knew nothing of Michael Ryan before he came to you ?—I saw him at
Collingwood.
369. You knew nothing of his previous history?—No more than seeing him at Collingwood.
370. Was that all within his period of two years and five months? —Yes.
371. Are you aware whether, now or since the hulks have been established, warders or
officers of any grade have been convicts under sentence ? Have convicts under sentence been pro-
moted to be warders within your knowledge ?—No man who has ever undergone a sentence in
this colony has been made a warder; we have as overseers men who are called “ old hands,” but
not men who have undergone a colonial sentence in this colony.
372. Do you think it would be wrong to appoint prisoners as warders ?—Decidedly.
373. By the Chairman. —When you were at Collingwood stockade, were not the prisoners
made bookkeepers there ?—There was one free clerk, assisted by a prisoner. The head clerk was
a free man.
374. Are you aware whether inducements are ever held out to prisoners to act as spies
upon their fellows—that is, that if they can furnish the head of the department with informa-
tion as to any projected escape, they will get indulgencies thereby ?—There is nothing held out,
but they frequently do give information.
375. Have you ever known them to give false information ?—No.
376. Do you always find the information given by prisoners of attempted escapes
realized ?—We could not say. If the attempt actually comes off, we are certain the information
is well founded; but then if the prisoners see we are more on the alert than usual, they, what
they call, “ drop to it; ” and then we could not say whether the information was right or wrong.
377. Do not you think there is a good deal of espionage carried on ?—There is a good
deal; but there is no inducement held out to the prjsoners to give information.
378. That is as far as you know?—Yes.
379. Have you a shower bath on board the President ?—No.
380. There is one on board of the Success , is there not?—Yes.
381. Do you know whether that has been used as a punishment?—l do not; I never was
two hours on board of her.
382. Was that shower bath put up in the Success in your time ?—lt was put up about
three years ago, when I lay on one side of the Bay and she on the other.
• 383. There is a box on board of the President, said to be a place used as a place of
punishment for certain offences —does the visiting justice ever award it as a punishment for a man
to be kept in that box for a certain time ?—No.
384. Have you seen it used as a place of punishment?—Yes, it has been used even in
my time.
385. Under what circumstances ?—lf a man is refractory, he is put there by day, but he
never sleeps there.
386. Then it is not true that people have been kept for five or six days in that box at a
time ?—Not to my knowledge.
387. Might it have happened in the President without your knowledge ?—No, not while
I belonged to her.
388. Can you order a man to go in there without the sentence of the visiting magis-
trate ?—Yes, it has always been considered so.
389. Who orders it at the present time—yourself?—Yes; if a man was riotous and
disorderly, he wonld be put in there.
390. By Mr. Patterson. —Have you ever put a prisoner in the box ?—I have.
391. What time did you keep him there ?—Only during the day.
392. Have you kept prisoners in the box for more than one day at the time ?—Yes.


393. What was that for ?—I forget the offence.
394. What was the man’s name that was in the box for more than one day ?—Thompson.
395. By Dr. Tierney. —ls this punishment ever ordered by the visiting justice?—No.
396. It is only inflicted by yourself?—Yes. In fact, I found a man undergoing it when
I took charge.
397. Does Captain Price ever order that punishment?—l have never known him do it.
398. Then you never knew anybody but yourself order that punishment?—No.
399. Was Captain Price aware that this punishment was inflicted?—He must have been
aware of it.
400. Are those punishments reported to the visiting justice?—No; it is not considerec
an addition to his solitary. Mr. Pasco, coming round, see 3 the man there.
401. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you record in any way the punishments you inflict upon the
men ? —No, simply that it is so many days’ solitary, and it is optional with the superintendeni
whether it shall be in the box, the cell opposite, or the two after cells on the lower deck.
402. By Mr. Hervey —The visiting justice orders solitary confinement and you may carry
it out in one of two ways, either by the box or in the cell opposite ?—Yes, or the two after cells
on lower deck.
403. Can you order a man into the box when he is riotous irrespective of the visiting
justice ?—Yes. If it was considered necessary to put a man in till the visiting justice came. I
should put him in. 6 J ’
404. By Mr. Patterson. Do you say you can put a man into the box whenever you
like? No, only while he is undergoing a magisterial sentence of solitary confinement.
405. By Mr. Hervey. —The power does not lie with you as the manager of the hulk to
put a man into the box whenever you think it necessary ?—No, I can inflict no punishment.
406. By the Chairman. —lf solitary confinement is ordered, you may put the man into
the box if he is refractory ?—Yes.
407. In respect to solitary confinement, do you not find that what is mere pastime to one
man may be almost death to another ?—I have found a great difference in the men.
408. And one man will become a favourite with the warders for being quiet, and the other
just the opposite ?—Yes, in a general way, they would be noticed according to behaviour.
409. Is it not the province of the visiting justice or the medical man to discriminate
between those characters and order punishment accordingly; is such a thing ever taken into
consideration ? —No, that is, his temper is not taken into consideration, it is simply the offence at
the moment; the visiting justice is guided in his decisions by the record of character which he
has placed before him at every trial. Of course the superintendent’s word as to the character of
the man would carry weight.
410. If you saw a man being sentenced to fourteen days’ solitary confinement, and you
knew from the habits, and history, and character of that man that it would do him harm, would
it be within your province to say you thought three days would be enough?—No, we should never
venture that far; we should simply give the man a good character or otherwise.
411. By Mr. Hervey.— How long have you been engaged in the hulks altogether ?—I
have been nearly six months at this present time, and I was eight months before.
- 412. Was there an interval when you were away altogether ?—Yes.
413. You have been appointed now to the superintendence of one of the hulks?—Yes.
414. You were not superintendent on the previous occasion ?—No; I was chief warder on
board the same hulk—the President.
415. In what year was that ?—ln 1853.
416. That was when she was first commissioned?—She was commissioned late in 1852
and I joined in 1853. There had been two chief warders before I went there.
417. How many prisoners were there at that time in the President ?—I could not say
from memory, but I think there were more than eighty.
418. Was she at that time the punishment hulk ?—Yes, the same as she is now.
419. Was Melville there at that time ?—He was.
420. How long had he been there previously to your joining her ?—Some months. I
could not exactly say how long.
421. Have you read his statement as to some very severe punishments being inflicted ?
Y«s.
422. Is that statement true or false ?—So far as my memory serves me, it is not true; but
the parties who could really speak more correctly would be the persons who attended him on the
lower deck.
423. Are they still in the service ?—No, they are on the other side. Mr. Horne was the
assistant superintendent; and during the time Melville was undergoing punishment, Mr. Stephen
Price took charge as superintendent.
424. Is either of those parties in the Colony ?—No.
425. Would you give the committee any statement, as near as you can, of what may be
in your recollection in connection with Melville’s case ?—I find by an entry in one of the books,
that on the 4th June, 1853, Melville formed one of ten that were at exercise on the deck!
Sergeant Graham, whom he speaks of in his statement, had relieved me for a few minutes, I
having some business to transact; and while Graham was in charge, it appears that he ordered
Melville to close up, that is, to keep a regular distance. The prisoners, when at exercise, go round
the deck and march at a regular distance. This is the statement made in the presence of Mr..
asco, and which, at the time, I understood to be correct. When he was told to close up, he
stepped out from the rank and told Graham he would be treated with more respect, that he


wished him to treat him with more respect. I was not present at the time. Mr Horne and
myself immediately came forward to the prisoner’s yard, where the men were at exercise, and
Melville stepped out on one side, and Graham made his statement to Mr. Horne of what had
occurred. Melville was on that occasion very insolent to Mr. Horne.
426. Were you then present ?—Yes.
427. It was only at the beginning of this affair that you were not present ?—Yes. I was
present when he spoke to Mr. Horne. Melville was very much excited and very insolent. When
the prisoners went down from exercise, Mr. Horne observed to me that he thought, from Melville’s
excited manner, there would be something up, and he would go down and see him put up in his
cell. He went down and I followed him. When Graham took the handcuffs off Melville, he
sprang at him and caught him round the neck, attempting to bite his nose off. Mr. Horne
immediately jumped on his back, and Graham caught him a blow under the chin with a “ neddy,”
and they all came to the ground together, and Melville certainly got a good hiding.
428. What do you call “ a good hiding” ?—With a “ neddy,” a life preserver.
429. By the Chairman. —Then a good deal of passion was brought into play —they were
not cool ? —No, a man within an ace of having his nose bitten off, would not be very cool.
430. By Mr. Hervey . —There were a good many blows passed ?—Yes, a good many; he
got a good hiding, and then we were obliged to put him again in the handcuffs. He states that
thirteen men threw themselves on him, but there could not have been that number.
431. How many might there have been ?—Perhaps five; he was kicking out in all
directions.
432. What sort of blows did you see struck ?—With a “ neddy.”
433. About the body, or face ? —About the body ; Ido not think his face was cut, the
doctor saw him afterwards.
434. Did the case require medical attendance afterwards ?—No; he was awarded twenty
days’ solitary, and that very same afternoon he was secured and put in his cell, and put on a
chain which went through a ring-bolt in the side of the cell.
435. Was it then that he was subjected to the punishment he speaks of, of being hung
up ?—No; it could not be so, because the ring is only three feet three inches from the deck. He was
secured with his hands behind him, and fastened by a chain run through the handcuffs, short up to the
ring-bolt. In fastening him up the sergeant made some mistake, or else it was from some defect
in the handcuffs, and Melville got the chain adrift; it was immediately reported to me, and I
came down again to have him secured. I opened the door of his cell, and he stood behind the
door with the chain three or four times doubled in his hand, ready to make a spring and a blow.
I opened the cell myself, and he said, “ If it had been Graham, sir, I would have struck him,”
but seeing me, he was quiet enough, and we then secured him.
436. What length of chain was it ?—A piece of old topsail sheet, or something of that
sort. That same night he was tried by Mr. Pasco, and then we had another tussle to secure him;
in fact, we had three tussles that day. He was tried by Mr. Pasco the same afternoon, and got
twenty days’ solitary confinement, and then we had as much trouble again to get him secured. He
was not hit on that occasion, we were obliged to turn him over on his belly to secure him, he
struggled so violently, and he was making use of the most violent language, and Mr. Horne
considered it necessary to put him up in that way all that night.
437. Could he lie down?—No; he could not that night. The next day he refused all
attendance, and I am not certain whether he was not kept in the same way the second night; but
I am certain the third day I lengthened the chain myself, so that he could lie down in his cell.
438. Were his hands behind his back all that time ?—I think they were the two first
nights.
439. And in the day also?—Yes; he was released occasionally during that time, but
he refused all attendance; he was sulky and stubborn, and he would not have his food, although
his rations were served out to him.
440. The third night his chain was lengthened ?—Yes.
441. Were his hands still kept behind his back?—No; he was allowed to sit on his tub
at the corner of his cell; but the medical oflicer could speak to that, because he had visited him.
442. Did he remain in that state for twenty days ? —No; the handcuffs were removed on
the 15th ; this took place on the 4th. It strikes me the chain was removed from him altogether
before the twenty days were up ; but I am not certain about that.
443. Was he the only prisoner you ever had to treat in such a way ? —The only one I
ever saw so treated; that was the only time I ever saw the chain used.
444. The system on board the President is that every man shall be in irons ?—Yes.
445. And the system is supposed to be solitary, though not silent ?—The silent system
was tried in the first instance, but it is not adopted now.
446. Why is ironing the prisoners necessary on board the President ; is it a part of the
sentence ?—No, not always.
447. But whether it is or not, they are ironed ?—Yes; every man is ironed immediately
on coming on board
448. What is the reason of that? —That is simply according to the regulation.
449. You just merely follow orders ?—Yes.
450. Presuming it to be from a feeling that the prisoners would be insecure if they had
not leg irons on while in their cells, do you consider that if they had not those leg irons on they
would be in a state of insecurity while they were in the solitary cells?—Not at all. I consider
them quite secure without irons.
451. Both day and night?—Both day and night.
Penal.—/.


452. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you think the number of watchmen would require to be
increased if the prisoners were not in irons ?—No.
453. By Mr. Hervey. —You think there would be no insecurity in the President hulk,
so far as the prisoners in the cells were concerned, if they were placed there without irons ?
They would be quite safe.
454. What would you do in respect to irons when they were on deck ?—That would
require consideration.
455. Have the prisoners great facilities forescape when on deck ?—No. They come up
ten at a time, each two men being handcuffed together.
456. Would they be always sure to attempt their escape if they were allowed on deck
without irons ? —I think they would attempt to do so.
457. What would their endeavour result in ?—Many things might happen. They would
rush the boat if they saw an opportunity, because they are all long-sentence men; or if not, they
are the worst characters from the other stations, so that you have the cream of the whole prison
population boxed up there.
458. There would be no fear of any danger as long as the prisoners were in the cells?—No.
459. But the fear arises when they come on deck ?—I do not see any great danger then.
460. Could the twenty officers and warders that you have on the hulk let those prisoners
leave their cells, and come on deck ten at a time, without being ironed; would it be safe to do
it?—Not under the present regulation; there might be some other measures adopted.
461. Do the prisoners ever remonstrate against being ironed, as to the illegality of it ?
I never heard the prisoners question that. They have done so when a man has been kept in
irons over his time.
462. What do you mean by “ over his time ? ” —Supposing a man is sentenced to two years
in irons, and he serves that time in irons; and it is then found necessary to remove him to the
President , he then has irons put on again.
463. If the judge makes no mention of irons in his sentence, is the man put in irons?—
I could not say.
464. You do not think that, for the security of the prisoners, they need wear irons at night
while confined to their cells ?—No.
465. And that is your opinion, as one who has had a good deal of experience?—Yes; I
consider them quite secure without any irons.
466. Do you consider the irons tend to exasperate them, and make them feel the punish-
ment more severely ?—Yes ; the men cannot be comfortable at night, however light the irons may
be; they get accustomed to it after a time, but it is a long time first.
467. By Dr. Tierney. Do the prisoners remonstrate against the irons being on ?—I think
it is a feeling with them, that they would grumble when they were made to wear irons for more
time than the time they were sentenced to irons. I could not say I ever heard a man directly
remonstrate about it.
468. They have remonstrated about it, have they not ?—I have heard the men speak of it,
of course
469. Are there any measures taken on board the President for the reformation of prisoners,
or are measures taken more to punish them than to reform them ?—The long-sentenced men and bad
characters from the stockades are sent there, and when they come there, of course, they are obliged
to comply with the regulation of the ship. So far as reformation is concerned, the religious
instructor comes once a week.
470. Are there any measures taken except that to reform the prisoners ?—None.
471. Then you think the hulks are more places for punishment than reformation?—
Decidedly ; our own hulk.
472. By Mr. Hervey. —You merely speak as to the President ?—Yes.
473. By the Chairman. —Do you think it possible that those men could be reformed by
any course of good treatment ?—I do not think the old hands could be reformed ; they might be
so apparently, but I should doubt the reality of the reformation very much, from what I have seen;
for instance, Melville himself, I think, commenced a convict career nine or ten years ago, and to give
him thirty-two years more to do is quite useless, he would never serve it under any system, and
then what is the use of attempting to punish him for any breach of discipline by a month’s
additional imprisonment, he does not care a snuff about it, because he would never serve his
thirty-two years out.
474. By Mr. Hervey —What is the difference between the ordinary punishment in the
President and the solitary confinement?—When a man is on solitary rations, he only gets one
pound of bread a day, and he is not allowed to speak to any of the prisoners.
475. How long does it take to put on a pair of irons to a man ?—About ten minutes.
476. To put on a pair of leg irons ?—Yes, they have to be rivetted.
477. Presuming that the men had to be ironed on going upon deck, could not any system
be adopted of fastening the irons by means of a lock and key, the same as a hand-cuff?—That
might bo done, a small chain might be put through the basil and a lock fixed to it, but with the
ordinary description of irons you could not do that.
478. Do not the irons sometimes cut the prisoners legs?—They chafe sometimes, if the men
are not careful.
479. Do they not sometimes occasion sores ?—Yes, but then it is the doctor’s duty to order
the removal of the irons.
480. Do you recollect any instance of a man being punished for tearing up his blanket to
put on the sores when he could not get a piece of calico ?—He would be punished for tearing his


blanket, as being Government property; but I do not recollect any instance of a man being
punished for tearing his blanket when he could not get a piece of calico.
481. Were you on board the hulk when the present religious instructor was appointed ?—No.
482. Are you aware whether he receives any pay ?—I heard him say himself that he
receives £2OO a year.
483. How often does he visit the President ? —Once a week.
484. Does he spend the whole day there ?—He comes about ten and stops till four.
485. He is at some of the other hulks on the other days of the week, is he not ?—Yes,
his whole time is taken up, Sunday and all.
486. What course does he pursue when he comes on board ?—He gives spiritual instruc-
tion to the Protestant prisoners, and with regard to the Catholics, he visits them if they wish it,
but not as their religious instructor. He has not visited any Catholics lately.
487. Then he gives secular instruction as well as spiritual ?—Yes, so far as answering any
questions that may be put to him.
488. Are the prisoners glad to see him ?—Some are, but I do not think the generality
care much about him.
489 By the Chairman. —There is no compulsion of the prisoners to attend his ministra-
tions, is there ? —No, he visits them in their cells in turn, taking about six each visit.
490. Does he pray with them ?—Yes, when they wish—he would pray with each man if
he wished it—he goes into each cell.
491. By Mr. Ilervey —Have you ever heard him spoken disrespectfully of when he has
been gone away ?—No.
492. Are his visits paid to each Protestant?—To any man that wishes to see him.
493. Is it left to the men to choose ?—Yes; if they objected, his services would not be
forced on them.
494. He does not of necessity go to all ?—Some do not care about him ; but, in my opinion,
they merely see him by way of a change.
495. By Dr. Tierney. —How many wish to see him generally, one half ?—No; I think
not so many as that.
496. On an average how many prisoners would wish to see him every day ?—I could not
speak to that, because I keep no account of his proceedings, but I should say, not one-half of the
prisoners.
497. By the Chairman. —You have said that you have a library on board the Presi-
dent ? —Yes.
498. Of what class of books ?—We have got Dickens’s Household Words, Chambers’
Journal, and so on.
499. They are not all religious books ?—No; they were at first, but the men got careless
about them.
500. By Mr. Keogh. —Would there be any danger of the men breaking into each others
cells if the irons were taken off during the night ?—No.
501. Nor out to the sea ?—No.
502. There would not be the least danger of that, would there ?—No ; but of course if a
man had his irons off, and he had any means of escape, he would be able to swim much better.
503. If the prisoners had the means, could they not as easily get through to each other’s
bunks with their irons on as with them off?—Yes.
504. By Dr. Tierney. —Could not the men be just as safely confined in those cells at
night by putting smaller irons on them than the irons that are used at present?—Yes.
505. By Mr. Hervey. —Would they not be quite as safe at night without irons at all ?—Yes.
506. Do the prisoners seem to sleep pretty well, or are they in great misery at night with
the irons ?—They seem to sleep pretty well/
507. By Dr. Tierney. —Does Capt. Price go into each cell when he comes?—Yes; every
cell is opened.
508. Does he speak to the prisoners individually?—Sometimes he does not speak to them,
he merely looks at them and passes on.
509. By the Chairman. —ls there any point of information which the committee have
omitted to ask you upon, that you think you could give the committee any information upon ?
Not at this moment. With respect to Melville, I beg to read this extract from the Superin-
tendent’s Inspection Book: — “ Her Majesty’s Hulk President , 7th June, 1853. Inspected the
hulk this day, arrived at 5 p.m., in consequence of a report from the superintendent in charge. Found
on arrival the prisoners on the lower deck noisy, and declined to visit them on account thereof.
Inquired into the circumstances connected with the riotous and violent conduct of Thomas Smith,
alias Melville, and am satisfied that the measures adopted by Mr. Horne were fully called for,
and carried out with judgment and firmness. The conduct of Sergeant Graham will be duly
noted.—(Signed) Samuel Barrow, Inspector of Penal Establishments.”
510. By Mr. Ilervey. —What is the most severe punishment, apart from a man’s original
sentence, that you have ever seen inflicted on a man in the President hulk ?—Only thirty days’
solitary confinement.
511. And during that time the prisoner would have a berth large enough to lie down in,
and a pound of bread a day ?—Yes, except in cases where a prisoner has been confined in the box
during the day; a prisoner can sit down in the box, but not lie down.
512. And you have never seen any other punishment ?—I have seen a man get a thrashing
with a “neddy.”
513. Has that been when you could not master a man without striking him ?—Yes, and


sometimes when they can be mastered. For instance, in a case of my own, where Thompson
assaulted the doctor ; and in Melville’s case, that was something similar.
514. By Dr. Tierney. —Are there other cases of a similar kind ?—lt seldom or never
has happened with me.
515. Does Mr. Price ever order the infliction of punishment ?—No ; I never knew him to
do it.
The ivilness withdrew.
Adjourned to Wednesday next , at two o'clock.
WEDNESDAY, 10th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Guthridge, Mr. Hervey, Mr. McCombie,
Mr. Patterson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. John Duffy examined.
516. By the Chairman. —Were you employed in the Penal Department?—Yes.
517. What as?—l was employed as a warder and an overseer.
518. At what place ?—At Pentridge stockade.
519. For how long?—I was there very nearly five years.
520. When did you leave ?—On the 21st of August last.
521. Were you dismissed or did you leave of your own accord?—l was dismissed.
522. For what reason ?—For allowing two prisoners to run away from my gang.
523. Did you get any character when you left?—Yes.
524. Have you got it with you?—Yes—[ producing the same]. —I had nothing to do
with the keeping of the prisoners. When I got another situation in the Police Department, Mr.
Price would not allow me to keep it.
525. Why not? —Captain McMahon went with me from his own office to Mr. Price’s
office; he told me he would consider me if Mr. Price would recommend me; he had seen my
character from Mr. Price.
526. What did Mr. Price say when you went to his office ? —He told Captain McMahon
he could not recommend me for allowing two prisoners to run away from my gang through my
neglect of duty.
527. By Mr. Hervey. —Did you hear him say so ?—Yes, I did.
528. By the Chairman. —Did the prisoners get away ?—They did, but they have been
taken since.
529. Were they taken before you left? —No.
530. Have you ever seen prisoners taken after they have run away ?—Yes, I took one
myself.
531. How did you take him ?—I fired at one.
532. What was done to him ?—He got six months’ additional.
533. What was he employed at before he ran away ?—ln a go-cart.
534. Was the six months’ additional continuing him in the same occupation, or did he get
six-months’ solitary?—He was, in a short time, sent on board of the hulks.
535. Have you ever seen prisoners beaten ?—Yes.
536. Was that a punishment adjudged by the magistrate to get a good beating?—No ; I
never heard any rules or regulations to that effect.
537. What were they beaten with ?—With a staff, such a staff as the police carry in town.
538. They did not tie him up to a triangle and give him a good beating ?—No.
539. It was merely an angry blow?—Yes.
540. Do you mean the committee to understand that a warder has it in his power to strike
a prisoner if he either disobeys him or angers him in any way ? —No ; he has not that power.
541. It is done whether he has the power or not?—lt is done.
542. By Mr. Hervey. —lf that is ascertained, what is done to the warder ?—Nothing at
all, he gets praised for it from the superintendent.
543. Could you name the name of the warder and the name of the prisoner in any case
where the prisoner was beaten to such an extent that he was laid up afterwards ? —I can name the
name of the warder; his name was Thomas Bourke.
544. What had the prisoner done whom he beat ?—I believe he wanted to go to the closet.
545. And the warder did not want to let him ?—The warder called him back, and he did
not come back, so he went to him and struck him with the staff and the blood jumped out of his
head.
546. Was any further investigation held into that case? —No, I do not think there was;
I know I saw the doctor going to attend his head.
547. Was that in his cell ?—No; before he went to his cell.
548. Have they got any hospital at all there ?—lt is not a regular hospital, it is one of
the wards, a sort of boarded hut.
549. Were you ever stationed in the Chrystal Palace at Pentridge ?—No; I have been there
on different duties
550. They have large wooden boxes to sleep in there ?—Yes.
551. Have you ever been in any of those at night when the men have been there—why
are men sent to the Chrystal Palace ?—Some for disobedience of orders, and some for any sort
pf bad conduct.


552. Who adjudges them to that ? —Mr. Price and the superintendent Duncan.
553. Can Mr. Duncan do that himself without Mr. Price’s interference ?—I do not know
whether he can, but he does it.
554. Is he a magistrate ?—No.
555. It is considered a punishment ? —lt is, they never can see anybody during the time
they are inside the walls, and if any of the men commit themselves in any way against the will of
the overseer or Mr. Price, they are handcuffed and made to sit on a stone.
556. Then while in the Chrystal Palace a further punishment is to handcuff them and
make them sit on a stone ? —Yes.
557. What punishment is awarded if they misbehave when sitting on that stone ?—They
are brought before the magistrate, and I believe some go to the hulks.
558. What is the Chrystal Palace ?—lt is a square piece of ground about an acre or better,
fenced in with wooden slabs, and inside of that the huts are built that the men sleep in ; they
have four wheels under them for the purpose of shifting them from one place to another, then
there is an iron bar runs right along the hut where the men tie their hammocks.
559. What are the sleeping houses made of?—Wood; the floors are strapped with hoop
iron.
560. How long is it since you have been in the Chrystal Palace?—About sis months.
561. By Dr. Tierney. —What are the length and breadth of the huts?—l believe they
are about twelve feet long by ten feet wide.
562. What height are they ?—About nine feet high.
563. How many were put to sleep in each of those huts of a night ?—I cannot say ; I
never was on duty there except going in and coming out again with my own gang.
564. Have you any idea ?—There might be nineteen or twenty sleep in each hut.
565. By Mr. Uervey. —ln a place ten feet by twelve ?—Yes.
566. By the Chat rman. —Have you ever had occasion to take tobacco from men ?—I have,
when I was a warder.
567. How do you take the tobacco from them—if you suspect a prisoner of having tobacco,
what is the first thing you do?—When I search a prisoner to see if he has tobacco about him, I
open his mouth first, and then rub down his sleeve and see if he has any tucked up his sleeves,
and then I rub him down his trousers to see if he has any there. I know when I was there as a
warder, if I saw tobacco, and asked the men for it, they gave it to me.
568. Have you ever seen the warders or overseers take any other means to get tobacco
than those you have described?—Yes; I have seen them take hold of the men by the neck and
half choking them, or throttle them, and strip them naked.
569. Was that in-door or out-doors?—Out-doors.
570. Have you ever seen this done in the presence of Mr. Price or Mr. Duncan?—Yes,
both at different times.
571. You have said that warders and overseers take upon themselves to strike prisoners
with sticks. Would they take their fists if they had not a stick at hand—have you ever seen a
prisoner struck with the fist ?—I have. I have seen Mr. Price himself strike a prisoner with his fist.
572. And knock him down ?—I could not say whether he knocked him down or not.
573. Do you know what it was for ?—About some tobacco he had in his mouth.
574. By Mr. McCombie. —ls Mr. Price a violent man?—He is very violent sometimes.
575. By the Chairman.— Do you know a man of the name of McGuire ?—Yes.
576. Were you at Pentridge when he was taken suddenly ill?—Yes, several times; he
took ill more than once or twice. ,
577. There was one time when a constable struck him and he shrieked?—Yes.
578. Will you explain the circumstances to the committee?—l and my own gang were
outside the wall working ; I heard McGuire sing out murder; I came out and saw a corporal in the
yard and another constable having hold of him ; I came to the fence and saw them dragging this
McGuire over to one of the huts, and handcuffing him, and tying his two hands up to the bar that
I mentioned a bit ago as running through the hut.
579. How high off the grouud was that bar?—Between six and seven feet.
580. What was done to him then ?—I do not know; I left when I saw that. I saw another
man handcuffed with his two hands behind his back, and fastened to a post.
581. What was his name ?—I forget his name. I have seen another man carrying a stone
a distance of fifty or sixty yards on his shoulder from morning to night; that was during the hours
of labor ; he was sentenced to that by Mr. Price.
582. By Mr. Guthvidge. —What was the weight of the stone ?—I do not know whether it
was a hundred pounds or eighty pounds; it was as much as ever he could lift up on his shoulder
every time he came to the place where it was.
583. By the Chairman. —That was considered a refinement of punishment ?—Yes.
584. It is reported that the farmers round about Pentridge can get men out for a week or
two to come to assist in their farming operations—have you ever known that to be the case ?—No.
585. They are never allowed to work at anything but Government work ?—Never; unless
for the officers on the station, such as Mr. Price or Mr. Duncan, or any of the overseers or
warders. They put in a requisition and then thoy pay so much a day for the men doing their
work. I had a gang of men out for three months, at a place called Mr. Kady’s Paddock, building
a stone wall for him, but then they were getting wood for the Government for the labor.
586. Are warders very frequently dismissed from Pentridge ?—Yes.
587. For what kind of fault ?—For very little.
588. Is the fault always stated ?—Yes.
Penal.— g.


589. Is there any other punishment hut dismissal attached to any fault by a warder ?
There is fine also.
590. Is that part of the regulations when you take office ?—No.
591. It is no part of your agreement, that, if you are dismissed, you will have to forfeit
your pay ?—No.
592. And is it frequently the case that pay is forfeited ?—Yes.
593. To what extent ?—I have seen warders fined from ten to fifteen days’ pay, but from
five to ten is the usual time.
594. Have you any idea of the number that have been dismissed ?—No; but many a
hundred have been dismissed, I think, in my time. I have seen them going away three or four
together in a morning.
595. By Dr. Tierney. —You said awhile ago that you were discharged for allowing
prisoners to escape ?—Yes.
596. Why did you allow them to escape, could you have prevented their escape ?
I could not.
597. Were all the prisoners out with you at the time ?—Yes; I had seventeen men under
my charge, and there were four warders with their double barrelled pieces besides myself, to keep
them from running away.
598. In your instructions, a copy of which is before the committee, you are told that, if a
man escapes, you are not to go after him. —“ In the event of any prisoners in future making an
attempt to escape, officers in charge of gangs on the stockade are directed on no account to go in
pursuit of such prisoners until they have collected their gangs.” Was not that your written
instruction at the time ?—Yes.
599. Was that the reason why you did not attempt to go after the men?—Yes; Mr.
Currie, the Wesleyan minister, offered me his horse to go after them, and I could not, because I
knew if I had broken through that regulation, I should be dismissed.
600. By Mr. Ilervey. —You had been four years at the Pentridge stockade ?—Yes, better.
601. Previously to that what was your occupation ?—I was at service with Mr. Lynch,
who kept the “ Rising Sun.”
602. Have you been long in this Colony ?—About six years.
603. Were you with Mr. Barrow while he had charge of the stockade ?—Yes; it was under
Mr. Barrow that I joined first.
604. Is the sytem that is now practised pretty well the same as then ?—No; men used to
do double the work then that they do now.
605. The prisoners?—Yes; and there was not half the punishment nor half the men
running away in Mr. Barrow’s time.
606. Were they engaged in the same sort of work in Mr. Barrow’s time that they are
now ?—No ; they have easier work now than they had in Mr. Barrow’s time. At that time they
were working entirely on the roads.
607. There were no mechanical works going on ?—Very little; there were about two or three.
608. It was formerly almost all stonebreaking?—Yes.
609. And you think that was more laborious ?—Yes; I am much used to laboring work
myself.
610. You are not a mechanic ?—No.
611. You say that there are cruelties now practised in the management of the convicts at
Pentridge?—l certainly do say so in reference to the hitting them and the way they are used in
taking the tobacco out of their mouths; I know there is a great deal of cruelty in that.
612. Is it done in a different way to what it was before, or in a different way to what it
could be done or should be done ?—I never saw it done until Mr. Price came, because before that,
every prisoner was allowed a little tea and sugar and tobacco, if he could get it, though it was not
furnished by the Government.
613. Mr. Barrow permitted those indulgencies which Mr. Price does not think proper?—
He allows no indulgencies except to those men in his own employment.
614. But Mr. Barrow was more exacting in his labor than Mr. Price is? —Yes; he does
not look at the labor at all or care about labor.
615. It is more good conduct?—Yes.
616. Is the object of your giving evidence to inform the committee with reference to the
cruelty, or is it with reference to your dismissal ?—No; if I had never been dismissed I would
have given the same evidence as now; but still it grieved me very much when I got a situation, that
Mr. Price should get me dismissed without a cause, after lie had given me a four years’ character.
617. Generally speaking, the prisoners are well treated at Pentridge, are they not —they
having so little labor to perform ?—They are not badly treated with regard to their work.
618. There is no exacting of excessive labor?—No; except in the new stockade, the
Chrystal Palace, I believe Mr. Price calls it, they are more particular there about the working of
the men than in the rest of the gangs.
619. That is the punishment place for men who have misbehaved in the other gangs ? —Yes.
620. Are the prisoners well fed and well lodged ?—They get whatever is allowed them.
621. They get all that the regulations permit ?—Yes.
622. Are they generally in good health ?—Generally.
623. They do not complain of excessive task work ?—No.
624. And the punishments are all pretty equal. There are no solitary cells, or anything
of that sort ?—There are a few cells, but they are merely made with wooden slabs. There are no
.stone cells; but I believe they are making some now.


625. They use those cells for the refractory for temporary punishment, do they not ?—Yes.
626. What you have observed in the way of striking the prisoners has merely been the
infliction of punishment with a staff; and this choking and extracting tobacco out of the prisoners’
mouths, that is what you particularly object to in the treatment of the prisoners ?—Yes.
627. Does it very frequently happen that the prisoners are beaten with a staff?—No.
628. May it arise from the brutality of the particular overseer more than anything
else ?—Yes.
629. And a man knows that in striking the prisoners he is committing a breach of the
regulations—it is a positive breach of the regulations, is it not, for a warder or overseer to use the
staff—you would not be permitted to use the staff, would you ?—No.
630. Would you be liable to be discharged for inflicting any punishment upon a prisoner ?
I never saw any man discharged for it; I might be discharged if I was charged with it; but I
should get more encouragement from Mr. Price for doing so than anything else, because I should
he called a coward for not doing it.
631. If you had struck a prisoner, would you have been discharged ?—I should not.
632. Was the beating of prisoners encouraged in the warders? —I saw him discharge one
overseer for running away from a prisoner, and I never heard a warder or overseer reprimanded
for striking a prisoner.
633. If an overseer were praised for it, would it not be done more frequently than it is ?—I
do not know.
634. Were you not positively forbidden to use a weapon of any kind to any prisoner ? —Ye3.
635. Is there not a general regulation that warders arc not allowed to strike the prisoners?—
There is no regulation to that effect.
636. Is it not an instruction ?—No; we have got no regulation to that effect.
637. Is there no regulation that you are not to strike a prisoner ?—No.
638. Then how do the warders and overseers know they are not to do it?—l suppose a
man’s own feeling would prevent him from doing so, unless he was so put upon that he could not
command himself.
639. You say that a warder or overseer is liable to dismissal if he does strike a prisoner ?
No I do not, unless he is brought into town and tried for it, then he might be dismissed.
640. Who would be his accuser on that occasion ?—lf the prisoner had any friends they
might bring him up for it; Mr. Price would never bring him up for it.
641. An overseer is liable to be complained against for doing it ?—Yes, if there is anybody
to complain of him. Mr. Price would not. I have never seen one complained of yet.
642. But you say it is very seldom that an overseer strikes a prisoner ?—I never saw an
overseer strike a prisoner, but I have heard of it; I have seen a warder strike a prisoner.
643. The warders have nothing to do with the prisoners when out at work, have they ?
They have nothing to do with the prisoners, only to keep them ; they have nothing to do with
regard to their work, only just to see that they do not run away.
644. The warders are out guarding the prisoners while they are at work ?—Yes, there are
so many warders to every gang during the hours of labor, and there is one overseer to every gang.
645. You say you never saw an overseer strike a prisoner?—No.
646. But you have seen a warder strike a prisoner ?—Yes.
647. Was it not the duty of the overseer to inform against the warder for that?—No; the
overseer would have nothing to do with the prisoners after they left his charge at night.
648. Is it at night they strike the prisoners then? —It might be in the day time. I saw
one man struck on the Sunday. ,
649. lie was not at work then ?—No; he was in the yard.
650. By the Chairman. —How do the prisoners generally employ themselves on the
Sunday ?—Heading.
651. By Mr. McCombie. —You have stated that you have seen Mr. Price himself strike a
prisoner ?—Yes.
652. Under what circumstances was that ?—The prisoner had some tobacco in his mouth,
which he would not give up, and then Mr. Price struck him.
653. That was only on one occasion ?—Only one occasion.
654. You never saw it done again ?—No.
655. By Mr. IJervey. —Then did the prisoner give up the tobacco ?—I did not see it. I
do not know whether he had any or not, but he was accused of having it.
656. By Mr. Me Combie. —Did he strike him savagely ?—He struck him so as to stagger
him, at all events.
657. A portion of the prisoners work inside the buildings, do they not, tailoring and so
on ?—Yes; there are a good many tailors, and blacksmiths, and carpenters, and all sorts of trades.
658. Who looks after them—the warders?—No; there arc overseers.
659. Which is the superior officer of the two, the overseer or the warder ?—The overseer
is during the time he has the prisoners at work.
660. What becomes of all the work that is done ; does it go to the Government ?—lt is
supposed to go to the Government.
661. You do not know whether it does or not?—l do not.
662. What sort of work is it chiefly ?—There is tailoring.
663. What clothes do they make ?—Warder’s clothes they chiefly make.
664. Police clothes ?—Yes.
665. Are they also engaged in shoemaking?—Yes; and blacksmithing.


666. Whom do the blacksmiths work for ?—They make cart-wheels for the Government,
and leg irons, and they made the Government chaise-cart that is there.
667. By Mr. Hervey. —The difference between the old system and the present is, that
formerly the prisoners were sent to one kind of labor only, breaking stones, and now they are
set to all kinds of mechanical labor and breaking stones as well ?—Yes.
668. And there is no more striking of the prisoners now than there ever was, it depending
entirely upon the brutality of the warder ?—Yes.
669. It is no part of the system to strike the prisoners or allow them to be struck?—No;
they have no orders to strike and no orders not to strike.
670. And it is discountenanced, and if known the man is liable to be dismissed, is he not ?
I believe it is so; but the way it is, is, one man can do as he likes and another man must do his
duty to the letter. I have known an overseer there that sometimes had 150 prisoners under his
charge, and he used to leave them to work or play, whilst he with two prisoners did go making ammu-
nition, and for hours and hours those prisoners would be making ammunition, which was not their
duty at all.
671. Do all the officers live within the walls of the place?—All but the overseers, and
they live outside if they are married men ; if they are single men, they live inside.
672. In the early part of your evidence you said that the officers were allowed prisoners to
work for them. Are the officers who live outside the walls allowed to have prisoners as domestic
servants?—No, not outside; the prisoners do the work on the station.
673. The reason why you did not go after the absconders who ran away from your gang
was on account of the general order that you were to, first of all, collect your gang and take them
into the stockade ?—Yes.
674. How many men had you on duty with you that day ?—Four men.
675. Did Mr. Price, in dismissing you, tell you what you should have done ?—He told me
that I should not have brought the men up the road I brought them up.
676. Were the men ironed when they bolted ?—They were not.
677. Did they get beyond range before you could fire ?—I had no gun to fire. I sung out
to the warder to fire, and I sung out three times to him before he turned round; and when he
did turn round the men were out of sight, they bolted into a gate.
678. Did any of the others go ?—No ; I always used to carry a sword stick with me, which
was made a present to me by Mr. Barrow before he was drowned, and I drew it and stood in the
middle of the gateway that the men had bolted through, and then I told the prisoners to close up,
and the warders to close up also. I kept them there for five minutes to see if I could get
assistance from the stockade; but I did not get any then, and then I marched the men into the
stockade.
679. How far was this gateway from the stockade?—About 200 yards. Then I asked
Mr. Duncan to let me go and get these men back; but he would not allow me.
680. How could you have got them back ; you say they were out of sight long before ?
I knew the run of the place so well, I could have gone across the country and got them back.
681. Had you been disobeying any order with regard to the road you brought the prisoners
up?—No.
682. Was it contrary to instruction ?—No.
683. By Mr. Patterson. —Were any of the other men with the gang discharged upon that
occasion ?—No, none but me.
684. By Mr. McCombie. —Were you the head officer?—l was the overseer. The overseer
has nothing to do with regard to ordering the warders to do their duty; there is a warder on
purpose to do that.
685. By Mr. Hervey. —The overseer only has to see about the prisoners doing their
work ?—Yes.
686. By Dr. Tierney. —Where are you at work now?—l have never done anything since
I was dismissed. When I was dismissed, I put all n:y papers and testimonials into the Attorney
General’s hands, and told him the cause of my dismissal, and I wanted an investigation of my case.
The Attorney General was kind enough to lay the papers before the Chief Secretary, and they
stopped there ever since until about a week ago, and I never heard anything about it.
687. You asked for an enquiry?—Yes; and I never got one.
688. You left in- August last ?—Yes.
689. And you have never got any pay since ?—No.
690. By Mr. Hervey. —Had Mr. Price ever complained of you before in any way ?—No,
never.
691. Did the dismissal take place the following morning after the escape of the prisoners?
No; Mr. Price suspended me the following morning, and then I was three weeks waiting for my
dismissal without pay.
692. Were the men caught in the meanwhile ?—No.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to to-morrow, at one o'clock.


THURSDAY, 11th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Clarke, Mr. Ilervey, Mr. Keogh, Mr McCombie
Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney. '
The Rev. Sam. Corrie examined.
693. By the Chairman. —You have for a considerable time visited the various hulks in
Hobson’s Bay as chaplain ?—Yes.
694. _ How long is it since you commenced visiting ?—I think more than three years but
I am not quite certain as to dates.
695. How long is it since you ceased to visit ?—About two years, I think.
696. Have you visited the hulk President ? —Yes.
697. Have you been down on the lower deck ?—Yes.
698. Have you been in the cells along with the prisoners ?—Yes.
699. Do you consider those cells are healthy ?—No.
700. Do you think the ventilation is sufficient to sustain life ?—To sustain life it may be
but I am sure it is not sufficient to promote health. ’
701. Did it ever strike you the place was not sufficiently clean ?—lt may have struck me
so, but it was owing to causes there was not any control over. When the wind was blowing in a
particular direction, they were obliged to shut the port hole, that occasioned a stoppage of the
ventilation ; and on such occasions, on going into the cells, I have been obliged to pull out my
pocket handkerchief and put it to my nose. J
702. Did the prisoners ever complain of this ?—Yes; every day they complained of some-
thing, and of that amongst other things. I have spoken frequently to the superintendent or
chief warder about the complaints made by the prisoners, and they said the prisoners were very
much disposed to make complaints. J
703. Did they make light of those complaints ?—I dare say they did.
/04. One complaint was about the bad ventilation of the lower deck; were there any
others?—Yes. I have frequently had complaints about the treatment the prisoners received.
The exact terms of the complaints lam not now able to state, it is so long ago; but I have a
distinct impression on nay mind that I never visited the hulks a day that I did not hear com-
plaints from several prisoners about various matters —say of treatment,’either as to want of clothes,
or food not properly given, or harshness on the part of the officers, or something. A constant
series of complaints I was obliged to hear every day.
705. By Mr. Ilervey. —Could you form any impression as to whether those complaints
were well founded ?—I could scarcely form an opinion, because, upon mentioning those complaints
to the officer in charge, he said something about my being “ soft ” and listening to the tales of
those fellows; I forget the exact words now, and, believing it to be beyond my province, I made no
further jnquiries. I was visiting more or less regularly every week for about fifteen months.
706. By the Chairman. —Did the prisoners ever complain of being subjected to tyranny
or crueUy ? Many a time, though I cannot tell when or by whom, except Melville.
707. Have you been actually a witness to any harsh treatment on the part of any of the
officials?—l never witnessed anything beyond the ordinary routine.
708. Were you frequently locked in the cells with the prisoners ?—I was frequently locked
in; but sometimes, owing to the bad ventilation, they allowed the door to remain open. There
was a warder, armed, always walking backwards and forwards.
709. Have you anything particular to state as to what you observed in the conduct of
Melville in particular—did you ever see any evidence of harsh treatment on him—any bruises ?
No, I never witnessed that; but from what I observed during all the the time I was visiting there,
I believe, that if Melville had been subjected to'different treatment altogether, he was capable of
reform. He has mentioned particular instances of harsh treatment to me, the exact words he
used or the circumstances I could not repeat now; I never thought of being called upon to give
evidence upon the subject. In particular instances he told me himself that it would be a charity
to take him out and shoot him at the yard arm ; only, he said, that they were not capable of doing
so merciful an act. It was after his telling me some tale of harsh treatment that he said so.
710. Have you visited the prisons in town ?—Yes.
/11. Do you think that the system of penal discipline adopted here is calculated to reform
the prisoners in the slightest degree ?—No; I believe it is calculated to make them worse.
712. Then your firm conviction is, that a young lad convicted for the first offence would
come out a worse character than he went in ?—lf he was a better man than I am, I believe he
would come out a double distilled villain. I look upon the whole system as radically wrong.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to Tuesday next , at one o’clock.
Psitti..— h.


TUESDAY, 16xn DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present : — Mr. Hood, in the Chair ; Mr. Hervey, Mr. Keogh, Mr. Miller, Mr. Mitchell,
Mr. Patterson, Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
The Rev. Sam Corrie further examined.
713. By Mr. Miller. —Had you had any experience of the management of convicts before
visiting the hulks? —No.
714. You stated in your previous examination that, in your opinion, had Melville been
subjected to a different treatment, you thought he might have been reformed ?—Yes; I think he
was quite capable of it; but that is only an opinion, of course.
715. In forming that opinion, were you acquainted with his former career?—No ; but when
I first visited the hulks and went to Melville, he told me, with a sort of frankness peculiar to himself,
that he did not care about religion at all; but that he received my visits as paying courtesy to a
clergyman, and that it helped him to pass away a portion of his time. I persisted in visiting him,
and gave him tracts, and, after a time, he promised me that he would conduct himself in a different
manner, and that he would not resent the insults, whether real or imaginary, in the manner he had
been doing. He did so, and that be became so much a different man is apparent from the fact
that he was promoted to another hulk, and allowed to go on shore to work.
716. Do you believe that he altered his conduct in consequence of the tracts and other
means you used ? —I believe he did.
717. Did ho receive any indulgence during the time you were visiting the hulks?—Yes;
he considered the liberty of having books a very great indulgence. It was through my repre-
sentations in a great measure that the library was procured, and this was a very great boon to
Melville.
718. Did you recommend him for any indulgence in consequence of his alteration of con-
duct ?—No ; I requested, before there was any apparent change, to be allowed to bring him Bunce’s
Dictionary of the Aboriginal Language, and it was granted; and I got him the use of a slate
sometime afterwards.
719. Was he drafted on shore during your time ?—No; I had ceased to visit before that.
720. By Mr. Patterson. —Did not Melville make use of the expression to you, “That he
would as soon commit a murder as kiss a maid?”—He did; but then the occasion on which he
used the expression should be stated along with it; because, unqualifiedly, it would make him a
very bad man, which, I believe, he is; and I may say of the officers in charge of such men, that
the strictest surveillance is absolutely necessary on their part; for I look upon the class of men
on board the hulks as the worst class of prisoners. This was after he had recounted to me an
instance of some harsh treatment; and he was so irritated that he then made use of this expres-
sion, with a most emphatic gesture —lifting his hand and saying, “ He would commit a murder
as soon as kiss a maid.”
721. By Mr. Mitchell. —You have said that the system adopted here is such, that if a good
man went in he would come out as bad a villain as there was upon the face of the earth. Upon
what facts do you form that opinion ?—The men can talk to one another, and in looking at the
roll of the prisoners I found that nearly half of them were “old hands,” and those old hands
, corrupted the new ones. It seemed to be their object to make every one as bad as themselves,
and to take a delight in recounting their various deeds of wickedness.
7.22. Then the system you would propose would be one of solitary confinement ?—Yes,
with such persons.
723. Are you not aware that one of the principal complaints of those men as driving them
to madness is this very solitary confinement?—Yes; but I have heard them talking to each other
through the cells, therefore I think it is not solitary confinement.
724. Have you not heard them state that the solitary confinement is worse than death?—
Yes; but I have heard the same parties talking to each other through the cells, as I said before.
725. Then their statements are not true ?—No.
726. From what you have seen in the fifteen months you have been there, what would you
suggest as* an improvement upon the present system?—l would do away with the hulks
altogether, and have a system of classification in a proper place, such as a gaol.
727. Your remarks as to the gaols already were, that they were so bad, that a youngster
sent in there would come out worse than a demon ?—My remark to that effect was intended to
apply rather to the hulks than the gaols. I would have a system of classification, so that the
very bad could be put into solitary confinement and be kept apart from the others entirely.
In the female prison I think they have only two wards, and I do not think the classification is
made very accurately; lam therefore afraid the prisoners come out much worse than they were
when they went in.
728. Then in your opinion a very much increased establishment would be necessary to
carry out an improved system of penal discipline ?—lt would.
729. By Dr. Tierney. —What measures of a reformatory character are taken on the
Hulks ?—None that ever I knew of.
730. By Mr Mitchell. —Are not the hulks the last place of punishment?—l believe they
are.
731. By Dr. Tierney. —You say there are no measures taken to reform the criminals on
any of the hulks ?—Not that I am aware of.
732. You had access as a clergyman to all the prisoners, had you not?—Yes.


733. Did they wish for you to instruct them ?—That was the general feeling—there was
a general desire to see me. With some, however, it was not a desire to receive instruction in a
religious point of view, but they stated candidly that it passed the time.
734. Nearly all the prisoners wished to see you ?—Yes, nearly all.
735. And you went into their cells?—Yes.
736. And you then spoke to them on general subjects, or on religious subjects. If you
spoke to them on religion, would they pay attention to you ? —They always received me and
listened to me with marked attention, and I endeavored to suit my conversation to the character
of the individual I had to deal with to the best of my ability. I read the Scriptures to some of
them and prayed with some of them; with others I did neither.
737. When they wished for it you did it ? —Yes, whenever they permitted it.
738. Did the vast majority wish for religious instruction, or did they only wish to see you
to have a lit of chat and talk with you ?—1 would not say the majority did wish to receive
religious instruction, but a good many did.
739. Do you think a good many did?—Y"es.
740. Do you think they were sincere ? —I am afraid a good deal of it was hypocritical.
741. Were they allowed books of instruction, or religious books to read? —They were
allowed the Bible at first; but after I had been there some time they got a library.
742. Do you think it pleased them?—Yes.
743. Is it your opinion that men in those situations ought to be supplied with books of
various kinds ?—I think they should. I think some measure should be adopted for regularly
giving them religious instruction.
744. Would you not say other instruction also ?—lf it could be done, it would be a most
desirable thing.
745. Do you think those persons might be reformed by giving them some occupation in
the cells, such as teaching them trades-r-as shoemakers, tailors, and so on ?—I think it would have
a very beneficial effect; they are plotting mischief when they have not anything else to do.
746. Is there any clergyman paid from the public funds for attending the convicts?—
I never received any money. Ido not know what is done now, but I know there was a sum of
£4BO on the Estimates for a member of the Church of England when I was there.
747. By the Chairman. —Did you ever apply for payment ?—I asked for it.
748. By Dr. Tierney. —What answer did you get ?—The Colonial Secretary at that time
was Mr. Foster, who said he had not any money for such a purpose, that the money had been all
appropriated. I referred to this amount of £4BO for the Church of England, and said it could
not be claimed by them, as they did not send a man on board. His answer in substance was, that
unless I signified my adhesion to that church I could not have it.
749. Did the members of every church wish to see you ?—They all received me very
readily, because I went to the expense of buying tracts of a nature that I thought they would
read, containing accounts of shipwrecks or stories, or something of that kind; tracts not con-
taining any peculiar dogmas of faith, but something interesting; and I brought those down to
them, and all of every denomination received me most gladly and took the tracts.
750. There is an opinion that admitting clergymen to the hulks is very often a bad thing,
in the way of favoring some attempt to escape. Have any of the prisoners ever wanted you to
plot an escape? Did any of them ever ask you anything of the sort? —Never in the most
remote degree was such a thing hinted by any prisoner on board.
751. Did the prisoners get tobacco on board?—No.
752. Did they often wish for tobacco?—Yes.
753. Do you think a small portion of tobacco might be allowed to prisoners on the hulks ?
No; I think prisoners should be punished in some way or other, and I would make that part of
the punishment. __The hulks must not be made quite a place of ease and comfort for them.
754. Have you been to the stockades ?—»-I visited for some of the other ministers there
occasionally, and have gone through the service and come away again. I visited the female
prison in town, and the subordinate male prison, for which I was paid. I had £75 a year.
755. From the Government ?—Yes. That is withdrawn this year. I have no salary now.
756. By Mr. Patterson. —Have you had any experience of the management of penal
establishments in any other country than this?—No.
757. You never attended any ?—I never attended any. I used to preach on board the
Deborah once a week, and the seamen there of all denominations, except the Roman Catholics,
asked permission to come in and hear me, and they listened to me with the most marked
attention.
758. By Mr. Thomson. —How are the females classified in the prisons you have visited?—
I think there are only two wards—the bad in the one and the not-so-very-bad in the other.
759. Arc the two classes allowed all to associate, or do they sleep in the same apartment
that they are always in?—l do not kmw how that is. I suppose the beds are laid down at
night, and they sleep in the same apartment.
760. Are any steps taken to reform them ?—There is a more regular visitation of ministers
there than on the hulks ; and I used to see them netting and exercising themselves in some useful
employment.
761. Was there any educational training going on ?—Not that I was aware of.
762. When you visited the prisoners, did you visit them daily ?—No ; once a week I held
service; the prisoners were classified into Protestants and Catholics, and when I went there the
Protestants were all brought in, and they always heard me with apparent delight; and I think
that, particularly in the female prison, my preaching has not been altogether in vain.


768. There is no clergyman appointed for regular ministration morning and night ?—No
it is only occasional visits they get.
764. There is nobody who conducts a service morning and evening ?—No.
765. Are they allowed books ?—I think they have some kind of a library.
766. Do you consider that there is a good classification of the women in the female prison
or could it be improved in any way whatever? —I think it could; I believe one prisoner contam
nates another; and I believe the very bad have a peculiar delight in making the others as bad
themselves; they should therefore be kept separate.
767. What could you suggest as an improvement upon the present plan ?—I would hav
one general gaol, into which they should all be sent, and I would have plenty of room for solitar
confinement, into which I would put the very bad, and classify the others—that would be m
idea; but I have never given much attention to the subject.
768. By Mr. Mitchell. —Have you had any experience of solitary confinement?—No.
769. Are you not aware that it has been found so dreadful a punishment in other countrie
that it has been obliged to be superseded by milder punishments ?—I have heard so; but I thin
a classification such as I speak of, with the prospect of being placed in a higher and better class
would induce them to conduct themselves better. I think that for prisoners, bad as they are, w
should always hold out something in prospective, that for good conduct and better behaviour the
should receive promotion.
770 There are two points to consider in regard to punishments. We have to conside
those who have not committed crime, and deter them by showing the consequences to others,
prison is not to be made a mere school of pleasure ?—I should be very sorry to make it so.
771. By Mr. Thomson. —Would you recommend that a chaplain be appointed to officiat
night and morning in the hulks ?—As the prisoners are at present scattered over hulks anc
gaols all over the colony, I think it would be impracticable. I think it would be very desirable
but I think, it would be impracticable. If you had one prison only, it could be carried out.
772. By the Chairman. —You said a short time ago that you faere in the habit of pur
chasing tracts and taking them on board. Are the committee to understand that you purchasec
them at your own expense ?—Yes.
773. And did the Government find the means for carrying you on board, or had you to pay
boatmen’s fares ?—No; a boat was usually sent for me from the Deborah, by order of the
Inspector General.
774. You never got any pay for the tracts you distributed ? —I never received a shilling
for my visitations on the hulks, which extended over a period of about fifteen months. I am no
certain as to the exact time.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. John Berkley called in and examined.
775. Have you held any situation in the Penal Department ?—I have; three or four. ]
have been Acting Assistant Superintendent at Pentridge stockade. I have been corporal at the
gate. I was then, at Mr. Price’s own solicitation, removed to the Lysander.
/76. What appointment did you hold in the Lysander f —Clerk and storekeeper, at
a year.
777. Have you any statement you wish to make to the committee, as to the general treat-
ment of prisoners on board the Lysander or at the stockade?—l consider the classification o 1
prisoners on board the Lysander very bad. I have known men and boys put in together. In one
instance there were ten men and a boy, who were awaiting trial before Mr. Pasco, put into one
ward; the corporal was sitting reading on the lower deck, and he heard a scuffle—he went to the
ward and he found a hammock down, and, as one of the men afterwards informed the chiel
warder, the act of sodomy was being committed on the boy, and the corporal took the boy out of
that ward and put him in another ward. I have known tobacco to be brought in with Mr. Price’s
own knowledge, although the men are punished for having it.
778. How do you know that it was with his knowledge?—Mr. Duffy, the overseer,
brought it in.
779. By Mr. Price’s orders?—By his connivance.
780. It has been stated that you offered your evidence at the trial of Melville, and that
they did not receive it ?—I did; I wrote a note to Dr. Mackay.
7SI. What evidence could you have given if you had been called ?—I was sitting in the
office on the afternoon that the rush occurred ; I saw a number of men in the water, and I said
“ Good God, the boat has capsized;” I then jumped up on the poop and saw the rest of the
performance ; I offered to swear that Melville did not commit the murder, but I would not swear
who did it.
782. By Mr. Miller. —Where were you ?—On the poop of the Lysander.
783. Do you refer to the occasion when Owens was murdered?—Yes.
784. By the Chairman. —What was the position of the Lysander relatively to the boats;
was she nearest the boats ?—No ; the Success was nearest them; I was further off.
785. By Mr. Miller. —You saw the murder committed?—l did; I saw the man struck;
I could not recognise Owens, but I knew it must be him because I knew he was the boatman ;
I saw two blows struck, and I saw the man that struck them.
786. How was Owens murdered ?—With a spalling hammer. It is my duty to muster
the tools. on shore once a month, and I reported to Captain Blatchford that a spalling hammer
was missing; it ought to have been searched for; but if so, it was not found.
787. Who committed that murder?—l cannot say.


788. Did you not come here to answer questions ? I did.
789. I put that question to you—who committed that murder ?—I cannot say.
790 You have s id that you saw the murder committed, and that you knew the man who
struck the blow ?—No ; I said I knew it was Owens who was struck.
791 You say you are sure it was not Melville who struck the blow r—l am.
790 How do you know that ?—I know Melville very well, and I saw him standing up
with his-cap on. . . . , . „ XT
793. Did you not know all the prisoners in the boat ? —INo.
794. Were they Lysander men? —No; Success men.
795 Was Melville the only man in the boat whom you knew ? —At that distance he was
the only man I could recognise. . , , , , . t i
796. What was the distance ?—Three hundred or four hundred yards; but still I knew
Melville, because he wore a peak cap.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to to-morrow, at one o'clock.
WEDNESDAY, 17tii DECEMBER, 1856.
Members tresent: —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Dr. Tierney, Mr. Thomson.
The Rev. W. C. Currie examined.
797. By the Chairman.— Were you chaplain at Williamstown at any time?—l was the :
Wesleyan minister stationed at Williamstown. _.... .
* 798. Were you in the habit of visiting the hulks ?—Yes ; I first went to W llhamstown m
March, 1853. T , , ,
799. Have you been in the habit of visiting the hulk President ?—I was on board the
hulk several times. ... . ~ f
800 Was any hindrance thrown in the way of your admission there, or in the way ot the
discharge of your duties?—When I went on board I had a letter from Mr. Price, in which a
condition was inserted that I was not to interfere with the men’s circumstances or condition in
any way. 1 have not the letter with me, but it was to the effect that I was not to interfere with
the men’s condition or circumstances. ,
801. By Mr. Thomson. —Was that as regards their sentences ?—I was not to have any-
thing to do with their condition there as prisoners. . „
802. You were to confine yourself entirely to the discharge of your religious du les
Yes, and that was what I wished. ,
803. By the Chairman . —Was there any foul smell on the lower deck, or m the cells,
from want of ventilation, or from other causes ?—Yes; sometimes I could not stay in the ce s
when I went in, from the stench there was in them. . 9 vr
804. Have you ever been a witness to any cases of ill treatment of any ot the prisoners?—No.
805. Have the prisoners ever complained that they have been ill treated. es.
806. Have you seen the marks of ill treatment on them?—Yes, I saw on one man, when
I visited the President, marks of a very severe beating.
807. Do you recollect the name of that man ?—No.
808. By Mr. Thomson. —You saw marks upon the man ; you cannot say whether they
were from ill treatment, can you ?—I saw marks where he had been beaten .
809. That is, he described himself to have been beaten. Is it not possible for a man to
knock his head against a place and produce marks like those of ill treatment .—I can tc t.e
difference between marks from a man knocking his head against a wall and from blows ma e
by a stick or other weapon. . ,
810. By Dr. Tierney —Do you think the marks in the case you allude to were wounds
from ill treatment ?—Yes. . „ „ . „ XT ,
811. Do you think they could not have been inflicted by a fellow-prisoner ?—No, because
the men were in solitary confinement. „
812. Did you ask the man who inflicted those wounds ?—The man stated that he was
beaten by a warder the night before. „ __ ~ . u
813. They did not result from fighting amongst the prisoners ?—No; the prisoners could
not fight on board the President. . . . , . ,
814. By the Chairman. —Will you state to the committee your opinion with respec- to
the present system of penal discipline adopted in this Colony ?—My impression was that the effect
of the solitary confinement of the men on board the President was of the most prejudicial character
lam giving now my then impressions; I have nothing to do with present circumstances 1
thought the circumstances and condition of the prisoners then were most preju lcia 0 icir
health. I believe that some of the men, in consequence of being kept by themselves without any
books or opportunity of reading, were becoming idiotic, and others insane. _
815. By Dr. Tierney.- The committee have it in evidence that the prisoners are of a
healthy character generally ?—I am speaking as to the effect of the system upon certain in i\ l ua 9 ,
and I can fortify my opinion by the statements of the last works publis ice a ionic upon e
subject of punishment. There they have been obliged to take the men out of solitary confinement
to prevent its having an ill effect upon them.
Penal. — i.


816. Did the men look in good bodily health when you visited them ?—Yes. I belie
every attention is paid to their physical health.
817. As to their mental faculties, was there any interest taken in the reformation of t
prisoners?—At that time there was nothing that I could see. The men could not read the boo
that were put into their cells, except at limited times. I have closed the door of one of the cel
and stood upon the prisoner’s tub myself, and the only way in which I could see to read was '
holding the book up to the light. There was not light enough in the cell to read easily..
818. Do you think that, even with the taste for reading you may have as a minister, if yo
were put in one of those cells, you could continue reading with the light there is there? No.
819. Do you think it would injure your sight or your mental faculties from straining tl
eyes ?—I should think it would do both.
820. By Mr. Thomson. —Does that apply to all the cells ?—The lower cells of tl
President.
821. By Dr. Tierney. —Does not that want of light occur only on one side of the vessel
—lt depends upon the hour of the day.
822. On the sunny side of the vessel you could see better than on the other, could you not
—Yes; but the sunny side would change with the hour of the day.
823. By the Chairman. —Would you continue with any observations you may have t
offer to the committee ?—ln consequence of the difficulties I met with in giving the men religiou
instruction I ceased to visit the vessel. I was only allowed to see one prisoned at a
then I. had no access to the men unless they wished to see me. I applied to Mr. Price two o
three times for facilities for affording those men instruction, and his answer to me was, “ I hav
been twenty years in the Penal Department, and I never knew a man reformed or converted, as yo
call it, yet. You may go and see them in their cells, but I can do nothing else for you.”
824. By Dr. Tierney. —Was it in consequence of that remark that you ceased to visit
It was the fact of only seeing one man at a time that induced me to give up my visiting.
never had permission to do anything more than see one man at a time. I obtained a large quan
tity of tracts for distribution. On taking a few on board one of the hulks, I was told that an
order had been received from Mr. Price that tracts were not to be given by any person excepi
the superintendent. I told him that I would not attend if I was to be thus interfered with
and I went.no more. The men on board at the time I visited complained very much of thei
want of religious instruction, or visits from their ministers, especially the Roman Catholics,
went to the hulks a year afterwards, after the appointment of a religious instructor, and ther
was a very marked improvement in the men.
825. By Mr. Thomson. —About what time did your visits to the hulk occur? '
commenced visiting in March, 1853.
B—6. Ilow many months did you remain visiting ?—I should suppose about six months.
. By Dr. Tierney. —At the time you visited were there books on board for the use of
the prisoners ?—Very few at first; but after the religious instructor went there, books were
procured,.and the. improvement was very great, not only as regarded their willingness to attend on
religious instruction, but the men became educated—they educated themselves. At my first visits,
when the men were willing to listen to me, I have heard the warders ridicule the men and say*
“ There is that d d fellow wants to see the parson,” and my impression was, that it was
perfectly useless for me to go there if that was the way the warders spoke of me to the prisoners.
. 828. Was that, said in your hearing, or in such a way as that you could hear it, though
it might not be said directly to you ?—I heard it.
829. Could the prisoners have heard it ?—I cannot answer for that.
830. Were they sufficiently near to hear an expression of that nature coming from a
warder . I should think so. We had liberty to hold service on board the Deborah and the
Lysander; and service has been held on board those hulks by us, that is, by the Wesleyan body
every Sunday, weather permitting, from that time to this. The impression I wish to convey to
the committee is this, that it was the want of facilities that was the cause of my visits to the
President being stopped. It is the system and the place I complain of, not the officers.
88^- there any service held on board the Sacramento at the present time ?—Not
Wesleyan service.
832. Is there any Christian worship of any sort conducted on board the Sacramento ?
I am not aware.
833. Is there any Christian service held on board the President on Sundays ?—I cannot
say. I have been away from Williamstown now for nine months. lam at present at Pentridge.
834. By the Chairman— -Apart from the system on board the hulks being bad, do you
consider that that system is carried out with humanity, and care, and attention; do you think
even the execution of the present system could not be improved ?—I have been several years in
Sydney accustomed to visit the iron gangs, and the method adopted towards the prisoners here
did not seem to me to be anything worse than usual, except on board the President, under
Mr. btephen Price.
835. Mr. Stephen Price has left the service now, has he not?—Yes.
836. By Dr. Tierney. —Do all the prisoners wish to attend service on the Sunday where
you have service at the present time on the Lysander and Deborah t —The men are willing to
attend, but they are not mustered for us; we have only the chance of going at such hours as
are not taken up by the religious instructor. They are not mustered for us at Pentridge, but
I get upwards of 200 men there.
, r B3 J' ihe chair man. —Are'they mustered for any one ?—The Protestants are mus-
tered for the Church of England clergyman, and the Catholics for the Catholic clergyman.


~ , 838 ‘ B U. Br - Tierney.—Do you think the prisoners on board the hulks are willing to
attend and receive religious instruction ?—Most willing and anxious.
8 39 If the committee have had in evidence that men who are on the hulks could not
tie reformed, do you agree with that doctrine?—l do not; and I say most distinctly, if the com-
mittee wish to obtain moral or spiritual ends, they must use moral or spiritual means.
840. You had great opportunities of seeing prisoners in Sydney ? Yes
. 84L Is i(i y°y °P inion it would be better to have the prisoners here working
occupied at some trade, than to have them idle, as at present they are on the President ?—Far
Dettcr.
• J B , d2 ' P° you tbink tbe men .might be taught to sew or make shoes, and would not their
minds then be occupied. Anything that calls the creative faculty into work amongst the
prisoners benefits them that is the testimony of the overseers. The men hate the hand-cart.
843. Did you ever see any continued system carried out where men are kept on hulks, or
in solitary confinement, without any measures being used to reform them ? —Never.
. 844 ‘ ben men are convicted, or doubly convicted, when in Sydney, are not they all
occupied in some work m chain gangs—road gangs ? Certainly.
believe k e * Dg placed in the road gangs the greatest punishment in Sydney?—l
8 1 4 . 6 - ?_ ave y. ou an y further observations to make to the committee ?—I consider the
power which Mr. Price possesses of placing men in irons most objectionable as a punishment.
«47. Are you aware whether Mr. Price exercises the power of ordering men in irons?
x am.
848. Will you state to the committee under what circumstances, which you know of, men
have been put in irons at the instance of Mr. Price ?—Captain Pasco told me that Mr. Price ordered
all the men in the ward, when Montgomery ran away, to be worked in irons for three months.
o4U. Without Capt. Pasco’s consent?—Without his consent.
850. He was then visiting magistrate ?—He was.
851. Will you continue your statement to the committee?—l think the evil of sending
men away without money from the stockade is a most grievous one.
•TT • , B ?u 2 ' Ha y e T 0 * known them to be sent awa y without money ?—Last Thursday I met a man
in Heidelberg who had come out of Collingwood that day with his ticket for Heidelberg, and he
had no friends and not a shilling. a
858. Had he a ticket for Heidelberg?—So he told me; for the Heidelberg district
804. And this was no longer ago than Thursday last ?—Yes.
855. Did you know this man—had you seen him before in Pcntridge ? No.
iu. 856 ,i Did , ve . r know an y tbe mcn to bo discharged from Pentridge without
clothes?—lhis man had the prison boots on, and another man that I took from town a few weeks
ago had been trying a w T eek to get work and could not, because he had the prison boots on. They
are marked with a broad arrow. J
An d H C °* ld not get em P lo y ment ?—No; because of those boots.
1 1, J x 8 ‘ „ , at detained that man in town ?—He was free ; he had been all over the country ;
he had travelled a hundred and fifty miles, and everywhere there was the same objection to him.
1 think the working with the hand-cart, taking stones and things long distances, very
objectionable. The strongest point, in my impression, in Melville’s case is where he says he was
willing to go and work at cutting stone, and they would not let him, but kept him at the hand-
cart. I think, in a country where labor is so valuable, to put those men to such labor is most
objectionable.
. , 859 ‘ Have y° u ev ? r , looked over the visiting justice’s book, the book in which the various
misdemeanours and punishments arc entered? —I have never seen it. The man I met at
Heidelberg told me that he had been placed in solitary confinement twenty days for bavin**
tobacco, and they stopped his ticket for three months in addition. That I consider a most
objectionable system, lou may keep men in for all eternity by that system.
SCO. Do not you think that a little tobacco might have a soothing effect on some of the
men ; just a little occasionally ?—I do not think it would be injurious to them.
indulgence' UW ° not P rob * b * fc tbem altogether from having it?—Certainly not, as an
862 \, To 11 S T* d i a ? bo , rfc time a S° tbafc y° u objected to the hand-cart; do you think that it
was overloaded ?—I think the sending men down through the streets of Williamstown to fetch up
stone has a tendency to degrade the men, and sending them down to fetch stone from the quarry
o is work that is not beneficial either to the public or to the prisoners.
11 v v'x. ° U i fc would be better to confine them to the quarries?—No ; I think they
"° U RCA \v m ij king be roa4s through the Black Forest than dragging the carts there.
• . . 4 * b ®. re be a great objection to having convicts making roads ?—That is
matter of opinion. With regard to the present system, I would say that I think the entire
dependance of the officers on Mr. Price is objectionable.
805. think he ought not to have the power of having men dismissed on his recom-
mendation without an inquiry ?—Most decidedly not.
806. Do not you think a man ought to have an inquiry if there is any charge against
lam, that inquiry being held by some other party than Mr. Price himself?—l think Mr. Price
ought to report to a board, if there was any charge against an officer; the superintendents of the
hulks and every officer are at present in the most dependant position possible.
i e xi •• • y . ™ airman. —What is the result if a prisoner is brought up on a charge
before the visiting justice and the charge is dismissed ?—I do not know.


Ber.W.C. Currie,
continued,
17th December,
1850,
Mr. Johnßerhley,
17th December,
1856.
868 Do you know whether a reprimand adds to a sentence ?—I do not know personally.
869’ Have you ever seen about Pentridge any instruments of torture of any kind, such
as posts driven into the ground and men strapped to them ?-I have never been in the Crystal
Palace, and I have been in no other part of the stockade, except when I have been in to hold
service. g7 o. prisoners cver complain to you that they had been put upon the spread eagle ?
Not STL Have P you d heal'd of an instrument called a “ spread eagle?”—Not by that name. I
have always been attending to my spiritual duties, and I could not enter into any other matters.
872. By Dr. Tierney.—Do you know anything about Collingwood stockade i —JNo.
873 Do you know anything about the lock-ups generally throughout the Colony . -I
consider the state of the lock-ups on the gold fields and at other places at the present time is
disgraceful men guilty of felony and drunkards put in the same lock-up?—They were when
I was at the gold fields. „ XT
875 Do you know anything about the lock-ups in town f —JNo. .
876 Do you know anything about the gaol? —No; I think that the allowing the doubly-
convicted men to associate with those tried here is one of the most objectionable things in the
Bvstem ; I think a classification of the prisoners ought at once to be made. _
J 877. Would you advocate the system of a man who happened to get in for a lesser
crime being subjected to cumulative punishments for any breach of discipline ?—Certainly not.
878 You think that system is objectionable ?—Yes. . .
879. Do you think, in punishing a man for any offence against prison discipline, the
authorities should consider his original sentence ?—lf there were a classification, you could make
laws to suit both parties; but the evil at present is, that vagrants and those convicted here for
the first time and the doubly or trebly convicted felons are all put under one code. 1 think, also,
there ought to be a separate establishment for boys.
880. Where are the boys at present ?—When I was at Williamstown, there were some on
board the Deborah, and there are some now at Pentridge.
881. What age were those boys ?—From thirteen to sixteen years of age.
882. Were they allowed to mix with the other prisoners?—The greatest care was taken,
but still there was no separate place for them. .
883. By the Chairman. — Are any means of reformation resorted to by the prison
authorities? Yes; in giving them books, and teaching them to a certain extent habits of
industry, I think there are. .., . , , „
884. Have you heard any complaints about the sleeping huts in the Pentridge stockade.
The sleeping accommodation in Pentridge is very limited, and not such as it should be. In the
room in which the prisoners sleep there is only just room for the men to stand upon the floor
When they go in ; and I have been informed, that some of them have to get into their bunks
before they can all get into the room. „ . . , .
885. By Dr. Tierney.—Are not facilities given to the prisoners for committing unnatural
crimes—is there any protection against that ? —I know nothing about that. I should suggest that
the committee can obtain accurate information with regard to the internal arrangements from
the superintendent, Mr. Duncan.
886. By the Chairman.— Tn your experience, have the men ever displayed any evidences
of a disposition inducing you to think that efforts made for their reformation would be futile ?
Never.
887. Have you any further observations that you wish to offer to the committee ?—The
Government have taken away all the salaries from the chaplancies to the gaols and penal stockades,
and that was done at a time when the Government grant was raised from £36,000 to £50,000;
and they stopped all the gold fields’ chaplancies as well, so that whatever is now paid for the
ministers is given by the different churches. The chaplain at Pentridge only gets £5O a year
888. By Dr. Tierney. —Are you aware that there is about one officer to the care of every
four prisoners on the hulks ?—I believe that is the case.
889. By Mr. Thomson. —Have you any further suggestions to offer for improving the
system adopted on board the hulks, more particularly the President and Saci amento, with a
view to reforming the prisoners, and at the same time keeping them in safe custody; or would
you suggest that the hulks should be given up altogether, and some other mode of dealing
with prisoners of the worst class be adopted; if so, what plan would you suggest?—l would
suggest doing away with the hulks altogether. I think that prisoners who are employed under
the Government ought to bo paid a small sum for their labor, so that they may have something
to begin upon when they get out, instead of falling back upon thieving.
890. What other mode would you propose for keeping the men in safe custody, if the
hulks were done away with ?—I would suggest that proper prisons should be built, and that the
men should be employed in those prisons in some occupation or trade.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. John Berkley further examined.
891. By the Chairman. —Before you were appointed storekeeper to the Lysander were
you a warder at the Pentridge stockade ? —I was a warder when I first joined.
892. What pay did you receive for being a warder ? —Ten shillings a day.


893. Were you not employed very frequently during that time in doing the work of the
assistant superintendent, in the office (Mr. Moyle) ?—I was.
894. What was the cause of that? —In consequence of Mr. Moyle being absent, from an
attack of rheumatic gout.
895. Is Mr. Moyle an infirm man ?—Me is.
896. Are you aware of the amount of salary paid to the assistant superintendent ?—I am
not. I think it is £3OO a year.
897. At the time you were performing his duties, did you receive any extra pay ?—None.
898. Did you perform those duties satisfactorily?—l was continued in the discharge of
those duties until he returned.
899. Were you made a corporal immediately after his return ?—Not immediately after.
900. Do you know whether the present assistant superintendent, Mr. Moyle, was ever
employed in any way in the penal department before the appointment of Mr. Price ?—No. He
married Mr. Pricers governess. He was a clerk in the office before.
901. Is his wife still Mr. Price’s governess?—She may have the appointment, but she
cannot be acting, because she is living with her husband, at St. Kilda. He has gone there for
his health.
902. Is it usual for men of approved conduct in the department to be advanced to the
superior posts, as vacancies occur ?—On account of conduct that pleases the superiors.
903. Can you, from your own knowledge, or from what you have heard, state any case,
excepting that of the present assistant superintendent, Mr. Moyle, in which a. person previously
unconnected with the department has been given one of the best appointments in it?—Lieutenant
Payne is another instance; he was a naval officer in the Herald, surveying vessel. There was
also Lieutenant Maxwell, a retired officer in the navy, who was appointed shipkeeper to the
Sacramento. Those are the only instances that I recollect at the present time.
904. You have said that Mr. Moyle was very infirm ?—Yes.
905. And that during his illness you performed all the work which he, if he had been
present, would have performed ?—No ; because his books were not up.
The witness withdrew .
Adjourned to to-morrow , at one o’clock.
THURSDAY, 18th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Guthridge, Mr. McCombie, Mr. Patterson,
Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
John Singleton, Esq., M.D., examined.
906. By the Chairman. —Have you been in the habit of visiting the penal departments
in Melbourne ?—I have been visiting prisons for the last twenty-six years, and nearly six years
in this country. I got permission from Mr. La Trobe, through the bishop, to visit the prisons
when I came here. I visited the Melbourne gaol for nearly four years.
907. What prisons have you been in the habit of visiting at home ? —Newgate, in Dublin,
most constantly every Sabbath, and Harold’s Cross prison, and Kilmainham gaol occasionally.
908. Your attention was principally directed to the spiritual welfare of the prisoners ?
Yes; and also to secular instruction and attention to temperance matters.
909. What class of prisoners were generally confined in those prisons?—Prisoners guilty
of larceny and felony.
910. Principally before trial ? —No ; both before and after conviction. Those in Newgate
were principally before trial. When sentenced they generally went either to Kilmainham or to
Richmond penitentiary. I principally visited in Newgate. I visited there for nearly twenty
years.
911. Have you ever attended any investigation into the management of prisons at
home? —No. # „
912. It has not been found necessary to hold such an investigation in Dublin l —No.
913. When you commenced to visit the prisons here, did it strike you that there was any
marked difference between the treatment and management of prisoners here and at home ?—Very
marked ; but the lengths of my visits at home were so short, that my time while there was taken
up most completely^with the one object I had in view, and I learned very little as to the
management of prisoners at home. Here I was particularly struck with what I thought
interfered with the reformatory principle being carried out. When I first commenced here I
visited the gaol principally; I did not see anything very remarkable there, except the want of
classification among the prisoners.
914. Having had six years’ experience of the penal establishments here, does it strike you
that the system pursued is calculated to reform the prisoners ?—Quite the contrary; I believe it
is just the means of propagating crime. My wife visited the female prison for nearly three years;
and when she was unwell, or detained by other matters, I went and visited for her, and I was
particularly struck by the effects produced by mixing all classes together —the young and the old,
and persons in for their first offence, with those who had been trebly convicted, old females who
have been prostitutes, and engaged in scenes of infamy for many years. We saw the effect likely
to result from that, and Mrs. Singleton mentioned the thing to Mr. La Trobe, who met her,
along with the sheriff of the gaol. She wished very much that there should be a classification,
and that the female prisoners committed for the first time should be kept by themselves; and she
Penal. — h •


, wished also that, even with the first commitments, there should be a separation between those who
appeared penitent, and whose minds were disposed for reform, and the others. That was intended
» to be carried out, but it was never done. Nothing of the kind was done; matters have remained
nearly the same up to the present time.
915. Did it strike you that the system was bad, or that it was badly carried out? The
system was bad and very badly carried out. When I say “ badly carried out,” I speak particularly
as to Pentridge. I have not so much to say as to the gaol here. I have visited Pentridge stockade
for the last two years. In January, 1855, my family settled at Pentridge, and I felt then a
desire to visit the stockade, and I did so. My own property is next to the stockade.
916. When you speak of the system being bad, you allude to the whole penal system of
the Colony; but when you speak as to its being badly carried out, you speak more particularly as
to Pentridge? —Yes.
917. Do you mean to infer that the system in other places is well carried out, or that it
is not so badly carried out as at Pentridge ?—That it is not so badly carried out, from the
limited opportunities I had of a personal knowledge of the other places. I have been in Colling-
wood stockade a few times, and on board the President hulk; but I have visited the Pentridge
stockade very regularly every Sunday for nearly two years.
918. Are you acquainted with any particular cases which would illustrate the opinions
you have advanced ?—There are two cases that have come before the public, which I think are
very striking, and it is likely the committee would wish to have some information upon them—
the cases of Michael Ryan and Thomas Bourke, at the Collingwood stockade. I would also here'
mention that I was precluded from visiting the Pentridge stockade on the 7th September by
Mr. Price.
919 On the 7th September last?—Yes.
920. For what reason ?—The correspondence has been before the Chief Secretary. I have
a copy of it in my pocket. The reason assigned by Mr. Price was, that I was speaking to a
Roman Catholic about carrying a message out. It was on a Sunday, after I had held two services
with the prisoners, one in the upper stockade and the other in the lower, and I had held a
Bible class with some of the men afterwards in the open air, for Mr. Price would not give me a
room to hold it in, and I had to hold it under the sun or under the rain, as the case might be;
but so anxious were the men to receive instruction, and I to give it, that we did not mind whether
it was in the rain or not. In place of my going to the solitary cells on that day, as I generally
did, I had to go away to meet Dr. O’Mullane in consultation at Richmond at half-past one, and
in passing through the yard some men spoke to me. One had spoken to me to get him a spelling
book, and another man spoke to me about speaking to his wife. He said, “ Sir, will you be
kind enough to call on my wife and speak to her. She is in the female penitentiary.” So
I searched my pocket for my tablet and pencil; I had not them about me, and I took
out this little Testament [ producing the sa?ne], and I opened the corner of it and wrote
down these words:—“Mary Boyle. F. Penitentiary. William Ducie. September 7th.”
Mr. Price saw me writing it down, and came across to me. I was just asking the man, was
his wife committed under the name of Boyle. I was waiting for a reply, when Mr. Price
came up and said he could allow no communication with the prisoners. I said I was doing
nothing wrong, but merely taking down the wife’s address. He spoke to me very rudely and
roughly, and I left him and walked towards the gate to get my horse. Mr. Price followed me
very quickly and said, “ I will not allow you to come in any more.” I said, “ Very well,
Mr. Price, on you rests the responsibility for time and for eternity.” He said he was prepared
to bear it. The next morning I wrote Mr. Price a letter, and left it at the stockade
for him. The letter was explaining what I could not explain the day before, because he
would not listen to me. I stated the facts as I have now stated them, and also entered into a
sort of recapitulation of my visits to the prison and the results of them. In it I referred to one
conversation wherein he told me, when I first came there, that he had been twenty-seven years
connected with prisons, and had never known a prisoner to be reformed. He told me that, as I
had mentioned to him that I had known many to be reformed, and more than that, that many
had really been converted and taken to live useful lives and die happy deaths. He told me it
was merely for a purpose that they put on a profession of religion, and he did not heed it. I got
an order to visit the Collingwood stockade, and another to visit the hulks, and about a year and
a half ago I went on board the President, and on that occasion I saw Melville in the President
hulk. I think it was in the latter end of March, 1855, I was on board the President. I
visited most of the solitary cells—they are all solitary cells—l visited most of them below for a
few moments, and spoke to each man, and also to some of those on the upper deck. Melville was
on the upper deck at the time, and there he had light in his cell, which the others had not, that
is, those on the under deck. I felt for them very much, when I saw men confined there for a year
or two, nearly in the dark ; some of them could read and some of them could not. One man, when
I asked him how he managed to read, took up his tub, inverted it, stood on it and held the Bible
up at arms’ length to catch the rays of light coming in, and he said that was the way he could read
at certain portions of the day. I spoke to Mr. Price about it I think a week or ten days afterwards,
at the Pentridge stockade. I spoke to him about the miseries the men were enduring and how
very severe the punishment was.
921. You alluded to the hulks ?—The President hulk. He turned round and said, “If I
had my offer, either to be hanged or to live for a year on board the President hulk, Dr. Singleton,
1 would go out to-morrow morning to be hanged.” I thought that spoke volumes as to the severity
of the punishment; but he made no offer whatever to try and mitigate the severity of the
punishment. I also suggested, respecting the solitary cells at Pentridge, that there might be an
auger-hole made in the door of the cells to admit a little light, for the air holes of the solitary


cells at Pentridge are so constructed as to preclude the admission of a ray of light. The cells
at Pentridge are not more than two feet in width.
922. Where are they situated ?—Quite in the back ground, behind the hospital, and behind
the sleeping rooms in a back yard. They are made of very strong slabs of thick wood, perhaps
two or three inches thick, and the air holes are placed in the side between the two cells. There are
three strong boards, the centre one is solid, not perforated, but there are perforations through the
sides, so that air- can get in, but no light. I have sometimes asked the men if they have not wished
to have a Bible, but there was no means of getting light. In one or two* of the cells they could
manage to see a little through a little chink there was down the side of the door, when shut
where the hinge was, and by holding a book close to that they could see a little sometimes - but
the walls are so close, and they are not whitewashed, that it was very little the men inside those cells
could see. I spoke to the superintendent, and asked, could it not be possible to have an auger-
hole bored through the door to admit a little light. I said that it could do the prisoners no harm
and might do their minds good, but it was not granted. All Mr. Duncan said was, that there
were new cells building, and they would have more light in them.
923. By Dr. Tierney —Is there one prisoner only in each cell ?—One prisoner in each cell-
and I have seen them there for seldom less than ten days, and some fifteen, twenty, or thirty
days; and the usual cause of their punishment was having tobacco.
924. By the Chairman.—Do you not think that it would be advisable to allow prisoners
to have a small portion of tobacco, to let it be part of the ration, and the deprivation of it to bo
a punishment for breach of discipline ?—I have often thought it would have a most salutary
effect; a little encouragement would do more with that class of men than a severe punishment.
925. Are you aware whether tobacco was prohibited in Mr. Barrow’s time ? I will not
6ay positively.
926. Is it prohibited generally in gaols in the United Kingdom ?—I am not positive upon
that subject.
927. By Mr. Patterson. —You say that the system is bad at Pentridge. Are you aware
of the system carried on in any other country?—l mean that it is bad at Pentridge in comparison
with the gaol at Melbourne.
928. Have you had any experience of the system carried on in any other country ?—I have
visited prisons at home for twenty years.
929. How do you know that the woman this prisoner wanted you to go to was the man’s
wife ?—I do not know it at all.
930. Have you any knowledge that she was not an accomplice of' his in the felony for
which he was sent in there ?—I never knew anything about the man, or his wife, or his family,
good or bad ; the man’s request to me was to visit his wife.
931. Did you ask him if she was his wife ?—I was asking him the question, how was it
her name was Boyle and his name Ducie. I said, “ Was she convicted under that name,” and
before he could reply, Mr. Price came up. The whole thing did not occupy two minutes.
932. From your experience of prisoners, do not you think a strict line of discipline is
absolutely necessary for them ?—I do. I think strict discipline, properly carried out, is absolutely
necessary.
933. Are you aware that Mr. Price disapproves of the system of prisoners being sent to
the hulks ?—I do not know whether he disapproves of it or not.
934. By the Chairman. —You have said that you knew something about the case of
Michael Ryan ?—Yes.
935. Do you know anything of his previous history before you met him in prison ?—No; I
never met or heard of the man before.
936. Do you know where he is to be found now ?—I do not.
937. Have you any reason to supppse that he is not what he represents himself to be,
namely, a free immigrant?—He never stated to me that he was a free immigrant. His own
statement was, that he never committed a robbery. He was transported out here. He was in the
60th Rifles, and stationed at Corfu, and he and some other soldiers were sentenced to be trans-
ported under the Mutiny Act for some breach of discipline relative to provisions, or clothing or
something of that sort. b>
938. Did he ever tell you how long that was ago ?—He told me the date, but I forget it now
He was sent out, I think he said in the Duchess of Kent, to Tasmania. He had been in the
service of Mr. Price and made mats for him, and the poor man cut up some rushes and made a
mat and threw it at my door, which showed he could do it. On visiting the City Court prison
on 14th September last, I asked who would take the total abstinence pledge. He said he would
do it, that he took the pledge once from Father Mathew, and would take it from me. He
said also that he came down from the diggings some years back and had £570 with him, which
he had spent in drinking in town; that he had been fined several times, and that he was brought
before the mayor at last and got six months’ imprisonment for drunkenness; that he was brought
down to Williamstown, that there he refused to work, refused to take off his hat, was shut up
on board the hulks for two years and a half, wanting eleven days, in heavy irons, and that ho
never saw the sun rise nor set during that time. That was what he stated to me.
939. By Dr. Tierney.—Do you know anything about the man’s previous habits?—He was
a great drunkard.
940. Do you think he was worse than a drunkard in his previous character?—He told
me himself that he had been in the habit of gaming and so on, but nothing more than that; he
was an exceedingly hasty man, a kind word would do anything with him, but opposition would
not. I think he is an honest man.
941. Do you think he is right in his intellect?—l think he is not very strong in hia


intellect. He told me that he had been struck on the right side of his head behind the ear with
a “ neddy” on board ship.
942. By Mr. McCombie. —Do you think ho has any monomania?—He is excitable and
passionate, and opposition increases his excitement. He had been a terrible man for drinking
and I think at the time he was taken up he must have been laboring under the effect of it.
943. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you think he is partially idiotic ?—I would not say that, but
I think he is not quite gound in his mind.
. 944. Would you treat that man differently to another prisoner—do you think a man like
him ought to be treated differently to others ?—I think if he'was treated with violence it would
have a bad effect.
945. By Mr. Patterson. —Did you ever report to Mr. Price that you thought that man of
weak intellect?—No; I had no conversation with Mr. Price upon the subject. He was in the
watchhouse when I saw him.
946. By Dr. Tierney .—Timing the time that you did attend the gaols did you ever remon-
strate with Mr. Price on account of any cruelty the prisoners were receiving ?—Nothing, except in
the case of the President, and I found how little I got for it; so that I did not think it would he
of any use to go to him. I asked him to show some little kindness to one prisoner, the son of the
Coroner of Wiltshire, a young lad who had run away from his ship and got in for horse-stealing,
and that when lie. had served the time allotted for him to get his ticket-of-leave he would grant it
to him, and he said he would see about it; but it was put off for six months longer, and the young
man begged me to say nothing to Mr. Price about it again.
947. Is the medical department in an efficient state?—The hospital is very bad; it is a
most unhealthy place. I dare say the men are pretty well attended to.
948. Have you heard that the medical men have been in the habit of punishing persons
by some torture called the bath ? I cannot say that I have heard the medical men have done it;
I have heard that baths were given as punishment, but it never struck me that it was the medical
men who did it.
949. It is in evidence before the committee that a case of sodomy was committed on
board the hulks. Do you think from your knowledge of prisons that men have the opportunity of
committing unnatural crimes in them ? —I have never seen or heard of anything of the kind in
the prisons here. I heard of one or two men within the last few days who have been punished
by Mr. Price for it.
950. Are you not aware that in all prisons it is not an uncommon offence ?—I am.
951. But you know of no case of the kind that has come within your own knowledge ? No.
952. In Mr. Price’s evidence he states that the baths were always given upon the doctor’s
instructions on board the hulks ?—I have not been on board the hulks, except occasionally
visiting the President, and then my time was so occupied that I could not attend to those things.
953. Do you know Dr. Wilkins, at Williamstown ?—I have seen him.
951. Is he a humane man ?—I really do not know much about him. I saw him examined
at the trial of^ the prisoners, and that I think is the only time I have seen him to my knowledge.
955. By the Chairman. Arc you aware of your own knowledge what the result to a
prisoner is of getting reprimanded by a visiting justice; does it add to his sentence ?—lt puts
back his ticket I think for six months.
956. By Dr. Tierney.—Do you think it is right for the visiting justice to sentence a
man to punishment, and afterwards to hold an inquest on the man—do you think a visiting
justice, ought to be a coroner ?—Decidedly not. I think solitary confinement in the dark has a
prejudicial effect upon a man’s health. I have been sometimes in the cells a minute or two
before the men could collect their minds to speak to me. They seemed quite foolish or idiotic
for a time when I went in to speak to them. They also seemed exceedingly low, and lost flesh
very much; for their food was only a pound of bread a day, and water, during the time they
were in that place; and they had no exercise, except to go out and walk up and down for half an
hour or an hour, chained together, and this often for a period of twenty or thirty days.
957. Is there not some difference between the two yards at Pentridge ?—There is the*
Crystal Palace that is a place where they send men for additional punishments.
. 958. Have you ever seen the sleeping apartments there ?—No;. I have never been in the
sleeping apartments.
959. Do you think it is prudent to have the prisoners drawing stones in a hand-cart ?
I do not see any objection to it, if not exactly in the gaze of the public.
960. Are you. aware that the prisoners complain of that ?—No. I have complained that
the men who are chained down to the stones in the upper stockade were not allowed to come to
worship.
961. By Mr. Patterson. —For what is that punishment inflicted?—l do not know. For
asking such a question I should be liable to expulsion.
962. \ou never asked Mr. Price?—No. I asked that the men might be unchained and
allowed to attend, the service which I held until a clergyman was appointed. I took up the two
services m Pentridge stockade in January last, and held them to the 7tli of September. At first
there was an objection made, to it, but at length the men were unchained and brought; they
were not allowed to come inside, but were placed on a form outside, where I thought They could
not hear what was going on. On more than one occasion I applied for permission to leave the
Iteligious bract Society’s tracts with the men, but was always refused (in the lower yard no
objection was made). I asked that the men who wished might be allowed to take their Bible
effect t iem f ° r SOm<3 k° UrS a^tor had concluded—some expressed a wish to that
9G3. What punishments are inflicted for insubordinate conduct at home in the gaols ?


—I mentioned in the outset that I was not acquainted with the internal management of the
gaols at home. lam not aware what punishments are used there.
964. What punishment would you suggest for insubordinate conduct? —I think the
Prussian system would soon bring the men round, if a man was put into a solitary cell and kept
entirely dark and on low diet for a couple of days, not thirty, as at present.
965. Then you approvo of solitary confinement ?—For a short time, hut not for thirty
days.
966. For how many days ?—Two or three days is generally iound sufficient to bring a man
round in Prussia.
967. Would you extend that punishment if a man would not become tractable—would
you keep on the solitary confinement? —I do not feel prepared to enter upon that subject.
968. It would be very desirable if you would suggest any improvement on the present
system?—l have heard the prisoners complain very much of the brutal way in which they are
treated, and it seems to harden their hearts. A man has told me that he had been caught by the
throat and thrown on his back and pressed until nearly suffocated, in order to prevent his swal-
lowing tobacco which he had been suspected of having in his mouth.
969. Did you ever see any act of brutality exercised towards a prisoner ?—I was not
present. I have been told it by prisoners when they have come out.
970. By the Chairman. —Would you inform the committee what took place in the case
of Bourke. You were present at the investigation ?—Yes, I was.
971. Who were the magistrates?—Mr. Price held the investigation. Mr. Little accom-
panied me out there.
972. By Mr. Guthridge. —Do you know whether the evidence was taken down at the
time ?—Yes, it was. Mr. Price took it down very slowly.
973. Was the evidence read over afterwards ?—Each person’s evidence was read over, after
it was taken down, separately.
974. By Mr. Patterson. —Can you suggest any improvement on the present system of
penal discipline ?—I do not feel prepared to enter upon the whole question of penal discipline.
I am not prepared to recommend any system for managing the prisoners; I leave that to persons
who devote their time more to it than I could. I would recommend that punishment should be
carried out in a humane way, so as to reform the criminal, and not to irritate him as the present
system does, which both lowers him in his own estimation and exasperates him, and makes him
hate his fellow men and look for revenge when he leaves the prison.
975. How often have you visited those places of punishment? —Generally every Sunday,
from two to five hours.
976. You have never been during the week? —No; I offered to Mr. Duncan to go of a
week evening and teach the men to learn to read. There were some young men who were
anxious to learn, but he would not or could not give me any room for it.
977. By Mr. Guthridge. —ls there any sort of schoolmaster or instructor in any of the
establishments?—Nothing of the kind, and the men’s desire to learn is very great.
978. Do not you think the appointment of a schoolmaster to each establishment would be
an advantage ?—The appointment of a clever schoolmaster, who could not only teach them to read
and write, but give those who are more highly educated, which some of them are, additional
information, would have a very good effect, and a lecture occasionally would have a very good
effect. I have occasionally mentioned Nineveh or Babylon, and given it a spiritual turn.
979. Do you know of your own knowledge whether the men have any means of instruction
excepting that afforded by the distribution of books ?—No.
980. Is any care taken in the distribution or selection of the books, or are they chosen and
given out indiscriminately without reference to the capacity or taste of the individual so supplied ?
That I believe. I would just mention a fact that'would throw some light upon that. About a year
ago I was very anxious that the prisoners should get a good library; I had ransacked all my own
books and my children’s books, and lent those books to the prisoners, and the desire to read was
so great that I was anxious to get the library improved. I applied to Mr. Carter, the minister at
Pentridge, and he made application. Mr. Price said, if there was an application sent in for books
it would be granted, so I went to two of the booksellers in town and selected books, as we had
arranged, to the value of £50 —schoolbooks, works on geography, arithmetic, spelling, and various
other useful branches of knowledge, such as historical works, biographies, and so on, and slates.
Those were all set aside by the bookseller, but although the selection was made agreeably with
Mr. Price’s wish, those books never were got. Some sort of a library was selected that some one
else thought pi’oper.
981. Do you know whether each man is obliged to take the book offered him, whether he
ha 3 read it the previous week, or wants it, or not?—No, I do not know that.
982. By Mr. Me Comhie. —Have you ever yourself seen any instance of unnecessary cruelty
exercised towards prisoners in the stockade ? —No, unless you look upon chaining men to a
stone in all weathers as unnecessary cruelty.
983. By Mr. Patterson —ln speaking of that, you cannot suggest any improvement—what
would you do with the men who were refractory, and would not do as they were ordered ?—I do
not profess to be a doctor of penal discipline.
984. By Mr. Me Comhie. —Do you think that system unnecessarily cruel?—l think it is,
especially where continued for many consecutive weeks.
985. By the Chairman. —ls there a hospital at Pentridge ?—There is.
986 What is done with the sick ?—They are put in there.
987. Are there any beds in that hospital ?—There are two tiers of wooden bunks.
Pbjtai,.—/.


. 988 Are there any mattresses ?—No; the only man that I ever saw lie on a mattress was
Gisborne, who was shot through the side. mattress was
989. By Mr. Me Combie, —Do not you think that a good deal of this unnecessary cruelty
of systern is in consequence of the want of accommodation to keep the men properfy under
control ? I do not think so. I think the punishments, as far as I have heard of them are
unnecessarily severe—fifteen, twenty, or thirty days in a solitary cell, with a pound of bread a
day, and shut out from light, I do not think necessary for a mere breach of discipline
9JO Do you consider that, where men have forfeited their liberty to their country solitary
confinement is too great a punishment ?—Not at least for a specified time, if they have Hght and
exercise, books and instruction. J
991. Do not you think the solitary system might be carried out altogether with crest
improvement to penal d.scipline ?-Something of a silent system and short punishments I think
would tend to improve men; but if a man gets ten or twelve years for stealing a horse he loses all hope
992. You do not consider it hopeless to expect the reformation of even the common
itZZ nMn * }\° Ur ga ° lS / Dd hu J ks ? ~ Quite the C ° 1 had in “7 this morning
1 t 3 1 h /?- got fr T P" sonerB ia different parts of the colonies, men who are in
good circumstances and doing well, confirmatory of this.
« 993. What system would you suggest for bringing this reformation about?—l think in
were possible 6 to alter*the°laws. S ° me for Sorter sentences if it
994. According to Mr. Price’s evidence, very considerable reductions are made in the
duration of the punishments for good conduct ?—lt is carried out in a very irregular manner
and very unsatisfactorily to the prisoners. J b lllduuer >
[ ra P rovements with regard to the superintendence of the
gistrates. I think there ought to be a general commission over the entire prison matters, and
that men m prison situations ought to be employed subject to this commission, and dismissed
subject to it, and not be left at the will of one individual.
oo?' y i° U ,l o , not a PP rove . o , f the system of having onevisiting magistrate ?—I do not
ooq w h< r, shrfuld com bme with the superintendent, there would be no check ?—No
in that respect ° U d J ° U SUggGSt a paid commission ?—Whatever the Government might determine
999. It would be a very onerous duty which such a commission would have to perform
You could not expect men to devote their time to it without being paid ?—I suppose not • but I
think it would be highly desirable not to let too much power be veXed in one individual
c . | ben you would propose a commission of three or four individuals to take the whole
system of penal business in the colony into their hands?—More than that
1001. Five?—Perhaps so.
10 °r T hat wo , ul f to . a . very great extent, do away with any risk of combination between
the superintendent and the visiting justice ?—I think it would be a step in the right direction
1000. is there any system of religious training or instruction you would propose ?—ln
addition to ministers, &c., having access at reasonable times for holding religious services cate-
chetical and Bible classes, I would like to provide, a well selected and extensive library, and give
e men free access to that horary, to employ their time in the evenings; and thus they would be
kept from talking together about their old habits, and forming new plans. That, I think, would
have a salutary effect. I mean a good library, not of the common reading books, but books of an
intellectual and scientific class. Some of the men wish to read books on scientific subjects and
some to improve themselves upon.matters of business. I suggested to Mr Price that they should
turn a large piece of ground, which, he had enclosed for grazing purposes, into a horticultural
gaiden, and teach men. on the most improved principles; so that, when the men were discharged
they might take situations, and be useful members of society. g ’
Yes I think s^ nd SJStem 7 ° U W ° Uld be a g °° d chance ° f their reformation ?
1 k i°° 5 ' y ,° U SUggest any im P ro vement in the way now adopted of teaching manual
labor, do you think that it is now upon a propef basis ?—I have not been in much through the
week days, but Ido not think the labor is at all remunerative. I. think that all the clothes and
shoes, &c., connected with the convict establishment and the Government ought to be made bv
the prisoners, and useful trades taught them. 6 y
» , 1 , 006 - 9 D ° not you think it is possible, by instilling industrious habits into the prisoners, to
reform them —Yes; I believe in America the prisoners are allowed to choose a trade and are
perfected in it, and when they get their discharge they are able to earn a livelihood ; and I believe
they also get some portion of their earnings paid to them.
1007. You would propose that, where a man is committed and is sent to one of the stockades
and gaols, that the first question asked should be, “ Do you beloDg to any trade,” and if he do
not, he should be asked what trade he would like to learn, and that he should learn a trade and
go out a more useful member of society than he came in ?—Yes.
, n k° bS '. nd sbat5 bat in addltl01 ? to a system of moral culture and religious instruction
should be put in action, so that in every way the man might be reformed and made a good
muTlii * inSt6ad ° f COntlDuin 2 a ad one Yes > for society’s sake as well as his own
1009 Mr. Price has stated that he had no hope whatever of any reformation of the men ?
His system I believe is adapted to preclude reformation; but I have had ample proof as to the
Scriptural reformation of some of the most incorrigible and degraded men, and such is the taste of
the men for reading, that I believe they would content themselves with reading and poring over


the books, if they had them, in place of concocting new Crimes and villainies. In some of the
prisons at home they have one man told off in each gang to read out for the day, and the others
are all obliged to work silently; that is, in the trades where there is not too much noise, such
as tailors or shoemakers. &c.
1010 Do you not think it is very improper for the visiting justice to be a Government
officer as well; ought not he to be independent of the Government ?—I think the citizens or
municipality where the prisons are situated ought to appoint their visiting justices, and I think,
of the commission appointed, some ought to be appointed by the Government and some by the
citizens.
1011. Does not Lieutenant Pasco hold a Government situation independent of his position
as visiting justice. Is he not the stipendiary magistrate at Williamstown ?—I thought all was
included under one.
1012. Do not you think it improper that an executive officer of the Crown should be
appointed a visiting justice ?—I do.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Charles Tye called in and examined.
1013. By the Chairman. —Were you engaged at onetime in the penal department ?—I
have been over convicts for the last twenty years in different parts of the world.
1014. Were you an eye witness to a prisoner who was said to be shamming insanity, and
who was put through some process to test him ?—Yes; his name was McGuire.
1015. Will you state to the committee what you recollect of what you actually saw in
that case; were you at Pentridge when McGuire was taken suddenly ill ? —I was.
1016. State what took place.—He was placed in solitary confinement; he was taken from
there, and there was a handcuff placed on each hand.
1017. By Mr. Guthridge. —Was this before or after he took ill ? —After he took ill.
1018. By Mr. Thomson. —Was not he examined by a medical man?—He was examined
by Dr. Webster.
1019. What was the next step?—l was locker at the time when they handcuffed him down
to an iron bedstead; his head was shaved; and there was a liquid, I do not know what they call
it, but I believe something connected with vitriol, that was put on his head, with a feather, and
all down the spine of his back, and his two cheeks, and the calves of his legs.
1020. Was that by the doctor’s orders?— Yea.
1021. By the Chairman. —What effect had it upon him?—Only to drive the man more
mad.
1022. What effect had it upon the skin ?—As soon as it was put on it became a blister,
and the blisters broke immediately, and the man could not lie down any where. He was lying on
his belly when it was done. It was put right down the back bone.
1023. How many days was it before all was healed up ?—lt took nearly a fortnight, or
more than that before it was properly healed up, and then it was repeated again; and in one
instance, the man knowing it was going to be repeated again, after his head was shaved in the
hospital, made a rush out, and attempted to strike the doctor. As soon as they let the hair grow,
they repeated the same punishment.
1024. Were you given to understand by the doctor or the dispenser that this was to cure
him from shamming madness?—Yes.
1025. Not that he was mad ?—The doctor, I believe, understood that he was not mad.
He said so. I could not say so. He had every symptom of madness about him. I considered the
man insane myself.
1026. The report through the place was that it was done because he was feigning
madness ?—Yes. '
1027. Was he in good bodily health ?—No; he was very weak.
1028. What became of him afterwards?—After that I believe he was sent up to the upper
stockade—the Crystal Palace.
1029. And you lost sight of him there ?—Yes; after that I went to the hulks.
1030. Do you know in whose charge he was put ?—I think he was in Kilmartin’s charge.
1031. Have you been to the Crystal Palace ?—Yes.
1032. Do you know anything about Gisborne’s case, when he was shot?—No; I was not
there then. The only thing I can speak of is the cruelty exercised in this department and the
consequence of it, as compared with various other departments.
1033. Have you been over prisoners in Van Diemen’s Land?—No, not in these colonies,
but at home, and in Bermuda and in Gibraltar, and I never saw that cruelty exercised towards
prisoners there that has been exercised here.
1034 Do you think the discipline in this colony is needlessly severe ?—I think there is one
thing might be adopted which would prevent a great deal of crime amongst the prisoners, that is to
allow them tobacco—let them have so much a week for their earnings. They work hard, some of
them cutting stone, and everything else. I have been over prisoners in Gosport, Portsmouth,
Bermuda, and Gibraltar, and there they are allowed say three pence a week for tobacco. Give
them that and they will work, and that will prevent all crime. There is one bad quality
belonging to Mr. John Price, and that is, that any man who goes and gives any information about
a man, whether he is guilty or not, he will immediately confine that man and keep him in the cells.
1035. The man informed against, or the man giving information ?—The man giving the
information.
1036. Have you read that column marked “Pentridge Stockade, No. 2,” in the Age ?


IvwTi^L 1 r/" ‘° the lruth of all tUt is detailod there - c r, “ «»**« */.•««<?
inq« tr y Guthrtd 9 e \~^ e y° u in the employ of the department now ?—No
i oqo v° W lODg Wer ® 0U in . the de P ar tment ?—Eleven months,
nn Tniv i° U f WGre DOt lfc dunng the time of Mr. Barrow’s superintendence?—No- I joined
p y ’ aSt W and 1 J effc eleven months afterwards; I was locker there, and’loc'ker at
thA hn S T°t VT d Specml cons , table ou board the hulks. I have not seen Melville chained up to
the bar, but I have seen another man served that way. a P 1
1040. Can you recollect his name ?—No.
or ,. , B y ™°™son—Were you present, and did you see all that is stated in this
t Wbicb y° U have ba » ded 1D ? ~ Tbe of the man being a servant to Mr. McPherson I
oXVa h e ,TrfT 6 ™ ost l ( l uiet and civil in the stockade, and after he had got the
ordei for his ticket-of-leave, when he was in the gateway, Mr. John Price came un and l r<w S
th lth I l * 6lllB / c ° nvxcfc frora Va n Biomen’s Land ;he said, “ You have been on the other side ”
and then he ordered me to go and put him in the cell, and the man was put in solitary confinement
bis liberation ?—Yes. Chatrman -— And at the same the Governor’s warrant was in force for
>bouUhem^ a e™ y rha e :e e do S „:itCX S WhM tobacco
1044. By the orders of Mr. Price ?—By the orders of the chief warder
ixia ™ ve yOU ever Seen h done in Mr - Price ’ s presence ?—No
- -Perintendent aY^rtntfnd^ "f
Inal’ T ierne y-— What may be called throttling a man ?—Yes
. OOT . • V r / 0U Gave tbe service y° urself » or were you dismissed ?—I was discharged from
he service, but I have got a character from Mr. Price. b
i a y° u discharged in consequence of any quarrel between you ? No • I was nn
, ktt d J 1 We ™e supposed, so many of us, to go on board the different
® do f° ur bours dufc y> t 0 S lve the other men a chance of getting a Sunday off. I went on
oard at eight and came ashore at twelve, and was not for duty then till next morning T
ad dressed myself and went into Williamstown, and I got rlther toomuch Z dTnt L the
ime system Mr. 1 rice adopts with the prisoners he adopted in this case. A warder went and
that I was coming home in liquor, and for that I was discharged.
1050. Was there any inquiry into the case ?—No; I was brought before the snnerln
adailtted the charge of being drunk; that was sent up to Mr. Price and he
amediately sent down my discharge. ” ; ana 116
1051 By the Chairman. —Was there any pay due to von thpn ? v OC! .
renty-two days pay due to me, and they kept back ten days (five pounds) and discharged me*™
1053 W e T ne Y—Bid you ever nave any disagreement with Dr. Webster ?—Never
oken f 1 n ebst ? r wh o ordered the treatment towards McGuire that you have
oxen ot r —les; he was the superior medical officer J e
S a-tedmotitlThe h^ t “tiespeof“ g “ ‘ b <= lightest; be always
w d Webster see the effect of this lotion upon the man’s skin ?—Yes.
Id of. ’ dreSSed m any waj ? ~ Yes > 1Q a sort of way, with anything they could get
1)1(1 Dr ' Webster see it afterwards?—Sometimes.
1058 . B l the Chairman.— ln the books of the stockade, there is an entry of a man bein*
an g s in possession; do you inow wbat th.f
i non' ? aVG thej water ’ clo sets at the stockade at Pentridge ?—Yes
■of ’;t“o t wlnh«f 0r pal>er ' or oakum ’ or “*“»« the
1061. If a prisoner secreted a piece of oakum about him for that particular purpose would
aid be”HabLiorit 1 ;" 1 " 8 “” i *“ * brC “ h » f if b ° was
-^.‘YoSrwh^woiis 8
be brougbt
1063. Have you ever known the case of a man being brought up for having a little mere
a& • C,ng iD - fli J ted? r l 0““otreoollect g any caso a p g res™ . P
1064. \\ hen a prisoner is brought up for a trivial offence like that, and gets five davs’
k " ow 7 wbat effect that ha s upon his sentence ?—lf he gets convicted for anvthin*
that land it extends his sentence for six months longer. °
1065. For a first offence?—Yes.
„ i d for a second offence ?—Another six months just the same. Supposing a man
ef h nf for , the . sma:lle f offenc . e there is, and he is committed by the visiting justice his
tis sil m„n th 8 , ° Ver m ° DthB '°° ger J and if be “ brou S ht “P for the
1067. What is a reprimand ?—Merely cautioning a man.


1068. Has that any effect on his sentence ?—Not that I know of. 1
1069. It has been given in evidence that that extends the sentence six months? —I would
not like to speak to that.
1070. It may be the case, but you are not aware of it ?—lt may be the case, but I always
understood a reprimand had no effect in lengthening the sentence; but if they get only twelve
hours’ punishment, that has an effect upon it.
1071. By Dr. Tierney. —What kind of sleeping apartments have the men at the stockade ?
The sleeping apartments at the Pentridge stockade are very good, as far as the rooms are con-
cerned ; certainly they are buggy.
1072. As to the Crystal Palace ?—That is very bad ; they sleep in hammocks there.
1073. How many prisoners sleep there ?—lt is on wheels. I only went in once or twice
when I was there, and I think there were thirty in one waggon. They sleep in hammocks there.
1074. Do you think there is any immorality in those places? —I never knew of anything
of the kind.
1075. By the Chairman. —Have you ever seen men suffering punishment in the Crystal
Palace?—Yes ; I have seen them handcuffed to the wheel of the waggon.
1076. For how long ?—For the whole day, I suppose. I have seen them when I have
been going up with the rations.
1077. By Dr. Tierney. —Was there any shelter over them?—No. I belonged to the
lower stockade. Supposing a prisoner is removed from the lower stockade to the upper, his rations
would be drawn in the morning, and I should have to go and take them up to him.
1078. By the Chairman. —ls not a totally different system pursued with regard to the
treatment of prisoners at Portsmouth, Gibraltar, and Bermuda, to what is adopted here ?—Yes;
you can do anything with a prisoner by kindness.
1079. Then the result of your experience has been, that all the prisoners you have met
with are susceptible to kindness ?—Yes, I could always do anything with the men by kindness,
but not with harshness; and I have had some of the greatest scoundrels in existence under me in
Bermuda and Gibraltar. I always treated the men kindly here and made them do their work
and their duty. I always treated them civilly, and I would not be afraid to meet the whole of
them in a body up at the bush at this moment.
1080 By Mr. 'Thomson. —Who has the power to administer punishment in the stockades?
—The visiting justice. If a prisoner commits a crime of any kind at all, there is a book, and
you are supposed to go and enter the charge in that book, and when the visiting justice comes
the prisoner is brought up, and the visiting justice takes the evidence of the warder and punishes
the prisoner.
1081. The visiting justice goes into the case and pronounces judgment ?—Yes.
1082. None of the warders have power to inflict punishment ?—INo
1083. By the Chairman. —You say, when a prisoner commits a crime, it is entered in a
book ?—Yes.
1084. Is there not a charge sheet as well ?—No.
1085. Does Mr. Price ever take it upon himself, to your knowledge, after a warder or
overseer has entered a charge against a prisoner, to withdraw that charge before it goes to the
visiting justice ?—I cannot say.
1086. Are the prisoners ever kept under restraint in any way before the visiting justice
comes ?—Yes. Mr. Price can order any man into solitary confinement and order irons upon him.
1087. That has been done?—Yes.
1088. Have you ever known a case where a man has been charged by a warder or overseer
putin confinement by order of the Inspector General and subsequently the case dismissed?—No.
I have known Mr. Price order prisoners to be put in solitary confinement for a breach of discipline,
but they have always been brought before a magistrate.
1089. And always been punished?—Yes, as far as my knowledge goes. I never recollect
a case of the kind you have mentioned.
1090. You have been both on board the hulks and at the stockades ?—Yes.
1091. Do not you consider that the prisoners on board the President would be just as
safe without irons there as they would be in a gaol—do you think they would jump overboard and
swim ashore if they had not irons on ? —I do not think they would do that; I think the irons
could be dispensed with, because I do not think the men would jump overboard; they would not
attempt it on board the hulks, because there are two sentries with loaded firearms.
1092. What is the object of putting the irons on ?—I suppose it is for punishment.
1093. By Mr. Thomson. —Would not the men make a rush at the sentries if they were
not ironed ?—They could not do it.
1094. By the Chairman. —How many are out to exercise at a time ?—Ten or a dozen.
1095. And they are chained two and two?—Yes.
1096. If the leg irons were off, would there be any risk of those ten men chained together,
two and two, overpowering the warders ?—No.
1097. What is the object of the leg irons?—Mr. Price puts them on for punishment, I
suppose.
1098. Mr. Price says that it is for safe custody ?—I cannot see any necessity for it. I
have had men under me at Chatham and Portsmouth and Gosport, and never had leg irons on
them.
1099. What were the sentences of those men ?—Some were sentenced to transportation for
life, some for fourteen years, and some for seven years.
1100. By Mr. McCombie. —They were the worst class of criminals ?—Yes.
Penal.— m.


1101. By the Chairman.— How long is that ago ? —lt was in 1831 that I was in Chatham.
1102. Then you have been managing prisoners all your life?—With an occasional interval
I have.
1103. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you ever found it necessary to use violence towards the
prisoners?—No.
1104. Have you never struck a prisoner with a neddy ?—bio ; and for two months I never
carried one with me, until Mr. Price made me do so.
1105. Have you ever seen others using a neddy ? —Yes, and stopped them from doing it.
1106. Where was this ?—On board the hulks.
110 T. What did they use the neddy for ?—lt has been used many times I think without a
cause ; that is, if a prisoner, when he was aggravated, made use of any observation to the warder,
such as " Damn you,” without expostulating with the man, the warder would out with a neddy
and give him a knock. - . .
1108. By the Chairman. —A neddy is a piece of whalebone loaded with lead, is it not—
in fact, a life preserver ?—Yes ; I should not like to hit a man with it myself. In fact, I never
carried one until Mr. Price ordered me to do so.
1109. Did he ever order you to use it?—Yes; he said, in any case where a prisoner was
obstreperous I was to use it, but I could always do my work without using it.
1110. And do you think others could also ?—Yes.
1111. By Mr. McCombie. —Do you think it possible to reform the prisoners ?—Decidedly.
1112. By the Chairman. —Have you ever known an instance, either at home or here, of a
man who has been sentenced for such a crime as burglary, or highway robbery, or horse stealing,
passing his usual time of probation, and subsequently going back into society, and becoming a
useful member of society ?—Yes; I have known many cases, and I could produce now two in this
country that are respectable men carrying on business who were transported here. _
1113. Have they served their period of penal servitude? \es; they are both living at
Richmond. . . .
1114. By Mr. Thomson. —Would your remarks apply to trebly convicted felons —the
Norfolk Islanders and other very bad men ?—I think there is a possibility of reforming them by
kindness and giving them encouragement; but not if the prisoners are tyrannised over, as they
have been. Then, when a prisoner is discharged, he is described to the detectives as such and
such a character, and he is so watched about, that the man has no opportunity of reforming, it
drives him into crime. ... . „
1115. By the Chairman.— ls it Mr. Price who fills up these descriptive sheets of the
characters of the men who leave the establishment ?—lt is done under his orders; his clerk
does it. . ,
1116. By Mr McCombie. —Do you not think there is a class so bad that there is nb hope
or chance of reforming them ?—I do not.
1117. You think there is hope for them all ?—I do, if they are treated kindly.
1118. Is there not a chance of even overdoing that—treating them kindly?—No; Ido
not think they would take advantage of it. You can always put a stop to that. If I have found
a man going beyond the bounds of the prison regulations, 1 have said, “ Now, if I know you to do
such a thing again, I will bring you before the magistrate, and he has known what I have
meant, and I never found a repetition of the same thing afterwards. He has turned round and
said, C( Well, Mr. Tye, lam very sorry for it; I will not do it again. Whereas, in other eases, the
warder, instead of admonishing the man, would immediately, go and place his name in the book
and bring him before the magistrate, and that would cause ill feeling between the pusoner and
the warder. .
1119. If the prisoners are such good-hearted men as you believe, how do you account tor
their having committed the dreadful offences for which they have been sentenced ? I cannot
account for that. ,
1120. Does not it appear inconsistent with their being so good-hearted and having such
good feelings, that they should commit such dreadful crimes, and perhaps the day after they have
come out of prison commit the same crimes again ?—I cannot answer for that. I only speak of
them whilst they have been under my charge. .
1121. By Dr. Tierney. —Would the warders in charge of the prisoners at the stockades
be justified in firing after a man if he ran away and attempted to escape ?—That is the order—
o shoot them, and take a sure and deliberate aim.
1122. Are the warders’ pieces always loaded? —Always loaded. It is more than a man
dare do to allow a prisoner to escape. .. ~ .
1123 You are not allowed to run after a prisoner ?—No, you are not allowed to leave your
post There are what are called flying sentries behind the regular sentries. If a prisoner should
make his escape and should escape the fire of the first sentry, the flying sentry fires at him, and
if he does not hit him, ho has to follow him, but not one of the regular line of sentries. Iho
prisoners might get up a sham rush, and if the attention of the sentries was taken off to the one
man running away, the whole gang might get away. T T
1124. Have you any other statement which you wish to make to the committee ?—iNo, I
do not think I have anything further to add, unless the committee have any other questions to
ask me. .
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to to-morrow , at one o'clock.


FRIDAY, 19tii DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present:—Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Clarke, Mr. Guthridge, Mr. Patterson,
Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
George M. Webster, Esq., M.D., called in and examined.
1125. By the Chairman. —What appointment do you hold under the Government in this
Colony ? lam staff surg-eon of the second class in the army, and lam now doing the medical
duty at the penal establishments and gaols in and around Melbourne.
1126. You are the medical officer in charge of the stockades at Pentridge and Collingwood,
are you not ? Yes; but I have besides, the three Melbourne Gaols, and the examination of
lunatics, previous to their admission into, as well as their discharge from, the Yarra Bend
Asylum.
1127. What is the emolument of that office ?—£3oo a year.
1128. Have you at any previous time, either in this Colony or elsewhere, had the medical
charge of prisoners ?—Of military prisoners and convicts on board ship.
° 1129. Have you any duties of an onerous description to perform as staff surgeon at the
present time ?—I have.
1130. Do you practise in private ?—No.
1131. Can you say of your own knowledge whether it is usual for the Government to give
the medical charge of prisoners to army surgeons?—lt is always done in Van Diemen’s Land. I
was asked to take this appointment shortly after I came into the country, in consequence of. the
Government believing that I would do the work at a cheaper rate than they would get a civilian
to do it, on account of the liberal allowances I received as a military officer from the Colonial
Government. The gentleman whose appointment I succeeded to had been receiving £9OO a year,
and they offered me £2OO, which I accepted; and I did the work for a year at £2OO a year. I
had to keep an extra horse, and, consequently, an extra servant; so that it really brought me
nothing, and I asked an extra £lOO a year, and I got it.
1132. By Dr. Tierney. —Who held the appointment before you?—Dr. James McCrea.
ITc was called Assistant Colonial Surgeon.
1133. By the Chairman. —Is your office independent of any control by the Inspector
General ?—I never receive any instruction from him whatever ; but I consider myself under his
control, inasmuch as he is the head of the department in which I do duty, and therefore I would
take advice or instruction from him.
1134. Not as far as your medical duties are concerned ?—Not so far as my profession is
concerned.
1135. Of course, as far as your treatment of the prisoners medically is concerned, you
are entirely guided by your own judgment; you do not refer to Mr. Price ?—I do not refer to
him at all.
1136. Is there a dietary scale for the sick prisoners ?—Yes.
1137. Is any obstacle thrown in the way of providing any comforts you may order for
sick prisoners ?■—No; every facility is afforded by Mr. Price in the way of comforts; not only
those which I order, and for which the Government have to pay, but any extra thing —such as
milk, or eggs, or tea, or coffee, whatever I like to ask for—is furnished.
1138. Are those articles entered in a book ? —My extras are entered in a book, because I
am responsible for everything which is issued. I keep a list of extras issued; and every month
there is a return goes into the head of the medical department, which is forwarded to the store-
keeper, I believe.
1139. Do you ever find it necessary to order extra clothing or feeding for sick prisoners ?
Yes; I have used my discretion in ordering an extra blanket or flannel waistcoat.
1140. Has the hospital at Pentridge ever been clear of patients?—Not that I recollect.
1141. Have the patients been suffering principally from chronic disease? —No; a great
many of the cases have been fictitious and got up to escape labor or punishment; some have been
from injuries produced by the prisoners themselves called “ malingering.” There are various
means the prisoners may adopt, as by applying some irritating medium to the eyes,, which would
make them sore; they find out many things which will do so. It is the same in the army.
There has been more acute than chronic disease, but very few serious ailments have occurred.
1142. Is there any hospital at present at Pentridge ?—No, there is none ; there is one in
the course of erection.
1143. Is the room which is used as a hospital in the day time used as a ward at night ?
It is both hospital and ward at night.
1144. Then the healthy men sleep with the sick at night ?—Yes.
1145. Is not that bad ?—Yes; but the whole establishment is only in embryo at present.
You have got so many prisoners to accommodate, and you have got no accommodation for them
until you can build it. I did report the want of a hospital to Dr. McCrea, and I believe he has
done what he could; but there can be no accommodation until it is built.
1146. Do you visit the stockade once a week ?—Twice a week, and also whenever I may
be called.
1147. How many huts are there in the stockade ?—I could not say.
1148. What is the average number of prisoners in hospital at Pentridge, where there are
450 men ?—I think I have now abont a dozen, and sometimes I have twenty-five or thirty in the


hospital, but then there are a great many for whom I prescribe every day, whose complaints are
trivial.
1149. Do you know the dimensions of the hut that is used now as a hospital ? I could
not mention the dimensions, but I would say that I do not think there is sufficient accommodation
there for the men. We calculate that every soldier ought to have 450 cubic feet of air if he is-
not s:ck; and if sick, 600, and I believe in the hospital at Pentridge the men have not 100.
1150. Are there any beds allowed in the sick wards beyond what there are in the other
wards ? At Collingwood there are no beds unless they are ordered. Beds, and blankets, and
rugs, and everything, are furnished if they are ordered. At Collingwood they have bedsteads •
the ward there is differently constructed.
1151. Are you to be understood to say that this hospital, in which the twenty-five men are
during the day, has its full complement at night? —I think they calculate that fifty sleep in it.
1152. There are more than the sick men sleep in it?—Yes. Healthy men come in at night.
1153. And there are twenty sick men there during the day?—Sometimes. At other
times there may be only ten or a dozen.
1154. Have you ever met with any infectious diseases amongst the prisoners?—Never.
In that event, I think a particular portion of the outer buildings should be appropriated to them.
Whenever I have had any man very sick, Mr. Price has, at my request, removed him to the
warder’s quarters.
1155. Have you any men there now? —I have a man there now—Gisborne—who has been
there for six months; and I had a man there the other day, ill of dropsy, who died after having
been there a long time.
1156. During the last six months have there been no bad or contagious diseases that
required the prisoners to be taken out of the hospital?—No; and in proof of that, there have
been very few deaths, and none from the deficient accommodation. There has been less mortality
amongst the prisoners than in any body of men I ever had to do with.
1157. Then, unless in an extreme case of illness or in case of a gunshot wound, or some-
thing which you consider dangerous to life, a sick man gets nothing but the ordinary run of a rug
and blanket on a board ?—No; that is from the peculiar position of the place. There is no
accommodation to give to the sick.
1158. There is no other accommodation for a sick man, unless you take him out and put
him in a private house?—No. But as far as I have seen, nobody has suffered materially from it.
I think if it was not for the peculiar climate there is here, you could not keep so many men so close
together. The peculiar rarification of the air here, I consider, is the means of keeping the men in
health.
1159. Supposing you sent in a requisition for twenty-five mattresses to put those men
upon, would not that be attended to ?—lt would; and whenever I have had a case that I thought
required an indulgence of that kind, I always recommended it, and the man had it.
1160. Can you see any objection to allowing prisoners to have a mattress to lie upon ;
would they not do more work if they were comfortably housed and slept ?—I think that where
men are put in for punishment and not for comfort, and you have a system of punishment, you
are bound to see it carried out, so long as you do not injure their health ; and it is much greater
punishment for a man to sleep upon a board than upon a mattress.
1161. Do you not think the moral degradation of imprisonment is a sufficient punishment?
—That depends upon a person’s idea of punishment.
1162. By Mr. Clarice. —ln a closely confined place like the stockade at Pentrido-e, is not
sleeping upon the boards healthier than sleeping upon mattresses ?—Yes, decidedly. ° When a
man is really sick, I think he ought to have every comfort in the world; but half of these prisoners
only come into the hospital for what they call a slant, and until they decidedly show symptoms
of sickness, they are much better sleeping on a board.
1163. By ille Chairman. —Have you ever had to order ma-ttresses except in the case of
Gisborne?—Yes; I ordered bedsteads and mattresses altogether at ColliDgwood. The prisoners
were sleeping on the floor when I took charge of that stockade. In the small hospital there is
there now, the}’’ have iron bedsteads.
1164. Are not the beds so arranged that the men sleep in tiers over each other?—Yes,
in these wards.
1165. Is there sufficient height between the tiers for the men to sit upright ?—Yes, more
than that. I think all those things might be very much improved, and still the punishments
be carried on in the same way, if you had the buildings to do it in; but until increased
accommodation i 3 afforded, it is difficult to know what to do to improve the present state of matters.
1166. Then you do not think it is the cost of the additional mattress and pillows that is
the cause of their not being supplied, but the incomplete state of the whole affair? Yes I
think it is because there is no hospital and no regular accommodation ; but whenever there is a
real case of sickness which requires any extra comfort, in any way, either of eating, or drinking
or clothing, or anything, it was always afforded, even to going against the regulations of tire
establishment. . The poor man who died the other day of dropsy took a fancy to smokino- tobacco
and I thought it would be a kind of solace to him, and I recommended it, and ho was allowed it!
1167. Do you know what amount the officers have to pay to the Government per day for
employing the prisoners as servants ?—No; I have never had anything to do in connection with
the penal establishment except as medical officer.
1168. Are there many men in irons at Pentridge?—Yes.
1169. If a man in irons is taken ill, do you strike his irons?—That depends upon the
nature of the sickness. I always strike them if I think he requires it.


1170. Bi/ Mr. Patterson. —Do you act as visiting justice ?—No, I am not a magistrate.
1171. By the Chairman. —Unless you really saw it was a dangerous case, the irons would
not he struck?—No; unless I thought that there was, medically, a necessity for striking
them.
1172 When a man’s irons were struck, might you not almost look upon his case as
hopeless?—Oh, no; I should strike them for a time until he was better; for instance, if he had
a sore upon his leg I should strike his irons for a time, and I suppose they would be put on
again ; I have not inquired into that.
1173. llow long does it take to take off irons, five or ten minutes?—l have often seen
them striking them, but I do not recollect the time it took ; I should think a few minutes.
1174. Do you think there would be any danger in taking off the irons when men wero
sick and putting them on again when they were better?—Of course, any sick men would not have
the irons put on again until they were returned to hard labor, and then they would be out of my
hands, and I should not know whether they wore irons or not.
1175. Are the irons at Pcntridge put on as a punishment, or to hinder escape ?—I could
not say ; but I fancy it is as a means of punishment; but I never busy myself about other
people’s business. I look after my own, which is the medical part of the business, and I never
interfere with the discipline any further than to see that it does not injure the men’s health.
1176. Have you any difficulty in distinguishing between real sickness and simulated
sickness? —I have had an apprenticeship of between fifteen and twenty years to that peculiar
branch of the profession, and in military practice it is the same sort of practice as with convicts.
In civil practice you never have people applying to you who are not sick, because they have to
pay ; but in military service, the men come to you to get off parade, or off going on guard, and
they simulate sickness. I think as far as my term of service goes, I have as good a knowledge
of that part of the profession as anybody here; because military men are particularly versed in
that branch of the profession, from their greater experience in it. We are not infallible; but
I think, generally speaking, I can tell when a man is simulating sickness, because I have had it
to do all my medical life.
1177. Setting aside altogether professional opinions in the matter, do not you think,
speaking generally, that prison rules, when made too strict, are apt to defeat the purpose iu
view ? —I do not exactly understand the nature of the question ; does it refer to the discipline
within the prison ?
1178. Yes?—l think if there is ever any case of cruelty or of unfair play, that that
should be well looked after; but I think if you give a man a punishment, it is better to punish
him well than to give him a sort of half punishment.
1179. If a man does what is wrong —commits a breach of discipline —should ho not bo
cautioned and not punished for the first offence, and be punished for a second offence?—l think
there is a great deal in that; I think that, generally, that system has been pursued, that a
warning has bec-n tried once or twice before the man has been punished. I sometimes have brought
up a man before the visiting justice for scheming. I did that at first; and I found that some-
times a man was only admonished, it being his first offence.
1180. Do you think that that mild system is carried out in a measure in the present
penal establishments of this country ? —I think so, so far as I have had an opportunity of judging.
I have always remarked that every time a prisoner has spoken to any of the people connected witi
the establishment, his complaint has been attended to.
1181. Is it quite common for the men to hurt their fingers, or bruise themselves in the
quarries? —Yes, they often do so. I have only known of one instance where a man has been
maimed by it. I had to take off his arm.
1182. Have men been brought, up to your knowledge, for having a piece of rag about
them ? —I am not aware.
1183. Do you see any reason why a man should not be allowed to have a piece of rag in
the quarries to put round his finger?—lf you have a regulation, I think you should abide by it,
and if a man had what he was not allowed to have, he must be brought up for it.
1184. Is it not the case that a great many of the charges brought before the visiting
justice are connected with tobacco ?—I believe that is the fact.
1185. Would it not be a good arrangement to allow each man sixpennyworth of tobacco
a week ?—The object of not allowing it is, that it is part of the punishment.
1186. Does it help to reform them?—There are some men whom you might reform by
good actions, but there are many of them that you could not do so; and if you gave a man any
luxury, you would do away with the punishment you wanted to give him.
1187. Are you not aware that the prisoners in Bermuda and Portsmouth, and so on, are
always allowed tobacco ?—Not in prisons. I had charge of the military penitentiary at Quebec,
and if one ot the convicts here saw the inside of that, I am sure he would wish himself back at
Pentridge.
1188. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you consider that the prisoners are better treated here than
in America ?—They are better treated here than soldiers are. When I was on board ship, the
convicts had one pound of meat a day; and when soldiers go on board ship, they have only three-
quarters of a pound.
1189. By the Chairman. —ls not the prisoners’ food very good in this country?—Yes;
very good.
1190. Sometime ago a man of the name of Woods met with an accident in the quarries,
did he not? —Yes; that was the man whose hand I took off.
1191. What was the nature of the accident ?—He bruised the bones, the carpus and meta-
Pexal. — n.


carpus, and there was quite a hardened swelling in the hand. There was no suppuration, but tl
hand gradually enlarged, and the hand became quite useless to him, and I took it off.
1192. Was he kept at work during the time his hand was bad, between the time the acc
dent happened and the time at which you amputated his hand ? —I do not fancy so; he could no
work with that hand.
1193. Do you know of ycur own knowledge that he was kept breaking stones every da
between the times at which you used to visit him?—l do not. It was not a painful injury, ant
he might have worked with his sound hand, while his maimed one was in a sling. At first I die
not anticipate that it would come to a case of amputation. I suppose he was six months ill.
am not aware of what labor he had.
1194. By Mr. Patterson. —Did he ever complain to you that he was employed?—Not
that I recollect; but he was a grumbling fellow, and it is very likely he did. Tie is a very sulk
discontented man.
1195. By Mr. Clarice. —Were you in the habit of visiting him and seeing his arm ?—Yes
I must see every one that is sick every time that I go there.
_ 1196. By the Chairman. —Are there not frequently cases of crushed fingers and toes, anc
other injuries incurred in working for Government, which impede, if not absolutely incapacitate
a prisoner when restored to liberty, in the full exercise of his powers of exertion for a livelihood?—
There have been cases of accident of that kind, but I think there are very few men that have been
permanently injured by any accident since I was there.
1197. Are the number of accidents greater in proportion to the number of people at work
than with the free people at work in the city?—Certainly not more; I think less. lam quit
astonished, considering that there are from 1100 to 1200 people to attend to, at the littl
attendance they require.
1198. By Mr. Patterson. —Could you name some number that you think have been
injured ?—I have got memoranda of every man that has been sick at the stockades. Any specia
information required I can give the committee.
1199 By the Chairman. —Do you remember a man of the name of Edwards, who, when he
was standing under the prison gateway, dressed for discharge by ticket-of-leave, was shot througl
the calf of the leg by the carelessness of one of the warders, and was long detained in conse
quence ?—Yes; it is quite true that he was brought up. When there arc any prisoners going
away they are brought up in the morning between The two gates at Pentridge, to stay there unti
the Inspector General or the superintendent is ready to send them into town to be discharged
This man was waiting in that way, and there was a warder at the gate. The breakfast bell was
rung, and at that time, after the prisoners have come in, the warders who have been on duty since
daylight go in for their breakfast. This warder was running down, he slipped his foot, and he
fell; his piece went off, and the bullet first struck the pavement outside twice, and then went ii
through a three-inch wooden gate, and then through the calf of the prisoner’s leg. It was a pure
accident, which nobody could have foreseen.
1200. Was he treated as a prisoner after that, or as a freeman ?—He was treated as
prisoner, because he had not got his discharge.
1201. He was waiting there to get his ticket-of-leave?—Yes, but he had not got it; he
was not treated in the hospital ; he was taken to the warders’ quarters, but, nevertheless, he was
treated as a prisoner; he got prison rations, but that could not be helped; there were no other means
of providing him with rations. He was treated in the warders’ quarters just the same as if he
had been a warder; every attention was paid him ; he had things sent from Mr. Price’s house. It
was certainly an accident.
1202. Is it the fact that Drake has lost one of his eyes?—No; he had a very sore eye,
but I do not think it is lost.
1203. Do you think it is not hopelessly gone?—l think not; I think men are much more
liable to have sore eyes where they sleep in crowded apartments, and it is very likely he got his
sore eye from that cause.
1204. By Mr. Patterson. —You have said that there were some things sent from Mr.
Price’s house to this man, who was accidentally shot—was that on account of the Government, or
was it on private account?—Private; everything that I have ever proposed or suggested to Mr.
Price, in the smallest way, in moving a sick man from one stockade to another, or in the way of
provisions, has always been done. I believe I may be considered a disinterested party, for lam
not going to be employed any longer in the penal establishments, and therefore it can be no object
for me to speak from partiality in any one’s favor; nor under any circumstances would it be worth
my while to do so, nor should I think of doing go.
1205. Are men ever allowed to come out when suffering from disease ?—That depends
upon a man’s wish; many men have the means of being more comfortable outside; but, if a man
wishes, he is allowed to remain. There is a man in Collingwood now who could be on ticket-of-
leave, and he is suffering from caires of the shoulder bone ; and as he says, “ If I go out, what am
Itodo ? I cannot make a livelihood ;” and he.has been kept there for some time. His health ig
not good, and he is getting extra rations, and every attention.
1206. By Mr. Clarice. —Does he perform any duty at all, or any work ?—No; he is in
the hospital, and he is getting half a bottle of porter a day and other extras.
1207. By the Chairman. —Do you consider it within your province to recommend any
indulgence to prisoners going as that they should be allowed to remain where they can
get medical advice—ticket-of-leave men are not allowed to remain in Geelong or Melbourne, or
on the gold-fields ?—lf any prisoner ever asked me to do so, 1 would not fail to do what I could.
1208. Has the case occurred where a prisoner has asked you to get that indulgence for


him ?—No, I think not; there was a man named Robinson, who was very sick, and he asked me
to get him out before his time, which I did ; and after getting his liberty his friends did not come
forward to take him, and he was detained; and I think he wanted to choose some place where
to go to, but I forgot the circumstances.
1209. Have not you, under such circumstances, found Mr. Price very tenacious of his right
not to be interfered with ?—No ; Mr. Price has always been anxious to explain to me why he would
not do what I asked him ; his knowledge of convicts I consider very superior to that of most men.
1210. By Mr. Clarke. —And he would satisfy you with his reason ?—He would.
1211. By the Chairman. —Are inquests invariably held in all cases of deaths occurring
in the stockades?—Yes; always, both in the gaols and stockades.
1212. Who is the coroner ?—The coroner for the county —Dr. Youl.
1213. By Dr. Tierney. —Is he visiting justice also?—Yes.
1214. By the Chairman. —When the visiting justice inflicts a punishment on a prisoner,
have you ever noticed whether there is any reference at all to the prisoner’s capabilities to bear
punishment, or does the visiting justice simply take into account the offence ?—I so seldom see
those things, that I cannot say. When the visiting justice comes, be goes into the office, he has
the men brought up, the witnesses are placed in the witness-box, and their evidence is taken
down and the case determined on. If I happen to be at the stockade I have my own duties to
attend to, and I do not see what is going on unless I have a case of my own.
1215. In prescribing for prisoners, do you write the prescription?—Yes, I have entered it
in the book always, except perhaps in the case of a simple dose of medicine.
1216. Have you ever had cause to complain of those prescriptions not being rightly
compounded ?—Not with the present dispenser. There was fault found with one or two that we
had previously.
1217. You are not aware of your own knowledge that the dispenser has put up the most
violent medicines without ever using a measure-glass or weights?—No. Of course, if 1 had
thought that to be the case, I should have dismissed him; but there was no reason to suspect it
from any ailment the prisoners had. If the man was unfit for his situation, he would be detected
in time; there is a great surveillance over everybody in the stockades.
1218. Has there ever.been a case of suicide since you have been connected with either of
the stockades? —No.
1219. Are you invariably examined at the inquests held by Dr. Youl?—Always. But as
I was absent from town I was not examined at the last inquest at Pentridge; I asked Dr. McCrea
to go. He had seen the prisoner when he was ailing.
1220. Have any complaints been made against the dispenser ?—Not against this dispenser;
or if there were, they were so trivial, that they were not attended to. There was a complaint
of giving some medicine wrongfully made against the dispenser who was sent away before.
1221. What do the medical comforts consist of?—Wine and porter, and sago, and arrow-
root; in fact, anything I like to order. The greatest consumption is in wine, porter, arrowroot,
sago, and tea and sugar, and lime juice.
1222. Have you any check whatever that, in that hospital, which is only a common ward,
the patients get what you order?—l cannot have any other check than that the articles are
handed to the individuals at the time by the warder; he is going about there and sees what is
going on.
1223. By Mr. Clarke. —The men would complain if they did not get what you ordered,
would they not ?—Yes ; but a patient who was sick might not be able to take all that was ordered,
and then it might be handed to some of the others’.
1224. By the Chairman. —What does low diet consist of?—Three ounces of arrowroot
and four ounces of sugar every twenty-four hours; it makes three good bowls of arrowroot, which
is a great deal more than the low diet for a soldier, which is only eight ounces of bread. If it
were not for the low diet, the medical officer would not be able to do anything at all with the
prisoners when they really complained, without having anything to complain of. If there were
separate hospital cells, which are being built now, there would not be nearly so many sick to
treat.
1225. Is it with your sanction or knowledge that prisoners in hospital at Pentridge are
made to turn out, if they are able to stand, at the muster at daylight by the superintendent of all
the men before going to work, without any reference to their disorders or diseases, or to the
weather—winter or summer ?—I am nor aware of that; every one that I think is unfit to get up
is desired to remain in bed, and if any man is taken ill between the times I am visiting, if he is
so ill as to alarm either the dispenser or the superintendent, they send for me; but if a man comes
in and seems to be rather unwell, the dispenser has the power to say he is not able to get out of bed;
but those that are ordered up have to turn out to muster in the morning.
1226. Is your dispenser a qualified medical man ?—No, he is not; I preferred him as a
dispenser from not being a qualified medical man. I had a qualified medical man before, but
I found he was always prescribing on his own responsibility, which is a very bad thing.
1227. Does not the present dispenser perform any operations?—He can bleed, but I never
let him do so; he very seldom does anything of that kind.
1228. Do you visit the men who are in solitary confinement every time you go to
Pentridge ?—Yes, every time.
1229. If they were taken ill would you treat them in their cells, unless they were
dangerously ill ?—Yes; unless I thought it was detrimental to them to remain in their cells.
1230 By Dr. Tierney. —lf it has been stated here that you ordered a blister to be put
on a man from the top of his head down his back and on his hips, would that be true ?—I had to


blister a man down the spine and on the back of his legs, but in that case it had a most salutary
effect, for the man was feigning madness, and he became sane.
1231. Was his back dressed?—Regularly dressed; the dispenser was ordered to attend to
it every day.
1232. And he did attend to it?—He did; and it had no prejudicial effect upon the man’s
health.
1233. llow long was the blistering continued ?—I could not say ;he perhaps was blistered
once or twice. I did not pursue this course until I had reported that the man was sane, and it
was referred to me to deal with him. I said, “ The man is sane ; Ido not think I ought to have
to punish him.” They said the way usually was, that the medical man had to cure him, and then
I blistered him.
1234. You admit that there are cases of men feigning insanity?—Yes; I have had three
or four.
1235. You stated a short time ago that medical men, not connected with prisons or the
army, had no opportunity of seeing parties who feigned sickness ?—I say they have less
opportunities.
1236. Are there not cases of benefit societies where persons want to get on the funds of
those societies, and so feign sickness? —Certainly, there may be exceptions; but in the army and
in prisons it is the regular thing to have to deal with simulated sickness.
1237. Are you not aware that in benefit societies men have been blistered for feigning
madness, and by that means have had to give up feigning sickness?—That is very likely to have
been the case.
1238. By Mr. Thomson. —Did you blister this man to cure the disease or to prevent him
from shamming?—lt was done with a double object; if the man had been laboring under disease
of the head, it was an act of counter-irritation, and I blistered him on the back of the legs
particularly, with that object.
1239. You did not order the blister to be put on the hips, did you?—On the back of the
legs and on the back of the spine.
1240. And on the head ?—No, not on the head; I did not order the surface of the body
to be so blistered as that it would be injurious to health.
1241. Bij Dr. Tierney. —Could you suggest anything of a reformatory character in prison
discipline more than there is at the present time at the stockades?—The first thing, I think, is to
get proper accommodation for the prisoners.
1242. Are you an advocate for having men in irons in solitary confinement ?—I think the
greater benefits you could give good men the better ; but with bad men you must resort to severe
punishments, so long as you do not injure their health ; and as far as my experience at Pentridge has
gone, the nature of the punishments has not injured their health.
1243. By Mr. Thomson. —ls that to reform them or to keep them quiet?—To deter them
from crime. .
1244. By Dr. Tierney.— Which should you prefer, keeping the bad class of prisoners in
solitary confinement in irons, or solitary confinement at work ? —I think they might be better
kept in employment. .... . ,
1245. Do you think continual solitary confinement in irons is likely to injure a man s
mind ?—X think solitary confinement altogether is likely to injure the mind, and the irons would
make it sooner more irksome, but still I think it is the greatest punishment you can give a man,
and I think you give him more punishment by giving him nothing to do.
1246. Would you continue that solitary confinement for. years ?—I would not.
1247. If you keep a man in solitary confinement without giving him any occupation, is not
that likely ultimately to injure his mind?—l think so.
1248. Then would not the punishment be as great or greater if you were to give the men
some description of work in solitary confinement ?—I think when the men have nothing to do tho
punishment is greater than if you.gave them something to ao ; I think the greatest punishments arc
Solitary confinement and the silent system. The silent system I strongly recommend.
1249. Are you in favor of cumulative sentences ?—No.
1250. Supposing a man is sent in for drunkenness or .some trivial offence, and sentenced
to six or twelve months, would you allow that man to be kept in by cumulative sentences for
breaches of discipline for perhaps ten or twenty years ?—I would not. I think the great mistake
here is that a man is sentenced to three years and he comes out in sixteen months on a ticket-of-
leave. His three years is a mistake, for he never gets three years. I would sentence a man to a
certain punishment and give him his punishment.
1251 By Mr. Clarice. —If the authorities were more lax in their punishment at present,,
do you not think it would bring about a bad state of things and lead to more punishment in the
end?—Yes; and to say the least of it, the convicts now are very much more cheeky at the
stations I have been at, and inclined to bo more insubordinate, knowing that public sympathy is
excited on their behalf. That shows how strict you require to be with those sort of people.
1252. Would insubordination increase to a very great extent, in your opinion, if the
discipline were not carried out with as much severity as it is at the present time ?—The principal
thing is, you have a small body of men to look after a great number, and unless they were in awo
of those who looked after them they would make a rush and murder the men, and it is only by
strict and sharp work that you.can keep those men in awe.
1253. By the Chairman.— That is merely your opinion, because you have never seen the
lenient system tried?—l have seen what danger a man runs from being in contact with those
people.


1254. By Mr Clarice. —Are you of opinion that if the punishment were more lax than it
is greater punishment would, in the end, result from it?—Yes; but at the same time I would
recommend a classification of the prisoners, and amelioration to those good men who deserved it; you
cannot, at present, have any separate sort of classification. If a man is sent in for drunkenness or
vagrancy he is put alongside of a villain who has stuck somebody up. If there were a classification
you might treat those short-sentenced men much differently to what you can now.
1255. By the Chairman. —Has it never struck you as wrong that a man sentenced for
three years for a first offence gets out in sixteen months, but if he is sentenced for two years he
has to serve that time out; can there be any reason why that should be the case ?—I am not
aware of that regulation.
1256. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you not think that, although penal discipline may be very
severe, the punishment may be carried out without resorting to violence towards the prisoners ?
1 think so; but in the position of the penal establishment at present, where they have so little
means of separating the prisoners, they may be more pushed than they would be if they had other
means to employ and sub-divide.
1257. Would not you say it would exasperate prisoners if they were struck with a
“neddy”?—Yes ; but then, if a man becomes insubordinate and shows a spirit of resistance, he
is ready to be joined by two or three others. If they saw he was likely to succeed, they would
rush up and help him at once; therefore the “ neddy ” comes in to over-awe those looking on, and
although it might be used at a time when it was not required, still there are occasions when it
may be required, looking at it in that w T ay.
1258. Still, if it could be avoided, you think it a bad system ?—Yes; I think the use of
the “ neddy ” is not to bo defended unless a warder was attacked by a prisoner.
1259. In that case you think the warder would be justified in using a “ neddy” ? —Yes .
the prisoners sometimes attempt to bite the warders, and otherwise injure them. ’
The reitness icithdrew.
William Welsh called in and examined.
1260. By the Chairman. —What were your duties when you were at Pentridge ?—To
come in and go back with despatches. I have left there. I am now acting as warder and
messenger at the office in town.
1261. Were you a warder when you were at Pentridge ?—I believe I was entered as that,
cither warder or trooper.
1262. Did you perform the duties of a warder ? —No; of a trooper.
1263. You got the pay of a warder? —Yes.
1264. Who appointed you to that situation ?—Mr. La Trobe. I was servant to Mr.
La Trobe previous to his going away.
1265. Were you ever in the police in Van Diemen’s Land ?—No.
1266. You have been there ?—Yes.
1267. Why was your uniform different from that of other warders and officers?—My
uniform now is not the same as that I used to wear at Pentridge.
1268. At the time you wore uniform at Pentridge, your’s was different to any body else’s ?
—Yes.
1269. Do you know the reason why it was different ?—ln consequence of being rated as
a trooper, I believe.
1270. Were you the only trooper?—The only trooper at Pentridge; now I wear the same
uniform as the warders.
1271. When you wore that particular uriiform, where was it made ? —At Pentridge, by
the prisoners.
1272. Did you pay for it ?—No; it was allowed me by the Governor.
1273. Was it made by Mr. Price’s orders ? —I should say so.
1274. Were you allowed separate quarters when you were at PeDtridge ?—Yes.
1275. How was it you were allowed separate quarters, when none of the others had got
them ?—Being a married man.
1276. Were not quarters built expressly for you ?—Not for me. 4
1277. Were you the first that occupied them ?—Yes.
1278. Whom were those quarters built by ?—They were removed by the prisoners from
a different part of the station.
1279. By Mr. Clarice. —Were they wooden buildings?—No, one was a tent and the
addition was a small iron house.
1280. There was no great labor in removing them?—No; I do not suppose it took more
than an hour to remove the building from where it stood.
1281. By the Chairman. —You have been a good deal at the Pentridge stockade, have
you not? No, very little. My orders were to leave Pentridge every morning at half-past nine
o clock and get into the office by ten, and then to leave town at four, if the despatches were ready,
so that I had very little to do about the stockade, except at the stable, to see the horses attended
to. I had very little connection with the stockade.
1282. Were you never a warder on duty?—No; I was at Pentridge two years and seven
months acting as trooper previously to being removed into town, and I never did a day’s warder’s
duty during the time.
1283. By Mr. Clarice. —Do you think the prisoners are treated worse at Pentridge than
in Yan Diemen’s Land?—Since I have been at Pentridge, to my own certain knowledg<fl have
seen more kindness bestowed by Mr. Price than severity. I have seen him go and make gruel with
Pekal.— o.


his own hands for the men when they were sick. I say that with a clear conscience, as between
God and man, I have seen more kindness than otherwise bestowed by that gentleman towards the
prisoners that were taken ill. On many occasions I have seen him go to his own kitchen fire and
make gruel and other nourishing things with his own hands and send to the sick prisoners. I
am not frightened of Mr. Price so long as I do my duty, and if I do not do that, he will dismiss
me very soon.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. John Berkley further examined.
1284. By the Chairman —Do you wish to make any alteration in the evidence you gave
on the first occasion of your being examined before this committee ?—Touching the case of
Melville, I do. In answer to question 780, I said, “ I wrote a note to Dr. Mackay.” I wish to
say, that I did not state on paper that I would give evidence as to Melville not being the man. I
gave the note to Sergeant OhNoill, of tho Detectives; but whether it ever reached Dr. Mackay, I
do not know. •
1285. By Dr. Tierney. —Did you ever tell any of the authorities that you could give
evidence in the case?—l never knew who they were until the day of the trial. I could not havo
any communication with them.
1286. By the Chairman. —ls there any further correction you wish to make in your
former evidence ?—I would add, that if it can be shown, which it has not been, that Melville
changed caps with one of the other men, then my identity of him falls to the ground; as I could
only, at the distance the boat was then, identify him by the cap. Therefore, what I wish to say
is, that the man who had on the cap, worn by Melville when the boat passed, did not strike the
blows; and unless it can be proved that Melville exchanged his cap for a round one, I maintain
that he did not strike the two blows in question. With respect to the classification of prisoners,
I wish to say, that the new arrivals are promiscuously sent into the lower deck, in the darkest
cells. I would mention the name of a gentleman, Mr. Warren, the editor of one of the papers
at the Ovens; I think he was sentenced either for libel or perjury; and that man was frequently
frisked, as they call it; that is, after the prisoners have gone down to their wards at night, a lot
of warders go down and strip them naked, and search their persons, and examine their ears and
toes, and all their privates, to see if they have any tobacco.
1287. — By Mr. Patterson. —Have you known prisoners secrete tobacco about their
persons ? —I have. Mr. Warren never had anything of the sort found, and still they persisted in
putting him under this ordeal, and he complained of it.
1288. By Dr. Tierney. —Was this Mr. Warren stripped naked?—Frequently; and he
complained of it, and asked why it was practised upon him when he never brought anything into
the hulks.
1289. What was Warren put in for ? —A political offence ; I believe either libel or perjury.
1290. Was it libel or perjury ?—I cannot recollect whether it was for libel or perjury.
1291. By the Chairman. —Were you acting as a warder at Pentridge at the time a rush
took place there some time ago ? —I was, in February ; I believe I was then in the office.
1292. Was that the rush w-hen Gisborne was shot ? —lt was.
1293. Was that rush known to the warders for some time before it took place—an hour or
two, or a day or two?—lt was known at dinner time. It was known to me previously. It was
known for some days that it would come off; but the precise hour was not known ; it was expected
to be much larger.
1294. Was it a particular gang —were the particular names known?—Not to me.
1295. Do you know of your own knowledge whether there were any steps taken to stop
that rush before it took place?—No; they said, “ Let it come off.”
1296. Who said ?—I think it was Sergeant Ellison told me it was to be allowed to come off.
1297. For what reason ?—Because it was said it would come some day, and they might as
well have it now as any other time.
1298. Were the warders served with any extra instructions on that particular day at
dinner time ?—ln the morning the chief warder ■went round and examined their pieces, which he
sometimes does, and tfid them to keep a sharp look out.
1299. In fact, were not some of the warders changed that day, and better marksmen putin
their place ?—There were several warders changed; for instance, I was changed. I was standing on
the very point where the rush was to come off in the morning; but I was relieved at about ten o’clock.
1300. Had you one gun or two ?—I had only one.
1301. Had any of the warders more than one gun on this particular day ?—Yes.
1302. Have they usually more than one gun ? —Never.
1303. What was the object of their having more than one gun on this particular day ?
To make sure work of it.
1304. And the rash did take place?—l was sitting writing in the office, when I was
ordered to go and get a rifle and take two men -with me and a target, and go down beyond the
Merri Creek, and conceal myself in the Merri Creek. We were to take a target by way of a blind,
because we had to pass the Crystal Palace. We went and took the target and went round to the
Merri Creek, and, according to orders, we hid ourselves.
1305. Was that according to orders from the Inspector General—that is, from officers
over you and under him ?—Yes.
1306. The rush took place and the warders did their duty ?—Yes'.
1307. Vv r as there more than one man wounded?—Two were slightly wounded, and
Gisborne was shot through the body.


1308. Do you know whore Mr. Price was when the rush took place ?—When the first shot
was fired, as I have learned, but I do not speak from ray own knowledge, Mr. Price was about the
workshops. J °
1309. Do you know that he was out at Pentridge ?—Yes; I saw him almost immediately.
1310. Did he come back from town at the usual hour that day ?—No.
1311. Did he come back sooner?—Yes.
1312. Did you ever hear Mr. Price say afterwards that he was aware this rush was coming
off?—He is a man I had very little conversation with.
1313. It was perfectly well known for two or three days to you and to the warders that
this rush was in contemplation ?—lt was known in the morning. When the overseers brought the
information, they said the signal was when one man split his irons in the quarry; and then they
got a go-cart and made up that they were going with that go-cart, and then they left it and ran
away ; and when I saw them they were running up the hill. When I heard the first shot fired I
was lying down amongst the stones.
1314. Did you fire ?—No.
1315. Were you beyond range ?—No.
1316. Were you blamed for not firing ?—No; I never heard anything more about it.
1317. Have you any statement to make about the case of John Martin ?—His case was in
the public prints—in the Herald —they took it up and wrote a leading article upon it.
1318. How long ago?—l think better than three months ago.
1319. What were the peculiar features of his case?—He came to us from the Melbourne
gaol, in his Melbourne gaol clothes, which were very thin duck clothing, with “ 11.M.G.” upon
them and the broad arrow. Those clothes were bundled up for him. His shirt and trowsers
were marked the same, and when he went away they were given to him, and he put them on, and
he was found in a gas-pipe with his feet mortified. 1 received him on board the hulk.
1320. Did he seem to be in good health when he came on board the hulk?—No; he
seemed to be quite silly and deranged.
1321. How long was he with you?—l think he was only there three months.
1322. Where was he landed ?—He was discharged from the detective office. All
prisoners are discharged from the detective office.
1323. Was he sent out of the detective office in Melbourne in those clothes?—He was.
1324. Did you make any representation when this man was leaving the hulk, that he was
not in a fit state to leave without a medical man seeing him? —I did; to Lieutenant Payne, the
inspector of hulks.
1325. What answer did he give you?—He made light of it, and said it was nonsense, and
let him go.
1326. Do you know anything of the case of Thomas Callaghan, on board one of the
hulks ? —Yes. He was prisoner in the Lysander when I went down.
1327. Did you see him put in the bath for punishment?—l was called down to see the
punishment one day; it was not part of my duty.
1328. Is it considered such a gay sight, that they send for the warders from the different
hulks to see the men get this bath ?—He was in my own ship, the Lysander.
1329. What was the matter with him that they put him in this bath ?—He had syphilis
in ano.
1330. Have you ever known a man treated for syphilis with a shower-bath before?—lt
was not a shower-bath, it was a plunge-bath.
133 D What did they use to wash him with; sponge, or flannel, or what ?—They used
flannel and sand. '
1332. Did ho cry out about it ?—He said it was worse than death.
1333. What do they call doctoring a man?—They pushed a piece of flannel, with caustic
on, up his anus.
1334. Was the medical man present there?—The prisoner hospital attendant was present.
1335. Doctor Wilkins was not there?—No.
1336. Was the man who was present a medical attendant to the prisoners, or was he a
prisoner himself? —A prisoner himself..
1337. By Dr. Tierney. —Was it at the same time that the man had these syphilitic sores
that he got the bath ?—Yes. He first got the bath and then the medical treatment.
1338. Did he get this bath as a punishment, or to clean him?—lt might have been done
with less severity.
1339. Did they throw cold water upon him?—He was put in the bath and well washed.
1340. Might not that be done to clean him ?—Yes, but it might have been done with less
severity.
1341. By Mr. Do you know of your own knowledge whether he ever was
complained of for being in.a filthy state? —He had this filthy disease upon him, but otherwise I
do not know that he was more filthy than any other man.
1342. By Mr. Thomson. —Was this done by order of the doctor ?—I do not know. The
assistant superintendent and the chief warder were both present.
1343. By the Chairman. —On board the Lysander they are nearly all working men, are
they not ? —Yes; there are only four solitary cells.
1344. How many men are there in the Lysander usually?—l have known as many as
280; the average is 250.
1345. On a wet day, or on Sunday, when they are not working, how are these 280
lodged and employed ; what are they doing ?—On Sunday they are allowed to come out in batches


and wash in the morning, then they are locked up again, and those that choose to come out to
church when the Wesleyan minister comes in the morning are allowed to do so ; those that do not
remain in their wards. In the afternoon, those that chose to come to hear the Church of England
clergyman can come out between decks, and those that are Catholics remain in their cells. On a
wet day or a holiday they are kept close below.
1346. Are they battened down, or the hatches closed upon them during the intervals
between those services?—No; there is no occasion for that. They are all locked into their
wards. There are fifteen or twenty in a ward.
1347. Are they wards with beds all round?—No; hammocks.
1348. By Mr. Clarice. —lt would not be safe to let them all out together on deck for
service, would it?—They are never let on deck during the day.
1349. It would not be safe to do so?—They might be let out in batches of twenty or
thirty at a time.
1350. But not in greater numbers?—The deck would not hold them.
1351. Were you at Pentridge when Mr. Price chained a man to a stone for a good
many hours for some trivial offence ? —There was a man served so, but I never saw him on the
stone; I was told he was put on the stone for a very trivial offence. There are men who can
tell the committee more about it than I can.
1352. By the Chairman. —Are there waterclosets at the stockades at Pentridge for the
use of the men? —There is a waterclosct within the stockade; one large one right down the side
of the ward, and there is a sentry stands up by it.
1353. By Mr. Clarice. —ls there any division in this one waterclosct?—Merely poles
along ; it is skeleton.
1354. By the Chairman. —ls there any oakum or paper left in it for the use of the men
or are they allowed to have a bit of rag?—No, and if they tear their shirts they are punished for
it. I have here a memorandum, which is a proof that there is a system of espionage going on in
the department.
1355. What is this memorandum ?—That is a notification from the sergeant of the shore-
guard to the inspector of hulks, through the chief warder, to let him know at what hour precisely
to a minute the chief overseer, who was then Mr. Vivian, arrived on the works. Mr. Vivian
was finally dismissed, after being three times ordered to resign.
[The witness delivered in the following document :]
“ Memo.
“ The chief overseer arrived on the works this morning at 8.15 o’clock.
“ Tuesday, May 20, 1856. (Signed) “J. CALDWELL, Sergeant.”
1356. By Mr. Clarice. —Are you in the employ of the penal department now ?—No; I got
an intimation from Mr. Price that my resignation would be accepted.
4357. And you did resign ?—Yes, I resigned on the day I got the intimation ; but it was
not accepted for five days after.
1358. Did you get an intimation from Mr. Price to resign?—Yes, through Captain
Blatchford. I got it partly from Mr. Price himself.
The witness withdrew .
Mr. John Duffy further examined.
Extract from Mr. John Berkley's evidence, Nos. 777, 778, and 779 read to the witness.
1359. By the Chairman. —Can you corroborate that ?—Yes.
1360. How do you know it was with Mr. Price’s connivance?—ln this way; one of the
prisoners came to me and told me there was from £5O to £6O on the station; I went to Mr.
Price and told him about it. I told Mr. Price, if ho would allow me I would get the money out,
that was, by allowing some tobacco to go into the men, and he told me to go to work and get it out!
I got about £7 of the money out and sent in some tobacco for the £7, and as I got the money I
gave it to the superintendent, Mr. Duncan. J
1361. By Mr. Clarke.— What price was charged for that tobacco—how much tobacco did
you send in for the £7 ?—I think there was about 2|-lbs.
1362. By Mr. Patterson. —What do you mean by saying there was £6O or £7O there
who had the money ?—The prisoners.
1363. Amongst them?—Amongst them.
1364. By the Chairman. —And they gave it to you on the faith that you would get
tobacco ? —One of the prisoners in my gang gave it to me. He put a question to me, and when
he did so, I went and told Mr. Price, and Mr. Price allowed me to give them the tobacco and get
the money out. 6
1365. By Mr. Clarke. —Where was this tobacco got from ?—I bought it.
1366. By Dr. Tierney. —What was done afterwards. Were the men punished for having
that tobacco?—l never heard of any being punished for it.
1367. By Mr. Clarke. —What became of the £7 ?—The superintendent got it.
1368. Did not you obtain any portion of it for spending the money to get the tobacco
in ?—No.
1369. Then you lost the price of the tobacco?—l got the money to pay for the tobacco
from the superintendent.
1370. By Mr. Thomson. —What was the superintendent’s name?—Duncan.
. >7l. By Dr. Tierney. What had Mr. Price to do with Mr Duncan?—lt was done
with his knowledge.


1372. llow do you know that ?—I told him I gave the money to Mr. Duncan as I got it.
1373. By Mr. Clarice. —Do you know what became of that money ?—I gave it to Mr.
Duncan. I also got a gold ring from one of the prisoners.
1374. Was tobacco often got in to the prisoners by that means ?—I believe it was.
1375. And did they generally pay a proportionate price, the same as they did for the
21 lbs. from you ?—I cannot say that.
1376. Did ever you know the overseers supply the prisoners with tobacco and charge
exorbitant prices for it?—Never; there was one overseer charged with it.
1377. But it was not proved against him?—lt was not proved against him.
1378. By Mr. Thomson. —Did you go to Mr. Price and tell him there was money with the
prisoners at Pentridge, and that you could get it out ?—Yes.
1379. And he authorised you to buy tobacco and take it into Pentridge and get the
money ?—No ; I told him what the prisoners told me, that the money was in the yard, and that, if
I got some tobacco to send in to those men that had the money, he would get all the money out.
I went to Mr. Price and told him about the information I got, and he said, “ Very well then,
Duffy, go to work and get it out.” So the night after that I sent in half a pound of tobacco and
I got a five pound note; I was to send in a pound of tobacco for every pound note; that was the
prisoners agreement for getting the money out.
1380. By Mr. Clarice. —But you got a five pound note for the first pound?—Yes.
1381. Did you send in four pounds more ?—No, I sent in as little as I could.
1382 By Mr. Patterson. —llow much did you send altogether ?—I am not sure ; I think
two and a half pounds.
1383. And what was the amount of the money you got out ?—£7.
1384. By Dr. Tierney. —Were not you expecting to get £5O ?—I was; but they began to
tumble among themselves that they were not getting enough tobacco in for what were
sending out, and they stopped it.
1355. By Mr. Patterson. —Are not the prisoners always examined every night and
morning as they come out of their cells ?—Not every morning.
1386. If any money was found on the prisoners, would not it be taken from them ?—Yes.
1387. Then where did they secrete this £6O or £7O, how did they manage to secrete
that ?—I do not know.
1388. By Mr. Thomson. —Are they not all stripped when they are taken in first?—Yes.
1389. Still, they had this money on them ?—Yes.
1390. By the Chairman. —Is there any other point that you wish to speak to, that you
have omitted ? —No, except as to the ring. Through that ring I got the information about the money.
1391. By Dr. Tierney. —How through the ring?—This prisoner was the cook for the
prisoners on the works, and I heard him telling some of the prisoners, “ That was a fine ring
which was in the yard yesterday.” I overheard the words, and I went to him and said, “ What
ring was that, Burns?” because there was an overseer that had lost a ring, and I thought it
might be the same ring. He says, “Itis a beautiful ring, Mr. Duffy, and it was offered yesterday
for a quarter of a pound of tobacco.” That night, when I came home, I went to Mr. Duncan, the
superintendent, and told him about this ring, and I made the remark, “ I think it is Mr. Buck’s
ring.” “ Well,” he says, “ Duffy, get it if you can.” So the next day I gave the prisoner a
quarter of a pound of tobacco for the ring, and he gave it to me. Then when I got the rino- I
gave it to Mr. Duncan, and through getting this ring this prisoner made the remark about the
£5O being in the yard.
1392. By Mr. Patterson. —What did you give him for this ring?—A quarter of a pound
of tobacco. '
1393. What became of that ring?—l gave it to Duncan, and he showed it to Mr. Price,
and Mr. Price gave it to me back again, and then I mentioned about this money in the presence
of both.
1394. By Dr. Tierney. — Have you got any employment since you left the penal
department ?—No.
1395. Are you doing anything now ?—No.
1396. Are you seeking employment?—l have never sought any employment since Mr.
Price refused me the situation I got.
1397. Have you got property to live on ?—I am living on the money I got whilst I was
with Mr. Price.
1398. Why do you not look for employment?—l expect that I will get back to my own
employ again.
1399. Do you come here to give evidence, or do you speak out of doors for the purpose of
getting rid of Mr. Price, with the vieSv of getting into your old situation again ?—No, far from it
1400. By Mr. Patterson. —Would you take office under Mr. Price again ?—No. I
would not.
1401. Did you never apply for it?—Never.
1402. By Mr. Clarice. —Then you expect Mr. Price will leave his situation?—l do not know.
1403. You say you expect to get back again to your old situation, but you would not
take employment under Mr. Price, so that you must expect him to leave ?—I do expect to
get back if Mr. Price leaves there; but if I were in the same situation to-morrow, and I was
called on to give this statement, I would say the same as I say now. Certainly Mr. Price took
the loaves out of my mouth recently.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to Tuesday the 3 Oth instant , at one o’clock.
Penal.— p.


TUESDAY, 30th DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present: —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. McCombie, Mr. Miller, Dr. Tierney,
Mr. Williams.
Mr. William P. Burne examined.
1404. B\j the Chairman. —You have been connected with penal establishments a good
while ?—I have.
1405. In various parts of the world?—ln New South Wales and this Colony.
1406. Not in Van Diemen’s Land ?—No.
1407. How long were you connected with penal establishments in New South Wales ?
In New South Wales I was nearly three years.
1408. In what capacity were you in the penal establishment in New South Wales ?
Superintendent of the Hyde Park barracks.
1409. What number of prisoners were there usually there ?—lt was a place in transitu.
Our numbers were very different at different times, from 250 or 300 up to 1500.
1410. Were they in separate cells ?—No, in wards.
1411. Who was principal superintendent then?—The principal superintendent of
convicts, Mr. Hely.
1412. Had you printed regulations for your guidance ?—There were some printed
regulations.
1413. Have you seen the printed regulations in force in this Colony ?—I have.
141.4. Were the printed regulations you had in Sydney of- the same nature, or more severe,
or less severe than those here ?—We had it more under our own control there. As superintendent
of the barracks, I had the entire control of the place; nobody interfered with me. It was a
home appointment and nobody interfered with me, not even the principal superintendent of
convicts.
1415. Did you usually keep the men in irons?—Never, except by order of the magistrates,
who sat in the barracks.
1416. You were never out in command of road parties?—No.
1417. In the barracks you had from 250 to 1500 men, and you never used leg irons?—
Excepting in particular cases.
1418. You did not use irons on them for safe keeping?—Not without the order of the
magistrates in the barracks, who sat in the barracks sentencing the men to so many days in the
cell with irons.
1419. That was a special punishment in a particular case ?—Just so.
1420. How long is it since you left Sydney ?—About three years.
1421. The transportation had been given over then?—Yes.
1422. Did you leave of your own accord ?—I did. I was removed from the Hyde Park
barracks and placed in the Commissariat.
* 1423. But when you left there you left of your own accord, and with the good opinion of
your superior officers ?—Yes.
1424. You gave every satisfaction ?—I did ; and I have testimonials in my pocket to that
effect £producing the same].
1425. You then came to this Colony ?—I did.
1426. Did you apply for a situation in the penal department here ?—No, I was sent for.
1427. The situation was offered you ?—The choice of two.
1428. I observe by this testimonial that, in Sydney, they have more than one visiting
justice?—They have four, who sit in court three times a week, and there are generally two, and
sometimes three on the bench at the same time.
1429. In this Colony they do with one visiting justice ?—lt appears so.
1430. Had you ever complaints in Sydney against the visiting justices for not doing
their duty, or for exceeding their duty ?—Never.
1431. When you were in charge of the Hyde Park barracks, if a prisoner committed a
trivial fault, a first offence, what was your practice and that of the warders under you?—We had
no such force as warders. I had the entire punishment of the men for any offence which arose
between the days of the sittings of the magistrates. I could put them in the cells and keep them
there, and then remove them, and not take them to the court at all, which I considered, a sufficient
punishment for a trivial offence. We had no warders. Our force consisted principally of
prisoners (soldiers, for purely military offences) appointed specially by the Government, at Is. 3d.
a day, upon my recommendation.
1432. What proportion did those bear to the whole number of prisoners in charge ?—I
think we had not more than eight altogether. There was the boatswain, and the assistant
boatswain, and the sentry, on my quarter, and I think five others.
1433. Then you had only one per cent, to guard the prisoners?—Not more sometimes; but
some days wo might have had 1500 prisoners, and other days not more than 1200 or less.
1434. How do you account for the fact that here they require about twenty per cent, on
the prisoners to take charge of them ?—I cannot account for it; it astonished me when I came
down here.
1435. Did you never represent that to the head of the department ?—I never had the
opportunity, I represented it to my brother-in-law, who was superintendent of the hulk in which
I was.


1436. Which was that ?—The Deborah.
1437. How many men had she in her ?—I think about eighty, on the average.
1438. And how many officers?—Myself, the sergeant, the corporal, and I think fifteen
or sixteen warders, besides a superintendent, a shipkeeper, and storekeeper*
1439. Are you clearly of opinion that that number is quite unnecessary?—Yes; after I
left the Deborah I was placed for three weeks on board the President, where the men are locked
up at night, and also in the day time, excepting the ten taking exercise; notwithstanding the
men were ironed, and locked up, and barred, and bolted in, so that it was physically impossible that
any of them could get out, there were two warders at night on the deck and two warders below.
Having two men on each deck at one time was quite absurd, they were not wanted there, The
two men, one above and one below, were all that you could make useful, and even one might do
the duty by common relief of two hours, the chief warder visiting every half hour as usual.
1440. You are inclined to think the code of regulations in force in Sydney, in the way in
which those regulations are carried out, superior to the code in force here ?—Unquestionably.
1441. Is it your opinion that the regulations in force here are capable of being carried
out in a way that would be to the advantage of the prisoners and society generally ?—From the
experience I have had in New South \Vales, I should say—Yes, if by humane and proper officers.
1442. Do you think the code of regulations as it exists here could be carried out in its
integrity beneficially to the prisoners?—As a reformation for the prisoners, it would be
impossible.
1443. Have you ever known convicts reformed—that is, have you ever known them
become industrious and friendly, and probably pious, and as far as human foresight could judge,
reformed characters ?—Most unquestionably, in New South Wales. In my own service I have
had men who would have done honor to free men—better men than I have had free.
1444. Of course, as superintendent of the Hyde Park barracks, you saw what crimes the
men had committed. When they arrived, you were aware of their previous history ? —Yes.
1445. Have you ever known cases of men who have committed heinous crimes, burglary
and robbery, and such like, and who have become such men as you would trust to manage a farm
or your other affairs ?—I would trust them with anything. I have given a man transported for
life ten pounds to go with a dray and buy things for me, and he has always brought me the
change correctly, and that for years.
1446. Was that by terror of the consequences that would result if they disobeyed you, or
through kindness and a wish to do well —which do you think was the guiding principle ?—lt was
the kindness and confidence they were receiving as opposed to the terror of what would take
place if they acted otherwise; the one acting on the other. One illustration probably would
lead the committee to a conclusion in some way. I will not mention names. I have had prisoners
remaining in barracks assigned to certain parties, and who, supposing that I had some influence
in altering their assignment, have come and asked to see me, and fallen down upon their knees
and begged that I would see them sent to some one else if possible, mentioning the party’s name.
I said I had no power whatever. They said they were quite sure the moment they went to such
and such a man their fate was sealed.
1447. By Dr. Tierney. —That was in the old time, under the old assignment system?—Yes.
1448. By Mr. Miller. —Who was Governor at that time?—Sir Richard Bourke.
1449. By Dr. Tierney. —Men had been put on the triangle by employers at that time,
had they not ?—They had.
1450. By the Chairman. —Were they afraid the parties they were going to would use
them badly ?—They were afraid they should be used so badly, that they would be obliged to take
to the bush to escape tyranny, and the consequences likely to result from it.
1451. Have you ever heard that the system pursued in Van Diemen’s Land during the
last twenty or thirty years was different in any respect to the system pursued in Sydney ?—I
have understood that it was much more tyrannical. I recollect at the time Lieutenant Gunn
was superintendent of the barracks there, he came up to Sydney, and was very much pleased
with what he saw.
1452. Have you had experience here on the hulks ?—The hulks and the marine stockade.
1453. And you are clearly of opinion that the system pursued there is wrong in every
respect —that it is not calculated to reform the prisoners, and is an extravagant system ?—I
think so.
1454. Have you ever made a calculation as to the probable cost per annum of each convict
confined in the hulks ?—I have made a rough calculation, by which I think some £BOOO a year
might be saved in the reduction of warders alone.
1455. Would you think it extravagant if it should be stated that the average cost of
prisoners is £1 per day for every prisoner, taking into consideration the first cost of the hulks,
and so on ?—I should say that was as near the mark as possible.
1456. Do not you think the prisoners ought to be kept for five shillings per day each ?
I can scarcely tell without entering into a calculation—l would not like to risk an answer off-hand.
1457. Are you aware whether the treatment of prisoners is different now to it was a
year or eighteen months ago ?—At the time that I was on board the Deborah I heard some very
curious tales, which never came under my own eye, and I never took any notice of anything but
that which did come immediately under my own eye. The system here is utterly different to that
at Sydney. In Sydney no officer was allowed, under any circumstances whatever, to strike a
prisoner, except in self defence.
1458. Are the committee to infer from that that the officers do strike prisoners here ?
It appears so, from public reports.


1459. Have you ever seen, or Lad reason to believe, that any of the warders in the Deborah
whilst you were chief warder, “ neddied” the prisoners?—Never in my presence.
1460. Did the prisoners ever complain to you of having been subjected to that treatment
—Never ; I never would have allowed it for a moment.
1461. Who was superintendent of the hulk when you were chief warder?—Lieutenan
Robertson.
1462. There was a letter of Lieutenant Robertson’s which appeared in the papers a fci
days ago ?—I saw there was.
1463. He seems to have seen what you did not see ?—He was there before I was.
1464. By Mr. Miller. —Are you in the employment of the Government at this time?—No
1465. How long have you left the Government service?—Ten months.
t 1466. Under what circumstances did you leave?—l left on account of writing to th
sheriff in a way that he did not approve of, and he said that the whole tenor of my commu
nication was of such purport, that he had no hesitation in dismissing me from his department.
1467. You were dismissed then ?—I was, from the gaolership at Beechworth.
1468. Had you some relation on board the hulk Deborah? —My brother-in-law
Lieutenant Robertson, was superintendent.
1469. Is he also now in the employ of the Government ?—No, I believe not.
1470. Under what circumstances did he leave?—He was dismissed the service along witl
myself at the same .time, I being immediately reinstated in the service; private domestic
misunderstandings being the cause of dismissal.
1471. You say you have had experience of convicts in New South Wales ? Yes.
1472. You have also stated that that was in the time of the late Governor Bourke ? It was
1473. Did you not say that you were appointed from home to the situation in New South
Wales ?—I came out originally with letters of service to Governor Bourke from the late Lore
Raglan, and he appointed me then to the Principal Superintendent of Convicts’ office. Lieutenan
Slade, of the 40th, was then superintendent of the Hyde Park barracks, and subsequently he
was made police magistrate, and then I was promoted to superintend the Hyde Park barrack
temporarily until that appointment was confirmed from home, and then I was confirmed in tha
appointment.
1474. What was the system in operation in New South Wales—the assignment system
1475. Would you advocate such a system being introduced into Victoria ?—I would not.
1476. Did you not advocate that just now, as being superior to the present system of pena
discipline here ?—They were imperial convicts, not originally convicted in the colony.
1477. You do not advocate the assignment system ?—Not here: decidedly not.
1478. What system would you propose for Victoria ?—I should certainly advocate a system
much milder than the present one. J
1479. Have you drawn up any system in detail, that you would state to the committee
ha\iug been an ohicci of some experience in these matters?—Not knowing what questions mio'ht
be put to me, I just made a few rough notes, that is all.
- 1480. Would you have any objection to prepare at your leisure a system of prison discipline
such as you would recommend for adoption here, and send it in to the committee ? None*
whatever.
. 1 481 - Then you will do it perhaps ?—With great pleasure. Before proceeding further
there is one thing I should state, that the present Chief Secretary, Mr. Haines, has replaced me
upon the list for service in the Government, conceiving that I was worthy of it.
148. J. Lou have been replaced upon thelist for employment when a vacancy occurs ? Yes.
1483. How long were you in charge of the convicts at Hyde Park barracks ? I was in
the principal superintendent of convicts’ office eight or nine months, and for about two years
afterwards I was in charge of the barracks. J
1484. Was it in your time that the convicts were a terror to Sydney, and allowed to coine
out at all hours of the night?—No.
1485. When did that occur?—Some four or five years after I left, when it got into hands
that, in my opinion, were very improper to hold the appointment.
1486. Were you able to manage and keep discipline with convict constables ?—Entirely.
Then I had the court in the barracks sitting three days a week.
1487. By the Chairman. —Was that an open court—was it open to the press ? If they
chose to come; but Ido not think they ever came.
1488. By Mr. Miller. —Who were the magistrates at that time?—The Collector of Internal
Revenue, the Harbor Master, the Inspector General of Hospitals, and the Deputy Surveyor General
1489. What punishments were those gentlemen in the habit of ordering?—We had a
punishment then in force which you have not in this Colony—that was the lash. *
1490. Corporal punishment?—Yes; and the punishment varied from twenty-five to 100
and even up to 150 lashes on very special occasions.
1491. How frequently was corporal punishment inflicted at Hyde Park barracks ?
Every day.
1492. How many did you flog at a time ?—lncluding all the police cases of Sydney and
the district, there would be frequently from fifteen to twenty a day, including boys.
. . 1493. Have*you seen any men die under the lash ?—No. When over fifty lashes were
inflicted the Assistant Colonial Surgeon was always present with me.
1494. Then you were in the habit of administering fifty lashes without any medical
attendant being present ?—Yes.


1495. You also had the power of confining a man yourself, without the intervention of a :
magistrate ?—I had.
1496. Were there any other punishments ?—I am not aware of any other.
1497. Are you aware that the overseers of gangs always have triangles with them ; and
at the least motion of a convict even, they would have him up and flog him at their own will ?
Never in my time.
1498. Have you never seen corporal punishment inflicted in the streets of Sydney, or
elsewhere, where the gangs were ?—No.
1499. Perhaps you never were with a gang ?—I have often been through the streets of
Sydney and seen them.
1500. What were the effects of the sentences of a magistrate then? Did the men
sentenced by the magistrate ever find their way to Cockatoo Island ?—That is a difficult question
to answer. I really could not say whether such was the case or not. It was a summary
conviction, and the practice of the bench was almost entirely confined to corporal punishment.
There was not much extension of sentence.
1501. At that time it was all corporal punishment and assignment?—Yes; exactly so.
1502. In your experience with those 1500 men, did you ever find any refractory characters
who might be known as out-and-outers ?—They stopped a very little time with us; a man might
be sent to Norfolk Island and become an expiree there and return to barracks.
1503. How might a man be sent to Norfolk Island?—l do not know; he would not be
sent from the Hyde Park barracks to Norfolk Island.
1504. Put, probably, he would commence his career of crime in Hyde Park barracks ?
I do not see what chance he would have of that.
1505. Some of the worst of the men would go through your hands, would they not? —
The men were brought there to be flogged, and immediately they were flogged they returned to
their assignment.
1506. kSupposing a man committed a crime, he would be then brought before the Supreme
Court, would he not?—Yes.
1507. Which was composed of military officers, was it not ?—There was a judge, but the
jury was composed of seven military officers.
1508. Were there many men sent to Norfolk Island then ?—A good many, I should think,
in a year.
1509. Who was Commandant of Norfolklsland at that time?-—I think Colonel Andersonwas.
1510. Who is now in this Colony ?—Yes.
1511. Do you know the nature of the discipline which was carried on at Norfolk Island?—
I have heard it was very severe ; but not so severe as in the hulks here.
1512. You heard it was very severe there ? —Yes.
1513. Do you know what it was ?—I do not.
1514. Then you cannot institute a comparison between the treatment of the worst convicts
in Norfolk Island and the worst convicts we have here in the President ?■—l cannot.
1515. Are not the convicts in the President supposed to be the worst of any here ?
They are supposed to be.
1516. Do you approve of corporal punishment ?—ln some cases I do; but I would not flog
a man for the first time.
1517. The hardened offender who committed seventy offences—what would you do with
him ?—I cannot say I quite agree with corporal punishment.
1518. The committee understood ycu to say just now you did agree with corporal punish-
ment ?—Not for the first time, I said; and even afterwards, if it can be avoided, I think it would
be much better.
1519. The committee wish to know your opinion about corporal punishment —whether you
approve of it or not in the treatment of convicts? —It is very difficult to give an opinion about it.
It has always gone very much against me to flog a man for the first time, for the very simple reason
that I am about to state, that it marks a man indellibly; and no reform afterwards will admit of his
pulling off his shirt, it shows what he has been at once. To flogging for the first time I have always
had an objection; but the second or third time it becomes comparatively a matter of no consequence.
1520. You would object to flogging a man at all; but when he was once flogged, you would
haye no objection to flogging him again ?—No.
1521. How long did you say you were on board the hulks ?—I was on board the Deborah
from the 15th of August to the 23rd of December. I was then removed for three weeks to the
President, and from there to the Marine Stockade.
1522. Did you know during that time any of the convicts express contrition to their
superior officers and promise a new course of life, and evince it by their conduct ? —No.
1523. Never?—No.
1524. Do you suppose, if any convict had done so, and had made an impression on you and
the other officers, that he was sincere and a reformed character, that his sentence would not gradually
have been remitted, and that he would not have had an opportunity of returning to society again?
I was only on the President for three weeks, and I could not judge.
1525. Did you happen to come in contact with a convict called 11 Owen Suffolk,” who made
a great noise in the paper some time ago ? —I think I remember the name.
1526. Do you happen to know anything of the man or his history ?—I do not; I remember
the name but anything further, I do not recollect.
1527. Do you think the hulks are a terror to the convict population here ?—I think a
man goes in as a wild beast, and he comes out as such.
Penal.— q.


1 iion you look upon the convicts as wild beasts ?—I look upon it that a man goes
in comparatively as a wild beast; he feels when he goes into the President,, as I believe & tbe
convict Melville made the observation, as though he left hope behind him.
lf>29. Then it is extreme terror to the convicts ?—I should think the very extremest.
1500. 'i hen if anything would deter those men from crime, is not the punishment on
board the hulk President sufficient to do so ?—lt is the extreme of punishment: but Ido not
think it would reform a man in the slightest decree.
1531. Is the discipline and punishment on board the hulks a terror to the criminal popula-
tion here—-are you aware whether it is or is not ?—There can be no question that it is a terror.
1582. Is it not, in fact, a worse punishment than death ? —I believe so. I think I would
rather die tham undergo a year of it. I think it almost impossible that anything can be worse.
. r • Tierney. —AVhen did flogging cease to be practised in Sydney?—l do not
think it ceased until the assignment system ceased, and I was out of the service then. It did
not cease until a long time after I was out of the service.
1534. Are you not aware that flogging was not continued in Sydney ?—lt was continued
for some time after I left.
15-35. How long ago is that ?—I left in 1835, 1 think.
153 C. I)o you prefer solitary confinement to having prisoners worked in irons ?—I see no
good in working them in irons; it prevents a man from doing his duty, if he is inclined to do it.
1537. There was one system adopted in Sydney, that doubly-convicted felons were
heavily chained and paraded through the streets of Sydney, and sent to the quarry to work
there, and then were brought back to Hyde Park barracks at night ?—They were not brought to
Hyde Park barracks; they were taken to the gaol. &
1538. Which would you prefer—that punishment or solitary confinement—which do you
think would reform the prisoners most ?—lt is a very difficult question to answer as to which
would reform them most.
1589. You said just now, that you did not like to see men working in irons. Will you tell
the committee why you do not like to see a refractory man who had committed a murder working
in irons, and doing something to occupy his mind, rather than see him in a solitary cell 9 I
would rather see him working without irons with a safe guard over him.
. I^ 4o, 4)0 y° u think ifc would be advisable in a quarry to have such a man working without
being in irons?—lt would depend very much upon circumstances, how the quarry was situated,
and what there was to keep the man there, whether he was within a wall or only in charge of
sentries, and whether those sentries were soldiers or otherwise.
1541. You stated just now that a prisoner having once received the lash, could never be
reinstated m society, that lie always felt degraded by it; are there not many persons now in
Sydney, in respectable positions in business and social habits, who have been flooded 9 Yes
many. 06 * ’
, 1542. And many men in Sydney and New South Wales, who formerly were convicts, and
who have been punished very severely, but who are now in respectable positions ?—There are
certainly. ’
i 513. Do you object to prisoners being placed as guards over other prisoners ?—Yes :
ordinary prisoners. ’
1544. Do you think that a person who had committed a political offence might be placed
over other prisoners ? Ido not think they stand at all on the same ground as other convicts.
. .f.°" Are there any other offences which you would place in the same class with those?—
Purely military offenees.
1540. Y as there any classification of prisoners at Sydney?—No; but I think it highly
DGccssury.
11 9 Were i nofc P e men committed petty larceny and felony plaeed in the 3ame
cells . 4 hey were placed in a ward all together, but they were assigned away so soon, that they
were not long in each other s company.
1548. You said a while ago that you did not like the assignment system, when men were
assigned to particular individuals ?—Yes. The assignment system for the imperial convicts, in
my opinion, was the best that ever was invented; but certainly not when it so happened that the
men were assigned to bad masters.
1549. When men get their tickets-of-leave, would you not think it more desirable to let
tic men go to a certain district rather than to have them assigned to a particular individual ?
When they go with their tickets-of-leave, they go to a particular district in New South Wales.
. l°bJ. Do you not think that a better system than compelling a prisoner to go to any
particular individual ? That was never done in New South Wales ; they used to get their tickets-
of-leave from the particular individual to whom they were assigned.
1551. Are you pot aware that, latterly,in Sydney the prisoners get their tickets-of-leave to
go to a particular district, and get employment in that district from any master they could ?
They did mmy day; but they got their ticket-of-leave from the particular master to whom
they w ere assigned. If I had a seven year man and he served me for three years, I think then
he would get his ticket-of-leave for four years for some particular district.
i a J? s "' Are y 0? no } aware that men were sent out from Hyde Park barracks with a
ticket of-leave, not assigned to any particular individual?—That was not the case in my day.
/ t / Would you prefer that system to forcing a convict to go to any particular indi-
vidual . 1 think so. It is no indulgence to go to a particular individual.
if r thmk convicts might he taught some trade or occupation when in confine-
ment . i think, if there was a graduated scale of reward and punishment, it would be desirable.


1555. Would you recommend that the prisoners should get any gratuity for their services?—
I would.
1556. Do you think that would he a good system?—l do; a very good one. I never
found a man yet who, if he had any prospect held out to him, would not work up to it.
1557. Do you think there are occasions when a man might bo allowed to have alittle tobacco?—•
es; tea, sugar, and tobacco. I think, if there were different classes for the men, and they
were to enter one class, and go on up through three or four classes, till they got to the full
allowance of indulgence, it would be desirable.
1558. Do you think religious instruction ought to be provided for the convicts at the
public expense ?—I do.
1559. Ilad you any quarrel with Mr. Price when you left the service ?—No; none.
1560. Or have you had up to the present time ?—No; I was reduced under the reductions
-of the late Sir Charles Hotham; but I knew why I was reduced.
1561. You have said that it was in consequence of a letter you wrote to the sheriff?—
No; that was afterwards, after I left the stockade. I was appointed secretary to the Customs
Board of Inquiry, and after that I was appointed to the gaol at Beechworth; and I left therein
consequence of the letter I wrote to the sheriff.
1562. Had Mr. Price anything to do with your dismissal from employment ?—Nothing
whatever.
1563. Directly or indirectly ?—I will not say indirectly—Mr. Price and I did not at all
agree in our system of management, and I was very glad to get out of it, quite as glad as he was
to get rid of me.
1564. By the Chairman. —You said in answer to a question by Mr. Miller that the hulk
President was a great terror to the convict population. Do you think it deters from crime ?—lt
deters them while they are there.
1565. Are you not aware that it is a well ascertained fact that, since horse stealing has
ceased to be punished capitally, there have been fewer horses stolen in England, not only fewer
according to the population, but actually fewer out of double the number of horses and double the
number of people ?—I was not aware of that. It would appear to me that a man, upon going out
of the President , would have such a deadly hatred to all his fellow men, that he would not care
what be did.
1566. Did you look upon a man that had been once or twice flogged in Sydney as a very
bad man—flogging was the extreme punishment, was not it ?—lt was the principal punishment;
solitary confinement was very seldom given, except for very short periods,
1567. By Mr. Williams. —Have you ever known any doubly convicted felons become
reformed characters or useful members of society ?—I could not at this moment, from memory,
name any particular cases, but I believe I may venture to say—Yes; many, very many.
1568. By the Chairman. —What is exactly meant by doubly convicted felons —is it
those that have been sent out from England and subsequently brought up before the police
magistrates? —They may be called doubly convicted, but that is not the exact meaning of the
term. If a man who came out as an imperial convict got convicted before the Supreme Court for
another offence, I should call him a doubly convicted man; but then, in many cases, men are driven
to be doubly convicted, who, if treated well in the first instance, would never have been convicted
again.
1569. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you not known persons sent out from England for a petty
larceny to be kept in Hyde Park barracks in company with the greatest scoundrels?—Yes, but
they did not remain there.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned.
WEDNESDAY, 31st DECEMBER, 1856.
Members present : —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Guthridge, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Williams.
James Edwards examined.
1570. By the Chairman. —Were you a prisoner of the Crown?—Yes.
1571. Are you a German?—l was born and brought up in Germany; my father was an
Englishman.
1572. What were you seut to prison for?—l was tried in Castlemaine court for an assault
upon another man, and received a sentence of twelve months’ imprisonment.
1573. Who gave you that sentence?—Mr. Justice Williams.
1574. Are you quite certain of the terms of the sentence ?—Twelve months’ imprisonment,
witb hard labor.
1575.. Did you remain in for twelve months?—No, I got out after eight months.
1576. Were you kept at hard labor all that time?—No.
1577. Where were you ?—I was the first part of my time a servant to some of the officers.
I have been on board the hulks.
1578. What were you sent to the hulks for?—Because Mr. Price came into the goal and
looked amongst all the men that came from Ballaarat. I had been very unwell, and I looked
rather bad. He said, “ I have seen your face before.” I said, u I do not think it.” He said,
“Do not you know me ?” I said, “ No.” Mr. Wintle said, “ Oh, it is no use to deny it; Mr.


Price knows you.” Mr. Price said, “Have you never been to Van Diemen’s Land ?” I said, “ No.”
He said, “ Well, I will let you smell the salt-water ;” meaning, lie would send me to the hulks.
I have no complaint to make about myself; only what I saw there.
1579. How long have you been in the Colony ?—Four years. I came from Adelaide here.
I had been in Adelaide about ten months when I came here.
1580. Then you left Germany after you heard of the gold diggings?—Yes.
1581. And you went down to the hulks?—Yes.
1582. How long did you remain there —which hulk did you go into ?—First, the
Sacramento.
1583. Were you put in irons ?—No, I went to the works on the point for some time.
1581. And then you were engaged as a servant—to whom ? —To Mr. Smith a little time.
1585. What is he ?—Superintendent on board the Sacramento.
1586. How long were you with him ?—I could not say exactly, only a short time.
1587. You wrought out your eight months in that manner ?—Yes, from one ship to another.
I have been in the three hulks, the Sacramento, the Success, and the Lysander.
1588. They never used you badly beyond sending you to the hulks? —No, they never
used me badly.
1589. Then why do you come here to give evidence ?—Because I have seen others treated
dreadfully who cannot speak for themselves, they have tried all they know; they did that at the
time Sir Charles Hotham came on board.
1590. Have you seen any case of positive ill treatment?—Yes, I have.
1591. Can you mention to the committee the name of anybody in particular who has
been ill used ?—Emanuel Guardian. He cannot speak a word of English. He is a Mexican.
1592. What was he committed for?—l believe it was for an assault.
1593. Is he a very powerful man ?—He is a tall man, but very thin.
1594. Why did they treat him worse than the other prisoners?—The prisoners believe
him to be not quite right in his mind. All the harm I knew him to do was to knock on his door
at night. Tie was out in the daytime at work, and at night he used to knock at the door.
1595. What did ho want ?—The man cannot speak English. I could not say what he
wanted. It is well known that a man, if he was sensible, would not knock on the door for nothing.
1596. When the warders went down, what did they do ?—They got ring-bolts in the
ground, and lay the man down on his back, and fastened him down to the boards on the broad of
his back with four bolts, one for each leg, and one for each arm.
1597. Was there anybody in that cell but himself?—No.
1598. Did you see this yourself? —Yes, with my own eyes, and I am willing to come
forward when called upon.
1599. When they attempted to chain this man down in this way, did he not rebel ?—I did
not understand a word he said.
1600. Did he not strike at them?—No; but, from what I hear, I believe he is bad
tempered, and very likely would do that.
1601. Was this man in irons when he was at work ?—Yes, fifty-six pound irons.
- 1602. Are they not only forty-eight pound irons, though called fifty-six ?—I have seen
various men wearing two bazils, because Mr. Price said the irons were not heavy enough.
1603. Was this man in leg irons at night when chained to the floor ?—Yes, he had those
irons on ; the irons never come off, except by special order of the inspector.
1604. Have you seen any other instances of what you consider tyranny or wanton cruelty
on the part of the warders?—l have heard the chief warder beat this man at night, and I have
heard the man call out. That man is now in the President, and you can see him, and you can
be convinced by the punishment book what he has suffered since he has been there.
1605. Were you at Williamstown at the time the rush took place, when a man of the
name of Flannery was shot ? —I just got there when his leg was being taken off.
1606. You only knew of that by hearsay ?—Yes.
1607. Do you know a man of the name of Moran ?—Yes.
1608. Have you ever heard that man say that they knew how to stop rushes ?—Yes.
1609. What was his manner of stopping a rush ?—They would put double warders on, and
supply them with bullets, and be prepared for it.
1610. Is there any other case of ill treatment that you know of?—There is a man of the
name of James Cousins, who is now at liberty. This man received a sentence of two years; I
cannot say what it was for; and he has done out of that 163 days solitary, in addition to the
two years.
1611. Was that in the hulks?—ln the Sacramento.
1612. How do you know that he has served those 163 days solitary ?—Everyone has a
board outside his cell, showing what he is there for, and the punishments are put on the board
underneath that.
1613. By Mr. Mitchell. —Those were extensions of punishments, were they not?—
Everything is an extension of sentence.
1614. For misconduct, by order of the visiting justice ?—Yes ; but he was eating grass
like a beast of the field. He was not in his senses; he would eat grass and keep it in his bosom
by handfuls.
1615. JBij Mr. Williams. —Where would he get grass on board the hulks ?—He would get
it when he was out at work.
1616. By the Chairman. —You say that his board shows his sentences?—Yes.
1617. Does the board also show what fault he had committed ?—Yes


1618. What was it for ?—The ordinary charges are called misconduct. There is another
case I wish to mention particularly—a man by the name of Owen Suffolk, he received a sentence
of ten years in Geelong, I do not know what it was for, but through the recommendation of Judge
a’Beckett, ho received a mitigation of his sentence of five years. This man did not go to his
proper district, or he was not in the district, or something to that effect, arid the magistrates on
the bench would not deal with him ; they left him to Mr. Price to deal with him. lie was brought
there and he lay then in the Sacramento hulk, aud Mr. Price put the other five years on, and in
place of five years he has ten years. Five years were taken off by the Governor, on the recommen-
dation of the judge, and he only did two years and then received his ticket-of-leave, and then his
original five years were put on again by Mr. Price.
1619. By Mr. Mitchell. —You say it was put on by Mr. Price. How do you know that ?
It could not be put on otherwise.
1620. By the Chairman. —llow do you know that that man was not brought before the
judges again, and sentenced to another five years ?—I am confident of it.
1621. How do you know he was not?—l have made inquiries since I have been out of
the hulks, and lie ha 3 not been tried. I have spoken to Dr. Singleton about it, and he
remembers the case, and he said the man had riot been tried.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourn cd.
THURSDAY, Bth JANUARY, 1857.
Members present.—Mr. Hood, in the chair; Mr. Clarke, Mr. Guthridge, Mr. McCombie,
Mr. Miller, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Patterson, Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. Angus McPherson again called in and further examined.
1622. JBy the Chairman. —The committee understand that you wish to make some ;
explanations in regard to your previous evidence ?—Yes.
1623. Can you refer to the questions you wish to have amended? —If my former evidence
were read I could point out the alterations; there are not many of them I think.
Question 36 L read.
1624. What is the amendment you wish to make in your answer to that question ?—The
answer says, “ Yes, very often.” I wish to ammend that part of it by saying, “ Yes; he sometimes
dismisses cases, and very often admonishes only.”
Questions 390 to 393 read.
1625. Have you any explanation to offer in relation to those questions and answers; do
you now recollect the name of the prisoner and the offence with which he was charged ?—He was
a man of the name of John Thompson, No. 1943, and his offence was attempting 1 to strike a warder
while on board the Success. He did in the box, so far as I can see, nineteen days out of thirty.
The box is 2ft. 6in. by 2ft. During the day a man in the box can sit on his night tub. The box
is 6ft. high. The man is taken down to his own cell and sleeps there at night. The
solitary cell goes along the curve of the bows of the ship, measuring sft. sin. I think.
1626. By Mr. Mitchell. —And what breadth?—l think about four feet at the widest
part.
1627. By what height?—Six feet ten inches.
1628. Is the punishment in the box very much severer than in the solitary cell ?—lt is
severer; a man cannot lie down in the box. He sits on his night tub, and stands up when he
thinks proper.
Question 407 read.
1629. By the Chairman. —What is your amended answer to that question ?—That I
find a great difference in the men in that respect.
Question 408 read.
1630 Have you anything to add to that answer ?—Yes. In a general way they would
be noticed according to behaviour.
Question 409 read.
1631. What have you to say to that ? —I wish to amend that answer by saying that Ido not
feel competent to answer the question.
1632. By Mr. Mitchell. —As feeling incapable of judging another man’s motives ?—Yes.
Question 435 read.
1633. By the Chairman. —What amendment have you to make in the answer you have
given to that question ?—I have said “the ring is only three feet from the deck.” It should have
been “ three feet three inches.”
Question 469 read.
1634. What is the alteration you wish to make in that answer ? —I stated that the
religious instructor comes “once a week.” It should be “twice a week.”
Question 470 read.
1635. What amendment do you desire to make as respects that answer ?—lnstead of saying
that there are “ no measures taken except that to reform the prisoners,” I wish to amend that
answer by saying, “Yes; they have bibles, prayer books, religious tracts, spelling books, dictionaries,
slates, aud arithmetics; and they are allowed to instruct each other by talking through the
partitions of their cells.”
Penal.— r.


1686. I thought it had been given in evidence that talking was not allowed?—Not loud
talking; they may talk to one another through the partitions of the cells, but not across the ship.
Question 483 read.
1637. What is the alteration you wish to make in your answer to that question ?—I
substitute “ twice’’ for “once a week.”
Question 486 read.
1638. What do you wish to add to that answer?—“ If asked to do so, when they wish to
see him, although he has not visited any Catholics lately.” That would be my amended answer. I
was in error in the answer I gave before.
1639. By Mr. Mitchell. —You mean, he does not go to the Catholics unless asked by them
to do so ?—Yes.
Question 487 read.
1640. By the Chairman. —What have you to say to that ?—That is wrong. It should be
“ So far as answering any questions that may be put to him.”
1641. By Mr. Mitchell. —Does not he give secular instruction to anybody—not to the
Protestants?—No. He is simply a religious instructor; he reads and prays with the prisoners.
He would read a chapter with a man, but he would not set him a task to be done by a given time.
1642. When you gave your evidence before, and stated in answer to one question, that he
did all those things with the slates, and the sums and other things, and in answer to the following
question, said that he gave secular instruction as well as spiritual, you had quite forgotten yourself?
I had so far as that. Knowing that he went into the cells to read and pray with the prisoners,
and they being allowed to have slates, I, at the moment, answered he did so. He is never inter-
fered with in bis own duties by me as the superintendent.
1643. Then, in fact, when you gave your evidence before, you were not aware of what he
did ?—No ; not rightly.
1644. And you have since ascertained that?—Yes; I have since ascertained that to
be a correct answer which I have now given.
Question 493 read.
1645. By the Chairman. —What do you desire to add to that answer ?—lt should read
as amended :—“ Yes, if they want to see him out of their turn.”
Question 513 read.
1646. What do you want to amend in that answer?—l would add, “and sometimes
when they could be mustered.”
1647. Have you any other alterations you wish to make ?—Those are all.
1648. You have stated, when before this committee on a recent occasion, that although
a great deal of espionage is carried on in the penal department, no inducement is held out
to prisoners to give information ?—Yes.
1649. And also that prisoners frequently do give information ?—Yes.
16c0. Have you not known it to be a rule, while you were chief warder at Pentridge
under Mr. Price, and generally during your experience in the penal department, that prisoners
giving information to the authorities were, either at the time or at the first subsequent
opportunity, rewarded for so doing, in proportion to its importance ?—A man who has made
himself useful to the Government has been appointed to be wardsman or anything of that
sort, but nothing more; that is, to have charge of a ward where there are sixty men, to keep
it clean, and so on. He is taken out of the gang. In place of being out at work, he is in
the stockade at his work ; but then the man must be fitted for the position in which he is placed.
1651. By Mr. Mitchell. —Do you not think it is necessary to hold up some sort of reward
or indulgence to the men to give information of any vile practices that are going on. Do you not
think there would be a good many injuries inflicted —men getting out, and murder being
committed —if they were not checked by other men giving information of such things being
about to take place?—That is not a question I could answer in one word without a great deal of
consideration. The whole system would have to be explained to show how it was necessary.
1652. Do you not think there is more information got from the prisoners themselves than
from those over them ?—Certainly.
1653. If the prisoners could trust each other, and could combine, from their greater
number, they would either break away from their place of confinement altogether, or it would
require a much larger number of warders to keep them ?—lf they could trust each other, and act
in concert together, you could not keep them two days.
1654. By the Chairman. —Have you not known a prisoner, when detected in the
possession of tobacco, “ square ” himself. You know what that means?—l know the meaning
of that word.
1655. That is, to prevent his being brought to trial before the visiting justice, by betraying
a fellow prisoner’s hiding place for tobacco to the Inspector General in person, or some other
functionary—have you ever known an individual case of that ?—I could not call a case to mind.
1656. Are such things done ?—lt is likely there may be.
1657. Have you ever known “ rushes ” and other plans got up by old hands in order to put
away those thus induced to engage in them. Have you ever known a case where the getter-up of
a “ rush,” when it was ripe for execution, gave information of it ?—I do not recollect a case in
point.
1658. You were, T believe, chief warder at the Pentridge stockade when an attempt at
escape was made by Daniel Gisborne and others ?—Yes.
1659. Do you know a prisoner, at that time at Pentridge, but now at the hulks, named
Thomas H. Lewis ?—I do.


1660. Was he not, or have you not heard, that he was an old (< lag ” from the other side ? '
I have heard so.
1661. Did you not know or hear that he had given information, or that information had
been given, to the Chief Superintendent and tho Inspector General, of this attempted escape on the
morning, or at least some time previous to its occurrence ? —I did not hear that.
1662. Were there any steps taken previously, to your knowledge, that led you to suppose
the Inspector General knew of it ?—The Inspector General was perfectly aware that it was likely
to happen. lam speaking of the man Lewis.
* 1668. Did you receive any orders ?—I received orders from the Inspector General.
1664. Will you state to the committee what course was taken on that day, and why taken by
you, as chief warder, responsible by the regulations for the safe custody of the prisoners? —On the
morning of the 31st of March, 1856,1 think between eight and ten in the morning, Mr. Price told
me he had received information that a general rush was likely to take place, and as it was expected
it would be from different points, he ordered me to have some warders thrown out under cover, to
intercept or go in pursuit of the bolters, should a rush take place. Two warders were accordingly
posted, one to the right and another to the left of the quarry gang on the Merri Creek, about a
quarter of a mile in rear of the stockade; Sergeant Ellison, with three more, was sent round the upper
stockade, to line the Merri Creek to the left; Sergeant Henniker, with one or two, was posted
outside the boundary wall to the right; Sergeant Mcllroy, at the upper stockade, was also in readiness
with his men to act. No signs of a rush were shown until about five o’clock, when five men first
walked and then ran from where the stone-cutters were at work, towards No. 7 sentry. He ordered
them to stop and go back, they however continued to run, and got through an open barred gateway
between him and No. 6; Nos. 7 and 6 then fired, but without effect, No. 5-| and Mcllroy, one of
the night guard who was posted outside with Sergeant Henniker, likewise fired. Mcllroy is said
to have wounded Gisborne, although I was myself inclined to think that Hart, who was on No.
was the man that wounded him. Hart thought so himself. No. i also claims to be the man who
wounded Gisborne. When Gisborne dropped, Brewer, without being wounded, did the same.
Gisborne was at least a hundred yards outside the boundary wall and line of sentries, and at least
180 from where Hart and Mcllroy fired. Graham and Jones continued to run, Graham gave in
and was captured by Mcllroy at the Merri Creek, about half a mile from the stockade. Jones was
captured in the bush by Mr. Price, about four miles from the stockade.
1665. By Mr. Clarke. —Those men were not in irons, were they ? —One was; Brewer.
1666. By the Chairman. —Where were you at the time this “ rush” took place ?—I was
to the right of the office, on the hill, where I had a full view of the whole of the prisoners.
1667. Were you there in the ordinary course of your duty, or in anticipation of a “rush ?
In anticipation that something would take place. . .
1668. The attempted escape took place from within the stockade, I believe ?—Prom
within the boundary wall, not from within the stockade.
1669. The stockade is surrounded by a high wall through which there is access and
egress by strong gates?—lt is not a high wall, and it is a slip panel. The wall is from four feet
to four feet and a half high.
1670. Was there a warder standing at the slip panel ?—No.
1671. Why was that? —The warders were at their various posts.
1672. In fact, if a warder had been posted at that opening, the men would have what is
called “ dropped” to it, and not have made the attempt ?—I cannot but think they would.
1673. You say the wall is not a high wall; is it not a wall that would take a man in
irons some trouble to get over ?—There was only one in irons.
1674. Do you think that any prisoner, however daring, would attempt to climb over that
wall, in order to escape, while in irons, with the sentries on their stations ? It is impossible to
say what those men would do.
1675. What is the thickness of the wall ?—Two feet at least.
1676. Did not some of the men who were taken lie down and suffer themselves to be
quietly taken when the shots were being fired at them —did they not lie down on the ground, and
so escape the shots? —There was one. Thomas Jones got away.
1677. Did Mr. Price pursue that man ?—Yes.
1678. By Mr. Mitchell. —If there had been a sentry at this gate, why would that have
prevented the men from rushing over this \.\ feet wall ? —The fact of a single sentry I do not
think would; but it would have shown the men that the authorities were aware that something
was likely to take place; at least, I imagine it would.
1679. What I asked was, would a sentry posted there have prevented the men rushing
over the wall ? —No, certainly not. .
1680. By the Chairman. —This Thomas Jones, is he an old hand ?—1 do not know.
1681. He is quite a young man, is he not ?—About twenty-six.
1682. I suppose all the men, except Gisborne, got two years’ additional ?—I think so, to
the best of my knowledge.
1683. By Mr. Mitchell. —Do you know that the information was given by this man
Lewis? —I did not receive it; Mr. Price received it; but Ido not know that Lewis gave it; I
don’t think he did. „ . , . . . ~ , , e ,
1684. By the Chairman .—Was not this man Lewis made barber immediately alter
that? —The next day, I think. ,
1685. Had he been barber before ?—He was a barber by trade; but he had never acted
with us as barber.


. 1686. Is not that considered one of the best, that is the easiest, billets about the place ?
It is considered a snug berth by the men. 1
w? 7 ' w, at r " id th ? l" an wll ° Bhot : eisbOT ”« get?—Mcllroy was promoted to be a
corporal, though there were three claimants to having done so.
x 1 5 88 ' ft f fU - le in the P enal de P artment > or afc least, is it not a prevailing expectatio
that warders who shoot prisoners will receive promotion, without reference, in fact, to any oth
claims for advancement ?—lt is not a rule. J
:! S' ft, Mr ‘ ftft- — Is ifc the dut y of a warder to prevent the escape of prisoners ? Ye
IoJU. is he ordered to fire at prisoners running away ?—Yes.
1691. Then this man, Mcllroy, simply did his duty?—Yes.
i coq ft ft’ —And t^ie raan w h° does his duty fearlessly gets rewarded ?—Ye
7 o. By the Chairman. —Did the other warders who brought back prisoners withou ,
s ootmg them get rewarded at all ?—There was no other warder brought back prisoners.
ioJi. Dow many warders were there posted?—Eight.
1695. l)o you mean that seven did nothing and one did all ?—They were extended rigl
round the stockade. We could not tell where it would happen. °
. AT ft 96 ' A \t not ft te T certain that the names of the parties about to rush were give
to J>lr. 1 rice or Mr. Duncan ?—I am not quite certain about that.
.1ft 7 - ft contemplated rushes, is it not usual to give the names of the prisoners ?—I hav
unr^\cl\“tldb7mJr Crtata ab ° Ut “ tbon ' We °°“ ld “
Van Sen’t Land^Yc^” 01 '”' e '' id ° noe that Lewis ™ ~™*>l
?° W did IIC C ° me to arber? —Be was from the other side.
i < j 9 " * WaS A ° n thc ° ther , side hc was an old unstable ?—Not with us. He was not so i
tho penal department to my knowledge.
. 170 L What made you think he was a barber by trade ?—I think it is so marked in h
description in the Register.
. . Had Lewis ever before been employed in any billet since his sentence, and wa« h
not, at the time he gave the information, working in the quarry gang ?—No ; I think he wa
employed as a washerman at the time of the rush. ’ w
J 7 ft- J ou had a servant once in the prison of the name of Charles Stewart?—Yes I had.
man ?—I have **** statement that a PP eared in the daily press referring to tha
1705. Are the allegations made in that statement substantially true ?—Well I could no
answer for what took place between him and Mr. Price. I know this, that he was’about to 1
and did go into town to receive his ticket. He was sent back again ; and I left him at PentrkPe
when I came away. ‘v
ho 70G h ftftft Stew ft left J our service, when dressed in his own clothes, on the morning
he was due Jiy the Governor s warrant to go away from prison ? Yes.
mnnthftftft I)( 7 0U ftftor what reason, or by what right] Mr. Price inflicted on him twelve
\;r„xxvii“ r : rice con th “‘ tlere was somoti,i " s not 6 i u “ re - tbat
steady, hZ ?-Ve^. Wart ' < '' ,r!nS ** '°“ S PCTi ° d he ™ in J '°" r SCT ™°> a iet
be a qu^ry 9 man. he *““ ° f 0r Str ° Dg frame A man; tbat is ' to CoDsider Ilim to
171 m!r Wa nftft° serve the additional twelve months?—To the upper stockade.
1711. vV hat is called the Crystal Palace?—Yes.
greater plnLmenV SCOnSideredaplaCe ° f S r c ate r punishment ?—That is considered a place of
Ido 1713 ’ D ° JOU kn ° W a prisoner of thc name of JoIID Barron, at the Pentridge stockade ?
1714. Do you know, or did you ever hear, why John Barron was turned out of his billet
under the assistant superintendent ?_Yes. He accused Mr. Moyle, the asSnt superintendent
of having received some meat without having it marked against him. Mr. Duncanfthe sunerin-
tendent, investigated the case and found the information to be false. ’ P
kind—aski™ 5 0Umade f C ft ge against him > recorded in one <?f the books that are here of this
me to look Jfl,K r n take a ? es f ge ft him out&ide when he went to his liberty?—Allow
me to look at the book, I have no doubt it is the case.
ivif* t •,£ officers report book wa.sproduced and referred to.’]
, ™ ft 1 • 1 read this entr y t 0 y° u as is here - 27fch of March, Barron, 1527, is charged
y you a prisoner to take a message for him outside when he went to his liberty The
sentence is, Thirty days solitary confinement upon bread and water ?”—Yes.
{Ij 7 - "V Mr. Mitchell.— Was Barron going to have his liberty?—No.
1710 ft ft Barron got thirty days’ solitary confinement ?—Yes.
1790 ft ft' conduct being contrary to the law of the place ?—Yes.
1721 B„ Mr J“ •° ntrarj 'T ‘ S C ° nlrarJ ' t 0 the ru, ° laid <Jow “-
ft , ' Mltc * e ll~ Ihe prisoner perfectly understood it ?—Yes.
1790 ft J new he t was making a breach in the regulations of the prison ?—He did.
which von mJ/ihit "—-yWili you state as nearly as possible the circumstances under
you made that charge. Did you hear the nature of John Barron’s conversation with the


man who informed against him to the Inspector General ?—No, the information was given to Mr.
Price himself.
1724. With the man, I asked?—Yes.
1725. Barron was sentenced to thirty days’ solitary confinement by Dr. Youl, in addition
to a week’s previous solitary confinement by the Inspector General before the investigation took
place ?—I could not speak to that without referring to the books at Pentridge.
1726. The books speak for themselves, do they not ?—Yes.
1727. Did you give any evidence whatever, or were you required to substantiate the charge
you had made?—No, I simply charged him, as chief warder, with the offence.
1728. Do you believe any prisoner goes out to his liberty without taking not only one, but
a dozen messages ? —Very likely.
1729. Then you think that regulation is evaded ?—As far as taking verbal messages, it is
impossible to carry it out.
1730. Was there any evidence taken before Dr. Youl, except the evidence of the man who
charged John Barron -with having asked him to take the message ?—So far as I recollect, I do not
think there was.
1731. By Mr. Mitchell. —Did the man deny the charge ?—I think he did.
1732. By the Chairman. —ls there any record kept of the evidence ?—lt is all entered
in the book containing the magisterial records.
1733. In what year was this ?■—lt would be in 1856.
1734. Is this the book [book produced ] ?—lt is
1735. This is the entry —“ Richard Smyth, being duly sworn, states, ‘I am a prisoner of
the Crown. The prisoner Barron came to me and asked me if I would (when going to my liberty)
carry a message for him to the Colonial Secretary or Mr. Fawkner. The message was, that there
was cross work carried on at Pentridge, that a dray had been repaired, and several horses had been
shod for private parties. That there had been a quantity of bones crushed and no account taken
of it.’ ” Was that all the evidence that was taken ?—Yes.
1736. Was Richard Smyth required to bring forward the evidence of any other prisoner
to substantiate that charge?—l do not think so. If there had been any other evidence, it must
have been there.
1737. By Mr. Miller. —Richard Smyth was going out as a free man.—Yes.
1738. There could be no reward given to him for giving this information ?—Not from the
prison authorities.
1739. By the Chairman. —Had Barron and he always been friendly ? —Yes, as far as I
know.
1740. However, the man pleaded “ Not guilty.” Richard Smyth gave his evidence, and
without anything further being proved the man had thirty days ?—The book shows that.
1741. By Mr. Mitchell. —Did you ever hear any complaint on the part of Barron, that he
was unjustly punished on account of Smyth’s charge against him ?—I do not recollect it.
1742. You have no doubt of the guilt of Barron yourself?—l think it very likely.
1743. You believe it was not a got-up case by Smyth ?—I believe the man is capable of
sending out such a message.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to Tuesday next , at one o'clock.
TUESDAY, 18th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present :—Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Clarke, Mr. Hervey, Dr. Tierney, Mr. Miller,
Mr. Patterson, Mr. Thomson.
Mr. N. W. Pollard examined.
1744 By Dr. Tierney. —l believe you are a civil engineer ? —I am.
1745. Have you been in connection with any of the penal establishments in England ?
During the time that I was in my articles with Mr. John Penn, of Greenwich, who was the
contractor for keeping in repair the machinery of Clerkenwell, I was accustomed to be sent to
assist in the repairs, and looking after the organization of the mills that were then in use ; but
was not in any way connected with the prison authorities.
1746. Do you know the system that is carried out there ?—Yes. Nearly the whole of the
prison was occupied in treadmills and nothing else, throwing away labor by working simply a fly
against the wind.
1747. Then you do not admire that system ?—Certainly not; it wasted the labor.
1748. Are you acquainted with any other system in England or elsewhere ?—I am. In
1836 I went to the United States, and during the time I was there, at that period, I had an
opportunity of seeing several of their prisons. The prison at Philadelphia is one where the silent
system without labor was carried on. That was altogether the solitary system. Also, at Sing Sing
and Auburn, in the state of New York, and other gaols I visited. Again, in 1851, I visited the
States, and had an opportunity to judge of the gaol discipline.
1749. What other penal establishments in the United States can you speak of, besides that
which you have spoken of at Philadelphia ?—At Sing Sing, on the Hudson, they have labor
employed with the silent system, but they were laboring all together.
Penal.— s.


the separate y o”Iet M 3&
have seen are conducted upon the principle of separation. ’ 0f tl,em tbat 1
htol. Are they more on the separate system than on the silent system ? Tt i „ ,
locked 9 up°separatfdyf haV6 " ba “- * ba « 4 theyVr 'XZZZlj
labor of 7 ts“m^V‘available”™’A T a’7 ° B !" A “ eri <=* ‘he
l P abo h r?a„l staring’ tul StowK “t ofLep^Ve^t
SiVd'tL S feredlt C r M 7 “OTl*bi^l
fa's Stale!" ' f °™ d ** ° f tbe -«°g it
that great advantage is,
1754. Is steam brought to bear there ?—Yes.
1755. Will you describe how it is the labor is made available ? Thn™ n i. t
paying prison ThoBe WOre Selfwing establishments ?-Ever y one. Baltimore prison is a self.
ment * 10 “«™ a ™trol and manage-
each man—a daily nortionTmdXtifdhddJ7? ? ~ A ° ett T of work is allotted to
of work depends the food of the prisoner, and without they work7e‘y deTo^at 0 ” Iffn P 0?”
what ”* ** U * h “““ W ‘hat
1759. And when he has earned his breakfast he gets it ?—Yes at the five,! .1 i
V&VZstnlZl am °“M T,° rli *” OIhMS ! ‘ h!s aho4: thefr in°7eer7o°n me
something. ' “ e m Wbleb tbe P rlBoncrs got afterwards ?-Every prisoner is paid
and whether therfis b ™’
of breathing room for every man Thev „n ,/ , e -7 have about 400 cubic feet
? sz ~- as
go 4s, a X‘“‘7 Zi P Z7jll S vit so l Y he “* “*
there rs a constant flushing going on which prevents’any bad efe’cts oc urring '
draw the’wa'ter t7‘he S pi a ear TdW “a Afh 7“ “7 b * H. can
saw vermin in them ; 1 a > ia going through the cells, I never
without food, but never anything beyond that. ’ V ° D ° Wa a maD t 0 out two <l a y s
self-infliVdedi bSry7cannot7 U 7ttou U t7™r ri im 7 f by t°l woriin S ? -His punishment is
elsewhere; but if you have no 1 baVe .f 6n . s . hort “Usance ordered
culprit, so it is not any punishment at ail ’ ° ° fJI prisoners will divide their food with the
have i
particularly of the prisons of Berbice, and Demarara, and Trinidad * 1 Sl>eak “° re
. ould you describe the model system there, that is, the system which you admire


yourself; would you describe it in any terms you please?—The one which I would take as a model
is the New Prison at Trinidad.
1770. Then would you have the kindness to describe the system there ?—Yes.
1771. By Mr. Miller. —ls that a British prison ?—lt is a British prison, but the reason I
take that, is on account of the system which was introduced under the Government of Lord
Harris. I acted as Superintendent of Public Works at the time, and my object was to make the
prison labor available for the public works of the country. We had a large quantity of work
to carry out and very little means to do it with, and I thought it was a pity to have such a large
force doing nothing, and I requested to be allowed to bring that force to bear on the public works,
and so far as the labor of those men was concerned, they were put under my department.
1772. By Dr. Tierney. —ls that a self-paying establishment?—The first year after we
introduced it, from being a charge of over £3OOO on the country, it returned a revenue of
£3OO clear of every expense.
1773. That was in the first year ?—.The very first year.
1774. Is there any corporal punishment inflicted there?—The first thing I did was to
knock down the treadmill they used to have, in. order to make room for separate cells there ; then
the same system was carried on there, but the punishment by flogging was not left in the hands
of the parties in charge at all.
1775. In whose hands is it?—ln those of the inspector of prisons and the magistrates.
The whole of the members of council as magistrates take it in turns to visit the gaol, and
together with the inspector of gaols form a board; but in case of any refractory conduct or
anything of that kind, the party in charge of the gaol sends in his daily report. There is a
report goes to the Governor every day, and he orders an investigation where there is anything of
consequence to demand it; but where the things are trifling, simply the visiting justice of the
gaol disposes of the case, but it is an open court.
177fi. Would you have the kindness to i*ead the statement which you have brought?—l
have applied the reasoning of this paper, which I am about to read, to our works in Victoria.
1777. By Mr. Miller. —That statement is in the nature of a scheme of prison discipline
for Victoria ?—Yes.
The witness delivered in the same , which is as follows :
The organization of our convict system stands second in importance to scarcely any question on which
it is probable our Legislature will have to deliberate; and if there are subjects demanding primary attention,
I know of none more difficult of satisfactory solution than this.
The treatment of criminals has given anxious thought to many men endowed with the highest mental
qualifications in all parts of the world, and yet to this day, in most countries, remains an unsolved political
puzzle.
I think that this failure is mainly attributable to the difficulties involved; but to this unquestionably
must be added the fact that the care and discipline of the outcasts of society have always been ranked as a
secondary employment for administrative talent.
No greater mistake could possibly be made than to suppose that the conditions necessary to the well
working of a convict system demands but an ordinary amount of talent or skill. If it be advisable to call in
the aid of high mechanical skill to set right an erratic engine composed of inanimate matter, no less necessary
is it to have a master mind to deal with wrongly organized human nature; and although, if all the aim of a
convict system were simply to punish and grind the offender, many thousands in any community might be
found to exemplify that they themselves only differ from the criminal, in the fact that the wrongs they inflict
are legalized; yet if it be conceded that the mere punishment of the convict is but a small part of criminal
treatment, it will be admitted that such a class of men are quite unqualified to carry out penal discipline.
I am impressed that the design of incarceration is not simply the punishment of the offender, nor would
all the end be gained if we were to add thereto incarceration of the criminal as a safeguard to society.
Besides these considerations, in all well regulated systems, the reformation of the offender must be constantly
and primarily kept in view, and hence the necessity to' find men for this difficult service, who, while they
uphold the majesty of the law, can administer that quality beyond price—mercy.
In offering these remarks to the Honorable the Legislative Council, I am not actuated by any feeling of
hostility to any of the parties who now administer our penal discipline; I cannot be so, because I know nothing
whatsoever of the individuals by whom it is conducted, and I certainly would not be inclined to conclude that
more wrong exists in our system, or that our officers are more vicious, or less competent than the bad organiza-
tion of English prisons necessarily makes them, unless something more than mere accusation appears to support
the charges which have been made against them; far less am I prepared to give the least credence to what is
gathered from thrice convicted and demoralized felons, on whose testimony so much stress has lately been laid;
and still again, I think that the evidence of those who have been employed in our establishments, and who
perhaps are discharged possibly from good cause, should be received with great caution, and only be relied on
if supported at least by circumstances.
If the administration of our penal discipline be viciously conducted—if the fault lies with men and not
with the system —inquiry can be made, and justice done on either side; but if the fault, as I apprehend is the
case, be with the system, I care not into whose hands you place the administration, disappointment must
follow; and I am impressed that any system of prison discipline that we have imported from the mother
country will be just as abortive and mischievous here as it is well known to be, with scarcely a single exception,
in the United Kingdom.
But if, from the necessity of our circumstances, we have brought from our homes an institution that is
defective, there is no reason why we. should stereotype it in this land; and it is perhaps to be considered
fortunate that circumstances have arisen to draw public attention to this but generally little interesting portion
of our public institutions; and the question now being ripe for discussion, I believe it to be the duty of every
man in the country who has had any opportunity to give the subject any attention, or who has been in a
position to throw any light on it, should come forward and “throw his mite into the treasury;” and it is with
this feeling that I humbly submit the following remarks to the Honorable the Legislative Council, gathered in
that country where penal treatment is better understood than in any other country in the world.
The subject is not new to me. It has, indeed, been familiar to me from my boyhood ; for even when
in my articles my employers were engineers to keep in order the machinery of the Clerkenwell prison, where
the treadmill was so largely introduced, and where, carrying out the wasteful extravagance and waste of our
English prisons, all the power created by the motion of the mill was made simply to work a fly governor
against the wind, and not put to any practical use. Since that time I have visited almost every penal
establishment in the West Indies, both British and foreign; and in one of these islands, where I had the


direction ot the public works, I made the prison labor largely assist in carrying out the buildings required in
XosTe" Unffi ? yet ™*t ua,led in the ™ld,Xt which is now common in
almost e\ei v \ pnson in the United States of America; a system not only punishing the offender and protection
society by the seclusion of the criminal, but at the same time affording the convict every obnorKitv fol
anappredablrrevenuef lllB Wh ° le ° f the COSt of criminal P rocedure and discipline, and further yielding
. . lie £ reat mistake, in an economic point of view, made in all our English prisons is putting the
Arnerir'a 'T 0 -' t T° rk a ? gl J es u but P oor remuneration outside the walls of the gaol. This is ignored in
point of fuel' S that COuntry . the labor of the convict is assisted with the best machinery; in
nlvtn ti C ’i - ve , h i m the mOSt arUstic and highly remunerative work they can find him, thus multi-
plying the value of Ins labor as manifold as possible. mum
cow , r lu’ i!? 1 ' instan< r e > that criminals in England were required to saw timber for railway works, a whip
visitino-ti ■ ° P - a Ced in tb ? P ris °ners’ hands. In America, a steam saw mill would take its place; and in
Ins f ,nrl X P r SOn -’ machl u? ry w 0^ d be found in every shape, from the mill, to saw the rough block, to
. . , 1 i- laming machinery ot the most Complex kind; thus multiplying the value of the labor of a
1? an eno ,7 nous extent, and making it no wonder, that, notwithstanding high reformatory and philan-
(l u miges . ie ® e prisons are not only self-supporting, but also assist the exigencies of the State
iNow, it this be attainable in a country where labor is worth but 4s. 2d. per diem, where machinery is
SvplvH - Pflic works, of which we stand so much in need, are Uttered overthe land
Slow ‘.’he ;™', l ic,T„Tot r ’ W " ether °" ‘" e —»° f T “ ™" d >* disable
. But li iS not , on , tbe T score of economy alone that artistic labor is selected for convicts in the United
mhid In ? when a tht LdTv di T °- U fp itS ado P tion - .Simple manual labor provides no occupation for the
nnnd, and, when the badly disposed mind has not occupation, it is certain that it will plot mischief Working
machinery meets this, as it not only demands manual labor, but equally does it employ the n h d and S
gives another opportunity to the criminal to avoid a further plunge into crime. P 7 d, and thus
know that more than one member of the present Executive are quite alive to the importance of a
reformatory administration of our penal system, and I believe, if the Legislature is prepared to meet ?
iXI n -t arge Prim f7 oUtlay ’ thafc will find those gentlemen to whom the subject more immediately
nelh!lS Prepared to organize a satisfactory establishment ; and I am under the impression that it is the
pe Imps too anxious jealousy of those who hold our purse strings for economy that has mainly prevented the
manifel o tU°LffeVt n hT s ?i!h en b lon f , b , ef f e this , date - Xo .' v , however, that want of prison accommodation is so
anilestly urgent, it is to be hoped that no such obstructions will be continued, and that the Legislature will be
prepared to vote such a sum for a very large increase of our penal establishments as will enable the Executive
to adopt all those improvements in prison economy which shall be shown to be desirable.
Without proper prisons it is superlatively idle to begin to talk of a reformatory system- without what onr
E AtT, 01 " 18 !? - na t cvon «* »aste, I defy the least approach to Ly SSTrmSSfio”
and without sufficient accommodation to completely separate the prisoners during the hours they are
of" vice onlice.” ' T * m '° “*“* “V CMTOti »" <* »**** attending the JntammatSJ ScJce
To continue the inhumanity now existing, and which has for some time existed on our uold fields of
huddling men into dens that fill them with vermin, destroys their health, and l?ads to rendering an erratte
mind lost for ever would only be to stain ourselves with crime worse thai that w profess topunish- 1
tahe , S ZZte Sffi'f'Tr f y «*» meLTes ’ai nil
l. j -I Ii l h ? f ’ on tbe Executive, if they are not prepared to cope with the difficulty •on the
Legislature, it they do not grant the funds necessary to remedy the monstrous evil. Y ’
1 hese things call aloud for increased establishments to be commenced at once, and I urge that in desicnimr
them, some more remunerative employment than mere manual labor shall be provided foJ Cployed as ouf
affah!st S fheir r a e S- are °n r er n manual . labor > the expense these establishments would entail might weigh
against their adoption ; but when the criminal is profitably employed, if by assisting him with machinery vou
higher development, and you gain, as I am prepared to show you might, a revenue from'his
notwhhstandmgthe increased cost of his incarceration, then I think it will be conceded the most
S^ugSplo" I hffoH s 'oSe“ b<! expc " de<l WOnld be ,0 use mea " s in P»«r to reclaim these
" 0 " "" ** “
- °r d° they stop here The convict who enters an American prison, and who perhaps committed
crime in consequence of the degrading ignorance in which all his life he previously existed, during a of
each day of his incarceration, lias secular education provided for him; thus again keeping his mind occupied
and allowing the contaminating influence of his fellow-prisoners to have less effect on him P Cd ’
a<yi„ 7 „i!;A;;;;s
. 1 1118I 118 tbey prov * fle m ?ulcations of morality through the religious adviser; they dispel ignorance throua-h
AtfSAr? t,leir ™' k ' agaln -ery-LCEsSXS
I hey show the criminal that, if evil deeds meet punishment, no less will amendment be rewarded and
no^mo^e. 111 ma Ung i 4 directly to the interest 1 of the convict himself,
nation y "’ J- Ut ! P ro Pose to S° even further than they do ; and if proper discrimi-
theseauclbeadopied flf " f fff t 0 Carry out our penal discipline, and the indulgences I recommend in
offender P ’ am qU ‘ tC SUre tliey wiH still further tend to the reformation of the
pnrH-pn ß n U fVpL C r nti " Ue ' J" Amorka exemplary behaviour shortens the term of imprisonment, and a certain
to commit crimet!Sf3S ner 1S mad 6 aVailaWe t 0 him when again at lar^e ’ 80 as to lead him
But although all this is done towards reclaiming the prisoner, no less is his incm-ornti™ + „
Many, perils most convifts, hive
work. American prisons are just suited to such cases, and a man who enters one must earn hil bre id hl tlli’
wo* f ” d - “■ “ <* W
short hirn.antllie eoercehii nl B-' but'ifihe foodlif
reaao e^'l^el^ 1 '" B’<l^y 8 ’ <1^yp0l " U^e *^ e, ' g *^ e^ dl^J'^i t ®d*^1 r bb^their l appetites C suiuly I man >11 ahhid1)y
ason, is not in a different category. I am prepared to hear such a system deiouneed as terture’; it is not


so; and is quite a different thing to a dietary dependent on the whim of any man. But if even it were torture,
it would he self inflicted, and the criminal would have no one to blame for it hut himself.
To get a breakfast in the United States prison a man must work for it, and to get a dinner he must
earn it. Accustomed to this discipline within the walls of a gaol, and with the certain knowledge that without
adequate labor he will not get his food, the criminal will be steady to his occupation while confined, and when
without the prison, is likely to continue those habits of industry he has acquired there, as he well knows,
if he does not gain his bread honestly when out of prison, he will most assuredly have to do so under less
advantageous circumstances.
I have remarked before that the separation of convicts when unemployed is most necessary to proper
penal discipline. This is the key to the American penal system, and with the self-inflicted penalty of short
food, will be found? an effective discipline, and far to surpass the treadmill, the whip, or the manacle, inasmuch
as by using it in the place of the latter instruments of torture, corporeal punishment is effected without
degrading the mind below the point to which it has already fallen.
The instant the prisoner has done his work, whether it be for his food or his rest, he should be taken
back to his separate cell, and on no account whatever should he be allowed to come into contact with the
debasing influence of those around him.
This is advantageous as a means of greater security ; and it will to a considerable extent allow working the
old and young offender in the same prison, and above all, it will allow those lessons which should be taught either
by the clergyman or the schoolmaster to have more weight. Abstracted from the conversation and example
of the hardened in crime, there will be hope for the young offenders; for, with no other occupation than would be
afforded by such books and other means of improvement as ought to be provided in every gaol, the convict
would be led into a different state of mind than that which led him into crime. Congregated with the mass
this is hopeless, and hence the cause of that monstrous absurdity—an English prison.
Another portion of the American discipline is compulsory silence among the respective prisoners
while at their work ; in mentioning which, I must guard the committee from confounding the silent system once
used in the United States, unaccompanied by labor, and that which is now in force with occupation for the
mind. In the one case insanity has invariably followed long incarceration, while in the other there never has
been an instance of loss of intellect.
Silence among the convicts is essential in any penal discipline in order dhat all classes of offenders maybe
worked in the same prison ; for, unless this precaution is used, a more expensive classification must be followed
out. Silence while at work again prevents any mischief being plotted; and as it has already been recommended
that after work the convict both for food and rest should be immediately taken to his cell, if silence be imposed
while he is laboring, there would be no fear of that contaminating influence stopping reformation, which is
sure to exist where the vicious are allowed to congregate freely.
At Sing Sing and at Auburn this silence may be said to be complete, and from the time the prisoner
enters the gaol until the time he leaves he is coerced in this respect, and compelled to make his communications
even to the warders in signs. This however I think unnecessary, for, as the intent of enforcing this silence
is to prevent contamination, I can see no objection, while enforcing silence among the prisoners themselves, they
should not be permitted to make necessary communications to the prison officers orally ; and of course, to derive
any benefit from their religious and secular teachers, they must do so.
Another discipline exercised in the United States prisons towards felons is that, on their entry within
the walls, they are for the time of their incarceration considered to be civilly dead, and are allowed no commu-
nication with their friends outside. At Auburn this is most rigidly carried out, and although I think it may
advantageously be generally introduced into our penal discipline, yet I am inclined to recommend a relaxation,
and that the privilege either of seeing or writing to friends should be reserved as an indulgence to those who
conducted themselves with propriety.
I have insisted that the convicts should be put to some labor that would not only be self-supporting,
but that also would be remunerative ;in point of fact, make their labor a reproductive work. Objections have
been raised both in England and in some parts of America against this ; and it has been urged that we have
no right to bring the labor of convicts into competition with free labor. If this were carried out, it would be
impossible to demand any labor from the prisoner, and a new system of punishment would have to be devised ;
for put him to what occupation you may, he will interfere with some employment outside the prison walls,
in countries where labor is at a discount; but, as in our case, where there is far from a glut in our labor
market, where, in fact, we have a miserably sparse population, the dogma is simply absurd.
Select as an instance any employment you please, and you will find we want more of it; and if this be
the case when none but the ordinary demand for labor exists, how much more patent will the argument for
employing our criminals on public works become, when we are about undertaking works of such magnitude
as cause us to pause until we are satisfied that we have hands enough at command. Surely, if we put our
convicts to do some of this, we do not interfere with the rights of honest labor, and I certainly can see no difference
in employing our criminals on the artistic works required on our railroads, or how, thus appropriated, they
would interfere with the rights of honest labor, if so employed, than if they be continued interfering with the
labors outside the prison, whose occupation is breaking stones. If they are to labor at all, it matters not
what they do, and certainly have as much right to interfere with one description of honest labor as another.
In a country like England, filled with paupers, some consideration might be given to this cry of
interference with the right of honest labor; but with us, where labor is most scarce, it would appear sinful to throw
any away ; and surely, even as an abstract question, the convict has as much right to labor for his bread as
the man outside the gaol, and a self-supporting system of penal discipline takes care that he shall do this and no
more, so far as he (the convict) is concerned. If he produces a surplus, the honest laborer, as one of the body
politic, reaps his share of advantage; while on the other hand, if he produces less than is sufficient to cover the
expenses of his incarceration, the honest laborer will have to contribute his quota to supply the deficiency.
So far as this particular country is concerned, I believe that, if we employ our convicts at such work as
would assist in opening up a communication over the length and breadth of the land, so far from doing the
honest laborer an injustice, sources of industry would be opened up to him, from which he is at present debarred
from the very expense that our present means of locomotion entails; while the cost of keeping the convicts, if
not put to remunerative work, would put the State in a position to borrow money to multiply those works
wherein the honest laborer would meet ample employment. Say, for instance, we have 3000 convicts to main-
tain, and that, over and above the cost of their maintenance, £4O per head is expended on them ; £120,000 per
annum, the interest of £2,000,000 of money, is wasted, which £2,000,000 would not only give the honest laborer
employment in constructing 100 miles of our railway lines, but, when these railway lines were completed, would
at the same time multiply the sources of employment to the working man in every conceivable manner.
It will be urged, that although a self-supporting system is organized in the United States, yet, in many
cases, the occupation of the convicts is made to produce such manufactures as compete with the foreign and
not the home market.
This, to some extent, is fact; but, in the majority of the prisons, say for instance those worked on the model
of the Baltimore penetentiary, this is not the case ; but, supposing it were even universally adopted in the
United States, our circumstances bear no similitude to theirs. We cannot occupy our prisoners in any
manufactures that will be remunerative in a foreign market; and until we can, the comparison would be unfair.
I have the honor to recommend to the consideration of the committee the foregoing remarks, and now ask
permission to submit some details on them.
It will be perceived that a complete reorganization of our present admittedly defective system must be
initiated before any of the above suggestions could be inaugurated, and although new arrangements of discipline
Penal —t


I and construction will bo needed. JVTorp tlnn nil miri oo fim .
we put the right man in the right place to carry out our penaUysten? for ifwSdTnnf We mUS } take Care J? at
but expensive disappointments- and lam inclined tr. ti.Ln /• J 1 / W V d ° ! 10t ’ we need expect nothing
care that no man who has been’trained in an onnosite sdintVtn t uef . s !f.P in * hls direction, we should take
with our new organization Thevmust f m m ti • , c one ln dicated should have anything to do
unfit for such asSm and itJeMafnW P** oll ‘MpUno, be totally
* ,he “V? h i“ rl r :
immediate superintendent htderTcT' ° f T is eonflded-the
instructors, the mechScaUssistStsandK If 1“ ’ f ”^? lcal <> fflcer . th ® clergyman, the secular
convicts under the preserirnrnortr T been Col ?taminated by the charge of
other hand, be men of judgment and decision ami o .^y™ n . nical coercion; they must, on the
pation they undertake and not following it „ eic ld > Wltd their energies devoted to the occu-
ttSSSST* “ ,0 k “ P ,h “ il b° VL * temptation,°and‘to make tEttfiS?£&££**£
■*“
nature of the employment at wldch^e^inteiuUhe 1 f| ard must of c °urse be had to the
prison being easy of access in case of anv emormcv S i & illld . due weight should be allowed to the
copious supply of that great neleLaryte e»tab”?shmenta-fresV“ate” n * W > •
employ our convicts, andlememberiiig'wlud a
that a. least a portion of our convict “ mb “* l recommend
east 500 mSe* each'rifc requiring forialSl'hne ataf h i tI Td C '' nm « y duri . ng tlle next lcn t®*™ "-ill be at
These sleepers will average say from four to fil ll t’ including the station out-turns, &c., 2000 sleepers.
:übic feet. An equal timber will he renhh- fff ° f tlraber ’ sa Yl,OOO,OOO sleepers containing 4,500,000
argely employed, and the 1000 miles of fencing necessa^^uTtSSf^ nstruct i°n, even supposing stone is
The present contract price for our sleeuers is ln/and il V l leas * much as required for this.
§§il^^
nd five per cent, required to do the ordinary orison work hrlel t Ptr Ce ?-‘ und6 v sec ° ndar y punishment,
“cbbe three sleepers, or othe/tiuiber ofsimUar equaUo^l°eacli ner’diem*
ringing the rough block criminal, for although the fdling and
the^iii^^webe^ short]
conSyrwc wm sulose him to t "XT!?“’ * .*2“ «»•'•»* "a. acre gone; or the
recapture to be tried for escape- and J* am c abbtrj, they would then he liable at any moment of
who htui one-experience of sile|, Sy l *'
paid them XSSatat^wCthey' Cc° o ** *° *
ggaggs; says*?: sss^j^v^£ssr t,,^t^
convict, the^rewardlthat'wouldliwuit'hhilin co l lstiln J!f ba.c before his eyes, in the more indulged
also give him the fruit of his toil earned even ai a criminal 110 " '™ Ukl s,lorte " tlle te™ of Ills durance, and
worki„™LrTh1 0 „ n umbSlLt U lwmnd ra S. ’ mUd J? "** and the timber, hut of those inside
and sotfinsidc the gaoUn all 500 min; „„IT, atel “cosTofTe Itoff w“contool follows MC
: iZsZ‘r d ?‘ ::: : z® j
2 ciorks ... ... ;;; i°? “ 0
3 Chaplains d
G Schoolmasters 19nn n ..
2 Directors of works ... "no n n
2 Clerks of works i" "• eSS 0 0
2 foremen K on n n
10 Warder! without^.'. 0 . Sa ° l ... E E E ES o %
M.-iit-n!..,,;.-r ... g g
5,450 0 0
suS t
quarters at and llmlculate B the >S machinm-y[ , tools, o^^ r other* p^f^at


£lOO, in all £3OO per man. basing my calculations on the high wages we are likely to pay for our work, and
not at the rates now ruling. This would make the cost both in and out the walls £150,000, and on
this allowing:—
Interest, at the rate of 5 per cent. ... ... ... ... £7,500
Insurance, one per cent. ... ... ... ... ... 1,500
Wear and tear of buildings, 10 per cent 10,000
Wear and tear of machinery, 30 per cent ... 15,000
Gives £34,000
Annual charges to borrow money to build the establishment, and to keep it in efficient working order.
Contrary to the usual practice in Government undertakings, interest and working charges are here considered;
in fact, I have supposed that Government was in the place of an individual who would have to charge all the
items I here enumerate.
We have now to consider the maintenance and clothing necessary for the prisoners. I would divide
both into probationary and felon. To feed the felon—l consider no indulgence whatsoever ought to be taken
into account. In this country nis meat may be considered on a liberal dietary, in such large quantities as
would be wanted, with 4d. per diem; his bread, 4d.; vegetables, 2d.; tea, sugar, and other food allowed
equal, say to the men on a survey staff, 4d.; and give an additional 4d. to cover contingencies, medical
charges, and medical comforts; and Is. 6d. per diem would cover the cost of his food. To those in the proba-
tionary class I would give indulgences, which Is. extra would cover, and 2s. 6d. per diem would be chargeable
on their establishment. The prison wearing apparel of the convict, allowing ample for change to encourage
cleanliness, could be had for £6; while that of the probationary class may be rated at £l2; this would give—
-300 felons, fed @ Is. Gd. per diem ... £8,220
200 probationary convicts, fed 2s. 6d 9,330
300 felons, clothed @ £6 per annum 1,800
200 probationary convicts, @ £l2 ... ... ... ... 2,400
£21,750
It will be remembered that I propose paying the convicts at the rate of Gd. per diem for the felons,
2s. Gd. for the probationary class ; this would give, even allowing no stoppages, and that those on works of
necessity were paid even for the Sabbath, we should have —
300 employed 320 days, @ Gd. £2,400
200 employed 320 days, @ 2s. Gd 8,000
£10,400
And still further again, we should have to add:—
Fuel and engine stores £lO,OOO
Books and educational appliances ... 2,000
£12,000
Making the annual cost: —
For staff £15,450
„ buildings and machinery... ... ... ... ... 34,000
~ food and clothing 21,750
„ payment for labor... ... ... 10,000
„ fuel, engine stores, and educational requirements ... 12,000
£93,200
Add to this, if you please:—
For military, say 80 men ... ... ... ... ... 10,000
The cost of catching and convictions, say £lO each per
annum on an average for 500 ... ... ... ... 5,000
£108,200
This £lOB,OOO distributed over 500 convicts would give £216 per annum as the cost of each, and the labor of
the convict, notwithstanding high reformatory discipline, increased security, and more humane treatment,
would be remunerative, instead of entailing a large expenditure; for if you take 310 days for the work that
would be given, and remembering that our rough sawn timber Avas valued at giving 6s. Bd. each sleeper, and
for other work in proportion, for Avhich we now pay 11s., and that so valued it Avould yield £1 per diem for
every convict; if so, assisted by machinery, one account per man would stand thus:—
310 days’labor, @£l ... ... ... ... ... ... £3lO
Charges aboA r e enumerated 216
Balance to credit of convict labor ... ... £94
Now let us pause for a moment to examine if my estimate as to the value of the convict labor, assisted
by machinery, be wrong.
Ist. We knoAv that simply for the unartistic labor of breaking stones outside the walls of a prison
labor is now worth 12s. Avages, with tent, Avood, and water. Surely, if we could assist the man who is even
breaking stones with machinery, his labor Avould be more than double the value, and we do not Avant to
double the value even of this loav class of labor to shoAV that, assisted by machinery, the work of one convict
might be made highly valuable.
2nd. Comparing the value of the convict labor Avith the instance I have taken, Avith a contract
actually entered into by the Government, Ave have an average of 11s. as the Avorth of a railway sleeper ; this
Ave may take as a fair price, for it Avas the result of the most open competition, and was in every way above
the least suspicion of favoritism. Now, the contractor in this instance found it to his advantage to avail himself
of a locality outside of the Heads; he has to carry the principal part of his supplies to his men by ship, to
bring back his finished material in a like manner, and then has to deliver at distances varying from one to
twenty miles. Surely this transport alone is Avorthy of consideration, and if we placed our convicts along our
lines in direct communication with the points Avhere our Avork Avould extend, we must beat such an expensive
Avay of going to work. The cost of our transport would be comparatively nil.
Again, the contractor has bound himself Avith the Government, as a matter of course, with a view to
profit —this, at least, Avould have to come out of his 11s. against the 6s. Bd. Avhich I contend the labor of our
convicts could make these sleepers for and leave a profit.
I bring forward these apparently foreign circumstances to show that the amount of Avork I have stated
as a fair day’s work for the convict, assisted by perfect machinery, is not an excessive estimate.


I have made the whole of my arguments to apply to one description of work; of course I intend to he
understood only as taking it as an example; all others similarly circumstanced would hear a like interpretation.
The work I have selected demands but a very limited amount of mechanical skill; others of a more artistic
nature would only enhance the position I have taken, while various others even requiring less attention might
with equal advantage he introduced, aided by machinery, into our prisons. Among these last may be cited
the manufacture of bricks for the public service, and earthern piping for agricultural purposes and cotter
for general use. ’ 1
I am not aware whether the stone abounding along our various railway lines is capable of being
by machinery; but, if it be, there again would be a most valuable occupation to which we might place ou
convicts. Under any circumstances, however, supposing all the timber be worked out as would render
unprofitable to carry even by rail, the working of stone beyond merely breaking it for the road will always b
a stand-by, as occupation for the criminals; but I do not apprehend any falling off of the timber, if it b
followed by trams, sawn in the gaol itself, until the establishments I have recommended have doubly anc
trebly paid for themselves. J
I have made it a condition to our more complete success that our penal establishment should b
alongside our railway lines, thus putting them within the reach of every description of material, no matter a
what distance, on which their labor may be profitably employed; but as I have selected the working
timber as them most feasible occupation at the present moment, it would, of course, be necessary that th
establishment should be in the neighborhood of some of those forests with which the country abounds
and, as I stated before, there should be abundance of water in the immediate neighborhood. A positio
answeimg this description might be found without much trouble or expense on the surveyed trial line betwee
ileiboui ne and Ballaarat; another in the country around the Yan Yean, where water power for drivin
machinery might also be made available, and the tramway already in existence might be made useful
bringing down the materials produced; a third place would be a position in the vicinity of Mount Eliza an
as there is no available road in that country at the present moment, a first prison work might be theconnectio
ot Melbourne and Western Port, and a subsequent extension into Gipps Land might also be held in view
and again there is the Black Forest directly on our main line of way to the northern gold fields affordin
ample scope for convict labor to assist in making our railways. ’
To determine the exact spot would require careful examination; and I am of opinion that a moderat
sum spent for the purpose would be well laid out. To three of the places mentioned easy access will soon b
in existence, and by the means in contemplation the supplies required to maintain the convicts and the wor]
done by them would be easy of delivery; while instantaneous information, by telegraphic communicatioi
along the railway wires, and the facility to bring force to bear on them, if necessary, could be carried out
In some of these places water-power could not be had, and steam would have to take its place; but in all
fuel to work steam-power would be cheap, and a sufficient quantity of water abounds to enable machinery to
be brought to bear to keep the sewage of the prison constantly flushed, and to admit of the frequent ablution
of the people, thus removing the disease and vermin at present ruling in some of our abominable pollutions
called prisons. 1
The filthy non-attendance to sewage on our gold fields’ pest-houses is most digraceful and a libel on
humanity and civilization, and in them it would be perfectly impossible to expect any man to attempt anv
reformation, as Ins self-respect and pride is completely destroyed by putting him into a place where no
humane man would leave his dog.
Having made allusion to the prisons of the gold fields, I would ask permission to say a few words
on the employment of the prisoners there. At the present moment I believe that those confined in the
stockades there give least return of any of the convicts. I venture to state that there is not a day’s work
done among any ten, and the expense of guarding at their play must be considerable.
•i. U° w ’ there , are several problems of vast importance to the welfare of this country which they micht
with advantage solve. The greater portion of the people confined on the gold fields are miners, and it would
not be unreasonable to employ them during their incarceration in solving questions that would be of vast
advantage to them when they are liberated.
I believe the greatest depth yet reached on any of the gold fields is about 260 feet, while 200 is more
general on most fields. To what depth we may go and mine successfully is not yet understood, and would cost
mory; money than can be expected from private individuals. Again, the exact position of our reefs are as yet
but most imperfectly ascertained; we are, however, certain of their parallelism. J
To determine both these questions might legitimately be undertaken by the convicts on a gold field
and on each a shaft of 100 fathoms might be sunk by them, and when at that depth a drive cutting every reef
on the gold field might be put in, and the question of their several values would thus be fairly investigated.
, n crossing a reef, if found to be auriferous to a paying extent, a reserve of 100 yards on each side of
the point ot intersection might be made, and a shaft sunk for its work.
To do this on a gold field, including the necessary lifting, ventilating, and pumping machinery would
requne somewhere about £10,000; but I am more than sanguine that it would prove a highly reproductive
work, while it is largely calculated to insure the safe custody and hard work of the convicts.
1778. By the Chairman. In speaking of American prisons, you made reference to task
work, and said that a certain amount of work is required of each prisoner, and that, if he did not
perform it, he does not get his food.—l want to know if that task work is of so easy a character
that, the most delicate prisoner can do it without difficulty ?—lt is very generally left to the
medical officer in charge. Where the men are employed in making machinery you can allot
different portions of the work to them better than where a simple tale of manual labor is wanted,
lhe men who are appointed to take charge of the prison discipline in the United States have a
wish to carry it out. They are carefully selected and are qualified for the duty they have to
perform. j j
1779. With regard to the work which those prisoners perform, is the machinery which
they make such as you have mentioned thrown into the market so as to come into competition
with free labor, or is it used in Government employment wholly?—ln some cases it is not, in
others it is; some of the States you are aware will not allow it to come into competition with free
labor, in others it is allowed, and particularly in those places where labor itself is scarce and
the production of those things does not interfere.
* i v l7B ?‘ Such f makin S machinery in the Southern States, there it would not interfere with
tree labor, because they do not make such things there ?—Yes, in such a case as that. I do not
allude prticularly to that case, but it is to such reasoning as that.
1781. If the same system were introduced here, would it affect free labor and have a
tendency to lower wages ?—On the contrary, I think if the system were introduced here, so far from
lowering the price of labor, it would increase it, if applied in the way I have suggested. Suppose
wo put it to carrying out railway work—that railway work will open up sources of industry,
without which the laborer could never have the sources to resort to.


1782. You mentioned Trinidad, with the few inhabitants there are there. Where do the
prisoners come from principally; they are not Imperial prisoners, because it is not a place of
transportation from England ?—They are principally Negroes.
1/83. By Mr. Thomson. —You have spoken of the system which you consider to be the
system. of a model prison at Trinidad, and which you said was made self-supporting in a very
short time. Will you describe the management generally ?—The prisoners all tale the same
amount of labor as a man Avorking in the public department would do outside; outside we paid
a dollar a day per task, and the cost of keeping the prisoners inside was not above twenty cents
a day; that is, the cost of keeping them, irrespective of the charges upon them. Now, when these
charges were taken, it came to about eighty cents lower, and gave a net of twenty cents to our credit.
1784. By the Chairman. —On each man ?—Yes ; in fact we were large buyers to support
the prisoners in the place of going retail, and therefore we generally fed them cheaper.
1785. By Mr. Thomson. —What were the men engaged on ?—Raising stone, sawing,
carpenters’ work, and all sorts of framing. We had competent men as warders, and they taught
the prisoners those trades which they desired.
1786. By Dr. Tierney. —l believe every prisoner sent in is sent out having been taught
a trade; is that the case?—Every one in going into the gaol can select any trade in operation
there, and many I have known go into prison who knew nothing whatever of any trade, who came
out perfect adepts at one.
1787. By Mr. Thomson. —Were they worked on the silent system; were they kept separate,
or were they associated ? —During the time they were at work you are obliged to keep them
together. Negroes are rather different animals to deal with to any other people in creation, and I
think that to completely tie up a Negro’s mouth would be impossible, but after the work was done,
and during food time, they would be perfectly separate.
1788. By the Chairman. —How many prisoners were usually there ?—About 230, when I
left, was the daily average. The warders were put one to every twenty.
1789. Were those the only officers employed?—Yes, but we had a chaplain and a doctor,
of course; a schoolmaster, of course. Every man was taught a trade, and a man not being able to
read and write was taught to do so. *
1790. Taking all together—schoolmasters, clerical assistants, warders, superintendents, and
everything, what per centage would it be ?—About one in every fifteen.
1791. Here I believe it is about one in every five—do you think that necessary ?—Certainly
not; it may be necessary. Ido not know much about the discipline of the prisoners here, except
•on the gold fields. On the gold fields the surveillance kept up is a perfect absurdity.
1792. By Mr. Thomson. —The Trinidad prisoners were within walls?—Yes. One portion
of the labor I omitted to mention—that prior to my taking charge of the gaol, that in relation of
the quarry, where the stone was cut, the stone was carted to the gaol entailing expense, of course,
to that amount. Now, I ran a fence round this quarry and used to take the prisoners to it.
1793. A wall round it?—A fence, and the parties who used to be kept working outside
were those whose times were short, and who knew that, if they escaped, the consequence would be
a long term of imprisonment inside. Only two cases of escape occurred in my time, that is, in
eighteen months.
1794. By Dr. Tierney. —l believe the solitary system is given up in America, and every
man is made to labor ?—The silent solitary system is given up.
1795. Every man is obliged to work in America at the present time ?—Yes. In Phila-
delphia it was found in twelve months there was scarcely any man who was subjected to the silent
solitary system any length of time was a maniac.
1796. By Mr. Miller. —Have you inspected the prison at Pentridge ?—No; I have had
no opportunity of doing so.
1797. You are not aware that the system you have just now been talking of is in existence
there ?—I am not; I can only state from what I have heard; but, if you will permit me, I would
not call the system at Pentridge separate.
1798. You do not know of your own knowledge what the system there is ?—Certainly not.
1799. Have you had any experience with convicts of the worst class. I may term them,
what we understand here, “ The Norfolk Islanders ? ” —No; I have never come into contact with
any Norfolk Islanders, but I believe the black population is capable of being as big scoundrels as
any- in creation.
1800. It is not therefore probably a question altogether of distinction of race, although
you said there was some distinction of race between the black people and the white men ?
Certainly, and I believe the comparison will be unfavorable to the black men. _ .
1801. Perhaps they are not parallel cases?—l do not think they are. Ido not think that
their position at all would give us any reason to believe they would be ordinarily guilty of a less
amount of crime than any other men.
1802. Is it not probable that the treatment that would suit a Negro would not perhaps be
applicable to a white convict ?—I think with regard to the treatment that would suit a Negro, that
he could do with worse treatment than a white convict. I mean to say that, if a better system
were applied to the Negro than to the white man, that we may take that system and apply it to
the white man.
1803. Have you visited the hulks here ?—No, I have never been on board the hulks.
1804. The punishments, I understand from you, that are in force in America are starvation
and corporal punishment in some instances ?—ln some instances corporal punishment, and in
some of the prisons they go to the enormity of putting a man in the position that he must either
drown or work.
Penal.— v.


1805. That is a Dutch punishment—one originating with the Dutch ?—Yes, in Surinam.
1806. Are there occasionally iu America complaints of harsh treatment by the authorities
of the prisons?—My visits were mere visits; I was in no way connected with the gaol. I had
not opportunities of seeing that. I was on a different errand altogether.
1807. You informed yourself as well as you could as you visited those different States ?
Yes, I was sent on purposes of emigration.
1808. By the Chairman.—l wish to ask you one question with respect to Trinidad, where
you state your model prison was, and where you say prisoners were kept for eighty cents, whilst
other classes cost 100 ; will you tell me what was the greatest offence for which the prisoners were
sentenced? —There were the usual offences of murder, manslaughter, burglary, and all the offences
that come under the head of crime.
1809. Similar to other places ?—Yes.
1810. And trial by jury ?—Yes.
1811. And a British judge ?—A British judge.
1812. And the same laws as our own ? —Exactly the same laws as our own, 1 believe, since
1838.
1813. From your observation in Trinidad, among the black population, of course you
observed some white prisoners ? —Very few.
1814. Do you suppose that they are neither much better nor much worse than the English
convicts ?—Just about on a par.
1815. By Mr. Miller. —You had corporal punishment at Trinidad ?—One instance.
1816. Did the prison regulations allow of it ? —By sentence of the judge only. There was
one single instance —a case of bestiality.
1817. In that case the convict was brought before the officer as you describe, I presume?—
lie was sentenced by the judge—that was part of the sentence in court —“ To be flogged.”
1818. By Dr. Tierney. —Would a man be flogged in the gaol at the instance of the
visiting justice; would there be any corporal punishment in the gaol at the instance of the
visiting justices for any breach of discipline or anything of that sort? —Certainly not; I never
saw such a thing.
1819. Did you ever hear of any of the officers, or men in charge over those men, striking
them or beating them in any way, or using corporal punishment ?—Yes, I have heard cf two or
three cases of the sort, but the instant dismissal of the person who inflicted the punishment was
the consequence.
1820. By the Chairman. —They were not rewarded for it? —Certainly not.
1821. By Mr. Miller. —How were the convicts guarded?—By the warders all armed.
1822. What was the rule of the prison in case of a convict escaping ?—They shot at him.
1823. They shot at him ?—Oh ! certainly.
1824. Is it a rule usual in all prisons to fire at a convict escaping’ ?—Certainly.
1825. Have you known in your experience any convict killed in attempting to escape?—
I have known one man wounded.
1826. Was this in Trinadad ?—The warder fired.
1827. And wounded the man ?—-The man was wounded and brought back, and he got three
years’ additional sentence.
1828. Without that regulation would it be possible to keep convicts?—No, not to keep
them at all, in fact.
1829. By the Chairman. —With regard to this rush, had you any connection with the
prison beyond being superintendent over the works? —No; I had the prison labor at my
command.
1830. By Mr. Miller. —Was it in your department ?—No; Iliad charge of the public
works.
1831. Were they attached to your department ?—No, they were not attached, but had the
use of them for any of our public works.
1832. The same as our Commissioner of Public Works may have the gang at Williamstown
to build his battery ?—Yes; I could not interfere with them.
1833. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you think that any of those men were as bad as the worst
of our convicts here? —We had plenty of trebly convicted men there.
1834. And you had them at work ? —At work.
1835. By the Chairman. —We have it from you in evidence, and I think no body doubts
it to be the fact, that it is your opinion the convicts cannot be safely guarded unless the warders
had power to fire at the convicts attempting to escape, and the convicts knew that ?—Yes.
1836. That was only your opinion; I now want your opinion on another subject. Sup-
posing you were the superintendent of convicts, and knew that a certain number of men were
going to endeavor to make their escape, do you think it would be your duty to place extra sentinels
with extra loaded muskets to shoot at them ? —Certainly.
1837. Would it be the course you would adopt to stop them?—No; I should break up
their confederacy in another way—l would not encourage the crime of escaping, and then punish
them for it. In fact, if I did, I should myself be a particcps criminis.
The witness withdrew.


Mr. Ronald Crawford Ferguson Smith examined.
183 S. By Mr. Miller. —You have had some experience in prison discipline ?—I have.
1839. In what colonies ? —ln Van Diemen’s Land and in this country.
1840. And also at Norfolk Island ?—I was attached to the Van Diemen’s Land depart-
ment.
1841. What situations have you filled?—l was assistant superintendent and otherwise
officially employed for seven or eight years in Van Diemen’s Land, and I was storekeeper here a
short time, and assistant superintendent in this country for nine months in the Lysander.
1842. Have you a knowledge of the workings of the systems that were adopted at Norfolk
Island in the management of convicts ?—I was not there under any previous regulation before
Mr. Price’s time; I am only acquainted with it from books and association with persons who have
been connected with them.
1843. Can you judge of the system that was introduced there under the name of Captain
Maconochie’s system, from the opportunity you have had of seeing the records, and so on ?—I had
the books that belonged to the time.
1844. The records? —The records, and also I have seen the men.
1845. That was a very mild system ?—lt was one of perfect indulgence, and on the
principle that men were open to the same feelings that operated on society generally.
1846. If I understand you, the convicts were to be treated as if they were men uncon-
taminated with crime?—That is Captain Maconochie’s principle.
1847. Will you state as shortly, but as minutely, as you can what the effects of that
system were upon those convicts?—They are on record officially in the report of Sir George
Gripps, and the commissariat officer, and the different clergymen of the establishment. I know
that Sir George Gipps made it as favorable as possible to Captain Maconochie. In fact, Captain
Maconochio himself, after he got home, I believe, qualified many of his opinions.
1848. Give the committee, if you please, a statement of what you know yourself.—Have
you got those records? —I have not.
1849. In the first place, were there many convicts reformed, or were there any ?—No; I
know all the convicts that were sent from Norfolk Island to Yan Diemen’s Land were the most
turbulent and worst conducted men we could possibly have in the station.
1850. Were the crimes common to convicts at all removed or checked by this soothing
system, as it was called, I think ?—The reverse.
1851. Did the system lead to insubordination ?—The offences that were in the books were
more of that character; there is an absence of minor charges.
1852. Were there many executions in consequence ?—From my recollection of the books,
I believe that the average, taking the whole term, was at least two or three per annum.
1853. Two or three executions per annum?—Yes, I believe so, taking the whole term,
from various causes; stabbing, I think, chiefly.
1854. Are you aware whether there were many or any of the convicts reformed by that
system ; that is, that they became reformed—good members of society ?—I do not believe it, from
my experience.
1855. Were they, in fact, obliged to alter the system ?—They were.
1856. Y\ r ho was sent to Norfolk Island to adopt the new system ?—A gentleman from
England ; Major Childs, from the Royal Marines.
1857. Was Mr. Price there ?—Not at that time.
1858. How long did Major Childs remain ?—Under two years.
1859. Who succeeded him?—Mr. Price.
1860. Was that the same Mr. Price who" is now in charge of the prison establishment
here ?—lt is.
1861. Were you under him there as an officer?—l was for six years with him.
1862. Can you tell this committee as to Mr. Price’s conduct there, whether he was an
efficient officer, and as to his treatment of the convicts; what the opinion of the Government was as
to his conduct ?—My opinion of his efficiency is, that he was a strict and able officer; certainly
severe both with the men and officers, as far as carrying out the principle of strict obedience to
regulation is concerned; and I believe that the Yan Diemen’s Land Government gave him every
credit for the management of the island; and when he left, every officer in the island presented
hith. with an address expressive of their satisfaction.
1863. Do you consider his conduct to have been unnecessarily severe and tyrannical, or
otherwise ?—I consider that Mr. Price is a man who habitually acts from rule and not from caprice.
1864. Have you been an officer under Mr. Price in this Colony ?—Yes.
1865. How long? —Fifteen months.
1866. Are you now in the Government employ ?—I have not been for the last twelve
months.
1867. Did you resign ?—I did.
1868. Have you had an opportunity of judging of the general conduct of Mr. Price, and
of the officers under him, with regard to the treatment of convicts in Victoria ?—I have; I have
been in every station. I resided at the Collingwood stockade for several months previously to his
arrival, and I am acquainted with the officers generally, and I believe, taking the department
generally, and the character of the officers, that they are superior to anything 1 have seen before
in Yan Diemen’s Land, as far as their qualifications are concerned.
1869. Is the general treatment of the convicts here more severe than it was in Yan
Diemen’s Land ?—lt is not more severe, because it is more in accordance with regulations.


1870. Do you think that greater coercion is practised here than is necessary to restrain
the convict population in a gold country like this ?—-I do not; the great difficulty is to keep the
men in for one thing. r
1871. Then it is peculiarly difficult to keep the men in safe custody here?—Yes; in
Van Diemen’s Land we could march 100 men from one end of the country to the other with an
officer and a couple of constables.
1872. When -a man is convicted here and sent to Pentridge stockade, if he conduct
himself properly, is there any peculiar difficulty in regard to his serving out his time anc
returning to society ?—None at all, if he is obedient to the regulations.
1873. Do you know in fact that, with regard to the great bulk of the colonial convicts—l
am not speaking now of the old convicts known to be such, but of the great bulk of those men
that are taken to Pentridge and kept there at work —that they serve out their time in a mucl
shorter period than they are sentenced to ? —Yes.
1874. Are you aware of that?—l am not aware that the bulk of them serve out their
time in less time; but I know it is in their power to do so.
1875. In fact, are there any men and what proportion that serve out their time, shortening
it by their good conduct and industry ?—A portion of them do so, arrive at their freedom in less
time. A man by good conduct can obtain his freedom in two-thirds of his time, if he is under
three years.
1876. Have you remarked certain statements having been made in the Colony gene-
rally ?—I have.
1877. Is it a fact that Mr. Price and his officers are bent upon endeavouring to entrap
the convicts in every way they can, to invent punishments of an extraordinary nature and
tyrannical description—as far as you have seen, are they actuated by the common motives of
humanity ?—I believe they are; so far as Mr. Price is concerned, lam satisfied that he never
acts arbitrarily himself, nor would he suffer an officer to do so. I believe that the greatest
temper and judgment are shown with reference to the treatment of prisoners, and particularly
here, where there is much more difficulty to encounter and where the means of regular
punishment are not at hand. We have no means of confining men and keeping them under
separate treatment in solitary cells.
1878. Can you give the committee any instance of any act of tyranny committed by Mr.
Price ?—I have known Mr. Price for eight years, and I have known him adjudicate upon at least
3000 cases. I was clerk to the bench at Norfolk Island, and I never knew a more patient man
with respect to the prisoners; for if they had anything to say, he was always ready to hear them.
I have known him to refer a case from court day to court day, to bring any evidence they thought
proper forward. The officers feel the effect of his discipline more than the men, in comparison
with the other systems.
1879. Is Mr. Price in the habit of hearing the complaints of the convicts?—He is. He
listens to any man.
1880. Does he follow this up?—He can of course exercise his own judgment.
1881. Has he dismissed any of the officers in consequence of their treatment of the
convicts?—l have never heard of any instance of an officer ill using a prisoner durino- my
connection with the department.
1882. Has Mr. Price dismissed any officer of his establishment ?—He has dismissed a
great number. That was the case in Norfolk Island. The fact of the matter is, that coming
from the easy system to one of strict obedience, there was great ill feeling and discontent created
I believe in the minds of men and officers.
1883. By the Chairman. —From what cause?—From the simple change from an easy
system of administration to one of strict obedience. For instance, in the olden times, a superin-
tendent could leave his station almost when he pleased. Mr. Price insists upon the officers from
the biggest to the least strictly applying for leave, whoever he may be.
1884. By Mr. Miller. —Do you consider that this discipline has been the means of placing
at present in the department an efficient body of officers?—l do, a most efficient.
1885. I think you said we have here rather a superior class of officers?—Yes.
1886. And those men are officers who have been selected by Mr. Price?—Yes. When I
came to this country there were five superintendents, and of these only two retain former
appointments.
1887. I want to know if, when you say that you consider that Mr. Price has been the
means of getting a better class of officers, you mean for the public service ?—A better class for
the public service.
1888. Is Mr. Price doing his duty with regard to selecting the best men he can to carry
out the system ?—Most certainly. J
1889. Has Mr. Price been successful in keeping in safe custody the convicts committed to
his charge ?—I think so.
1890. Have there been many escapes as far as you know ?—Very few. One from my ship.
1891. One man escaped from you?—Four from the Lysander, chiefly owing to my own
over confidence. ° J
' 1892. For that, I presume, you were reprimanded by Mr. Price ?—I expected to have got
dismissed ; but the fact of the matter was, being only the second in command, it was the duty of
my superior officer to havo seen to it as well as myself.
1893. Then did it fall upon your superior ?—Yes, he was reprimanded, I believe.
. 1391* Are you aware that wo have amongst us here some of the very worst classes of
convicts ?—I am.


1895. By the Chairman.— You believe so ?—I am aware of it.
1896. blow do you know it ? —I know it from previous experience of the convicts in Norfolk
Island and Yan Diemen’s Land.
1897 How do you know there are not as bad in Gibraltar or anywhere else; surely it can
only be a matter of your opinion ?—lt is according to my experience. We had Gibraltar men in
Yan Diemen’s Land.
1898. By Mr. Miller. —Is there any selection made of the worst men for the purposes of
classification ?—As far as the means will allow, they are classed.
1899. Where are the very worst men sent to ? —The very worst are sent to the President
hulk.
1900. Are the prisoners sent there always kept in safe custody, or have there been any
escapes from there ?—There have been no escapes. One man got out some time ago, but he got
frightened in the water and was caught again.
1901. Then he did not escape?—No.
1902. There have been no escapes then from the President? —No.
1903. What would be the effect on society here if those men were to escape—you have
had some experience in bushranging in Yan Diemen’s Land, and know the crimes in Norfolk
Island, and you have seen what has been done in Victoria?—The fact would be, that there would
be a irreat deal of murder, manslaughter, and robbery, and the expense of catching them again.
1904. And every crime that it is possible for a human being to commit ? —I believe so.
1905. Is it not in your opinion of the first importance, in any system of prison discipline
that we may have here, that those men should be kept in safe custody?—lt is the first duty to society.
1906. The system generally, I think you say, is one of severity ?—lt is one of obedience.
1907. It is a severe system ?—lt is not so severe as the ordinary English system.
1908. You would characterize it as a system of rule and obedience ?—I consider this a
system of rule and obedience, and not of severity, because severity's comparative.
1909. Is this system one that would encourage the criminal population here to commit
crime and subject themselves to its consequences, or is it a terror to them ?-—At present I consider
it answers the end of penal legislation, inasmuch as it is obnoxious to criminals.
1910. That it is a terror ?—lt is a deterrent.
1911. Are you aware that, when men are subjected to this prison discipline here, upon
their liberation they leave the Colony—speaking now of the criminal classes?—l am aware that,
comparatively speaking, the present scheme has been more successful than any other, if we may
judge from the smallness of the re-committals. '
1912. Very few make their appearance again ?—Comparatively speaking, very few.
1913. Then is the inference you draw, that they are either reformed or that they leave the
Colony ? —Either one or the other.
1914. You do not know of your own knowledge perhaps that they leave the Colony ?—I do
not know that; but I believe it to be so.
1915. Are there any suggestions that you can offer to the committee as to improving
the present system of prison discipline, and if so, would you have any objection to put those
suggestions in writing before the committee? —I will do so with a great deal of pleasure. I have
devoted a good deal of time to reflecting upon the thing. lam not much read up in books as far
as the scientific part goes, but I have had experience.
1916. And you will give the committee the benefit of your practical knowledge upon the
subject, ?—The only recommendation that I would suggest with reference to improvements in
discipline would be, the establishment of a proper penitentiary, in which the worst, the most
troublesome, and the most disobedient men could be properly treated. In England, every man that
has received a sentence, whether his conduct bad, or indifferent, receives a certain amount
of solitary separate confinement, according to the term of his sentence. That is the plan I
believe adopted under Lord Grey’s administration. Every man, whatever his conduct maybe,
goes into separate treatment. They build cells varying from an expense of £l5O to £250 a man
for the accommodation of those prisoners.
1917. By the Chairman. —Where is that?—ln England ; I would refer you to the speech
of Lord Stanley, copied the other day by the Argus, 26th December, I think.
1918. By Mr. Miller. —There is one subject I wish to ask you upon—are there any
religious instructors here for the prisoners ?—Yes, there are; there are ministers of both per-
suasions—Catholic and Protestant, who visit the prisoners; and also respectable persons have
obtained Mr. Price’s permission to do so. I know three or four who used to attend regularly on
board ship as missionaries.
1919. Are you aware that some of these missionaries were thought to have abused their
privileges and to have interfered with the discipline?—As an officer, I always took care that it
should not take place; I should have reported it immediately and have prevented the person
coming again.
1920. Are you aware that they interfered in any cases with the discipline ?—I am not
aware of it personally.
1921. Then as far as you know, they had access to the convicts? —We did not allow any
conversation. They merely held service.
1922. They were allowed to attend and hold service ? —To hold service and speak to the
men in a body, but not to associate with them.
1923. To preach, in fact ?—Yes, and to read the Scriptures.
1924. Was that privilege allowed to all ministers of religion ?—To every person who
obtained an order from Mr. Price.
Penal. — x.


1925. Then, I understand from you that ministers of religion applying to Mr. Price wer
allowed to visit the hulks, and hold service, and give religious instructions ?—Most certainly, a
proper times. No less than four missionaries visited the station I was at in my time.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to to-morrow , at one o’clccTc.
THURSDAY, 22nd JANUARY, 1857.
Members present:— Mr. Hood, in the chair; Mr. Guthridge, Mr. Thomson, Mr. Clarke,
Dr. Tierney, Mr. McCombie, Mr. Hervey, Mr. Mitchell.
Count John Dembinski called in and examined.
1926. By the Chairman. —You are a Prussian by birth, are you not?—No, I am from
Russia; but our family has been banished and our estates confiscated. lam now a political exile
1927. You have been a good deal in Prussia, have you not ?—Yes.
1928. You are a Pole, I suppose, by birth ?—Yes.
1929. Are you a son of General Dembinski, the celebrated Polish revolutionist ?—Yes.
1930. Have you travelled in Prussia a good deal ?—For about a year and a half, with
particular desire of acquiring some knowledge of matters which came under the consideration ol
the Statistical Congress in Brussels, in the year 1852.
1931. Did prison discipline or the construction of prisons come under your observation in
that time ?—The system of prison discipline newly introduced in the year 1842 attractec
my attention.
1932. To which do you allude, the construction or management?—Both. It was
thoroughly new system of reforming prisoners, which is adopted in Prussia only for crimina'
offenders, not political offenders.
1933. Is imprisonment for debt any part of the law in Prussia?—lt is ; but of course nol
the same as imprisonment for criminal offences. I may say that the actual system of criminal
correction is rather a personal experiment of the present King of Prussia, and has not the force
of law throughout all Prussia, so that in some provinces it is not yet adopted. It is a greal
experiment; but it has not the force of law throughout the whole country.
1934. Is it exclusively for felons; those guilty of stealing, and burglaries, and such
like ?—lt is for all common criminals, even for the highest offenders ; the system is adopted for
murder, or any crime involving the sentence of death.
1935. For fighting duels?—No, that is dealt with by a mixed commission of officers and
civilians; but I believe, recently, that has been placed under the jurisdiction of the jury.
1936. The prisoners put into those prisons are not of a better class than the same class of
prisoners here or in England ?—Exactly the same.
1937. They are not mixed up with a large number of debtors and duellists ?—No, never.
1938. Would you describe to the committee the treatment they receive and the
punishment they get for certain offences, and also the kind of buildings used ?—lf you will allow
me some latitude in my speaking, as I am not well acquainted with the English language, I shall
be happy to do so. I would say that the chairman having been so kind as to tell me yesterday
that I should be called before the committee to-day, I tried to get a kind of resume in my head
how to bring the matter forward. The system in itself bears as a motto that the strict line
between crime and madness is extremely difficult to be defined; and that, therefore, all crime
should rather be considered as an act of madness, and the man committing it as in a state of
temporary insanity, or perhaps having in his organism already a state of temporary derangement.
Society, therefore, should never be permitted to exercise a kind of vengeance against the criminal,
but rather to act on him as a kind of lunatic, and to seek for the best means of curing his moral
and mental disease. In Prussia they have followed a rule of curing which has found many
adherents in a medical point of view, namely, that Nature is the greatest medical man of all
ages; that the self-reaction of human nature in bodily disease may be fairly considered the best
mode of curing, and that all the skill of the medical man should be directed to taking away all
that could come across the self-reaction of nature. The best means of helping nature is to
leave her to herself, and all the medical help be directed to put aside all that could come in
the way of nature. The same system they have adopted in reference to moral diseases; and in
the modified system of isolation they have adopted the idea of the self-reaction of the human
mind as the best mode of curing that moral disease called crime. The system is seclusion—
isolation from all converse with the world. It is the Pennsylvanian system with a modification.
The utmost sentence which a man can incur for any crime—that is, the sentence which is
equivalent to the sentence of death under the old system —is ten years, for any crime committed
before the moment the man has been sentenced. A sentence can never accumulate over a period
of ten years; and the sentence of the judge is the utmost which a man can endure—that is,
ten years, or it may be six months, or five years, according to the sentence—so many years’,
months’, or days’ isolation from human converse; but the director of the prison, and his
council of several sub-directors, have the power to mitigate the sentence of a prisoner according
to his behaviour. The director of the prison, assisted by his council of sub-directors, may be
considered on a small scale as a kind of constitutional monarch, who has the power of mitigating
but not of increasing the sentence of the judge. A man brought into prison is confined
in a cell, leaving him, if I am not wrong, about 7000 or 8000 cubic feet of air. The


cell is built in an oblong shape, so as to allow room for physical exercise. In that cell all
means of self destruction are taken away; there is no nail nor any means by which he can kill
himself by hanging, nor any corner nor sharp ledge giving him an opportunity of breaking his
skull, so that self destruction is almost or quite impossible. The opening of the cell is managed
so as to leave in any case very good ventilation, but at the same time allow the light to be taken
away from the prisoners—that is the only increase of pain the director and his council can
inflict upon a man; that is the only increase a man can get over the sentence he has once
received, and that only in case his behaviour becomes very insubordinate. The man is left
there quite isolated, without any occupation, without any book, and without the converse of any
clerical man, for a certain time. That time may be to the very end of his sentence •
he may remain all the time in that state if the director and his council think proper. Now I
must come to the fact that he is deprived of any book, religious or otherwise, as well as of the
assistance of any clerical man; in fact, he is left quite alone with himself—that is the most
important point I believe of that system. However, the present King of Prussia is a man of very
religious tendencies, and he has with reference to this new and improved system of reforming
criminals, made the observation, that no religion, no books, no words, no teaching can act so
well upon the mind as the self religion of a man’s soul. A man’s mind as well as his body
requires exercise when in a state of health, or even when his strength is not altogether broken
down. The mind requires exercise, and when it has no objects to divert its attention it
reverberates and reflects upon itself. Here I can speak from experience, having been for twenty-
two months in perfectly solitary imprisonment in almost a dark place, eighteen or twenty feet
below the surface of the ground in the fortress of Kiew, in Russia. I have experienced the fact
in myself. My thoughts, however, were diverted by two very great considerations, that is, not
being yet sentenced and being in incertitude how long I was to remain in that place, whether all
my life or perhaps only a day or two longer; and on the other side, having committed no crimes
in the eyes of society, only in the eyes of the Government; having committed no crimes
that could make me ashamed in the eyes of my countrymen of Poland, nor of any free
thinking and liberal men. But being deprived of any occupation and being left quite alone
with myself, my thoughts acted so strongly on me, that every action of my life from my fifth year
I could remember as clearly and perfectly as if it had occurred only yesterday or the day
before. Many prisoners left in the Austrian or Russian prisons in quite solitary confine-
ment have experienced the same thing—that is, the perfect memory of every action, and
the perfect faculty of scrutinising every action of their life. Every other faculty of the'mind
being in perfect impossibility of being exercised, all the strength of the intellect is reverberated
and concentrated on the memory; and as every man has in his mind and in his soul a conscience
of what is wrong and what is right, remembering all that he has committed, and leaving it to his
own judgment, he soon acquires a conviction that he did wrong, if he did so. It is that point
which is considered as the most important in the Prussian system—that is, that the greatest
reformation of a man, as well religious as philosophical, and the best book that can reform him
is the self reaction of the mind on itself. That reaction is so strong, that it has been objected to
as an evil of the system. It has been said that a man subjected to the self reaction of his own
mind gets mad. Therefore a latitude is left with the director and his council, composed, I believe,
of five or six sub-directors, to modify the sentences of the men. After a lapse of time, which
seldom passes five or six months for the most inveterate criminals, a man is so broken down, that
he implores, as a great favor, to have some occupation; that occupation, if given to him, is manual
labor, but nothing to diverge his thoughts. In order that his thoughts may always revolve on
himself, and not be diverted, he is manually occupied; but he is allowed no books, and no religious
teacher is allowed to communicate with him; and I may state that that deprivation of religious
treatment is a very bold experiment. After a certain' lapse of time, during which the man is
allowed to work in his cell; on his requesting it, he is allowed to work in a great room, in common
with other criminals who have been thought also fit for that indulgence, and they are classified
according to age. Throughout all the time of his sentence, however, he is kept, according to the
old rules of the philosopher Buddhaghuras, whom we call Pythagoras, in strict silence. The
system of isolation is then changed into a system of silence. lie works in company with
other criminals in a trade which he has the liberty and latitude of choosing, but he is
obliged to work in perfect silence, and even during the hours of recreation (which is taken in
the form of walking two by two, one behind the other) a perfect silence must be kept. In
fact, each prisoner is isolated mentally from his fellow prisoners by that silence. The diet of
the prisoners is adapted so as to leave them in the most perfect state of bodily health
possible. A bath is allowed once a week to every prisoner, and not only allowed, but
enforced, if his state of health be such that he can bear it, and the strictest ’order
is observed as to health and cleanliness, as being particularly desirable, elevating a man in his
self-esteem. Any physical ill treatment or punishment, including hard words, is completely
prohibited. In fact, the only punishment a man can receive for bad conduct is to be put again in
his solitary cell, and to be deprived of light in a completely dark place, without the free ventilation
of Ins cell being in any way endangered. . For each prisoner a book is kept, marking his conduct,
with the good and bad points; and he is allowed to shorten his sentence by his good conduct, a
certain number of points representing a certain amount of time, which is taken away from his
sentence. I believe in no European continental country the system of confiscation of property is
adopted, except in Austria, for political criminals, and in Russia, and there only in the western
piovinces——the former Polish provinces; and there it is considered as rather a vengeance over the
whole family, which is considered to bear the same thoughts and ideas as its family father, and is
resorted to to paralyse the political influence and power of any family, a member of which may have


been involved in some political conspiracy or But —on
of property, I tbink, does not exist many umpean . g ’ gentenced , tbe j u( i ge> an d the confis-
banished. A man may be sentenced to a > consequence of his being condemned, because
cation of his property is never regarded as a natural. conse *l™™° fnnoccnt of crime .
it involves a punishment on his children or relative., } 0 f prison gets back what he had
Under the Prussian system, not only the man after comm o p » g ~ f bavins
before, but, having been taught a trade, and hav.ng worked . of the prisoS
been a certain number of years m prison, aboufc 3 y 500 to 4000 criminals,
establishments is constructed, if < . > f orwarde d in the last fifteen or twenty
and realizes, in some part, the social Utopian material for the tradesmen occupied in
years, namely, laboring in common. The raw material i°r by the Govern -
those prisons is bought in wholesale quantities wit . &1 ig worked up by die prisoners,
ment as a rolling capital to the establishment Tie expenses of the establishment are
and a very strict calculation is 'ep ,so as ’ j earned for themselves; and a sum
“ V ul^u a t toXt 0 : rht SX his labtls thu, enabled to be given to him.heu leaving
but the real and proper management by winch tliits w h ic h a man is placed after
to a very important point of the system, that, I.he ■ b society as branded, and
leaving the prison. In most cases a man =_ P employer would choose in preference a man
man coming out of such a bli.toent if he can
produce a favorable account of document,
h» uicd eS **£
document 3 would take an hour or two for a man to.read over if
he thought that the matter was worth ascertarmng, to ascertain if hewould find any hcnchUrom
Tth a r good document, to be far hss liable to fail into
advantage Mempkye _ The ho isa better laborerf-He is a better laborer,
dish onesty 0 h aps never'had’been punished’ 8 The conduction of the “prison is
T™n4on is divided into four quite different sections and the criminals are separated according
to their ace Tho number of warders and official persons attached to each establishment, if I
recollect Holitlv but I cannot state it accurately, is one director, five snb-directors, and about
Zir ixty her persons attached to the establishment All the work of bakers andwasb,H. is
done by the prisoners themselves; and, for each establishment, including from 3500 o 4000
, T fp; n ir f ]ip r p arc besides the director and five sub-directors, about fifty or oixty men,
four and a-half or five per cent, on the capital advanced by the State is set aside out ot the tunas
derived from the labor of the prisoners; but all that exceeds that, goes to the profit of the
prisoners themselves. The system may he resumed, I believe, in two principal points
first the belief that the self-reaction of the mind is the best cure for that moral disease
called crime or the propensity to crime; and secondly, the allowing a man to be well
considered after going out of prison, if his behaviour in prison has been such that he can
See afterwards adorable* document of his conduct; in which case instead of being
branded and induced again to fall into crime by that horror which every one shows to a criminal
ffirsflas!


■with books which are forwarded to him by the religious societies of his creed. In fact, a little
library of religious books is provided in each prison at the expense of the religious societies of
the different creeds, and on Sundays a prisoner is allowed to read some of those books, but only
when he is working in common with other prisoners. As long as he is secluded and alone, he is
secluded from any converse, as well with books as with men, and is left entirely to himself.
There is an idea promoted that an objection may be raised to the system, from the fact that a
prisoner is not allowed to converse with any clergyman as long as he is completely secluded.
That objection, it is said in the Statutes, would be perfectly right, supposing a man had never
received any religious notions whatever, which may be the case in a heathen country, but in a
Christian country like Europe such a supposition cannot be admitted. Every man there is
supposed, in his childhood, to have had some religious instruction; and besides that, his own
conscience awakens in him and shows him what is right and what is wrong, and his memory is
called back to his days of infancy and innocence, and to the religious thoughts and instructions
which were inculcated in his childhood, so that, even without the help of religious aid in books
or speech, his thoughts are forcibly called to his moral and religious remembrances.
1940. By Mr. Clarice. —Have you not seen and known evil results follow from the mind
giving way under such treatment?—The council of the director and his sub-directors have
latitude to deal with that. They are appointed for that purpose. It is their most important duty
to watch over the state of mind of the men, and to see how far they can bear the pressure of the
self-reaction of the thoughts ; because, really that curative mode is so exceedingly strong, that it
could break the mind and bring madness. That is the principal objection which has been raised
by many philanthropists and philosophers against that system of seclusion, that a man gets mad,
and it would be so with any temperament, even the most idle one, if continued for a sufficient
length of time.
1941. Do not cases of madness often occur?—The director and his sub-directors are
obliged to have every day a revision of the cells, and to keep a watchful eye on the state of mind
of the men. Before madness or breaking down of the mind would occur, a man feels himself so
pressed, that he requires, and begs for the favor of getting some distraction, which is allowed to
him by the director, after consulting his council of sub-directors; and that is allowed to him in
the shape of physical manual labor. Then later, when' his conduct is still improving, he is
admitted to work in common with other persons, and that satisfies the necessity of society enough
to prevent madness.
1942. By Mr. McCombic. —Occupation cures it ?—Decidedly.
1943. What species of madness generally occurs ?—lt is peculiar to every shape of brain
and mind.
1944. Is it melancholy ?—Not always; it depends upon the organization of the brain of
each individual.
1945. Generally speaking, what type is it?—lt has its different development, according to
the organization of the men.
1946. By Mr. Clarice. —Are the prisoners allowed any luxuries at all in those prisons?—
No, none whatever. There is great cleanliness, and a diet which is adapted to the strength of
the prisoner and to his state; that is, if he is alone in the prison without physical occupation he
gets a different diet to that which he gets when he is allowed to work, or when be is allowed to
work in company with others, which is observed to produce a greater amount of labor. Supposing
a man to work to the utmost of his strength in a cell alone, which he always does, because it is
a great distraction and divergence to his thoughts, he never does so much work as when working
beside another; that is a fact which has been proved.
1947. By Mr. McCombie. —ls that reform which you have mentioned generally lasting—
you say that after prisoners come out of this penetentiary they are thoroughly reformed?—l
cannot state that fact.
1948. So far as you know? —At the Congress, in Brussels, it was stated that there was an
extremely small amount of recidives, but the system has only been in work a small time. The
statement produced at the Congress was intended to show that, for small crimes, such as larceny,
not some of the great crimes, such as murder or forgeries, to which a man comes only by degrees,
but small crimes where the prisoners were occasionally young when they came into prison,
they got decidedly improved. The amount of recidives amongst those criminals was stated at
the Congress, at Brussels, in 1852, to be extremely small, which is the reverse of the old
system. It has often been argued that by great rigor and by a system of repression
a criminal may get so frightened that he will not endeavor again to get under the same
punishment. That has been urged by many persons; but it seems that the greatest of all
punishments is death, and the sentence of death and the execution of it, however performed in
public, seems to be a very small means of preventing further crime by example. It was proved
by documents at the Congress, at Brussels, that the recidives of youthful criminals was very
small indeed. Allusion was also, at the same time, made to the comparatively greater number of
recidives of youthful criminals when punished under the old system, when a man sentenced for a
short time for a comparatively little offence was brought |in contact with men already masters
in crime, and where he thought of a more cunning and a more skilful manner of acting in future.
In fact, in the old system, where a man is not secluded completely from the other criminals,
instead of being ameliorated, it is out of doubt, that he almost always becomes more vitiated. The
new system has been in work long enough, nearly ten years now, to prove, most decidedly, that
amongst young criminals—amongst persons who have been committed for the first time and
amongst persons committed for small offences—the number of recidives has been extremely
small, which may be accounted for by the fact that, under the new system, a man does not get more
Penxl.— y


vitiated by the contact of greater criminals than himself, because, if not actually secluded, if
working with them in a common room, he is still in fact secluded from them by the system of
silence which is secured through the whole time of the sentence being passed. Even in the
hours of recreation, no communication whatever is allowed between the prisoners in words or
signs; it is prevented as much as possible, and the slightest offence against that rule is punished
by a week or a fortnight’s confinement, or more, in the solitary cell, during which time the man
loses all opportunity of increasing the amount of money which would be given to him on
getting out of prison, and also loses the opportunity of shortening the time of his sentence by
working himself out by good points, which he might merit; for when a man is in his cell he can
get no good points.
1940. Dy Dr. Tierney. —l think you stated that a clergyman or some religious instructors
were allowed to go to the prison twice on Sundays. Are those clergymen or religious instructors
paid by the State to attend the gaol ?—I cannot answer pertinently to the question, but I believe
they aie delegated from some of the religions societies, which provide the books for the
libraries. They must bring a document from the bishop, or chief clergyman, or abbe, a letter of
recommendation to the directors, and then they are allowed to communicate with the prisoners,
ihe same men are not permanentlyfappointed, they are only delegated; and perhaps every Sunday,
or every month or so, it is another who is delegated. J
1950. Arc the prisoners brought up and mustered in numbers, or are the clergymen allowed
to go to them individually ?—ln numbers, according to the creed. Only in the Catholic creed, in
cases of confession. I here is a separate cell for the confessions.
mu l • H l °, W I ? Dg may a P risoner be isolated. What is the longest time you have known ?
lhat is thoroughly dependant upon himself. The sentence of the magistrate is, that he is to be
isolated completely for such a timaj that is ; for all the sentence.
,ii may be ten y ears > y° u say ?—Yes, ten years is equivalent to the sentence of
death under the ancient system; that is the maximum.
1953. To what extent may that he modified?—That a man may only be a month, or
perhaps three months, or perhaps six months in his cell—it is completely according to his
conduct. r j &
1954. And according to the opinion that the directors have of him ?—Yes.
1905. Have the medical officers anything to do with it ?—Yes, there is very strict medical
surveillance about the prisons.
, ... A medical men attend to the mental diseases of the prisoners as well as to their
bodily diseases ?—None whatever.
, . 1957. Your doctrine is, that every prisoner is laboring under a mental disease?—That is
t e opinion ot the system. Supposing a man is brought before a magistrate for a crime on which
every man accords to say that he is mad —for even persons not partaking of the ideas of that
system will believe a person mad committing certain acts—then he is sent to a lunatic asylum.
I hose persons are not sent to the isolation system, but only such persons as, according to the
general view, are considered criminals and not mad. Such persons as any magistrate would
consider not mad, that system considers as in a state of insanity of mind.
„ } state d just now that you had been a prisoner yourself—was that for a political
offence ?—Yes; I was in prison four times in my life.
*959. lor political offences ?—Twice for political offences, namely, five months in Austria
an wen y-wo mon„hs in Russia, in chains, and twice for duelling; but that comes in another
line of punishment. I he prison for duels is in a military fortress, and a man is left for the term
of his sentence, supposing say eight weeks, on word of honor that he will not go out of the limits
or the fortress. °
• v 1 ???* [ a CVG 7 man taught a trade * hilst in P™on ?—Yes; and a trade occupying not his
mind but his physical powers—he is taught a manual trade.
19tii. Hoes the work in the prison interfere with the free laborer. In English prisons it
is not thought desiraole, inasmuch as they say that the work of convicts would interfere with
tree labor. Is that the case in Prussia ? Have the people any objection to it ?—Yes, decidedly
they have objections, and it is daily objected to in the newspaners; but Prussia has a government
which acts a little m the mihtary manner, and does not inquire so much about public opinion.
i» I R a i IIS - Wer t 0 hla >3; that the population in Prussia, according to the square miles, is far less than
free maA ° l m b,a S" an{ * mucb more work can be done without producing any danger to the
f u A tbl T 3 cau ? tr y> where we have a small population, the work ought not to interfere
with free labor ?—No, I should think it would make a very small difference.
od. Ho you think it is a good system to classify prisoners according to their age and not
according to their crime. Supposing a young man going in for a small offence put in the same
room with a murderer do you consider that a good system ?—He is isolated by silence; he cannot
communicate with his fellow prisoners; it is as well as if he was with the oldest men.
1904. He is not allowed to hear, or know, or understand anything the other men do ?
-No ) he cannot communicate either by words or signs.
1965. Is there any corporal punishment inflicted in those prisons ?—Never
19bb. Are men ever chained ?—Never.
t^iA 9 , 07 ’ 0r flogged?—Never; any punishment bearing physical pain is completely
completely' aLILheT “ U ° a “ C ' 1 ‘ hink * he ° f phys!oal P mlisll “ ent is
} 96 l BIJ the • CJiairn \ an ;—As far as you know, do you consider that, so far as the Prussian
y has been carried out, it having been twelve or fourteen years in existence, it has been


successful or a failure ?—la my private opinion it has been decidedly successful, and in the
opinion of the Congress of Brussels it has been decidedly successful.
1969. What was the composition of that Congress of Brussels?—lt was a statistical
Congress, to bring about an exchange of the statistics of all the countries of the world that would
unite in it.
1970. And that statistical Congress pronounced this plan which you have been describing
as successful?—As producing, in matter of fact, decidedly this result, that the number of recidives,
that is, of persons who, after having come out of prison committed another crime, was exceedingly
small in comparison with any other reforming or punishing system.
1971. By Mr. Thomson. —How long has this system been in operation?—l think it was
in 1841 or 1842 that the first establishment was put in operation.
1972. By the Chairman. —How long have you been here ?—About eight months.
1973. Have you been much in England?—Not at all, except for a few days when
coming here.
1974. Do you think the criminals in Prussia are better or worse managed than here ?
I believe in Prussia the average of intelligence is less than in England, and therefore that system
would not work so favorably there as in a country where the intelligence i 3 far higher, because it
is a system which works on the intelligence of the men—it acts entirely upon the principle of the
self re-action of the mind. The more intellectual man would feel it most acutely, whilst the mere
brute would lie down in his cell and sleep.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Alexander Willis examined.
1975. By the Chairman. —You have been a good while in the penal department I
believe ?—I was for nearly two years in the penal department here.
1976. And for several years in the penal department in Van Diemen’s Land?—Yes, I was
twelve years there.
1977. In what capacity ?—I was a clerk in the office of the Comptroller General.
1978. Dr. Hampden ?—Yes.
1979. How long is it since you left the penal department in Yan Diemen’s Land? I left
in July, 1852.
1980. When did you leave the department in this colony?—ln May, 1855.
1981. What were you in the department when you were here?—Superintendent of the
Sacramento hulk.
1982. What is the proportion of officers of all grades to the prisoners in the Sacramento ?
There were different numbers at different times. There were from nine to twelve warders.
1983. About twenty altogether, clerks and boatmen, were there not ? —Yes.
1984. And how many men does she accommodate?—About 121 or 123.
1985. The average would be about 100,1 suppose ?—No, she was always full after the first
few months.
1986. Were the prisoners on board the Sacramento kept in irons?—Yes, she was
stationed at Geelong, at the request of the Geelong people, to receive the prisoners tried in that
district; so that all prisoners who came in under sentence, not of irons, did not have irons put
upon them.
1987. The'committee are anxious to get as much information as they can upon two points.
The first one will be simply one for your opinion, whether the system of prison discipline pursued
here is the best. The second is a question of fact, whether the system is carried out as it ought
to be, in accordance with the regulations, and in accordance with the distinct dictates of
humanity and justice, not only to the prisoners, but to the officers. If you could give the
committee information upon those two points, or perhaps confine yourself to the latter, because
the first would be more matter of opinion, perhaps it would elicit what they want better than
could be done by question and answer ? —There really was no system in my time, and there were
no regulations to guide any person. When I received instructions from Mr. Barrow, on joining
the Sacramento, I was furnished with certain regulations, and told to carry them out in so far as
I found them applicable. They were old regulations, originally drawn up for the President
punishment hulk, and were not applicable at all to the other hulks.
1988. Then you were put there as master, to do as you liked?—Almost. At Geelong
I had full authority to act as I pleased.
1989. Did you ever find it necessary to submit prisoners to punishment without the
intervention of a visiting justice?—l did occasionally. 1 found it necessary sometimes to iron
men, that is all.
1990. Did you ever make use of the shower-bath ?—No.
1991. Did you ever see it used ?—No.
1992. Was there one on board your ship?—Yes; there was.
1993. What was it there for, if it was not used?—lt was placed there to be used as a
punishment.
1994. By Mr. Clarice. —Was there much punishment in putting a man into the bath ?—A
person of delicate constitution might receive a shock, but not otherwise.
1995. From the great fall of water?—No; I have taken a shower-bath tbero myself.
1996. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you seen the shower-bath on the Success ? —Yes.
1997.. Is that anything like the one on the Sacramento ? —I suppose it is the same principle,
except that it is fitted up in a different place.


. 1998. Is the one in the Sacramento more severe than the one in the Success ? I have
’ never been in the Success one ; I have the other.
1999. By Mr. Clarice. The officers then go in to take baths in the same shower-
bath ?—Yes.
2000. By Dr. Tierney. —Did you not write a letter recently from Castlemaine which
appeared in the newspapers ?—Yes.
2001. Will you state to this committee the purport of that letter ?—lt was simply to cor-
roborate Melville’s statement.
2002. Then you think Melville’s statement was correct ? —I have not the slightest doubt
portions of it were correct.
2003. Which portions ?—How he was treated on board the President.
2004. By Mr. Thomson. —Were you on board the President at the time Melville was
there ?—I was on board the President a portion of the time Melville was there.
2005. By Dr. Tierney. —You stated in your letter that you read Melville’s statements ?
—Yes.
2006. And you stated that you considered the chief parts of Melville’s statement were
correct ?—His statement was perfectly correct; that is, if I may believe the superintendent’s
(Mr. Horne’s) own word for it.
2007. Will you state now any part of the system which you saw yourself that you
considered wrong. Was Melville ill treated to your own knowledge ?—He was not ill treated that'
I know of from my own personal observation.
2008. Then, from what you saw yourself, was he well treated ?—He was treated the same
as other prisoners. He was very troublesome.
2009. Still you say his statement was correct ?—I say his statement was in the main
correct.
2010. By Mr. Mitchell. —You say his statement was correct, but you do not know it was
correct, except from what you heard from Mr. Horne ?—Yes.
2011. Will you state what you heard from Mr. Horne ?—Mr. Horne told me that he
knocked him down himself. He was in the act of making a spring at the sergeant, and
Mr. Horne was standing behind and caught him by the back and pulled him down, and then the
sergeant struck him with a life-preserver.
2012. You do not consider that ill treatment under such circumstances, do you, if Mr.
Horne saved the sergeant’s life ?—Certainly not.
2013. By Dr. Tierney. —ls there any other portion of the system in which you do not
admire the treatment the prisoners received ?—I cannot say that I do, because so much was left
to my own discretion that I treated prisoners in any way I pleased, so long as they were not
ill treated.
2014. Used the visiting justice to go on board the hulks ?—He used to visit occasionally.
2015. How often ?—At Williamstown, once or twice a week.
2016. Would the prisoners not be brought before him, if they were guilty of any
misconduct ?—Always, unless sometimes he would not wait until they could be brought to him. *
2617. Did you ever see the warders ill use any of the prisoners?—Never.
2018. Nor the superintendent? Did you ever see Mr. Price strike a prisoner?—No; I
never had an opportunity.
2019. Then, the fact is, you do not complain of the system at all ?—I think it might be
improved, no doubt, because there are no regulations and no system at all; everything is entirely
carried on hy Mr. Price’s order.
2020. Do you think it necessary to keep the men in irons on board the hulks by night as
well as by day ?—lf they have irons on by day, you cannot take them off by night.
2021. Do you think it necessary to keep a man in irons at all?—As a punishment, with
some men it is necessary.
2022. Do you think it necessary when not ordered by the judge ?—Certainly not.
. 2023. Have not the warders and yourself taken baths as well as the prisoners who have
bee’n ordered baths by the medical man ?—A bath was never ordered by the medical officer on
board the Sacramento whilst I was there.
2024. Supposing a bath was ordered, would you consider it any great cruelty ?—Cer-
tainly not.
2025. Are you acquainted with the stockades ?—I was living at Collingwood some time.
2026. Have you ever been over the stockades ?—Only the Collingwood stockade.
2027. Is the prison discipline carried out properly there, do you think ?—I have no means
of knowing.
2028. I thought you said you were there ?—I was living there for a short time before I
went to the hulk ; the stockade was only half the size it is now—that was in 1852.
2029. Could you suggest any improvement on the present system ?—I never thought the
subject over. I have been otherwise employed, and lam not prepared to offer any suggestions upon
the point. I think the present system is too costly, and there is not an absolute necessity of keeping
up such an immense establishment, and that, if it were concentrated more, it would be better.
2030. By Mr. Clarice. —Do you think the men would be safe without being in irons ?
I think so.
2031. They have attempted to escape when in irons, have they not?—Yes, they can
always manage to break them.
2032. Do not you think it would be much more likely for them to attempt escapes if they
were not in irons ?—I think it might be so, but not much more frequently than if in irons.


2033. By the Chairman. —During the time you were in charge of the Sacramento , did
you ever see an instrument called a “ neddy” used ? —Never used—there were plenty on board.
2034. You never saw them used ?—No.
2035. Did you ever see them used in any of the other vessels ?—No ; not that they would
not have been used if there had been occasion for it and a prisoner had been refractory.
2036. When could that occasion arise—you have always five or six warders at command,
have you not ? —Yes.
2037. And if a man positively refused to go into his cell, would you consider that an
occasion when a neddy should be used?—No. There are not always so many warders on the
spot. There is a man called a locker, who unlocks the cell sometimes in company with a
sergeant, and sometimes alone, and suppose a prisoner to assault him.
° 2038. By Mr. Mitchell. —Is the neddy a species of constable’s staff?—No; it is a life
preserver; it is made of whalebone, with lead at each end.
2039. By Dr. Tierney. —Would not a constable’s staff be as useful?—You could not
conceal a great stick as well; you could carry this in your pocket..
2040. By the Chairman. —Could not a warder cope with a prisoner without a life
preserver ? No ; I have seen a prisoner take three or four men to manage him. I remember a
case where I had to handcuff a man with his hands behind him all night before I could make him
quiet. * I was obliged to secure him hand and foot. We tried all fair means first, but he would not
be quiet.
The witness withdrew.
Ordered —That this Committee he adjourned to Monday next, at half-past, one o'clock.
MONDAY, 26xh JANUARY, 1857.
Members present:—Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Patterson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. George Wintle called in and examined.
2041. By Dr. Tierney —You are the governor of the gaol of Melbourne ? I am. .
2042. After the prisoners are sentenced, who removes them to the hulks, or to 1 entndge .
After sentence, if they are sentenced to labor on the roads of the Colony, they are removed fiom
the side where they are awaiting trial, the south side of the gaol, to the labor yard; and there
they are kept at labor, such as we can get from the Corporation—stone breaking—until
Mr. Price has got room in his establishments; and then he comes and picks them out. Ihe long
heavy-sentenced men he mostly sends to the President or the Success— men charged with
unnatural offences are always kept in separate confinement; and the others lie takes according to
any previous history he may know of theca, and disposes of them in various parts of the
2043. Then the committee are to understand that it is Mr. Price makes the selection ? Yes.
2044. And sends them on board whichever hulks he likes ?—Yes.
2045. Or send them to the stockades ? —Or to the stockades.
2046. Does he do that in your presence? —Of me or the head turnkey, or both.
2047. Irrespective of consulting you in the matter ?—I am not consulted ; I only remember
his having spoken to me but once —about a man named McCabe, who was tried for a murder up
the country, and sentenced to fifteen years—three years in irons. He asked me if I had known
the man before, and I said I had known him to be in the constabulary. He sent him to 1 entndge.
2048. By Mr. Patterson. —Mr. Price sent him to Pentridge? —He was sent to i entndge.
2049. By Dr. Tierney. —Are you aware that prisoners not sentenced to work in irons or
to be in irons, by the judges of the land, are taken on board the hulks and placed in irons ?—-By
hearsay. Those men that were committed for the murder of Owens were brought to the gaol to
me with very heavy irons on them. I found, out of the nine prisoners I received, on examination
after their trial, that the sentences to irons of eight of them had expired. One of the name o
Fielder, who had been sentenced to fifteen years, three in irons—l found the term of his sentence
had not expired, and I put light irons on him, and he is in irons now. , . ,
2050. What I asked you was, whether men who had been sentenced to work on the roads
without irons had any of them been placed in the hulk President or on board any of the hulls
in irons?—l have heard so; but I have never been on board the hulks since Mr. I rice has had
them. Ido not send them away in irons. .
2051. Men who are not sentenced to be in irons, have they been removed out ot your
custody on board the hulks in irons?—Yes; there was a lot of men removed from the President
when she was leaking; I think there were forty or forty-four.
2052 By Mr. Patterson —Long sentenced men—are you in the habit of putting irons
on them, unless especially sentenced to irons by the judge?—No, unless specially sentenced by
the iudo-e. I might, certainly, in any extreme case. Supposing I thought that any man had
shown such a disposition to get away, or to ill use my officers, then I do not think I should hesi-
tate to put him in irons ; but I have not had occasion to do so.
2053. Never? —I think not.
2054. By Dr. Tierney. —Do your officers use <f neddies” ? —No.
2055. Do you instruct or allow them to carry them about? No.
Penal. — z.


2056. Not Instruments loaded with lead, called “ neddies” ?—No, all they carry i 3 the
common constables’ baton.
2057. By the Chairman. —You said a short time ago that Mr. Price went round. After
a general gaol delivery you meant ?—Yes.
2058. lie goes round and musters the prisoners, I suppose ?—No; they are mostly in the
labor yard.
2059. Poes he take the muster book ?—We hold the muster book.
2060. And Mr. Price sends some of the prisoners to the hulks, some to Pentridge, and
some to Collingwood ?—-Yes.
2061. Is that marked opposite their sentence—is there any sort of entry goes in that
muster book at that time ?—Yes, an entry is made in order to facilitate the preparation of the
warrants for their removal.
2062. Then it is within your knowledge that men simply sentenced to so many years on
the roads have been sent to the hulks ?—Yes.
2060. Purely from Mr. Price’s authority you have known that done ?—Mr. Price picks
them out for the different stations, and are forwarded on warrants of the Governor.
2064. You mentioned the case of a man named McCabe ?—Yes.
2065. Why was not he sent to the hulks, do you know ?—I do not know anything
particular; Mr. Price thought, perhaps, he was a quiet man.
2066. McCabe s case is an exception to the general rule of sending long-sentenced men to
the hulks ?—-To the general rule.
2067. There was an investigation took place at the gaol some time ago into a case of
attempted unnatural offence, in the case of a boy, some eight or ten months ago, named Jenkins.
Do you know that case ?—Yes.
2068. Jenkins says he was threatened in your presence by Mr. Price, and in the presence
of Dr. Youl, that if he did not give evidence to commit the man he would send him to the
President, and that Mr. Price said, “ If I was to give you a remission of your sentence, you would
tell the truth.” Did you hear any such observation as that?—No; Mr. Price seemed dissatisfied
with the manner he gave his evidence, and some remark was made that he would send him to the
President. He was sent to the President.
2069. And three or four months were then up ?—There must have been some time passed.
2070. That is one case you know of, where a prisoner not sentenced to chains was put in
chains ?—Yes.
2071. There was an investigation some time ago at the gaol, in the case of a man who
claimed money which he said was taken from him and not returned. It was the case of a man
who claimed £llOO, and said that onlyh£Boo had been returned to him. Could you furnish this
committee with the results of that investigation, or the notes of it, if any notes were taken ? -
That was the caf e of McCoy.
2072. Are all prisoners searched in the gaol or the police office?—They are mostly
searched before they come to the gaol, and always on their arrival in the gaol, and all moneys
found upon them is taken possession of and entered in the gaol books. In the case of this man
McCoy, on being brought to the gaol, there was found by my turnkeys a quantity of money,
which was handed over to me that evening. It was reported by the head turnkey to me that the
man was dissatisfied, and said that there ought to be more money by £l5O. They were all in
£5O notes. I desired another search to be made, and then he gave up £4OO or £450. He still
adhered to his statement that more money had been taken away than was given up to me, and I
brought it under the notice of the sheriff the following morning, and the money taken from him,
which I had in my possession, was paid over to the sheriff; and an investigation took place before
the sheriff and Mr. Harrison, the then visiting justice at the gaol.
2073. Did he tender proof that Pawley had taken the money?—No; nothing more than
his own word.
2074. Did an investigation take place before Dr. Youl ?—No, but there was a second one
after the man got his ticket.
2075. Was there any evidence taken at all?—Yes.
2076. Were there notes of that evidence taken ?—Yes.
2077. What became of them ?—I do not know. They were taken away by the chairman.
2078. That was a special board for that special case ?—Yes; and a copy of the depositions
was sent to the Chief Secretary, I should suppose.
2079. Py Dr. Tierney. —Who was chairman?—l think Captain Mac Mahon.
2080. I believe you have Melville and some of those other prisoners in the gaol at
the present time? —I have nineteen of them.
2081. Is there room to keep them without putting them on board the hulks, without
putting them in irons and exasperating them ? —lf the prisoners were to be removed according to
their sentences by Mr. Trice, we might be able to keep them there; but we are forced to find
room for all the prisoners convicted up the country, and to receive all sentences from magistrates.
M e are now full ; there are two hundred prisoners ia the gaol now.
2U<B2. What I want to know is this, could not prisoners convicted of lesser crimes be
removed to Pentridge and other places, and leave you those prisoners who are doubly convicted?
.No, I do not think an arrangement of this kind could be effected in the present state of the
gaol.
2083. Have they been well behaved since they came under you?—l have had no trouble
with them. I mean Melville and the other eighteen prisoners.
2084. You have had no necessity for using violence or force with Melville or any of those
men ?—No.


2085. Ilow many men have you at work at stone-breaking?—Seventy-nine men.
2086. Would there be any danger in placing those men to breaking stones —Melville and
those others?—l do not say there would be any danger.
2087. Would you be afraid of any bad result from it? —No; they would want to he very
carefully watched; it is a very natural thing that men with thirty years over their heads should
try to escape.
2088. By the Chairman. —Do you know a hoy named Macdonald ?—Yes.
2089. Do you consider him an irreclaimable character? —No; I should think a young
lad like him without being steeped in crime before, if he was kept to himself, or from others, you
might turn him out a good member of society.
2090. Are you in the habit of receiving prisoners from the Police Bench, under summary
jurisdiction and short sentences ?—Yes.
2091. Men are sentenced to three, six, nine, and twelve months, who never go before a
judge and jury at all, but come up directly to you ?—Yes, frequently.
2092. Are those who come to you simply on a charge of vagrancy treated the same as those
sentenced for felonies by judge and jury?—As far as labor goes, if they were sentenced to
labor, we could not make any difference, unless we had more room.
2093. Their hair is cut and everything the same as with other prisoners ?—No, I never
put the prison dress on them. I give them an odd article now and then as they require it. A
man for seven or fourteen days, or even for a month, I should not cut his hair so close.
2094. We have had it in evidence from more than one witness that, to use an expressive
phrase, it is all “ bosh ”to expect to reform prisoners; that it is hopeless to attempt it. Is that
your opinion ? —No.
2095. By Dr. Tierney. —Would you object to give us your ideas of penal discipline?—
I should not object to answer any questions that may be put to me.
2096. Would you put men who had been sentenced by a judge of the land to ten years or
to six years to work on the roads, in solitary confinement, and in irons?—Not unless sentenced by
the judge.
2097. Do you not think putting men in irons, when they have not been sentenced to it,
exasperates them ? —lt is annoying to them, no doubt about it.
2098. Would you put men found guilty of murder or bushranging in the same community
with persons found guilty of lesser crimes, such as larceny ? —I would not, if I had proper
accommodation.
2099. I suppose you believe that a penitentiary is required for females?—Yes.
2100. And also a penitentiary for boys and girls ?—Yes; there are twenty-six children in
the female gaol now.
2101. By Mr. Patterson. —Of what age ?—From eleven downward.
2102. By the Chairman. —Under eleven ? —From eleven to one. I should say their
mothers come in there, and sometimes they are sent by the bench. I had two boys sent down
from Castlemaine.
2103. By Mr. Patterson. —What was their offence ?—I do not suppose their offence was
anything, but the magistrates do not know what to do with them. They send them into the gaol
to take care of them—picked up in the streets.
2104. By Dr. Tierney. —Are you in favor of the solitary or silent system ?-—I think the
solitary; I do not approve of the silent system.
2105. Do you think every man ought to be worked if sentenced by a judge ?—lf they
are employed it keeps them out of trouble. It is a dreadful thing to have men and women
unoccupied.
2106. Do you think the mind ought to he occasionally occupied, such as by reading and
writing, and the consolation of a clergyman ? —Yes.
2107. If we had proper prisons, do you think many of our prisoners could be reformed ?
Yes; I think exposing our prisoners makes their minds very unsettled. Even working down at
Williamstown and seeing the ships going backwards and forwards, and seeing people moving
about, makes them dissatisfied.
2108. Do you think it is necessary if a prisoner rebel against the overseer, to crack his
skull, or to use very great violence to restrain him ?—A prisoner rebelling would require to be
placed under proper restraint for the safety of the officers and for the preservation of the other
prisoners. .
2109. Suppose there were four or five men present to restrain the men from violence .
I would not approve of using violence in that case.
2110. In fact, it exasperates the prisoners ? —lt does not do any good either to the guard
or to the prisoners.
2111. Do you think you can effect more good with the prisoners by being kind to them ?
A great deal may be done by kindness, but a good deal of firmness is required at the same time.
2112. By Mr. Patterson.— Do you think that Mr. Price, in making his selection of
convicts to be sent on board the hulks, is unfair on any occasion in his decision ? Ido not think
he acts unfairly.
2113. Do you consider he rejects those he should take, and takes those he should not.
I should suppose he takes them according to the best of his judgment, to do the best he can for
the country. . . . _
2114. By Dr. Tierney. —Still you are occasionally of a different opinion ?—At times I
might be. Ido not know that I have taken particular remark.
2115. Do you approve generally of the selection he makes of those men he takes away ?——


Men sentenced by the magistrates under the Vagrant Act —I would not approve of those being pu;
on board the hulks; but I cannot say whether lie has taken any. I know there have been stiort
sentenced men sent backwards and forwards.
2116. You generally approve of the men he takes ?—The long-sentenced men I do.
"M 7. Do you not think that the governor of the gaol, and perhaps the medical officer, 01
the visiting justices, might be consulted, that there might be a board formed to remove prisoners
to the hulks from the gaol/—I think a board of two or three gentlemen at any time would be
better, I should say in the punishing even of one man.
2118. Suppose the selection were left to yourself, would you rather have the responsibility
left with yourself, or have a board who might pronounce on your decision ?—A board, decidedly
2119. By the Chairman. —Have you ever been on board the hulk President? —Yes.
2120. Do you consider that there is any necessity for keeping those even in irons, anc
each in a separate cell ?—I should not think there was a necessity for keeping them in such heavy
2121. By Mr. Patterson. —But you would consider it necessary that they should be
kept in some irons ?—I should not like to have many of them up on the deck at a time.
. 2122. liy the Chairman. —" With twenty warders, do you think there would be any danger
of having ten at a time P—No, I think not. I was on board the Phoenix hulk, in New South Wales
when I arrived first in the Colony, and we used to have 200 or 275, and we had all the prisoners
going to Norfolk Island; and we had a military guard consisting of twelve men over them but
all the warders we had were six.
2123. Do you think it necessary for twelve warders and eight other officials to be on board
the President hulk, where there are only forty prisoners ?—No.
2124. What proportion does it require at the gaol of turnkeys, warders, and clerical
assistance of all kinds, yourself included ? —I have twelve turnkeys, two head turnkeys, an overseer
of labor, and there are two clerks and myself.
2125. What is the average number you have confined there?—The average number is
about 200. 1 have had 385. °
„ , % Mr - Patterson. —Did ever any make their escape from gaol?—Only one I think
from the inside. There were others.
2127. Were they out of the gaol ?—Yes.
2128. How many ?—Two were out of the gaol, and one is away.
T he ot^er was re-taken ?—Yes. When you look at the hulks—l have good walls
and the hulks have not. Then along with those men, I have the assistance of the military; the
military are outside
2130. How many military?—Six on guard.
olq > ° n<3 me g uar d j but there are two sentries only on out of the six.
. . By the Chairman. —Do you consider that, if those two sentinels were taken away,
the prisoners would any the more readily escape ?—I consider my prison would be safe without
them; but decidedly the name of the guard is a check.
2133. Tou made the-remark, that the gaol had a high wall round it. Do you think a mile
of water is not as good as a wall; that a vessel moored a mile away from the beach is not as good
as a twenty foot wall ?—Many a man will chance getting into the water if he saw an opportunity,
when he would not scale a wall. If I was on board the hulks, I would try and swim ashore, if I
had the chance. ‘
The witness withdrew.
Y illiam McCrea, Esq., M.D., called and examined.
Victoria ?—I am You are the Chief Medical Officer for. the Colony of
2135. V ould you state to the committee the nature of the authority which you exercise
over the penal department of the colony?—! have control over the medical officers in the
penal department now. Last year there were two officers; now there is.only one. Dr. Wilkins
had charge of the bulks and Dr. Webster, the Military Medical Officer, had charge of the
Vl° V 1 S afc 1 entn( % o ancl Collingwood. That system has been altered since the Ist of January.
I have charge now of the stockades at Pentridge and Collingwood, in addition to my other duties.
/idb. \\ hat was tne cause of Dr. Webster’s removal or resignation ?—lt was to reduce
the expenditure. °
a resident dispenser, of the name of Goy ?—Yes, he has resigned.
° ldb \, be , cause was dissatisfied with his situation. It is an onerous
and disagreeable billet. I hat is what he stated to me as his reason.
. ~109. Ihe committee has had it in evidence that the authorities have been in the habit
ot chaining men to a stone for as many as fourteen hours out of the twenty-four; in fact, from
ay ig it to dark, for weeks together as a species of punishment. Do you know that, of your
knowledge?—l never heard of it. ’ y
• fl . . W?" ld y°, u con sider, as a medical man, that it would be a safe punishment to
i fiict. W ould it not be probable to bring on disease of some kind?—lt depends whether it is
the h ° USe ° r - m X f ; lU . thc sun or out of ifc ‘ la the hot sun ifc would not be a very
healthy thing—no question about it. J
knnwl Ji 4 ? 1 ' Mr Patterson Could such a thing occur in that stockade without your
owled B e. Before the Ist of January I was not visiting the stockade; it was my officer who


was visiting them. Excepting on some extraordinary occasions, as in the case of a lunatic, or of
some operation that required the aasistanoe of another medical man, I did not visit the stockades;
but if there was any complaint against the medical officer I did, on these occasions, visit them.
Since the Ist of January nothing of the kind could have occurred without my knowledge.
2142. By the Chairman. —Do you not think that kind of punishment would be apt to
lead to fistula ?—Certainly not; if a man had fistula, it must arise from some other cause.
2143. I believe disease of the eye is prevalent there—do you know the cause of that?—
I think it is from the dust. It is occasioned by men working outside in the dust, and by the
chippings of stone and those kinds of things. Diseases of the eye are more prevalent at Colling-
wood than in William sto wo, and I attribute it to the dust —there is an immense quantity of dust
at Collingwood and Melbourne.
2144. In prescribing for that disease, or any other disease, what check have you over the
medical officer in charge that your prescriptions are carried out. Heavy complaints have been fre-
quently brought forward by discharged prisoners that they did not take the medicine, because they had
not confidence in the dispenser; that he weighed or measured the drugs in the case of a prescription
ordered by the medical officer ?—We are obliged to trust him. We have, in the first place, a man
who is a member of the Pharmaceutical Society at home, and a very good dispenser; at the same
time my office is always open to any complaints that are made againt the dispenser, through the
visiting justice or Mr. Price ; and complaints have been made by Mr. Price, and I have had
occasion to take notice of them.
2145. You have no proper hospital at Pentridge ?—A very good one is building on the
representations which have been made by Mr. Price and myself. The present hospital accommo-
dation is totally inadequate.
2146. Do you think, where men are really sick, and you, as the medical officer, are visiting
them, having placed them on the sick list, that it would be right to take their irons off?—ln
some cases, but not in all. If you did, you would have every man in the place sick.
2147. Have you the means of telling whether the men are shamming? —In some cases we
have; but even if a medical man discovered that a man was shamming, it would not be good policy,
nor is it the practice on the part of medical men to let him know that you are aware of it.
When a man comes on the sick list and complains to me, I treat him accordingly; for instance,
to-day I was at Pentridge at six o’clock, and a man came and complained, as to whom I was
perfectly satisfied that nothing was the matter with him. At the same time I adopted towards
him such treatment (as I always do in such cases) that, if he were ill, would do him good, and if
not, would be a punishment to him; but I never suppose a man to be coming to me and telling a
falsehood. If I have reason to suppose a man i 3 shamming, I examine the symptoms; and, as I
have said, if he be ill, he is relieved ; if he be shamming, he is punished. One of the things I
look to is low diet. Most of the complaints that men bring before me are of such a nature as
that low diet is the best way of treating them, and if they are really ill, it will do them good,
and if not, it is a punishment.
2148. What is low diet?—Three ounces of arrowroot in a day, made into two basins; one
in the morning, and one in the evening.
2149. Do you not think that it could be increased with advantage?—How do you mean ?
You mean in exceptional eases, of course. Excepting in a case of an operation, or anything in
which it is necessary for a man to be put upon higher diet, I always put him on a low diet; but
if I see a man’s complaint is such that really a better diet would do him good, I put him on
better diet.
2150. It is wrong to have huts twenty feet by eighteen by twenty, for sixty men ?—A
hundred and twenty cubic feet I consider too little; but I have seen sailors in less, who were very
healthy. I have been myself in less, and very healthy. , I passed nearly three years on the coast
of Africa, in a sloop, in which my cabin was only six feet long, by four feet wide, and about four
feet eight inches or five feet high, in some places with two beams across it, so that my head was
raised so much at night that my nose was within three inches of the beam; and I was never
better in my life. I have seen men in the lower deck of a ship, where the deck was not four feet
high, and their hammocks stowed in fourteen inches, and yet they were healthy.
2151. Have you any check upon the medical comforts, that they are really given?—Yes;
we have had complaints about that from the prisoners, who can always make complaints when I
see them. The prisoners themselves would complain if there was anything wrong in that respect.
The prisoners are a check upon the medical man, and it is my desire that the prisoners should be
treated, not with a view to punishment, but with a view to relief; and my officers under me have
acted upon that principle, and if the prisoners did not get the medical comforts they were ordered,
they would complain directly.
2152. Do you recollect the case of a man at Collingwood, named Benson, who was sent to
the lunatic asylum ? —I cannot call it to mind.
2153. He was supposed to be shamming illness, and was treated as having been shamming,
and he was punished, I believe, besides; he was then sent to the Yarra Bend, and died in about
a month or six weeks ?—I do not recollect the case.
2154. Dr. Youl was visiting medical man?—When I first came down to Melbourne
he was visiting surgeon to the gaols and stockades.
2155. Do you know who gave him that appointment ?—Mr. La Trobe ; It was before I
took charge of the department.
2156. Why did he give it up?—Dr. Youl gave it up on account of being appointed acting
coronor when Dr. Wilmott resigned ; Dr. James McCrae was appointed in his stead.
2157. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you know anything of prison discipline ?—Something of it.
PjlNAi..—2 a.


2158. Do you know anything of it in any other country than this?—l have seen prison
discipline at home, and have had charge of convicts myself.
2159. What is your opinion in regard to the management of convicts here as compared
with other countries—do you consider they are more severely treated here in their management ?
I do not think so.
2160. Are they more leniently treated ? —T do not think there is much difference as fa
as that is concerned.
2161. Do you think they are equally well treated here as compared with Great Britain ?
In what respect ?
2162. I mean in every respect; first, with regard to provisions?—Unquestionably.
2163. Their mode of discipline ?—Yes; there is one thing in this country defective-—thcr
is not by any means sufficient accommodation ; but, with regard to provisions, I think the convict
are as well treated here as anywhere.
2164. There has been a great deal said with regard to cruelty exercised at the stockade
and places which you as medical officer have charge of. Have you ever been an eye-witness to any
extreme cruelty exercised on the convicts?—Never.
2165. Do you believe there ever has been ?—I do not. If any cruelty involving healtl
had taken place, I think the medical officers of my department would have represented it to me
as it would have been there duty to do. Since I have had charge of the stockades myself, there
has been no cruelty of any description to lead to any injury to any man. There may be of course
any amount of cruelty without my knowledge.
2166. But you do not believe it?—From the opportunities I have had of seeing it, I do
not believe it has been committed; lam only speaking of course as far as my knowledge goes.
2167. You say you have never known any cruelty to be exercised Have you ever known
within your personal knowledge that Mr. Price has behaved with the greatest consideration to
prisoners when they have been unwell ?—Several instances I have known of. There is one man
I have known who is an instance, who is at Pentridge now.
2168. Have you any idea of Mr. Price having done as has been stated, namely, cookec
arrowroot and sago with his own hands ?—I do not know as to his having done so with his own
hands, I have known him give those things out of his own house.
2169. And he was not repaid for it?—No, he has constantly been in the habit of giving
butter, milk, and fowls from his own stock.
2170. You know from your knowledge that he has been extremely kind to the convicts?—
No doubt about it.
2171. And attentive, where lie has thought that the convicts have been deserving of it?—
Yes, no doubt of it.
2172. By Dr. Tierney. —There has been something on record of a man on board the
hulks who was dissatisfied with Dr. Wilkins, the medical officer, and wished to have another
medical man’s opinion, and that you refused to see him—a man of the name of Thompson; can you
explain that ?—That is the name. I have the papers in my hand. It is a remarkable case, and
I can explain it very shortly. A little time before this affair occurred the district surgeon sent to
me tp say that there were orders that the visiting justice and himself should visit the hulks once
or twice a month. I sent to him, in reply to this, to call on the visting justice and appoint a day
with him, that they might visit; thinking it was simply necessary to mention a thing of that
kind. He did so. The visting justice, in return to this, made a reply that he would visit the
prisons what day he liked, and it was the duty of the medical officer to attend him when he
pleased, and he was not aware that the medical officer had anything to do with his department.
I think that was about the substance of it. But it is all in writing in these papers. This was
reported to me by the district surgeon of William3town. I certainly was somewhat astonished,
and I communicated with the Chief Secretary, requesting that Mr. Pasco might be instructed to
make an appointment with the district surgeon. That was the beginning of this affair. But the
whole state of the case is fully developed in the correspondence which I now hand in.—[Vide
Appendix T.]
2173. It has been represented to the committee that the shower-bath has been used on
board the hulks as a punishment, and ordered by Dr. Wilkins ?—Such a thing has not been
reported to me, but my instructions to the officers are, and I have every reason to believe they are
carried out, that nothing shall be given to the men as a punishment. It is distinctly and clearly
understood by the officers in my department that no punishment of any description is to bo ordered
by them.
2174. Would you consider that the shower-bath was a very great punishment ?—lt would
depend upon circumstances.
2175. Would one of your medical officers be justified in using the shower-bath if he thought
a man was in good health and shamming lunacy ?—lf he thought it was such a phase of lunacy
that it would do him good, he would be perfectly justified—it is a powerful remedy.
2176. If a prisoner was shamming lunacy would the medical officer be justified in applying
blistering lotion to his head, and back, and legs ?—lf he was shamming any disease of the brain*
he would be perfectly justified.
2177. Do you think, from what you know of Dr. Wilkin3, that he is a humane man or
otherwise ?—I have not the least doubt of it. The prisoners have all ready means of complaining
through Mr. Price, and he has complained several times.
2178. Do not you think that if there is any cause of complaint against your medical
officers, it would be a great deal better that it should come directly to the head of your department
than to Mr. Price. Would there be any objection to that ? —The complaints would not come to me


in that way—the prisoners would complain to Mr. Price, “ I do not think the medical officer is
treating me right,” and Mr. Price would bring that complaint to me.
2179. By the Chairman. —Do you not think that it would be advisable, before any severe
measures were applied to any party suspected of shamming, that more than one medical man
should give his opinion upon the case ?—I do not.
2180. Supposing the medical man were wrong, and the man was not shamming, would not
it be a hard case that the man should be blistered from the crown of his head to the sole of his
■foot ?—ln the case of that kind at Pentridge stockade, Dr. Webster had my advice and my
opinion that the man was shamming, and he got well soon after.
2181. He is still in custody, is he not?—l do not know what has become of him since he
gave in and acknowledged that he had been shamming, but whether that is the man in question,
I cannot say.
2182. By Dr. Tierney —Have you anything that you wish to state to the committee?—
Nothing, except that I am very anxious to see better hospital accommodation than there is at
present.
2183. I believe you brought that subject under the notice of the late Governor ?—lt
was at the suggestion of the Inspector General and myself that that hospital was commenced.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned to Wednesday next, at one o'clock.
WEDNESDAY, 28th JANUARY, 1857.
Members present : —Mr. Hood, in the Chair; Mr. Miller, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Patterson,
Mr. Thomson, Dr. Tierney.
Mr. Malcolm Ilarcus Smith called in and examined.
2184. By the Chairman. —What office do you hold?—I am superintendent of the
Sacramento.
2185. How long have you held that appointment?—l got my appointment on the 7th of
May last; in June last I came into the hulk.
2186. How many prisoners are there on board the hulk at the present time ?—With the
six sailors, 130.
2187. You are superintendent ?—Yes.
2LBB. Have you one chief warder ? —Yes.
2189. And how many ordinary warders ?—Seventeen ; that is, including the two boatmen.
2190. How many overseers ?—Two.
2191. Are there any other officers?—A sliipkeeper and a storekeeper.
2192. Any clerks?—The storekeeper is both clerk and storekeeper, and there are two
lockers and a sergeant.
2193. Your salary is £4OO a year ?—Yes.
2194. And what is the chief warder’s salary ?—£3oo.
2195. And the lockers—how much ? —Ten shillings and sixpence a day.
2196. And the ordinary warders ?—The sergeant has twelve shillings a day; the ship-
keeper fifteen shillings a day, and the clerk and storekeeper £275 a year ; the overseer fifteen
shillings a day, and the ordinary warders ten shillings.
2197. That would be twenty-six officers and warders altogether ? —Yes.
2198. Do you consider the whole of that staff necessary for the safe keeping of the men ?
I do not see how it could be very well cut down.
2199. Perhaps you are net aware that prisoners can be kept in the hulks at Woolwich
with one fourth of that staff?—l never was at Woolwich. I joined the service in Van Diemen’s
Land in 1841, and I have been nearly five years here. I was one of the first that was appointed.
2200. Are the prisoners in the Sacramento kept separate ? —No.
2201. How many are there in a cell ?—Three or one.
2202. By Mr. Mitchell. —lf the vessel were larger, so as to contain double the number of
prisoners, would the same number of warders be capable of controlling the whole ? The same
number of officers would, but we should require more warders.
2203. What proportion of warders ?—We have a warder to every five men now 5 if we
had double the number of men, I should require about five more warders.
2204. By the Chairman. —That would be a warder to every twenty men? —The actual
ship’s duties could be performed with the same number of warders, but we must strengthen our
shore guard.
2205. What class of prisoners have you on board the Sacramento ? Are they men who
have been previously on board the President or Success ? —I suppose nearly all the men that I
have, with the exception of those who have come direct from the gaol, which is not a very large
number, have been on the President, and that within the last eighteen months.
2206. Was there on board one of the hulks a sort of emeute a short time ago ? They
struck work for a day or two, did they not?—Not to my own personal knowledge; I heard so.
2207. That was not on board the Sacramento ? —No.
2208. What vessel was it on board?—The Success I heard, but I cannot say whether it
is true or not. I only speak from hearsay.


2209. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you a bath on board the Sacramento ? —Yes, a shower-
bath.
2210. Ts it a very severe one ?—lt is a very good shower-bath ;it has never been used but
once, and that was on an occasion when a man had lock-jaw, and we struck his irons, and put him
in the shower-bath. That was the only time it was used.
2211. By the Chairman. —And that cured the lock-jaw ? —The sudden shock cured it. It
was used under Dr. Wilkins’s orders.
2212. By. Dr. Tierney. —Have any prisoners been punished on board the Sacramento
by means of the shower-bath ?—I never knew of one.
2213. What height is the bath ?—About six feet four high, and just large enough for a
man to stand in.
2214. Would you have any objection to take a bath in it yourself?—Not the slightest in
the world, if I wanted one.
2215. By the Chairman. —When a man is put into that shower-bath, is there an unlimited
supply of water ? —He is never put in except by order of the doctor, and then we have nothing
to do with the quantity.
2216. Who has command of the stop ?—The doctor.
2217. B y Mr. Patterson. —What is the size of the Sacramento ? —3OO tons.
2218. By the Chairman. —lf you had not these six refractory seamen on board, would
you require to have the services of two or three more men ? —Yes.
2219. So that it is in reality thirty-one men to manage the 124?—The sailors have
nothing to do with the management.
2220. But they are required ?—They are merely required because they are safer than
penal men to pull the boat.
2221. Would you make the prisoners do it if you had not them?—We should have to
make the prisoners do it, although it would not be so safe. The sailors are equally with the
prisoners sentenced to hard labor, but for short and in fact uncertain periods only.
2222. By Mr. Miller. —How long have you been a superintendent ?—I joined in
September, 1852, and took charge of the Richmond stoekade.
2223. Then you must be one of the oldest superintendents in the department ?—I am the
oldest.
2224. Have you had an opportunity of seeing the treatment of prisoners in any other Colony
than this ?—I was appointed superintendent in Yan Diemen’s Land in 1841, which appoint-
ment I held for many years, until the breaking up of the system.
2225. Is the treatment of convicts here more severe than it is in Yan Diemen’s Land, or
the reverse ? —I should not say that the treatment is more severe here, further than that the
orders are more strictly adhered to and carried out.
2226. Did they resort to corporal punishment in Yan Diemen’s Land? —They did.
2227. Is there any corporal punishment administered here ?—No.
2228. Not in any case ?—Not in any case.
2229. Have you had an opportunity of observing the general conduct of the present
superintendent, Mr. Price ? —I have.
2230. Do you consider that his conduct has been tyrannical and unnecessarily severe ?
I have never seen it so in any of the establishments I have had charge of under him—decidedly
not.
2231. What is the general opinion of the convicts themselves as expressed with regard to
Mr. Price’s conduct ?—I could not arrive at that from them with propriety. I could not as an
officer receive or hear such expressions of opinion.
2232. You have not been able to ascertain that?—Most decidedly not; they would not
give it to me as an officer, or would it be of any proper value if they did.
2233. How would you yourself characterise Mr. Price’s conduct with regard to those points
as to being tyrannical and unnecessarily severe ?—I should say, most decidedly, it is not the case.
2234. Then are the committee to understand that, in your opinion, the discipline adopted
with regard to the convicts here is not unnecessarily severe?—lt is not unnecessarily severe, and
in proof of it, I would instance my own ship, where the average number of men brought before
the magistrates during the last twelve months is one half per cent.
2235. The Sacramento is not a punishment hulk, is she ?—Not the worst.
2236. Is she understood to be a punishment hulk ?—lt is a punishment hulk of course,
but still it is a step nearer to the stockades on shore; a removal to them being regarded as an
indulgence.
2237. Have the convicts under your charge an opportunity of reforming in any way if
they desire it ?—I believe that every means is given them. We have a religious instructor, and
we have plenty of boobs, and plenty of slates, and clergymen can visit if they like.
2238. Is there any case in which these convicts under your charge have shown any marks
of reform ?—I am sorry to say, not.
2239. They have not ?—No; a vast number of the men that I now have I had before in
Yan Diemen’s Land.
2240. What is your opinion of the class of convicts in this Colony—the men in those hulks ?
Do you consider those men capable of reform, or do you consider them such men as are stated in
England to be men that are not capable of reform ?—I would not like to go so far as to say that
any man is perfectly irreclaimable, but I believe their reform is very problematical.
2241. What has been your experience as to its being possible to reform those men by
ordinary means ? —I believe it is not.


2242. That i 3 your opinion ?—Yes.
2243. Are you aware that a similar opinion has been expressed by the late Governor, I
think, of the Coldbath Fields Prison in England ? —I am not aware of that. I have had the same
men under a third conviction in Victoria, and I have known them to be bond in Van Diemen’s
Land.
2244. Then your object is to enforce the safe custody of those prisoners and their punish-
ment ?—Decidedly.
2245. That is the object of the hulks ?—Most decidedly ; and with the view of deterring
crime.
2246. Will you tell the committee whether that object is carried out in an unnecessarily
cruel manner, or not?—Most decidedly not —quite the reverse.
2247. Have there been any religious instructors allowed to visit the prisoners in the hulk
under your charge, and afterwards prevented from doing so ?—They have been allowed, but none
ever prevented.
2248. Are you aware that, in some of the other penal establishments here, a stop has been
put to the visits of religious instructors ? —I cannot say that lam aware of it.
2249. You have not heard of that ? —I may have heard it ; but Ido not know it.
2250. You do not know it from your own knowledge ?—I do not.
2251. In the hulk under your charge no religious instructor who wished to see the convicts
has been prevented from administering such religious instruction or consolation as he might think
fit ?—Never.
2252. Are the committee to understand that ? —Most distinctly.
2253. I presume that no tobacco or other luxuries are allowed to be given to the prisoners
in the hulk under your charge ?—No, nothing but wbat is allowed under existing Government
regulation.
2254. In all the penal establishments that you have had charge of and seen, is it not the
custom invariably to debar convicts under punishment from any luxuries whatever ?—Yes.
2255. Do you think it would be advisable to introduce a modification of that arrangement
and give them those luxuries ?—No, Ido not. I have seen it tried in Van Diemen’s Land under
the probation system, and was productive of increased amount of punishment.
2256. And what was the result ? —That we merely afforded the prisoners a means of
blinding and disguising a system of traffic by allowing a small portion to be given.
2257. They would make it a pretext for introducing more ?—Yes, and that too by most
objectionable means.
2258. What would be subversion of discipline ?—Subversion of discipline would be caused
by that interference with restraint and obedience which follows the allowance of luxuries. It is
the want of luxuries that makes the loss of liberty chiefly felt as an evil by our class of convicts.
2259. Are the men in your charge in irons ?—I have forty at present in irons.
2260. And how many out of irons ? —Eighty-four not in irons.
2261. Do you think it necessary, for the safe custody of those forty men, that they should
be kept in irons ?—I do; I expressed the same opinion to Mr. Stawell many years ago, when
visiting the Collingwood stockades.
2262. What is the state of health of the men in the hulk under your charge ?—For the
last year the per centage of sick has been 3£.
2263. How many deaths ?—None.
2264. Then the state of health is rather beyond the average?—Yes.
2265. By Mr. Patterson. —You have stated that you have eighty men without irons.
Had they never irons on ?—They have all had irons on. I iron all the men when they come to
the ship. . '
2266. When did you remove the irons from those eighty men ?—I could not say when
each man’s irons were removed. They were removed whenever I had an order from the Inspector
General, and in some instances I have recommended that it should be done.
2267. By Mr. Mitchell. —Are those irons removed upon your report ?—Mr. Price
knows the state of the men from our report, and his knowledge of the men.
2268. By Mr, Miller. —Why are the irons removed ? Is it for good conduct and because
you consider it safe to remove them ?—For good conduct, and the prisoners having worked off
some of their time, the irons may be more safely removed.
2269. By the Chairman. —Has Mr. Price the supreme power of dismissal of all the
officers in the department?—No; Mr. Price can only dismiss up to the sergeants, he suspends
from the superintendent downwards to the sergeants.
2270. Have you ever known a case in which Mr. Price, having suspended a man, dismissal
did not follow ?—Never.
2271. Have you ever known a case where Mr. Price has suspended a man who was afterwards
dismissed, and subsequently re-instated ?—I am not aware of such a case.
2272. You said, in answer to Mr. Miller, in proof of the mildness of the system, that only
half per cent, of the whole have been punished ? —I do not say even punished, I say only half per
cent, have been taken before the magistrate.
2273. And you adduce that as a proof that the system is not severe ?—Yes.
2274. Do you mean half per cent, per day?—No; half per cent, on the yearly aggregate.
2275. That is, there would be only three-quarters of a man brought before the magistrate
in the year ?—No; it is daily.
2276. By Mr. Miller. —How many men have you ?—The average daily strength for the
year was 120-^.
Pbnjj..—2 b.


2277. How many men daring the year were brought before the magistrate?—l do no
remember ; I merely remember the per centage from having made out the returns.
2278. Do you mean that there is one man in every two days?—One man on the aggregat
of every 200.
2279. That is, every two days there would be one man brought up before the magis
trate ?—Yes.
2280. By the Chairman. —ln your answer as to religious instruction and the means o:
reforming prisoners, you seem to place your whole means of reformation in books, and slates, anc
religious instruction. Are there any other means of reforming prisoners?—They are debarrec
from everything like temptation, they are kept cleanly, orderly, and obedient; the religiou
instructor visits them constantly, and they have lots of good books and slates.
2281. lou say ordinary means would not reform these men. Do you mean by ordinary
means the means you use?—l would not say they were past reformation, but I believe they ar
not likely to be reformed.
2282. What do you mean by ordinary means? —I do not belive any means woulc
reform them.
2283. Then extraordinary means would not reform them ?—I do not think it would.
2284. Mr. Miller put the question to you, was there any cruelty practised in the pena
establishments, and your answer was, decidedly not ? —To my knowledge, decidedly not.
2285. That simply means, that you never saw it ?—Yes.
2286. By Mr. Mitchell. —Could it take place without your knowledge ?—Not on boarc
my own hulk.
2287. And in whatever establishment you have been since you arrived here you have
never seen any cruelty practised towards the prisoners ?—No.
2288. By the Chairman. —What do you consider cruelty to a prisoner ?—I should call i'
cruelty even to carry out the regulations harshly or intemperately.
2289. Did you never see a man struck with a neddy ?—Never.
2290. Have the seventeen warders on your hulk a neddy amongst them ?—There are
none ever used. I have seen two cases of assault in my ship, and in neither case was the
prisoner struck.
2291. Then you can manage the prisoners without striking them ? —Decidedly.
2292. Do not you think in some ships they cannot do that ?—lf a prisoner struck a man
and attempted to knock him down, I think the use of a neddy justifiable.
2293. If a prisoner attempted to strike you, would you stand aside and tell two or three
warders to pitch into him ? —No ; not unnecessarily handle him, if milder means would do.
2294. Would you consider that cruelty ? —Yes, if struck without downright necessity.
2295. By Mr. Miller. —Supposing a warder under your command was to assault a
convict and knock him down with a neddy, or beat him with a neddy, would you dismiss that
man or not ?—I should report him.
2296. And if he was reported, how would he be treated—would he be encouraged to do
that, or would he be dismissed ?—I believe he would either be fined or dismissed, but no such
case has gome under my notice.
2297. By the Chairman. —Have you anything to do with paying the warders and
officers?—Yes, I pay them monthly.
2298. What do you do with the fines that are deducted ?—I transmit them to the
Inspector- General with a declared account made before a magistrate.
2299. Are the fines any part of the regulations?—Yes.
2300. Who drew up those regulations ? —I had a hand in them myself originally.
2301. They are not under any Act of Council, are they ?—They are under the Act of
Council, 16 Vic., No. 32, so soon as they receive the sanction of the Executive.
2302. With regard to tobacco—how is it that the men could not trade upon their other
rations as well as upon tobacco, if it were served out weekly or daily as a part of the rations ?
It would afford them an opportunity of disguising any system of traffic.
2303. Why does not serving out the other rations afford an opportunity of doing the
same ? The other rations they would not care so much about, and are not marketable in this"way.
2304. By Mr. Mitchell. —Are not the other rations perishable ?—They are.
2305. So that they could not hoard them up ?—No. The difficulty of preventing traffic
is very great, even although they are confined on board those ships, so much so that I myself
have detected one of the warders supplying them with tobacco by forwarding letters to their
friends. This warder supplied the prisoners with tobacco, for which he charged them £1 a
pound; he would take a letter up to a place in Melbourne and get £5 and buy two pounds and
half of tobacco, and bring it down to the prisoners, and pocket the rest.
2306. By Mr. Miller— -Have not you known of a case of a person selling tobacco at
£5 ss. per pound, and getting paid through the confederates of the prisoners in Mel-
bourne ?—No.
2307. By Dr. Tierney. —You say there are about forty men in irons in your hulk, and
about eighty-four out of irons. Can you tell me how many men were in irons three months a"o
on board of your vessel ? —I could not from memory, because I had not the same men in. °
2308. Do you think there was a greater number or a lesser number ?—I should say there
were more. J
2309. A great deal more ?—Yes.
2310. In what proportion ?—About eighty I dare say.
2311. By Mr. Mitchell. —lt varies from time to time ?—Yes, as we have different drafts
of men.


2312. By Mr. Patterson. —Has that system of putting irons on the men undergone an;
change since the sitting of this committee ? —Not that lam aware of. Mr. Price has taken o
irons as usual; sometimes he takes off more, sometimes less.
2313. By the Chairman. —What was the largest number you ever knew struck off in on
day ?—I should be afraid to say from memory.
2314. A dozen ?—I dare say we have struck off thirty or forty—fifteen, twenty, differen
numbers.
2315. Do the books show all those things ? —Every one.
2316. By Mr. Miller. —Are the convicts aware of the proceedings of this committee ?
They are.
2317. Do they get full information upon the point ?—Yes.
2318. Has that introduced a spirit of insubordination ? —lt has unsettled them very much
2319. And made them more difficult to manage? —Yes.
2320. By Mr. Mitchell. —Have you any means of conjecturing how they obtain their
information ? —These men have wives, brothers, and relations, and there are dischargee
prisoners. The Point is clear all night, Saturday afternoon, and all Sunday, and there are plenty
of means of leaving any information there, and they plant it, and the prisoners pick it up when
they go on shore to work.
The witness withdrew.
Ordered—That this Committee be adjourned sine die.
WEDNESDAY, 3rd JUNE, 1857.
Members present :—Mr. Hood, in the chair ; Mr. Cowie, Mr. Guthridgc, Dr. Tierney.
Hi chard Youl, Esq., M.D., examined.
2321. By the Chairman. —You are one of the visiting justices of penal establishments
in this Colony, I believe ? —I am.
2322. By Dr. Tierney. —l believe you have, in some cases, sentenced prisoners to six
months’ imprisonment, in addition to their original sentences. Will you state for what offences
those additions were made ? —lf you will tell me the instances, I will state whether those
offences were for insubordination, or for fighting, or for something likely to lead to an escape
of the prisoners.
2323. You never sentenced any one yourself for insubordination ?—No. There were
always two magistrates ; and in those cases where I sat with another magistrate, I merely
sat as chairman.
2324. Who are the other magistrates that usually sat ?—Most frequently, Mr. Hackett.
2325. Do you think it would be advisable to have an open court for investigating such
offences P—l do not think it would.
2326. Why ?—I think, if there were an open court, the friends of the prisoners and
persons disposed to philanthropy would always be in attendance, and they would be constantly
representing the sentences passed upon the men as cruel and unjust, and keep them in a
constant state of excitement.
2327. Do not you think it would be a wholesome check on magistrates if the chairman
of that court were to summon the magistracy to attend on those occasions ?—lt is very difficult
to get two magistrates to attend at all.
2328. But lam speaking of honorary magistrates—unpaid magistrates ?—I do not
think that you could carry out any system of penal discipline with unpaid magistrates.
2329. That is not the question. My question is, would not the public and the prisoners
be better satisfied if honorary magistrates were summoned in cases requiring magisterial inter-
ference . My impression is that once every month a bench of magistrates ought to sit, and
decide on serious cases occurring in our penal establishments.
. 2330. What objection is there to having a court open to the press ?—I see no objection
to havyig a court open to the press at all, so long as it is confined to the press; but I see serious
objections to allowing persons to go there for their own purposes.
2331. Have you known men sentenced to sit on a stone, from morning to night, as a
punishment ?—I have never known them sentenced to it. When men would not work,
Mr. Price ordered them to sit upon a stone, but they always had two hours’ exercise every day.
2332. Have you known men sentenced to be chained to the wheel of a cart, in the
stockade, as a punishment ?—I think I have known one man tied to the wheel of a cart.
2333. In the stockade ?—Yes.
2334. Was it not a magisterial sentence ?—lt was not. I did not order it.
2335. Did you see the man there ?—I did not.
2336. Have you ever sentenced a man to carry a stone of 50 lbs. weight, as a punishment,
up and down the yard ?—No, never. I have no power to do it.
2337. Have you ever known that to be done ?—Never.
2338. Have you ever sentenced any prisoner for using, or having in his possession, paper
or rags, for the purpose of going to the watercloset ?—Never. I have sentenced a prisoner for
having copies of newspapers in his possession, but not for the purpose stated. I have sentenced
a man for having a copy of the report of the citizens’ committee in his possession.


2339. Were you ever interfered with in your duties ?—Never by any one.
2340. We have it in evidence that a man was chained to a stone for twelve hours a-day,
’ in fact, from sunrise to sunset, for I think six. weeks, as a punishment—do you know if that was
the case ?—lt never took place.
2341. Are you aware whether the regulations under which the Inspector General acts
allow him to order such punishments without the intervention of a magistrate ?—ln the first
place, I am satisfied that it never was done; and further, I know of no rule that would authorise
the Inspector General to do it.
2342. By Dr. Tierney. —But still you know a man was chained to a wheel?—l know he
was, and I reported the circumstance at once.
2343. If it were given in evidence that a man was so chained in a burning sun during
an entire day, would that be true or false, do you think ?—I think it would be false. I think
two hours was the time, and it was in the morning.
2344. Do you approve of cumulative sentences?—Cumulative sentences passed
by visiting justices scarcely ever act to prevent a man getting his freedom, excepting
in cases where the sentences are very short indeed. They are mere nominal things.
If I sentence a man who has got ten years to three months’ hard labor, it does not interfere
with his getting his freedom. The only way in which it acts is this : Supposing a man to be
sentenced for ten years, after five years he would get his ticket-of-leave, but must have been
six months free from offence. Thus the visiting justice must not have passed sentence upon
him for six months previously.
2345. By Mr. Hood . —Suppose a man was sentenced for ten years, and at the end of the
first year he got punished, would he be entitled to a ticket at the end of five years, the same as
if he had not been punished ?—Yes.
2346. If he were punished within three months of the expiration of his sentence, he
would then have to wait six months longer ?—Yes; the way in which I sentence men is:
Supposing a man to be short-sentenced, say for fifteen months or two years, I almost invariably
add to his sentence. Supposing he is sentenced for seven years, I give him solitary confinement
on bread and water; and those two punishments have been found efficacious.
2347. By Dr. Tierney. —Supposing a man is taken up under the Vagrant Act, for
drunkenness—suppose he was sentenced to twelve months’ imprisonment —supposing, during
that twelve months, he was guilty of any breach of discipline, would you not give that man
punishment—have you not done so ? Say, suppose you sentenced him to two or three months’
additional imprisonment, would that be added to that man’s sentence ?—lt would; under all
short sentences it does act accumulatively.
2348. Do you think that likely to make that man a better man ?—I am only speaking of
discipline, not of improving his moral character.
2349. Some men may be a little obstinate—do you think it is a wholesome thing to
punish such men so that their sentences may accumulate and they be kept six or twelve years ?
Whenever I see a man of that character, I recommend him separate treatment. There are men
of such peculiar temperament, that it is not safe to allow them to work or to employ them in
any way. If I meet with such I invariably recommend that they should be put under separate
treatment and kept free from excitement, and thus they are put in the best position they could
possibly be.
2350. Do not you think a man might be inclined to break the discipline of a gaol or
stockade. lie might think he was put in there wrongfully. Do you think it wise to
accumulate his punishment in such cases, and make him worse than he was before ? —lf a man
is on the works, and if he is allowed to show doggedness and to break the rules with impunity,
you destroy the discipline of the entire establishment; and, therefore, I remove such men
invariably.
2351. But do not you think you ought to distinguish between a bad man and one who
thinks he is sent there needlessly ? —We always do. It is invariably done.
2352. Are you aware that men have been sent to gaol and imprisoned for a term, and
that they have remained double the time they were originally sentenced for ?—I know one
instance.
2353. Only one? —Only one. Tie has been twenty-five years in prison. He was
sentenced for drunkenness. He has been a whole life in gaols and prisons. He told me that
out of twenty-three Christmas-days he had spent twenty-two in gaol. And it happens here
very often, that the very worst men in this country are confined under the Vagrant Act. They
are so artful, that the detectives cannot take them for crime, however well known they may be.
2354. But you are aware that very respectable men may be taken under the Vagrant
Act ?—None have noticed it more strongly than I have. I wrote the Colonial Secretary in
consequence of several respectable men being sentenced to several days’ imprisonment for
being drunk, on bread and water.
2355. Have you ever known of violence being used by warders or others ?—I have only
known two instances.
2356. Have you ever known an instance of some of those men waiting with a pistol to
shoot a man’s leg ?—I have never known armed men go into the stockade. I know that the
prisoners cut through a little wooden place in the Crystal Palace.
2357. I allude to a particular instance ?—On the occasion to which you allude, the
warders were not armed with pistols. The prisoners stuck one of their own pairs of trowsers
through a hole to know if anybody was there, and one warder got hold of it, and that gave the
information that they were there. They wished to know who were the men who planned the
rush. The warders were not armed.


2358. What is the size of the place ?—They hold ten each, I believe.
2359. Are you aware there are sometimes twenty or thirty in each?—l am aware
there are not. . . _
2360. If we have it in evidence that there are ?—Then it is not true. You never can
put them there. They are only constructed to hold so many.
2361. Is there a sick ward at the Crystal Palace ? —There is not one. If the men are
ill they are sent to the hospital below. There are two stockades—the upper and the lower.
The upper is the Crystal Palace. It is a stockade surrounded with a fence, and constructed
for the purpose of being moved. It was to have been a moveable prison. The buildings are
carriages (just like Womb well’s Show) on wheels, which can be moved across the country.
They have long bars across, and hammocks for the men to sleep upon, so that it is impossible
to crowd them. That is the upper stockade. If men are taken ill there, they are put into the
hospital below; and that is the only hospital. There is a ward used as a hospital.
2362 How many do you say is the most that were ever in it ? —I cannot say tor certain,
but I think ten is the number which it holds. lam satisfied that if you go to the nearest farm
or lodging-house, Pentridge is very much more favorable to health than it, bad as it is. lam
quite satisfied that, taking the lodging-houses of free laborers and comparing them with Pentridge,
the prisoners are infinitely better lodged than free laborers. . .
2363. -By Mr. Hood. —There is one subject I should like to hear your opinion ol that
is, the indulgence of tobacco to prisoners—a very large proportion of cases that come before you,
as’ visiting justice, arises out of their having tobacco ?—A great many of them.
2364 Do not you think that would be completely avoided if a small indulgence to the
extent of 3d. or 6d. mirth a week were allowed them ?—Mr. Price very much objected to the
use of tobacco. He said it would lead to trafficking. The prisoners were never satisfied with
that allowed by the Government, and the fact of tobacco being allowed, led to trafficking with
the warders; and when that was the case, it led to trafficking in other things. I think, it you
had different prisons, you might indulge them in tobacco ; but until then, it would lead to endless
traffic and greater punishment. ,
2365. Why do not they traffic about their tea and sugar ? —They have not tea and sugar.
Their rations are served out to them prepared.
2366. You incidentally mentioned the Vagrant Act. You have had as much experience
as any magistrate in the colony ; has it worked well ? —I think it has. It has been most effica-
cious in the colony. ,
2367. Is it not liable to great abuses ?—lt can be abused, but the benefit to tins colony
has been incalculable. ~ , , , „ T • i •+ j.-n
2368. You allude to the great rush of people which has taken place f —l think it still
useful. I think it requires great alteration. I think some power ol appeal, it it could be
managed, should be introduced into the Vagrant Act. I know that many who have been com-
mitted were most respectable persons. In one instance, a man came out in the Great Bt itain
and was taken up by a sergeant of police, who swore to his being an associate of thieves, and
accordingly he w T as sentenced to two years under the Vagrant Act. The man had £/0 in lus
pocket at the time he was taken. With great difficulty, and by the assistance of some fellow-
passengers, he got out; but there is great difficulty in a man’s obtaining his liberty, if he is once
2369. Then so far you think that the oath of a constable should not be acted upon
rashly—there should be some opportunity of appealing ?—I think so.
2370. There is one more question I should like to ask, about ordering solitary confine-
ment. You know perfectly well that there is a great difference in the temperament of men—
you yourself could not stand solitary confinement—many a phlegmatic man with dark complexion
could enjoy it; do you ever take that difference into account, or merely consider the crime on
awarding punishment ?—I always take into account, as well as I can, the nervous peculiarities
of the men. In many cases Ido not punish men at all. I recommend them to the medical
officer, and treat them as insane. There are several.men that were the most violent, who ha\e
become the most manageable; because they know, if brought up before me, I shall say they are
insane. There are men so exciteable, that punishment makes them worse, and I therefore
recommend them to the medical officer, and in that way they get over it. A man had rather
be punished than thought insane.
12371. By Dr. Tierney. —ln removing prisoners to the various stockades, from one
place to another, are you consulted ?—Ho, I have nothing whatever to do w T ith the selection of
prisoners ; I merely have the power to recommend. I cannot order a man to be sent from one
place to another. . ,
2372. Are you consulted wdien prisoners have to be removed from one stockade to
another, or from the stockade to any particular hulk ?—There are no regulations to the effect
that I should be, but I was frequently consulted by Mr. Price on the subject.
2373. There is no regulation ?—None whatever.
2374. By the regulations I find, that “ The visiting justice will make such recommenda-
tions to the inspector of penal establishments for the removal of prisoners from one penal
establishment to another for punishment, or for any other purpose, as may appear to him to be
advisable.” Do you think that would be a very wholesome thing, if carried out ?—-Those
suggestions do not instruct me that no man should be removed without my concurrence. I have
frequently recommended that prisoners should be removed. _ .
2375. Do not you think it would be a very wholesome thing that the medical officer and
visiting justices should be consulted in removing prisoners ?—I do not think the medical officer
should be consulted.
Penal.—2 c.


2376. Do not you think the medical officer might know whether the men could underg
a severe or small degree of punishment ?—The medical officer visits twice a week, and if he see
that a man could not support punishment, he orders him to be released.
2377. But lam speaking of the 125th rule. Can you see any harm in the medical office
also recommending, in unison with the visiting justices, the removal of the prisoners ? —Ther
can be no harm at all. The medical offcer equally with myself can recommend the removal o:
prisoners for purposes of health. If you use the medical officer for purposes of punishment a
all, his life would not be worth a week’s purchase.
2378. I would use him for the opposite purposes. Do you think a man may be punishec
at the whim of any particular individual ?—No, I do not think so.
2379. Do you think it has not been done in any of our penal establishments ? —I d
not think so.
2380. Suppose you were inspector general yourself, would you not think it a ver
grave responsibility for some small breach of discipline in the stockade to remove a man to th
hulk President perhaps merely for some disobedience ? —I am quite positive that no man has
ever been moved to any hulk for any such reason as that. Whenever he has been removed, th
crowning point must have been something more than slight disobedience of orders—it has been
in consequence of bad conduct for a length of time.
2381. Then, if men stated they have been removed for such, it is not true ?—lt is not.
2382. Then what harm could there be, before they can be so removed or punished, t
consult with the visiting justice ?—No harm in it.
2383. By Mr. Hood. —We have it in evidence that, after a general gaol delivery th
inspector general goes to the gaol, and the prisoners sentenced are brought up and rangec
round. He reads the sentences and sends this man to Collingwood, another to Pentrid«-e
and another to the hulks; do you know by what rule the inspector general acts ?—Yes, al
men whose sentences w r ere long, who were convicted of highway robbery, or of murder or sue!
alienees, would be sent to the hulk President ; all convicted for first offences were sent to the
Lysander ; all tradesmen were sent to Pentridge.
2384. Without reference to the length of their sentences ? —lf a man’s sentence was for
a certain time, he was invariably sent to the President or Success —first the President, then the
Success, then the Sacramento, and then say to Pentridge and Collingwood.
2385. Those were rules that should have been acted upon ? —Yes.
238 ?' We haVe i<; in evideilce the y were not acted upon, and so far from that, that
McCabe, who was sentenced to fifteen years’ transportation, was at once taken to Pentridge
and at the same sessions a man who had got twelve months’ imprisonment, and had his choice tc
serve either at Castlemaine or Melbourne, was sent to the President? —l do not recollect
McCabe, but the inspector general, in filling up the sentences, although a man mioht have
only a sentence of five years in this Colony, yet, if he had been transported in Yan Diemen’s
Hand previously, or had been at Norfolk Island, he sent him for safety to the hulks.
2387. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you take into consideration at all that men may be
reformed ? —Yes. J
.2388. Did he send him to a particular hulk according to the period of his original
sentence, and not according to his conduct under discipline for the last few months ?—He
could know nothing of his conduct for the last few months, except he was sentenced for ten
years. In the Melbourne gaol you know very little, for most of the violent men in the hulks
were perfectly well behaved in Melbourne gaol. There is no punishment in Melbourne gaol.
I do not punish six men a year there.
2389. But the prison inspector, irrespective of you or the doctor, or any one, can send
any man to any particular hulk, Avithout considering what the man’s conduct was ?—He does
consider the man’s conduct in this Avay: Mr. Price had knowledge respecting the prisoners which
no other inspector general had nor will have, for he knew the history of all the old offenders
that came into Melbourne gaol from their first transportation to that time, and therefore he
lad a power of selection which no other man had. The gentleman just appointed will no doubt
ask advice for assistance in classification.
2 i 390 ' ' Do yOU P resent classification is good ?—lt is most defective. Mr. Price
did all lie could for classification. If you get a man originally transported for life from
Jhaigland, who has been once or tAvice sentenced to be hanged, and has been a long time at
Norfolk Island, if he is convicted under the Vagrant Act, you are Hot justified in putting that
man among the Lysander people, who are convicted of a first crime.
.£• r ' o °d; —-^- s y understand the rules of our penal establishments, a man for
a first offence gets a ticket in ten months, if he is not for three years; and if it is a second offence
he has to serve his full time. The impression on my mind is, that although he might have
been perfectly well known to Mr. Price, and not only that, but though the man admits that he
has been at Norfolk Island, and originally sent out as a prisoner, it counts as a first offence if
he has not been committed before in this Colony. Do not you think this to take his
previous career into consideration ? —lt has a very deterring influence.
2392. If a man gets six months’ imprisonment here as a vagrant, if he was to forget
himself again and get drunk, that you count as a second conviction, though both summary
convictions before magistrates ?—The convictions must be for felony—second convictions for
ielony.
2393. Their conviction under the Vagrant Act will not count ?—No.
_ 2394. Were you one of the board that sat in the gaol in the case of a man named
McCoy r—Yes.
2395. Do you know what became of the evidence of that committee ?—Captain McMahon


had the evidence at the Colonial Secretary’s office. That inquiry was instituted by Mr. Price.
Ihe evidence was very contradictory; it was not taken in the gaol.
2396. I should like to ask you one question as to your opinion about Mr. McPherson’s
statement respecting that contemplated rush in March. I think the best way will be to read it.
. Questions and answers 1658 to 1695 read.
The object of this portion of McPherson’s examination was to elicit the facts connected with
that rush. My conviction was, and it is confirmed by that evidence, that the inspector did not
take a proper and kind course in not preventing that rush. You take a different view. The
committee will be glad to hear your reasons ? —I saw the inspector general, and he told me
he had information that a rush was to take place. I asked him in which gang it was to take
p ace. lie said he believed it was to be a general rush, and he posted extra sentries all round
where the rush took place. I went out next day and Gisborne, one of the prisoners, was shot.
e sent to ask me to see him, and I went to see him. Gisborne complained that Lewis, who
got up the rush, was not game enough to go through with it, but was promoted to be the barber.
Mr. Price said he did not know Lewis was in it, and he ordered him immediately to be put in irons
and sent to the hulks. The way in ivhich he was made barber was this —the barber left and
the superintendent asked were there any barbers in the stockade ? They said Lewis was one,
and he was therefore made barber on that account. He was the man who got up the rush, but
he v ould not go through with it. With reference to putting persons on to shoot them—l have
known more than one rush at Pentridge. Whenever Mr. Price heard that a rush was
contemplated, he always went and told the men, “ Now, I know all about it; are you inclined to
drop it. If not, I shall send you to the hulks and put you in irons.” lam satisfied that, had
le mown the men, he would have immediately had them sent off, and woidd never have put on
sentries for the purpose of shooting them down.
2397. By Dr. Tierney. —You say Lewis was sent to the hulks ? —Of course there was
an inquiry, and he was proved to have been the man who got the whole thing up. It is frequently
case a rush is got up for the purpose of a man giving information, and it is very
difficult to ascertain whether a rush is for the purpose of serving a particular man, or for escape.
lam satisfied lam giving you Mr. Price’s version of it, and that it is correct. You get a great
deal of information from men who do not want to be known to have given it, and you cannot go
m 0 p lO stockade and explain to the prisoner the reasons for doing every thing, although you
may have good reasons for it.
2398. by Mr. Chithridge. —lf I understand your evidence, you admit that there are
senous objections to the present system of dealing with convicts ? —I think the present system
is the only one possible, so long as the present buildings are in existence. A better one can
only take place when proper buildings for classification are erected.
2399. There are evils existing now ?—Unquestionably.
. 2-100. And you think the only care is, in getting proper buildings for the purpose of
working and managing them ?—Yes.
2401. By Dr. Tierney. —We have it on evidence about the Crystal Palace, a man of
the name of Duffy was overseer?—A discharged overseer.
2402. He states that there were nineteen or twenty sleeping in each hut? —It is very easy
to see. The buildings are so constructed, that every man has a proper amount of pure air.
Come to Pentridge and examine the men; you cannot find a finer body of men. If you wanted
a man for any purpose—if your life depended upon their exertions, you could not find better
men, nor men in finer condition, than they are.
. .2403. In question 555, Duffy says, “ They never can see any body during the time they
are inside the walls, and if any of the men commit themselves in any way against the will of the
™™eer, °r Mr. Price, they are handcuffed and made to sit on a stone.” And when asked,
, " hat punishment is awarded them if they misbehave when sitting on the stone,” he says,
in answer to question 557, “They are brought before a magistrate, and I believe some go to
the hulks. Is that evidence correct ?—ln the first place, it has never been considered a punish-
ment to set a man upon a stone. The object of putting a man upon a stone was, if a man
vould not work, they do not allow him to remain skulking about the place, but he was put
before all the men doing nothing. It was for the moral effect that it was done, but it is not
considered a punishment.
*i 9 2 ave y° u ever seen a man throttled, or half choked, to get tobacco out of his
mouth. I have known many men taken by the neck when they have attempted to swallow
anything to get it out of their mouths.
2405. It is stated, it was done in the presence of Mr. Duncan or Mr. Price ?—Tt may
have been. J
Question and answer 571 read.
2406. Do you believe this evidence ? —I am satisfied that Mr. Price never struck a
prisoner m his life.
Question and answer 572 read.
2407. lie never struck a man so as to knock him down ?—lf he ever struck a man, you
maj be satisfied he would knock him down. He was the most powerful man in the country.
Question and answer 574 read.
2408. Is it true, that Mr. Price was a violent man—if not, I think you had better correct
that evidence, if you can ?—I never saw Mr. Price violent with prisoners. I have known him
a long time. Ido not think he was a violent man at all. He was the best tempered man I
ever saw. The abuse of Melville and those fellows would have driven almost any man to
violence.
2409. Do you believe this about McGuire ?—(Answer to question 578 read.) —I do not


know of any suck circumstance taring occurred. Ido not believe it occurred. There is no
bar through the hut. Answer to question 581 read. _
2410. Is this correct ?—No, it is not correct, distinctly. A man would not do 1 .
Answer to question 582 read. ,
visit the'ttoclSde^youw^/'tad to explain to
np in the touting of a man that I transposed, It could not he for g™g rndence agamrt
Sd reto ZvedTJn rSLfto the magistrates of the hulks!
Questions and answers 630 and 631 read.
2413 I consider those very important questions. I want to ask you, were such
r“f ££J m
cared for. The military, the 40th Begiment, are not so well fed. The prisoners are Better
cared com plained to you of such cruelties?—Only in two instances,
and I immediately reported them. My business is only to report. .
94,15 By Mr l Hood—V rom the tenor of your last answer, lam led to believe that the
inspector general does not dismiss warders without the case coming before the Colonial
Secretary ? —He recommends their dismissal. „ n , , Thpre is a regular record
2416 Then he does not dismiss them- at pleasure ?—Oh no I Ihere is a regular recoru
kent If one is fined, the fines ate paid once every month. The men are tried for ollenc
before the inspector general. He records the sentences in his book A copy is made every
month by th/superintendent of the particular place. It is forwarded into Melbourne, and
ramount is deducted from their salaries by Ihe accountanl. and upon the
Mr. Price, that amount is paid into the Treasury, to the credit of the
This fund is placed in the hands of two trustees, Captain McMahon and mys • P
invested in Government debentures, and the rest as a floating fund to reward such wa
have is attributed t 0 officers in getting work done by the pri-er^-The
mode in which work is done is under a regulation. It is th.s-“ That all persona m the penal
department as officers shall be permitted to get work done at a certain p .
reouisitions for the labor of a bootmaker to make a pair of boots. Ihis is lodged in te
ofS.ce • it is ordered he shall have the services of a bootmaker, and the supermtenden
bootmakers reports the time of working. That time is stopped out of the month s pay. There
can be no collusion. I have had things done. It is often there is no work for mechanics and
we have been obliged to send mechanics into the stone-breaking gang, because we could not get
WOrk ' 2418. It is complained you pay very little ?-Wi> used to pay the value of the rations.
We now nav 7s. Gd. per day. It costs as much as free labor.
We now w£o Bt y ed that nearlyall that hag been s t ated agiunst Mr Pnce and
yourself could be disproved—is not that a reason why the Government should amomt a
commission to complete this inquiry f-I do not place the least faith on the evidence ot
nrisoners In any case brought before you, for a fig of tobacco, six men would swear that a
thing never took'place, and six would swear that it did. In one particular instance it was a
question whether a man got a black eye by falling against a side table, or tlnd mother man
struck him Six swore he got a knock by a side-table, and six that they saw the ma _
himfand ihereforc such evidence is of no value whatever. is one special
in the Aqe newspaper, in which two men gave evidence of ill treatment at rentndge
Collingwood. Now! on referring to the books, one, at the time that he said he saw this cruel y
at CoHingwood, was in Melbourne gaol, and the other never was at Collingwood stockade m his
life • and yet they swore they saw the man treated ill. . , , ,ji
2420 My opinion is that you should have a commission appointed to carry out the
labors of this committee, if all the evidence of the prisoners is false, so as to give an opportunity
of proving it false ? —I think, if the evidence you have taken here had been taken m the
presence of persons capable of cross-examining the witnesses, because of being acquainted with
tluTcircumstances, it id all have been proved to have been false. “mtement caused by
these inquiries is subsiding; but if it is to be kept up, I have no doubt we shall hase more
murders committed. When this evidence is published, it will renew the excitement Previousy
to these inquiries my trials were from eight to ten a month-they rose to sixty ”
now for a week I have had no case; but of 1100 men under my care I sentenced twelve a
month, and from twelve it went up to sixty or seventy; and the moment this is published thue


11l be probably another outbreak. I have brought a return with me if‘ £
esent it, showing the mode in which I punish the men. oo P t nowp never inflicted a
nsiderable danger from the mis-statements that have gone or • severely and
nishment that was not in strict accordance wi e c . p before me
visedly I took charge from Capt. Harrison ; twenty-tour men were brought up before me
e firstdav I was there 8 and all for breach of discipline. The men used to say we will take
enty-four hours for he gave them twenty-four hours’ solitary confinement on bread and water,
d they did not care. I punished those severely who had been punished two or three times
fore. I punished them severely and punishment ceased, and from that time up to the Bepor
the Citizens’ Committee I never punished one-sixth of the number punished by any o er
acistrate I have a return of punishment inflicted by me tor six months, and by Mr. Pas
r § the same period Out of 567 prisoners, which is not one-half the number under my care,
Jo cases wer P e brought up before him ; out of which 62 were dismissed, 199 admonished,
id the rest sentenced to v&rions punishments. . n v •» ±,
2421. Then the whole were brought up ?—Exactly It only shows the inutility of shg
mishments. On reference to my return you will see that, out of 1049 prisoners, I had 2
LS es • and yet it is said I am the worst magistrate, and the most severe. I rest upon t a
Turk the propriety of my management of those convicts I invariably reprimand a man if
nought up land in case of a second complaint, I invariably punish him. Ihey know I will
Linish, and in consequence Ido not punish so much as Mr. Pasco.— [l he witness handed in
? turns of punishments .— Vide Appendices U. and Y.] . . , , .
2492 Ba Dr. Tierney.— What do you think about the American punishments—not
Iving them anything to eat, unless they earn it ?—We have the greatest difficulty m making
Dnvicts gain their living, for all raw material is dearer here than the manufactured article
lade from it. We can buy them new clothing cheaper than they can make it up.
2423 But do not you think the principle a good one —is it not advisable to have
risoners kept in employment f-Unquestionably; but there is a strong feeling against the
mployment of convicts here. In all city contracts you find a clause m the contract, that the
ontractor shall not buy stone got by convict labor. There is every opposition to it
2424 Would it not be desirable that they should be kept at labor, m preference to
nttino- them in solitary confinement ? —I think they should be employed, if practicable ; but it
j impossible to do so here. We cannot get material to do it. . T i ij ru
2425. It would be advisable ?—Unquestionably. There are many points I should like
o have stated in evidence, which you have not mooted at all, with reference to the manage-
utnt o^|2s < °Hlve you much solitary confinement in your stockade ?—We have not the means
2427 What do you call the punishment on board the President hulk ? It is not
olitarv confinement-separate treatment, we call it. It cannot be solitary confinement, where
W are allowed to talk all day long to each other. Properly, we have no solitary confinement,
veept in the main gaol, in Melbourne. It is worth while to go. to Pentridge and look at the
olitary cells. There are six log cells, built of slabs. That is the only accommodation for
olitary confinement. I have written every month, and represented strongly the state of those
stockades and JVti*. Pn.ce has also. . ,
2428 Your female prisoners are in a very bad way ?—The female prison is a disgrace to
i civilized community. There are 130 women and thirty children. In heavy rams they
sometimes cannot leave the dormitories; the whole place is under water. There can be no
classification; the only classification is, that there is one violent ward.
2429 I think you stated, just now, that, under the Act, the latter part of the 14th
Clause is more severe than the former Act ?—Yes, I think it is; I think it gives more power
under it: lam not sure that I have more power than under the original Act.
2430. The Amended Act? —Yes, it increases somewhat the powers ot the visiting
y ou condemn the Act more than the regulations?—The Act was put into my
hands They said, « Carry that out to the best of your ability,” and I did so.
’ 2432. Ho not you think it ought to be amended ? —I have recommended that it should be.
9433 You sentence men sometimes to severe punishment —have you every known a
case'of death occurring under your sentences ?-Never I have never held an inquest upon a
man upon whom I have ever inflicted punishment. I should recommend Dr. Wilmot should
be requested to hold such an inquest. I have only held two inquests m the stockade.
2434. Will you be kind enough to give us the sanitary state oi the prisons r—lhey
<u e all the Western G-aol ? —There is no sickness; the amount of sickness is less than
outside I would observe, that I think no man, because he is a lunatic, ought to be sent to a
gaol. I have reported it most strongly nearly every month for three years, and I think it a
2436. Belative to our lock-ups —do not you think it advisable to separate the prisoners
there in the first instance; that there should be a separate room for persons who committed a
lesser crime than for a man taken up for murder?—The men taken up for such crimes are
always put into separate cells. There is a place for persons taken for drunkenness, where they
are supplied with blankets. There are separate cells for females. In drunken cells they are
supplied with bedding. Once or twice people have died in those lock-ups.
11 2437 Do you think, in the lock-ups in the country, persons should be allowed
something to lie upon ?—I think it would breed a great deal of vermin. We always allow
them blankets.
Penal. — 2 d.


2438. Might there not be a kind of wooden bed ?—You would have them filled
with bugs. It is impossible to keep them clean.
2439. Might there not be a board or bench ?—Like a seat —that might be done.
2440. We have it in evidence, that you have refused prisoners’ evidence of anv
complaints they have to rebut ?—I always object to prisoners’ evidence, for you can get it
either for or against; for invariably six come to swear one way and six another, and I feel
always inclined to punish them all. I never refused evidence to rebut any charge against
them. I have never refused to take any evidence, but have always written it down in the
record ; and lam the only magistrate that ever kept a record. In that record, the sentences
and evidence are written down.
The witness withdrew.
Adjourned sine die.


APPENDIX A.
PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS.—DIETARY SCALE.
Melbourne, Geelong, Williamstown, Portland, Belfast.
No. 1.
Prisoners confined in gaol : —
Wheaten bread, 12 ozs.
Maize meal, 12 ozs.
Fresh beef, 4 ozs.
Vegetables, 8 ozs.
Salt, l oz.
Soap, \ oz.
No. 2.
To prisoners in separate confinement on board penal
hulks :—
Wheaten bread, 16 ozs.
Meat (fresh), 8 ozs.
Vegetables, 8 ozs.
Maize meal, 8 ozs.
Sugar, 1 oz.
Soap, | oz.
Salt, £ oz.
No. 3.
To prisoners at hard labor in gaol or on board hulks,
and at stockades :—
Wheaten bread, 16 ozs.
Meat (fresh), 16 ozs.
Vegetables, 16 ozs.
Maize meal, 8 ozs.
Sugar, 1 oz.
Salt, i oz.
Soap, 5 oz.
No. 4.
For incorrigibly idle prisoners :—
Wheaten bread, 8 ozs.
Maize meal, 8 ozs.
Potatoes, 8 ozs.
Salt, \ oz.
Sugar, 1 oz.
Soap, \ oz.
No. 5.
Wheaten bread, 12 ozs.
Maize meal, 8 ozs.
Potatoes, 12 ozs.
Salt, £ oz.
Sugar, 1 oz.
Soap, £ oz.
No. 6.
Children of female prisoners confined in gaol :—
Wheaten bread, 8 ozs.
Beef (fresh), 4 ozs.
Milk, 1 pint.
Soap, | oz.
No. 7.
Persons confined in lock-up or watchhouses :—
Wheaten bread, 24 ozs.
Prisoners when sick, receive one-half the ordinary No. 3 or 4 ration, unless otherwise ’ ordered by
medical officer.
In solitary confinement the ration is :
16 ozs. bread.
£ oz. soap.
APPENDIX B.
PRISONERS’ CLOTHING.
In summer :—
1 straw hat
1 duck frock
2 pairs duck trowsers.
In winter :—
1 cloth jacket
1 pair cloth trowsers
1 cloth cap.
During the year :—
2 or 3 shirts, when required
2 pairs of boots or shoes R
Braces or belts, when necessary.
BEDDING.
2 blankets
1 woollen rug.
At hulks in winter: —
1 additional blanket.
Penal Appendix.— a.


APPENDIX C.
SCALE OF PERIODS TO BE SERVED BY PRISONERS FOR TICKETS-OF-LEAVE.
Term of Sentence.
Number of Years to
serve for the indul-
gence of Ticket-of-
Leave.
Remarks.
Not exceeding 3 years
2 years
Prisoners are permitted to submit
3 „
applications for indulgence in the
4 „
annexed form when they have
» 8 »
6 „
completed one-half of these periods,
„ 10 „
"i »
and are allowed by good conduct
9 „ i
to reduce the term specified by
15 »
12 „
one-third.
[No. lIP.
Application of No.
for
Offence.
Sentence.
Date of Conviction.
Previous /
History. j
Offences
and
Sentences
since -
Conviction.
>
•
Gaol Report
of Conduct.
Reports
of Conduct
at prior
Stations.
>
Overseer’s f
Report.
Chief Warder’s
Report. (
Superintendent’s
Report. (
Inspector f
General’s >
Remarks. (


APPENDIX D.
sth December, 1856.
Retukn, showing the Number of Books, Library and School, also the Number of Slates at the various Penal
Establishments.
Name of Place or Hulk.
School Books.
Library Books.
Slates.
Main Depot
78
513
50
Collingwood
24
70
50
Lysander
50
162
27
Success ... ... ... ...
175
183
76
President
73
137
100
Sacramento
98
117
63
Total number in use
498
1182
366
The Inspector General, Penal Establishments.
JOHN SMITH, Storekeeper P.E.
APPENDIX E.
(!•)
Sib, Penal Hulk President, 24th February, 1854.
According to your instructions, I have the honor to forward you herewith a certificate from the Medical
Officer, relative to the prisoner named in the margin, as also a minute made by the Visiting Justice about the
same man.
I have, &c.,
The Inspector General, (Signed) STEPHEN PRICE, Superintendent.
Penal Department.
(2.)
22nd February, 1854.
I have this day examined Bernard Walker, prisoner on hoard the hulk President, and consider him to
he perfectly sane in mind, from his general appearance and the questions I put to him during his’confinement.
He has given a great deal of trouble since he has been on board, and has been punished on several occasions
for bad behaviour. He now represents himself to he of unsound mind, and wishes his removal to the Pentridge
Stockade. I would suggest his removal to the hulk Success, where I think his feigned insanity would very
soon be removed.
(Signed) JOHN WILKINS, Assistant Colonial Surgeon, &c.
(3.)
Copy of a Minute made by the Visiting Justice on board the penal hulk President, 17 th February, 1854.
Bernard Walker, charged with having wantonly destroyed his clothing and utensils, and other outrageous
conduct, sentenced to thirty days’ solitary; but, as he is guilty of committing the most filthy acts in his cell, I
would recommend his removal to another hulk, where he may have the benefit of the bath to keep him cleansed.
(Signed) C. PASCO, V.J.
(4.)
24th February, 1854.
Transmitted for the information of the Inspector of Hulks. The prisoner will be removed as early as
the necessary authority can be procured.
(Signed) JOHN PRICE, Inspector General P.E.
The Inspector of Hulks.
( To be returned .)


(5.)
27th February, 1854.
Transmitted for the Superintendent’s information.
(Signed) F. S. HORNE.
(6.)
g IB Hulk Success, lBtli December, 1854.
I have the honor to inform you, the prisoner named in the margin was transferred to the Marine
Stockade for medical treatment, according to your instructions. ,
Also, to bring your attention to the fact, that the proper authority for the transfer (the Governor s
warrant) is to be sent, which I have the honor to remind you of.
J I have, &c.,
The Inspector General, (Signed) C. B. PAYNE, Superintendent..
&c., &c.
(7.)
gIR Marine Stockade, Williamstown, Ist February, 1855.
I have the honor to inform you that the prisoner named in the margin expired this evening at nine
o herew . tli f orwar( j a i e tter to the Coroner requesting his attendance, and requisitions for a coffin.
I have, &c.,
The Inspector General, (Signed) WM. ABBOTT, Superintendent.
Penal Establishments.
(-0 ) 2nd February, 1855.
The Superintendent should have sent to the Coroner direct long before this hour, 10.) a.m., as it is very
probable that he may now be absent.
The Superintendent, (Signed) JOIIN PRICE, Inspector General P.E.
Marine Stockade.
(• 9 ) 3rd February, 1855.
An electric telegraphic message teas forwarded to the Coroner at nine o'clock the same morning. The
coroner:tended this 3a/ An inquest was held; verdict, -Death by natural causes,” and the body will be
buried this evening.
The Inspector General, (Signed) WM. ABBOTT, Superintendent.
Penal Establishments.
APPENDIX F.
HOURS OF LABOR AT THE PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS, VICTORIA.
Months.
Stockades.
Hulks.
Remarks.
Proceed
to
Labor.
Leave
off.
Proceed
to
Labor.
Leave
off.
November, December, January, and )
February )
March and October
April and September
| May and August
| June and July
A.M.
5.45
6.15
6.30
7.30
7.45
P.M.
6.0
5.30
5.30
4.45
4.30
A.M.
5.45
6.15
6.30
7.30
7.45
P.M.
5.30
5.0
5.0
4.15
4.0
/ To breakfast before pro-
l ceeding to labor, and
C the hours from 12 to 1
i to be allowed for dinner.
Alteration allowed at Pentridge and Collingwood Stockades.
Xu tl e months of November, December, January, and February, from 5 a.m. to 6 p.m., allowing from 8 to
8:} for breakfast and from 1 to 2 p.m. for dinner.


APPENDIX G.
Description and Dimensions of Cells on board the Penal Hulk President , 4tli December, 1856.
LOWER DECK.
No. of Cell.
Length.
Remarks.
Deck.
Ceiling.
W IDTH.
HEIGHT.
1
ft.
5
ins.
2
ft.
7
ins.
0
ft.
4
ins.
0
ft.
8
ins.
4
The whole of the cells on the
2
5
2
7
1
4
2
8
4
lower deck are ventilated to seaward
3
6
0
7
2
4
0
8
4
by scuttles of an average of six by
4
6
2
7
2
4
1
8
4
six inches, and the reverse way in-
5
6
6
7
4
4
4
8
4
board by two apertures over the
6
6
9
7
3
4
4
8
4
cell doors, and about half the width
7
7
0
7
5
4
0
8
4
of the cells. The lower aperture is
8
7
2
7
6
3
10
8
4
six inches deep, and the upper ten
9
7
6
7
6
4
1
8
4
and a half; both are secured by
• 10
7
6
7
6
4
4
8
4
round iron bars. The scuttles are
11
7
6
7
10
4
5
8'
4
seven feet nine inches from the
12
7
6
7
6
4
4
8
4
deck inboard, and about three feet
13
7
6
7
10
3
10
8
4
above water line outboard.
14
7
8
7
6
3
10
8
4
15
7
8
8
0
4
1
8
4
16
7
8
7
6
4
3
8
4
17
7
8
8
0
3
10
8
4
18
7
7
7
6
4
2
8
4
19
7
8
7
11
4
6
8
4
20
7
6
7
6
4
6
8
4
21
7
6
7
11
4
0
8
4
22
7
5
7
6
3
8
8
4
23
7
6
8
0
4
9
8
4
24
7
2
7
7
4
4
8
4
25
7
6
7
8
4
3
8
4
26
7
0
7
6
4
4
8
4
27
7
6
7
7
4
0
8
4
28
7
0
7
6
4
6
8
4
29
7
6
7
5
4
6
8
4
30
6
10
7
5
4
4
8
4
31
6
6
7
3
4
0
8
4
32
6
6
7
4
4
0
8
4
33
6
2
7
2
4
2
8
4
34
6
3
7
2
4
5
8
4
35
5
8
7
0
4
2
8
4
36
5
6
7
0
4
2
8
4
37
5
0
7
0
4
1
8
4
38
5
0
7
0
4
4
8
4
i Width after part of deck of these
39
5
8
7
o
4
8
✓ 8
6
/ two cells two feet one inch; and
i the ringbolts fastened to ship’s
40
5
6
7
0
4
6
8
6
( side are three feet three inches
l from the deck. They are used
J as solitary cells when required.
MAIN DECK.
No. 0/ Cell.
Length.
Width.
Height.
Remarks.
Deck.
Ceiling.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
•
Box
2
6
2
6
2
2
6
6
The box is ventilated by a pipe
( 5
6
6
6 )
two and a-half inches in diameter,
Solitary Cell
(3
1
4
11]
4
2i
6
10
passing through the ship’s side.
Water Closet
6
9
7
4
4
1
7
1
The solitary cell is ventilated in
Ditto
6
9
7
4
4
1
7
3
the same way.
41
7
6
7
3
4
1
7
4
42
7
3
7
9
4
4
7
4
43
7
3
7
5
3
9
7
4
44
7
5
7
6
3
7
7
5
45
6
6
7
7
4
6
7
4
46
7
6
7
6
4
4
7
5
47
7
6
7
7
4
1
7
4
48
7
6
7
6
4
0
7
5
49
7
8
7
7
3
8
7
4
50
7
6
7
7
4
0
7
5
51
7
8
7
8
4
1
7
4
52
7
6
7
8
4
0
7
5
Penal Appendix.— b.


No. of Cell.
Length.
Width.
Height.
Remarks.
Deck.
Ceiling.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
ft.
ins.
53
7
9
7
9
4
1
7
4
54
7
7
7
7
4
4
7
4
:
55
7
9
7
8
4
5
7
4
56
7
7
7
8
4
0
7
5
57
7
9
7
10
4
1
7
4
58
7
7
7
5
3
10
7
4
59
7
9
7
9
4
0
7
4
60
7
9
7
7
4
1
7
4
61
7
9
7
8
4
1
7
4
62
7
7
7
8
4
0
7
4
63
7
9
7
5
3
9
7
4
64
7
9
7
6
4
1
7
5
65
7
9
7
11
4
0
7
4
The cells on main deck are veuti-
66
7
9
7
6
4
1
7
4
lated to seaward by scuttles, the
68
7
6
7
5
4
5
7
4
same as lower deck, and inboard
69
7
9
7
9
4
5
7
4
by an aperture over the cell doors
70
7
5
7
5
3
11
7
4
about half the width of the cell
71
7
8
7
8
3
9
7
4
and six inches deep. The scuttles
72
7
3
7
4
4
2
7
4
are four feet eleven inches from
73
7
7
7
6
4
5
7
4
the deck.
74
7
3
7
3
3
9
7
5
75
7
6
7
6
3
9
7
4
76
7
5
7
3
4
1
7
5
77
7
5
7
6
4
4
7
4
78
7
3
7
3
4
4
7
5
79
7
3
7
4
3
4
7
5
80
7
1
7
1
4
1
7
4
81
7
0
7
3
4
2
7
5
82
7
0
7
0
5
4
7
3
83
7
0
7
2
5
2
7
5
A. McPHERSON, Superintendent,
APPENDIX H.
DESCKIPTION AND DIMENSIONS OF CERTAIN CELLS ON BOARD H. M. PENAL HULK
“ SACRAMENTO.”
Size of two large cells, upper deck.
No. 9.
Length of floor, 6 ft. 11 in.
Length, 7 ft. 5 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 6 ft. 5 in.
Height, 6 ft. 8 in.
No. 24.
Length of floor, 6 ft. 9 in.
Length, 7 ft. 7 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 6 ft. 2 in.
Height, 6 ft. 8 in.
Size of two large cells, lower deck.
No. 1.
Length of floor, 6 ft.
Length, 8 ft. 3 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, G ft. 2 in.
Height, 7 ft. 3 in.
No. 28.
Length of floor, 6 ft. 5 in.
Length, 8 ft. 6 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 6 ft. 3 in.
Height, 7 ft. 3 in.
Four men have occasionally had to sleep in
these cells.
Size of common cell in upper deck.
Length of floor, 5 ft. 11 in.
Length, 6 ft. 3 in.—3 feet from floor.
Width, 6 ft. 3 in.
Height, 6 ft. 8 in.
Size of common cell in lower deck.
Length of floor, 5 ft. 11 in.
Length, 7 ft.—3 ft. from floor
Width, 6 ft. 8 in.
Height, 7 ft. 3 in.
There are never more than three men placed
in these common cells.
Size of single cell in upper dec];.
Length of floor, 6 ft.
Length, 6 ft. 4 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 4 ft. 7 in.
Height, 6 ft. 8 in.
Size of single cell, lower dec];.
Length of floor, 6 ft. 2 in.
Length, 8 ft. 1 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 3 ft. 1 in.
Height, 7 ft. 3 in.
Size of solitary cells.
Length of floor, 4 ft.
Length, 6 ft. 9 in.—3 ft. from floor.
Width, 2 ft.
Height, 7 ft. 3 in.
. M. 11. SMITH.


APPENDIX I.
(Extracted from the Age of 18th December, 1856. )
PENTRIDGE STOCKADE.
No. 11.
CASE OP CHARLES STEWART.
Ido not think there ever was (and assuredly there was not at the time) a quieter or more hard
working man in the Pentridge stockade than Charles Stewart. He was a first-timer, i.e., he had never been
in prison before; his sentence was for three years—that is, he was entitled to discharge on ticket-of-leave at the
expiration of sixteen months. He was a servant of the late chief warder at the main depot, Mr. Macpherson,
and master and man were well suited to each other. I willingly take an opportunity of testifying to the
untiring zeal and humane disposition displayed by Mr. Macpherson, noAv superintendent of the hulk
President, in the exercise of his office ; and lam sure I but express the universal opinion of the prisoners he
has so long guarded, when I say that the whole penal department does not contain a more active and
trustworthy officer.
Charles Stewart had never got into any trouble, unless, indeed, I may except a little affair involving a
miserable crust of toast, rejected at the chief warder’s breakfast table, which he was charged with giving to
(or rather being an accessory to its abstraction by) a wretched fellow-prisoner who had chanced to come, on
some duty or other, to Mr. Macpherson’s quarters. This, in the estimation of the superintendent—a little man,
moral and very fat—was a high crime and misdemeanor, and he was adjudged to have his indulgence suspended
for fourteen days ; that is, to serve for fourteen days hard labor in addition to the sixteen months required by
the regulations. This sentence, being forwarded to the Inspector General’s office in town, was duly approved
and signed “John Price.” It was returned to Pentridge, and there duly recorded in the prison register as
“ Misconduct.”
All things, however, have an end, as we humbly hope Mr. John Price may find to his cost. The usual
application of a prisoner for the indulgence of ticket-of-leave was sent in on behalf of Charles Stewart; it was
recommended in the customary form to Government by the Inspector General; it was approved by the
Governor, whose warrant came out, through the Inspector General, to the superintendent of the stockade for
the discharge of Charles Stewart to ticket-of-leave at the expiration of sixteen months and fourteen days from
the date of his conviction.
The long-looked-for day came at last. Charles Stewart had cast off his prison garments, as he trusted
finally, and dressed in his own clothes, stood at the prison gateway to go away. But the fates were adverse.
I have described the system of “dogs.” Amongst these was a little yelping cur, an old lag from Van
Diemen’s Land, named Powell, still at Pentridge, where may he long remain. This little beast was pleased to
report secretly, that Stewart had been on “ the other side.” He did not allege that he had been a prisoner there,
that he was a bolter, that he had ever done anything wrong there, or that he went there by any other name, or,
in short, anything, but that he had seen him there. It was very odd that Powell, who had been at the Pentridge
stockade during the whole time of Stewart’s confinement (and a great deal longer to boot) should only have
discovered this fact at the moment of Stewart’s proposed departure ; and, besides, what earthly business was
it of Mr. Price’s, of Powell’s, or any other man’s, if Stewart had been at any former time in Van Diemen’s Land,
unless it was asserted, which it was not, that he had been a prisoner of the Crown?
Amongst Mr. Price’s numerous pleasant little devices, is a favorite one for impressing on the prisoners a
belief on his omniscience. Obtaining information through his “ dogs,” he pretends to have discovered it by
means only of his own surprising astuteness. Now, the hour at which the prisoners for discharge usually quit
Pentridge is one at which John wanders, like Satan, to and fro the stockade, in his shirt collar, his glass stuck
in his eye, and his hands in the pockets of his shooting-coat, seeking whom he can pick a quarrel with. On
the morning in question his mood was not propitious, as indeed, it very seldom is, unless he has got a good
batch of fresh prisoners, or has been solaced in some similarly satisfactory way.
He came across Charles Stewart, and taxed him of his own knowledge, with having been in .Van
Diemen’s Land ; not, be it still specially remembered, with having been a prisoner there at any time, or a
suspicious character, but with having been there. First, Mr. Price said, he remembered to have seen him at a
shop ; next it was at an hotel; then he was sure he had seen him somewhere, but could not recollect where, and
finally he conjured Stewart to make a clean breast of it, ancTto tell him all about it.
Charles Stewart, who from the outset denied the allegation, steadily persisted in declaring most solemnly
that it was not true. He asked Mr. Price a question, rather awkward to be answered by any man with a less
elastic conscience, how he was so confident of this matter all at once ? He told him, very truly, that he had had
the most ample means of ascertaining his history during the preceding sixteen months, and could have done so
before he recommended his discharge to Government. He said, that if Mr. Price detained him for the purpose
of inquiry, he would willingly do his whole sentence of three years if detected in any false statement.
Mr. Price continued to bluster and bully in a way which no one but a prisoner who has seen it can imagine.
Finding this course of no avail, he next attempted cajolery, and promised Stewart, if he would admit having
been in Van Diemen’s Land (still no mention whatever of his having been a prisoner, or of his being suspected
of doing anything Avrong there), that he should go. The poor man said—these were his OAvn words—
“ Mr. trice, I Avill do anything to get away from this place. If it will give you any pleasure to hear me say
I have been in Van Diemen’s Land, I vvill say so, if you will let me go; but, indeed, sir, I have never in
my life been there.
The Inspector General greAV tired and violent. In a tAvinlcling, off went Charles Stewart’s free clothes,
and on again Avent the badged and tattered rags. AAvay went, under the remorseless hands of the stockade
barber, the hair, to its very roots, Avhich prisoners on the roll for discharge are allowed to groAV for two
months before they go. For days and days that man was in a solitary cell, on half prison rations. The
visiting justice never saw, heard of, or interfered Avith him. And how did he emerge? In handcuffs! to
be taken to the upper stockade, at Pentridge, Avhich is distinct from the main stockade, and under the control
•of an old convict, now Mr. Price’s crack overseer, named Kilmartin, Avhere the very hardest labor in the penal
department, Avhich cruelty and experience can devise, is inflicted on the prisoners. For twelve long months,
over and above his sixteen months and fourteen days, did Charles Stewart, a man of the feeblest frame, toil
and suffer. It was but the other day he was let go (having served nearly twenty-nine months) to finish the
remainder of his sentence on a ticket-of-leave, when the luav has declared that prisoners of three years’
sentence Avho shall have served in the stockade sixteen months, and with a ticket-of-leave for eight months
(in all twenty-four months), shall be discharged to freedom. And for what has Charles SteAvart suffered all
this ? For telling the truth alone, and for daring to abide by and maintain it!
Why, too, did Mr. Price keep him so long as tAvelve months ? I verily believe he did not at first mean
to do so. In a moment of ungovernable passion, which he so often displays, brooking no obstacles, and
believing himself Avholly irresponsible, as, indeed* the Government have suffered him so long to be, where a
prisoner is concerned. Mr. Price would not be contradicted, and did a most wicked and illegal act. He


injured Charles Stewart most deeply and undeservedly, and there are but few of us who do not know the
rapid transition of the mind from injury to hate. The public are not so silly as to think that Mr. Price ever
attempted or expected to make good his assertion by inquiry or proofs. He never moved a step further in
the matter, except to punish and tyrannise over his unfortunate victim. And when Charles Stewart at last
appeared once more for his discharge, after the ordeal he had undergone, did Mr. Price ever recur to the
former story ? Could he say to the prisoner, “Aha ! my boy, I found you out; I was right, you see, notwith-
standing your asseverations ! I hope this will teach you to tell me the truth next timet” Not so ; not a word,
not a syllable, either from the oppressor or oppressed: the one ashamed to speak, the other so grateful to God
that his hours of suffering were past. . _ . „ x , ,
Charles Stewart is at this moment in the district allotted to him. He is very easily to be summoned,
though still within the clutches of the penal establishment. I have not laid much stress on the slight little
fact of the Governor’s warrant for his release being overridden and kicked aside, without any report being
made to any person, or any reference whatever to any new facts or disclosures, justifying the detention, being
written in any of the books at Pentridge. This, however odd and irregular it might seem, is a proceeding
quite in order, and supported by numerous precedents, in the penal system now prevailing. I shall come to
this by-and-by. It is usual, though by no means an invariable custom, when prisoners are sent up from the
main to the upper stockade at Pentridge, to assign on the muster roll some reason for the change, which is
regarded, as it is designed, as a severe punishment. Charles Stewart’s offence, as it is still to be seen on the
muster roll in the superintendent’s office, is “ Prevarication!!! ”
APPENDIX K.
NOMINAL RETURN OF THE STAFF OF OFFICERS AND” WARDERS SERVING IN THE
PENAL DEPARTMENT ON THE 15th OF DECEMBER, 1856.
[JVctf printed .]
APPENDIX L.
[Copy.]
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BY THE INSPECT OK] GENERAL OF PENAL ESTABLISH-
MENTS, IN THE CASE OF THOMAS BOURKE, AT THE COLLINGWOOD STOCKADE.
The statement of Thomas Bourke saitli:—
lam a prisoner of the Crown, under a sentence of six years’ hard labor. I have recently received some
blows on the head from Mr. Turnham. It occurred in this way:—l went to Dr. Webster, the medical omcer
who comes here, complaining of a swelling in the testicles. He treated me for my ailment, giving me a
suspension bandage; this was about three weeks ago. In about three days after this I saw Dr. Webster
again. He examined me ;he examined my privates; he would do nothing for me; but said that I was an able
strong man, and that I should go to the quarry. I went. I then complained to the overseer ; the overseer
put me to light work. The overseer spoke to Mr. Payne, who put me on the stone heaps to light work. 1 was
on the stone heap about two days and a half, when I saw the doctor again, having been desired by Mr. Payne
to see the doctor every time he came. The doctor examined me again; feeling my arm, he said I was a
strong stout man, and that I could do my work. I told him that I did not complain about my arm, it was
my back. He said, I could eat my rations. I said, yes, and a bit more ; but my back was very bad and also my
testicles. Dr. Webster then said, if I came again, he would put me in the cell, and take me beiore l)r. ioul.
I then told Mr. Turnham to put me in a cell at once, that 1 was not able to work. Mr. Turnham then said,
“Be off,” and Mr. Payne told Mr. Turnham to put me in the cell. When I was under the verandah, Mr.
Turnham then took the constable’s staff and wallopped me on the head. I told him that I would go quietly,
but he took the staff and wallopped me on the head. When the constables were putting the handcuns on me,
the “ special” came and hit me in the eye with the key, and cut me on the hand with the staff. I gave 110
provocation, only as lam now standing here. I have not been a doctor’s man. I assaulted no one. When
Mr. Turnham told me to go to the cell, I did not turn round to him and threaten to strike. I did not see the
superintendent push me. I went quietly to the cell when told. Dr. Webster was there, but I did not see him,
as I was covered with blood. I did not go into No. 3 ward and refuse to come out. I did not struggle with
the constable and try to throw him or bite him. I did not call the doctor “ a bloody old rascal.’ I was
not in a passion. Billy Green, Con. Crawley, and O’Connor were there. Dr. Webster came to the cell and
ordered my head to be dressed. I did not tell the doctor that “ I had often had worse than that. ’ After I
was beaten, King, the barber, came and took me away from the constable. I was not thrown on the ground,
but beaten on the legs. I was handcuffed till nine o’clock at night, when Mr. Turnham came and took the
handcuffs off. I cannot account in any way for Mr. Turnliam’s conduct.
Taken and signed before me this 3rd day of
December, 1856. Bead to Thomas Bourke.
(Signed) John Price.
his
THOMAS + BOUKKE
mark.


James O’Connor states :
I was in hospital on the day when Bourke was struck by the chief warder. I saw the special, Moran,
taking Bourke round the body to take him to the cells, the chief warder was walking behind him; Bourke
turned round and said “ Don’t strike me.” I saw no one strike him at that time. Bourke caught hold of the
constable, and the verandah post with one arm, holding the post with one arm and the constable with the
other ; the chief warder then came up, took the baton and struck Bourke on the head ; he struck Bourke
several blows. Mr. Payne then came up and told him to “give it to him.” Mr. Turnham struck him several
blows, and he bled from the face and head. Mr. Turnham walked round him, trying to hit Bourke in the face
with the baton. I sung out “ murder” and “ mercy,” when the patients told me not to sing out too loud, or
that they would all be put in the cells. King, the barber, then came and took Bourke from the post, and he
ran into the centre of the yard. Bourke made no blows at any one, only resisted going to the cells. lam
certain Mr. Payne said give it to him. Ido not think that Mr. Payne was there a minute. Bourke and the
constable were still fast at the post. I did not see more men than King come to assist. After Bourke got
away, he said, “ You are treating me cowardly.” I have seen men several times go to the cells with the chief
warder; they are not struck; they have gone quietly. I cannot account for what took place.
(Signed) JAMES O’CONNOE.
The statement of William Green saitli: —
I was present when a disturbance took place between the chief warder and Bourke on the 19th of the
last month. I was standing for medical inspection next to Bourke. When the doctor came to Bourke, he
asked what was the matter with him, when he replied that he had a pain in his testicles. The chief warder
said, the last time the doctor was here he had complained of his back. The doctor felt his arm, and Bourke
said he was not bad there, but in his testicles. The doctor looked in his mouth, and said, he was not bad there.
Bourke replied, no thank God, he could eat plenty if he could get it. The doctor then said, if he came any
more, he would take him before the visiting justice. Bourke then said, if he would not give him something,
lie would complain to the magistrate. The chief constable then told the man to go away, or he would
lock him up. I was then out of their view about half a minute, when I saw a constable holding Bourke by
the arm, and Mr. Turnham striking him with a baton. I walked away and saw nothing more. The constable
had hold of Bourke ; Bourke did not make use of any bad language to the doctor ; I should have heard it, if
he had done so. Mr. Payne was out of my sight, but I saw him push no one whilst in view. I asked Bourke,
when he came out of the cells, if he had struck the chief constable. He said “ No,” but that four of them
had struck him; that he wanted to hear no more about it.
(Signed) WILLIAM GEEEN.
Taken this third day of December, 1856.
(Signed) John Price, J.P.
The statement of Thomas Williams, alias Cornelius Crawley, saith :
I was not present when any disturbance took place in the yard. I did not see Bourke struck by any
one. If Bourke has said that I was present, it is not correct.
(Signed) THOMAS WILLIAMS.
Taken before me this third day of December, 1856.
(Signed)) John Price.
Edward Plunkett states:—
lam a prisoner. I remember a disturbance taking place between Bourke and Mr. Turnham. The
doctor, Dr. Webster, was present, andjhad the same opportunity of seeing what I saw as myself. I saw the
chief warder pushing Bourke from the outer yard, under the verandah. I saw Bourke put up his hands and
say “ Don’t strike me.” Mr. Turnham had nothing in his hand at that time. Mr. Turnham called one of the
warders; got a baton and struck Bourke; he struck him two or three times. Crawley and I are together in
the gang; we belong to the same gang; we fell in together. I did not see Mr. Payne strike Bourke. When
Mr. Turnham struck Bourke, Bourke had hold of no one. I saw no struggle with them. I saw the warder
outside the small yard. lam positive I did not see Mr. Payne catch hold of Bourke, and run him into the
verandah.
his
EDWAED X PLUNKETT,
mark.
George Dunmore Lang saith:—
lam a prisoner employed as a writer. I remember the disturbance that took place between Mr. Turnham
and Bourke. The first thing I saw was a scuffle under the verandah. Bourke had hold of the sentry
round the waste. The constable threw him on the ground. Bourke had his arm round the post. Bourke was
struggling to get away. Bourke at that time was receiving blows from Mr. Turnham, I do not know what
for. Three prisoners came to hold Bourke, who held him, and he broke away, and was told to go to the cell.
Two of the prisoners had hold of him. He went into the cell and was told to come out to have handcuffs put
on. He came out; he was handcuffed, and the special warder struck him over the mouth. I saw Bourke
talking, but what he said Ido not know. It was a staff Mr. Turnham was using. I did not hear Bourke told
to let go by Mr. Turnham. I heard Bourke swearing after he got away. I had the door shut. I should not
say the struggle lasted five minutes. At one time Bourke had one arm round the warder and another round
the post. He seemed to be a stronger man than the constable. During this time Mr. Turnham was striking
Bourke. I did not see all that took place. I do not remember Mr. Turnham having hold of Bourke, but I
remember seeing Mr. Turnham’s knuckle being bound up, which I heard was caused by Mr. Turnham striking
his own hand whilst holding Bourke. I heard Bourke say he would not allow any man to lay a hand on
him. I know I have always seen the men go quietly to the cells.
(Signed) GEOKGE. D. LANG.
Penal Appendix.—c.


The statement of George Lockett saitli: —
lam a surgeon and a prisoner here. I came here at the end of October, and hare been hospital attendant
ever since. On the morning that Bourke got his head cut, I was standing at the hospital door. On hearing a
scuffle I turned round and saw Bourke strike at the chief warder. The warder ran up to the chief warder’s
assistance. Bourke took hold of the warder round the waist, and had it not been for the post, of which the warder
caught hold, he must have gone down, from the force used by Bourke. The chief warder then struck Bourke
three or four times on the lower part of the body, and also on the arms and hands. Bourke then seemed to use
more force, and the chief warder hit him on the head. Bourke still tried to throw the constable down back-
wards, and Mr. Turnham called me to assist. I went over and took Bourke round the waist, I released
him from the warders and laid him on the ground ; he got up and walked backwards, and said “ I’ll knock the
first bloody man’s head off who comes near me.” King, the barber, then went to him, and he followed King to
the cell. He was very much excited. I had a great deal of difficulty in taking Bourke from the warder. King
did not interfere with me. King could not have been there assisting without my noticing him. Ido not know
where King was. I laid Bourke on the ground. I saw Sutton there, but cannot say if he assisted me. I
have seen men taken to the cells ; I never before saw violence used to them. The men generally go quietly.
I was assisting the chief warder before King came up. I dressed his wounds, two scalp wounds, one on his eye.
Bourke was struggling with the constable for full five minutes and more. lam a surgeon, and from the strength
I saw Bourke display in struggling with the constable, I should consider him fit for quarry work. Had it not
been for the post, the warder must have gone down. I saw Bourke go into the cell. I think he went quietly.
I did not see any one strike him in his cell. I did not hear him threaten any one. I did not take particular
notice of him. I saw him handcuffed. He might have used threats without my noticing him.
(Signed) J. G. W. LOCKETT.
Joseph Sutton states:—
lam a prisoner, and cook at the station. The cook house is at the corner of the verandah opposite the
hospital. I remember, about a fortnight ago, seeing Mr. Turnham following Bourke to the cell, as I suppose.
He told him to go before him. He turned round twice facing the chief warder. Mr. Turnham put out his
hand to push him on, when Bourke turned round and made a blow at Mr. Turnham, saying, he would allow
no bloody man to push him. The warder came up with his staff. Directly the warder came up, Bourke
caught hold of the warder and tried to bring him to the ground. The warder caught hold of the post, and
Bourke struggled with him for some minutes. Bourke kept his mouth close to the warder’s shoulder, and I
thought intended biting him. Mr. Turnham tried to loosen his hands, and struck him with the staff first on
his hands. Mr. Turnham struck Bourke on his head, when Bourke rose his hand to him. One warder only
was present at this time. It took three of us to take him off the warder —myself, King, and Lockett. Bourke
jumped into the yard, and said, he would knock any bloody man’s head off who came near him. I think
Lockett got hold of Bourlte’s hands ; I pulled him by the legs ; King had hold of him, but where I cannot say.
I never before saw any one going in a disorderly manner to the cells. Bourke was threatening and calling
names as he went along.
(Signed) JOSEPH SUTTON.
Statement of J oiin King saith .
I remember the day Bourke was taken to the cells. On that day I heard a noise at the end of the
verandah. I turned round to see what it was, and I heard the chief warder tell Bourke to go on, saying,
“Go on,” for Bourke was very stubborn and would not go on. He turned round and put his fist in the chief
warder’s face after he got a little way under the verandah, but did not strike him. The constable ran up when
he saw Bourke hold his fist in the chief warder’s face. He raised his staff. Bourke ran at him and seized
him by the breast, and tried to throw him down, trying to throw him. The chief warder caught hold of the
staff. Bourke would have thrown the warder down, but he caught hold of the verandah post. Bourke kept
dragging at the warder with all his strength. After he had driven the warder some times round the post,
the chief warder struck Bourke on the side or hip to make him let go. The warder still kept going round the
post from the effects of Bourke’s heaving at him, Mr. Turnham still striking him, and telling him to let go.
Mr. Turnham called out for assistance. I came up with Sutton and Lockett. I unclasped his hands from the
constable. The chief warder told him to go to the cells, and seeing him turn round again and thinking that
there would be more of it, I told him to come with me, and I put him in the cell myself. When he was put in
the cell he was kicked by no one. The special struck him with the key. He was cursing and swearing, and
saying what he would do if he had the constables in the cell with him. He was excited, cursing and swearing
all the way as he went. He swears very little. He has been on the station some time with me. He said that
he would show them what he could do, that he was not as some of them, a coward.’ If Mr. Payne had sung out
“ Give it to him,” I should have heard it; certainly he did not say so. Mr. Payne did not touch Bourke, that
I saw.
(Signed) JOHN KING-
Statement of William Taylor saith:—
I did not see any disturbance between Mr. Turnham and Bourke. I was with the doctor when Bourke
told the doctor he had pains in his back. The doctor examined him, and said he could see nothing the matter
with him, and that, if he came again, he should take him before the visiting justice. Bourke replied, he could
take him before the visiting justice if he liked, or he would go to the cells. The superintendent told him he
should go to the cells. I saw Mr. Turnham call the constable. When the constable came up Bourke turned
round, and he. appeared to me to be resisting going to the cells. He held up his hands before his head. No
one was striking him or attempting to strike him. They were only shoving him because he would not go to
the cells. I saw no more, as I had to walk down the yard. Bourke did not appear to be out of temper.
(Signed) WILLIAM TAYLOR.


Mr. JosErn Turnham states:—
I am chief warder. On the 19th of last month the prisoner Bourke attended the medical officer; the
medical officer told him that he was strong and able-bodied, and must do the work he was ordered, that he made
a practice of coming every time he came, and that, if he came any more, he should take him before the visiting
justice. Bourke said he would see the visiting justice, and he could put him in a cell. I said to Bourke, “Go
away, don’t be foolish.” Mr. Payne said, “ Put him in a cell.” I said, “Go on Bourke, go to the cell,” putting my
hands on his shoulders and gave him a gentle push. He turned round, both his fists clenched, and I thought he
was going to strike me. I think I struck him with my fist. I stepped back; Mr. Payne came between us and
pushed him before me on to the verandah; he went into No. 3 ward—not No. 5, as stated. I ordered him to come
out; he would not. I several times told him to come out. He was standing against the bunks in a fighting
position, telling me" to keep off. I pulled him out; a scuffle then ensued between warder Moran and the prisoner;
he caught hold of Moran round the waist and struggled to bend him back. Previous to this I had taken the
staff from Moran’s hand; I threatened him that, if he did not let the warder go, I should strike him. I struck
him on the hip, I think once on the hands, then took him by the collar, using every exertion to separate them.
I struck him on the head, thinking that would compel him to leave go. He became so desperately violent, that
I thought he would break the man’s back as he was bending. I became completely exhausted in trying to
separate them and called for assistance; the three prisoners, King, Sutton, and Lockett, came and took the man
off the warder; he was then put in the cell. He. rushed o.ut into the yard before going to the cell, and made use of
very violent language. The sergeant and special then came down, and I heard Bourke call some one “a bloody
wild Irishman.” He rushed with his hands cuffed, holding them up at the warders. O’Donnell then shoved the
keys in his face. Dr. Webster then came round to him.
* (Signed) JOSEPH TURNHAM,
Chief W arder.
Lieutenant Payne states:—
I am superintendent of this station. I remember the occurrence now under investigation. It was about
last Thursday week, the sick were ranked up, Bourke was amongst them; the doctor saw him, as he complained
of a pain in his testicles. The doctor remarked that he did not think that there was anything the matter with
him, that he was a strong man and that he could do his work. It is on the doctor’s order, the men are sent to
work, light or otherwise. Dr. Webster told Bourke that if he came again before him on such frivolous
complaints, he should have him brought before the visiting justice, and placed in a cell. Bourke, on this, turned
round to him and said, “ Oh, you can bring me before the visiting justice and place me in a cell.” It was said
in a tone and manner different to that in which he usully addressed the doctor. I considered his manner
insolent. I immediately said “ Well then, you shall be placed in a cell.” Mr. Turnham then went and caught
him by the shoulders to push him on to the cell; he was mumbling. Bourke stepped back, closed his fists, and
stood as I considered in a threatening attitude, his fists were closed down in front. I then stepped before the
chief warder, caught him by the frock and walked him to the verandah. I should say he was out of sight ot
Plunkett, he' was in sight of Green and O’Connor. Mr. Turnham came past me, and pushed him along the
verandah, as he had turned round and was “ squaring ”up to me. I then said, “ Put him in the cells,” and went to
where Dr. Webster was; I came back in about half a minute and saw Bourke struggling with warder Moran. I
came up to him and said, “Let go.” He had Moran round the waist. I turned round to the chief waider and
said, “Make him let go.” The gangs had fallen in, and I sent the gangs to labor. I saw, before I left, the chief
warder use the constable’s staff over the man’s body. When I went to him no one had struck him. I can swear
no blow was struck till Bourke was on the verandah. I thought Bourke was going to strike Mr. I urnliam.
(Signed) CHARLES B. PAYNE.
Patrick Moran states :
I am a warder. I have been in the force two years and upwards. I remember the occurrence now under
investigation. I was on duty in the yard and heard Dr. Webster speaking in a loud tone to Bourke. I
went down towards where he was; I heard Dr. Webster tell Bourke to go away, and that he would bung him
before the magistrate. I did not hear the exact words. He did not go, and the chief warder told him to go, which
he did not do. The chief warder gave him a couple of pushes and told him to go along; he turned round
twice, when Mr. Payne shoved him on. He then got into No. 5 ward in the inner yard; he stood inside the door
in a fighting attitude, sparring like. I was special in the yard, and I told him that, it he struck any one, I should
strike him. He then came out of the ward and caught hold of me without any force; I then pushed him and he
fell; how it was done I cannot say. The chief warder at this time had taken the staff out ot my hand; Boui ke
got up and took a very firm hold of me round my waist. The chief warder told him to let me go ; he struck
him with the staff and told him to let me go ; we struggled for near ten minutes, I cannot exactly state the
time. We both had hold; Bourke was trying to throw me down. I thought Bourke stronger than myself, and
caught hold of a verandah post, going round and round the post, but could not get free from him. Ihe chief
warder told him to let go, or he would strike him. He would not let go, and the chief warder struck him. \\ hen
the chief warder could not get him away, he called some prisoners to assist; they came and took him away; 1
could not say how many came. I could not tell what Bourke’s object was in taking such a grasp of me; my
arm was black and my side sore from the struggling. Bourke did not strike me. Bourke was bleeding
profusely. I did not hear Bourke make use of bud language. (Sjgnea) PATRICK MORAN.
The statement of G. W. Webster, Esquire, saith:—
lam surgeon on the staff and attend the penal establisments. I know a man named Bourke in the
Collingwood stockade; he has lately been applying for medical relief, though not on the list of sick; he complained
of pain in the back and testicles. 11c had no swelling; I thought he had nothing the matter with him; i examined
him particularly. I may have given him a bandage. I saw him on several occasions complaining o e same
thing, which I deemed frivolous. I considered him fit for hard work, and warned him agains repea ing is
application. I told him that if he came again, I should take him before the visiting justice. e answeie< in a
disrespectful manner, but the words used Ido not remember. He was ordered away by the chief warder, and as


he did not go, he was ordered to a cell, and he and the chief warder went together. I think the chief warder
either took him by the collar or touched him on the shoulder and told him to walk on. I shortly after heard a
scuffle behind me as if a man were resisting; that lasted a few minutes, or I cannot say exactly how long. After
I had finished my duty, I went towards the hospital and then saw Bourke being taken to a cell. lam not
certain of this, however. I examined Bourke’s head about ten minutes after he left the yard; he had a cut on
the head, a scalp wound, and some slight bruises about the face and eye. I asked him to let me look at his
head. Bourke said, “ Oh, that is nothing, I have often had worse than that before.” He was excited.
(Signed) G. W. WEBSTER, M.D.
A true copy.— Joseph Stone, Clerk.
John Price, Inspector General, P. E.
APPENDIX M.
PENAL DEPARTMENT.
List of Officers and Warders who Lave left the Service*, from the 22nd October, 1856, to
sth December, 1856 :
Establishment.
Office.
Name.
p d
* £
o o
Cause of Removal.
« s
(D
f-i
Hulk Lysander
Chief Warder
J. L. Ranking
) Called upon to resign, having
( proved their inefficiency on
99 •••
| Storekeeper J
J. Berkely
j the hulk taking fire on the
! 22nd October, 1856.
Inspector General’s 1
Office ... ;
Clerk
H. T. Squire
Ill-health.
Hulk Success
f Clerk and ]
( Storekeeper j
J. Wrangle
g
Inability to perform duties.
99
Warder
W. Callard
>
None given.
Pentridge
Do
J. Daniel
C/2
a>
Going to the diggings.
99 •• •
Do
P. Shelian ...
K
None stated.
99 •• •
Do
C. Fraser
None stated.
99 « •••
Do
W. Murray
To go to Sydney.
Hulk Ly sander
Do
W. Griffiths
To go to the diggings.
99 •••
Do
W. Pavey
To join his family.
Collingwood
Do
B. Watson
Private affairs.
99 •••
Do
P. Dunscombe
Private affairs.
99 •• •
Do
P. McKenzie
'
( Frivolous charge against supe-
| rior officer.
99 •••
Do
R. Lechmere
Neglect of duty.
Pentridge
Do
J. Donnelly
Previous discharge from police.
Hulk Sacramento ...
Do
A. Moran ...
Asleep on post.
99 • • •
Do
W. Byrne ... ...
L c3 <
Overstaying leave.
99 • • •
Do
J. McClusky
Asleep on post.
Hulk Ly sander
Do
P. Moran
CZ2
Refusing duty.
Hulk President
Do
D. Donoran ... |
ft
Asleep on post.
Do
M. O’Driscoll
| Asleep on post.
Hulk Success
Do
J. Doyle
Asleep on post.
Pentridge
Do
J. Rodgers... ... !
J l
•) . (
Drunkenness.
Collingwood
Do
E. Waters ...
Overstaying leave.
Do
Samuel Clarke
■s
i Insubordinate conduct.
Hulk Ly sander
Do
J. McGarr Anderson
l| )
Absent.without leave.
Do
f I i
1 Neglect of duty in quitting their
1
Do
T. Hind
i s /
V posts on the occasion of the
!
) hulk taking fire.
JOHN PRICE,
Inspector General, Penal Establishments.


APPENDIX N.
PENAL DEPARTMENT.
RETURN of Tickets-oe-Leaye issued to Prisoners during the Years 1854, 5, and 6, by the Inspector General of Penal Establishments.
1854..
1855..
1856..
Totals
K
O'
w
J c* to •
J Alberton.
j
Ox • to
j Brighton.
4*
1— to H-
j Benalla.
Districts.
to
| • • to
J Bourke.
C5 | &>*-*-*
| Bacchus Marsh.
<£> | <0 • j
| Belfast.
to j • to • j Chepstowe.
sa | j to | j Colac.
; 10
to • • J Gisborne.
# ►—*
J Glenelg.
CO
: : co
Grant.
00
j 03
j Horsham.
I—*
i - :
Hamilton.
CO
Ox
- : :
Hexham.
1
8
26
Heidelberg.
o>
M
24
24
19
Kilmore.
4*
C5
to to
**■ **
Kyneton.
*
*
Melbourne.
to
- : -
Maiden’s Punt.
j Or
if*
8
26
20
Portland.
CO
co .* r
Seymour.
-
-< : :
Sale.
tO >-• >—
Swan Hill.
Ox tO l
The Leigh.
; to
: to :
Warrnambool.
-
: :
Western Port.
CO
CO
to :
co 4*
Wangaratta.
CO
: to >—
Wimmera.
to
oo 4* :
Discharged with ticket-
of-leave, but handed
over to the police as
absconders from other
colonies.
CO
CO
05
!
49
108
179
Total No. of tickets issued.
05
05
OX >— <
4*
On arrival at their
respective districts.
No. who have
reported them-
selves to the
police.
to
CO
4* tO CO
Subsequently report-
ed themselves to the
Police Benches.
to
li
2
8
No. of ticket-of-leave holders re-
turned to Penal Establishment
for breaches of the regulations.
Ox
to to i—
No. of ticket-of-leave holders who
have received or applied for
free certificates.
4*
o
28
8
4
No. of ticket-of-leave holders free
by lapse of time.
* This man was permitted temporarily to reside with a relative in Melbourne, in consequence of being unable from the state of his health to proceed to the interior.
JOHN PRICE,
Inspector General of Penal Establishments.
Penal Appendix.— d.


APPENDIX O.
CD
ID
00
r—t
U
<D
H
<D
O
o
p
■4^
m
r—l
CO
O
nd
*+^
o
-P>
o
15
§*
o
©
O
• .a
<D
■5
O
o
15
*"d
2
P
a
c§
is
o
t»
a
.2
g|
W Is
®
Eh a
g
<3 o
3 |
p s
<
«
g *
-s
s
*3
w
T 3
O
Ph
<D
pd
-p*
Tl
f-<
c 3
O
o
'Tj
,<D
rH
H
d
o
o
O
©
p
o
£
05
K
Eh
«H
p
<Vh
O
P 3
P
Eh
P
P
No.
Offence.
Sentence.
Date of Conviction.
Name of Person in immediate at-
No.
Name.
Date of Death.
Verdict of Jury.
tendance on each prisoner at
time of death.
Remarks.
Penal Prisoners. —
/
Marine Siockade. —
1
650
Johnson, William ...
Keeping a dis-
12 months
22nd Mar. 1853
14th Jan., 1854
359 Anthony Riley, prisoner
No inquest. Body interred by
orderly house
at Lysander
direction of the coroner,
upon the certificate of as-
2
1253
Wallgate, William ...
Larceny
9 months
12th Nov. 1853
12th April, 1854
Not known 1
sistant colonial surgeon.
Inquiry held by the police
3
1061
Collingwood, John ...
Drunkenness
3 months
12th June, 1854
11th July, 1854
Died from old age and decay of nature,
Not known }•
magistrate. Testimony of
accelerated by intemperance
f
assistant colonial surgeon
taken. Cause of death
4
1086
Walker, Bernard
Desertion ...
14 commuted
5th Feb., 1853
1st Jan., 1855
Death from natural causes ...
2791 W. McLouglin, prisoner
—dysentery.
to 10 years
at Lysander.
Hulk Success. —
5
702
Cox, Charles
Horsestealing
7 years rds.
27th April, 1853
16th July, 1843
Died from natural causes
Mr. Gardener, chief warder.
6
148
Gough, Alexander ...
Robbery
10 years rds.
16th Feb., 1852
8th Aug., 1854
Died from natural causes
Mr. Hyland, chief warder.
7
822
Sullivan, Patrick
Stealing from
10 years rds.
13th July, 1853
18th Sept., 1855
Died from suffocation caused by rupture
Mr. Gardener, chief warder.
the person
of a blood vessel
8
1486
Stephens, William ...
Robbery
12 years rds.
10th April, 1854
22nd Oct., 1856
... ... ... ... ...
••• ... ••• ... ...
Drowned at rush of prisoners;
Hulk Lysander. —
tile body not recovered.
9
2321
Francis, Thomas
Vagrancy ...
3 months
12th April, 1855
16th July, 1855
Died from natural causes
1726 IL Williams, prisoner.
10
2442
Kennedy, Charles
Larceny
6 months
14th May, 1855
14th Nov., 1855
Died from fever
Ditto.
11
2610
Moody, George
Larceny
7 months
4th Sept., 1855
14th Nov., 1855
Died from stricture, producing
Ditto.
Williams, John
rupture of bladder
12
438
Horsestealing
6 years rds.
19th Nov., 1852
30th Mar., 1856
Died from natural causes
Mr. Maxwell, asst, superindt.
13
374
Read, John
Horsestealing
7 years rds.
17th Sept., 1852
5th April, 1856
Died from acute inflammation of the liver
Ditto.
14
2569
Miller, Thomas
Vagrancy ...
12 months
17th Sept., 1855
12th April, 1856
Died from diseased liver
Ditto.
15
2798
Mooney, Thomas
Larceny
3 years rds.
24th Feb., 1855
17th June, 1856
Death arose from consumption
Ditto.
Refractory Seaman. —
16
2861
Saradin, (a Malay) ...
Refusing work
14 days h. 1.
15th Sept., 1856
5th Oct., 1856
Died from dysentery
Mr. Maxwell, asst, superindt.
17
2959
Turner, John
Desertion ...
4 weeks h. 1.
I3tli Oct., 1856
22nd Oct., 1856
Wilful murder against Melville
and others.
Hulk Deborah. —
18
751
Seode, Hussan
Refusing duty
4 weeks h. 1.
lltli Oct., 1853
17th Oct., 1853
Died from acute bronchitis ...
Not known.
19
752
Sobbias
Refusing duty
4 weeks h. 1.
lltli Oct., 1853
26th Oct,, 1853
Died from natural causes
Not known.
20
701
Mastid, Joseph
Refusing duty
12 weeks h.l
19th Sept., 1853
3rd Dec., 1853
... ... ...
Not known
Inquiry before Capt. Cary.
Report as follows: —“Died
from natural causes.”
21
1435
McDonald, J ohn
Desertion ...
10 davs h. 1.
11th Mar., 1854
17th Mar., 1854
Died from natural causes
Not known.
22
1292
Khan, Kalla
Refusing duty
2 months h. 1
6th Feb., 1854
24th Mar., 1854
Died from natural causes
Not known.
23
1929
Huta, James
Refusing duty
12 weeks h. 1
7th Oct., 1854
17th Nov., 1854
Died from natural causes
Not known.
24
2114
Jones, John Hy.
Refusing duty
12 weeks h. 1
: 28th Nov., 1854
3rd Dec., 1854
Died from inflammation of the lungs
| Not known.
JOHN PRICE, Inspector General, P. E.


APPENDIX P.
PAPER ON PRISON DISCIPLINE BY R. C. F. SMITH.
g IE Williamstown, Dover-place, 19th January, 1857.
In accordance with the desire of your Honorable Committee, I most respectfully submit the following
observations on the subject of penal discipline:—
I have had considerable official opportunity of becoming acquamtad with the working ot every penal
system that has been in colonial operation during the last twenty years, and have thus observed—
-Ist. The original assignment system of Tasmania.
2ndly. The probation system which followed.
3rdly. The effects of Captain Maconochie’s system of marks and indulgence, and the immediate
contrast subsequently afforded by the enforcement of strict discipline at Norfolk Island.
4thly. The penal system of Victoria.
I have devoted much attention to noting the different effects and merits of these various plans of
treating criminals, but shall confine my present remarks to such points as I believe to be most pertinent to
present circumstances. I may, however, first of all state that my experience has resulted in convictions
wholly opposed to that popular disposition to undervalue the good effects of strict discipline as a reformatory
agent and to that mistaken philanthropy which would exalt the efficacy of refined appeals to moral influences
as a means of controlling and reforming that very class of society whose whole lives have been spent in
opposing much stronger restraints. ~r , T ,
Ist. and 2nd. The British Government abandoned the old assignment system of Van Diemens Land
chiefly from a persuasion of its failing to act as a deterrent to the commission of crime in the United
Kingdom. The probation system next produced would not, I believe, have conserved the moral interests of the
mother country any better than the preceding system ; hut its very unfavorable colonial operation produced
that intense political opposition to the continuance of transportation in any form, which ended in the
acquiescence of the Imperial Government in the Colonial demands. To the increase at first, and the reduction
at last, of the Tasmanian penal establishments may be traced the growth of our criminal population in
Victoria. In the earlier period of Van Diemen’s Land being thronged with probation convicts, numbers of
absentees made their way to Victoria, simply because the other Colony was too full for them ; but afterwards the
attraction of the gold fields immensely increased the stock of runaways, to say nothing of the wholesale-made
probation emancipists who flocked over in droves. With reference to the additions which we have received,
and may still receive, owing to the winding up of Imperial interests in Tasmania, I shall reserve occasion for
mention in another place. _ . , T ....
3rd. On the subject of Captain Maconochie’s system and its failure at Norfolk Island, I am willing to
enter more largely, because no philanthropic scheme has been produced more elaborately, or could be tried
more fairly, and because it may be said to fully embody all the contradictory conceptions and benevolent
extravagances of the present times on the question of the aims and means of penal legislation. The character
and fate of such a system may, therefore, be usefully remembered as an example of how much easier it is to
propound fine theories than to produce profitable realities.
Captain Maconocliie had the prosecution of his scheme completely in Ins own hands, with every
advantage of time, and place, and prisoners, because convicts were furnished straight from England for his
experiment, besides having older hands also to work upon. It cannot be said that he labored under
any disadvantage, that his views were misunderstood, or that they were not properly carried out. _ _
His system was one of indulgence, or the application of what he terms “ moral influences, in opposition
to the ordinary modes of physical coercion. His plan of punishment and reward by marks, which had a
certain pecuniary value in the way of purchasing luxuries, proved unequal to secure good conduct in either
wa y ; and the failure would have simply made the scheme ridiculous, but for the fearful condition of depravity
and disorder which was the cause of such laxity, and occasioned the recal of Captain Maconochie at the end of
a four years’ trial and the abolition of his system. The accumulated difficulties of his mistake were left to his
successor to contend with, who came directed to introduce the ordinary probation system but Major Childs
soon proved unequal to the task of reducing to order the pupils of Captain Maconochie s philanthropic school,
and a series of outbreaks taking place, winding up with the murder of the chief constable and several police.
The Tasmanian Government dismissed Major Childs, and Mr. Price (now Inspector General, Victoria) was
selected to undertake the command at this season of great emergency. Volunteers were called for among the
officers of the penal department, and the service was publicly regarded as a desperate business. And thus
ended in much evil the reign of indulgence. Captain Maconochie’s plans of doing good were as unsubstantial
as a child’s card house, which falls down so soon as touched. The harm his plans did remained to be cured.
By dint of great severity, in a few months Mr. Price brought his command into a submissive state, and
henceforward the turbulence, robbery, stabbing, murders, and other crimes, common under the previously
tender administration, became, comparatively speaking, almost unknown under the regime of strict discipline.
For one murder, and one capital execution, which appeared to mark this latter reign, twenty or more capital
punishments belonged to the former period ; and I can state, from my knowledge of the public Island
records, which were in my custody, that the same diminished result existed in every respect, except in the
registration of cases of mere ordinary disobedience, or breach of regulation, trifles not recognised by philan-
thropy, but especially numerous under any system of real control. And this tendency of indulgent treatment to
be distinguished by great crimes, and of strict discipline for the multiplied exhibition of smaller ones, is the
lesson to°be gained, by comparison of the different condition of affairs which prevailed under these opposite
systems at Norfolk Island; a difference requiring insisting upon, not from any want of knowledge of the
public failure of the philanthropic experiment, but from a less popular patronage of the successful results ot
ensuing practical discipline. But experience will not fail to draw the inevitable conclusion, that indulgence
is wholly fatal to that humane regard for the well-being and reformation of the convict which it erroneously
proposes to consult. , . „
4thly. I have now to speak of that part of my experience which relates to the working of our present
penal system in this country. I formerly resided for some months at a station of which my brother was
the superintendent, under Mr. Barrow, and I have since held office for about fifteen months, more latterly as
assistant superintendent in the Lysander hulk. I have been in the habit of visiting most other stations, and
am tolerably well acquainted with the character of many subordinate officers, and the general resun ot my
knowledge of the working of the department produces the conviction that its administration possesses the
rare colonial merit of that substantial consistency between regulation and practice, on which the true efficacy
of any system really depends, and that, as a means to an end, it shows a favorable result in the small number
of re-committals that appear—not ten per cent, of the number of prisoners who have been discharged.
The present code of regulations was carefully compiled under the auspices of Mr. La I robe, and may
emphatically be termed a probation system of anything but too severe a character. Embracing all recognised
aims in protecting society, by rendering adequate punishment for the discouragement of crime, it yet leaves
open every possible avenue by which we can instill hope and promote reformation; so much so, that each


convict may be said to hold in his own power, as he is disposed to be obedient or the reverse, his future
prospects for worse or for better. All the appliances, which we can understand by the term moral means, are
fully permitted in the cultivation of religious impressions at suitable times, and the liberal use of schools, books,
and Bibles.
Our present system also secures, by uniformity of labor and discipline, that regular effect contemplated
by legal or judicial sentence. This regularity of consequences is interfered with whenever the partial principle
of taskwork has been adopted, as I know that to be a system essentially unfair in its operation.
The perfection of English prison accommodation, obtained at the enormous cost of from fifteen thousand
to twenty-five thousand pounds for every hundred convicts, enables the application of a severe course of punish-
ment, by separate treatment and solitary confinement, which is felt more than seen. In this country the
absence of proper buildings renders control more difficult, and punishment more obvious, but far less severe
than it is in England; our extensive use of chains being more a measure of safe keeping than of any real
punishment.
We have also, I without hesitation assert, at the same time to contend with the worst class of criminals
in the world, as can be plainly demonstrated by calling to mind the fact that the best or reclaimable portion
of the one hundred thousand convicts imported into the adjacent colony had been lost sight of before the
cessation of transportation, and are not now generally distinguishable from the mass of colonial population
here or elsewhere; but the few thousand who remained under Tasmanian penal' treatment during the last
seven years have been the residuum or dregs of the entire existent criminal importations of the past twenty
years. Numbers of this sample Dr. Hampton has let loose upon Tasmanian society, convicts of the stamp of
“ Rocky ” Whelan and McManus, who were hanged after committing several murders, &c. Many of such
men have come already, and more will hereafter find their way over to Victoria, and the body of criminals
now described will be found filling the penal establishments of every colony, but particularly Victoria, being
the richest one, unless the efficiency of her penal arrangements induces them to prefer other countries
possessing more mild institutions. Three-fourths of our prison population are old convicts, and a vigorous
system of coercion is not more required to keep them in than it is to keep them out of our penal
establishments.
The only thing which I can suggest in the way of improving the regulations or condition of this
department is, that every old convict re-convicted in this colony should undergo a term of separate treatment
and solitary confinement on the English plan, and be also placed in chains for half his sentence, and that a
stone penitentiary be built as soon as possible, adapted to the English plan of treatment, and capable of
retaining five hundred of the worst characters. The remainder or better portion might then be more safely
distributed in the present manner, wherever the most prolonged public work could be found for them. It has
occurred to me that moveable iron stockades might be constructed and used with advantage, particularly if
convicts were to be employed on the roads and railroads. The hulks have always been a mere necessity.
Having thus stated my views, to the best of my ability, as to the general efficiency and good tendency
of our penal institutions, I must now add my humble testimony to the prevailing good conduct and character
of the officials. No cases of such cruelty and wanton ill usage, as have recently been publicly charged to their
account, have ever come under my knowledge. I do not suppose the most determined benevolence will venture
to suggest the practice of the officials allowing themselves patiently to be “beaten by thieves;” and the
incredible action of convict spite and violence, often from no more exciting cause than the official discharge of
duty in the ordinary way, must be seen to be understood.
The officers of the penal department perform twice the amount of duty measured by time and intensity,
or by time alone, to that of any other branch of the civil service; to say nothing of that rigid attention to
duty and propriety of personal conduct, alone essential to his particular department of the public service,
which Mr. Price so fully insists upon, and which has rendered him unpopular with many of his officers at
Norfolk Island, and some in this country.
Of Mr. Price himself I can honestly state my belief, that no public officer has ever exceeded his untiring
devotion to the public service, and to the calls of an enlightened humanity in the patient and impartial
treatment of criminals. I feel fully assured, from the experience of a great many years’ close observation,
that the proceedings of Mr. Price are regulated uniformly by a conscientious regard for the interests of society,
and the ultimate good of the unhappy subjects of penal treatment who come under his control.
I have the honor to be,
To the Honorable the Chairman
of the Committee of the Legislative Council
on Penal Establishments.
Sir,
Your obedient humble servant,
RONALD C. F. SMITH.
APPENDIX Q.
Return of Officers, "Warders, &c., who have left the Department since the present Inspector
General (John Price) took charge up to the 31st December, 1856; showing the dates of their
appointment, their salaries, the dates and reasons of their dismissal, discharge, or resignation,
amount of pay due to each w hen leaving, and how much (if any) left back.
(Not. printed.')
APPENDIX R.
PAPER BY MR, KENTISH, RECOMMENDING THE INTRODUCTION OF THE ASSIGNMENT
SYSTEM.
(Not printed .)


APPENDIX S.
S 1R > 'Williamstown, 19th January, 1857.
In conformity with the request of your Honorable Committee, I have the honor to forward a report on
penal discipline, as carried out in New South Wales, conjointly with a few suggestions based upon my
experience of convict management there and in this Colony.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
The Honorable the Chairman of the WILLIAM PITT BURNE.
Legislative Council Committee on Penal Establishment,
&c., &c., &c.
To the Honorable the Chairman of the Legislative Council Committee on Penal Establishments, Sfc., fyc., Sfc.
Sir, Williamstown, 14th January, 1857.
The public mind having been at length aroused to the conviction that the treatment of the convict
population of this Colony has hitherto been one of brutality, costliness, and inhumanity, combined with the
most gross and palpable injustice, it becomes the province of persons experienced in the management of the
prisoner to offer the results of their experience in aid of the great object of penal reform.
Unsurpassed as is the present system of brutality and outrage in the annals of convict management, it
is truly lamentable to perceive that even the slightest prospect of amelioration of such barbarity, miscalled
“ penal discipline,” is viewed with disapprobation, and perhaps with dismay, by those functionaries and their
familiars who desecrate, in their hapless victims, the sacred attribute of manhood, by their habitually debasing
treatment. It would go far to prove the immense amount of prejudice that has yet to be disposed of before
the desired solution of the problem of persuasion over coercion shall have thoroughly established itself.
In conformity with the request of your Honorable Committee, I venture to place on record a synopsis
of the views which I have ever entertained with regard to the management of the convict, based upon an
extensive and successful experience, as superintendent of an establishment in transitu, by far the largest
and most varied in the whole range of the transport colonies.
In it were usually confined men of every age, under sentence for every species of crime, from the youth
of fifteen years, convicted as a London pickpocket, to the hardened doubly and trebly convicted felon and
Norfolk Island expiree, or the murderer whose life had been saved by some technicality of law or defect in the
necessary evidence to convict, and who had again become eligible for assignment to private service. Such
men I have had in my service, such men I have intrusted with property of value, and from such men have I
experienced the utmost amount of faithfulness and good conduct; and it is notorious, that at this moment
very many of these persons are a living contradiction to the assertion of the “ impossibility of criminal reform.”
To Lieutenant General Sir Richard Bourke, one of the most enlightened governors that ever graced the
vice-regal throne, whose name stood pre-eminent, not only as a soldier and a statesman, but whose memory is
associated with the declaration that justice was due to the criminal as well as to the free—belongs the honor
of greatly amending and improving the laws relating to the convict population of New South Wales; and
amongst the many wise and necessary enactments was one in particular, “ That no officer having charge of or
control over convicts should, under a penalty of immediate dismissal, strike a prisoner; and, also, that no
master of assigned servants should, under penalty of the immediate withdrawal of the whole of them, commit
such infraction of the penal regulations.
“ There are the courts of justice,” said Sir Richard Bourke, “it is for them to deal with offences; to
them let the prisoners be consigned; it is not for you to infringe the laws by taking them into your own
hands.”
For the Sydney district there was the convict court of Hyde Park barracks sitting three times a week—
Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday; composed of four unpaid justices—the Inspector General of Hospitals, the
Collector of Internal Revenue, the Deputy Surveyor General, the Chief Harbor Master—officers entirely
irrespective of the convict department; and in no case do I remember the principal superintendent of convicts
(an officer analogous to our inspector general of penal establishments) sitting in jurisdiction over a prisoner,
or in any way whatever interfering with the magisterial duties of the court. In this court, then, the prisoner
had a fair and impartial hearing, and every sentence becoming accumulative was awarded with the utmost
care and circumspection.
The cells consisted of twelve in number, built of solid stone, in a way that rendered escape next to
impossible, and of which I, the superintendent, kept the keys, and in which any prisoner convicted of a barrack
offence was confined on bread and water for periods varying from twenty-four hours to fourteen days.
For more serious offences, except in cases where the prisoner had been originally transported for life,
and in which case the accumulative sentence could only be made so by bearing upon the period in which his
good conduct would have obtained for him a ticket-of-leave, and by never less than two, and usually by three
magistrates, sentences varying from three months to two, three, and five years in an iron gang were awarded;
but in passing sentences of the extreme length, great care was exercised in the infliction of them, and great
attention paid to the prisoners’ former career and general character in the colony.
' I now turn to a different species of punishment—the lash—punishment by which was inflicted by a
scourger properly trained, on a mattress placed upon a triangle, and marked about the ordinary height of a
man’s shoulder, for two hours every morning, in order that, by practice, no unfair striking might injure the
recipient of it.
The cat was formed of nine tails, the cord sent from England of a regulated size, and which was the
usual punishment for offences of a cast deserving more than the ordinary term of solitary confinement, and
less than that of sentence to the iron gang, beginning with twelve months.
The usual offences for which the lash was inflicted were as follows:
No. 1.
Under the inspection
of Superintendent
LAshM,
(Insolence to an officer, gross breach of barrack regulations, and a variety of
) smaller offences, for which accumulative sentences were considered
i inappropriate (previous character always taken into consideration by
( court) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
No. 2.
Under the inspection
of Superintendent.
{Absconding first time, in addition to serving time absent. Sentence
inflicted by two magistrates. A variety of offences, not altogether
describable, but more heinous than those of No. 1 ... ... ... 50
Penal Appendix— e.


No. 3.
Under inspection of'
Superintendent,
accompanied by
Colonial Assistant
Surgeon, who, if
r necessary, ordered
cessation.
All offences to which the lash was adjudged over 50 and up to 150, the
maximum
Although I am of opinion that the lash, to some men, is a very efficacious punishment, the more
especially the first time it is administered, let it not be forgotten that it causes an indelible mark; a mark that
no after reformation can obliterate. I, therefore, am entirely averse to an appeal to that species of punish-
ment in the case of individuals of whom a reasonable hope of reclamation may be indulge i .
It must be borne m mind that these prisoners were, for the most part, imperial convicts, removed,
alto-etliei from the scenes of their former exploits, placed in a new country, and haying every opportunity,
by good conduct under the system of private assignment, of improving their condition m life; and in very
manv instances had become free, either by servitude, or by conditional or by absolute pardon, and having
commenced a new era in their lives, had settled down into the position of highly creditable and respectable
members of society, and their families, many of whom are members of the learned professions, members of
Council, and otherwise holding the most respectable positions, are another; contradiction to the
of criminal reform;” but such a state of things never could, by any possibility, have been the result of such a
reckless and inconsistent system as that now in force in this Colony.
r It would be well, in'the conclusion of the details usually adopted in New South Wales, merely to state
that to keep together in good order, and in a strict state of discipline, a number of men varying from 3ao to
1550, it wasVnly necessary to employ the following strength in the establishment of Hyde Park barracks
1 Superintendent —free.
1 Overseer —free.
3 and 4 paid convict clerks. . , , , ~
8 Convict soldiers, at Is. 3d. per diem. These men were usually employed when opportunity
offered, but ordinary convicts of good character were frequently recommended, and I found
them excellent constables.
In addition to the above, the necessary staff of cooks, wardsmen, &c, was employed, from which posts
well conducted prisoners obtained their tickets-of-leave, latterly granted only for the country ; no tickets-of-
leave Sg, except under very special circumstances, granted for any of the towns of the Colony of New South
WaleS The peculiar excellence of the system adopted in New South Wales lay in the simple fact, that the
convict had^constantly in view “that honesty was the best policy, that the road to his future success in
life was plain and straightforward, whilst that upon which he would have travelled as a thief and a vagabond
was but rugged and uneven, profitless and tedious, and inevitably leading to ultimate destruction. Ihose
who, not wanting opportunity, took the good road, reaped the reward of their sense and judgment; those
who took the bad one, had, unfortunately, to bear the brunt of their election.
Alas, how destructive then is the road they travel here ; without hope, without pity, without even the
shadowof a chance at the day lias ( j awne d which will lead to far different results, and that a graduated
scale of reward and punishment will have the very best effect upon the mind of the prisoner of this Colony
1 now propose to offer to your Honorable Committee a few suggestions, which in the present state of the
Penal Department of this Colony, and in the hope that they may eventually have some share in the contem-
plated reforms, I trust will not be considered out of place. . A .. ,
In the first place, as a preliminary step, and one of vast importance, is the absolute necessity, by some
iudicious measure, of allaying the present feverish anxiety of the convicts, both in Hobson s Bay and at the
depots at Pent ridge and elsewhere. The late disclosures, and their convictions that the public are greatly
interested in their favor, having in a great degree operated upon them m a spirit of incipient revolt.
With the utmost respect then, I would first suggest that some individual in whom the Government can
repose confidence, and in whose name a prestige exists in the minds of the prisoners, be empowered to visit
the respective hulks and stockades, to muster the prisoners, and distinctly give them to understand that any
breach of the existing laws will be visited with condign punishment ; that alterations are about to be made in
the penal laws that will give to every well conducted prisoner the benefit ot reaping the advantage of. lns good
conduct ; but that much will depend upon their own good sense as to the amount of benefits that may be
This 1 suggestion, I am prepared to believe, will meet with opposition, but knowing the mind of the
convict as well as I do, I know that the very confidence placed in them will be religiously replied to by their
good conduct, and that they will await patiently the deliberations of the Parliament.
This having been done, the next step may be effected with equal ease, that of reducing the present
expensive strength of the penal establishments (at any time and under any circumstances most needless and
unnecessary, investing the prisoner with a false idea of his own strength and importance) to very nearly
cne-half —on board the hulks, to begin with; the land force of warders to remain as they are, until the
prisoners are allotted to their respective classes, and the reward rations to be allowed, and be placed upon a
On board the hulks, the guard may be safely placed upon the following footing.:
1 superintendent, having the command of the warders ; no chief warder required.
1 clerk and storekeeper
1 sergeant, doing the ordinary duty of chief warder
1 corporal
8 ordinary warders.
To complete the ordinary day and night guards, where the prisoners are for th< > most part in heavy
irons—barred, bolted, and strongly padlocked into their cells; I would ask, m the name ot common sense,
what more can be required, than the following watch kept by day and by night
Dat Duty
Prom 6 a.m. till 10 a.m.—l on deck, lon lower deck, armed ... 2
10 a.m. „ 2 p.m.—l „ 1 „ » ••• 2
C- 2 m „ 6 p.m.—4 „ <1 ■ ■■ * ••• 2 ,
1 6 warders.
Night Duty.
From 6 p.m. till 10 p.m. —l on deck, lon lower deek, armed ... 2
1 10 p.m. „ 2 a.m.—l „ 1 « ”
2 a.m. „ 6 a.m.—l „ l « «


When warders are required for the accompanying guard-boat in landing prisoners, the guard might be
formed by four shore warders, to be placed between the prison boats and the hulk from which they proceed.
Thus it will be seen, that six warders do the ordinary duty, day and night; you have then two to spare
for relief in sickness or absence ; and, in addition, a sergeant, doing chief warder’s duty, and corporal, setting
the relief guard, to look after the arms, &c., &c. And I am of decided opinion, that when a proper classifi-
cation shall take place, when the alteration in diet and reward for good conduct shall be established, and
the prisoners placed on a different footing, that another reduction to one warder, where there are now, or will
be by my proposal, two employed, may be very safely made.
It is to be hoped that circumstances will very speedily admit of the total dismemberment of the hulks,
and that, in imitation of the gaol at Sydney, a wall, I think from sixteen to eighteen feet high, to enclose a
necessary reformatory or penitentiary, will be quickly raised by convict labor; in which strong wooden huts,
to hold twenty-five men each, will be erected temporarily, during the building of such permanent
accommodation'as may be considered necessary.
I would with the greatest deference submit for the consideration of your Honorable Committee, that the
most eligible site for the erection of a principal depot or penitentiary would be on the southern point of
Williamstown, beyond the lighthouse ; a position which, from the coolness and salubrity of the sea air, the
drainage of the sea, the central situation as a landing-place for prisoners sent down from the seaboard parts of
the Colony, together (when the Murray, Mount Alexander, and Melbourne railway is finished) with the
branch trains to the various western gold fields would, in my humble opinion, be the most advantageous to
the Colony.
In this, or in any similar building, that would appear to your Honorable Committee to be more eligible
in its position, the grand penal reformatory should be established; in which all prisoners, male and female,
should be arranged in a state of classification, according to their ages, the nature of their crimes, the length of
their respective sentences; in a word, all the remedial and corrective intentions of the law should be there
fully carried out. For the young and ignorant, an educational and labor branch, combined. For the older
and more hardened prisoners, a labor branch, combined with educational—but perhaps in a minor degree as to
education—would be advisable; but having in constant view the great incentive to labor—reward, to the well
conducted, present as well as future.
I should especially recommend for the consideration of your Honorable Committee, classes No. 1,2, 3,4,
both of reward and punishment—prisoners deserving of reward to be moved gradually forward ; those
deserving of the reverse to be moved gradually backward, and to recover their lost ground when their
characters shall deserve it. That a colonial indent be kept against the name of each prisoner, by which will
be shown at a glance the general character of the prisoner. Human nature even in the free is not infallible,
therefore let every man or woman prisoner have as much benefit from their general character as. wisdom,
prudence, and mercy will admit of; and it is to be hoped for the future that your Honorable Committee will
set your faces entirely against such a vast injustice as the centralization in one man of the power of almost
unlimited imprisonment, or the reverse. Strict, unswerving, and impartial justice to the prisoner, combined
with a proper degree of mercy, will do more towards his reformation than all the punishment that could be
inflicted upon him. .
The permanent establishment of a fund for the assistance of prisoners at the expiration ot tlieir
sentences should, I respectfully submit, be a leading point in the deliberations of your Honorable Committee,
whether as a part deducted from the wages of their labor, or by whatever means it may be established, it will
be for you to consider; but allow me with all deference to ask the questions 'Where is the master who will
receive into his service a man fresh from the contaminating influences of a prison ? Where the mistress who
will take a servant from the like source ?—without character, without even the means of obtaining honestly
a morsel of bread. Theft or starvation, the only alternative. Few there will be likely long to hesitate upon
which road they will enter, unless some means are adopted by which a prisoner may have sufficient to enable
him to exist until he may he able to procure his bread in an honest and reputable manner.
It would appear to me'that a certificate, signed by the head of the establishment, by two of the visiting
justices and the clergyman who have been daily in communication with the prisoner, would have great weight
in the deserving man’s favor, whilst the knowledge that such a certificate would be withheld from him at
such time as he might become free by servitude, would operate as an incentive to good conduct.
Whatever may be the result of the deliberations of your Honorable Committee, and that great good will
result to the hapless victims, bad though they be, no doubt can for a moment be entertained, and I have no
hesitation in declaring it to be a principle based upon many years’ experience of the convict both publicly and
privately, that moral influence exercised over the convict by a system of mildness, aided by firmness and
discretion, and carrying with it that respect, of which a convict never loses sight, towards those who treat them
with kindness and forbearance, will very soon convince the sceptical that violence and brutality are not the
means by which the bad will be made good. ✓ ....
But in order to carry out to a happy result such improvements upon the present foul and iniquitous
system of prison discipline, the selection of officers calculated to inspire the convict with every feeling of lespect
and gratitude will become an object of paramount importance.
In conclusion, I would submit that, until the hulks be abolished altogether, the four vessels might be
conveniently made to represent the four classes into which I propose that the male prisoners should be arranged;
in each of which hulks, in addition to the proper and necessary religious observances, useful secular instruction,
conducted in a moral and kindly spirit by the most suitable person available daily, in support of the
ministration on the sabbath of the regularly appointed chaplain.
To carry out this subject in all its details would be to extend to a volume this report, for the length ot
which I already have to claim your indulgence, in the hope that my sentiments may not be wholly without
effeat in the good cause you have in hand.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
WILLIAM PITT BURNE
APPENDIX T.
(1-)
MINUTE OF THE VISITING JUSTICE, WILLIAMSTOWN, ON THE CASE OF THOMPSON.
Hulk President, 7th February, 1856, noon.
Prisoner John Thompson (No. 1525) complains of the reduced ration ordered him hy the medical officer;
during the interval of his being out of solitary. The length of confinement to which the prisoner has been
subjected has so reduced his person that, although the penal ration may be prejudicial to him while under
medical treatment for any disease, it is worthy consideration whether or not some nourishing food should he
substituted for that withheld.


12th February, noon.
Prisoner John Thompson (No. 1525) complains that, on reporting himself to the medical officer this
morning as cured of the complaint for which he has been treated, the medical officer ordered him “ half ration.”
The prisoner having undergone considerable punishment in solitary confinement on bread and water, and the
present being an interval of a month allowed in order that lie should be recruited prior to completing his
sentence the object of such arrangement is frustrated if the prisoner is deprived of proper nourishment.
(Signed) H. W. BLACKFORD.
Superintendent.
(2.)
COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE DISTRICT SURGEON, WILLIAMSTOWN, EXPLAINING
THE CASE OF THOMSON.
Received March 13 | 56. [Copy.]
No. 20 | 3 | 56.
g IK Williamstown, 10th March, 1856.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a memorandum from you, requesting me to furnish a
report relative to the minutes of the visiting justice made on board the hulk President on the 7tli and 12th
ult., and likewise an entry of the same nature made on the hulk Success on the 25th of the same month, two
days after the complainant Thompson had been put on his full ration. _ _ .
In reply, I have to state that this practice, viz., withdrawing a portion of the ordinary ration until
such time as the stomach could tolerate the full quantity allowed, has been pursued with great success
almost during the whole time the hulks have been established; or at least, as soon as I discovered the great
disadvantage which accrued to the party by giving the full scale of diet at once to those who had undergone a
long sentence on bread and water. Such treatment I can unequivocally state, from a long experience connected
with the penal establishments in this district, has enabled me to ward off many serious cases of dysentery which
would otherwise have occurred; and in the case of Thompson, who is the subject of the present inquiry, this mode
of treatment has been particularly called into requisition; as in no instance I think has any one of the convicts
suffered so much solitary confinement on bread and water as has the prisoner -Thompson since his location in
the hulk President. However, in this instance, lon one occasion tried the full ration after a lapse of his month’s
solitary, which acted most prejudicially,and the dysenteric disease that ensued proved highly dangerous, and was
only with the greatest care and difficulty conquered. The prisoner in question is also a difficult one to treat in
many instances, as his own statement can never be relied on, being one of the vilest characters, if not the vilest,
among the category, and who has often stated that he has been seriously ill when in good health, and vice
versa, he has likewise refused his rations for several days; attempting at the same time to beguile me into the
act of ordering him something from the list of medical comforts, which I have studiously avoided, knowing
the character I had to deal with; he has nevertheless always had as much as could be possibly given him with
impunity, commencing with soup, hominy, bread, &c. Afterwards, in a few days, a portion of meat was allowed,
and an extra quantity of soup to compensate him for the loss of the potatoes, &c. After this course has been
followed a few days, the whole ration is then given, provided the patient is able to bear it; but in such cases I
always use my own discretion, and invariably prescribe the quantity that is commensurate with the health of
the party then brought under my notice. With regard to the nourishing food, which should, according to the
visiting justice, be administered in lieu of that witheld, viz., wine, sago, and such indulgencies, I beg to state
that the prisoners’ rations are well adapted for such cases, without the more expensive aricles mentioned above,
as nothing could be more suitable to the stomach after a very low diet, than the soup, meal, &c.; and if such
indulgencies recommended by Mr. Pasco were practised on board, the solitary cells would never be empty.
Such management of the solitary would, I consider, be highly salutary to the prisoners, and has after a long
trial been found most beneficial.
I have, &c.,
The Chief Medical Officer, (Signed) JOHN WILKINS,
Melbourne. District Surgeon.
(3.)
COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS
FORWARDING MINUTES OF THE VISITING JUSTICE, WILLIAMSTOWN, ON THE CASE
OF THOMPSON.
Received 17 | 4 | 56. [Copy.]
D. 1868. | 56 | 280.
Penal Department, Inspector General’s Office,
g IR Melbourne, 16th April, 1856.
I do myself the honor to forward for your information copy of a minute made by the visiting justice
of the hulk Success, in his diary on the 9tli instant, relative to prisoner John Thompson (with reference to
whom a prior memorandum of Mr. Pasco was forwarded to you on the 4th ultimo), my remarks thereon, and a
further minute of Mr. Pasco’s of the 15th instant, relative thereto.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) JOHN PRICE,
The Chief Medical Officer. Inspector General Penal Establishments.
Extract from the Diary of the Visiting Justice,
9 April, 2 p.m.
Cleared the charge sheet. "
Prisoner John Thompson complains that, on coming out of solitary confinement, the medical officer
ordered the prisoner’s rations to be reduced without the prisoner complaining to the medical officer of his
health. Whether such a course was necessary or not I am not competent to judge, but consider that the
question might be put to a medical board whether the prisoner’s health demanded that particular treatment.
(Signed) C. P.


Minute of the Inspector General thereon.
10th April, 1856.
The visiting justice and the prisoner may be acquainted that, when this man before complained of his
treatment, the matter was inquired into by the chief medical officer, and it appeared that it was necessary for
the preservation of the prisoner’s health that, on coming out of solitary confinement, he should not at once be
placed on a full ration.
(Signed) JOHN PRICE.
Extract from Visiting Justice's Diary.
15th April, noon.
The minute of the Inspector General, in reply to my minute of the 9th instant, relative to prisoner J ohn
Thompson’s complaint, is not satisfactory, inasmuch as the chief medical officer has not visited the man, but
gives his opinion from an ex parte statement.
(Signed) C. P.
(4.)
COPY OF LETTER TO THE CHIEF SECRETARY, REQUESTING HIM TO TAKE SOME MEANS
OF STOPPING THE REFLECTIONS OF THE VISITING JUSTICE ON THIS DEPARTMENT.
No. 56 | 191. [Copy.]
Chief Medical Officer’s Office,
Sir, 17th April, 1856.
I regret that I am again obliged to complain of the visiting justice of Williamstown.
On the 4th ultimo a copy of a minute of the visiting justice, regarding a complaint of a prisoner named
Thompson, was forwarded to me by the Inspector General of Penal Establishments, I called on the district
surgeon to explain and report upon the matter, which he accordingly did, his report completely satisfying me
that he had acted judiciously.
I have this day received, from the Inspector General of Penal Establishments, a minute of the visiting
justice relative to the same prisoner, accompanied by a minute of the Inspector General and an additional
minute of the visiting justice.
With reference to the latter minute, the correspondence will show that I paid due attention to the
complaint of the prisoner and the first minute of the visiting justice, and that I did not give my opinion from
an ex parte statement.
These reflections of the visiting justice on my department are not calculated to promote the good of the
public service, and are so unjust, that I am reluctantly compelled to complain of them and to request that you
will be pleased to adopt whatever measures you may deem requisite to stop them.
I hfliYG Sc c
The Honorable the Chief Secretary, (Signed) W. McCREA.
&c., &c., &c.
(5.)
COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE CHIEF SECRETARY, ENCLOSING A COPY OF A LETTER
TO THE VISITING JUSTICE, WILLIAMSTOWN, ON THE CASE OF THOMPSON.
GB. | 2042. [Copy.]
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sir, Melbourne, 31st December, 1856.
In answer to the request made in your letter of yesterday’s date, I do myself the honor to enclose a
copy of the letter addressed to the visiting justice, Williamstown, by me, relative to his report on the medical
treatment of a prisoner—John Thompson.
I have, &c.,
The Chief Medical Officer, Melbourne. (Signed) J. MOORE.
[Enclosure in No. 5.]
GB. | 56 | 731. [Copy.]
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sir, Melbourne, 14th May, 1856.
Referring to the correspondence which has taken place on the subject of the medical treatment of the
prisoner John Thompson, and which has been brought under the consideration of the Chief Secretary, I am
desired by Mr. Haines to express his opinion that, although it is clearly your duty, as visiting justice, to attend
to all complaints made to you by prisoners, yet, that in the present case it is apparent that you have travelled
beyond the line of your duty in condemning the medical treatment to which the prisoner was subjected. The
reasons assigned by the medical officer for the regulation of the prisoner’s diet appear quite sufficient, and Mr.
Haines regrets to find that your comments upon them display more of personal feeling towards the officer in
question than of common sense.
It appears plainly to Mr. Haines that it is unnecessary for the chief medical officer to visit the hulks
merely to decide upon a principle being carried out in a particular case, which experience has shown ought to
be general in its application.
In conclusion, Mr. Haines desires me to say, that he regrets to observe that the spirit shown by you on
this occasion is calculated materially to interfere with the impartial discharge of your duty, and that, if not
abated, it will clearly be his duty to recommend that you be relieved from your post.
I have, &c.,
The Visiting Justice, Williamstown. (Signed) J. MOORE.
Penal Appendix.—^


APPENDIX U.
RETURN of IMn. and PenrSHMn™ at the Pentridge and Coliingwod BtrfWjj-dita 0-h during the Six Mentha ending 30th September, 1856, by Riehard Toni, &*.
Names of Stockades and Gaols.
Average
dumber of
Prisoners.
Number of
Cases brought
before the
Visiting Justice.
HOW DISPOSED OF.
Remarks.
Dismissed.
Admonished.
(
Solitary Confinement.
PUNISHMENT
AWARDED.
Hard Labor.
Hard Labor in Chains.
Under
5 Days.
5 Days and
under 10.
10 Days and
under 20.
20 Days and
upwards.
Under
3 Months.
3 Months
and upwards.
Under
3 Months.
3 Months
and upwards.
Pentridge and Collingwood
•739
242
10
95
3
7
31
36
23
Nil.
16
21
Central Gaol
170
5
1
1
...
...
2
1
Pemale Gaol
80
5
...
...
2
2
1
Eastern Hill Gaol
60
1
1
Totals
1049
253
11
96
3
8
33
40
25
Nil.
16
21
APPENDIX V.
,, TT , , -r, 1- c: Months endino- 30th September, 1856, by Crawford A. D. Pasco, Esq., Visiting Justice, Williams town.
RETURN of Prisoners and Punishments at Penal Hulks, Hobson s Bay, during the Six Months enuing ouin ocpieu pc, * J
Average
Number of
Prisoners.
Number of
Cases brought
before the
Visiting Justice.
HOW DISPOSED OF.
—
Remarks.
>'
Dismissed.
Admonished.
Punishments awarded.
Solitary Confinement.
Hard Labor.
Hard Labor in Chains.
Under 5 Days.
5 Days
and under 10.
10 Days
and under 20.
20 Days
and upwards.
Under
3 Months.
3 Months
and upwards.
Under
3 Months.
3 Months
and upwards.
CO
567
580
62
199
150
87
28
9
37
3
1
4
o
oo =====[
CZ>
ro
rv> ■■
By Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.
