

REPORT ON DIPHTHERIA AT WALKERVILLE.
REPORT of INQUIRY regarding the OCCURRENCE and CAUSES of the OUTBREAK
of DIPHTHERIA at WALKERYIDLE, and the MEASURES TAKEN for DISIN-
FECTION and PREVENTION of the SPREAD of the DISEASE.
1 h J ve to re port that I have held six meetings and examined 16 witnesses, and have visited the Walker-
ville School and various premises where cases of diphtheria occurred, and interviewed the occupiers. In
cases where it was necessary I inspected the sanitary arrangements of the houses, and inquired into the
milk supply, the water supply, the presence of disease among fowls, cats, and other domestic animals,
and inquired what communication the families had had with other people for some time previously. I
have inquired into the details of 23 cases that have occurred since the 11th December, 1908, 17 of these
being in children attending the Walkerville School. Two cases were fatal.
I. THE SOURCE OF INFECTION IN THE SCHOOL.
The possible sources, considered in detail, are :
( A ) The School Premises.-- There was nothing in the school or in its neighborhood at the time of my
visit to these to show that it was likely that diphtheria should originate there ; nor did I find any history
of any condition previously existing that would account for the occurrence of disease there. All the facts
in the history of the cases point to the introduction of the disease into the school from without.
(b) The Bosisto Case. —Marjorie Bosisto, aged 7 years, living at Dutton Terrace, Medindie, was reported
to the local board by Dr. Good as having become ill on the 11th December, 1908. I find that she was
attending Miss Cant’s school. No other pupil there was ill, and there were no other cases of diphtheria in
the district. She had been in Rundle Street, Adelaide, three days before she took ill; but for a week
previously she had not been visiting elsewhere, nor had any visitors been at her home. No local circum-
stances of sanitation, milk supply, or water supply gave any information as to the origin of the disease.
I do not find that this case had anything to do with the outbreak at the Walkerville School or with any
other case in the Walkerville district.
(c) The Kreusler Case. —Leo Kreusler, aged 6 years, living at 6, Northcote Terrace, Medindie, was
reported to the local board by Dr. Good as having become ill on the 22nd of February, 1909. He was
attending the Walkerville School, and was in the Junior classroom. The evidence does not show where
he was exposed to infection.
On the question of his having been a source of infection to Stanley Uren or others, one has to consider
that if Uren had not been at school as a possible source of infection, then Kreusler’s infection, in order to
have been the cause of the outbreak, would require to have lain dormant in the school materials or in-
cubating in the other pupils for a total period of 11 days after he left school. This, of course, is not im-
possible. Again, if Kreusler had infected Uren (who took ill on the 28th February) it is probable he would
have infected others as well, who would probably have developed the disease about the same time as Uren.
But when one considers that Kreusler was in the Lower Juniors—in a different part of the room from that
in which the other cases occurred, the inference is that it is extremely unlikely that Kreusler spread in-
fection either to any of the pupils or to articles of school furniture.
The scientific facts bearing on the problem are that a child exposed to infection may develop the
disease in from 24 hours to a week or more —usually in from two to five days ; and that infection may
cling to school desks and school materials for a time, the limit of which has not yet been determined.
(d) The Uren Cases. —The chief features of these are as follows : —About the second week in January
the Uren family left Port Victor. The father came to Adelaide. One child —Stanley—lived in Franklin
Street. Mrs. Uren went to Port Pirie, taking another child —Eric—aged 3 years and the baby with her.
The whole family went to a house in Church Terrace, Walkerville, next to Mr. Farrow’s. Stanley was
admitted to the Walkerville School on the Bth February, and sat among the Upper Juniors. On the last
day of February, about three weeks after they entered the house, Stanley became ill, and was kept at home
from school. Dr. Brummitt saw him on the 6th March. He was taken to the Hospital on the 7th. That
night Eric was taken ill, and he was admitted to the Hospital next day. Mrs. Uren had not been visiting
in Adelaide or elsewhere within three weeks of the time the children were taken ill. They did not play
with other children in the neighborhood. The house was dirty before the Uren family went into it; but
it was all cleaned out and the walls and ceilings attended to before they lived in it. There was a cellar
underneath one of the rooms, and when the walls of the house were hosed down the water got into the
cellar. A nasty smell used to come up from it. The cellar was not ventilated, and the people used to
have to keep the windows of the house open to let the smell out.
As stated above, it appears unlikely that Stanley Uren contracted the disease at the school. He may
have infected his brother Eric, or, on the other hand, Eric and he may have acquired the disease from the
same source. The insanitary condition of the home may not have been the origin, but it may have been
a contributing cause in both cases.
11. THE


11. THE SPREAD OF THE EPIDEMIC BY MEANS OF THE SCHOOL.
On the sth March—five days after Stanley Uren took ill and left school—Clarence Good, who sat at
a desk immediately in front of him, was reported by Dr. Brummitt to be ill. Thereafter there occurred
the cases of Norman Horne, on the 7th ; Eliza Harris, on the Bth ; Clifford Smith, on the 9th (in a different
classroom) ; and Irene Smith, on the 10th. The schoolroom had been closed on the Bth ; but there seems
no doubt that these cases (excepting Clifford Smith’s) are traceable to infection in the schoolroom. They
were the first crop from the infective seed.
On the Ist April the school was reopened, and the following cases occurred in the same room as
formerly : —Edward C. Sanders, on the sth ; Effie Anderson, on the Bth ; Geoffrey Stevenson and Roy
Angas, on the 10th ; Hazel Morphett, on the 14th ; and Gladys Michie, on the 22nd. This last patient
was in the north-east room.
On the Ist June, Alexander Farrow was taken ill ; on the 6th, Florrie Barker ; on the 12th, Madge
Jefferies ; on the 13th, Keith LeCornu —all pupils in that room. It is very doubtful whether the boy
Farrow could have caught the infection from materials in the room so long after a previous case had occurred.
The fact that the three next cases did not occur till the 6th, 12th, and 13th, taken with the fact that Farrow
lived next door to where the Uren family had stayed, and that Farrow’s premises were not in a satisfactory
sanitary condition, leads me to conclude that the school was freshly infected.
111. CASES IN CHILDREN NOT AT SCHOOL.
(1) Eric Uren. This case has already been discussed.
(2) Norman Mitchell, 2 years old, off Park Terrace, Gilberton. Taken to Hospital on the 22nd March.
His people say he may have been playing with other children in the park.
(3) Leonard Mitchell, 6 years old, brother of the former ; became ill on the 26th March. He may
have caught infection from Norman.
(4) Morna Dobbie, 4J years old, living at Church Terrace, became ill on the 29th March. Mrs. Dobbie
is not aware of the child having been in contact with any children attending the Walkerville School, nor
of the child having been outside their own premises. A brother attends Queen’s School, North Adelaide.
(5) Nellie Edmunds, 4J years old, living at Brunswick Street, North Walkerville, became ill on the
6th June. She may have been playing with children who attended the Walkerville School.
When the houses in which these cases occurred are marked on a map, along with the others referred
to, it becomes obvious that a large proportion of cases occurred in Gilberton ; and an inspection of premises
there by the Chief Inspector revealed insanitary conditions that ought not to exist. It is probable that
in some cases these conditions acted as contributory causes. LeCornu’s premises, for instance, require
immediate attention.
IV. THE DISINFECTION OF THE SCHOOL.
It is beyond reasonable doubt that the Junior schoolroom had infective material in it for some days,
before the outbreak that began on the sth of March, and that cases occurred subsequently on account of
the presence of such infective material. The schoolroom ought to have been closed as soon as it was dis-
covered that Stanley Uren, who had attended in it from the 9th till the 28th February, was suffering from
diphtheria. All the children who had been in the room from the 28th February, or a few days before,,
should have been kept under observation at their own homes. The room, however, was not closed until
March 8th —that is, not until several children had sickened and several others had become infected. It
would not have been amiss even to have closed it for 12 days —the period of quarantine of the exposed—■■
when it was discovered that Leo Kreusler had suffered from diphtheria in it. Had this been done it is
manifest that Stanley Uren would not have been in a position to infect other children of the school.
On the 11th March Inspector Ingerson reported that he had disinfected the Junior classroom. This
officer of the Adelaide Local Board had been lent to the Walkerville Local Board by Dr. Borthwick, Officer
of Health to the Adelaide Local Board, who had authority to do so. This was done by arrangement with
the Director of Education and Dr. Brummitt—the officer of health of the Walkerville Local Board of Health.
The rest of the school was closed on the 15th March, and disinfected, and the whole school was opened on
the 30th March. On April 19th Dr. Brummit reported to his board : —“ Five cases of diphtheria have
been notified between the 7th and 15th of April. All the patients were in the Upper Junior Class, which
assembled in the room from which nearly all the cases came last month. The classroom is clean, and well
ventilated ; it has been sprayed and, I think, fumigated by a man kindly lent by the Adelaide Board of
Health, but it is evident that a centre of infection remained. Books, papers, and many small things in use:
in the school were destroyed. The infective particles are invisible, and I cannot indicate them.”
The dates of the occurrence of the fresh cases bear out Dr. Brummitt’s opinion about a centre of in-
fection remaining ; and when one further considers that a 2J per cent, formalin spray was applied to desks
that were neither scrubbed nor washed the conclusion is clear that a centre of infection did remain, and
caused the second outbreak.
It seems impossible to bring home to anyone any responsibility in connection with this disinfection of
the school. Dr. Borthwick states that on every occasion on which Inspector Ingerson carried out dis-
infection he did so “ under Dr. Brummitt’s instructions.” This, of course, is not strictly evidence. What
it amounts to is a disclaimer by Dr. Borthwick of any responsibility on his own part. Dr. Brummitt says
he gave the inspector general directions, which amounted to telling him to do the work without stating
the means or the method to be employed. Beyond this, Dr. Brummitt was not conversant with the details,
and took no responsibility. There was a minute of the Walkerville Board that the Adelaide inspector
was asked to act under the Walkerville Board. Being lent to the Walkerville Local Board, the inspector
had no responsibility to his own board or its officer of health ; and not being an officer of the Walkerville
Board he had no responsibility to that board. An arrangement of this sort has no legal or business characters
in it.


The Director of Education supposed he was having something more from Dr. Borthwiok than the loan
of an officer. He naturally felt that in Dr. Borthwiok’s letter of the 11th March, taken with other circum-
stances, he had Dr. Borthwick’s assurance that the work had been thoroughly done. Dr. Borthwiok’s
letter reads :—“ I forward herewith copy of report by Inspector Ingerson, which shows that the Junior
schoolroom at the Walkerville State School and its contents have been thoroughly disinfected.” The
Director’s interpretation of the letter seems warranted, and his inference reasonable ; at the same time
it must be noted that the letter is sufficiently ambiguous not to be in absolute conflict with Dr. Borthwick’s
statement—“ I took no personal responsibility regarding the disinfection of the school or premises or articles
of clothing. I simply instructed the inspector to place himself at Dr. Brummitt’s disposal.”
It is reassuring to find that so far as schools are concerned there is no likelihood of this unsatisfactory
situation regarding disinfection recurring in Walkerville or arising elsewhere. The Director of Education
has engaged a fully qualified and experienced sanitary inspector for work of this sort. There is only one
point on which this inspector’s powers may come short, viz., in making inquiries at homes, and this may
be obviated by giving him the powers of an inspector of the Central Board of Health throughout the State.
After Inspector Ingerson’s second disinfection there is no evidence of any infection remaining in the
building.
V. THE ADMINISTRATION.
The measures taken by the local board of health for Walkerville to control the spread of infectious
disease are inadequate. The board exercises no supervision over its officers in these matters. The methods
of investigating and recording the facts regarding the occurrence of infectious disease are unsatisfactory.
There is no attempt to insure effective disinfection. No effective systematic inspection is made of the
district in order to discover and remedy insanitary conditions that favor the origin and help the spread of
infectious disease.
The memorandum of the Central Board regarding the duties of the local boards and their officers, issued
after the Health Act came into force, is very comprehensive. The existence of this memorandum was
unknown to the chairman, the officer of health, and the inspector (who is also secretary) of the local board.
It sets forth the powers that every local board possesses under, and the obligations imposed on it by the
Health Act, 1898, in dealing with the control and stamping out of infectious diseases within its district.
It says that on receiving notification of the case the duty of the officer of health begins. His first concern
is the health of the district and how infection can be kept from spreading from that case to other families.
In all visitation, for the purposes of isolation, promptness is of prime importance. If isolation is to be of
any use, an infectious case, however mild, must be attended to at once by the officers of the board. Local
boards should order disinfectants to be used in and about the sick room, and they may, either by their officer
of health, trained nurse, or inspector supervise the use of disinfectants and remove articles for disinfection
that cannot be properly disinfected at the house. Disinfection, in order to be thorough, should be done
by the officers of the local board. Penal clauses against exposure should be strictly enforced. The memo-
randum concludes thus : —“ If these provisions for dealing with the spread of preventable diseases are
carried out in the complete form here indicated they will be the means of saving much time and money
to the local board and also of preventing a great deal of unnecessary sickness within their district. It is
very desirable, therefore, that every local board should give this memorandum its early and careful
attention.”
These are the barest necessaries of administrative work in checking the spread of infectious diseases.
The duties of the officer of health and inspector are set forth in detail in the regulations under the Health
Act. In the recent cases of diphtheria the sanitary inspector beyond sending a sheet of instructions did,
according to his own evidence, “ absolutely nothing.” The evidence of other witnesses corroborates his
statement.
The officer of health, after all allowance is made for delays in notification by medical attendants, made
no serious effort to trace the source or check the spread of the epidemic. He knew that nothing was done,
apart from what he himself did, by way of superintending disinfection ; and yet he never personally super-
vised any disinfection nor satisfied himself regarding the way in which it was carried out. He appears
to have been content when a sheet of instructions was posted to people who would have encountered im-
possibilities or been guilty of a reckless use of deadly poisons had they attempted to carry out the recom-
mendations it contained.
In tracing disease he seems to have failed to realise the necessity of acting promptly and
making exhaustive inquiries. The statements he has recorded about the two cases, Kreusler’s and Uren’s,
which were all-important and form such a large element of the investigation, are meagre, misleading, and
inaccurate when tested by other evidence. Allowing, as he says, that his diary is but an outline, of which
his fortnightly reports are amplifications, one finds that in the fortnightly reports of these cases the material
facts are even more meagre. Regarding Kreusler’s case, Dr. Brummitt wrote in his official diary : —“ Geo.
E. Kreusler, Northcote Ter., aet 6. Diphtheria ; removed to Ch. Hosp. Visited house. Instructions
given.” In his fortnightly report, .dated March Ist, 1902, he wrote : —“ One case of diphtheria occurred
in Medindie. The premises are particularly clean and well kept, and I can discover nothing to criticise.
The child has been removed to the Children’s Hospital, and premises have been disinfected.” No name,
age, or date is given.
In the official diary Uren’s case appears with others as follows :
March 7 Notified by R. B.
Diphtheria Cl. Goode, aet 7.
Stanley Uren
8 “ Eric “
9 “ Clifford Smith, aet 12.
11 “ Harris (Good), aet 6.
Norman Horne, aet 7 (Plummer).
13 “ Irene Smith, aet 6 (Harrold). Ins


In the fortnightly report, dated March 15th, 1909, the officer of health wrote “ The solitary case
of diphtheria reported a fortnight ago has unfortunately been followed by seven others, one of which proved
fatal All but one of these children were taken to the Children’s Hospital, and measures have been taken
to guard against extension of the disease. Seven of these eight children had been associated in one room
at the Walkerville Public School. The Director of Education determined on Monday morning (Bth) to send
the children away who had occupied that room, and to have the room thoroughly disinfected. More
recently it was decided to close the school altogether for a fortnight.” In his report of April sth he refers
to an inspection of one of the premises where diphtheria occurred, saying, “ My last report includes the
name of Clifford Smith, of Dutton Terrace.” This is a mistake ; the report referred to included no name
whatsoever.
There is no record of any inspection of the house in which the Uren family lived, nor any account of
inquiries regarding their movements ; in fact, none were made. And yet these cases were attended pro-
fessionally by Dr. Brummitt himself.
There is a similar lack of information in respect to other cases ; and, speaking generally, the diary
and reports of the officer of health give little assistance in this inquiry.
By the regulations under the Health Act an officer of health is required to give immediate information
to the Central Board of any outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease within the district. Even the
second outbreak in the Walkerville School was not sufficient to make Dr. Brummitt report to the Central
Board the presence of disease in Walkerville. It was not until the Central Board of Health, on the 26th
April, asked the local board to obtain a report from him that he sent any communication on the subject.
The manner in which the officer of health views his duties is illustrated by the evidence he gave regard-
ing the case of Irene Smith. He said : —“ I went to the house on receiving notification and found that it
had already been let to another tenant. The child was in hospital ; the family had gone to another house.
I believe the owner had no certificate before he let the house —certainly not from me.” If the owner had
no certificate he was liable under the Criminal Law Consolidation Act. Dr. Brummitt did nothing. The
evidence contains nothing to explain this attitude on the part of a responsible officer towards his duties
and obligations. He ought to have reported the matter to the local board if not to the police.
Another aspect of this subject demands notice. Communicable diseases are preventable ; and for this
reason the Health Act gives a local board power to protect the people of the district against sickness, death,
loss of time, money, and occupation by levying rates to isolate people who are possible centres of infection.
In none of these cases did the local board for Walkerville exercise its powers and privileges. On the contrary,
of some 17 cases admitted to the Children’s Hospital only five paid any portion of the cost of maintenance.
The Walkerville board paid nothing, although it was clearly through its neglect that a number of these
children became ill. It is unlikely that the expenses could be legally recovered, but I think that the accounts
should be rendered to the local board, which, morally, is doubly liable. Charitable contributions and
Government subsidy are not properly administered when spent in this manner.
Summarised the evidence shows that:—
1. Diphtheria was introduced from without into the Junior classroom of the Walkerville School in such
a way as to become a source of infection, about the 28th February, 1909.
2. No attempt was made to check the outbreak on the appearance of the first case by closing the school-
room and keeping exposed children under observation.
3. In consequence, diphtheria spread to other children in that room.
4. The first disinfection of the schoolroom was incomplete, and diphtheria reappeared among the
children.
5. There is no reason to believe that any centre of infection remained in the school after the second
disinfection.
6. The schoolroom was reinfected from without about the Ist of June.
7. The Director of Education and the officers of the Department did everything that was suggested
to them by the various health authorities whom they consulted.
8. The local board of health for Walkerville and its officers failed to exercise their powers and to perform
their duties in respect to investigating the origin and checking the spread of infectious disease within their
district. At least nine cases of diphtheria in school children, two of which were fatal, have to be recorded
as in all probability due to inefficient administration.
9. The local board does not possess the skilled services required for the effective administration of
the Health Act.
July 14th, 1909.
W. RAMSAY SMITH,
Chairman.
Adopted by the Central Board of Health and printed for distribution to local boards of health.
July 14th, 1909.
S. C. STENNING,
Acting Secretary.
