

Nf>
52>1-WS4-
f/V PMX>
epou of M s Speech j
tht Planter I i Executive
Committee, Hji, December 7th,
1915


f
i
B * -
i
i
I
i
. . j


Report of Mr. C. F Andrews? Speech
TO THE
Planters? Association Executive Committee,
Fiji, Dec. 7th, 1915
(Confidential.)
PURPOSELY came down without any notes be-
lj T \V cause t want to speak quite freely and frankly all
II 1 11 * s P n m Y l am a ver y bad speaker, but if
II yj you will bear with me, I will give you first of all,
the actual facts which brought me here to this
Colony, and Mr. Pearson, my friend, and then tell you exactly
as far as I can, our own impressions; and then if I may, at
the conclusion, I will give you an idea of what I think it may
be possible to recommend on my return to India. I should be
most grateful indeed, if you would ask me some questions on
anything I may say or suggest, so that I may very thoroughly
sift the matter out with you.
I cannot tell you how grateful I am to you, Gentlemen,
for asking me to meet you, before I leave Fiji. I know it is
quite natural that there should be some doubt and question-
ing in the island about our visit. We came without any
official recognition and with absolutely no credentials, but we
came as fair minded Englishmen, determined to see things
with our own eyes, and on every side we have received very
real and true consideration, both from the Governor and from
the Planters of Fiji, and we are very grateful for it.
I am most anxious as far as my own influence and con-
victions carry me to be both reasonable and open-minded in
this matter, and, as far as possible, to meet you in what your
experience teaches you to be true. I say that with all my
heart.
I must first of all begin with India. I think this is better,
because you do not know, and naturally you cannot realise
exactly the situation in India, and so I shall endeavour to tell
you in a very few words what that situation is.
There are three causes, I think, which have brought the
indentured system, during the present year, very strongly be-
fore the Indian public. The first has been the evils of bad
recruiting. The unscrupulous and wicked recruiting going on
in India has almost reached a climax?at least, that is my
impression. The evil is most prevalent in the North of India.


The reason why it has become more unscrupulous lately
is, in my opinion, because the price of labour has gone up at
an enormous rate. It has quadrupled itself in many places in
the North of India within my own memory. At one time you
could get a coolie from 2 to 3 pence per day, and now the
prices are from 8 to 12 pence per day. These prices rule
throughout the North of India. Of course, in some cases,
labour is still to be got for 4 pence per day, but this refers
to people who are absolutely ignorant as to what is going on
around them. All over the North of India anybody who
knows where to go, can get work at 12 pence per day, and
he would practically get it all the year round if he liked to
try for if.
I went, for instance, to Delhi just before I came out.
That was in September, and I asked the labourers there what
they were getting. They were simply shovelling earth, and
the men told me they were getting 12 to 13 pence a day, and
the women were getting 9 pence a day at most unskilled
labour. They were close to their own homes, they had little
shanties provided for them, they had no inconvenience, and
they could get work at this rate of labour quite easily. There
were thousands getting it.
The Secretary of the Commerce Department told me
that this price was common over the North of India, over
large areas of the country.
Well, you can see, Gentlemen, that if the price of labour
has risen so enormously all over the North of India, it is very
likely that the recruiters, who are paid so much per head for
those they take to the depot, must resort to tricks of all
kinds. (By the way, this payment per head is a very bad
system. Recruiters are paid SO' much a head for men and
women, and they obtain an extra 10 rupees for a woman, be-
cause women are more difficult to get. They are paid so
much per head after they reach the depot; and I think that is
a very bad system indeed. It places temptation in the Re-
cruiters? way, and they are not strong enough to
stand the temptation. It is wrong to tempt them in this way;
it means that they try to get hold of women by foul methods,
if they cannot by fair means induce them to emigrate.)
I should just like to show you how very serious from your
point of view this is. There is one society in the North of
India called the Marwaris. It is not a political society, but
it is the richest, the wealthiest, the most conservative, and
the most orthodox society in Northern India. The members
are merchants; they don?t speak English, but they are very
able and wealthy men. I think, if I may say it, Gentlemen,
that as far as wealth goes, well, your banking accounts are
as nothing compared with what they have. Many of them
are practically millionaires, and can put down any sum of
money they like. They have branches all over the North of
India. I used to go and see them regularly when I was in
Calcutta. They live in a quiet way, they don?t spend their
money, they have no State to keep up, and they have such a
lot of money at their disposal that they can put down thou-


sands of pounds to help any cause they take up. This com-
munity is very backward in other ways, but it is very
business-like, and very practical.
Well, Gentlemen, this great society was brought up
against you simply by a single bad recruiter. Up country, a
woman was kidnapped by this bad recruiter, and brought
down to the depot at Calcutta. She wanted to get back to
her home, and when she found that she was being sent to
Fiji, she was in desperation. She was a clever little woman.
She wrote on a piece of paper?in her own language Gome
and rescue me. n She did not know anyone in Calcutta, but
she knew that representatives of her own caste would be
there in that Marwari community. She did not know anybody s
name, but she expected there would be somebody in the com-
mumty named Sheopersad. There was a little boy outside
selling newspapers, and she said, ?Take this note and give
it to Sheopersad, of the Marwans, ? and he took it, and he
found out at last Sheopersad, and he said, ?This came from
a woman who is being taken to Fiji. Sheopersad did not
know this woman, but he consulted the Marwans, and they
went up to the Magistrate and got an order for a search.
They searched the depot and they found the woman, the
men who actually went to the depot told, me the story, and 1
am telling you exactly what he told me. He said that when
they were at the depot, many women at opce came nocking
round him asking to be saved. He took down about 13 or 14
names, and next day he went to the Magistrate again an
obtained another order and made another search.
I have only told you this story for one reason, and mat
is, to show that this one recruit set the whole of this great
community up against you, and now this community is pu -
ting up any amount of money to bring an end to this sort o
thing. I saw in one of their recent minutes, for instance,
that the society commuted a coolie ?they paid 683 rupees
and they would put up thousands and thousands of rupees
for the same purpose if they only knew of similar cases.
They would pay any amount of money in their endeavour to
make the evils of the present system of recruiting known,
with a view to putting an end to it. Thus the public are
taking it up all over the North of India. They have printed
songs, which are being sung in India telling the people to be-
ware of the recruiter. I handed one of these in the vernacular
to Mr. Booth, the Agent General of Immigration. This move-
ment against bad recruiting is going on all over the North ot
India, and was caused simply by that one case of a kidnapped
I have come across many cases of pure deception told
me by recruited Indians, who are here now. I have talked to
them, and gone amongst them, especially amongst free
Indians, who had no wish to deceive me Some of them are
doing very well, and if you asked them if they would ike o
go back again they would say ?No,? but the fact still re-
mains, that I came across a number of cases of pure decep-
tion: and this system is still going on. ,
Mr. Pearson also came across a number ot cases in the


North of this Island, and when he came back from Lautoka,
we consulted together, and 1 told the Governor, and we sent
a cable to the Viceroy and to the Press about it, urging im-
mediate prevention of fraudulent recruiting.
Well, Gentlemen, as I have said, matters came to a
climax this year. There is now an agitation in the North of
India against indentured immigration, and it centres in this
question of bad recruiting. This will have to be put a stop to
at once. It is a popular movement, and news of it has
reached the Indian Government authorities.
The next thing that roused the educated people of India
was Mr. McNeil?s report. While on the one hand it showed
the remarkable prosperity of Indians in Fiji and the prosperity
of the Colony in general, it also showed those terrible figures
of suicides, crime, and sexual immorality; and that portion of
the report has been received with very great gravity by the
Indians, and they have taken up these matters, particularly
the suicides in Fiji, which are out of proportion to anything
known m the rest of the world in regard to Indians of this
class.
Just to show you, in one minute, how serious the figures
are in this colony compared with anywhere else, I will give
you some of the returns. In Madras the figure is 4< per
million per annum, in the United Provinces 61 per million, and
m Bombay 28 per million per annum. In Fiji the figure is
920 per million per annum, and for the years 1912 and 1913
the hgure was even higher still. Among unindentured Indians
m rm it is roughly 140 per million per annum. In Natal, where
conditions were very bad, the average over 5 years was about
400 per million per annum. In Trinidad the average was the
same, and m Jamaica also. In British Guiana the average
was only 100 per million per annum, and you should make in-
quiries and find out why the figure there is so- low. But your
own figure for the year 1912 was at the terrible rate of one
thousand one hundred and seventy per million per annum
or one suicide m every 852 coolies: i.e., more than twenty
times as high as Madras. And in 1913 it went as high as one
every 7 IV ' that 13 t0 Say ? � ne thousand four hundred
and fifty per million per annum. In 1914 I understand the
actual suicide rate was somewhat lower, but attempted
suicides were numerous, and in the present year the
actual suicides have gone up again to their old terrible high
gure, and attempted suicides have also been frequent. The
figures are appalling, absolutely appalling.
And then the sexual immorality mentioned in the report
?I need not speak about it, you know what I mean In
India, marriage is held as a very sacred thing indeed. ' And
consequently the educated people have got a very bad im
pres Sl on from Mr. McNeill?s report. The |ood tH?|s that he
said about Fiji weighed as nothing compared with those
moral evds; these they felt like a knife, and not unnaturally
Ihe educated Indians, the most cultured in the world many
ot them, have taken these matters very seriously indeed


They will not stop now till the whole system is brought to an
end. . ,
Another matter which attracted the attention of the edu-
cated people of India to Fiji ?you may consider it a very
small matter, but coming as it did just on the top of the other
trouble, it meant a great deal?was the withdrawal of the
vote here in Suva from Indian citizens. You cannot imagine
what that meant at the time to educated Indians, when they
were agitated by the suicide rate and other things that were
in that report/ They considered that not only were the
Indians subject to bondage, but when that bondage was over
and they had an opportunity of recovering their self-respect,
that opportunity was taken from them. It was an extra-
ordinarily unfortunate thing for you, gentlemen, that just at
the very time when things were at a climax, it was known all
over India that the vote had been wiped out, as far as Indians
were concerned. This wiping out of the Indian vote, this loss
of franchise, coming as it did on top of the bad recruiting
and Mr. McNeill?s report, made a great impression, and this,
as it were, was the last straw that broke the camels back;
that is what I mean. This was the situation in India, and it
is the situation still, and I do not know that there is anything
at all which will alter this situation. It has gone too deep for
that, and has made too deep an impression on the minds and
feelings of the Indians. .
I want to add one or two other things to make it all quite
clear. One point is this?the war has made an enormous
difference to Indians in their self-respect. They say, ??We
are fighting side by side with the British, the New Zealanders
and Australians, as brothers and comrades, and they recog-
nise us as such, and they love us as brothers. We have shown
them our bravery on the battlefield, and we have been treated
as brothers and comrades.? They are now fighting on the
field of battle, and you have only to read the newspapers to
see the bravery they have shown, and the help they are ren-
dering us in this great crisis, and they say, ?Are we to be
compelled to go to Fiji, and be treated as slaves and robbed
of our self-respect? We are a freedom loving people, and we
want to be free. We don?t want to be sent out under bond-
age, and just as Englishmen would not stand such a system
as this for a moment, so we shall not stand it, and we want
our Government to protect us.? ,
That feeling has grown enormously throughout t
length and breadth of India. The question of freedom and
self-respect is now a bigger question than anything else. _ Ut
course, the other questions of suicides, bad recruiting, vice,
etc., are of grave importance, but the desire for freedom is
growing stronger and stronger, and is now becoming the
greatest factor in the new situation. c ,
If, for instance, you asked the Secretary of State th
this question might not be taken up until after the war, as
being a controversial matter?well, India would ask for the
abolition of indenture at the end of the war with such power
and justice, that no English or Colonial Government could


refuse it. The British Government would undoubtedly say,
that if India wants it, India must have it.
But even now, during the war, there is a very serious
reason, indeed, why the question should be taken up immedi-
ately, and not allowed to stand over for one moment. The
Indian Government itself cannot afford at this war time to
have a burning question of this kind agitating the people of
India, especially in the North. During the war, there is the
thought uppermost that the safety of India is far too important
a matter to run any risks whatever from unrest, and, there-
fore, this question must be faced now. To settle the question
would be to put an end to a very serious unrest.
I have spoken very freely, and I hope you will quite
understand me. Ido not want this that I have said to go
beyond you, gentlemen, to agitate the public mind in Fiji.
I don?t want it to go into the press. I simply want you to
know the actual situation, as I know it in the north of India,
and this is the situation in a nutshell.
There is one other thing, which perhaps you do not realise.
Mr. Gokhale made the abolition of the indentured system his
last dying request. Mr. Gokhale was the greatest statesman
that India .has recently had. He went out to South Africa
m 1912, and it was his going there that really settled the
Indian trouble in South Africa, and brought an end to inden-
ture there. After his South African experience he devoted his
life to the task of abolishing this system in every part of the
British Empire. He died before his work was accomplished,
but he left this charge to the Indian people, and everyone
who reveres the name of Gokhale has got this task as a sort
of will and testament from him.
Mr. Gokhale died in January this year, and you will
notice that from that time onward this question has become
a far deeper one in the minds of the people of India. His
death has brought it into a more prominent position, because
it has made it a kind of sacred mission to the people.
The situation in India is really this. India has awakened
quite as much as Japan and China have. Do not make any
mistake on this point.
I spoke to Mr. Knox in Australia, and it was simply pain-
ful to me to find how utterly unaware he was of the position
in India. They were too absurd for words, the statements
he made about India.
He did not realise that India has awakened. Every part
of India has awakened, and it is now a different country al-
together. The voice of India to-day is a powerful voice, and
it is a voice that statesmen of the world will have to recog-
nise, and they will recognise it. India is awakening in a most
amazing way.
Do you know, gentlemen, that the greatest poet we have
in the world to-day is an Indian? He has been given the
Nobel prize -this prize has been given out of Europe for the
first time in its history, and an Indian obtained it. Why can
India produce such men? Because India has awakened. And
India will very soon play a far greater part in the world?s his-


Tory than Japan or China, because India has always been the
thought centre of Asia. India has given to China and Japan
the best of its poetry, art and religion. India has always
been the centre and focus of thought in Asia. And in my
opinion, when history comes to be written 100 years hence,
they won?t talk so much about the marvellous advance of
Japan with her great guns, etc., but they will talk about the
marvellous advance of India, and of the ideals fashioned there
that make for the higher progress of humanity. That is what
India is doing to-day, and she is not going to be treated
merely, as it were, as a servile country, as a subject race.
She is not going to be treated like that?you will have to take
India as a comrade in arms, or you may lose India altogether.
If any gentleman in the room thinks India is content to re-
main as she has been in the past, he is very much mistaken.
You have only to go to India to understand the position. That
is the India you are up against. Do not minimise the situa-
tion, it is a serious one.
Now I come to the simple facts that I have found here.
I agree with Mr. McNeill?s report in a very great measure in-
deed. I Hold with him that this is an ideal place for Indians
to settle in. They can make money here as free men. Both
Mr. Pearson and I have been extraordinarily struck with the
prosperity of the Indians, who have been able to settle as
free men on the soil, but I feel very much more seriously than
Mr. McNeill over the moral question?the question of the
growing evil habits of the Indian people in Fiji. What do you
want? Do you want an Indian people who will always remain
in a servile condition? Do you want men in a degraded state?
Or do you want people who will grow up as free men, with
good morals and habits, good citizens and industrious in
every way, fit to take their place in the Councils of this
Colony? If you really want the latter, then all I can say is,
that this present servile Indian population will never give it to
you. The conditions under which they are living here are
such as to foster and increase the vice and immorality which
are now prevalent amongst them. They destroy those best
qualities which I know well enough in the Indian in his own
country. Do not make any mistake about this. I know
Indians of this type. I have lived amongst them, worn their
dress, eaten their food as one of themselves, and I love these
people, I know their habits, and I tell you, gentlemen, that
these Indians coming out in this way have lost the best of
their habits and taken up habits which are uncommon in
India. It is time, gentlemen, that you inaugurated a new
system. The old system wants scrapping. You have got to
get m new machinery, and you have got to deal with the
Indian in new ways. You have got to find out his best habits,
and not encourage his bad habits, which grow like weeds in
Fiji, causing this crop of murders, crime, gambling and other
things, crimes which are very rare indeed in India, even
amongst this class of people, but as common as possible out
here. I know this class of people. I know their lives, and
here, somehow, they have got degraded; they have lost their


best habits, and even as free people they are still degraded.
Vice has become so ingrained that they have not been able
to recover their self-respect; that is what I have seen. If you
want to know the cause, it seems to me that far, far the most
important cause, and the most obvious cause, is the low pro-
portion of women to men. With the scarcity of women of a
marriageable age, bad effects must necessarily follow. This
unnatural system cannot produce any other fruit?it simply
cannot. You know the state of immorality in the coolie
?lines.? I have seen it with my own eyes. I have watched
their faces, and have seen the children; I simply can?t bear
to think of children growing up in that atmosphere.
In India the morals amongst Hindus are strict in the
matter of marriage and the home, and Hindus are very care-
ful about their women. The women in India are very chaste;
but these women, well, you know what they are, and how
can it be different, situated as they are, living the lives they
do, brought up in this atmosphere of vice and degradation?
You have destroyed the sacredness of marriage in their minds,
and in doing this, you have destroyed all that is best in Indian
life. Indians in India have some bad qualities, but the one
thing that is truly noble in them, and which has become al-
most a religion to them in India, is the very high marriage
ideal, and here you have about 9 out of every 10 in this
colony, whose ideas of marriage have simply been ship-
wrecked. There is hardly a decent idea of marriage left
among them, and the cause, as I have said, is in bringing out
women in this unhealthy proportion. This has got to stop, if
this colony wants to have any decent Indian people in it at all.
The present system works out also as industrially bad,
because under it the more money the Indian gets, the more
he will gamble and use in vice; while on the other hand, if
you have a decent system and treat the people decently, if
you take them as married people and encourage them to act
as married people and respect their married life, then you
will have one of the most law-abiding people m the world,
you will have some of the best and most patient workers, who
will never give you any trouble.
I simply can?t tell you how strongly I feel on this subject.
Do not make any mistake. You are not improving these
people. You may be giving them more money, you may be
making them more skilled, but you are ruining the one thing
which is their very soul?their religion. You are ruining their
ideas of married life. I am talking of Hindus.
At present, there are three men to every one woman, and
you are increasing the evil every ship-load you bring in. This
is my verdict on the indenture system. It is not based on
academic knowledge or anything of the kind; it is based on
facts, on what I have seen with my own eyes. If you had
seen what I have seen in India you would say exactly the
same thing.
I tell you another thing. I went to the depot at Calcutta
and saw Mr. Gibbs. I saw the actual material that was com-


ing out to Fiji by the next ship that was going to sail. There
was a considerable number there?though quite a number
had already left?and I spent some time with them. I ques-
tioned them as to where they were going, and where they
came from. I went on very carefully in my questioning, as
I knew I was coming to Fiji, and I wanted to try to get
clear with my own views and impressions and ideas. I looked
them carefully up and down, men, women and children alike,
and I can assure you, gentlemen, that the sight I saw in that
depot of these coolies was very different from what I have
seen in the lines in Fiji. A degradation has taken place;
something has happened?a serious moral degradation. You
may be able to make them more capable for work, and much
more skilled and able to make their fortunes in many ways;
but there is one thing that is happening in the lines?they are
morally depreciating.
The coolie lines are an apprenticeship of labour, I am
quite ready to believe it. But I tell you, gentlemen, that lam
absolutely certain from what I have seen about one thing.
These coolie lines are an apprenticeship of vice. The people
who come out of these lines are morally worse than when they
came from Calcutta.
The system of recruiting has added further to the evils,
because you have so many prostitutes, I dare say, from 30
to 40 every ship-load. You know the result of that-?it has
led to more and more degradation and violation of their mar-
riage ideas, and so you get these hundreds of sexual criminal
cases in the Law Courts, so that the Indian is notorious as
being the criminal of Fiji.
So, gentlemen, I do really feel, speaking as man to man,
it is time that the old system was scrapped, and if there is
any other way of doing it, well, do it. If not, abolish it al-
together. I am most anxious to continue to bring Indians
out, but only on infinitely healthier conditions. I am ready
to discuss this with you, and to talk it over with you before
I go back to India, but certainly I must go back to India with
these very same impressions that I have given you this morn-
ing. They are what I believe to be facts.
I have put before the Governor and other gentlemen this
question: Is it not possible to meet all the difficulties and
bring in labour under healthier conditions? I have a proposal
which I will sketch out as rapidly as possible:?
The first thing is, that this bad system of recruiting,
especially of unmarried people, must stop. They must be
brought out under family conditions, or not at all. You must
stop recruiting individual persons. This is my first point.
Secondly, the lines must be broken up. You must have
married quarters and single houses, so that they can live
decent and respectable lives?not huddled together in stables,
as it were.
Thirdly, the woman, if she wants to, and her husband
desires it, must be allowed to keep her own home, and not
be compelled to go out into the field to work, especially the


woman with children ?I don?t believe in this ? nursery scheme
for children. I believe that an Indian woman should be al-
lowed to cook her husband?s food and look after his home.
To an Indian woman, it is a most sacred duty to cook her
husband?s food, and the husband is made a very much better
worker in consequence. It may be that in some cases, the
woman may want to work in the held in some way, but she
has got to have perfect freedom to say whether she wishes
to work in the held or not. If a man decides that his wi e
need not work in the held, then she need not. That must be
quite clear. I do hope that this thing can be arranged, as
I feel very strongly about it. .
Fourthly, there should be a regular steamer service from
here to Calcutta. Under this present service 900, or even
1,000, come out on the one ship, huddled together, learning
their bad morals even on board ship. I have heard of t e
things that happen on these steamers, and I don t like it. u
the other if you had a regular steamer service with
Calcutta, via Auckland, taking cargo as well as passengers,
bringing out about 200 at a time under decent conditions,
you would have very much less evil on board, and you would
have the people brought to Fiji without losing some of their
decency on the way, as so many do at present I should
imagine that a regular steamer service would be of great
value to you, for not only would these people come out, but
the free people of the colony could go to and fro The pros-,
perous Indian citizens could go for their holidays, and 1
would give India a far better idea, of the conditions in riji-
At present the idea of Fiji is that of a horrible place m some
out of the way part of the world. It is regarded as the very
end of the earth, where all sorts of crime and vice abound.
We want to change this opinion, and give India a goon idea
of Fiji as a place to send her people to.
And gentlemen, I will go back to India and tell them
most clearly and plainly, as far as I can, what a
country Fiji is, and what chances there are for Indians under
different conditions. I shall also tell them of the generosity
and kindness I have experienced, and the fair way m which
the Planters and the Governor have met me on this question.
I want India and Fiji to be close together, instead ot
being thousands of miles distant, and I want them o e 1
regular communication with each other so that the good s
of Fiji, which is so splendid, will be known in India, as we
as that which is bad. Now only the bad side is known; why
should not the good side also be known? It will be known if
you get a regular steamer service. . ? arinni .
Another point which I want to raise is this,
contemplate anything more than a two e^ a gemenG
If you pay the passage out for anyone, I can cont r^! a Q
this, that he should come under a free civil contract for two
years, with power to commute if he desires it, say on three
months? notice. Otherwise, lam quite certain that soon n
Indian will come out at all, but I do think that a free civil
contract with power of commutation is one that any tree man


rmgnt contemplate, and I do not see anything of the old in-
dentured system under such a proposition. I have been asked
to agree to a three years? engagement, but this I could not
do. I could not accept it myself as satisfactory, arid I am
sure that those gentlemen who sent me out would not coun-
tenance anjrihing more than a two years? engagement. I may
find a difficulty m India even about that.
This is my present view on leaving the Colony. If such
free civil contract with power of commutation were accept-
able to you, I think then that the Indian people might come
out as married people, and as families, under these free con-
ditions.
There are two further points I want to mention. The
first is your system of marrying these people?the Marriage
Ordinance. One of the greatest evils you have suffered from
in this colony is your disgraceful Marriage Ordinance in the
past?l can use no other word about it?the disgraceful way
in which marriage has been treated in this colony in regard to
Indians. I feel very strongly on this point, and really believe
that a great deal of evil is attributable to the disgraceful
Indian marriage law. You have brought out Indians, to
whom marriage is the most sacred thing in life?almost their
religion; you have brought out people here, and you have
treated all that religion of theirs as though it were nothing
at all. You have simply made them pay 55., and give in their
names at the Registry Office?and then they were married.
When they were married exactly, no one could tell. They
were simply registered as married, and nothing else. This
has been done for 32 years, and the result of it you are suf-
fering from to-day.
I speak very feelingly because I feel very deeply on this
subject. I know their lives, and I know what marriage is to
them. It is the very essence of a Hindu woman?s life?it is
her religion. And she is practically told that her religion
has nothing whatever to do- with marriage. All she has got
to do is to pay ss. and the registration will be made.
Well, I am most thankful to say that the colony bas al-
ready taken this matter up in regard to its new Marriage
Ordinance. It is recognising the sacred side of marriage,
and it is establishing a law to improve matters throughout
the colony.
And then the land question. I shall not deal with this,
as you have already taken it in hand. I think the propositions
now before the Government are splendid. Everything on that
side soon will be admirable, as far as I can see and hope. It
is far better with regard to the Indian to bind him to you, not
with a bondage of fear, but with a bondage of love and affec-
tion. And the one thing the Indian loves, which he is always
looking for, is a piece of land which he can call his own,
where he can bring up his children decently and live a decent
life. There is no one who loves a tiny bit of land more than
an Indian. Make him a freeholder, and you will make him
happy.


This has been to some extent done in the past, but you
are going to do more, and I am sure the colony will be better
and more prosperous when the proposed scheme is carried
out. On that side lies your salvation. I will not speak more
about it?you are doing well on that point.
Then there is another point in my mind, i.e., good edu-
cational, medical and sanitary conditions. These are very
big subjects, but if they are taken in hand they will do a
great deal to make this population worthy and good. If you
ask me what you should do, I should say, get some respon-
sible people out from India as teachers and medical helpers.
Get a system of schools all over the country. Get really good
people out as headmasters. Do what we do in India?pay a
travelling doctor, or a medical helper, who would not only
train the people up in ways of health, but teach them sanitary
ways also. If you carry through a big system, both
as to medical and sanitary conditions, these doctors
will help to uplift and bring the Indians forward.
You will have Indian leaders, not merely in money
matters, as the storekeepers are, but helpers in edu-
cational and progressive ways. If you can work out
these great progressive schemes, you will stand a very good
chance of eliminating the evils that are here at present. And
if you are ready to take up these matters I am quite prepared
to ask the Indian Government, as far as I have any influence
in the matter, to help the colony. lam quite sure that you
will not find the Indian Government ungenerous, if you show
you are prepared to do things properly. The Indian people
are most generous in that way, and if you show that you are
really anxious to make the Indian people here in Fiji a credit
to the people in India, instead of being a disgrace as they are
at present, the Indian Government, I think, would come for-
ward with a generous subsidy. If this were the case the
Planters, for at least five years, might be relieved of direct
medical and school expenses, while making the necessary
changes in their labour.
I may add that I could assist you to obtain teachers of
the class you require to start the scheme?men who would
devote their time to raising the Indian to such a position that
he would be a credit to himself and to your colony. Then a
great many of the vices would die down amongst them. You
require an entirely new organic Indian life in the colony,
different from what you have at present. That is my candid
opinion.
Well, I have gone on too long and have spoken perhaps
much too freely, but I hope you will not misunderstand me.
I thank you very much, gentlemen, for so kindly listening
to me for such a long time.
3 1508 00323439 5


*
?
