

Report on Reorganisation of the Library
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL RESEARC
development of the library
Since the A.C.E.R. was established in 1930 the library
has steadily developed in order to meet certain obvious needs but
without any attempt at exact definition of policy. The increased
the Lib rar y and the desirability of providing the most
efficient service possible have led to the appointment of a trained
librarian and to more careful consideration of the functions which
the library should perform and the methods it should adopt. The
Council is greatly indebted to the National Library at Canberra for
making available for about two days the services of Mr. H. L. White,
an authority on special libraries. Mr. White thoroughly examined
the present situation and methods. He gave very valuable help, both
in defining the issues on which basic decisions should be made and
in making suggestions as to methods which would best achieve the
aims decided on.
The Council’s library at present contains some 2,400
books and 2,900 pamphlets. Some 90 journals are obtained, of which
60 are overseas. Newspaper cuttings on education from all Aust-
ralian States have been comprehensively collected and pasted in
books m chronological arrangement since 1930. The library has
acquired its present stock chiefly through purchase but to a con-
siderable extent through gift and to a lesser degree through
exchange. The annual average expenditure since 1930 has been £llO.
GENERAL STATUS OF A.C.E.R, LIBRARY
As is shown above the library is relatively small. But
owing go the Council s unique position as an organisation interested
in every phase of education, and with responsibility to all parts
of Australia, there might well be justification for making its
library so comprehensive that it could be regarded as a repository
for every book on education which might reasonably - or even
unreasonably -be asked for either by the Australian student of
education or. the student of Australian education. One has in mind
the combination of an efficient library on modern educational trends
together with something corresponding to the ’educational museum 11
which is found in some countries of Europe. Even as it is, the
Council e library is the only educational library in Australia
equally available. to, say, the teacher of a small bush school in
Queensland, the. Minister of Education in Tasmania, the member of
Parliament in Victoria making a special study of education, the
student of education in New South Wales who has to write a thesis,
the^ inspector of schools in South Australia, the Superintendent of
Technical Education in Perth, the lecturer at the Teachers’ College
South Australia, or the person who has been asked by a Commission
of the Commonwealth Government to survey an educational problem.
Individual requests for books, or for information based
on a study of the Council’s books, cover each year an even greater
range of persons than is suggested by the examples above. The
library is used extensively ty teachers and administrators of private
and special schools, members of a wide variety of cultural bodies,
and, during the war, Manpower authorities and Army and Air Force


education officers. The total number of requests for books or
bibliographies in a year exceeds 1,500. This number includes a
considerable proportion of Victorian borrowers who have learned
at first hand of the Council's resources. The number of borrowers
would be greatly increased if our facilities were more widely
advertised in other states..
Considering the Council*s policy of collecting all
possible reports on Australian education, there is little doubt
that its library (except in the unthinkable event of its holdings
being dissipated) will. in 50 or 100 years'time be the chief source
of reference for the historian of this period of our educational
development*
It is not the Council*s policy to collect school
books as such. But in with the 'museum* aspect men-
tioned above it would be extremely useful to make, say every 20
years, a fairly complete collection of books being used in schools
at the time. The library has at present a number of text books
published by the various Education Departments and these are
frequently referred to. Another desirable aim might be the col-
lection of modern text books from other countries and the procure-
ment of a wide range of school curricula.
Any attempt to make the Council's library a
comprehensive Collection of books on education, even though there
might be a place for such a library, would involve an expansion so
great that it could not be considered while the financial future
of the Council is unsettled. It might require an annual expenditure
on books of ten times the present it might need a staff of
from 6 to 10 librarians. Present accommodation would be completely
inadequate. Indeed, even at the normal rate of expansion, accommo-
dation will be a problem in the very near future.
The Council’s library, especially if it assumes
increased importance, might well be named the Frank Tate Library
in honour of one of Australia’s greatest educationists.who was
largely responsible for the establishment of the Council and foi* its
operations over the first ten years, as well as for the arousal of
interest in public library services in Australia*
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER EDUCATIONAL LIBRARIES
It is proposed that, as soon as possible, we should
make a study of the resources and policy of other specialised
educational libraries such as the Sydney Teachers* College library,
the libraries of the Teachers' Federation in Sydney and the
Teachers' Union in Perth, the libraries in the University Schools
of Education, those in the Education Departments and various others*
The results should indicate whether the Council ought to aim at
ultimate extension along the lines indicated. The information
would also be of immediate assistance in deciding how best. to
provide the complementary and special services.which must in the
meantime be our main goal* Particular emphasis should of.course
be placed on materials which cannot be obtained elsewhere in
Australia. Our capacity to provide 'the unusual book for the
unusual need* may well be interfered with by the attempt to supply
the 'bread and butter needs* of teachers. Books which are in
common demand by teachers in their regular courses of training
should obviously be available elsewhere"*


The proposed survey could appropriately begin with
the information now being collected at the National Library for a
Union list of serial holdings in the Humanities and the Social
Sciences*
THE LIBRARY AS A TOOL FOR THE COUNCIL 1 S RESEARCH WORKERS
The original purpose of the library was to provide
the staff at headquarters and other investigators working under the
auspices of the Council with the necessary tools for their work.
It is considered that this must remain the central purpose and must
take precedence over the * lending* functions which have developed
to an increasing extent in recent years. If expansion takes place,
it might eventually prove necessary to make two collections, one
consisting of books which must be kept on the spot, and the other
of books which can be lent. At times duplicate copies would be
justified.
COLLECTION OF TESTS. RECORD CARDS, ETC.
The Council*s library contains what is almost
certainly the chief collection in Australia of sample copies of
standardised tests from English*speaking^-countries. There are
about 500 items included in the collection. The tests cover
scholastic attainment, intelligence, temperament, and special
aptitudes. In addition, there are samples of school record cards
and of rating scales for assessing various aspects of school
efficiency.
This collection has proved indispensable to the
Council*s staff in its test contructional work and has been widely
used by other special workers in the field. The sample copies are
not sent out on loan* Contacts of the Council with other research
centres assist it in keeping up to date but a good many new tests
have to be purchased as they become available*
CATEGORIES OF IMPORTANCE TO THE .COUNCIL 1 1 S LIBRARY
Before the above-mentioned survey of other.
educational libraries in Australia is made, itwould be unwise to
arrive at anything more than a tentative decision concerning the
types of printed material which the Council should attempt to cover
in"more or less comprehensive fashion* The general.policy so far
adopted has given the library considerable holdings in the
following directions - official reports on Australian education,
reports of official and other bodies on educational problems in
the English-speaking countries, general year-books and reference
books on education, educational surveys, books on statistical and
experimental method, books on the assessment of
differences (e*g. tests and examinations) and their educational
inxplicationSv, books on psychologyand child development* g A number
of" books deal with the problems of curricula and of teaching
method. Others deal with special aspects such as adult education,
delinquency, vocational guidance, etc* The library is not
strongly developed in the history or philosophy of eaucation ana
could be stronger in material for the comparative study ox
education, though there is a good deal not available elsewhere in
Australia. It has some of the important books on sociological
problems. There are other categories such as books for parents


on child management which, if excluded, would enable the library to
-cover more effectively its fields of specialisation.
ACQUISITION
It is suggested that the Council should endeavour to
secure aXl material in the following groups;-
« . -jHt
a* Official Australian reports bearing directly or indirectly on
education* *
b. Australian educational periodicals, official and unofficial.
c. Books published in Australia on educational and related
problems.
d. Overseas references to Australian education.
e. Selected books of reference (relevant to education) published
m English, e.g., the Year Books of Education, Year Book of
Mental Measurement, etc.
f. Reports of the Board of Education (England), the Office of
Education (Washington).
g. Reports published by bodies similar to the Council itself.
h. Books on the methodology of research in education.
, „. . . The Council should aim at procuring all the important
publications in the following fieldss-
a. Books on the methodology of research in the social sciences
generally.
b. Books on statistical method.
c. Official and other studies of the history or status of social
conditions in Australia which have a bearing on educational
and cultural development.
d ‘ wo?£c£ S ° f educational authorities in the English-speaking
e. Books on the method of teaching various subjects.
f. Books on special aspects of education, such as school
administration* training of teachers, finance, school plant,
medical services, etc.
g* Books on psychology which have important educational bearings.
h. Books on the measurement of attainment and of ability.
i. Books dealing with teaching aids, such as films, radio,
libraries. 7
a ihe Council should aim at covering New Zealand almost, if not quite,
as comprehensively as Australia. For practical purposes, then,
the term ’Australia 1 above might be interpreted to include New
Zealand as well.. Most official and other reports are already
obtained from that country.


j. Books on adult education, community centres and allied topics.
k. Books on child guidance and vocational education.
l. Books on comparative education.
m. Books on the history or philosophy of education.
_ T^ e Council should finally aim at procuring outstanding
books m the following fields
a. Anthropology, economics, political science* human geography,
sociology, genetics. e * 9
b. Psychology and fields of applied psychology, other than
education.
As indicated above, there must be clear definition of
the fields to be covered if the library is to be of maximum
usefulness. Material of all kinds outside these fields must be
rigorously excluded and. that within the selected fields constantly
enriched. Wider material for occasional use should be secured
through interlibrary loan. The services of the National Library are
always available to assist libraries wishing to locate books, as
well as serials, not available in their own state. At the same time
we should aim at reducing the cost and speeding up the supply of
the material we acquire.
These aims can be realised only by the prompt receipt
and systematic examination of information about educational material
and by the establishment of buying and exchange relations in the
country of origin. The chief modifications of our present methods
which would be needed are s-
-1. Receipt (by Air Mail as soon as possible) of the Times
Educational.. Supplement (G. 8.) and the Education Indey; (U.S.)
2. Allocation of responsibility for selection in defined fields
to various staff members, the librarian to hold a watching
brief for * cover* and * balance 1 .
3. Librarian to arrange for advance lists from educational
publishers and to examine regularly some library copy of the
Bookseller (G. 8.) and Publishers* Weekly (U.S.) to ensure
prompt ordering of forthcoming books of outstanding
importance•
4. Extend the use of overseas agents until finally only
Australian and perhaps New Zealand material is acquired
locally. Apart from the question of cost and speed of
delivery, the * approval* method, which inevitably develops
between customer and local agent, is well known as a book-
seller* s device for increasing and widening the scope of a
customer*s purchases. Simpkin Marshall, of London, might
replace Rawson, of Melbourne, as agent for our English
books just as McClurg, of Chicago, fulfils our £IOO worth
of American orders each year. Reconstructing after the
* blitz’ , and with renewed emphasis on export business,
Simpkin Marshall will be specially anxious for new Australian
customers as stocks improve. Books do cost more when pur-
chased in Australia, though the reason is not apparent in
the agreements governing their sale. Libraries and educa-
tional institutions should receive 10 % discount on


published price of English books* the only additional charges
being freight and exchange4 If books are posted, freight costs
about 5%* Discount on American books is not fixed and in normal
times should exceed 10% for A.C.E.R. orders. Rawson charges
publisher’s price to him (which would vary from 10% to 33 1/3%
with a likely average of 25% for A.C.E.R. books) plus freight,
plus 20% commission. A study of costs should precede the°
proposed change in method of supply.
5. Use the wide range of A.C.E.R. publications" to extend exchange
relations with educational and other authorities and institutions
m Australia and abroad. At present we should be able to
exchange with such bodies as the Teachers’ College, Columbia,
and the University of the State of New York. Opportunities for
future exchanges in the European field will also be kept in mind.
« . _ . .Because of the generally authoritative nature
• . Publications , and as official authorities do not always
insist on a strict Quid pro quo, such exchanges are especially
profitable.
_ A card record of exchange arrangements, including
a general statement of what is sent and what received will assist in
protecting A.C.E.R. interests.
We should not hesitate to call on overseas
representatives of the National Library ■whenever it appears that they
might be of service. The London representative has already been
asked to negotiate for us with the Board of Education.
ORDERING AND ACCESSIONING PROCEDURE
. Orders for books will be listed on standard
cards, dated and filed in alphabetical order of authors pending
receipt. After accession details, but not numbers., .are added to the
cards they will be incorporated in the shelf gradually being
prepared for existing stock.
Orders for serialswill be listed on visible
slips of Kalamazoo type, dated, and incorporated in the loose leaf
index used for recording the receipt and subsequent loan of individual
Headings will conform with those used in the main entry(3;
in the catalogue and details of source, frequency, location and
circulation will be added. System of routing latest issues to staff
members^ will be simpler and more effective than the present practice
oi listing them, along with books and pamphlets, in the weekly
accession list. The usefulness of this list might ultimately be
increased by classifying it, by adding details of publisher, place,
date and price of publication for the books and pamphlets, and by a
selective analysis of the serials. It would then merit wider
circulation,. at least to Council members and educational authorities
and institutions within Australia and perhaps New Zealand.
list. A list of books in the order in which they appear on
the shelves.
(2) Serial. .A publication issued in successive parts, usually at
regular intervals, and as a rule intended to be continued
indefinitely.
(3) MdlA The full or principle entry for a book in the
catalogue. As a rule the author entry.


; # Donations will be appropriately acknovtfledged and,
in the case of important gifts, recorded on cards arranged by donor.
By contrast, serial publications, whether received by gift or
exchange, should not be acknowledged unless by express request, or,
occasionally, as a means of keeping in touch with the donor.
Pamphlets of sufficient permanent value will be
classified* catalogued, and filed in pamphlet boxes as an expanding
classification to be kept on the shelves at the appropriate numbers.
Ephemeral items and material such as typescript, plans and photo-
graphs whose format makes it unsuitable for normal library treatment,
will be kept in expanding manilla folders in a self-indexing vertical
arranged alphabetically by subjects appearing on projecting
guides. Newspaper cuttings are treated separately, being pasted in
books country-chronological order. The advantage of applying
the self-indexing method to certain of these, even to the extent of 1
incorporating them in the vertical file system, might be
There may be Special reasons for maintaining the
order.for references to developments within Australia, but this is
not likely to apply to those which report overseas developments.
CATALOGUING AND CLASSIFICATION
The unit card v principle will be adopted and
there will be three card cataloguess
1. A 1 finding* catalogue, combining in one alphabet main and
added entries(5) ? including distinctive titles and references.
(Author).
2. A subject catalogue, arranged alphabetically, and including
analytical entries.
3. A shelf list arranged in classified order of the material on
the shelves.
The catalogues have been planned on the assumption
that the subject approach is, on balance, of greater importance to
the Library ! s users than the author approach, and that the information
in a Social Science library is more effectively revealed through
subject headings than through a classified catalogue.(7) Specific
subject headings, with a liberal use of analytical entries for books
and periodicals, will be used to group related material in the
subject catalogue, while the books and pamphlets will be grouped on
the shelves in broad classes only, not extended ordinarily beyond
the third decimal. Subject headings will be based on Pettus*
♦ Subject headings in education 1 . (H.W.Wilson. N.Y.) 1S38, and the
Education. Index (II.W. Wilson, N.Y), in -progress. Staff discussions on
the adoption of headings and references, especially those for
Unit card* A single form of card which serves every purpose by
the addition of the appropriate type of heading*
(5) Added- entry . Any entry other than the main entry. There may be
added entries for editor, title, subjects, etc.
(6) Analytical entry. The entry of some part of a book or of some
article contained in a collection, including a reference to the
publication which contains the article or work entered.
(7) Classified catalogue. A catalogue in which the entries for
subjects are made, not under the names of the subjects, but
under the class numbers for them arranged numerically.


emerging topics, will provide the best guarantee that this basic tool
will meet the needs of its prime users, and will be an invaluable
aid to the librarian in her understanding of the materials with
which she deals*
It will also foster the mutual respect and
general co-operation between staff and librarian which are so
essential in a research institution, and especially one of limited
size*
, . The classification, for educational topics, will
be based on the International Bureau of Education* s Abridgment of
Section 37 of the *Brusseld* Classification,,and, for psychology and
general sociology, the 14th edition of Dewey*s Decimal Classification*
Along with simple book numbers it will be printed in white ink
on the spine of bound volumes, and in pehdil on the left hand top
outside cover of current serials and the right hand of pamphlets*
It will also appear on all catalogue cards as the call number in
the 1 finding* and subject catalogues, and as the basis of arrangement
in the shelf list*
. # The * finding* catalogue will be made by adding
distinctive title entries to the existing author catalogue, and
including main entries, and added entries, including distinctive
• \ entries and author references for new material. Main entry
will be based on the 1 Joint Rules.*• w) Personal names will be
entered under surnames and initials only. Imprint(lO) will be given
in full, but collation(ll) omitted. Series, contents and tracing
notes(12) will be included*
In view of the importance of serials and because
our holdings will be an important contribution to the Union Catalogue
at Canberra, cataloguing might begin with these. The rules for
mam entry should be those set out in the National Library circular
to co-operating libraries. The related problem of disposing' of
incomplete sets, or of taking steps to complete them, should be
faced at the same time.
.BORROWING AND LENDING
p olicy under this head can be finally determined
only after the survey of resources and requirements proposed above
has been completed. Two principles can be stated, however.
1* Loans should be made direct to the borrower, the services of
union lists and central libraries being limited to locating
material except in cases where the borrower or the book
warrants an additional safeguard. In reverse, A.C.E.R. should
encourage libraries to lend to it direct on all occasions.
(8) Book. numbers* Symbols added to the class number to distinguish a
particular book from others with the same class number. The first
3 letters of the author*s name will be used in this library*
(9) 1 Joint Rules 1 . Catalog Rules, author and title compiled
by Committees of the American Library Association and the (British)
Library Association*
(10) Imprint. Place of publication, publisher and date,
(H) Collation* That part of the description of a book which specifies
the size, volumes, number of pages, illustrations, etc*
(12) gracing notes* Notes made on the main entry for a book to
indicate the headings for added entries.


2 ’ it V nornni n tn P h ° tosr ? phic copying will eventually make
tL to accept copies of needed material, especially
short article* This trend should be watched as it
will increasingly affect the attitude of all libraries
towards iending. Meanwhile A.C.E.R., both as borrower
ssss ““ ca ” iui ““ “ a
3 * Sff books, bound volumes of periodicals and books in
use by members of the staff should be lent only ?n
special circumstances and for short periods.
The following practices will be followed s-
1* D® ??g Qal 3- oan Period. will be two weeks. Items will be
recalled unless m active use*
2. Staff members and other regular borrowers will be silntted
numbers, to be recorded, along with date of issue, recall
and return, on the borrowing Records.
3. f*>ans of serials will be recorded on the visible index.
4* Loans of books and pamphlets will be recorded on cards
prepared when an item is first borrowed and arranged in
alphabetical main entry order in open trays.
-
BINDING AND E,-IITPT.F.TW
K . ,. _ . Little binding has been undertaken to date and a
P° lic y should always be approached with caution. Binding
ab ?°?* b an unci ue proportion of a library budget,
adrat h^-n~ e ? Serials predominate. The principle should be to
SnS to use. _ It might even prove wise to postpone the
f C K nt serials and house them in boxes while they are in
ZLi emn x b V S ? r ?* Probably the most satisfactory bidding
for much used material,such as the Journal of Educational Research
Renortbuckram, for little used material, such as the Annual ’
boards? f an overseas educational authority might be, cheap %
r, . , T . Stationery and furniture are being supplied bv
, iullens * include plain punched cards of inter-
national size (approx. 5 x 3 W ), guide cards, ruled book cards,
expanding folders, pamphlet boxes, a vertical file cabinet, a 16
book? 1 * ca £t° ablnet wi £ h r °ds, and a stand for the display of new
books. Sheets are to be printed for use in a Kalamazoo Binder.


